Anti-paedobaptism, OR THE SECOND PART Of the full Review of the Dispute
Concerning INFANT BAPTISM: In which the invalidity of Arguments inferring a
Duty from a positive Rite of the Old Testament concerning a positive Rite of
the New, by reason of Analogy between them, is showed; and the Argument against
Infant Baptism, from Christ's institution, Matthew. 28. 19. the sayings and
practice in the New Testament is made good against the Writings of Mr. Stephen
Marshall, Mr. Richard Baxter, Mr. Thomas Blake, Mr. Thomas Cobbet, Mr. John
Cotton, Dr. Nathaniel Homes, Mr. Robert Bailee, Dr. Daniel Featley, Mr. John
Brinsley, Mr. Cuthbert Sydenham, Dr. Henry Hammond, Mr. Thomas Fuller, and
others.

By John Tombs, B. D.

But speaking the truth in love, we may grow up into him in all things, which
is the Head, even Christ.

Ephesians. 4. 15. LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at his House
at the Sign of Sir John Oldcastle in Py-corner. MDCLIV.

To the Right Honorable the Lord PRESIDENT and COUNCIL to his Highness the Lord
PROTECTOR.
I Presume to present to your Honors a Continuation of the full Review of a
Dispute of which the first part was presented to his Highness more than a year
ago. To which Writing I take my self many ways obliged, not only because of my
own engagements, but also, and that chiefly, by reason of the important
concernment that the truth be preserved. I am sensible that the increase of
Books is thought a grievance by many, and that none are more unwelcome, than
such as are about Controversies, specially when they tend to unsettle men in
what they have received, and in no point more than in this. Few have ability
to discern in Disputes which part preponderates: Few are willing to bestow
pains in such unpleasant studies: Few can digest a truth which exposes to
reproach and loss. These and other considerations had kept me from this
adventure, if my allegiance to Christ had not bound me to vindicate his truth,
and charity to men tied me to endeavor their undeceiving. Wisdom must be
justified by her children: nor can he give a good account to Christ at his
appearing, who shall, out of undue respects, leave to spoil the truth with
which he is entrusted. Polemick Writing are to few delightful, yet necessary;
it being unlikely that practice of piey should flourish when Doctrines of Faith
and Worship are corrupted. They that decline studying and meddling with
Controversies, if they be not sluggish, yet are likely unwary, not heeding that
thereby the wall is unrepaired, which should keep out Seducers from perverting
the Churches. Peace is indeed very desirable, but Truth is put first, Zech. 8.
19. Were men better tempered than commonly they are, dissenters might ventilate
things in question with less offense; I mention it with rejoicing, as a sign of
Gods presence with us, in hope that the same Spirit of unanimity will diffuse
it self among our Christian brethren throughout the Nation. That Dissenters and
Contenders in writing, and otherwise, in this and other points, for their
several judgments, have acted hitherto in the business of approving public
Preachers with much harmony of mind, and agreement of votes; Surely the work
of Christ would be much advanced by a firm consociation in order to the work of
Christ so far as we agree, though there should remain, as no doubt there will,
diversities of opinions in things disputable. Nor do I despair that Disputes
will be managed with more sweetness of spirit, candor, and tenderness toward
dissenters than formerly they have been.

In this hope my intention is (with Gods assistence) to prosecute the Dispute
begun, a part whereof I now tender to your Honors, being desirous that my
self, and the cause I manage should stand right in your eyes, who are the eyes
of the Commonwealth. For whom I beg light from Heaven toguide you in your way,
and help from him, who has been hitherto your strength, and who will be with
you, while you be with him, and remain,

London, June 1. 1654. Your Honors humble and devoted Servant in the Lord,
John Tombs.

The Contents.
SEct. 1. Of the reason and purport of this writing. Sect. 2. That no good
argument can be drawn from positive rites of the Old Testament to prove a
Divine appointment in positive rites of the New, nor is it true which Mr.
Baxter says that infants admission into the Church is fully determined in the
Old Testament. Sect. 3. Mr. Blakes plea for arguments from analogy in mere
positive rites of the Old Testament, and Mr. Baxters speech about infant
admission as determined in it, are refelled. Sect. 4. Mr. Baxters speech about
the little said for Antipaedobaptism is vain, and his speech about the
antiquity of infant baptism, is very inconsiderate; and his speech about the
difficulty and importance of the point in question* is examined. Sect. 5. The
first argument against infant baptism from the institution Mat. 19. 28. Mark
16. 16. and the practice in the New Testament is urged. Sect. 6. Mr. Blakes
exception, against the major, that such institution or example as I require for
inifant-baptism is unnecessary, is refelled. Sect. 7. Mr. Marshalls exceptions
that Matthew. 28. 19. is not the institution of baptism, that only Disciples are
not appointed to be baptized, that this was a rule only for a Church to be
constituted, are refelled. Sect. 8. The exceptions of Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Blake
etc. against the arguing from the order of teaching before baptizing, of Mr.
Marshal, Mr. Hussy, etc. that baptizing is discipling, are refelled. Sect. 9.
The exception of Mr. Marshal, Mr. Blake, Mr. Cobbet, that nations are appointed
to be baptized Matthew. 28. 19. and so infants, is refelled. Sect. 10. That
infants of believers are not Disciples appointed to be baptized, Matthew. 28. 19.
Sect. 11. Mr. Cottons allegations in his Dialogue chapter 1. to prove infants
Disciples, are showed to be insufficient. Sect. 12. Mr. Baxters allegation of
Acts 15. 10. to prove infants Disciples, is fully answered, and his arguments
retorted. Sect. 13. The arguments are vindicated which are brought to prove
infants not meant by Disciples Acts 15. 10. Sect. 14. Infants discipleship is
not proved by Mr. Baxter from Lev. 25 41, 42. which speaks of the Israelites
being Gods servants. Sect. 15. That infants are not proved to be Christ's
Disciples from being subjects to Christ, Christians, belonging to Christ, Luke
9. 47, 48. Matthew. 18. 5. Mark 9. 41. Sect 16. Dr. Featlie and Mr. Stephens
arguments from John 3 5. for infant baptism, are answered, and baptism showed
not to be a cause of regeneration, and Mr. Cranfords words are considered.
Sect. 17. The 31. Cap. of Mr. Baxters plain Scripture Proof, etc. is answered,
and Mark 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. is showed to make nothing for infants visible
Church Membership and baptism, and his description of visible Church Membership
is considered and his argument from Deuteronomy. 29. 10. showed to be insufficient.
Sect. 18. The 41. Chap. of Mr. Blakes Vindic. Foeder: about Christ's speech of
little children Matthew. 19. 14. is answered, and my sayings in my Postscript
vindicated. Sect. 19. Animadversions on Mr. Cobbets. Just Vindic. part. 1. chapter
4. and the arguings of Dr. Homes, Mr. Bailee, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Sidenham from the
words and actions of Christ to little ones are answered. Sect. 20. The practice
of infant baptism is not proved, Acts 16. 15. by baptizing an household, against
Mr. Marshall, Dr. Homes Mr. Bailee, Mr. Cook, Mr. Sidenham, Mr. Fuller. Sect.
21. That 1 Cor. 10. 2. proves not the practice of infant baptism against Mr.
Bailee, Mr. Cobbet, etc. Sect. 22. Mr. Blakes argument from Gal. 4. 29. is
answered. Sect. 23. Mr. Brinsley and Dr. Homes their conjecture from Heb. 6. 2.
to prove infant baptism, is refelled. Sect. 24. Dr. Hammond his way of proving
infant baptism from the Jews baptizing Proselytes children, is showed to be
vain. Sect. 25. Dr. Hammonds elusion of Matthew. 28. 19. alleged against
infant baptism* is refelled. Sect. 26. Dr. Hammond neither from 1 Cor. 7. 14*
nor from sayings of ancients proves the Apostles to have baptized infants.
Anti-Paedobaptism, OR A Full Review of the Dispute concerning INFANT BAPTISM.
SECT. I.
Of the Reason and Purport of this writing,

HAving by my Postscript, Antidote, Addition to the Apology, Praecursor, and
Ample disquisition of the meaning of the ingraffing, Romans 11. 17 The promise,
Acts 2. 39. The holiness of Children, 1. Cor. 7. 14. formerly printed,
endeavored to vindicate my self, and the doctrine of Anti Paedobaptism, which
I assert, from the objections which have been published to hinder the
entertainment of it; I now proceed with the divine assistance to review the
dispute about Infant Baptism, which was made public by the Printing of my
Exercitation and Examen of Mr. Marshal's Sermon in the year 1645. which is
become the more laborious and tedious to me by reason of the many Antagonists,
and their several writings since published, notwithstanding the equal and
serious motion I made in the Epilogue of my Examen, that I might see some one
writing, either of the Assemblies, or of their Commitees, or the London
Ministers (who in their attestation ceasur'd my Positions as erroneous and
pernicious) in which the whole strength of the proofs for Infant Baptism might
be put together, and Readers with my self eased of the trouble and charge of
buying and perusing so many several writings, which some disclaim, and others
magnify. But this motion which would have quickly brought the matter to an
issue, and made a shorter dispatch of the dispute than is now likely to be,
being so far from meeting with a ready acceptance, that thereby an occasion was
taken to misrepresent me as a braving challenger, and one that minds
self-ost^ntation more than the truth of God (which is an artifice unworthy the
users) and an opposite course taken to bear me down with a flood of injurious
calumnies, and impetuous rather than considerate Antagonists, I am put to this
choice, either to weary my self by answering so many several writings, or else
give advantage to them who are ready to take all advantages how indirectly
soever (as appears by master Baxters dealing with me about the dispute at
Bewdly, master Simon Ford of Reading his dealing with me about the passages in
the Act at Oxford 1652.) to possess people with prejudices against me*, and of
the unanswerablenesse of what is brought for Infant Baptism, if they can but
pretend that it is declined, though it be neglected only for the futility and
feebleness of it. But the former being more eligible for the truths sake, I
conceive my self engaged to proceed in the Review of the Dispute. The writings
which with mine own I am to review, are either such as are directly written
against me, or such as at least for the truths sake I conceive meet to examine,
whether they meddle with my writings or not; of the former sort are Master
Stephen Marshals defense of his Sermon, Master John Gerees Vindiciae
paedobaptismi, and Vindiciae Vindiciarum, Doctor Nathanael Homes his
Animadversions on my Exercitation, Master Thomas Blake his Answer to my Letter,
and a great part of his Vindiciae foederis, and most of all Mr. Richard Baxter
his plain Scripture proof of Infants Church Membership and Baptism* and
together with these, what Mr. Thomas Cobbet of New England, in his just
vindication has thought fit to oppose against my Examen, sent in a manuscript
to New England, and delivered to him to examine, as Mr. Cotton informed me by
his letter, though I be not named in Mr. Cobbets book Others there are, which
though they do not expressly oppose me, yet Mr. M. Mr. B. or some other, do
direct me to them, as Mr. Cottons Dialogue, Vossius his Theses, Mr. Baillees
Anabaptism, Mr. Drew, Mr. Church, Mr. Stephens, Dr. Featly, Mr. Lyford, Doctor
Hammond, etc. Mr. Rutherfurd is one, to whose writing Mr. Baxter page 211.
directs me, but I have not yet met with ^ame other thing which he has written
about this argument, than what I find in his Temperate plea, chap. 11, 12. yet
when any other thing of his, or any other Authors, occurrs, which suggests any
thing considerable, besides what others before have published, and is already
answered, I do intend to take it into the Review, and to deal impartially, as
one that seeks truth, and is sensible that he is accountable to the Lord about
writing as well as speaking; nevertheless, in handling thereof, I shall not
tie my self, any further than I see necessary, to set down each Authors words
at large, but so much of them as I conceive requisite, and according to their
meaning, and the force of their arguments, as rightly as I can. The method I
once intended to use in this Review was according to the order of my Examen,
but I shall now use such an arbitrary method as I shall judge most clear and
comprehensive, beginning with Mr. Richard Baxter his three first chapters of
the first part of his book forenamed.

SECT. II.
That no good argument can be drawn from the positive Rites of the old
Testament, to prove a divine appointment in positive Rites of the new; nor is
it true as Mr B. says, that Infants admission into the Church is fully
determined in the old Testament.

MAster B. begins the dispute, page 1. with a preface tending to move
affections, otherwise than pleaders before the Aropagites were to do, and was
desired of Mr. B. that Logic might be used, and Rhetoric for born; but
however the preface is framed, and takes with many, yet so many mistakes in it
are showed in my Praecursor, as might deter readers from blinding their eyes
by the dust raised in it. He then tells us he must needs lay down several
positions that must necessarily be well understood before they could understand
the point in hand, and these are no fewer than ten, which if they had been all
omitted, I see not but that the point might have been as well understood as now
it is. I do not remember where master B. makes any use of them for clearing the
point, and therefore I judge them, with his three propositions, chap. 2. to
serve only to forestall men's minds, if they be not used to dull the Readers
attention ere he come to the point, as the Turks use their Asapi to blunt the
Christians swords by killing them before their Janissaries fall on. But what ever
the intent was, there are sundry passages that require animadversions; His
first position is, That the holy Ghost speaks of somethings in scripture more
fully, and of others more sparingly, which I grant to be true; but I like not
his instance when he says, that the scripture speaks little concerning the
heathen that never heard the Gospel, whether any of them be saved? or upon
what terms he deals with them for life or death? Far is it [saith he,] from
my reach, to discover the Holy Ghosts mind in this: whereas me thinks the
Scripture speaks much of this, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 12. Romans 1. and 2. and 3.
and 11. Chapters. And to be doubtful, whether they that never heard the Gospel
were saved, and upon what terms God dealt with them for life or death, is in my
apprehension to be unresolved whether there be not another way of salvation
than by Christ; whether a man living and dying a professed Idolater without
repentance, may not be saved by his moral dem^anour; and whether Pelagianism be
not true, that by nature without grace men may be saved. Vedelius in his book
de deo synagogae charged Barlet the Arminian with a dangerous position in
writing in verses before a book of Manasseh Ben Israel the Jew, that the God of
Jews and Christians was one, and intimating that Jews remaining in denial of
Christ might have God for their God, contrary to John 8. 24. and 14. ^6. Act. 4
12. 1 John 2. 23. and 5. 12. 2. John 9. How much more dangerous a conceit must
this be, much lessening the grace of God in Christ, tending to Pelagianism, and
to make Idolatry a venial sin, to imagine that men that never had the Gospel
nor the Prophets, but were such, even the best of them, as are described Romans
1. 21. etc. that they should be saved, when the Scripture so plainly tells us,
Revel. 21. 8. 27. and 22. 15. that all Idolaters shall be without? But I leave
master B. to Doctor Prideaux his lecture de salute Ethnicorum to resolve him in
this point.

And whereas he says the Scripture speaks sparingly of Infants, it seems
then some at least of his texts he brings for Infants discipleship and visible
Church Membership are impertinent, since they are so many; and whereas he
instanceth in the case of Insant-Baptism among such things as are not plainly
determined in Scripture, he does thereby gainsay the title of his book, which
he calls plain Scripture proof of Infants baptism; nor is he relieved by what he
replies in his praefestinant is morator, where nothing is brought out of his
words, before or after, which shows I have not rightly alleged his words in my
Praecursor, Sect. 2. And his words page 9. [ the grounds of it are very easy
and plain, though to many it be difficult to discern how it is from those
grounds inferred] do confirm my observation, that he contradicted his title,
since the inference which is the proof, is in them confessed to be difficult.
But what he says in the words following, page 3, 4. is more exactly to be
scanned, as touching the main Basis of Paedo-Baptism. The new Testament (says
Mr. B.) speaks more sparingly of that which is more fully discovered in the
old, what need the same thing be so done twice, except men had questioned the
authority of the old? the whole Scripture is the perfect word and law of God;
and if he should reveal all his mind in one part, what use should we make of
the other? How silent is the N. T. concerning Christian magistracy? which made
the Anabaptists of old deny it; Where find you a Christian in the new Testament
that exercised the place of a King, a Parliament Man, or Justice of Peace, or
the like? so of an oath before a Magistrate, of war, of the Sabbath, etc. how
sparing is the new Testament? and why? but because there was enough said of
them before in the old; This also is the very case in the question in hand. The
main question is not, by what sign members are to be admitted into the Church?
or whether by a sign or without? But at what age they are to be admitted
members? now this is as fully determined in the old Testament, as most things
in the Bible, and therefore what need any more?

Answ. Mr. B. here asserts in the question about Infant baptism, that it is as
fully determined in the old Testament as most things in the Bible, at what age
persons should be admitted members into the Church, and therefore what need any
more? which if true, Mr. B. had done well to have spared the allegation of Mat.
28. 19. Acts 15. 10. Luke 9. 42. 48. Mat. 18. 5. Mark 9. 41. Romans 11. 17, 19,
20, 24, 25, 26. Mat. 23. 37, 38, 39. Romans 4. 11. 1. Cor. 7. 14, Mark 9. 36, 37.
and 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. and others the allegation of Act. 2. 38 39. and 16. 15.
1. Cor. 10 1, 2. for Infant Baptism, not troubling the Reader with more, when,
if he speak true, the proof might have been made by fewer texts; Frustra fit
per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora. And indeed when Paedo-baptists speak
not like wranglers, but ingenuously confess the naked truth, they acknowledge
there is no express precept or example for Infantbaptism in the new Testament,
but they must fly to the old, Master Marshal in his sermon of baptizing
Infants, page 34. Doctor Young in the passage cited in my Praecursor, Sect. 22.
Eaton and Tailor, defense, page 57. Do not you conclude Infants must be
baptized, not because the new Testament expressly says so, but because you find
it in the old; the Jews children were circumcised, therefore Christians
children must be baptized. The assembly at Westminster answer to the dissenting
Brethren touching Ordination, page 186. If par ratio will not serve turn to
prove an ordinance of Christ, or at least to warrant a practice, how will our
brethren prove baptizing of infants? Which confessions me thinks should deter
Paedobaptists fom alleging precept and practice of it out of the new Testament;
or at least readers and hearers should learn more wit than to be cheated
thereby, when their own confessions do show that they are brought only to fill
up books, and to deceive the poor simple readers. But let us view Mr. B. words
better.

He says, the main question is not by what sign members are to be admitted
into the Church, or whether by a sign or without, but at what age they are to
be admitted members? now this is as fully determined in the old Testament as
most things in the Bible. Mr. M. in his defense, page 195. says thus; First,
for the point of will worship I shall desire you to prove this Conclusion, That
all things belonging to Christian worship, even in the circumstances of it,
even the ages and sexes of the persons to whom the ordinances are to be
applied, must expressly be set down in the new Testament; if you prove not this,
you say nothing to the purpose, for this is our very case, page 205. This about
Infantbaptism touches but a circumstance of age.

Answ. It Is true, the main question is, whether infants are to be baptized? But
they that deny it, do so, not merely because of their age, but because Collings
vindic. minist. Evan. page 67. It is a rotten distinction to distinguish of
substantial and circumstantial acts in businesses relating to Gods worship, in
which we must have an eye to every tittle of institution. Cawdrey Sab. Rediv.
part. 2. chapter
they appear not ordinarily to be disciples of Christ, or believers, or capable
of these in act. Their admission by baptism is questioned because of their
nondiscipleship, not precisely by reason of their age. Mr. B. in his Appendix
to his plain scripture proof etc. page 302. And that in so material a thing as
Infantbaptism, and so about the proper subject of so great an ordinance; and if
you judge Infantbaptism a mere circumstance, you 7* page 277. The subject or
material thing is the substance of a command.
are much mistaken. If the question about Infantbaptism touch but a
circumstance of age, then the question about Infant-communion touches but a
circumstance of age, and if men may without precept or example in the new
Testament of Infant baptism be acquitted from willworship, because it touches
but a circumstance of age, by the same reason they may be acquitted from
willworship, who give Infants the Communion, because it touches but a
circumstance of age. Our Lord Christ and his Apostles having determined who are
to be baptized, it is manifest willworship or humane Invention to baptize
others than he and they have appointed; and it is so much the worse, because it
is not only about the proper subject of so great an ordinance, but also the
main end and use of baptism, by altering of which the ordinance is quite
changed into another thing, and the Church of God exceedingly corrupted. But
letting that pass, admission of Infants into the Church (Mr. B. says) is
fully determined in the old Testament; if he mean not the Christian visible
Church, he speaks ambiguously, and if his words be meant of the Christion
visible Churah (of which only is the question) then it is as fully determined
in the old Testament, that Infants should be admitted into the visible Church
Christian as most things in the Bible, as that God made heaven and earth, idols
are vanities, fornication a sin, etc. But surely none will believe Mr. B. in
this, but he that is so simple as to believe every word. Me thinks he should
not have said such a word at Bewdly, where he says in his History, were many
ancient stayed Christians, that would not as children be t^st up and down, and
carried too and fro with every wind of doctrine, except he presumed they would
take what he said, as true, without trial. Formerly this was the received
doctrine, that Baptism was the sacrament of admission into the Christian
Church, that Baptism and the Lords supper were the sacraments of the new
Testament, instituted by Christ himself, that Circumcision. and the Passover,
and the whole Jewish Church policy are abrogated, which if true, it is very
bold to say, that Infants are to be admitted into the visible Church Christian,
is as fully determined in the old Testament, as most things in the Bible, when
there is not a word in all the old Testament about the age, or way of admission
into the visible Church Christian. But where does Mr. B. find this admission so
fully determined in the old Testament? In the dispute at Bewdly he denied the
precept of Circumcision to be the ordinance of visible church membership, And
in my Praecursor, Sect. 6 I say, as yet I can fi^d no such law or ordinance for
Infants visible Church-mem-bership save what is enjoined concerning
Circumcision. To with he replies in his Praefestinantis morator, What not yet?
And yet dare you boast so confidently of your prepared confutation? yet can you
find no law that made women Church Members? nor the uncircumcised males in the
wilderness? O the power of prejudice! Whereto I say, though I boast not of my
prepared confutation, but speak of it modestly, yet I find no cause to be less
confident of my prepared confutation, because of these frivolous interogations
of Mr. B. It is not the power of prejudice which is the reason why I find not a
law or ordinance for Infants visible Church Membership, but because I do not
see or read of law or ordinance for Infants visible Church Membership besides
that of Circumcision, either upon my own search, or Mr. Bs. or others showing;
I asked once a Preacher at Bewdley where it was? he told me it was Deuteronomy. 29.
10, 11, 12, 13. I told him I find a relation of a fact, of a thing that was
done, but not a word of any law, ordinance precept or command, determining thus
it shall be, this shall be done* etc. or any other form of speech that imports
a law, ordinance, precept, statute or command to make female infants visible
Churchmembers; much less do I find an appointment, law, ordinance, that some
infants were once to be admitted members of the visible Church (which Mr. B.
should have proved to be unrepealed, according to his assertion, cap. 5. 26.)
except the law of Circumcising infants. And therefore my confutation of Mr. Bs.
argument, cap. 5. might be sufficient, if I only denied such an ordinance or
appointment, till it be showed. I do confess my weakness in my answering at
Bewdley, in that I permitted Mr. B. to run on in the proof of an ordinance
unrepealed, before he had showed me where that ordinance is, but I perceived
therein what I feared still, that I should not in a verbal dispute observe
what was necessary to be heeded. But I may say with truth Mr. B. either
understands not what is meant by a law, ordinance, appointment liable to
repeal, or still binding, or loves to pervert words from the genuine sense, as
he did the word [ accuse;] or else he is unwilling to speak plainly, who being
provoked to show in what text of Scripture that pretended law, ordinance,
appointment is, does not yet show it. And for his assertion here, it exceeds
all faith, that infant admission into the Church (meaning the visible Church
Christian) should be as fully determined in the old Testament, at most things
in the Bible.,

But wherever, Mr. B. imagines it is fully determined in the old Testament, the
Assembly at Westminster in their Confession of faith, chap. 25. Art. 4. allege
but one text out of the old Testament, viz. Genesis 17. 7. 9. for admission of
Infants by Baptism into the visible Church, and if Mr. M. their Champion in
this Point express their minds, they deduce Infant Baptism from this
principle, All Gods Commands and Institutions about the Sacraments of the Jews
bind us as much as they did them in all things which belong to the substance of
the Covenant, and were not accidental to them. Which how false it is, how
contrary to the Tenet of Divines former and later, is showed in my Examen,
part* 3. Sect. 12. to which I may add the Assemblies confession of faith, chap.
19. Art. 3. All which ceremonial laws are now abrogated under the New
Testament. And if all of them be abrogated, how can it be true that the law
about circumcising Infants still binds? But Mr. M. in his Defense page 195.
conceives his argument from the analogy of the Ceremonial law of Circumcision,
which he calls his Analogical argument, page 201. good; on the contrary I deny
any argument from analogy of the Ceremonial law good in mere positive
ceremonies to prove thus it was in the old Testament, therefore it must be so
in the new. And thus I argue,

1. Arguments from Analogy in mere positive Rites of the old Testament to make
rules for observing mere positive Ceremonies of the new wthout institution
gathered by precept or apostolical example or other declaration in the new
Testament, do suppose that without Institution there may be par ratio, a like
reason of the use of the one Ceremony as the other. But this is not true; For
in positive Rites there is no reason for the use of this and not another thing
in this manner to this end, Cawdrey Sab* Rediv. Part. 2. Chap. 6. page 226. A
^teer positive law which is special to some person or nation is of no force
under the Gospel, unless it be ratified by the Gospel.

Baxter plain scripture proofs page 341. Nature tells us nothing of mere
positives


by, or to persons, but the will of the appointer. For there is not any thing
natural or moral in them, they have no general equity, they are supposed to be
merely not mixtly positive. Therefore where there is not the like Institution,
there is not a like reason; and therefore this opinion of Analogy in positive
Rites from a parity of reason without Institution in the new Testament is a
mere fancy, and no good ground for an argument. To apply it to the Mr. Collings
caveat for Proph. page 77. The equity of the ceremomonial law is a dark notion
to me, Christ is she equity of it. The Apostle calls it a shadow; the equity
the^ of it is the substance of a shadow, and what that is I cannot divine
besides Christ whose shadow it was. I always understood by the ceremonial laws
those laws that concerned the worship of God in that time, which were wholly
ceremonial and abolished being fulfilled in Christ.
case in hand, Circumcision and Baptism are merely positive ordinances; Mr. B.
calls them, p. 9. Positives about worship. Generally Sacraments by Divines are
reckoned among mere positives; Chamier. Panstr. Cath. Tom. 4. l. 2. c. 12.
Sect. 20. nulla vera ratio Sacramentorum potest consistere absque institutione.
l. 7. c. 10. Sect. 1. nullum Sacramentum est a natura sua, itaque prorsus ab
institutione. The places are innumerable in Protestant writers and others to
prove this; were it not that I find my Antagonists often forget what is
elsewhere yielded by them, I should not say so much, the thing being so plain,
that there is nothing natural or moral in them, because till they were
appointed (which was thousands of years after the creation) they were not used,
nor taken for signs of that which they signified. The reason* then of Baptism
and Circumcision is merely Institution; if then there be not the like
Institution, there is not the like reason. This argument is confirmed by Mr.
M^. grant, Defense, page 92. 182. the formal reason of the Jews being
circumcised was the Command of God* therefore there is not the like reason of
Infant Baptism as of Infant-circumcision without the like command of God. But
there is no express command for Infant Baptism as Mr. M. confesses, therefore
there is not par ratio, like reason of the one as the other.

2. I thus argue, If all the Laws and Commands about the Sacraments, positive
Rites and Ceremonies of the Jews, be now abrogated, then no argument upon
supposed analogy or parity of reason from the institution of those abrogated
Rites can prove a binding rule to us about a mere positive Rite of the new
Testament. For how can that make a binding rule to us about another mere
positive Rite without any other Institution, which it self is abrogated? that
which binds not at all, binds not about another thing, v. g. Baptism. But all
the Laws and Commands about the Sacraments, positive Rites and Ceremonies of
the Jews, are now abrogated, as is proved in my Examen, part. 3. sect. 12. and
confessed by the Assembly Conf. of faith, chap. 19. art. 3. ergo none of them
bind, This argument is confirmed by the words of Mr Cawdrey Sabbat. Rediv.
part. 2. chap. 7. sect. 7. page 263. No ceremonial commandment can infer a
moral commandment. The reason of our assertion is this, because partial
commandments given to some Nation or persons (as the Ceremonial precepts were)
cannot infer a general to oblige others, even all the world. Again, Sect. 10.
page 276. First it is so in all other like special and ceremonial Commandments
concerning days, whenever the particular day was abrogated, the whole
Commandment concerning that day was utterly abolished, the Law of Circumcision
and of the Passover is expired as well as the sacramental and ceremonial
actions commanded by that law.

This Mr. M. conceived he had prevented by supposing that in some commands
about the Sacraments of the Jews, are some things that belong to the substance
of the Covenant, and limiting his assertion to those. And when in my Examen
page 115. I argued, that in no good sense it can be true that some of the
commands of God about the Sacraments of the Jews contained things belonging to
the substance of the Covenant, he tells us page 198, 199. of his Defense, that
our Sacraments have the same substance with theirs, the same general nature,
end, and use; which he makes in these things, theirs were seals of the
Covenant, so ours, etc. But none of all these are to the purpose, his
allegations tending only to prove that our Sacraments and the Jews have the
same general nature, which he calls substance, but not a word to show that any
command about them belonged to the substance of the Covenant, but as if he were
angry, or did disdain a man should question his dictates, only recites his
meaning, and a passage or two of Protestant Authors, and never answers a word
to my objection, Exam. page 115. that in no good sense could it be true that
some commands of God about the Sacraments of the Jews did contain things
belonging to the substance of the Covenant. Yea when I animadverted on that
saying in his Sermon, the manner of administration of this Covenant was first
by types, shadows and sacrifices, etc. It had been convenient to have named
Circumcision, that it might not be conceived to belong to the substance of the
Covenant: I reply, says he, in his Defense, page 99. this is a very small
quarrel, I added, etc. which supplies both Circumcision and other things.
Which words in the plain construction of them do note, that Circumcision is
comprehended in his etc. as belonging to the manner of administration, not to
the substance of the Covenant. And yet page 187. he has these words, I have
already proved (that is no where, no not so much as in attempt) that
Circumcision though a part of their administration did yet belong to the
substance (meaning of the Covenant of grace) belong to it, I say, not as a part
of it, but as a means of applying it. So uncertain and enterferring one another
are his speeches about this thing. And yet this salve he adds is not true in
any sense in which the word [ substance] may be taken. For if he mean by [
applying the Covenant] the signifying Christ to come, or the spiritual part
promised, so Circumcision was a Type or shadow, and therefore according to his
doctrine belonging to the administration that then was, not to the substance of
the Covenant; if he mean by [ applying the Conant] sealing or assuring the
righteousness of faith to men's consciences, neither does this make it of the
substance of the Covenant, the Covenant being made before, and though
Circumcision had never thus applied it, the substance of the Covenant had been
the same, yea the Covenant was the same in substance, according to his own
doctrine, 2000. years before Circumcision did apply it to any; now I do not
conceive any thing is to be said of the substance of a thing, when the thing
may be entire without it; so that in this point I deprehend in Mr. M. speeches
nothing but dictates; and those very uncertain and confused.

Secondly, says he, page 198. When I say that Gods Commands about their
Sacraments bind us, my meaning never was to assert, that the ritual part of
their Sacraments do remain in the leas^ particle, or that we are tied to
practice any of those things, but only that there is a general and analogical
nature, wherein the Sacraments of the Old and New Testament do agree, which he
thus a little before expresses, my meaning being plainly this, that all Gods
Commands and Institutions about the Sacraments of the Jews as touching their
general nature of being Sacraments and Seals of the Covenant, and as touching
their use and end, do bind us in our Sacraments, because they are the same;
whereto I reply, that Mr. M. supposes the Commands of God are about the
general nature of being Sacraments and Seals of the Covenant: which is a most
vain conceit, there being no such Command or Institution, there is no such
Command that Sacraments should have the general nature of Sacraments, or be
Seals of the Covenant, or that they should signify Christ and seal spiritual
grace: these things they have from their nature, as he says, which is the same
without any Institution. The natures, essences and quiddities of things are
eternal, invariable, and so come not under Command, which reaches only to
things contingent, that may be done, or not be done. Did ever any wise man
command to men that man should be a reasonable living body, or whiteness a
visible quality, or fatherhood a relation? And to say that God commands
Sacraments to seal the Covenant, what is this but to say that God commands
himself? For he alone by the Sacraments seals to us the Covenant or Promise of
Christ, or grace by him. All Commands of God are concerning what the persons
commanded should do, and they must needs be of particulars, not of generals,
for actio est singularium, action is of singular persons and things. Though God
may command man to think or acknowledge Sacraments to be Seals of the Covenant,
yet it were a most vain thing for God to command that Sacraments should be
Seals of the Covenant, or to have this general end or use, to seal or signify
Christ, and spititual grace, to us, which belongs only to himself to do by his
declaration of his meaning in them. Such Commands as Mr. M. imagines, are a
mere Chimaera, or dream of his brain. Secondly, the like is to be said
concerning his conceit, that such Commands bind us in our Sacraments; For to
bind us is to determine what is to be done, or not to be done by us; But such
imagined Commands do not determine what is to be done or not to be done by us,
and therefore cannot bind at all. Thirdly, when Mr. M. confesses we are not
tied to the least particle of the ritual part or any practice of those things,
he does thereby acknowledge that all the Commands of God about the Sacraments
of the Jews, which were all about rituals, are quite abrogated. For all
Sacraments are Rites or Ceremonies, and to imagine a Command about a Sacrament,
and not about a ritual part or Ceremony, is to imagine a Command about a
Sacrament, which is not a Sacrament, Chamier. Panstr. Cathol. Tom. 4. lib. 1.
chap. 8. Sect. 9. arguing against Suarez the Jesuit, that dreamed of a
Sacrament appointed in the law of nature for remedy of original sin, yet had no
determined Ceremony, speaks thus; Sacramentum aliquod institutum a Deo,
Ceremonia nulla determinata a Deo, quis capiat? Sacramentum institui et
Ceremoniam non determinari? Aeque dixerit loquutum esse deum, et tamen vocem
nullam protulisse, nam aeque Sacramenti genus est Ceremonia et Vox
loqisutionis. Fourthly, were it supposed that there were some Commands about
the general nature of Sacraments, binding us, though every particle and
practice of the ritual part be abrogated, yet this would not reach Mr. M.
intent, which is to prove the Command of sealing Infants with the initial seal
in force, binds. But to seal Infants with the initial seal in force is not of
the general nature of Sacraments (for then it should belong to the after seal
as well as the initiating) but after his own dictates of the special nature of
the initial seal, and so Mr. M. principle serves not for his purpose.

Thirdly, I argued thus, Examen. part. 2. sect. 8. If we may frame an addition
to Gods worship from analogy or resemblance conceived by us between two
ordinances, whereof one is quite taken away, without any Institution gathered
by precept or Apostolical example, then a certain rule may be set down from
Gods word how far a man may go in his conceived parity of reason equity or
analogy, and where he must stay; For to use the words of the Author, whose book
is entitled Grall^, if Christians must measure their worship according to the
Institution and Ceremonies of the Jews, it is needful that either they imitate
them in all things, or else that some O Edipus resolve this riddle hitherto not
resolved, to wit, what is moral and imitable in those Ceremonies, and what not.
But out of Gods word no rule can be framed to resolve us how far we must or may
not go in this conceived parity of reason, equity, or analogy, Ergo. The major
is evinced from the perfection of Gods word, and the providence of God to have
the consciences of his people rightly guided. The minor is proved by provoking
those analogists that determine from the Commands about the Mosaical Rites and
usages what must be done or may not be done about the mere positive worship and
Church Order of the New Testament, to set down this rule out of Gods word. This
argument is confirmed by experience in the controversy between Presbyterians
and Independents, jarring about the extent of Infant Baptism, the Elders in new
England, Mr. Hooker, (besides Mr. ^irmin) Mr. Bartlet, etc. restraining it to
the Infants of members joined in a Church gathered after the congregational way
as it is called. Mr. Cawdrey, Mr. Blake, Mr. Rutherfurd and others extend it
farther, master B. Plain scripture proof, etc. chap. 29. part 1. page 101. to
all whosoever they be, if they be at a believers dispose. And both sides
pretend analogy, which being uncertain, Mr. Ball after much debate about this
difference, as distrusting analogy, determines thus in his reply to the answer
of the new England Elders to the 9. posit. posit. 3. and 4 page 38. But in
whatsoever Circumcision and Baptism do agree or differ (which is as much as to
say, whatsoever their analogy or resemblance be) we must look to the
Institution (therefore the Institution of each Sacrament must be our rule in
the use of them, not analogy, and analogy is not sufficient to guide us without
Institution, and to show that analogy serves not turn of it self to determine
who are to be baptized, he adds) and neither stretch it wider, nor draw it
narrower than the Lord has made it, for he is the Institutor of the Sacraments
according to his own good pleasure, and it is our part to learn of him, both to
whom, how, and for what end the Sacraments are to be administered, how they
agree, and wherein they differ, in all which we must assirm nothing but what
God has taught us, and as he has taught us. Which how they cut the sinews of
the argument from Circumcision to Baptism, without wrong to master Ball, is
showed in my Apology, Sect. 13. page 57.

Mr. M. in his Desence, page 83. Mr. Blake page 74, 75. of his answer to my
letter, seem to deny, that Paedobaptists do frame an addition to Gods worship
from such analogy, the contrary whereof is manifest from the passages cited
before. But Mr. Blake over and above, page 75. sets down three cautions, which
being observed, then this kind of arguing from analogy and proportion is
without any such pretended danger. The insufficieny of which cautions being
showed in my Postscript to the Apology, Sect 17 page 143. I conceive it
unnecessary to repeat my words, which the Reader may here find, and the
vindication of them from what Mr. Blake opposes in his vindiciae foederis,
chap 42. follows in the nex: Section.

4. I argued, that if this way of making rules binding men consciences in mere
positive worship from analogy of the ceremonies or rites of the Old Testament,
without institution in the New, be valid, then our Christian liberty from the
Ceremonial Law is made void. For by this way of determining things as of Gods
appointment, by our conceived analogy, al or a great part of the Ceremonial Law
may be put on our necks under pretense of analogy, and so the fruit of Christ's
purchase of Christian liberty lost, and we in vain exhorted to stand fast in
the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free. For as Chillingworth once told
Knot the Jesuit, if the Pope be made sole Judge of Centroversies, and
infallible Expositor of Scripture, it will be in effect all one, as if he were
allowed to make a new Scripture and Articles of faith; and tyranny may be
introduced as well by arbitrary expounding, as well as by arbitrary making of
laws: so in this case the bondage of Moses his law may be put on our necks, not
only by those that say, it binds in the letter, but also by those that say,
Gods commands about the Sacraments of the Jews bind us in the analogy and
proportion.

5. This argument has strength from the sad experience the Church has
formerly and of late had in yielding to these reasonings from analogy, in the
many Canons of Popes and Prelates, heavily loading Gods Church with rites and
decrees about them, imposed from analogy of the Ceremonial Laws of Moses. The
Constitutions of Popes, and Canons of Prelates, and the books of the
maintainers of them expounding and defending their rituals, and liturgies, are
full of them, to wit, rites about Priests, their Orders, Garments, Dues,
Festivals, Sacraments, Votaries, Religious houses, and such like, drawn from
Mosaical Laws. It is a common complaint of Protestants and Antiprelatists, that
in imitation of the Jews, under pretense of analogy, a new named Judaism has
been brought into the Christian Church, and the reforming of them like Hercules
his labor in clensing Augias his stable Some I have named in my Examen, part.
3. s. 9. more I might. In the Augustan Confession among the Articles of abuses,
in the chapter of the Ecclesiastic power, its the general complaint, that
Popish writers made a worship in the New Testament, like the Levitical. I may
use Mr. Bs words in his Appendix to plain Scripture Proof, etc. page 302. And
indeed if all that is not contrary to Scripture customs, and that man's vain wit
can find reasonable from Scripture, must be admitted, and that upon equal
authority with Scripture, if they do but take it for a tradition Apostolical,
Then 1. it will set man's wit a work to make God a worship, or judge of the
currantness of it, according to his reason; and one man will think it
reasonable and another not. 2. And what a multitude of Ceremonies will this
admit into the Church, to the burthening of men's consciences, and the polluting
of Gods worship? Is not this the door that the body of Popish trash came in at?
and the Argument that hardneth them in it, and hinders their reformation to
this day? And if you open this Gap, what a multitude of fopperies will rush in?
Certainly by this means the Gospel has been shadowed and repressed; no stint
either has been or could be put to the inundation of such impositions, as long
as liberty has been given under pretense of analogy with Jewish rites to add
to the worship and discipline of the new Testament: but it has happened
according to Austins Complaint, Epist. 119. to Ianuarius, that the state of the
Jewish Church under Divine precepts has been more tolerable, than the
Christian burdened with humane presumptions. Ames Bell. enerv. tom. 3. lib. 1.
cap. 8. th. 15. Romanenses in suis ceremoniis partim imitati sunt Gentes,
partim Iudaeos. th. 17. Ceremoniae hujusmodi tollunt discrimen illud quod Deus
voluit esse inter Iudaeos and Christianos, quia paedagogiam Iudaicae similem
habent.

6. If such Arguments from Analogy of Jewish rites abrogated may be valid to
impose on men's consciences things about the worship of God, then Popes and
Prelates are not only unblamable and justifiable in so doing, but also
Protestants and Non-conformists will be unjustifiable in no yielding to them,
but opposing them.

Mr. Church Divine warrant of Infant-bapt. page 49. in answer to these three
latter reasons, speaks thus. Arguing from the Jewish types for the Substance of
those shadows, tends neither to an introducement of Judaism, nor yet to a
justification of the Quisquilian toys of the Papists: for it is neither
arguing for the Ceremonies of the Jewish Church, nor for the fooleries of the
Popish Synagogue, but for privileges which the faithful may expect by Christ,
of which those ceremoni's were prenunciative, and are ceased, not because they
were evil, but because we have the substance and truth of them, which is much
better, non quia damnata, sed quia in melius mutata, August.

Answ. The objection was, Arguing from Circumcision for Baptism of infants, is
the way to introduce Judaism, and to subject the Church again to the whole
burden of Jewish Ceremonies: Mr. Churches answer is, Arguing from the Jewish
types for the substance of those shadows, etc. Which answer is either merely
impertinent, or else he conceives arguing from Circumcision for Baptism of
infants to be arguing from the Jewish type for the substance of the shadow.
Which if he stand to, then he must make Circumcision the type, and Baptism of
infants the substance of Circumcision, which sure is not according to
Scripture, which makes Christ the body, of which the ceremonies, and among them
Circumcision, was a shadow, Col. 2. 17. Nor does Mr. Church prove any thing
that he says, but vainly dictate, when he makes arguing for infant Baptism
from Circumcision to be arguing for privileges which the faithful may expect by
Christ, and makes Circumcision a ceremony prenunciative of infant Baptism;
against which, and the whole way of arguing from the use of Jewish rites to
Christian from analogy without other institution, I further reason.

7. Protestant Divines do frequently deny the Jewish Sacraments to be types or
figures of ours, Ames. Bellarm. ener. tom. 3. lib. 1. cap. 3. th. 11.
Sacramenta externa sunt figurae: figuras figurarum non instituit Deus, that
they figured or represented Christ and his grace, not other Sacraments* Cap. 4.
th. 13. Absque ulla ratione asseritur circumcisionem fuisse figuram baptismi:
sacramentum non est signum visibilis sacramenti, sed invisibilis gratiae.
Therefore no right arguing by analogy from a Jewish rite to a Christian, which
must suppose one to be a sign of the other, which is denied by them. Mr. Church
his speech is vain, That the Apostle argues from the Sacrifices in the Jewish
Church, Romans 12. 2. Heb. 13. 15. the offering of our selves, and the
sacrificing of praises, which he calls the calves of the lips, etc. For 1. the
Apostle does not argue at all, but only allusively calls the presenting of our
bodies, and giving thanks, a sacrifice, and the calves of our lips, by reason
of some resemblance: which if it be arguing In the use of every Metaphor there
is arguing. 2. Were it arguing, yet it is not to the purpose, since it is not
any arguing from the use of one rite to another by analogy, but from a rite to
a moral duty, to wit, devotion and thanksgiving. And when he adds, And from
sealing the promise by the initial Sacrament to infants of Gods people
aforetime, may the sealing of the promise by the initial Sacrament to infants
of Christians in this Dispensation be rightly argued; sealing the promise,
being the substance of Circumcision and benefit intended by it: and such
arguing has no color of setting up Judaism, for arguing for the thing
signified tends not to the introducement of antiquated Ceremonies, he does but
write at random. For if the reason of his assertion be pettinent, then he must
hold, that sealing the promise by the initial Sacrament to infants of
Christians in this Dispensation is the substance of circumcision and benefit
intended by it. But it is either unintelligible to me in what sense the sealing
of the promise by baptism to infants of Christians can be the substance of
circumcision, and the benefit intended by it, or else it is very absurd.

For then it will plainly follow, 1. That till infantbaptism of Christians,
Circumcision was without its substance, and the benefit intended by it. 2. He
makes infant baptism the thing signified by circumcision, and the substance of
circumcision, and so one ceremony signifies, and is the substance of another.
But however we judge of his unintelligible or absurd arguing, it appears not by
his answer but that the way of arguing by analogy from circumcision to baptism,
that is from the regulating our practice in a rite of the New Testament by a
rite of the Old, as obliging our consciences, may and does introduce Judaism,
and other evils, as was objected.

Mr. Blake answer to my Letter, page 97. seems to put by this arguing of mine,
by advising me to read over Bellermine, and tell him then whether his arguments
to lay the Sacraments of the Jews as low as types, and to extol the Sacraments
of Christians as their antitypes, be not the self same that I and my party make
use of to make so large a difference between circumcision and baptism.
Protestants deny them indeed to be types, because they assirm they are in
substance the same, our doctrine keeps us at a distance from Bellarmine, when
you are in this reconciled to him, making the same differences as he does
between Circumcision and Baptism.

Answ. Had M. Blake directed me to the place in Bellarmine, he would have me
seriously read over, I should have done it. But now not well knowing what place
in Bellarmine he would have me read, and the reading him all over, and that
seriously, being a very tedious task, I do not gratify M. Blake in his
request: But to what he says, I reply, I put sundry differences between
Circumcision and Baptism in my Examen, part 3. sect. 9. which Mr. M. his
Defense does not show to be false. If they, or any other I make, be the same
with Bellarmines, and yet true, Mr. Blake does causelessly except against me for
agreeing with Bellarmine; sure it is no matter of blame to agree with the Devil
himself in the truth, it is no evil to believe there is one God, because the
Devils do so, James 2. 19. But how this should reconcile me to Bellarmine in
that which I except against him, that he makes the Jews Sacraments Types of
ours, is to me unintelligible. 2. Dr. Ames his words show, that therefore he
denied that Circumcision was the figure or type of Baptism, because a Sacrament
is not a sign of a visible Sacrament, but of invisible grace, and that God has
not appointed figures of figures, or types of types, but types of some body or
substance. The reason M. Blake gives why they are not types, because they are
in substance the same, I know not what Protestants do give, whoever they be
that do say so, in my apprehension, either they speak nonsense, or false.
Sacraments being nothing but actions used to some ends, according to
appointment, what substance they should have, but the actions and the use, I
understand not. Now that the actions are not the same, it is manifest, cutting
off a little skin, killing, roasting* eating a lamb, being not the same with
washing the body with water, and breaking and eating bread, and drinking wine;
and for their end and use it is certain, however they may agree in some things,
yet those being generals, and accompanied with more differences in their end
and use both general and particular, it may be with greater reason denied, that
they are the same in substance, than averred that they are: And arguments drawn
from the one to the other concerning their use, are from things unlike, as much
as like, yea denied by the users to be types, figures or signs, the one of the
other, and therefore cannot infer a parity in the thing questioned, without
institution.

8. The ceremonies of the Jews are now not only mortal, but dead, buried, and
deadly, according to the received Doctrine; yea, some condemn not only the use
of them formally, but also materally; Rutherford Divine right of
Church Government, Introd. sect. 1. page 8. says, It is a false ground of the
Prelates, that Circumcision, a Passover Lamb, and all the Jewish ceremonies,
though with another endand intention than to shadow forth Christ to come in the
flesh, are indifferent. Riv. on Exodus, 20. Walaeus are cited by Mr. Cawdrey,
Sab. Red. part. 4. c. 1. page 527. to the same purpose; therefore not to be
revived, no not in Effigy by following any rule about them, as by Analogy, or
proportion between them and ours, without like institution binding us.

9. Arguments from Analogy in positive rites, without institution in the New
Testament, except God declare either by general rule, or particular example he
allows such Arguments, are but humane inventions, as not being from the Spirit
of God, (for that speaks only in the word about Doctrines, but from man's
reason: But such are the Arguments drawn from a positive rite of the Old
Testament now abrogated, to regulate our practice in the Sacraments of the New,
as obliging our consciences. Therefore they are against the second Commandment
in the Decalogue, our Saviors words Mat. 15. 9. In vaiu do they worship me,
teaching for Doctrines men's Precepts; it is tyranny and usurpation in them that
impose them, and violation of their liberty, forbidden by the Apostle, Col. 2.
20. in them that submit to them. Davenant exhort. to brotherly commuunion, chapter
1. tells us, that Luther wisely admonishes us, that in matters surmounting the
capacity of humane reason, we beware of Etymologies, Analogies, Consequences
and Examples.

10. Arguments from conceived Analogy, are but Arguments from that which is
like, not the same: But such are but weak things. Proportions are weak
probations, said M. Rutherford, Due right of Presbyt. chapter 2. sect. 2. page 37.
Chamier Panstr. Cath. tom. 1. lib. 9. c. 10. s. 47. Deinde sunt hujus generis
conclusiones magis verisimiles quam necessariae nisi nitantur Diser to Dei
verbo. Oxford Convocat. reasons against the Covenant, page 27. The Arguments a
minore and a majore are subject to many fallacies, and inless there be a parity
of reason in every requisite respect between he things compared, will not hold
good: They do illustrate rather than prove; and therefore they that assert that
Poedobaptism si fully determined in the old Testament, where they have nothing
but analogy from Circumcision, and the Jewish Church state, what ever their
confidence be, do but show their weakness. I shall now examine what Master
Blake says in answer to my Arguments, and then what Mr. B. brings for his
speech above recited.

SECT. III.
Mr. Blakes plea for arguments from analogy in mere positive rites of the old
Testament, and Mr. Bs. speech about infantadmission as determined in it, are
refelled.

MAster Blake Vindic. Foederis chapter 42. sect. 2. speaking of me says. And to
this end he sets himself, First to dispute down all Arguments a pari, all
whatsoever that are grounded on parity of reason, or analogy and proportion.
This he speaks to in his Examen page 28. And I may here fitly refer the Reader
to that which I have written chap. 10. sect. 4. of my answer to M. T. only in a
few words viudicate it from his exceptions against it in his Apology, page 140.

And page 308. he says, The Reader will hereafter find me reasoning with my
full strength against the force of all Arguments a pari.

Answ. It is not true, That I set my self to dispute down all arguments a pari,
all whatsoever that are grounded on parity of reason, or analogy and
proportion. For 1 in the place cited Examen page 28, 29. I do expressly level my
arguing against arguments from analogy only in positive instituted worship
consisting in outward rites, such as Circumcision, Baptism, and the Lords
Supper are, which have nothing moral or natural in them, but are in whole and
part cetemonial. 2. I do dispute against all such arguments, not as brought to
illustrate or confirm a thing otherwise proved from institution, but when they
are brought to infer Divine institutions and commands obligatory of men's
consciences. I had said Exam. part. 2. s. 8. page 29. To me it is a dangerous
principle upon which they go that so argue, to wit, that in mere positive
things (such as Circumcision and Baptism are) we may frame an addition to Gods
worship from analogy or resemblance conceived by us between two ordinances,
whereof one is quite taken away, without institution gathered by precept or
Apostolical example. Mr. Blake answer to my letter page 74 asks who those be? I
told him that he did Birth-privilege page 15. (I should have said 14) and I
mean those words, upon this ground (the Covenant) Infants under the Law were
Circumcised, and upon the same ground Infants are now to be Baptized: by the
grounds of both Circumcision and Baptism we enforce the Baptism of Infants:
what is objected against one concludes against both: Circumcision and Baptism
are therefore by the Apostle promiscuously taken; there being the same
principal and main end of both. But he says now Vindic. foederis page 373. In
my whole discourse I did studiously avoid arguments drawn barely from analogy,
so that we may see how willing Mr. T. is to quarrel, and how loath to speak
truth.

Answ. There was nothing but truth and fair arguing in my Apology page 142. For
though Mr. B. denies his argument to be barely from the analogy between
Circumcision and Baptism, by which he hid enforce the Baptism of Infants, yet
his arguing from the grounds of both, without institution gathered by precept,
or Apostolical example, is barely from analogy. Analogy or proportion I neither
did imagine nor conceive Mr. B. made in the likeness, resemblance, or evenness
in the ritual part of Circumcision and Baptism, that is the cutting off the
skin, or the washing the body, as if he did argue, Infants had a skin cut off,
therefore Infants are to be washed with water: But the analogy I conceive made
by him between them, is in the supposed parity of reason, taken from (as he
calls them) the grounds of both, secluding institution, as my words show,
Examen page 29. and postscript page 142. now this Mr. B. does in the words
cited, arguing from the Covenant, the same principal and main end of both, and
thence dictating what is objected against one concludes against both, and
asserting (though falsely) that Circumcision and Baptism are therefore by the
Apostle promiscuously taken, and mentions not the distinct institution of
Infant Baptism from Infantcircumcision, but as if he counted them the same, yea
as if he meant them all one, imposes on the Apostle as if he took Baptism and
Circumcision promiscuously: wherein he argues from bare analogy (if not
identity) between them without institution. And therefore I do still charge him
with arguing according to that principle, which he says, is as dangerous to
him as to me. But he has yet another shift.

In case, says he, I had by analogy with Circumcision made proof of Infants
title to Baptism, it would not have freed him from calumny, seeing it is no
addition to worship, Baptism is worship as Circumcision was, this is but a
demonstration of the latitude and extent of it.

Answ. There is no calumny in it. For he adds to Gods worship who does make
something worship of God, which he has not appointed, as Non-Conformists did
argue in their Negative argument against the Bishops Ceremonies from Deuteronomy. 4.
2. and though the Conformists did allow some addition to Gods worship in
indifferent ceremonies, yet they agreed that to make any such addition as
necessary binding the conscience, or part of Gods worship, specially when it is
in things determined by institution, was unlawful. Now God has appointed
expressly disciples or believers in Christ to be baptized, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16.
16. and no other, and this is his instituted worship; he then who baptizeth
Infants who are not disciples or believers, and does this as Gods worship, does
add to the worship having no institution gathered by precept or Apostolical
example: nor does he demonstrate, but devise a latitude and extent of the
worship of his own head, or worships God after the precepts of men. As for the
words, it is no addition to worship, Baptism i^ worship as Circumcision was,
they seems to intimate, if there be any reason in them, than Infantbaptism is
no addition to worship, because Baptism is worship as Circmcision was, which
imports, that there could be no addition to worship in adding to Baptism,
because it is worship as Circumcision was, whereas the reason is better to the
contrary, that it being not commanded Infant baptism is addition to worship,
because Baptism is worship as circumcision was.

Mr. Blake goes on. It runs in Mr. T. his head that we go about to find not a
Baptism-institution, but an Infant-baptisminstitution, and that barely by
analogy from Circumcision. This I confess were a wild undertaking.

Answ. It Is true, I did think Mr. M. in his Sermon page 44. when he said,
Baptism was instituted long before (that command Mat. 28. 19.) to be the seal
of the Covenant, had sought its institution from Genesis 17: and in his Defense I
find not that which might take me off from that conceit. And it still runs in
my head that Mr. Blake must either find not only a Baptism-institution, but
also an Infant-baptism-institution, or else we must yield Infant Baptism a
corruption of that ordinance, whether it be called will worship, or profaning
it, or what other sin that corruption be termed. As he that will acquit prayer
to Saints, or for the dead, from corruption, must find not only an institution
of prayer, but also of prayer to Saints and for the dead; he that will acquit
Infant-communion, Bell-baptism, etc. from corruption, must find not only an
institution of the Communion and Baptism, but also of Infant-communion and
Bell-baptism. I agree, that it were a wild undertaking to go about to find an
institution of Infantbaptism, especially Genesis 17. because it is not to be found
there, or in any other part of holy Scripture, and yet I think Paedobaptists do
go about to find an institution of Infant Baptism, and that barely by analogy
from Circumcision, as I show before, and therefore by Mr. Blakes own censure
their attempt is a wild undertaking.

He adds. Neither I nor Mr. T. to help me, can find an
Infant-circumcision-institution. If he instances Genesis 17. 12. He that is eight
days old shall be circumcised among you, every man-child in your generations;
I say that is no institution of Circumcision, but a subsequent directory for
the particular day (according to the Paedagogy of those times) when the person
was to be circumcised. The institution we find not with restriction to infancy,
but in that latitude as to comprize males of any age, v. 10. This is my
Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy s^^d after thee, every
man-child among you shall be circumcised. Mr. T. knows very well, that by
man-child only the s^x and not the growth is distinguished, omnis mas, as
Junius and Tremellius, every male, as Anisworth reads it; If that after
directory had not followed, they might have circumcised (as we baptize) infants
upon any day at our best conveniences. This is plain in the text, and may be
further cleared; if the institution it self be with that limit of time to the
eighth day, then it had been their sin (according to Mr. Tombs, the sin of
will worship) in case that time through negligence had slipped, to have
circumcised them another day, as it was for a man unclean, or in a journey on
the 14th day of the first month (the time appointed for the passover) to
observe it any other day, till God appointed the 14th day of the second month
for such occasions, Number. 9. 6, 7, 8. But that they had their liberty by virtue
of the institution to circumcise any other day, when that was over, is clear in
the text, and may be farther made plain, that Abraham so understood it by his
circumcising of Ishmael at 13 years, which had been without warrant, had there
been an institution only for children of eight days; when God was displeased
at Moses his neglect of the Circumcision of his Son, Exodus 4. 24. yet he was
pleased that he was after circumcised v. 26. So that as there was an
institution in Old-Testament-times, for all males in Covenant without
difference of age; so there is in New Testament times an institution of Baptism
for all in Covenant without difference of age or sex.

Answ. Mr. Blake says, neither he nor I to help him can find an
Infant-circumcision-institution, and yet he himself finds, Genesis 17. 10. an
institution in that latitude, as to comprize males of any age: if there be an
institution to circumcise males of any age, then there is an institution to
circumcise male infants, who are of some age. And therefore it seems to me a
wild speech of Mr. B. to deny the finding of an institution of
Infant-circumcision, when he himself sets down the institution of it within a
few lines of those words. But he conceives it no institution of circumcision
Genesis 12. 10. To which I say, Be it subsequent directory, or what ever else he
will call it, Mr. Blake might easily perceive by my words, Examen page 28, 29.
and elsewhere, I take the word institution for any appointment by precept,
command or example approved, either express, or gathered by good consequence;
if any of these ways an institution of Infant Baptism can be showed out of the
New Testament without the analogy of Circumcision, I should not make any doubt
of it, and therefore it is but unnecessary wrangling which he uses about the
word [institution]. Let him show any subsequent directory for Infant Baptism,
as is for Infant-circumcision without the analogy of Circumcision* and I am
satisfied. Yet to show the vanity of his speeches and arguings I shall a little
scanne them, He denies an institution of Infantcircumcision, Gent. 17. 10. he
says, it is but asubsequent directory for the particular day.

Answ. Ausonius Popma de differ. verborum l. 3. Institutines sunt praecepia,
quibus docentur homines atque instituuntur. In this general acception a
directory is an institution. But were it taken strictly for a command
establishing that ^ite, surely v. 12. not only the particular day was
appointed, but the person also, to wit, the Infant of eight days old among
Abraham's people, and all the verses 10 11, 12, 13, 14. together are termed
sanctio circumcisionis, by Pareus in his Commentary. But we find not the
institution with restriction to Infancy, says Mr. Blake. Ans. True, nor did I
ever say the institution was restrained to Infancy, or that there was an
institution only for children of eight days, nor do I deny that the precept
Genesis 17. 10. was more general than that it should be restrained to the eighth
day: yet v. 12. the circumcising of infants was limited to the eighth day. Mr.
Cawdrey Sabb. rediv. part. 1. page 135. For some particular occasions of
worship, God was pleased of old to determine some time exclusively, as the
eighth day from the birth of a child for Circumcision, and the eighth day for
the sacrificing of the firstling males of cattle, neither sooner nor later. Nor
do there want those among Protestant Divines, who make it unlawful to do it
before or after but will worship, except in cases of necessity, as in the
wilderness, etc. in which case the rule holds, God will have mercy and not
sacrifice, and the thing might be done afterward, as in the circumcision of
those who were born in time of their travel in the wilderness. But to have
altered the time of a man's own motion, without such necessity, had been
will worship, as it was charged on Jeroboam 1 Kings 12. 33. that he sacrificed
in the month he had devised of his own heart. What Mr. Blake says, there is
in the New-Testament-times an institution of baptism for all in Covenant,
without difference of age or sex, is false, except by being in Covenant he
understand, not being in Covenant by Gods promise only, or others faith, or
undertaking for them, but by their own act of Covenanting, that is engaging
themselves in their own persons by their, own act to be Christ's Disciples or
believers in him, there being no institution in the New Testament times of
baptizing any other than Disciples or Believers in Christ. Mr. Blake adds. I
instanced in the Apostles argument from analogy for Ministers maintenance, 1
Cor. 9. 9. 1 Timothy 5. 18. Mr. Tombs answers, The Apostle does not by bare
analogy conclude Ministers maintenance, but from the Lords ordinance; He does
conlude it then (by his confession) from analogy, though not barely from
analogy. Neither have any one of Mr. Ts Antagonists concluded Infant baptism
barely from analogy of Circumcision. There are other arguments which wait for
his answer, so that this instance stands.

Answ. My Confession was not, that the Apostle argued from any such analogy as
Paedobaptists conclude Infants Baptism from, to wit, the To Mr. Fisher, urging
1 Cor. 9. 10. for an equity of the Geremonial Law to prove Christmas, Mr.
Collings Caveat p. 77. says. The Apostle indeed 1 Cor. 9. 10. urges the
equity of that piece of the Law, Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox,
etc* but I never took that for a piece of the Ceremonial, but for a piece of
the Judicial Law.
rule of Circumcision, thus, Circumcision was appointed to Infants in Covenant,
therefore Baptism is appointed to Infants in Covenant, they having the same
main and principle end to seal the Covenant of grace (which is Mr. Blakes own
arguing) which is from a ceremonial rite of the Old Testament to a ceremonial
rite of the New, without precept or example of Christ or his Apostles. For 1.
The Apostles argument 1 Cor. 9. 9. seems not to me to be from analogy, but a
testimony explained. So Mr. Dicson in his Com. Arg. 3. a testimonto legis de
pabulo bovi trituranti dando: quod ostendit dictum esse in gratiam omnium
laborantium in aliorum usum, potissimum in ministerio. Diodati, The end of Gods
Law is not to show how cattle should be fed, but to command equity to be used
in just rewarding of those who labor for us. Mr. Blake himself vindic*
foederis page 406. Thirdly he argues from the command of the Law: 2. If it be
from any analogy, it is in things that have a parity of equity, and so it is in
moral things, which are perpetual, not in mere positive rites. 3. It is an
analogy which the Apostle delivered to us, not analogy made by men not guided
by an infallible spirit, as is the inference of Paedobaptism from Circumcision,
and therefore is not of force to oblige men's consciences* I have showed before
that the Paedobaptists main argument is barely from such analogy, and for other
arguments waiting for mine answer, either they are answered before
sufficiently, o^ God assisting, will have answer in this Review. Mr. Blakes
arguments vindic. foede. chapter 43. sect. 1. require no longer answer. The first
is the same with Mr. Bs. second. And the Major is to be denied, if by [ unless
order be given to the contrary] be meant of order given to the contrary in
formal positive terms, such as this, Thou shall nor baptize Infants. If it be
meant of order given to the contrary, either in express formal prohibitive
terms, or equipollent, the Minor is to be denied.

In the second the Major is to be denied, and in like manner the third,
distinguishing the term [ holy] In the fourth both the Major and the Minor, and
so likewise the fifth, explaining the term [ church privileges*] In the sixth
the Major is to be denied if understood of the invisible Kingdom of God only,
if of the visible, the Minor is to be denied: In the other two additionals, the
Major if universal is to be denied, and the Minor is true of infants of
unbelievers as well as believers.

And for the last Argument the matter is as easily answered as the form. For
the Major, Those that are to be saved are to be added to the Church by baptism,
Act* 2. 47. is to be limited by the text v. 41. thus [ when they willingly
receive the word] If no larger answer be given Mr. B. to these arguments, yet
this will be enough to show they are without much difficulty answerable. Mr.
Bs. proofs likewise, God assisting, shall have fuller answer than they deserve,
though were it not for his own and others conceits of his writings for
infant baptism, I should think it lost time to bestow it in an exact
examination of his inconsiderable dictates.

As for the present instance of M. B. of the Apostles arguing from analogy, he
may see it now fallen, and so likewise the next, of which he speaks thus.

I instanced in the Apostles arguing 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. he makes it good that
partaking together of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, we are made one
Ecclesiastical body, by way of Analogy with the like in the sacrifices of the
Jews, yea in the sacrifices of the Gentiles; to which Mr. T. says, this
argument is to prove, that they which profess Christ may not partake of the
things of Idols. From this general truth, that they which join in the service
of any God, they hold Communion with that God, and are one with those that
worship that God; this the Apostle proves by instances in the Christian and
Jewish services. So that this argument is from a genoral truth proved by
induction of instances. Mr. T. mistakes, the Apostle takes no such general
truth for granted, but affirms that we are one body at the Lords table, which
he first proves by analogy in the instances mentioned, and then concludes
thence against communion with Idols; That which the Apostle disputes he l^ies
down, but we have not these words in the text.

Answ. There is no mistake in my Analysis of the Apostles words. He had v. 14.
warned them of Idolatry, to wit in going with the Infidels to their Idol
feasts, and to make them more heedful of what he said he prefaceth, v. 19. And
then argues: not thus, they that partake of the Lords Supper are made one
Ecclesiastical body by way of analogy with the like in the sacrifices of the
Jews, yea in the sacrifices of the Gentiles; For then the conclusion to be
proved should be, we are one body Ecclesiastical at the Lords table, and the
sacrifices of the Gentiles should be the medium to prove it, which had been
ursi for such a proof, nor in any passage of the Apostle is used to that end.
For how inept an Argument had this been, the Gentiles in their sacrifices had
communion with the Idol, therefore they that partake of the Lords Supper are
made one body Ecclesiastical? Nor would the proof be much otherwise if it were
thus (as Mr. Blake makes it) we are one body Ecclesiastical who partake of the
Lords Supper, therefore in Gentile sacrifices we communicate with Idols. And me
thinks there is a circle in this proof, by the Gentiles sacrifices to prove we
are one body Ecclesiastical in the Lords Supper, and thence to prove we
communicate with Idols in Gentile sacrifices. But the scope of the Apostle
appears by the words, v. 14. and v. 19, 20, 21. evidently to be the dissuading
them from the Idol-feasts on their sacrifices, because they had therein
fellowship with the Idol, did partake of its cup and table, and so with Devils
v. 20, 21. which had been an argument in concludent, were it not thus made, To
have fellowship with the Idol is evil to be avoided by Christians, as being
Communion with Devils. But to partake of the thing offered to Idols is to have
fellowship with the Idol. Ergo, The Minor, which alone is proved, rests on this
general maxim, They have fellowship with a true or supposed Deity, who partake
of his service, and this the Apostle proves to be true by the instances of the
Christians and the Israelites, v. 16, 17, 18. I know sundry Protestant
Expositors make the argument to be thus, Ye may not partake of the Idol
banquets, because ye are partakers of the Lords supper. But I conceive this not
right: For v. 16, 17. the Apostles medium is not from the matter of fact what
they did, or duty what they were to do, but from the tendence of their action
in common construction and interpretation of the end and use of such actions,
which did show they had Communion in the body of Christ. Which is clearly
proved from v. 18. where the Apostle allegeth the Israelites partaking of their
altar to the same purpose to which he had used the former, v. 16, 17. now the
Christians neither did nor were to partake then of the Jewish altar, and it is
not a reason from their fact or duty* but only from that wherein Christians
breaking bread, Jews and Gentiles eating of their sacrifices did agree, that
these actions testified their fellowship with that Lord for whom these services
were performed. And therefore by Piscator, Dicson, and others, the argument is
thus framed, Israelites by eating of the sacrifices testified they were
professors and partakers of the Jewish religion, therefore they that eat of
Idol sacrifices, they testify that they Communicate with Idolaters in their
idolatry: Yea Mr. Blake himself in his answer to my Letter page 74. does
plainly acknowledge the Apostles argument to be from a general maxim common to
all religious service, when he says, yea he further makes it good (that which
he concluded before) in the words following, even from the Heathen, it is of
the nature of religious worship, whether true or false, to make those of one
body (as I may say) religious that partake of them. Whence it is apparent that
it is not an argument to prove any duty in a Christian rite of the New
Testament from the ceremonial law, since it is by his own confession even from
the Gentiles sactifices, which sure by analogy or resemblance being altogether
forbidden, cannot make us a rule in Christian mere positive worship, and
therefore there is no such argument in the Apostles speech from analogy, as I
opp^gn.

Mr. Blake yet adds. I instanced in Christ's defense of his disciples from the
charge of the Pharisees, Mat. 12. 3, 4. by analogy and proportion of the like
in David. Mr. T. answers, that is only an instance to prove that sacrifice must
give place to mercy, a ceremonial to a moral duty, not an argument from mere
analogy or resemblance of things different. He proves that truth then by
analogy, if not by mere analogy, and he tells us of no other thing that is
joined to help it out, and make it an argument complete. To these, abundance
more might be added.

Answ. It is enough to show this instance impertinent, in that it is not from
such analogy as is used to prove Infant Baptism by Infant-circumcision; Thus it
was in a rite in the old Testament upon this ground, Ergo, it must be so in a
rite of the New Testament, because the same pretended ground remains other than
Gods command or institution: which I called mere analogy in mere positives
without a distinct command about each rite. As for my exposition it was right,
that Christ allegeth David's fact as an instance, that ceremonials give place to
morals, and sacrifice to mercy, as appears by v. 7. And hence in giving rules
about exposition of the Decalogue usually from this passage a rule is drawn,
that ceremonials give place to morals, sacrifice to mercy. Sure I am, neither
here, nor any where else in Scripture is there found such an argument as this,
Thus it was in a ceremony of Moses Law, therefore thus is must be in a rite or
ceremony of the New Testament.

Mr. Blake proceeds thus. Upon Mr. T. his desire of rules how far we may go
in this parity of reason, and himself allowing this way of reasoning in morals,
which in many cases might be singularly useful and very helpful in this
particular; he is yet silent, we may then keep our way of reasoning without
rules, as well as he his; I yet gave in mine, which he epitomizes, and gives in
to the Reader by the halves. To whom in the first place I might apply that of
the Poet, Carpere vel noli nostra, vel ede tua.

Answ. There was no reason I should set down rules about reasoning from analogy
in morals, how useful soever they might be. For 1. though I said in my Examen
page 28. for that which is natural or moral in worship an institution or
command in the old Testament is allowed as obligatory to Christians, yet I did
not say, that in morals a man may reason as Paedobaptists reason in
ceremonials, This was a duty or sin in the Old Testament, therefore another
thing is a duty or sin in the New Testament (which was not in the old also) by
imagined parity of reason, as my words Postscript sect. 17. import. 2 Neither
is it necessary to set down any other rules than what either Logicians set down
in the Topics about arguments a comparatis, or Divines give in the expounding
the Decalogue. 3. If any more were requisite, yet it would have been to draw me
into a dispute on the by, to fall on that point in that place. 4. If it had
been fit for me to do it, yet at that time I had no leisure, the Postscript
being written when my Apology was almost printed, as I say in the Postscript
sect. 1. which is also a reason why I did not set down all his words about his
rules in my Postscript sect. 17. which he calls epitomizing of them, and giving
in to the Reader by halves, when the rules were as fully delivered by me as
himself, and only the applications and amplifications omitted, nor does he show
wherein I have omitted any thing of the strength of them. But whereas Mr. Blake
says, he may keep up his way of reasoning without rules, as well as I mine, he
does untruly suggest that I keep up any way of reasoning without rules; my way
of reasoning is such as the Apostle used 1 Cor. 11. 23. and best Divines court
certain, to take that only as of Gods appointment in mere positive ceremonies
of the New Testament, which is gathered by Christ or the Apostles, precept or
example, in the New Testament. Pareus Comment* in Mat. 26. 26. quicquid igitur
Dominus Jesus hic instituit atque praecepit necessario est observandum, nec
omittendum, quicquid non instituit nec praecepit non est quasi necessarium huic
sacramento ob^rudendum sed rejiciendum. Hinc videam illi qui fractionem panis a
Domino institutam omittunt vel damnans. Which doubtless is as true concerning
Baptism, Mat. 28. 19. Jus Divinum Eccl. regiminis by London Ministers, part* 2.
chapter 10. page 99. The power of Church government is not natural but positive.
Therefore all such power claimed or exercised without such positive grant is
merely fine ti^ulo, and ipso facto null and void. And for his way of reasoning
without rules, to wit, to argue thus, It was so in a mere positive ceremony of
the old Testament now abolished upon this conceived reason, Ergo, it must be in
like sort in another ceremony of the new Testament, which is conceived to have
in part the same use, if he kept it up, it will condemn the reformation of many
Popish and Prelatical ceremonies, and justify the retaining of them.

The thing I required in my Examen page 29. was this, I desire any learned man
to set me down a rule from Gods Word, how far I may go in my conceived parity
of reason, equity or analogy (to wit, in mere positive things to frame an
addition to Gods worship from analogy or resemblance conceived by us between
two ordinances, whereof one is taken away, without any institution gathered by
precept or Apostolical example) and where I must stay; when it will be
superstition and will worship, when not, when my conscience may be satisfied,
when not.

Mr. Blake, Vindic. foed. page 375. says of me. Take them as he lays them
down Apolog. page 142. 1. When parity of reason or analogy does not institute
any piece of worship, or the least part of the service of God, but only help
to a right understanding of the nature, use and extent of that which is
instituted. 2. When in our reasoning from analogy for the right understanding
of any institution or ordinance, we do not rest solely on the analogy with
other commands, but have our further reason for confirmation. 3. When the
analogy holds full proportion in that for which it is brought, so that nothing
can fairly be brought against the one, but may be also concluded against the
other. Against these rules he takes three exceptions, 1. That never a one of
these rules is brought out of Gods Word, for there is neither declaration of
such rule, nor example to prove it. The first rule I thus illustrated, Ainsw.
page 76. You find nothing in Scripture for excommunication of women, yet we
find in the old Testament Miriam shut out of the Camp, Number. 12. 14. and in all
penalties for transgression, in Scriptures we find no regard had of distinction
of sex, and by consequence it is not to be denied, that women offending are
within this censure. Mr. T. magisterially answers, The proving of
excommunicating of women from Miriams shutting out of the Camp, Number. 12. 14. is
not a Scripture Collection, but a mere device of men. If there be no such thing
as excommunication in the New Testament (as Mr. T. says page 92. and unsaies
page 93.) then I confess what he says, but if there be such an institution
(which here is not a time to examine, as I am sure there is of Baptism) then it
may be evinced from that place that it reaches to both sexes. Mr. T. would
have us to proceed by alterable rules of prudence. This prudence as may be
inferred, is to reach to both sexes.

Answ. My answer notwithstanding this reply stands good. For 1. He brings not
any declaration or example where the Holy Ghost argues thus, Excommunication
extends to women, because Miriam was shut out of the Camp, Number. 12. 14. It is
true, the Anti-Erastians, as Rutherfurd Divine right of Church Government, c.
7. q. 3. attempt to prove that separating from the congregregation for leprosy
typified Christian excommunication, and thence Mr. Blake would prove
Excommunication of women. But neither is any other than an humane device, it
cannot be proved, that only scandalous sin answers to leprosy; original sin
or sins of thoughts may as well be conceived to be signified by it, and
separating from the congregation may as well typifie exclusion from heaven, as
removal from the visible Church, yea more agreeable to the end, since putting
out of the Camp was not for amendment as excommunication was. That
excommunication which the Scripture in the New Testament mentions as belonging
to Christians, I grant is to be of women as well as men, but we need not run to
the Old Testament to prove it, 1 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6. 14.
2 Timothy 3. 5. prove it. If that Rev. 2. 20, belong to excommunication, a woman is
in express terms made liable to it. I agree with Mr. Blake, In all penalties
for transgression in Scripture we find no regard had of distinction of sex,
and by consequence it is not to be denied, that women offending are within this
censure: so that by his own grant we need not run to analogy from ejecting the
L^per, to prove excommunicating of women* It is not true, that (...)d unsay: my
words are plain, distinguishing ju^^dical Excommunication of superious from
social, granting this latter, though demurring about the former. I have showed
my meaning plainly in the Addition of my Apology sect. 17. 19. in my letter to
Mr. Robert Baillee of Scotland; what Mr. Blake holds in this point I cannot
well tell. Some conference I had with him in London made me doubtful whether he
were not somewhat of Erastus his judgment in this point; here he does not say
there is an institution of Excommunication as he is sure there is of Baptism.
But I deny if there be an institution of excommunition that it may be evinced
from Number. 12. 14. that it reaches both sexes, much less that any precept may
be thence gathered as obliging Christians in the use of excommunication: If
there were a rule thence obliging, it would follow that excommunication is to
be but seven days, and then the excommunicate to be received in again. What I
said of ordering things by alterable rules of prudence is expressly meant of
things concerning which we have not precise direction from Gods Word, which I
suppose Mr. Blake will not deny to be true, though he is pleased to mention it,
as if it were mine and not his tenent.

He says further. I brought an instance not for a proof of it self, but
illustration of another proof from Divines arguing against nonresidence from
Ezekiel. 44. 8. This (he says) is good after other arguments, but of it self is
not convincing. Such arguments then are of validity when aright placed and
marshalled orderly, I hope this of mine then is of force, it is not in the van
but brings up the rear.

Answ. What I acknowledged, that the argument was good after other arguments, I
mean to illustrate, not to prove, nor would I deny an argument from
Circumcision of infants good to illustrate Baptism of infants, if it were
before proved from precept or Apostolical example, manifested in express
assertion, or deduced by good consequences. But the most of Paedobaptists make
the argument from Circumcision their Achilles, and by their texts, and
confession of a Committee of them, it was the main, if not the only argument
in the Assembly. Mr. Bs arguments he puts in the van are no better, as is
briefly showed, Postscript, sect. 2. etc. Yet for the text Ezekiel. 44. 8. upon
better consideration it seems not fit to illustrate a proof against
nonresidence, since the sin there charged was not leaving the Temple themselves,
but admitting at the will of the Prince other than of the Tribe of Levi to be
in Gods sanctuary, Number. 18. 4. yea even the uncircumcised, and thereby Gods
holy things were profaned, and idolatry brought in. And therefore the
observation of the New Annot. of the second edition is, that unlawful
Ministers, false in doctrine, soul in life, are not to be admitted but ejected.
But for Mr. Blakes rule, there is no one text brought out of Gods Word to prove
it, that we may argue from analogy, so as to infer a duty from an use in mere
positive worship of the Old Testament now abolished in the use of a rite of the
New, without any other precept in the New Testament, when we do not institute
thence any piece of worship, or the least part of the service of God, but only
make it a help to a right understanding of the nature, use and extent of that
which is instituted. Yea this rule seems to me to speak inconsistencies, For he
supposes that analogy may not institute any piece of worship, or the least
part of the service of God, yet allows direction from analogy in the nature,
extent and use of that which is instituted; whereas the nature, use and extent
being the chief part, or the very service it self, and are determined in the
institution Mat. 28. 19. if we may take direction from our conceived analogy in
them, we may not only institute a piece of worship, or the least part of the
service of God (which Mr. Blake denies) but also the main part, yea the very
service itself, which has no greater parts than the nature, use and extent. So
that Mr. Blakes first rule, denying the use of analogy in the least part of
Gods service, yet allowing it in the nature, use and extent of that which is
instituted, is but a rule destroying in one part, what is built up in the other.

He adds further. The second and third rules he says are not set down from any
declaration or example in the Scripture. I desire him at his leisure to look
again, and he may see the second rule confirmed from the Apostles way of thus
arguing, 1 Cor. 9. and the Lord Christ's Mat. 12. The third is confirmed by that
reasoning of Christ with the Pharisees before mentioned, compared with our
reasoning with Antipaedobaptists.

Answ. I have looked again, and I say still these are impertinently alleged by
Mr. B. as being not one of them from such analogy as Mr. B. maintains and I
deny, as I have before showed, and for Antipaedobaptists reasonings, they are
the fairest that can be, keeping close to the confessed institution of Christ,
and practice of the Apostles, and there is this objection which is fairly
brought against Infant Baptism, that there is no command or example for it in
Scripture, which cannot be brought against Infant circumcision, and for the
hypotheses of Paedobaptists from the Covenant, seal, succession to
circumcision, etc. there is not one of them true, as God willing shall be
showed in the process of this Review.

Mr. Blake goes on, His second exception is, These are very uncertain. For no
reason is given, why they may not make a new worship, who may by their analogy
extend it beyond the institution in the New Testament. This very well answers
Mr. T. his ingenuity, to which I may reply by way of retortion, why may not Mr.
T. as well deny an institution and destroy it, as well as curtail that which is
instituted? we shall be able to make it good, that he curtails Christ's
institution in the New Testament, cuting off many Churchmembers in Covenant; he
shall never be able to prove that we extend it by analogy or otherwise beyond
the institution.

Answ. That exception of mine did very well agree with ingenuity, and it might
have stood better with Mr. Bs. ingenuity, to have taken the exception as
sufficient to invalidate his rule, than to have made this taunting reply. The
answer had no fault, but that it was a little more modest than might have stood
with truth. For 1. I might have said truly, not only that no reason is given,
but also that no reason can be given, why they may not make a new worship, who
may by their analogy extend it beyond the institution in the New Testament. For
their analogy being a mere humane invention, if they have authority to enlarge
the ordinance, they have authority to make a new worship; the Papists if they
have authority to appoint Baptizing of bells, they have authority to appoint
the Sign of the Cross, for the same end for which baptism was; the same
authority which serves for the one, serves for the other. Yea, if the analogy
direct in the nature, use and extent of an instituted worship, what does it
else but make a new worship? And that it may be seen how dangerous it is to
follow Mr. Blakes rule, I would have it considered how we shall avoid
justifying the Popish mass, if we stick to it. He allows analogy in the
understanding of the nature or use of an instituted worship, the Lords Supper
is an instituted worship, and it is conceived it succeeds the Passover, as
Baptism Circumcision; if then by the analogy of Circumcision we may gather the
use of Baptism, we may in like manner from the analogy of the Passover, gather
the use of the Lords Supper. It is certain from he Apostles words, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
For Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us, that the Passover was a
sacrifice and such a sacrifice as resembled Christ, and therefore propitiatory*
and then by analogy the use of the Lords Supper is so too, which is the chief
point whereby the popish mass is established. The very self same rule will
prove the Ministers of the Gospel, who succeed the Priests of the Law, and by
analogy from whom, according to Mr. Blake, the Apostle reasons, 1 Cor. 9. 13,
14, will be proved sacrificing Priests, if as Mr. Blake says, analogy may
direct us in the use of an instituted ordinance. 2. I say Mr. Blake does by his
analogy according to his first rule, allow the making a new worship* For the
worship is not the same, but a new worship, when though the same element be
used, yet the nature, use and extent of is otherwise than the institution, as
though the Pharisees used water according to the tradition of the Elders, Mark
7. which is the element used in Baptism, yet their washing their hands was
another worship than Christian Baptism, because the nature, use and extent of
it, was other than the institution of Baptism: So likewise though water be
retained in their so called Infant Baptism, yet it being neither used in the
manner appointed by Christ, to wit, by dipping, but by sprinkling or pouring,
nor on the subject appointed by Christ to be baptized, to wit, disciples or
believers in him, but on Infants, who are not such, nor to the end Christ
appointed, that is, to testify by that act their owning Christ for their Lord,
their dying to sin, and rising to newness of life, but only to seal the
Covenant of Grace, I say a new worship is made in their Infant-watering, as
there was of old a new worship made in Infant-communion, and is at this day in
the Popish mass, and Baptizing of bells. As for Mr. Blaks retortion, I do grant
Mr. T. may as well deny an institution, and destroy as well as curtail that
which is instituted. But that by denying Infants visible Churchmembership in
the Christian Church of the New Testament, and their being in Covenant, and
right thereby to Baptism, I curtail Christ's institution, I do then expect he
will be able to make good, when he proves the snow black and the crow white.
And whether I prove* that by analogy or some other way Baptism is extended
beyond the institution in Infant Baptism, I leave it to the Reader to judge.

Mr. Blake goes on thus. The second rule (he says) overthrows all, for if we
may not rest solely on the analogy, why at all? How then is that collection
from Ezekiel. 44. 8. good, after other arguments against non-residence? neither do
I say, that it may not go alone, but it will hardly go alone, but other
arguments will be found to second it, in which I also gave instances.

Answ. 1. The collection from Ezekiel. 44. 8. is good to illustrate, not to rest
on as a proof, yet with the correction of my speech as above. 2. I did not
charge him that he said it may not go alone, nor is it to the purpose which he
tells us that he said analogy will hardly go alone. But this I say, His second
rule is that reasoning from analogy holds when we do not rest solely on the
analogy with other commands, but have our further reason for confirmation,
which does plainly intimate that we may not rest solely on it. Now I argue, if
it be a good proof, we may rest solely on it; For one good proof is enough for
a man to rest upon, though more arguments make it clearer. If then we may not
rest solely on analogy with other commands (as Mr. Blakes words intimate) then
it is not a sufficient proof. To which in Mr. Blakes words there is no reply,
nor has he avoided my objection that his second rule overthrows what he
contends for, the validity of his analogical arguments impugned by me.

Mr. Blake of me. He adds, this is enough to show that analogy has no
strength, that indeed it does not only illustrate, connot prove* what is an
argument by analogy, but an argument a simili? I had thought there had been
much difference between these two kinds of arguments a pari and a simili; pari
a similibus omnino differunt, says Scheibler in his Topics. I may send him to
his Dictionary to see whether one be not Englished equal or even, and the other
like or semblable. I may send him to the Predicaments whether one be not in
Quantity, the other in Quality, and demand of him whether there be magis and
minus par and aequale, as there is magis and minus simile? And to con ult with
the Topics whether that be not one head from which they draw arguments which
in their judgment are valid: Has Mr. T. never read de paribus idem est
judicium? quod valet in re pari valet etiam in compari. I think he never read
de similibus idem est judicium: quod valet in simili valet etiam in re
assimilata. If Mr. T. be agreed we will refer it to the Common Law, whether
this way of reasoning will hold or no; if it fail, we shall need no other
Levellers to take down that art, it will fall of it self, they have scarce any
other way of arguing. But if these only illustrate (which I think no Logician
will say) yet it is here sufficient, There was an institution of Circumcision
and there is of Baptism; neither of these needs proof being not in controversy
between us and our adversaries. The right subject of Baptism only is enquired
after; the institution has Infants we say within the verge, and are not
excluded from it; For this we have our arguments which from the initiating
sacrament of the Jews we only illustrate.

Answ. It seems Mr. Blake thought he had me here at a lift, and therefore after
a message from him by words of mouth some years since, intimating he took my
speech to be absurd, that an argument from analogy is but an argument a simili,
he bestirs himself in this manner in this his book. But to stop him in his
carreer. He tells me he had thought there had been much difference between
these two kinds of arguments a pari and simili: which may be true, and yet my
speech true also, what is an argument by analogy (I did not say a pari) but an
argument a simili? He tells me, paria a similibus omnino differunt* says
Scheibler in his Topics. Answ. It is true, Scheibler Top. c. 23. q. 2. says
so, But withal he tells us, that Titelman comprehends paria sub similibus, and
Hunuaeus, similium and parium aut nullum aut pertenue discrimen esse ait, idque
propterea, quia eadem exempla referantur ad similia and paria. Yea even
Scheibler himself c. 23. says, Ad similia etiam pertinent parabolae and
analogia; analogia est similitudo composita trium vel quatuor terminorum.
Keckerm. syst. log. lib. 3. c. 6. sequitur locus qui est a similitudine
composita, quae dicitur analogia seu proportio. Burgersdicius Instit. log. l.
2. c. 18. Intelligitur hoc loco non simplex sed composita similitudo sive
analogia. And in the same place has this passage even of analogy. Argumenta ex
locis similium p^tita magis illustrant quam probant, and ut ait Molinaeus
afferunt magis dissentiendi pudorem quam assentiendi necessitatem. Georg.
Dounam. Comment. in Rami Dialecti. lib. 1. c. 21. Comparatio similium (...)
dicitur, id est similitudo, dicitur etiam proportio Graece (...) ut similia
proportio nalia Graece (...) and a mathemacis (...), inquit Fabius lib. 5. c.
11. quidam a simili separaverunt, nos eam subjectam huic generi putamus. Nam ut
unum ad december, sic december ad centum, simile certe est, and ut hostis sic malis
civis. Ac certe proportio nihil aliud est, quam duarum rationum similit udo.
Sic enim Euclides (...) Ratio autem seu (...) est duorum inter se terminorum
collatio. Exempli gratia, ut 2. ad. 4. sic 3. ad. 6. proportio sive similitudo
est, quia eadem est ratio seu qualitas 4. ad. 2. quae 6. ad. 3. scilicet dupla.
Solent quidem hae voces a quibusdam ad quantitatum collectiones adstringi,
verum generalis sunt significationis. Nam and similitudo omnis proportio est,
and qualitas omnis ratio est. And for the Dictionary. Pares* cum paribus
facillime Congregantur in Cicero, is rendered by Cooper, like most readily
gather in company with like. Par est, Plaut. it is like or equal. Par Co^at
jungatque pari. Horat. Jam sumus Ergo Pares, Martial. These and innumerable
instances besides show that however in the Predicaments par is applied to
discrete quantity, and simile to quality, yet they are taken without such
exactness in other Authors, and that frequently parity is as much as likeness
in quality and other conditions. And it is known that it is a rule in Logic,
that qualities are sometimes expressed by words of quantity, as when we say a
great Philosopher. And for the Topics locus a pari is not a pari numero, or
simili qualitate only properly so called, but also from any such argument
which makes it probable that the like may be said of the one as of the other:
locus a majori and minori is all one with locus a magis and minus probabili. I
find in Keckerm. syst. log. l. 3. c. 7. this Canon. De paribus and similibus
idem est judicium. I grant good use of arguments a paribus and a similibus in
the Common Law, which they call from the same case: nor do I except against it
as insufficient for Judges and Lawyers to determine by. Yet as in the Law when
there is a Statute Law which determines any case, Judges and Lawyers use not
then such arguments: so Christ having made an express Statute concerning
Baptizing, and who are to be baptized, it is against the Law of God for Mr.
Blake to run to his analogy, and to impose on men's consciences such uncertain
conjectures as his analogy from circumcision, which are no better than his own
and other Paedobaptists figments. And me thinks his words she^ there is no
strength in it, when he says. The institution of Baptism has infants within
the verge, and are not excluded from it; For this we have our arguments, which
from the initiating sacrament of the Jews we only illustrate. If other
Paedobaptists would stand to this, we should be less cumbred with the argument
from the Covenant and seal, which was Mr. Marshals and the Assemblies main if
not only argument. However the Reader may here take notice that Mr. Blake
confesses that he with others do only illustrate their arguments for
Paedobaptism by the argument from the initiating sacrament of the Jews: which
may move the considerate Reader to regard little that argument, and to look for
other arguments from the institution comprehending infants, which have and will
appear frivolous, as his exception here against me has been.

Mr. Blake yet adds. The third likewise says he, is uncertain and vain; For
how shall we know when the analogy holds full proportion? when nothing can be
fairly brought against the one, but may be also concluded on the other? when is
the proportion full? if only when omnia sunt paria. When Mr. T. will destroy
our old Logic to set up his own Divinity, it were to be wished that he would
furnish us with a new piece of Logic as he has done of Divinity, that all
learning humane and divine may stoop to his reformation. I have learnt these
for maxims. Parium exacta est convenientia. Quod de uno parium affirmatur id
affirmatur etiam de altero and e contra. But these with Mr. T. are vain and
uncertain, and all arguments that dance not after his pipe, though our Saviors,
St. Paul's, or any others.

Answ. There is nothing here but flirts and flams. Neither do I destroy old
Logic, nor set up any other than what I have from the Scripture, yea and the
best approved writers: nor need I any new Logic to help me in the reformation
of Infant baptism, but such as Protestant Divines have used in reformation of
Popish and Prelatical ceremonies. I do not say the maxims of Logic Mr. Blake
here sets down are vain and uncertain, and all arguments that dance not after
my pipe. But this I say, Mr. Blakes rule about arguing from analogy conceived
between Circumcision and Baptism, or any other Old and New Testament rites, so
as without precept or Apostolical example in the New Testament to frame an
obligation on our consciences is vain, and uncertain, nor does our Savior, or
St. Paul, or any other sacred writer argue so, as in my answer above may be
seen.

Mr. Blake, This can never happen ( says Mr. T.) in analogies between the
rites of Moses and the rites of Christ. How did Paul then reason from a parity
in the Jewish altar and the Lords table, 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. Yea from manna and
the rock to the Lords Table? as Pareus and other interpreters observe, that
spiritual meat was eaten in the one and in the other, and a like danger of
profaning the one and the other.

Answ. I said true, it can never happen in analogies between the rites of Moses
and the rites of Christ that all things should be even, or that there should be
an exact agreement between them, so, as that which is affirmed of the one
should be affirmed of the other, or that there should be the same reason in the
use of the one as in the other, and thence inferred, what ought to be done in
the one ought to be done in the other, they who are to partake of the one are
to partake of the other. This is enough to overthrow the supposed parity
between Circumcision and Baptism as inferring Infant baptism, that they agree
not in this, that the institution of Baptism extends it to all those to whom
the institution of Circumcision extends it. It is not true that Paul did reason
1 Cor. 10, 16, 17. from such a parity in the Jewish altar and the Lords table,
as if what was done at the one, must be done at the other by reason of an
answerableness in the one rite to the other. But he argues from that which is
common to both, and to all other Religions whether true or false, that they
which did partake either of them did thereby profess the same Religion, to
prove that they which should eat of the Idol meats had communion with the Idol,
and so with the Devil. It is not true that the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4.
argues from manna and the rock to the Lords Table, as if he would prove that
spiritual meat was eaten in the one, therefore in the other, or that it was
dangerous to profane the one (for what danger was there in profaning the cloud,
Sea, manna, or water out of the rock?) therefore there is the like danger of
profaning the other, much less what was done in the one was to be done in the
other by reason of analogy between them: But the Apostles argument is
manifestly this, the Israelites being under the cloud, and passing through the
Sea, was to them as Baptism to us, their eating manna and drinking water from
the rock noted Christ as well as the Lords supper to us, and yet this could not
save them from Gods displeasure when they sinned, therefore our sacraments will
not shelter us from Gods wrath if we sin, which v. 6. 11. 12. of 1 Cor. 10.
manifestly show to be the force of the Apostles reasoning.

Mr. Blake adds. If when there is a parity in many things, it will be (says
he) uncertain how many parities will serve turn to make the proportion full.
Here is an excellent dexterity to enervate so many Scripture arguments, that
the weakness of this argument (in spite of all Logic) might appear; I have
told him, and may tell him still, The Corinthians and the Pharisees wanted his
headpiece, otherwise Christ and Paul had not gone so away with arguments of
this nature. To satisfy him therefore fully, one parity will serve the turn.
The exact proportion, say Logicians, is in quantum paria respectu tertii in quo
paria comparantur. There are many imparities between the Lords supper and
manna, yet they agree in this that both were spiritual meat; so between the
Jewish altar and the Lords Table, but they agree, in this, that there is
Ecclesiastical communion in both of them, to make the partakers of one body
Ecclesiastical: many differences between Circumcision and Baptism, but so far
they agree (by Mr. T. his confession) that both are initiating sacraments; he
has multiplied many differences, but stands not to any as in application to
this particular in difference.

Answ. There is in my answer nothing tending to enervate any Scripture
argument, though what I say is enough to show the vanity of Mr. Blakes
arguments* there being no certain rule to show how many or what sort of
parities, general or special, essential or accidental will serve turn. Neither
Paul nor Christ did argue thus, this was appointed in a rite of the Old
Testament, therefore thus it is to be observed in a rite of the New. In Logic
it is usual to deny an argument valid a comparatis, though there be some
parities, caeteris non paribus. It is true one parity will serve turn to make
things compared even in the thing in which they agree. But there must be so
many parities, or such a parity in things compared as make them equal in the
reason of the thing inferred, otherwise one disparity proper to the matter is
enough to enervate the argument. Which is very manifest in the argument about
Infant baptism. For the formal reason of Circumcising Infants being the
command, there is no parity to infer thence Baptizing of Infants without the
parity of command. Which is the difference I have often stood to in application
to this particular in difference; which is not whether Baptism and Circumcision
be initiating sacraments, but whether an argument can be drawn to bind
conscience in the use of the one from a command, in the use of the other
without a precept in the New Testament.

Mr. Blake concludes this section thus: The third exception is, It is uncertain
whether these rules be sufficient, whether there be no need of any more. It is
certain then that Mr. T. cannot make it appear that they are insufficient, in
case he could he would not have left them at any uncertainty: I shall judge
them sufficient till I hear from Mr. T. the contrary.

Answ. I have made it appear that these rules are not sufficient to make good
the proof from analogy disproved by me: nor was it formerly uncertain to me
they are not sufficient; yet I might say truly, it is uncertain, whether these
rules be sufficient, whether there be no need of any more to satisfy others,
who may think them too few as well as otherwise imperfect. I for my part do
judge them notwithstanding Mr. Blakes plea to be insufficient, and all
arguments inferring duty as of Gods appointment in the use of a rite of the New
Testament from some likeness or agreement with a rite of the Old Testament now
abolished, without direction in the New, as frivolous and serving only to make
wrangling, fill people with superstitions, and to weary Scholars, as I say in
the Addition to my Apology in answer to Mr. Baillee sect. 15. Mr. Cawdrey Sabb.
rediv. part. 4. chapter 1. against Dr. Sanderson, saying Divine right or
institution is that First which is properly and primarily such; as what is
(first) enjoined by express ordinance of God, or (secondly) what may be deduced
therefrom by evident illation. Secondly that which is secondarily and
consequently such. To which four things (say they) are required, 1. equity, 2.
analogy, 3. insinuations in the new Testament, 4. continued practice of the
Church, speaks thus. But this proceeding seems not sufficient. 3. There are
things now in common use which have all the four conditions, and yet he will
not say they are Divine institutions; as the observation of Easter etc: which
yet are confessedly but Ecclesiastical. And will Mr. Cawdrey make a Divine
institution of Infant baprism which in the next page he says we have no
express command (nor express example of it) in Scripture, from grounds which at
most can make but analogy without equity (for in mere positive rites there is
no equity but the appointers will) insinuations in the New Testament or any
truly well proved continued practice of the Church? However Mr. Cawdreys words
are sufficient to show (though they oppose himself) that he counted analogy not
sufficient, no not though accompanied with equity, insinuations in the New
Testament and continued practice of the Church to make a thing of Divine
institutution, but only Ecclesiastical. Which being granted, Mr. Marshals
analogical argument (as he calls it) which with him the words of the Assembly
intimate to be the chief prop of the Divine institution of Infant baptism,
falls to the ground. But lets hear what Mr. B. says also.

What need (says Mr B.) the same thing to be done twice, except men had
questioned the authority of the old?

Answ. The Holy Ghost has delivered many things twice in the Old and New
Testament, yet sure it was needful, else it is not likely it would have been
done. Will Mr. B. charge the Spirit of God with needless committing so many
histories, sayings of Christ etc. to writing, because they were written before?
And to his question I say, If there were no other need, yet there was this,
that the agreement of the Old and New Testament might appear, whereby the
authority of both is greatly confirmed.

The whole Scripture says he, is the perfect Word and Law of God: and if he
should reveal all his mind in one part, what use should we make of the other.

Answ. The Gospels of the four Evangelists are the perfect Word and Law of God,
they need no unwritten tradition for a supplement, in them those things are
written by which we may have life, John 20. 31. yet there is use of Paul's
Epistles. Suppose all Gods mind revealed in one part, so as no more doctrine or
truth were in the rest than in one, yet there is use to confirm, explain,
enforce that which is elsewhere written in that one part. And indeed this
reasoning of his would prove that book or part of Scripture to be of no use, as
suppose Marks Gospel, which is counted an a bridgement of another, or so much
of that Gospel as reveals no more of Gods mind than another does: which me
thinks Mr. B. on better consideration should disclaim.

He goes on. How silent is the New Testament concerning a Christian Magistracy?
which made the Anabaptists of old deny it. Where find you a Christian in the
New Testament that exercised the place of a king, a Parliament man, or Justice
of Peace, or the like? so of an oath before a Magistrate, of war, of the
Sabbath, etc. how sparing is the new Testament? and why? but because there was
enough said of them in the old? This also is the very case in the question in
hand.

Answ. The Anabaptists (as they are called) of former times, or some of them,
as it is reported (for their own books I never saw) of them, denied it lawful
for Christians to be Magistrates, to war, to swear, not only because of the
silence thereof in the New Testament, but also because they mistook the meaning
of the texts, as forbidding them Is. 2. 4. Micah 4. 3. Zach. 9. 10. John 18.
36. Mat. 20. 26. Mat. 5. 34, 35. Luke 22. 25, 26. etc. And so either did or
seemed to do some of the Ancient Christians, even those who are called the
Fathers, of which may be seen Sixtus Senensis Biblioth. sanct. lib. 6. annot.
25, 26. And yet learned men do not think the New Testament silent of a
Christian Magistrate, of an oath, or war, but that there are texts for them in
the New Testament, of which some are brought by Grot. l. 1. de Iure Belli. ac
Pacis c. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. Romans 13. 1. etc. And though there be no example
of a Christian King, Parliament man, or Justice of Peace, yet we find a
Christian Centurion Act. 10. a Christian Deputy Act. 13. 12. Christian parents,
husbands, masters, whose government is allowed, and rules given about the
managing of it. Wherefore I conceive Mr. B. does too much betray Christian
Magistracy, soldiery, civil judicature, etc. who suggests to his Reader, as if
the New Testament were silent of Christian Magistracy, and sparing about war,
or oaths before a Magistrate. I confess the determination of the Old Testament
is obligatory, because these things are moral, not peculiar to the Jews: but it
does not follow therefore that an argument is valid from analogy conceived
between rites of the old Testament and the new, or the Jewish policy and the
Christian to conclude an obligation to us in a rite of the New Testament, the
rites of the Old Testament being merely positive, not from the beginning proper
to the Jews, and together with the policy of the Jewish Church now abrogated.

But there seems to be more difficulty about the Sabbath. Mr. Marshall had said
in his Sermon, that all that reject the baptizing of Infants do and must upon
the same grounds reject the religious observation of the Lords day. In my
Examen part. 2. sect. 8. I denied it, there being something moral from the
beginning in the Sabbath, not so in Circumcision, and there being something in
the new Testament to prove an institution of the Lords day, nothing about
infant baptism, To this Mr. M. replies, However the determinate day does depend
wholly upon institution, therefore they who reject that which depends upon
positive institution, unless its institution can be expressly found in the New
Testament, are as much at a loss for the Lords day as for baptizing of infants.
2. And the advantage is here for infant baptism above the Lords day, because in
the proof of infant baptism there is only need to show the subject to whom
baptism is to be applied, in the Lords day the institution of the day it self.

Answ. 1. That which he says first confirms my exception; for therein he
acknowledges there is something natural or moral by institution about a
Sabbath, but shows nothing natural or moral in Circumcision.

2. I never rejected infant baptism because its institution cannot be expressly
in so many words or syllables without consequence found in the New Testament,
but because it is not there either in express words, or by good consequence.

3. If the determinate day require positive institution, there is institution
brought out of the New Testament, if not express, yet by good consequence,
which I count sufficient.

4. Yet I do not count Mr. Ms. consequence good by analogy in his Defense page
208. The Jews keep the Sabbath on the seventh or last day of the week, ergo the
Christians keep the Sabbath on the first day of the week. Of my judgment
herein with other Antipaedo baptists more may be seen in my Praecursor, S. 15.
And for the other thing Mr. M. adds, it is nothing to the business in hand,
which is not about the greater or lesser necessity of clearing the institution
of the Lords day or infant baptism, but about the principle by which infant
baptism is rejected, whether it necessitate us to reject the Lords day: which I
denied, because this principle, That use of a mere ceremony or positive rite
which has neither precept nor example in the New Testament is to be rejected,
will not reach the Lords day, which is not merely positive, but in part moral,
and has precept and example for it in the New Testament, neither of which can
be said of infant baptism.

That which Mr. B. adds next about the desperate highest sort of Antinomians,
who wipe out all the Old Testament with a stroke, and that they may as well do
so by the New Testament too if they please, and telling us the question whether
infants should be baptized is turned into a higher, whether the Scriptures be
the word of God or not? I might well let pass as being nothing to the point in
hand, the denying of infant baptism to be in the Old or New Testament, neither
being upon the higher or lower sort of Antinomians (if there be such difference
of them) principle, they that deny infant baptism, being not necessitated to
it, nor so far as I find in their writings (except what I have met with in Mr.
Dens Books) denying the obligation of moral precepts of the Old Testament. All
that they are necessitated to maintain is, that Ceremonial precepts of the Old
Testament and imagined ANALOGY between Baptism and Circumcision, the Jewish
Church state and the Christian, are of no force to conclude a divine
appointment concerning any Sacrament or merely positive worship of the New
Testament. And therefore his Pathetick Rhetoric, though elsewhere of use, yet
in a dispute as this his writing should have been, has the face either of
malignancy toward his Antagonists, or of an indirect trick to prepossess
people with horror of that opinion, which he would refuse before he comes to
his Arguments, which is the chief part of his skill. And for what he says
further that incestuous marriages are not forbidden in the New Testament, and
tells the men of Bewdley, That some of eminency that deny Infant baptism deny
either incestuous marriages, or any thing else not forbidden in the New
Testament to be sin, It is like the former, since he might know that Antipaedo
baptists are not necessitated to deny the obligation of the moral Law, in which
the Laws about incestuous marriages appear to be in that the Canaanites were
punished for their incests Levit. 18. 25. And Mr. B. if he had any mind to deal
heartily with me, might have told them, that I was none of those men, since he
might (if he did read my books with any heed, of which I much doubt) have told
them, that to this objection I answered in my Examen page 111. 1. That the
instance of the Laws about forbidden marriages brought by Mr. M. is not to the
point of the obligation of mere positive ceremonial worship, since the command
about prohibited degrees in marriage is moral 2. That yet there is for one
branch of Incest an express censure in the New Testament, proving the
unlawfulness of it. To which Mr. M. page 196. of his Defense says, But how
would you laugh at such a consequence in another, a man may not marry his
Fathers wife, a thing which by the light of nature was abhorred among the
Heathens, ergo all the degrees of forbidden marriages in Moses Laws stand firm?
whereto I reply, I made no consequence but this, one branch of Incest is
expressly censured in the New Testament, therefore it is unlawful. And this I
only brought to show the impertinency of Mr. M. allegation to prove the matter
in question, it being granted by me that a moral precept of Moses is in force,
thought not a ceremonial, and yet Mr. M. brings instances only of morals
standing in force, none of ceremonials, and instead of clearing the pertinency
of his own instances, makes a consequence as mine, which, says he, I would
laugh at in another, which dealing is cavilling not answering. The like to
which is that which follows in him. The like say you against Polygamy, there is
proof against it, Mat. 19. 5. 9. But is this an express prohibition of it? Must
you not be compelled to go by a consequence to bring it in, which is ab I
contend for? Whereto I reply. Though Mr. M. page 3. of his Defense charged me
unjustly with a Socinian plot in my writings to question all conclusions
deduced by consequence from Scripture, yet page 205. he says of me, That I
neither there nor here deny this Argument from a consequence to be sufficient
for practice of some things in the worship of God, which are not expressly laid
down in the New Testament, and therefore he might easily have seen, if he
would* that to prove we may go by a consequence is not all he contends for, it
being known to him that I grant it. But this he is to prove, or else he still
is besides the business, that a consequence is good from analogy of an
abrogated rite of the Old Testament to prove a Divine appointment concerning a
mere positive rite of the New Testament, till this be done, his, and Mr. Bs.
and Mr. Bls. arguings are quite besides the business in hand and carry an
apparent show of Sophistry, not of just disputing.

SECT. IV.
Mr. Bs. Speeches about the little said for Antipaedobaptism is vain, and his
speech about the Antiquity of Infant baptism is very inconsiderate, and his
speech about the difficulty and importance of the point in question is examined.

THe rest of Mr. Bs. ten positions are granted by me, but what he says of me,
page 5. that he never to his remembrance did plead with an able Papist, but he
could say for more for his religion then Mr. T. said for his opinion on James
1. or his Sermon since, that he might insinuate that he and others had reason
to be settled in the practice of infant baptism, because I said so little then,
and my Sermon presently after, is like* King James his resolution, to be more
for the Bishops and Ceremonies, because Doctor Reynolds and his Colleagues said
so little against them in the Conference at Hampton Court, from whence M: B.
might gather* that if such men as Dr: Reynolds (whose equal every way the world
did then or since scarce yield) D: Spark, M: Chaderton, M: Knewstubs, did fail
to speak what had been requisite, when it was expected, though they were four,
which were to object, and that upon a sufficient time of premeditation, and yet
this no good evidence for Bishops and Ceremonies, it is no good evidence for
infant baptism, that I being single, being to answer ex tempore, hardly allowed
by M: B. to repeat his Arguments, whereof some were hypothetical syllogisms,
brought to prove an hypothetical proposition, and therefore such as could not
be well repeated, and his arguments containing such terms, as it appears now by
his Book, he used in senses different from what other Authors use them, and yet
would not explain them, with sundry other captious devices, and provoking
speeches, as I have in part made manifest in my writings, and through Gods
assistance shall do more, said so little at the dispute. Who is there that has
experience of humane infirmity, who knows not that distractions, forgetfulness,
in advertency, sudden weakness of body, extemporality necessitated, slowness of
speech, care to restrain passion, do hinder a man from speaking that in a great
meeting, which he could in his study by writing easily express? What I said
Jan. 1. 1649. was almost wholly as a Respondent, as the Argument required. Now
they that know the rule of Schools understand the Respondents business is but
to repeat, deny, distinguish, apply to the arguments of the Opponent, and this
was done by me then, why it was done no more fully my Antidote, Praecursor, and
the Review show. M: B. had in his Epistle Dedicatory to his Saints everlasting
rest, published to the world, that I was driven to gross absurdities, being
moved to name those absurdities in his answer to my Valedictory or ation, he
names 27. p. 207. To all which I answer in my Praecursor Sect: 17. and clear my
self from the absurdities he imagined. In his Praefestinantis morator, when he
comes to answer that Section, he only replies thus, Sect: 17. I know not one
word of Answer that this Section needs for him that will peruse my words. To
which I conceive I may without any heat reply, that he either wrongs his
Readers by not making good that I was driven to gross absurdities, after my
clearing of my self from them, or me, in not acquitting me from his charge. But
I must needs speak it, though with grief, that I have scarce met with less
justice, or fair dealing from any man than from M: B. and both his and other
Antagonists courses tend not to an impartial and equal way of examining the
point in controversy, but they use artifices to prepossess men against me and
my writings and speeches, and to deter them from considering them. In my Sermon
January ^0. 1649. was given an answer to M: Bs. arguments so far as I could
retain them in memory, or find them in some imperfect notes, when I had sought
in vain to have them from M: B. himself in writing. Now they are in print, they
have or shall have a large answer, if the Lord will. Papists may say much more
than I said, yet that either for their Religion orree will so much of moment
can be said as against infantbaptism is vainly surmised. It is well M: B. in
his 7. Position confesses some Divines have argued weakly for infant baptism,
and brought some misapplied Scriptures. If ye mean my Books by the third or
fourth written against them* (as it is most likely) he might know my writings
were in answer to M: Marshall, whose writing is conceived to contain the
Assemblies grounds, he is styled by M: Stalham the Antesignanus, and perhaps it
may be judged arrogance in M: B. to imagine his own arguments better than his.
For my part I think them weaker. However he had sh^wd some care of truth and
love to me, if he had by communicating them to me endeavored to stop me in my
supposed error. But this I count my trouble, though I hope it will advantage
the truth, that first Mr: Ms. Sermon has been magnified, and that by examining
it I hoped I had done my work, and yet after M: Blakes writing being magnified,
I was put to answer that, and then Mr: Bs. preferred before them all, and yet I
am referred by him to answer M: Cobbet, M: Drew, M: Church, and after all
Doctor Hammonds is preferred, so that I must answer that, or else the truth be
betrayed. It seems Paedobaptists know not well what to re^ on, when they do
shift so much from one to another. But I go on* M: Bs. eighth Position is, that
one sound argument is enough to prove any thing true: yet more may be brought
against infant baptism. Almost all that Protestants dispute against Popish
Rites, Non-conformists against Prelatical Ceremonies, may be said against
Paedobaptism, M: Bs. words in answer to Mr. Bedford, Plain Scripture proof etc.
page 302, 303. are appliable against infant baptism. In my Praecursor I had set
down M. B. words in the second Edition of the Saints everlasting rest, part. 1.
chap. 8. Sect. 5. page 179. in the margin; in his Praefestinantis morator he
says, To what end you recite my allegation of Justin Martyr is past my reach
to imagine; unless you would insinuate that I confess this to be the course
with all the baptized, which I expressly say was the way of baptizing the aged.
Answ It had been easy for M. B. to conceive why I set down those words, to
wit, to prove from his own confession, that to baptize upon profession of
faith, and to admit none to the Lords Supper but those who are thus baptized,
is no new over-strict way. And however he now endeavors to mince the matter,
these words of his, [ And in the primitive times none were baptized without an
express covenanting, wherein they renounced the world, flesh, and devil, and
engaged themselves to Christ, and promised to obey him, as you may see in
Tertul: Origin, Cyprian, and others at large.] being printed with a full point
at the end, are as plain a denial that infants were baptized in the primitive
times, as words usually express. As for the words following; I will cite but
one for all, who was before the rest, and that is Justin Martyr; speaking of
the way of baptizing the aged says, they are not words, if they be
restrictive, that limit any ones* speech but Justin Martyrs, and if by them M:
B. would intimate that Justin Martyr did not in that speech set down the way of
baptizing all that were then baptized, the words following saying thus, how we
are dedicated to God we will now open unto you, and then setting down the
constant way of baptizing without any exception, M. Bs. addition will easily be
perceived to be but a shift to avoid the evidence of this relation of Justin
Martyr, Apol. 2. ad Antoninum, being so plain to prove infantbaptism not to
have been then in use among Christians. Likewise in my Praecursor, Sect. 16.
page 66. I bring an argument against infant baptism from M: Bs. own words
mutatis mutandis. His answer in his Praefestinantis morator is in these words.
His Confidence, page 66. is mavelous. I doubt not but that he knows that I
take the words [since the solemn institution of Baptism Matthew* 28.]
inclusively; And so I answer, that this solemn instition is our warrant,
requiring us both to disciple nations, and baptize Disciples; and we have other
Scriptures which plainly prove infants to be Disciples.

Answ: My confidence is upon good reason, M: Bs. marvelling is from ignorance;
what he means by taking the words [since the solemn institution of Baptism,
Matthew. 28.] inclusively I know not* except he mean that time when that
institution was given, as well as the time after, or that institution to be a
warrant as well as after precepts or examples. Either way the medium of M. B.
serves my purpose. For it plainly asserts, that what we have no warrant, in all
the New Testament, for, we are not to do ordinarily* what we have precept and
example for, we are to do. Which if he will stand to, then his warrant out of
the Old Testament is not sufficient for infant baptism, and so it is not fully
determined in the Old Testament, at what age persons are to be admitted into
the Church, as he said before, and what we do we have warrant for by his own
grant, since he cannot deny we have precept and example for baptizing professors
of faith. And then his including here Matthew. 28. 19. in his Texts (though not
brought Plain Scripture proof, etc. page 342. to prove his antecedent) is an
intimation that in all the rest of the Texts, John 4. 1. Acts 2. 38, 41. and 8.
12, 13, 16, 36, 38. and 9. 18. and 10. 47* 48. and 16. 15, 33. and 18. 8. and
19. 3* 4, 5. Romans 6. 3, etc. he finds not precept or example for baptizing of
infants, and so if he find not warrant Matthew. 28. 19. for baptizing infants,
all his other proofs are by his own reasoning made invalid. For sure the Texts
alleged do as evidently prove this antecedent [ we have no warrant by word or
example in all the New Testament (since the solemn institution of Baptism,
Matthew. 28.) to admit any member into the Church by Baptism, but believers by
profession, but both precept and constant example of admitting them by it] as
Mr: Bs. [we have no warrant by word or example in all the New Testament (since
the solemn institution of Baptism, Matthew. 28) to admit any member into the
Church without Baptism, but both precept and constant example of admitting them
by it] The consequent then [we must not admit ordinarily any by Baptism without
profession of faith] must by the force of his own illation be undoubted to
those that take the word for their rule. As for his evasion, that he has other
Scriptures which plainly prove infants to be Disciples, how miserably he fails
therein will appear by that which follows in this Review. The Reader may
perceive that whatsoever his talk be about a Gift and Ordinance of visible
Church Membership unrepealed, and of Christ's Laying of hands on little ones,
and such like Arguments and Texts he brings, yet if he will stand to his own
reasoning in Arg. 9. against deniers of Baptism by Water, page 342. of his
Plain Scripture proof, etc. we have no warrant to admit ordinarily by Baptism,
but according to the precept and example in the New Testament in the Text,
Matthew. 28. 19. and the other Texts before recited. Concerning which I have
reason to be as confident as of common notions, that they include not infants,
and to marvel that Mr. Bs. prejudice should so blind him, as not to see the
futility of his arguings to prove infants to be Disciples included in the
institution Matthew. 28. 19. But I proceed.

Because, as he says, page 5. An answer cannot be always presently given,
which may make the case plain to some men, therefore Mr. B. should have given
his arguments in writing to those that came to him, which had been an easier
and fairer way than to tell them as he does, page 6. If any of you have taken
up the opinion of Antepaedobaptism, and have not read and studied Mr. Cobbet,
M. Church, and other the chief books, and been able (at least to himself) to
confute them, you have but discovered a feared conscience (a most heavy, though
vain censure, showing what rashness and distemper was in Mr. B. in this
writing) which either takes error for no sin, or else dare venture on sin
without fear, and have betrayed your own souls by your laziness, as if a man
might not be satisfied by reading of the Scripture, and conference with the
able of the opposite party, without reading so many Books. Sure Mr. B. who had
read those Books showed little charity to those of Bewdley that came to him for
arguments for infant baptism, when he would neither set down his own arguments
in writing, nor direct them in what part of those books they might have
satisfaction; but fly upon them with so deep a charge, without any moderation
of spirit. And when he says, page 7. He dare say by my books, that it is my
case not to have received the doctrine of infant baptism on the best grounds
and arguments. I reply, 1. that there are many passages which make me think he
never read my books with exact diligence and heed, but (if I may use his own
words) He betrays his own soul by his laziness or prejudice. 2. It shows a fond
conceit in him of his own arguments, which another perhaps will think weaker
than those of Calvin, Ursin, Piscator, the Assembly, Mr. M. etc. which he might
perceive by my Exercit. and otherwise, that I had considered. I said in my
Apology, page 6. that I rested wholly on 1 Cor. 7. 14. for many years, and that
Text Mr. B. calls a full plain Text, and Dr. Hammond in effect builds all his
proof for infant baptism upon it, and therefore Mr. B. might have perceived his
mistake concerning me, if he had heeded my books. If some Divines have argued
weakly for infant baptism, used some unfit phrases, and brought some misapplied
Scriptures, as he says, I am sure Mr. B. had reason to number himself among
them, if he be not the man who has in all these outstripped them. I wish he
had held his resolution of not heaping up many arguments, it would have saved
me much labor.

To his words, Whatsoever Mr. T. may pretend among the simple, I shall easily
prove, that infant baptism was used in the Church as high to the Apostles days
as there is any sufficient History extant to inform us: and that the deferring
of Baptism came in with the rest of Popery, upon Popish or heretical grounds.

I answer, 1. That my pretenses about the innovation of infantbaptism are not
among the simple, as he would insinuate, but among the most learned, for whose
examination my allegations are obvious in print. 2. That his assertion
concerning the antiquity of infantbaptism is most inconsiderate, there being
nothing in Ignatius, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, Epiphanius, and other the
most approved Histories and Authors, for his assertion. And for those be
brings, the highest is Pope Hyginus, whose words he alleged out of his Decree,
which I conceived had been in his Epistle decretal, judged to be counterfeit,
but Mr. B. in his Praefestinant is morator lets fly at me Sect. 3. for my
mistake. I confess I have not Blondellus, Surius, Nicolinus, Crab, Binius,
Gratian; but Osiander Epit. Hist. Eccl. Cent. 2. l. 2. c. 5. says, Reliqua
Decreta, quae huic Episcopo tribuuntur, ex Gratiano ad verbum (quia prolixa non
sunt) referemus. And then sets down five Decrees, on the second of which he
notes thus, Ex hoc decreto el^^et vanit as harum constitutionum; and quod falso
prioribus Episcopis Romany tribuantur. Quis enim credat? etc. Quare manifestum
est haec Decreta longo tempore post Hyginum facta, and in Ecclesiam Dei, jam
superstitionibus Pontificiis contaminatam, introducta esse. Hujus farinae sunt
and proxime sequentia Decreta, de rebus frivolis edita, of which the last is,
In catechismo, and in baptismo, and in confirmatione unus p^trinus fieri
potest, si necessit as cogat, non est tamen consuetudo Romana: sed per singulos
(astus) singula suscipiunt. Whereby the Reader may perceive the Decree to be
but a forgery, and that if it were true, yet it does not mention the baptizing
of infants, since Gossips were at the Baptism of elder persons, (though Dr.
Hammond say in his Mr. Fox in the second Book of the Acts and Monuments, as the
years 636 664.
Letter, page 214. Godfathers have place only in baptizing of Children) as may
be made appear by instances at the baptizing of some S^xon Kings, and
otherwise, and the Decree it self, putting a Gossip in Catechism before a
Gossip in Baptism, makes it probable not to be meant of a Gossip to an infant
baptized. And lest it be thought Osiander is alone, I will adjoyn the words of
Mr. Fox, Acts and Monuments first book at the year 175. The like (that
Telesphorus made them not) is to be thought also of the rest, not only his
Constitutions; but also of the other ancient Biships and Martyrs, which
followed after him, as of Hyginus anno 142. who succeeding him, and dying also
a Martyr, as Volateranus lib. 22. declares, is said or rather feigned to bring
in the cream, one Godfather and Godmother in Baptism, to ordain the dedication
of Churches: when as in his time so far it was off, that any solemn Churches
were standing in Rome, that unneth the Christians could safely convent in their
own houses. Likewise the distincting the orders of Metropolitans, Bishops, and
other degrees, savor nothing less than of that time. Doctor Prideaux, one of
Mr. Bs. own Authors for this Decree of Pope Hyginus about Gossips, though he
make mention of it where he speaks of that Pope, Compend. of History, cap. 7.
Sect. 3. interr. 7. yet after, among many of his inquiries, this is the third,
Whether it be likely that these religious Popes in such extreme persecutions
had liberty or list to think on making Cardinals or Gossips, and introduce a
rabble of beggarly Ceremonies. And though I were mistaken in calling that
decree of Hyginus the Decree in the Epistle, yet I think the Authors which
censured the decretal Epistles did comprehend the Decrees ascribed to those
first Popes among those forged Writings under that name. However, what I have
produced is enough to justify my speeches in my Praecursor, that the Decree
ascribed to Pope Hyginus about Gossips, is so manifest a forgery, that I could
hardly have imagined any learned Protestant would ever have alleged so
notoriously forged a writing: so that I need not answer Mr. Bs. allegation of
this testimony, as by current consent of Historians assuring us that Hyginus
Bishop of Rome did first ordain Godfathers and Godmothers at the baptizing of
infants, and his questions thereon, but by telling him he has reason to be
ashamed of abusing men with this forgery after so much eviction of it by
learned men, being more like a brazen faced allegation, than that he so
censures me for without cause. The next of his allegations is Justin Martyr,
from whom besides the bastard writing of Questions and Answers ad orthodoxos,
all the rest alleged, page 156. by Mr. B. is manifestly impertinent, and his
genuine writing yields a good evidence against the use of infant baptism, as
unknown to him, as may appear by what is said before. Mr. B. in his
Praefestinantis morator, says Sect. 3. Seeing you deny nothing in Justin
Martyrs words, you must yield that it was known to Mothers that their infants
were of Gods kingdom, and then certainly they were Church Members, and known
Disciples or Christians. To which I reply, that I have not Justin Martyr now by
me, and do doubt whether in that passage of the Epistle ad Zenam and Serenum,
he did mean infants, since the term is [children] which may be meant of persons
who are come to some age capable of understanding; and if the words be meant of
infants, yet it may be very well conceived that the meaning is, that of such is
the Kingdom of Heaven, that is the Kingdom of Glory, and that not in respect of
their present, but future estate, as when it is said, Matthew. 5. 10. Blessed are
they which are persecuted for righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven; that is, they shall have a great reward in Heaven, verse. 12. And then
it neither proves their present being of Gods visible Kingdom, nor that they
were Church Members, and known Disciples or Christians, and to be baptized.
This testimony for the antiquity of infant baptism I remember not alleged by
any before Mr. B. and therefore besides the impertinency of the words, as he
himself allegeth them, I see no need to search any further into it. His
allegation, page 154. out of Iraeneus is impertinent, wherein besides other
frivolous inferences out of his words he tells us, that Irenaeus cannot mean by
sanctifying, internal real sanctifying only, for then according to their
exposition of Renascuntur, it should be but Tautology, q. d. [ He sanctifies
all that are sanctified or new born] whereas had he heeded these words set down
by himself, this imagined Tautology had been seen to be his mere mistake; for
his words are, Omnes venit per semet ipsum salvare, He came to save men of all
ages, as Dr. Hammond renders it, not as Mr. B. He sanctifies all that are
sanctified. And yet if they had been thus, he sanctifies by himself all that
are born again or sanctified by him, it had not been a Tautology, since it is
manifest that Irenaeus by [ per semetipsum] meant by the pattern or example of
his own age, and then it is no Tautology, but has this plain sense, that all
that are sanctified by Christ, he came to sanctify them by the pattern or
example of his own age, and therefore lived in every age of a man, which is the
purport of Irenaeus his discourse in that place, which is by all sorts of
writers censured as his mistake Having said so much of Mr. Bs. mistakes, and
thereby sufficiently showed that no writer in the two first Centuries mentions
infant baptism, and therefore Mr. Bs. speech is most false, that he shall
easily prove that infant baptism was used in the Church as high as the Apostles
days, as there is any sufficient history extant to inform us, I leave the
examining of the testimonies for baptizing of infants, or against them, till I
have finished the review of the dispute from Scripture testimonies, and then I
intend not only to examine what Mr. B. has scribled in his Plain Scripure
Proof, etc. part. 2. chap. 15. and in his Praefestinantis morator, Sect. 3. but
also what Mr. Ms. friend Dr. Young (as I am informed) and what Dr. Hammond (men
better acquainted with the writings of the Ancients than Mr. B. or Mr. Bl.)
have said about the antiquity of infantbaptism, and do no whit doubt but that I
shall with the Lords assistance make good the assertions of the first part of
my Examen, that First, infant baptism is not so ancient as is pre ended;
Secondly, that as it is now taught it is a late innovation, meaning as it is
taught by the Assembly, Mr. M. and the reformed Churches called Calvinists. As
for Mr. Bs. assertion, that he should easily prove that the deferring of
Baptism came in with the rest of Popery upon popish or heretical grounds, if he
mean the deferring it till a person were catechized and of years sufficient to
answer by himself to the three questions, about Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience, which were still put to the baptized, it is not only vain and
inconsiderate, but notoriously false, it being the constant order of the Church
to baptize after catechizing, and the baptizing of infants only an exception
from the common rule and order, in case of danger of death, till after
Angustines days, who flourished in the fifth Century. The grounds on which
Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen did persuade the delaying of Baptism, were
neither popish nor heretical, as their words alleged in my Exercit. Sect. 22.
show. But on the contrary, the hastening of infant baptism manifestly appears
by the words of Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen, alleged there, and of
^yrian, and Augustine, together with the relations of Gregory Nazianzens and
Austins Baptism alleged in my Examen, Part. 1. Sect. 7, 8. to have come from
the popish conceit, that without Baptism infants could not come to Gods
Kingdom, or were damned. I deny not, deferring of Baptism to have been an abuse
upon sundry misconceits set down in Mr. Ms. Defense, page 22, 23, 24, 25. but
not one of them popish, except that of washing away sins by it, which was the
very ground of hastening infant baptism, as appears from the passages forenamed
by me. That which made persons of years defer their own Baptism, made them
hasten the Baptism of their infants.

Whereas Mr. B. would have Mr. Cradocks Gospel Liberty read, I have read it,
and do find that neither in his second part, chap. 12. nor here, Mr. Cradock
is well used by Mr. B. Mr. Cradock page 114. counts the custom of the Church
the weakest rule to discern by, and then only he leaves Christians to it, when
there is no other light to go forward. Mr. B. himself page 302. concludes
against Mr. Bedford, that in so material a thing as infant baptism, to hold
Traditions Apostolical, not contrary to Scripture-custome, or which may not be
confirmed from Scripture, as our rule, is prejudicial to Scripture, and a
complying with Papists. Besides, I need not say anymore than Mr. B. there says
about the uncertainty of Traditions unwritten, and customs of the Ancients,
which may serve for the present till a fuller answer be made to that
calumniating question in his Praefestinantis morator, Sect. 3. Do not you care
to smite through Christianity, so you may bring down infantbaptism? which he
has as much need to answer as my self; for he shows page 303. by the
uncertainty about Easter, the mistake of Irenaeus about Christ's age, how
uncertain the relations of the Ancients are about things not set down in
Scripture. And for the customs of Christians an See Sprint of Conformity.
Age or two after the Apostles, Writers do show many corrupt customs came in
about Easter, Lent, Infant-communion, sending the Communion to the absent,
mingling Water with Wine, Monastic profession, honoring of Martyrs; about
Baptism, giving Milk and Honey to the baptized, anointing them, the use of the
sign of the Cross, which grew to a very great number in Augustines time so as
that in his 119. Epistle to Januarius, he complained, as is before mentioned,
and yet they increased after in the height of Popery, by reason of the
innumerable company of humane Ceremonies, insomuch as that the pure worship and
truth of the Gospel was shadowed so much, as that for the abundance of such
leaves, the fruit of the Gospel Worship and doctrine was very little or scarce
discernible, and Christian Religion was almost wholly placed in those
Ceremonies. And therefore however there were weight in that argument of the
Apostle, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God of those times, yet
especially in matters of Ceremonies and positive worship the former after the
Apostles days, much less the present customs of the holiest Saints and
Churches should not be of any great weight in cases controverted, except when
they serve to expound some passages of the Scripture that are cleared by them.
Yet this will no whit infringe the validity of the testimony of the Ancients
about the canonical books, or right readings of the Scripture, no more than the
discrediting of the Jewish Rabbis relations about their Traditions does
infringe their testimony about the books of the Old Testament, though Mr. B. in
his Praefestinantis morator, Sect. 3. would insinuate, as if denying the
certainty of Austins rule about Apostolical Traditions must infer an
uncertainty about the canonical Scripture, which shows his proness to
calnmniate me, and his inconsiderateness in not observing how this may be
objected against his own speeches, page 303, as well as mine. As for Mr* Bs.
tenth Position, though I grant it as it is set down, yet in his amplyfying of
it there are sundry things that need animadversions. 1. That whereas he speaks
of some, that disclaim Reason because they require express words of Scripture,
and content not themselves with his supposed evident consequences; he may know
that I have often acknowledged consequences good proof from Scripture, and if
others do deny consequences, I do imagine that if they were rightly understood,
it would appear that they deny only such far-fetcht consequences as are used
about infant baptism, resting upon such hypotheses as are taken for granted,
when they have need of proof, or such consequences as are drawn from the rites
of the Jews to the Sacraments of the New Testament, which if it be their
meaning, Mr. Bs. censure of them as senseless ignorant wretches is too harsh and
magisterial. 2. To what he says, Will you allow of such an argument for
infantbaptism as Christ brings for the Resurrection? I answer for my self and
the people of Bewdley, to whom that speech was intended, we will: but withal I
say, that in viewing of his book I discern nothing but Mr. Bs. vanity, in
imagining his arguments to be like Christ's, when upon trial they have little in
them but superficial reasonings urged with much confidence and importunity upon
mistakes, and stuffed with impertinent Texts, frivolous questions, and childish
wonderings, fitted like things set in fields and gardens to fright birds, to
deter the shallow heads of this age from the truth, who either have no mind,
or no ability to examine it scholastically. This is my judgment of it. Chap. 2.
After all his ten Positions, Mr. B. has three more Propositions, the first
about the difficulty of it, in amplifying of which he confesses the point of
infantbaptism to be such, as the most godly learned impartial Divines cannot
agree in, after all their writings, disputing, studying, and praying; which
being true, it is most unjust in Maresius that in his sixth question he makes
the error of Anabaptists intolerable, in Ministers, that they will not permit
such as deny infant baptism to preach, nor will either themselves hear them, or
pray with them, or suffer their hearers, but renounce communion with them, and
make separations from them, and so show themselves Schismatics, yea, and in
their Pulpits and Writings endeavor to make them odious, exciting Magistrates
to imprison, expel, and destroy them; on the otherside the Parliament is
justified in that speech of theirs in the Declaration Ordered March 4. 1647. to
be published in answer to the Scots Commissioners Paper, that the opinion
against the baptism of Infants is such, as wherein in former ages as well as
this, learned men have differed both in opinion and practice, and that therein
they held it fit that men should be convinced by the Word of God, with
gentleness and reason, and not beaten out of it by force and violence. But Mr.
B. has another fling at my speech, that it is an easy point, and that the
reason why so many Divines did not discern it, was their wilfulness or
negligence, and this he imputes to want of humility, modesty,
conscientiousness, and that he should tremble to pass so high a censure,
forgetting what a heavy censure he had past before on others of discovering a
seared conscience* either taking error for no sin, or else daring to venture on
sin without fear, and betraying their own souls by their laziness, p. 6. Who
should be Antipaedobaptists without reading, and studying first some books
there named, calling others ignorant senseless wretches, with much more of this
kind over all his book, in which it is frequent with him to censure me, my
answers and speeches, as if they showed some fearful spiritual judgment fallen
on me, when his own mistakes through heedlesness, or uncharitableness, are all
the occasion of such a censure. But for my speech here, I say still, that I
know not how to say otherwise, and yet deprehend not any such pride* immodesty,
or want of conscientiousness in my speech, nor any such high censure as he
should tremble to pass, but as humble and fair an answer as is to be given to
the question. Godly, learned, and humble men have differed in the points of
Prelacy, Ceremonies, Ordinances, even in things that in themselves were easy
to be discerned. What censure is easier than this, when some of them have
continued in an error easily discernible, to say it has been through
wilfulness or negligence? which things are incident to the best and ablest,
when they have a conceit of the point as of small moment, specially in
comparison of peace and unity, when prejudice by education, determinations of
Councils, Schools, leading Writers, Magistrates censures, etc. prepossessing
them, draw them from examining it, or if they do examine it, makes them willing
to satisfy themselves with imperfect and raw answers to their scruples, and
most of all, when the loss of Preferment, Friends, Estate, Liberty comes to be
in question, and pre-engagements make it grievous to retract. What I said of
this is manifest by the instance I gave about Lutheran Consubstantiation, which
M. B. should have showed not to be appositely brought, and not carp and cavil
at my words so often as he does (though they were but in a speech in private
conference) that he may paint me out in as ugly shape as he can, specicially to
those of Bewdley, my dear Auditors heretofore, but now causlesly by his
affrightments estranged from me; which if it be not a fruit of malevolence in
him I know not what to call it. As for his talk of his own doubts and pains to
resolve himself, and the easiness and plainness of the grounds of it, it
satisfies not me, but still I am suspicious of his negligence in not
considering better many of those things he has taken up. In which I am
confirmed from his own confessions of prejudice, unwillingness to be put on
this business, in that it diverted him from other enjoyments and studies, and
from his hasty printing, his indistinct handling specially of his second
argument, never clearly opening his terms, nor showing the hypotheses on which
he builds his second main argument, his disorderly placing his proofs, his
heaping up impertinent Texts, his mistakes of my answers, his overly reading my
writings out of contempt of them, his frivolous questions, and expostulations,
etc. And for his inference about my wilfulness or negligence, it is but a
further piece of petulancy to insinuate that of me, in which my Apology, Sect.
4. might have undeceived him, though it were not then so easy to discern that
error as now, after so much debating of it, did not pride, prejudice, fear, or
some other partial affection hinder. And for Mr. Bs. conceit of his grounds,
though I neither find them easy nor plain, yet it is no marvel others discern
not how infant baptism can be inferred from them, which can at most prove a
reasonableness of the thing, as Mr. Bedford* Dr. Field, Dr. Hammond, and others
speak, but not an institution of God, which must be gathered from precept or
example in the N. T. and can only warrant our practice as the mind of God in
mere positives about worship in the New Testament. In the explication of his
second Proposition, page 10. he again objects my speech, that Mr. Ms. Principle
on which he establishes his Proof from Circumcision for infant baptism is one
of the first condemned Heresies, by which I meant that Proposition which he
has in his Sermon, page 35. that all Gods commands and institutions about the
Sacraments of the Jews bind us as much as they did them, in all things which
belong to the substance of the Covenant, and were not accidental to them, in
which thus much is maintained, that some part of the command of Circumcision,
and the other Sacraments of the Jews, bind us as much as they did the Jews,
which is expressly condemned, Acts 15. 24. as subverting the souls of the
Gentiles, and is called, the heresy of the false Apostles, by the
Century-writers, Cent. 1. lib. 2. cap. 5. and others condemn it under the title
of Judaism. But then says Mr. B. Mr. M. is an Heretic with me, and all the
Divines in the world that go his way. To which I answer, This inference has
too much show of Sycophancy, being urged so often, and to the People of Bewdly,
my quondam Auditors. For, 1. though I say that Doctrine is such an Heresy, yet
I do not say Mr. M. still holds it as his words did import; yea, I did
acknowledge in my Apology, page 99. and in this writing Sect. 2. that Mr. M.
does deny that we are tied to any practice of the ritual part, which is indeed
to retract his former speech in his Sermon. 2. But were it true that he did
still hold it, yet it would not follow, that he were an Heretic with me. For,
1. I should not take him to be an Heretic that holds that Doctrine which is
Heresy, if it were not so directly, but only by consequence not heeded, as
this of his is. 2. Nor do I take him to be an Heretic that does hold that
which is Heresy directly, except he hold it in or with a party made to
maintain it. And therefore I do once more protest against Mr. Bs. calumniatory
inference, and deny that I account Mr. M. an Heretic, and yet I account still
his Principle mentioned, if it were held as the words in the Sermon did import,
to contain one of the first condemned Heresies, to wit, Judaism. To this
calumny Mr. B. adds another. Because I used the words of the Apostle, Acts 20.
26, 27. in a Sermon, he from the report of his Notary, and a multitude of my
Auditors, likely his tale tellers, without sending to me about the truth of it,
prints what he received from them, and thence infers, that the baptizing of
persons of years, notwithstanding their infant baptism, is taken by me for a
fundamental point, which the salvation or damnation of men does necessarily
depend on. Or what I meant to say [their blood be on their own heads] he knows
not. And yet he conceives me to contradict my self when I blame the Papists for
making baptism of necessity to salvation.

To which I reply, that herein Mr. B. shows his inconsiderateness, or his mind
to calumniate, or both. For, 1. he might have interpreted my words, as I think
when I spoke them they were meant, in reference to other duties which I had
taught them, with that of Baptism. 2. If it were meant particularly of Baptism,
yet the threatening I conceive was not to the bare omission, but to the omission
joined with opposition. 3. I am sure, if I did threaten, their blood should be
on their head for omission of Baptism, it was not simply or barely for the
omission, but for the omission after teaching, and upon supposition of
conviction, by it of their duty* And this I think Mr. B. does not stick to do
to his hearers, in case after teaching and supposed conviction by it, they
practice not a duty, though non-fundamental, as suppose reproving of their
neighbors. For then they live presumptuously in sin, and such sinning consists
not with sincerity and truth of Regeneration. And yet this does not suppose the
point in it self fundamental, that is, such as the mere ignorance of it, or the
bare omission of it does damn a person, or exclude out of the kingdom of God:
in which sense I blame the Papists for maintaining a necessity of an infants
being baptized to its entering into the kingdom of Heaven.

But Mr. B. does not think God lays so great a stress on this point, as I and
others do.

Answ. That which I hold is this, 1. that Baptism with Water is an Ordinance of
Christ that binds Christians now as well as in the Apostles days, Mat. 28. 19.
Mark 16. 15, 16. Act. 2. 38. and 10. 47, 48. Ephesians. 4. 5. And I detest the
audacious impiety of Socinians, and those in our days, who count themselves
above Ordinances, that is as Mr. B. well interprets it, Plain Scripture Proof,
etc. page 24. above obedience to God, and so Gods, as being one of the most
palpable delusions of unsound men in our days, who place their perfection in a
manifest disobedience to Christ's appointment, and some of them in an
Antichristian presumption, as if they sat in the Temple of God, and showed
themselves as God, do most arrogantly of their own heads, without any allowance
of God, make void the express prime Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ, calling
it a low dispensation, etc. I hope I shall have liberty hereafter to show the
frivolous allegations and pretenses of these men. In the mean time they may see
what Mr. Laurence, Mr. Bartlet, M. B. page 341. of this his Book, have written
for these Ordinances. 2. I hold that every Minister of the Gospel is bound, as
to preach the Gospel, so to baptize those that are made Disciples, Matthew. 28.
19. 3. That every believing Christian is by necessity of precept tied to be
baptized, that is, dipped in water, in testimony of his profession of Christ
his Lord, Mr. Blake, Vind. foed. cap. 6. That is the Covenant draught, terms of
the Covenant we find, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, and he
that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16. 16
upon his being made a Disciple of Christ, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. Acts
2. 38. and 22. 16. 4. That this is ordinarily where and when it may be had
without unmercifulness, defect of water, or some other like reason, a necessary
means of salvation, Mark 16. 16. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Tit. 3. 4, 5. Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. 5.
That infant baptism is not the performance of the duty of being baptized
according to Christ's appointment. 6. That in a regular and orderly way,
persons, notwithstanding their pretended infantbaptism, are not to be admitted
to the Lords Supper till they be baptized upon profession of their faith in
Christ, Acts 2. 41, 42 1 Cor. 10. 2, 3, 4. and 12. 13. These things I may
hereafter have opportunity to debate more fully. As for that which Mr. B.
says, page 10, 11. It does no whit overthrow this necessity which I assert,
but rather confirm it: For Gods freeing us from the great burden of Jewishrites
makes it the rather necessary for us to obey Christ's appointment in those few
Sacraments he has ordained, which Mr. B. truly says, As they are duties they
are great, and so in themselves considered, and not only in respect of the
consequences of them. And he says truly, page 11. All Christ's commands must be
obeyed, both great and small, so far as we know them. Yea, Mr. B. Scripture
proof, page 342. says, Baptism with Water is Heb. 6. 2. reckoned among the
foundations or principles which are of standing use, and therefore it is so it
self. Nor is his interpretation right, that the things ascribed to Baptism are
ascribed to it without the external washing. In all these places, Romans 6. 3, 4.
1 Cor. 12. 13. Gal. 3. 27. Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. 1 Peter 3. 21. the outward use of
Water is expressed, though the things ascribed to it do presuppose something
more, as he himself allegeth them, page 342. which is the meaning of that
speech, 1 Pet, 3. 21. Not the putting away of the filthiness of the flesh, that
is, not it only, but the answer of a good conscience toward God joined with
it. And whereas Mr. B. tell us, that we shall never be able to justify it, if
we lay out the hundredth part, or perhaps the thousand part of our time, study,
talk or zeal upon this question, I confess this may be true at some times, in
some persons: but if other tenets be clear, and other duties not neglected, and
this becomes a doubt of conscience, and falls into frequent practice, so as that
it concerns them much for themselves, people, and little ones to be resolved in
it, else they shall sin either by omitting a duty, or by doing a thing with
gainsaying or doubting conscience, it is justifiable, though they bestow more
than a hundredth part of their time and study upon it. And especially if the
person be a Minister called to be a Guide to the People, and by special
providence and solemn covenant led forth to vindicate the truth in such a time,
when otherwise it is likely to be suppressed, and the Assertors of it
oppressed. In these and such like cases it may be unjustifiable, if a person do
not spend more than the hundredth part of his time about this question; else
neither the Hussites will be justified in spending so much time in opposing the
half-Communion, nor the Protestants in opposing Transubstantiation, nor the
Non-Conformists in opposing the Ceremonies of Bishops. Mr. Tho. Goodwin preface
to Mr. Cottons Dialogue for infant baptism, says truly, The due application of
baptism to all those persons Christ would have it administered unto, cannot but
be apprehended by all that have any insight into the Controversies of these
times, to be of very high importance. Not that I like their Carriage that
neglect other necessary things, and spend all their time, study, talk, and zeal
about this, such hypocrisy I should declaim against with him, remembering what
our Savior said in a like case, Matthew. 23. 23. These things ought ye to have
done, and not to have left the other undone.

As for M. Bs. third Proposition concerning the grounds on which the point of
infant baptism stands, that they are of great moment, because what he says,
rests on the heap of consequences he infers from the denial of infant baptism
(of which there is scarce any one true) and the showing them to be but vain
surmises, depends on the dispute it self, I shall therefore respite the
vindicating the truth, from them, till I come to examine in this Review the
arguments from Scripture urged on both sides, after which shall come in those
from humane testimony and reason, unto which I now apply my self.

SECT. V.
The first argument from the institution, Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. and the
practice in the New Testament against Infant baptism is urged.

MR. B. says page 8. he will prove, 1. That it is the will of God that some
infants should be baptized. 2. that it is the will of God that all infants of
believers ordinarily should be baptized.

This latter does better state the question, which is about the practice of
those reformed Churches that baptize infants, whose doctrine is, that it is the
privilege of a believers child. Yet Mr. B. and M. Baillee for some advantage
choose to undertake the proof of the former, whereas the true state of it is, as
in my Examen s. 2. and Mr. Ms. Sermon, Whether the infants of believers are to
be baptized with Christ's baptism of Water by the lawful Minister according to
ordinary rule? I hold the Negative, Mr. Marshall, Dr. Homes, Mr. Geree, Mr.
Blake, Mr. Baillee, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Baxter, etc. hold the Affirmative. My
dispute is to this purpose.

The ordinary rule for baptizing is Christ's institution, John the Baptists, and
the Apostles appointment and practice: But neither according Christ's
institution, nor according to John Baptists, or the Apostles command or
practice, or any other approved example in Scripture, is the baptizing of
infants of believers; Therefore the baptizing of infants of believers by a
lawful Minister is not according to ordinary rule. The Major is confessed by
all sorts, specially Protestants and Anti-Prelatists. M. Collings Episto the
Reader before his Vind. Minst. Evang. In things relating to the worship of God
it is a general rule, in which our brethren and we have long since agreed, That
nothing ought to be done without an express warrant in the Gospel.

Mr. Rutherford, Due right of Presbyteries, page* 364. what the Apostles
commanded not in Gods worship, that the Churches must not do.




Mr. Bs. words are cited by me in my Praecursor, s. 16. and the force of his
reason is showed here before s. 4. to contain this Proposition, What in baptism
we have no warrant for by word or example in all the New Testament (since the
solemn institution of baptism Mat. 28.) we are not to do; and much more to like
purpose may be gathered from other passages of his page 302, 303. and Mr. M. in
his Sermon on 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. is very punctual for Gods command to be observed
in his worship. The 28 Article of the Church of England against reservation of
the Bread etc. has these words, The Sacrament of the Lords Supper was not by
Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshipped, whereby it
is apparent that reservation of the bread is condemned, because it is not by
Christ's Ordinance, though Mr. Perkins in his right way of dying well confess it
to be ancient. Bellarmine himself tom. 3. cont. de sacr. bapt. l. 1. c. 8.
Sacramentum non pendet nisi a Divina institutione. Chamier tom. 4. panstr. cath
lib. 5. cap. 14. sect. 55. ^is solis baptizare competit, quibus Commissio data
est baptizandi. Haec propositio per se patet: quia baptismi institutio pendet a
sola voluntate instituentis: itaque ex hac sola me^^enda: quomodo eucharistiae.
Lib. 8. c. 2. s. 3. Quod si igitur tota sacramenti essentia est ab institutione
divina, profecto hac violata, non potest sacramentum consistere. C. 8. s. 14.
He cites Calvin's words. Institutio enim Christi est certa regula, a qua* si
deflect as, jam rectum non tenes. S. 21. At nos, contra hanc sceleratam
audaciam ratum habemus illud Bielis in Canonem lectione 35. sacramentum irritum
reputatur si contra institutionem celebretur. L. 7. c. 13. s. 17. sed non
peccari in missa privata negatur; non enim aliter potest si contra
institutionem admittatur: sic consentiunt omnes peccatum fuisse, cum
baptizarentur mortui: quia videlicet institutio habuit doceri, baptizarique
gentes: in quibus mortui nulli numerantur. Sic emendatum fuit, quod olim
admittebatur, ut infantibus porrigeretur eucharistia: quoniam institutio habet,
ut seipsum probet, qui de hoc pane sit esurus: similis omnino and communionis
ratio; quandoquidem disertum, Accipite, edite. Mr. Seldom lib. 1. de syned.
Ebrae. c. 13. page 500. Modorum and temperamentorum ejusmodi ex arbitrio Humano
accessione, ut id quod esset institutum aliquod Divinum novaretur aut ullatenus
mutaretur, nunquam rite permissum est. If all these testimonies satisfy not,
the Apostle Paul's speech 1 Cor. 11. 23. yields us this truth, that the
institution of Christ is that whereby an abuse in a sacrament is to be
reformed, and therefore is the ordinary rule according to which the sacrament
is to be administered. Whence the New Annot. on that place infer, The only way
to reform any abuses in the Church, is to have recourse to the word of God and
first institution. And even the Assembly itself Confession of faith chap. 20*
make many things used by Papists, as private masses, half-communion, adoration,
elevation, reservation of the bread, contrary to the nature of the Sacrament,
and to the institution of Christ, and prove it only by these texts. 1 Cor. 10.
16. Mark* 14. 23. 1 Cor. 11* 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Math. 15. 9. which are no
proof without this Proposition, To vary from the institution in things
appointed is evil, as being an humane invention, or worshipping of God after
the commands of men, contrary to Matthew. 15. 9. The Minor is confessed by Mr.
Cawdrey Sab. Rediv. part. 4 chapter 1. number. 59. We have not in Scripture either
precept or example of children baptized. Mr. M. in his Sermon page 35. that
there is neither express command or example in the New Testament that children
should be, or were baptized, and page 44. It is said indeed that they taught
and baptized, and no express mention of any other, and a little after, both
John and Christ's disciples and Apostles did teach before they baptized, because
then no other were capable of baptism: But that we may not seem to beg what is
to be proved, I further argue thus. The institution and practice of the
Sacrament of Christi an baptism is set down in the New Testament; But baptizing
of infants of believers is neither according to the institution of Christ, nor
any practice or example therein, Ergo. The Major is plain of it self: For
Christian baptism being a Sacrament of the New Testament, must have its
institution and example to regulate it, there or no where. It is frequently put
into the definition of the Sacraments of the New Testament, that they are
ordained by Christ himself, and for defect of Christ's institution in the New
Testament, sundry things are denied to be Sacraments of the New Testament. The
Minor is proved from the texts which speak of baptism, either of the
institution or practice. From both which I argue thus. Matthew. 28. 19. is
Christ's institution, Mr. B. calls it The solemn institution of baptism: But the
baptizing of infants of believers is not according to Christ's institution of
baptism Matthew. 28. 19. Ergo. The Minor is proved, First from the Subjects
appointed to be baptized, to wit disciples of all Nations. They that are not
disciples of Christ are not appointed to be baptized. Norton resp. ad Apollon.
c. 2. page 34. non (...) baptizandi: Matthew. 28. 19. discipulate baptizantes.
But infants of believers are not disciples of Christ; Therefore they are not
appointed to be baptized. That [ disciples] included in the verb [(...) make
disciples] as [(...)] is Romans 4. 4. in [(...)] is the substantive to [(...),
them] is proved from the expression, John 4 1. where it is said [ when the
Pharisees heard that Jesus (...), makes disciples and baptizeth] This the
Evangelist says was done by the Disciples of Christ. Now what they did before
in Judaea, they were after appointed to do among all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19.
Therefore no other were appointed to be baptized than were baptized before,
John 4. 1. (saving only with greater extent) that is, disciples made of, or
among, or in all Nations. Beza annot. in Mat. 28. 19. Discipulos facite, (...),
id est discipulos mihi facite ex omnibus gentibus, Make to me disciples out of
all Nations. Ursin Explic. catech. part. 2. q. 69 Verbum (...) quo Christus
utitur proprie est discipulos facite, quod declaratur a Ioanne c. 4. 1. The
word [(...)] which Christ uses, is properly [make disciples] which is declared
by John chapter 4. v. 1. Pareus Comment. in Matthew. 28. 19. (...), est idem quod
(...), discipulos facere Christo, ut explicatur John 4. 1. It is the same with
to make disciples to Christ, as it is explained John 4. 1. The New Annot* on
Matthew 28. 19. of the first edition (which is now altered in the second
edition, to hinder truth) teach] Greek, make disciples of, as John 4. 1. all
nations] not Jews alone, but Gentiles also Acts 10. 34, 35, 47. Chamier Panstr.
cath. tom. 3. l. 12. c. 9. s. 15. It was the express command of Christ, teach
or make disciples in all nations. Norton resp. ad Apollon: c. 2. page 35. (...)
is to make disciples, Joh. 4. 1. Cameron in his Lecture on Mat. 19. 3. (...),
to make a proselyte, is as Mat. 28. 19. (...) is said for [ to make a
disciple]. This is confirmed in that what is said of Joseph Mat. 27. 57. (...),
rendered by the vulgar Latin, Beza, our English, etc. [ who also himself was
Jesus disciple] is John 19. 38. (...), being disciple to Jesus. Whereby it is
apparent that in both places, in Matthew the Noun [ disciple] is included in
the Verb, though in Matthew 28. 19. it be used actively [ make disciples] in
the other Matthew 27. 57. it is used passively [ he was himself a Disciple] The
same is to be conceived of the two other places where the word is used Matthew
13. 52. (...) made a disciple. Acts 14. 21. (...) had made many disciples. And
this is further proved from the parallel place Mark 16. 15 16. where [ preach
the Gospel to every Creature] answers to [ make disciples all nations] and [ he
that believes and is baptized] answers to [ baptizing them] which plainly
shows the subject* of baptism to be disciples, and those disciples to be
believers, as Chamier proves panst. cath. tom. 3. l. 12. c. 9. s. 15. But such
are not infants of believers. Ergo, they are not appointed to be baptized. 2.
Those only Christ appointed to be baptized to whom the Gospel was preached, and
the persons taught; But such are not infants, Ergo. The Major is plain both by
the words, Mat. 28. 19. make disciples, which is by teaching, and more plainly
from Mark 16. 15. Go preach the Gospel to every Creature, which answers to
[disciple all nations] and this is to precede baptism. This is confirmed by the
Apostles practice, which shows how they understood Christ's words, and how we
should understand them, for they baptized none till they were taught, Ergo
neither should we. Conformable hereto is the constant exposition and
observation of former and later writers and Expositors, of whom as they have
occurred to me I shall set down their words. Athanasius Orat. contra Arianos.
Ideoque salvator non quovis modo baptizandum praecepit, sed primum dixit
docete, ac deinde baptizate in nomine Patris et filii et spiritus sancti, ut ex
doctrina recta fides oriretur, et cum fide baptismatis integra initiatio
perficeretur. Hieron. in Mat. 28. 19. Primum docent omnes genses: deinde doctas
intingunt aqua non enim potest fieri ut corpus baptismi recipiat sacramentum,
nisiante anima fidei susceperit veritatem: Ordo praecipuus: jussit Apostolis ut
primu^ docerent universas gentes: deinde fidei intingerent sacramento et post
fidem ac baptisma quae essent observanda praeciperent: which words are also
ascribed to Hilarious in Matthew 28. 19, 20. And the like to Beda, Anselmus,
Aquinas, Paschasius, Rabanus, Lucas Brugensis, Iansenius, and many others on
Matthew. 28. 19. which were it necessary might be produced: whence the Ancients
deduced, that persons were first to be catechized, and then to be baptized:
which was constantly observed, except in case of present danger of death
toward children of believers, until some later ages. But because later
Protestant writers are of more esteem with most of my Antagonists, I will add
some of them, Calvin in Matthew 28. 19. apud Marlor. Baptizari jubet Christus
qui nomen Evangelio dederint, seque professi fuerint discipulos. Ursin Cat.
Explic. part. 2. q. 69. Quasi dicat colligite mihi Ecclesiam per verbum, et
quos feceritis mihi discipulos toto cord credentes eos omnes et solos
baptizate and mihi areliquis separate. Pareus Com. in Matt. 28. 19. Colligite
mihi Ecclesiam inter omnes gentes, praedicatione vestra adducentes eos ad
fidem. Alsted. Theol. polem. part 3. page Piscator observe. in Matthew. 28. 19.
Docete omnes gen^e^ (nempe praedicando Evangelium, ut declarat Marcus)
baptizantes eos, vult ergo ut prius constet de alicujus ^ide, quam is
baptizetur.

Collings vin. Min. Evang page 36. It is the first act in ministerial Commission
Mat. 28. 19. first preach, then baptize.


251. Ut praecipitur ex cohaerentia sententiarum Matthew. 28. docete omnes gentes
(nempe praedicando Evangelium) baptizantes eos. Confer cum Marc. 16. Becm.
Exercit. Th. 17. p. 259, 260. Doctrina praecedit, baptismus sequitur. Mr.
Cotton, The way of the Churches in New England, chap. 4. sect. 6. And indeed
the Commission which Christ gave his Apostles, holds it forth that they were
by preaching to make disciples before they baptized them and their children.
This later is his own addition, the rest is right and to my purpose. But sure
Christ did not appoint to preach the Gospel to infants, therefore he did not
appoint to baptize them. For Christ appointed his Disciples to baptize none but
they who were first preached to, and consequently they do it without Commission
from Christ, who baptize infants ordinarily without preaching the Gospel to
them. I suppose no man will conceive Christ appointed infants of a day old to
have the Gospel preached to them, it had been a ridiculous injunction;
therefore neither did he appoint them to be baptized. For both commands are
joined together concerning the same persons.

3. The institution is, To baptize into the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Spirit, But the baptizing of infants is not into the name of the Father, Son
and holy Spirit; Ergo their baptism is not according to the institution. The
Minor is proved from the right understanding of the meaning of the phrase of
baptizing into the name of the Father, Son and holy Ghost, Beza annot. in
Matthew 28. 19. Into the name] that is the Father, Son and Holy Spirit being
called upon. And this interpretation is confirmed from the words of Ananias to
Paul Acts 22. 16. Arise and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the
name of the Lord, where is injoined calling on the name of the Lord with
baptizing, which explaineth what Christ had appointed, Mat. 28. 19. Of
baptizing into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Or to be baptized
into the name is to be baptized with the person baptized, his devoting himself
to the Service of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit. This is gathered from the
phrase 1 Cor. 1. 13. Were ye baptized into the name of Paul? Beza annot. in
Acts 19. 3. Baptizari autem in ejus nomen dicimur, cui nos per baptismum
dicamus ac consecramus: quamobrem recte Paulus negat sese in nomen suum
quemquam baptizasse. Or to be baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, is to be baptized with profession of that doctrine, to wit, that Jesus
is the Son of God, Act. 8. 37. testified by the Father, Son and Spirit, Mat. 3.
17. 1 John 5. 5, 6, 7. as to be baptized into John's baptism, Acts 19. 3.
whether the same with being baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus, verse 5.
as those conceive that expound the words as spoken of what John did, or
different, yet it was with profession of doctrine, as Beza annot. in Acts 19.
3. Baptizari in Ioannis baptisma significat doctrinam quam Ioannes annunciabat,
ac baptismi symbolo obsignabat, profiteri, and baptismo adhibito amplecti. I
will add the words of Grotius annot. in Matthew. 289. (...)] cum locutio, haec
varias habeat ex Hebraismo significationes, eam his praeferendam arbitraor,
quae baptismo maxim propria est. Est autem baptizari in aliquem, vel in ejus
nomen, se ei auctorare atque devovere, and de ejus nomine appellari ^elle.
Paulus 1 Cor. 10. 2. (...), respiciens illud Exodi 14. 31. Crediderunt in Deum
and Mosen servum ejus, id est, Mosi tanquam Dei ministro cum bona siducia
regendos se commisere, sic Paulus negat quenquam baptizatum in suum nomen, 1 Corinthians. 1. 13, 15. hoc est, sibi velut novi dogmatis auctori mancipatum.
Maimomides de bello capta (...): baptizet eam in nomen proselytarum, id est, in
eam religionem quam profitentur proselytae. Christiani igitur tres sui dogmatis
auctores agnoscere jubebantur, Patrem, filium and spiritum sanctum, nihilque ut
necessarium admittere, quod non ab eis esset profectum, id est, quod non a
patre ortum, a filio proditum, a spiritu vero esset partim explicatum apertius,
partim obsignatum. Administratur enim baptismus, ut loquitur Hilarious, in
confessione, and auctoris and unigeniti and dom. But infants of believers do
neither call upon the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, nor devote themselves to
their service, nor profess the doctrine of Christ, Therefore they are not
baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit, according to
Christ's appointment.

Mr. M. Defense page 266. calls these petty reasonings, and says, That
baptizing into the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost should be
interpreted to be invocation of Gods name, and so to make baptism and prayer
all one, is strange divinity.

I reply. My words are perverted by him: I said baptizing is to be with the
party baptized his invocation of the name of the Lord, not that baptism and
prayer are all one, but that they should be concomitants, and together in the
use of baptism after Christ's appointment. And this is no strange divinity to
others, however it be to Mr. M. The words of Ananias Acts 22. 16. Beza on
Matthew 28. 19. show it to be no strange or forced Divinity. Becman Exercit.
Theol. 17. p. 251. has the like, In nomen hoc est invocato nomine Christi
baptizamur. The New Annot. on 1 Cor. 1. 13. The third reason taken from the
form and end of baptism, wherein we make a promise to Christ, calling on also
the name of the Father, and the Holy Ghost. The words of Grotius a learned man,
whatever his other qualities were, show it to be old Divinity. Annot. on
Matthew 28. 19. he speaks thus. Post has ergo stipulationes atque responsiones,
quas verba Sacramenti Tertullianus vocat ad militiae morem alludens, sequebatur
baptismus, cui accedebant preces in quibus nominabantur Pater, Filius, and
Spiritus sanctus. Orationem hanc proprie ad patrem directam indicare videtur
Justinus, (...). Deinde, (...). Solemn ejus invocations verbum erat Abba
Pater, ut not at Chrysostomus 8. ad Romans 15. The words in Chrysostom hom. 10
(...). That is, by which we cry Abba Father. This holy Ministers know what it
is, rightly commanding to say this word first at the mystical prayer, meaning
at baptism. Grotius goes on thus. His si addas id quod Acts 22. 16. refertur ab
Anania dictum Paulo (...), Videbis tum eum qui baptizabatur, tum eos qui
baptismo aderant (neque enim in toto coetu exercebatur primis temporibus, quod
ostendunt, etc.) solitos orare Deum patrem (...), quomodo ipse orare nos docet,
John 14. 13, 14. Ut sidem ejus qui baptizabatur, and liberam illam
christianismi professionem muneraret spiritu suo sancto per gradus quosdam,
quorum initium erat, (...). Grotius notes to like purpose on Luke 3. 21. where
it is said, Jesus being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened; which
shows Christ prayed at his Baptism, and thereupon the Spirit descended; which
the Ancients conceived as a Rule, and is at least recorded as an Example to be
imitated.

Mr. Cobbet in his Just Vindic. page 182. calls this New Light, which if he mean
Ironically, (as it is likely he does) he may hereby perceive, that he is
mistaken, and for what he excepts against this Exposition, that neither in the
baptizing of the Samaritans, Acts 8. was that Rule observed, nor was it
possible that the three thousand baptized in one day, Acts 2. should arise each
of them, and call upon the Name of the Lord, as they were baptized; it proceeds
upon a mistake, as if no calling on the Name of the Lord were sufficient, but
that which was set and solemn before the public Assembly, whereas neither is
Baptism necessary to be administered before the public Assembly: Grotius proves
out of Justin Martyrs words, and otherwise, that it was administered not as they
now do infant* sprinkling in the public meeting place, but in some place
without, aside from the public Assembly, and the calling on the Name of the
Lord was or might be ejaculatory, whether in the heart only, or by words,
praying to the Father by Christ for the Spirit.

Mr. M. makes this inference from my words; Then it seems if the party baptized
call on the Name of the Lord by prayer, that is all that is intended by
baptizing into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

But this is but another of his pervertings of my words: for in the same place
I joined with it, devoting themselves to the service of, and adherence to the
Father, Son, and Spirit, which I proved out of 1 Cor. 1. 13, 15. which proves
plainly that to be baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, notes
not a Ministers Commission from the Father, Son, and Spirit, nor a Form of
words to be used by him at Baptism, whether the party baptized understand it or
no, but in baptizing, engaging the party baptized to acknowledge the Father,
Son, and Spirit, as Lord and Teacher, Diod. Annot. in 1 Cor. 1. 15. In mine own
Name] as to bind them unto me to acknowledge me for their Head. Hence John's
Baptism is the Doctrine he preached, and the baptized by him professed, Mark 1.
4. Acts 10. 47. and 19. 3. and the Pharisees therefore were not baptized of
John, Luke 7. 30. because they should have professed John's Doctrine, which they
were against, if they had been baptized of him, as their Disciples did their
Doctrine, and John's Disciples did his. Clear therefore it is, that [baptizing
into the Name] does note not only the act of the Ministers of Baptism, but
also the party baptized his act of invocating, addicting, profession of Service
and Doctrine, and obediently testifying it by that sign: for that is plain from
the command, Acts 2. 38. Let every one of you be baptized in the Name of Jesus
Christ, (...), which is the requiring of a duty from them conjoined with
repentance, and therefore to be baptized is not merely passive, but implies a
voluntary yielding of a person to it. And it is further proved from the words
to Paul, Acts 22. 16. where he is commanded, (...), Arise, baptize, and wash,
which all require voluntary action on his part, as well as ministration on
Ananias his part, out of which this argument is formed: They are not baptized
into Christ's Name, or his Fathers, and Spirits Name, who do not perform the
acts required in that expression; But infants of believers do not perform the
acts required in that expression; therefore they are not baptized into Christ's
Name, or his Fathers, o^ Spirits, according to the meaning of it in the
institution. So that this argument is not a petty reasoning, but a solid
reason, to prove infants baptism not such as Christ appointed. As for Mr. Ms.
frivolous question, Were not the infants of the Jews devoted to God by
Circumcision, though they could not actually devote themselves? Though I am not
bound to answer his impertinent questions, yet I will tell him they were; yet
this is nothing to the business in hand, about the meaning of the Phrase [ to
be baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit] which manifestly
implies the party baptized his act, which infants cannot do. Whereas no where*
there is such a command [Be ye circumced in the Name of Jesus Christ] nor is it
all one to be circimcised, as to be baptized; which is still supposed but never
proved.

4. I further urged, Christ bids the Apostles presently after Baptism, Teach
them to observe what ever he commanded; But this direction could not pertain to
infants, they could not be taught to observe Christ's commands; therefore
neither were they appointed to be baptized: Mr. M. denies that they were
enjoined presently to teach them to observe what Christ commanded. But the Text
knits these together, Baptizing and Teaching, so as that they that were
baptized should be taught, and that by them that baptized them; which the
Apostles could not do, being to go up and down from place to place, to plant
the Churches in all Nations, if they had been to baptize infants; for then they
must have staid many years till they came to understanding to be taught to
observe what Christ commanded. No man me thinks should imagine Christ's
appointment to be thus, Make infants disciples, and baptize them, and then
after five, six, or ten years, when they are grown to some understanding, come
again and teach them to observe what I have commanded, but that Christ did
appoint them to teach them presently after Baptism, that is, in so many hours
or days after that Ordinance was administered, as it could be well done. Nor
does Mr. Cobbet avoid this objection by saying, page 179. then they must be
presently taught the whole mind of Christ, which is impossible. For
[presently] is not restained to an instant, but comprehends a just latitude of
time for the doing of the thing, only it notes that the beginning of it is to
be not long after Baptism, but sooner by much than it could be done to infants.
Mr. Baxter Plain Scripture Proof, page 341. argues thus, What Christ has
conjoined, man must not separate; but Christ has conjoined Discipling and
Baptizing, (I add, and Teaching) therefore we must not separate them.

5. The institution of Christ is best understood by the command of the
Apostles, the resolution of Philip, the practice of John Baptist, the Apostles,
and other men sent by God to baptize; but the Apostle Peter commanded first
Repentance and then Baptism, Acts 2. 38. Philip resolved the Eunuch demanding,
What hinders me to be baptized? If thou believe with all thy heart, (...),
thou may, it is lawful or allowed thee, Acts 8. 36, 37. John the Baptist,
the Apostles, and other holy men sent by God to baptize, baptized none but
Professors of Repentance, Faith, and being Disciples of Christ, as may appear
by the Texts mentioning their baptizing, Mat. 3. 6. Mark 1. 5. Luke 3. 10. Acts
2. 41* and 8. 12, 13, 38* and 9. 18. and 10. 47. and 11. 17, 18. and 16. 15,
31, 32, 33. and 18. 8. and 19. 5. and 22. 16. Therefore Christ's institution is
of baptizing only Professors of Repentance, Faith, and being Disciples of
Christ, and therefore not infants of believers. The major cannot be denied by
those that confess that Scripture best expounds Scripture, and that the
Apostles knew Christ's mind, and did observe it. The minor is manifest from the
Texts alleged. And Mr. Rutherfords words are express to that purpose, Divine
Right of Church* government, cap. 5. q. 1. page 257. We read that John Baptist
and the Apostles baptized none but such as confessed their sins, and professed
faith in Christ Jesus.

To this Mr. M. Defense, page 227. says, that it would be a hard task for me to
prove that John baptized none but upon profession of Repentance.

I reply, 1. It is proved already and confessed by Mr. Rutherford. 2. I did
think Mr. Ms. own words, Sermon page 44. that John did teach before he baptized,
because then no other were capable of Baptism, did amount to as much, till Mr.
M. to help himself, referred [then] to the time until Parents were converted
not to the time of John's and the Apostles ministry, of which the objection was,
to which in those words he answered. For the objection was, that they always
taught and made them Disciples, by teaching before they baptized any; and Mr.
Ms. words in his answer were, John and Christ's Disciples, and the Apostles, did
teach before they baptized, because then no other were capable of Baptism,
which if not understood of the time of their Ministry, it was an answer
besides the objection. 3. Mr. M. has not yet showed any other, but such
baptized by them, and therefore it is probable in the highest degree of
probability that no other were baptized by them. 4. I think an argument in this
matter from the Evangelists relation negatively is good proof, unless we will
suppose John Baptist and the Apostles were defective in their duty, or the
Evangelists in their narrations of that which frequently (if it had been their
duty) would have occurred, and their story lead them to mention, and it was of
much concernment to the Churches of God in after Ages they should.

2. He says, It would be hard to prove that John did impose or require
confession of sin before baptism.

Reply. I think not, 1. what they did, sure was required of them, else it had
not been an acceptable thing, and by John, else he had failed in his duty, Luke
1. 17. But they confessed sin before Baptism* Matthew. 3. 6. Mark 1. 5. Ergo. 2.
He that preached repentance to them that came to be baptized, required
confession of sins (which is a chief part of it) before Baptism; But so did
John, Matthew. 3. 2. Ergo. 3. He that preached to them to prepare the way of the
Lord, required confession of sins before Baptism, for that was the preparing the
way of the Lord by bringing persons to confess sins, and then to baptize them;
But John did preach to prepare the way of the Lord, Mat. 3. 3. 4. He that
preached the Baptism of repentance, required confession of sin to Baptism; But
John did preach the Baptism of repentance, Mark 1. 4. Luke 3. 3. Acts 13. 24.
and 19. 4.

To prevent this, says Mr. M. It is said, he baptized them eis (...), ( unto
repentance) not (...), ( in repentance) as stated in actual repentance.

But dare Mr. M. in good earnest say that John Baptist did admit persons to
Baptism that were not in a state of repentance? If he should, I doubt not but
to be able to prove the contrary from that which is said of those he baptized,
Matthew. 3. 6. They were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins; and
Mark 1. 5. They were all baptized of him in the River of Jordan, confessing
their sins; [ all] must not be understood simply, for so it were not true, but,
as the matter requires, with this limitation, all that were baptized were
baptized confessing of sins, which was a state of repentance, Matthew. 21. 32.
the different state of those that believed John, and those that believed not,
is expressed thus, the one repented that they might believe, and the other not.
And by comparing it with Luke 7. 29, 30. it appears they only were baptized
that believed John, and others not. But were it not Mr. M. had been minded to
wrangle, there had been no need to have proved this, His own words, That there
was a new Church to be constituted of those that should receive Christ, Sermon
page 44. shows none were to be baptized but penitents, unless they were to be
Church members who were not in a state of repentance. Would John admit manifest
impenitents? Then the new Church should consist of impenitents, and so no
difference between the Church and the world, them that receive Christ and them
that receive him not, all should be Church Members. John's baptism and Christ's
is by Protestants asserted to be all one, saving that the one pointed at Christ
to come after, Acts 19 4. the other as already manifested by name, neither did
admit any but penitents, and believers in show. As for Mr. Ms. quirk, that he
baptized (...) Matthew 3. (...). unto repentance, not (...) in repentance. 1. I
might urge Erasmus his reading ad poenitentiam, at or upon their repentance, as
the like is to be expounded Matthew 12. 41. (...) not [unto] but [ at the
preaching of Jonas. 2. There is no need* for both are true, and may be proved
out of the text, that he preached repentance to be before baptism and after.
That he preached repentance to be before baptism is already proved, and Pareus
in his Comment. on Matthew 3. 5. disputing against Maldonate the Jesuit, who
applies this confession of sins to Auricular confession, urges the tense
(...), it is in the present tense, referring to the time of baptism, having
confessed their sins, or then confessing their sins when baptized, not
confessing their sins after as in Auricular confession at the sacrament of
Penance as they call it. Hereupon he urges, Non prius baptizabantur postea
confitebantur ut in^p^e fingit Maldonatus, and concludes, that John rejected
the Pharisees when he saw their hypocrisy, v. 7. and infers that his auditors
first in testimony of repentance confessed their sins, and then were baptized,
and gathers this doctrine, To the Sacraments no impenitents are to be admitted.

Its true that he baptized them unto future repentance, that is so as that they
were required and professed to repent and change their lives. Therefore he
required that they should bring forth fruits meet for repentance, Luke 3. 8.
and directed particularly wherein verse 11, 13, 14. Initial repentance is
prerequired to baptism, and continued repentance is to follow after, and
therefore John Baptists calling for repentance and preaching the baptism of
repentance show not only that this was the lesson they were all to learn, but
that also as Pareus proves, that they must all manifest that they repented
before he baptized them, and that all did and were tied to make confession of
sins, notwithstanding Mr: Ms. saying.

Master M. sets down the judgment of very learned men who conceive their
confession of sins was not because it is a necessary medium to all who should
receive baptism, but to clear his baptism from misconstruction, to thwart the
opinion of justification by the works of the Law. To which I say.

1. That were this granted, yet it avoids not my argument, who bring the matter
of fact only, it is enough for me at present if it appear that John baptized
none but penitents.

2. Yet the judgment of those very learned men is but their own saying, nor
can it be right. For if the end of John's requiring repentance was only to clear
his baptism from misconstruction, because the men who came to be baptized of
John, were such as had been educated in an opinion of justification by works of
the Law, and so more was required of them than of others, as it is usual to
require more of an heretic for his admission into the bosom of the Church,
then he had required such confession of sins and repentance only of Pharisees
and their Scholars, whereas he required it also of Publicans, Harlots,
Soldiers, as may be seen Luke 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. And indeed he required it
of all for both ends, that he might contradict the Pharisees doctrine, and
because it was a necessary prerequisite to his baptism, because his baptism was
contrary to the baptism that initiated proselytes into Judaism, in the nature
of it, that is the doctrine taught by the Baptist, and professed by the
baptized, the Pharisees baptism requiring observance of the Law for
righteousness, and John's baptism requiring repentance for remission of sins,
and therefore the Pharisees rejected it, Luke 7. 29, 30. so that in truth this
judgment of those learned men about the reason of John's baptism proves against
Mr. M. that repentance is to antecede baptism, and his allegation thereof may
be retorted upon him.

6. To strengthen this argument from the institution of Christ and practice
Apostolical, there are many passages in the Epistles, which do prove that
baptism was and ought to be with such profession and acts of the baptized, as
do not nor can ordinarily be ascribed to infants of believers, and therefore
they are not rightly baptized according to ordinary rule. To. 6. 3, 4 Know ye
not, says the Apostle, that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptizd into his death; therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life, now to be baptized into
death and Christ's death is by baptism to engage our selves to die with Christ to
sin, with profession of purpose of newness of life and hope of resurrection.
Becman. Exer. Theol. 17. page 257. Baptizari in mortem Christi dicimur quatenus
stipulamur nos credere in Christum pro nobis mortuum and ipsius exemplo veluti
en^care peccatum ne nobis dominetur. But this could not infants do therefore no
insants were then baptized, and consequently ought not to be now.

1. Cor. 12. 13. For even by or in one Spirit have we been baptized into one
body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free, and have been all made
drink into one Spirit, or as some copies have it, have been all made to drink
or drench into one drink into one Spirit. That here baptism with water and the
drinking the cup in the Lords Supper are meant, is manifest, the Apostle
arguing from the end of those two rites for the union and communication between
all Christians, as 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. he had done in the Lords Supper, and Ephesians.
4. 4* 5. he does from baptism. And without that allusion the phrase is not
intelligible. And the exception of the Antibaptists is vain, that it is
Spirit-baptism not water baptism, For it is indeed both, Spirit-baptism from
the Spirit as the cause, and water baptism together as the outward element. Now
hence three Arguments arise against infant baptism.

1. All that were baptized into the body were baptized by one Spirit as the
Concurrent cause as Mr. B. says rightly in his plain Scripture proof, etc.
page 342. that is together with the word, as Ephesians. 5. 26: is declared, by
preaching of which the Spirit was given, Gal. 3* 2. and this was presumed of
all, as 1 These. 1. 2. 4. and elsewhere. And Mr. B. truly says in the same
place, That it was all that were thus baptized into the body. But I subsume,
infants were not thus baptized, Ergo, no infants were then baptized, and
consequently ought not to be now.

2. All that were thus baptized were also made to drink, or did drink
themselves, or were drencht by their own act in the receiving the cup in the
Lords Supper unto one Spirit in communion and testification of one Spirit, as 1
Cor. 10. 16, 17. But infants did not thus drink, Ergo infants were not then
baptized.

3. All that were counted members of the body of Christ, or the Church, were
thus baptized, and made to drink. But infants were not thus baptized, and made
to drink, for if so, they received the Lords Supper, therefore were not then
visible Church members, and consequently ought not to be so counted now.

Gal. 3. 26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. 27.
For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ have put on Christ. Where
the Apostle proving that they were all the children of God by faith in Christ,
because they had put on Christ, must needs intimate that it was by faith in
Christ Jesus that they had put on Christ, and then the Apostles speech is this,
As many of you as have been baptized into Christ have by faith in Christ Jesus
put on Christ, and consequently so many as were baptized were believers, and
therefore no infants were baptized for want of faith.

Ephesians. 4. 4, 5. There is one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one
hope of your calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism. Whence I argue,

1. They that have one baptism, have also one faith; But infants had not one
faith; Ergo they had not one baptism, and consequently are not to have it now.

2. One faith is placed before one baptism, therefore faith went before baptism
in the Apostles days, and consequently infants were not baptized.

3. They that were counted of one body had one faith; But infants had not one
faith, therefore they were not counted of one body, that is Church Members, Mr.
Bs. words p. 342. confirm this Ephesians. 4. 5. As the whole Church is one body,
and has one Lord, and one faith, so has it one common baptism,

Ephesians. 5. 26. That he might sanctify it, cleansing it with the washing of water
by the word, whence Mr. B Plain Script. proof, p. 342. inferres, the whole
Church of Christ must in duty be washed with water. Now I argue, 1. They who
were washed with water, were cleansed with the washing of water by the word,
which word is the word preached, as where mention is made of baptism, there
mention is made of preaching of the word going before it, and [ the word] does
no where signify the covenant or promise of God taken precisely or
abstractively from the narration of Christ's coming and invitation to
repentance, but altogether as it was preached, as may be seen in Peter's speech,
Acts 10. 36, 37, 38, etc. But infants were not cleansed by the word; therefore
they were not cleansed by the washing of water.

2. The whole Church was cleansed with the washing of water by the word; But so
were not infants; therefore they were not parts of the Church, and consequently
are not now.

Col. 2. 12. Buried with him in baptism, wherein ye have also been raised
together through the faith of the operation of God who has raised him from the
dead. Whence I argue. They who were buried with Christ in baptism were also
therein raised together through faith, and consequently were believers; But
infants were not in baptism raised together through faith; therefore they were
not buried with Christ in baptism, that is, they were not baptized, and by
consequence ought not to be.

Tit. 3. 5. is usually expounded of baptism, as by Mr. B. page 342, so by many
others. But if the washing there be meant of baptism, it is such as was with
regeneration and receiving of the Holy Ghost; therefore not of infants whose
regeneration and receiving was unknown.

Heb. 6. 1, 2. Where the foundation is mentioned, this order is observed, first
repentance, then faith, then baptism, then laying on of hands, then
resurrection of the dead, and lastly eternal judgment, now if the Apostle kept
a right order here used in teaching, and according to the event of things (as
he seems to have done) then repentance and faith went before baptism: and so no
infants baptized.

1 Pet. 3. 21. The baptism that saves is accompanied with the answer of a good
conscience toward God. This says Beza in his annot. on that text alludes to
the Custom of stipulating or promising at baptism by the baptized: which if
right (as is probable) then it is manifest that the baptized did answer at
baptism, which infants could not, and therefore were not baptized.

SECT. VI.
Mr. Blakes exception against the Major, that such institution or example as I
require for infant baptism is unnecessary, is refelled.

AGainst these arguments (chiefly the two first) brought to prove that infants
are not to be baptized, according to the institution Matthew. 28. 19. and the
practice of the Apostles (besides what is alleged and refuted already) many
things are alleged. Mr. Blake Vindic. foederis page 411. construes the
objection, that infant baptism wants an institution, as if the meaning were
that it wants an institution with limit to infant age, and then talks thus at
randum, This Objection, if it have force in it, followed home, will overthrow
all baptism at any age, and every other new Testament ordinance whatsoever: For
according to this rule a person must bring a precept for one of his age to be
baptized. But this is M. Blakes mistake of the objection; For in it an
institution is not required with limit to infant age, but such an institution
as comprehends by any description ordinarily infant age. But then, says he,
upon the same account church members in covenant of any age ought to be
baptized, and so the institution is not in question (about that there is an
agreement) but whether infants be in covenant, whether they be any
church members, is to be disputed, which already is satisfied.

Answ. It is false which he faith that there is an agreement about the
institution, I deny that the institution is, Baptize persons in covenant,
except he mean persons in covenant by their own profession and promise, or that
it is all one to baptize disciples and to baptize persons to whom God has
promised, or covenanted Christ: For then the Jews yet uncalled should be
baptized, to whom Gods covenant is, Romans 11. 27. It is false also that upon
the same account upon which the institution of baptism with limit to infancy is
waved, church members in covenant of any age (in Mr. Blakes sense) ought to be
baptized, and that the question is only whether infants be in covenant, whether
they be any members. He knows well that I yield that infants are in the
covenant of grace, in respect of Gods promise to as many of them as are elect,
whether believers children or not, and that I grant that many of them are
members of the invisible Church; yea he himself in his 43. chap. of Vindic.
foederis sect. 3. had disputed against my tenet, denying a connection between
the covenant and initial seal, and therefore this speech of his shows either
his oscitancy, or his willingness to mislead.

He then repeats his arguments in his Birth privilege in the same words he then
used to prove the institution to comprize infants, which were answered in my
Examen sect. 13. and my answer there vindicated in my Postscript sect. 14, 15,
18. in answer to the 11 chapter of Mr. Blakes answer to my Letter. I will not
here repeat what I then answered, but reply to what he excepts in his Vindic.
Foederis page 413. where he does not show insufficiency in what I say Apol.
page 147. to answer his allegation of Isaiah 49. 22. But says he doubts not I
abuse my memory. Concerning which I yield it not unlikely my memory did fail me
in that thing, of his alleging Isaiah 49. 22. as an argument by it self. I hope
this may satisfy Mr. Blake, and the Reader, if he read the places in my
writings here mentioned, may be satisfied that it proves not any thing for Mr.
Blakes purpose. Likewise for what I answered in my Postscript sect: 18. to his
allegation of Mat. 18. 5. and 10. 42. Mark 9. 41. Luke 9. 47, 48. he refers to
Mr. Baxters book page 22. I shall refer the Reader to my answer to Mr. B. here.

M. Blake only adds, that the denial that infants are within the verge of the
Commission, Mat. 28. 19. involves the Apostles and all that are employed in
their work in succession, in a contradiction. The nations are to be discipled:
Infants bear a part of the nation: and yet infants are in an incapacity wholly
of it. See Mr. Cooks answer to the Challenges of the Anabaptists of Stafford,
page 14.

I reply, Mr. Blakes words are so obscure (as many of his speeches are) that I
understand not his meaning when he says, The denial that infants are within
the verge of that commission Matthew 28. 19. involves the Apostles, and all
that are employed in their work in succession, in a contradiction, whether he
mean thus, my denial involves the Apostles in a contiadiction to their own
sayings, or to Christ's words: either way understood, I discern not any truth or
show of truth in Mr. Blakes words. Christ's words are a command, and not an
enunciation, and therefore there can be according to exact expression no
contradiction to them; and for any sayings of the Apostles which should be
involved in a contradiction by my denial, it is beyond any art of divination of
mine to guess which and where they should be. And for his syllogism it is
false, consisting of four terms, 1. The nations, 2. to be disciples, 3.
infants, 4. bear a part of the Nation. If it were good I might from the
parallel place Mark 16. 15. argue in the same manner, Every creature is to have
the Gospel preached to it; Infants bear a part of every creature, therefore to
infants the Apostles were to preach the Gospel. Nor is there any contradiction
in these two Propositions, The nations are to be discipled, and yet infants are
in an incapacity of it, no more than in these, God has granted repentance to
the Nations, Acts 11. 18. yet not to infants, All nations and all people are
exhorted to praise God, Romans 15. 11. in him shall the nations trust, verse 12.
yet not an infant meant. The speeches are so plain Acts 15. 3. declaring the
conversion of the nations, verse 7. God made choice among us, that the nations
by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel and believe, verse 14. Simeon
has declared how God at the first did visit the Nations to take out of them a
people for his name, verse 17. That the residue of men might seek after the
Lord, and all the Nations upon whom my name is called, verse 19. Wherefore my
sentence is that we trouble not them which from among the Nations are turned to
God. Acts 20. 25. As touching the Nations (for the word translated Gentiles and
Nations is the same in all these places) which believe, we have written, and yet
in no one of these places are infants meant under the term [ Nations] And when
our Lord Christ expresses what he said Matthew 28. 19. Disciple all nations,
by the words preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark. 16. 15. as the
comparing the texts shows, and interpreters confess; I know not how to conceive
with what Spirit Mr. Blake is moved, who does so often seek to impose his stale
all egations so often and so plainly refuted. Will any man conceive that Christ
bid them preach to infants, and yet his bidding them to disciple all nations is
as much as to bid them go preach to all nations? If men do swallow down such
fancies, I can hardly judge but that they are willing to be deceived. In Mr.
Cooks book in the place to which he refers me, I find no more then in Mr.
Blakes, and therefore need give no other answer than what is given to him.

But Mr. Blake adds. For that part of the objection, that there is no example
in the New Testament scripture of infant baptism, I answer, First, for an
example of baptism with limit to any one precise number of years or days, we
have but one that I know (if that) in Scripture, and that is of Christ, who was
(as is computed) about the age of thirty when he was baptized, if this be pressed
and followed all must at that alone be for baptism, and no other of any age may
be baptized. Mr. T. had many years above thirty over his head, when I heard him
say, that he was satisfied, that though an infant ought not to be baptized, yet
being baptized in infancy, when in years he did make profession of the Gospel
this was valid, which he spoke in justification of his own baptism; though now
(as error is creeping) of an Antipaedobaptist he is grown up to an Anabaptist,
and is rebaptized, and in his Praecursor glories in his shame of rebaptizing
others.

Answ. The Objection as by me framed does not intimate a pleading the necessity
of an example with limit to any one precise number of years or days, as a rule
to be followed in baptism, but rests in the institution and examples in the new
Testament as sufficient to direct whom to baptize, to wit disciples, repenting
believers in Christ by profession, whatever be their age, nor did Mr. Bl. ever
hear me press Christ's age as the exact rule for the time in which Christians
should be baptized; and therefore did not Mr. Bl. take occasion to vent his
jerks and quips (in which he is frequent) he had forborne to recite my speech in
that manner he does. Concerning which I do not think I did then express my
self, to wit in the year 1643. (for sure it was in that year that I spoke with
M. Blake now above nine years since) in the very words he sets down; I do
rather conceive by the words in my Exercit. page 22. composed about that time,
that I spoke more cautelously. But had I said it, it only shows I received
light by degrees, as in all reformations it has been. Neither am I an
Anabaptist, nor do I rebaptize, and though I glory not in any thing of mine,
yet count it not my shame, but my honor, that God has used me as an
instrument to reform the superstitious opinion and profane practice of
infant baptism, or rather (as now it is used) sprinkling or perfusion, and do
bless God with rejoicing, that amidst so many temptations, reproaches and other
sufferings, my heart has been obedient to Christ's command of being baptized,
and baptizing, though to his own shame, he makes it my shame that I have done
my duty in this particular.

Mr. Blake adds. There are many things of which we make no question, and yet we
have no example of them. I instanced in the trial of the suspected wife by the
water of jealousy, there is no example for it in all the old Testament
Scripture; and for women's receiving the Lords Supper, there is not a particular
institution, or any particular precedent for it in the New Testament: See
further instances in Mr. Cooks Treatise before mentioned, page 21. They cannot
give us any instance of any one trained up by believing parents for baptism,
and as soon as he could give an account baptized, not one child of a believer
brought up for covenant and not in covenant.

Answ. I may say also there are many things of which we make no question, and
yet we have no example of them: It is enough if either precept or example
approved could be brought of infantbaptism. Of the trial by the water of
jealousy there was no need of example to direct, when the rule was so plain.
Mr. Cooks instances are to no more purpose than Mr. Blakes, being brought
against them who deny proof by consequence, which I do not. Their need be no
example brought according to my principles of a believers child catechized
first and baptized after, it is enough to us that such a one is comprehended in
the institution being a disciple, Christ never requiring us to enquire whose
children they are, but what is their faith and profession, and to baptize
disciples and believers in him. If Mr. Blake mean [ by being brought up for
covenant] to be taught the knowledge of the true God, Ishmael the child of a
believer was brought up for covenant and not in covenant. Of women's, who are
Christian believers or disciples, receiving the Lords Supper, my speech Examen
page 112. was right, there is institution and example of it in the New
Testament, and this is justified in my Postscript s. 11. But Mr. Blake has a
fling at my instances, though his fellow Paedobaptists count them very plain,
he is minded it seems to be ad oppositum to me in all I say in this argument.
The particular command for women's receiving the Lords Supper I said was (...) 1
Cor. 11. 28. Let Mr. Fox in the Acts and Monuments of the Church relates how in
the disputation at Oxf. 1554. with Mr. Latimer Dr. Weston objected this thing,
and Mr. Latimer answered, he found a woman's receiving the Lords Supper 1 Cor.
11. 28.
a man examine himself, and so let him eat, this says Mr. Coleman is as clear
for women as men; But then, says Mr. Blake John 7. 22. is Moses his command,
the Jews practice with Christ's approbation, in the same comprehensive latitude
in regard of both sexes, as in Saint Paul for receiving the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. I answered, true, if the subject matter did not limit the word
(...) to the male John 7. 22. it being a relation of the Jews practice, which
was only to circumcise the male, which it does not 1 Cor. 11. 28. But then
says Mr. Blake, my express formal command is lost, they are not expressed but
included only, and by consequence, which will not be denied either to Mr.
Coleman, or Mr. Blake. Answ. This is enough for me which he grants, that women
are included in that precept 1 Cor. 11. 28. though by consequence only, for
then there is institution in the New Testament for their receiving the Lords
Supper, and therefore this objection of Mr. Blake and others against my
requiring either precept or example of infant baptism in the New Testament in
express terms or by good consequence, by requiring me to show a like precept or
example for women's receiving the Lords Supper, is answered by his own grant,
that there is such a precept for women's receiving the Lords Supper, as I deny
to be for infant baptism. Yet I still say it is more than by consequence, even
an express precept in formal terms for women's Mr. Will. Cook Font. uncov. page
16. The word (...) notes the species or kind of man distinct from other
creatures, without difference of age or sex.
receiving the Lords Supper, which is 1 Cor. 11. 28. For I take that to be an
express command in formal terms, which is in the imperative mood, and in a word
that according to Grammar construction comprehends both men and women, there
being no circumstance restraining it to the male. And in this sense Mr. M.
says truly in his Sermon page 35. Express command there is that they should
teach the heathen and the Jews, and make them disciples, and then baptize them,
though Jews are only comprised under the general term [ all nations.]

Mr. Blake goes on. He further says, that 1 Cor. 10. 17. is an express example
in formal terms of women's receiving the Lords Supper; we being many are one
bread and one body, for we are partakers of one bread. I demand of Mr. T.
whether the Apostle speaks in the person of Christians or in the person of
women? not of women sure, for he takes in himself, and he was a man, and then
the formality of an express example falls. When it is said that the whole house
of Israel is circumcised in the flesh, Mr. T: will not yield that there is a
proof, not by any consequence, that women, though of the house of Israel were
virtually circumcised: but all partaking of one bread, there is a proof formal
and express that they were at the Lords Supper.

Answ. An express formal example is mentioned 1 Cor. 10. 17. of women's
receiving the Lords Supper, there being relation of partaking the bread in the
indicative mood, and the term [ we all] according to Grammar construction the
matter not excluding them comprehending women as well as men. For the Apostle
under [ all we] expressly comprehends all the many that were one bread and one
body, who are all Christians both Jews and Gentiles, 1 1 Cor. 12. 13. Mr.
Blakes demand makes a disjunction of members coincident, which is illogical;
However to it as it is I say the Apostle speaks in his own person, not in
another, yet he speaks of the persons of all Christians both men and women,
and he takes in as expressly the women as the men, and the formality of the
example is of one as well as the other. As for the other passage alleged by Mr.
Blake the Predicate [ circumcised in the flesh] being necessarily understood of
actual circumcision, there is a necessity to understand the Subject [ the whole
house of Israel] synecdochically, else the speech would not be true. But tropes
are not to be made but where there is a necessity to make good the speech, or
to make it agree with the scope, circumstances and other expressions: of which
there is no necessity 1 Cor. 10. 17. to verify the speech of the Apostle, but
that it is true of women as well as men, and must be so understood without a
trope, and therefore there the speech is to be expounded according to the plain
Grammatical meaning as expressed formally without the like trope.

Mr. Blake says of me. He brings Acts 20. 7. that the disciples on the first
day of the week came together to break bread. Here is an example as express and
formal. Mr. T. cannot infallibly prove by help of consequence much less
expressly that there was a woman there. At that night meeting there might be
none but men, as at the first institution. It can never be an express example
till it be made appear that none are disciples but women.

Answ. I had thought when it is said, it is appointed unto men once to die, Heb.
9. 27. death passed upon all men, in that all have sinned, Romans 5. 12. it had
been express and formal for women's and infants dying though there be other men
than women and infants, and yet in both places [ men] in Greek is in the
masculine gender, [ Disciples] in the Acts note all Christians Acts 11. 26.
Tabitha is named a disciple Acts 9. 36. and therefore there being no reason to
make a trope Acts 20. 7. in the word [ Disciples] Christian women as well as
men are comprehended. And by breaking bread, say the Assembly at Westminster
Answer to the reasons of the dissenting brethren page 67. Sacramental breaking
of bread is understood generally by all, Acts 20. 7. The like is said by
Chamier Panst. Cathol. tom. 4. l. 7. c. 6. s. 13. And it is confirmed, 1. from
the text, the words importing that the breaking of bread is there meant which
was the end of their customary meeting on the Lords day; But this was
Sacramental, Ergo. 2. From 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. where the Lords Supper is called
breaking bread as the usual known term among Christians. This seems to me
infallible proof, that women were there, or which is to my purpose, that
usually they did meet with other disciples to break break. As for what Mr. Bl.
adds, That if I had the texts in hand of a whole household baptized, they would
be sufficiently formal for infant baptism, I tell him no: for I could not have
withstood the clear light to the contrary, from the words Acts 16. and 18. and
elsewhere, which limit the whole house to persons that did hear the word,
believe, receive, fear God, etc. Ampsing. dialog. contra Anabap. page 206. Idem
quoque vobis responsum volumus ad loca illa, Act. 16. 34. 1 Cor. 16. 15. Tit.
1. 11. ubi quaedam de totis familiis enunciantur, quae non nisi de adultis
accipi possunt. It is false that the Commission Matthew 28. 19. is to baptize
Nations, but disciples in or out of nations, as is proved above. Providence
has not ordered that nations including infants have been brought into the
Church as Christ appointed, to wit by preaching the Gospel: but the national
Churches are gathered (otherwise than Christ appointed) by human laws and
infant baptism. I value as much the Churches practice as ever, but it is false
that in no controverted thing the Church is found so unanimous as in this of
infant baptism. It is more unanimous about Episcopacy Prelatical, use of the
sign of the cross, and many other things, as may be seen in Mr. Sprint of
Conformity page 85. etc. I shall in convenient time I hope show the mistakes of
Paedobaptists plea for infant baptism from antiquity.

The other speech of Mr. Blake, That which will speak for infants to receive
them into Heaven, will speak also to receive them into the Church by baptism,
is not true. For Election, the Covenant of Grace, a secret work of an initial,
habitual, seminal or actual holiness or faith, being supposed, may speak to
receive them into Heaven, yet not to baptism, Nor does it follow that if want
of faith exclude them from baptism, then by the text Mark 16. 16. the same want
of faith excludes from salvation. For (as I answer in my Praecursor s. 6.) a
want of faith dogmatical excludes from baptism, and yet excludes not infants
from salvation.

SECT. VII.
Mr. Ms. exceptions, that Matthew 28. 19. is not the institution of baptism,
that only disciples are not appointed to be baptized, that this was a rule
only for a Church to be constituted, are refelled.

THere are many other exceptions against the argument from the institution
Matthew. 28. 19. to be considered. Mr. M. in his Sermon page 44. says, 1. That
of matthew. 28. is not the institution of baptism. 2. It was instituted long
before to be the seal of the Covenant. 3. Its only an enlargement of their
Commission. To which in my Examen I said,

1. If this be not the first institution, yet it is an institution, and the
institution of baptism to us Gentiles, and therefore the rule by which
Ministers are to baptize, there being no other institution that I know of to
regulate our practice by, but such as is gathered from John Baptist, the
Apostles, and some preachers in the Acts of the Apostles, their practice and
sayings.

2. By requiring him to show another institution, else Paedobaptism cannot be
acquitted from will worship. To this M. M. Defense page 225. having referred me
to part 3. s. 13. where he says, all this is abundantly answered, says, This
enlargement of their Commission is very un^itly called by me an institution of
baptism to us, their Commission at the same time was enlarged to preach to the
Gentiles, will you call that an institution of preaching? And that the method
of preaching to us Gentiles must be fetch out of this place? I know you will
not.

Refut. 1. By institution I conceive is meant no other than commanding,
ordaining, appointing, and I find the words used as equipollent so
promiscuously in the Assemblies confession of faith chap. 27* 28, 29. in the
larger and shorter Catechism, in the Directory about baptism, that sure Mr. M.
was either very forgetful of what past in the Assembly, or very much disposed
to cavil when he excepted against my speech as un fit, in calling Mat. 28. 19.
the institution of baptism. The Assembly Confess of faith chapter 27. art. 3. call
it the word of institution, chap. 28. art. 7. allegeth no other text to prove
the ordaining and appointment of baptism by Christ, but Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mr. B.
calls it page 342. the solemn institution of baptism, yea in the disputes with
Papists and others about the author, minister, form, use of baptism, it is so
common a thing to call this the institution of baptism, yea the regulating
institution, the words therein are called the words of institution even in the
Directory, that I admire Mr. M. should put in this exception had he not a mind
to wrangle or to find a knot in a bulrush. I will recite Chamiers words,
Panstr. Cath. tom. 1. l. 9. c. 10. s. 39. Dico hanc ipsam formam baptizandi in
nomine patris and filii and spiritus sancti and solam esse and optimam constare
ex Evangelio: ubi nimirum institutionis est descriptio. Nam quis ignor at
quaecunque instituuntur a Christo non tantum optime institui, sed etiam sic, ut
non debeant aliter. But he tells me he knows I will not call that Matthew 28.
19. an institution of preaching, nor affirm that the method of preaching is to
be fetched out of this place. To which I reply, He is deceived, I do call it an
institution of preaching, and therein follow his Colleague Mr. Rutherford Due
right of Presbyteries page 454. That which we allege is an institution for
preaching and baptizing, Matthew 28. 19, 20. and before him Pareus in his
Comment. who intitles this part of the chapter, institutio ministerii, and from
hence with the generality of Divines fetch the method of preaching. But says
he, This was only an enlargement of their Commission. Answ. I find that the
Apostles had commission to preach, Mat. 10. 7. and that they did baptize, John
4. 1. which I doubt not they had Commission for: But be it so, yet however Mat.
28. 19. they had their Commission enlarged in the extent of the persons to whom
they were to preach and baptize, and this Commission is an institution of those
works: so that frivolously it is denied to be an institution because it was an
enlarged Commission, when the enlarged Commission was all one with a renewed
institution, and must needs be a rule about preaching to, and baptizing of
Gentiles, and therefore the institution of baptism to them. But it was
instituted long before to be a seal of the Covenant. Answ. I deny not but John
Baptist was appointed to baptize by God Mat. 21. 25. John 1. 6. and the
Apostles by Christ: but where there is any institution of baptism so expressed
as to regulate our practice before that Mat. 28. 19. I find not, and therefore
know no solemn institution by which we are to be guided in the use of it before
this. But it was long before instituted to be the Seal of the Covenant: for
this he refers us to that which he had said before. Answ. What ambiguity,
uncertainty, and falsity there is in Paedobaptists speeches about the Covenant,
being in Covenant, seal of the Covenant, connection between the Covenant and
seal, will be showed in that which follows. For present I know no place
assigned by Mr. M. in his Defense part. 3: s. 13. wherein he shows that baptism
was institu^ed long before the time of the speech Mat. 28. 19. to be the seal
of the Covenant. I have read over that section, and do aver that I find it so
empty of any either proofs or answers to my Examer, that his words in my
apprehension are mere trifling. If it be thought I wrong a man of such repute,
let any man show me a word in all that section (in which he says he has
answered all this abundantly) in answer to what I say that Matthew 28 19. is
the institution of baptism to us Gentiles, and the rule by which ministers are
to baptize, and that there is no other institution, and I will forfeit my
credit. He neither in all that section, nor elsewhere, that I know, shows
either any other or foregoing institution of baptism to us Gentiles, or any
other but this with John Baptists, the Apostles, and some forenamed their
practice and sayings for a rule of baptizing: only p. 212. he dictates thus.
Sir, since it is apparent that here is no new Commission for any new method in
their work, but only an enlargement of their Commission to apply their
Ministry to new persons, how could they understand our Saviors meaning to
proceed any other way to the Gentiles than among the Jews? etc. But to whom is
it apparent? and when, either sleeping or waking? where is the old Commission
that we must understand this by, so as to proceed the way to the Gentiles that
was taken among the Jews? Is it the Commission of circumcising Genesis 17? If
that be it, then baptism is not a Sacrament of the New Testament only but of
the old, then it is not a new administration, then the Commission of baptizing
is to any parent, though no minister, to baptize, then it must be done the
eighth day, to males only; were Christ's words thus to be understood they had
been a mere riddle: where or whence it is apparent that ever the Apostles
conceived that in executing the Commission Mat. 28. 19. they were to proceed
according to the Commission about circumcising? I have showed Examen part. 3*
sect. 14. that it rather follows to the contrary that they did and were to
proceed clean otherwise. And therefore that the Apostles should understand the
institution Mat. 28. 19. by the institution of circumcision Genesis 17. is so wild
a conceit, that I cannot impu^e it to any thing but mere dotage in the
assertor, there being no one word in the Commission or the executing of it
throughout the Acts of the Apostles that does show that Christ had reference to
it, or the Apostles so understood him. Yea if that of Circumcision Gent. 17. be
an institution of baptism, by like reason that of the Passover Exodus 12. must
be an institution of the Lords Supper, and then the Lords Supper should be
instituted before the night in which Christ was betrayed, and the Lords Supper
should be from Moses, and regulated by the Ordinances of the ceremoni^l Law
etc. If Mr. M. mean by the foregoing institutution the manner of the Jewish
Doctors in baptizing proselytes children with the parents, it shall be showed
hereafter, especially in answer to Dr. Hammond, that there is nothing therein
for infant baptism now, it being done to no Jews or their infants many ages
before Christ's incarnation, and therefore not out of respect to the Covenant
Genesis 17. nor as a privilege from thence, but merely as a rite to purge them
from the uncleanness of Gentilism, nor ever done to the infant posterity of the
proselytes of righteousness after the first time of being made proselytes, nor
ever used to proselytes of the gate. And yet had the use been such as that
infants of Proselytes after their first en^rance on the Jewish profession had
been baptized, yet there is no commission in Scripture for it, though Rabbis
would fetch it, some from Genesis 35. 2. some from Exodus 19. 10. some from the
flood, nor is there any thing in the institution of Christ, or Acts and sayings
of the Apostles, that shows that Christian baptism was conformed to the Jewish
baptism in this, and therefore I conclude, that there is no other institution
besides Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. together with the Apostles, John
Baptists, and others forenamed sayings and practice, that is a rule to us about
baptizing, and if infant baptism be not here appointed, it is besides the
institution, and so irregular.

But Mr. M. allegeth further, that it is not said that only disciples are to be
baptized. To which I replied Examen page 132. it is not said 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let
him only eat that can examine himself, nor here only preachers in office are to
baptize, nor only two to be one flesh, nor let only wine be drunk in the
Euchurist, or water used in baptism, yet Divines make these speeches exclusive.
M. Ball of the Covenant par. 2. c. 2. p. 252. when difference or distinction is
contained in some term, the proposition is for sense exclusive no less than if
it were expressly noted. Against this Mr. M. excepts Defense page 215. That the
practice and example of Christ and John is sufficient to make a positive rule
affirmative but not exclusive, and the reason is plain, they possibly might not
meet with all persons and occasions, as though no proselyte of the gate were
baptized till Acts 10. nor any till they made actual confession of their faith
and repentance, nor any rule given that the receiving the extraordinary gifts
of the holy Ghost should without any other confession be a sufficient warrant
to baptize any, yet Peter upon the very pouring out of those gifts, without
requiring any further confession either of faith or repentance, baptized
Cornelius and all his Company.

Ref. 1. M. Ms. confessions are to be noted, that none till they made actual
confession of their faith and repentance were baptized till Acts 10. nor any
rule given that the receiving the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost should
without any other confession be a sufficient warant to baptize any, which do
grant that till then there was neither rule nor practice of baptising any
without actual confession of their faith and repentance, which is in effect a
grant of the Minor, in my argument, denying any institution or practice in the
New Testament of infant baptism, for there is no other rule or practice of
infant baptism after Acts 10. otherwise than that before.

2. It is to be observed, that Mr. M. deals not rightly with me in that he
makes me to have framed the exclusive rule from practice, whereas I joined
institution with practice, and showed neither to be for infant baptism.

3. If the non-including of persons or things in the institution or practice of
baptism be not exclusive, then the institution is not our rule, then there is
no will worship, or it is no sin to swerve from it, we may add to Gods worship
infant-communion, and innumerable other things rejected may be lawful, then do
preachers, especially Mr. M. unjustly urge the Parliament, and others, to
reform invented ceremonies, and Protestants contend against Popish rites in
baptism, mass, etc.

4. However Mr. M. conceive, yet men abler than Mr. M. do frequently assert
negative arguments from institution. I will name one who has few fellows,
Chamier Panst. cath. in the words lately by me here recited, and tom. 4. l. 5.
c. 9. s. 24. Haec testimonia sunt institutionis: quae etsi non prohibent
toridem verbis alios liquores: tamen eo ipso quod non ponat excludit. L. 7. c.
10. s. 38. quamquam in hoc genere rerum quae nihil sunt nisi ex institutione
validissimam esse aportet argumentationem negativam si inde sumatur.

But Mr. M. says, John the Baptist and the Apostles might not meet with all
persons and occasions.

Answ. It Is true, they baptized no Emperors or Kings, because none were
converted, yet they had a rule to baptize them if disciples: But this could not
be the reason of their not baptizing infants, since innumerable believers had
infants in the times of the Gospel story, and Acts of the Apostles, and yet no
mention of baptizingany. Do not Mr. M. and other Paedobaptists plead that the
little children brought to Christ were infants of believers, and yet there is
not a word of their being baptized? As for Mr. Ms. instance to prove no
necessity of practice to warrant infant baptism, though I grant if there were
institution without practice it were enough, yet is it not rightly brought. It
supposes Peter baptized Cornelius and his household upon the very pouring out
of extraordinary gifts, without actual faith and repentance required; And I
grant he required them not: but yet withal it is manifest he did not baptize
merely upon the pouring out of extraordinary gifts without them. For the text
Acts 10. 46, 47. expressly says, they magnified God, ere he spoke of their
baptizing, and Acts 11. 17. that they had the like gift as themselves who
believed on the Lord Jesus, and they gathered thence that the Gentiles had
repentance unto life granted by God.

But it is objected by Mr. Cobbet, Just Vindic. part 2. cha. 3. sect. 2. that
Mark 16. 16. none but true believers are meant, then if the term be exclusive
none but such are to be baptized. 2. that those believers had signs following
them, verse 17.

Answ. The rule is, disciples by profession are to be baptized, to which is
equipollent [believers by profession] I say not that believers only who are
such as those Mark 16. 16. are to be baptized by us: But yet comparing Mark 16.
15, 16. with Mat. 28. 19. I gather that a disciple and believer are terms
equipollent, and so it helps me to understand the term [disciple] as answerable
to the term [believer] And though by reason of the matter predicated Mark 16.
16. the believer there is only a true believer, yet the term often is given to
believers only by profession, and we find such warrantably baptized, and that
is enough for our direction: though we are to require more, yet we are not to
forbear baptism till we know there is more. We acknowledge only true believers
have right before God to baptism: but in the face of the Church believers by
profession have right to baptism, and are to be taken by us for true believers
upon their profession, till they be discovered to be otherwise. As for verse
17. it does not say these or some of these signs shall follow every of them
that believe: but they are true if they followed some of them that believe,
since the terms being indefinite in matter contingent, the Proposition is true
if only particular. Indefinita propositio in materia contingenti aequipollet
particulari, say Logicians.

But there is an objection ad hominem against my self, that I have said that if
I knew an infant were actually sanctified, etc. I would baptize him, if so,
then an infant is not excluded out of the institution.

Answ. I grant that an infant barely as an infant is not excluded out of the
institution, but as ordinarily not known to be a disciple or believer. If an
infant were known to be a disciple or believer, I would baptize him, as I would
one who having his tongue cut out who is known to be a believer otherways. But
then I have added that this would be upon extraordinary manifestation only,
and so not according to ordinary rule, and therefore justifies only that
extraordinary fact, not the ordinary practice of infant baptism, which has no
rule ordinary or extraordinary.

But then says Mr. M. page 215. show us your extraordinary ^ule.

Answ. When I do thus, or challenge this, I shall: in the mean time it is
enough that my concession does not infringe my argument against baptizing
infants ordinarily without ordinary rule.

Mr. M. has yet another exception in his Sermon, page 44. That no other are
mentioned to be baptized but disciples, or believers, because a new Church was
to be constituted, and then all were to be baptized upon profession of faith,
after the children came in by their right by virtue of the Covenant.

Ref. 1. when I come to examine Mr. Ms. Conclusions I shall show, that there is
no such Covenant as to give right to believers infants to be baptized; yea that
title to the Covenant did not give right to Circumcision, and therefore this is
a vain pretense.

2. He assigns that for a reason why no other were baptized, which was not a
reason: For in the Jewish Church which was already constituted, and which
Christ did join himself to, and to whose children they say did belong the
Covenant, yet while other were baptized all the time of John and Christ's
Ministry on earth, no one infant was appointed to be baptized, no not those
infants Mark 10. which Christ blessed, and which were (if Paedobaptists say
true) believers infants in Covenant.

3. It is a vain pretense, that there is no mention of baptized infants;
because they had no right till their parents were converted: For neither when
they were converted is there any mention of the infants baptism.

4. The institution Mat. 28. 19. expounded by the practice of John Baptist etc.
is the standing rule for Churches at first planting, and after increasings, nor
can any other rule be produced distinct from this, and therefore neither at
first conversion, nor after settlement of Churches, are any to be baptized
according to ordinary rule till they be disciples of Christ, or believers by
profession.

SECT. VIII.
The exceptions of Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Blake, etc. against the order of teaching
before baptizing, of Mr. M. Mr. Hussy, that baptizing is discipling, are
refelled.

AGainst the argument from the order of teaching first and then baptizing, it
was excepted that it is said Mark 1. 4. John did baptize and preach, which
objection in my Examen was removed by the words of Beza par. 4. s. 1. To which
I add, that the reason is manifest from the text why the one was put after the
other, not because he did baptize any before he had preached, but because Mark
having expressed his baptism, it was needfulhe should show the difference
between John's baptism and the Jewish or Phasaical baptism.

To this Mr. M. returns thus much. Christ's order is (say you) teaching should
go before baptizing; is not that the same with this; That men must be made
disciples by preaching before they be baptized? To which I only say,

1. That the arguments are not the same as I made them, the first being taken
from the term [(...) them] the other from the order of teaching before baptizing.

2. However I take that which Mr. M. grants, that it is the same to teach, and
to make disciples by preaching before baptizing. But Mr. Cobbet just vindic.
part 2. chapter 3. sect. 2: allegeth something against this argument. He grants
some things in this order of Christ are perpetual, but he will not have all to
be presidentiall to all Churches and times, because it is said Mar. 16. 17. in
the same speech, that miraculous signs should follow them that believe.

But if this were good, then the rule should only hold while such gifts remain,
which no churches now have, and so he must fall into the opinion that makes
water baptism a temporary ordinance, and those things which he grants
perpetual, as viz. preaching the Gospel before baptism is to be administered by
such as preach, discipled inchurched persons are to be baptized, that in
founding churches the first members are to be visible professors of the faith
in reference to church estate, that baptism is with water applied to the
persons baptized, and that into the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
must be temporary as well as teaching before baptizing: If the one be perpetual
notwithstanding this reason so is the other, and presidential to all churches
and times.

But says Mr. Cobbet, there is a distinction to be made in baptizing at the
gathering of Churches, and when they are gathered: the order must be observed
at the former, not the later.

Answ. 1. If it was to be so at first gathering of churches, why did not those
in New England observe it then when they first gathered their churches? surely
they were not rightly gathered for want of baptism if this be the rule at
gathering of churches. Nor can they plead their baptism they had in the
National and Parochial churches of England; For by their principles, baptism
belongs to the children of believers, not as such, but as in church covenant,
and church members, and therefore they baptize not any but the children of
church members in covenant, and yet most of them had their baptism in the
churches of England, and their parents no church members and so neither they
nor others that gather churches in Old England do keep to their principles in
the gathering of their churches.

2. But besides what I said before to this objection, Mat. 28. 19. there is no
such distinction made, and we are not to distinguish where the law does not,
yea all the institution, and every thing in it was to be observed in the
churches of Christ in gathering and gathered at all times, as is manifest from
the promise annexed of being with them always to the end of the world, which
shows that he would have that rule continued to the end of the world, and to
encourage them therein he promises to be with them. To say with Mr. S^ltmarsh
in his Sparkles of glory and some others, it is to be read [ to the end of the
age] is frivolous, since Matthew 13. 39* 40, 49. Matthew. 24. 3. the very words
show it to be meant of the last time at Christ's coming to Judgment.

But (says Mr. Cobbet) the Commission James 5. 14. to an^oint with oil, is not
perpetual.

Be it so, that that appointment of the sign of a gift of miraculous cure now
cease, yet it does not follow that the institution Mat. 28. 19. in which a
sign of a perpetual duty is institu^ed, is temporary.

But says Mr. Cobbet, There are variations in the mention of Christ's last
Commission about the Lords Supper, and therefore another analogy of faith and
comparing Scriptures with Scriptures is to regulate us in this point of
Sacramental order, and so in the other.

To which I answer, 1. That the variations Mr. Cobbet sets down are none of
them about the order of the actions appointed by Christ pertaining to the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and therefore not pertinent to the presen:
business.

2. If Mr. Cobbet will not have the order in the institution to be moral and
perpetual about the Lords Supper, then they do ill in his Judgment that
contend against Papists, Prelates and others to have the Lords Supper reduced
exactly to the first pattern as a constant rule, there being such variations as
disable it from being a rule.

3. I grant that analogy of faith and comparing Scriptures with Scriptures is
to regulate us in this point of Sacramental order: But till Mr. Cobbet show
that in any other Scripture or analogy of faith there is a rule that persons
should be baptized before they be taught, his reasoning is, not to the present
purpose.

But then says he, If order must be observed so strictly, baptizing must go
before salvation, Mark 16. 16. repentance may be before faith, Mark 1. 5.
confession before faith, Romans 10. 9. if the place in Mark must be so closely
stuck to without comparing it with the Scriptures of the old Testament, then we
must preach the Gospel to Dogs, Cats, etc. since it is expressly said preach the
Gospel to every creature.

Answ. 1. That if it follow not that every thing set before is first in order
of time or nature, yet what is first appointed to be done in the solemn
institution of Sacraments, is to be done first, as taking, blessing, breaking
bread, before eating, so teaching the baptized before baptizing as the Apostles
practice shows, who best understood Christ's appointment. As believing upon
preaching is to go before salvation, so baptizing ordinarily and regularly (for
which I now contend) and yet in special cases as persons may be saved without
personal actual believing upon preaching, so without baptism. To avoid the
inference of preaching to Beasts, we need not go to the old Testament Mat. 28.
19. ^ol. 1. 23. etc. yield sufficient light to show, that by [ every creature]
is meant all nations of men, or Gentiles, as well as Jews.

But (says Mr. Cobbet) if it be absurd to say the Gospel is preached to little
ones, what shall we say of Christ's speech Mat. 19. 14. Deuteronomy. 30. 6. Acts 2. 38,
39. Luke 1. 76?

I answer, This may be said, that all these are frivolously alleged to prove
that Christ should appoint the Gospel to be preached to infants (which were to
make Christ as ridiculous as the Legends do Francis the Friar) since none of
them mention any speech or preaching to little infants, though some of the
speeches are of or concerning infants. As for what he further adds, It was no
absurdity that infants were circumcised, Christ laid his hands on infants,
Peter's feet were washed, though these acts were not then understood. I grant
it, and say, if Christ appointed infants to be baptized, I should not count it
an absurdity, but since his express institution is, that teaching should go
before baptizing, till that order be showed to be alte^ed, it is a profane
abuse of the ordinance of baptism to baptize those who are not taught.

Mr. Blake Vindic. foederis page 243. speaks thus, This is the weakest of all
arguments, to reason for a precedence of one before another from the order in
which they are placed in Scripture, so we may say John baptized before he
preached the baptism of repentance, for his baptizing is mentioned before
preaching of baptism Mark 1. 4. So we may say we must have glory first and
virtue after, for so they are placed by the Apostle, 2 Peter 1. 3.

Answ. Though in Histories of facts sometimes things are s^t down last which
were done first, yet in setting down institutions, order and every circumstance
is observed, so as thence to conclude it irregular not to observe the order
used in the primitive institution, 1 Cor. 10. 16. the cup of blessing is
mentioned before the bread we break, and yet it would be counted a disorder and
sinful to administer the wine before the bread, because in the mention of the
institution the three Evangelists and Paul observe exactly the order as well as
the use of the elements, as delivered by the Lord. In like manner when Christ
appoints, and the constant practice of the Apostles expounds his words thus,
that first persons be made disciples and believers, and then be baptized, sure
it is an act of transgression of Christ's command to do it otherwise, especially
considering that by so doing the prime and chief end of baptism, to wit, to
signify the baptized persons engagement to repentance and faith in Christ, is
thereby evacuated.

Mr. Blake ^aith Vindic. foederis page 136. God is a God of order, and he will
have order observed, and p. 164 God will not suffer that disorder that the
leading Sacrament should come after.

I may more truly say, God will not suffer the disorder of Mr. Bl. to have
baptism go before and faith follow, when by necessity of precept, as he speaks
there, Christ having instituted it and commanded it, discipleship and believing
are put before baptism Mat. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15, 16. and the Apostles so taught
and practiced Acts 2. 38. 41. and 8 12. 37. and 10 47, 48. and 11. 17. and 16.
15, 33, 34. and 18. 8. Glory is put before Virtue 2 Peter 1. 3. without
disorder, if either the meaning be as Heinsius in his Preface to his
Aristarchus sacer on Nonnus conceives, he has called us by his glorious power,
or if the ordinary reading be retained, though Virtue be before glory, yet we
are called to glory first as the end, and then to virtue as the means, the end
being first in intention, though last in execution.

There is another exception which I counted in my Examen p. 126. a very absurd
one, and such as I presumed none that had any wit would entertain it, to wit
that making disciples Matthew. 28. 19. is to be by baptizing them, and yet Mr. M.
in his Defense page 212. goes about to maintain that the Jews children were
discipled when circumcised, and page 213. that baptizing may be well rendered
discipling, and allegeth Spanheimius for it. Mr. Hussy vents it as very
remarkable and advantageous to prove infant baptism. But against this toy I
argued in my Examen page 131. 127.

1. No Lexicon, nor I thought expositor do expound [(...) make disciples] that
is circumcise or baptize them.

2. That the word plainly signifies so to teach as that the persons taught do
learn and accordingly profess the things taught.

To this Mr. M. replies, 1. That better Critics than my self say that (...) is
a Rabbinick phrase, and from their use of it it is best to be understood, and
that with them it signifies to admit scholars, not because they were taught,
but that they might be taught.

Answ. But Mr. M. neither names the Critics, no^ brings proof for what they
say, nor if it were all granted would serve his purpose to prove that ever
[disciple ye] is as much as [circumcise ye, baptize ye] I grant there is great
use to be made of the Talmuds and Rabbis in expounding many passages in the
New Testament, but in expounding this term there is no need of using them, when
the use of it in other places, and comparing it with other Scriptures are
sufficient to clear it, yet if Mr. Ms. Critics look over all the Talmuds and
Rabbis I presume they will not find one passage wherein the making of a
disciple or admitting of a Scholar was ever applied to an infant. And though
Mr. Hussy ridiculously tell us of taking children to School, and counting them
for Scholars, who carry a hornbook to School, though they be put there only to
play and keep them from harm, yet neither do any so admit as Scholars infants
of a day or eight days old, nor is [a Scholar] all one with [a disciple] the
latter word being from learning, the other from vacation from other employment
that he may learn, nor is making a disciple all one with admitting a Scholar.

Rightly says Becman: Exercit. Th^ol. 17. page 2^0. verbum (...) (quod omnes
libenter admittunt) ex nativa origin est discipulos facere (...). Atqui hoc
ipsum non nisi accedente doctrina fit. Qui enim discit tanquam (...) ab alio ^x
ra^ione (...) dicitur itaque discipuli sunt qui docentur and discunt. page 261.
nec ulli discipuli sunt nisi qui docentur. Dum igitur Christus Apostolos jubet
(...) ante omnia and quidem de necessitate jubet docere.

But 3. Mr. M. refers me with a blind direction to Spanheimius to consult with,
which however I have done, as I find his words Dub. Evang. part. 3. dub. 27.
and I say as in my Apology page 100. besides the mention of his words there
need no other refutation.

For 1. it is false, that [ to make disciples] signifies the end of their
sending, and not the act they were to do, whereas it plainly notes the first
act they were to do: and if it had been the end of the act of baptizing and
teaching, it should have been thus [baptize and teach them all things, (...)
that ye may make all nations disciples.]

2. Spanheimius there makes [(...) make disciples] to answer to [(...) he
makes disciples, John 4. 1.] But there it is another thing than baptizing, for
making disciples and baptizing are knit together as two distinct things, and
the making disciples there was by preaching, as the story of the Evangelist
shows, therefore making disciples Matthew 28. 19. is by preaching, and is not
barely baptizing.

3. His own words do refute the reason of his analysis. For he allegeth this
reason, because if (...) should simply signify only to teach, there would be
found a tautology in Christ's words thus; Go teach all Nations, baptizing them,
teaching them. But this absurdity is not avoided by his own exposition. For he
himself says, non significat solum docere, sed and discipulos facere, now if
it signify at all to teach the tautology is alike, if we say, Go, not only
teach, but also make disciples baptizing them, teaching them, for by his own
words teaching is twice commanded. Nevertheless in my exposition (commonly
received) there is no tautology, Go, make by teaching or preaching the Gospel
(that Jesus is the Christ) disciples, so as that they learn him to be the
Messiah, and profess him, as Mr. M. expounds John 9. 27. will ye be his
disciples? and then baptize them, and after teach them to observe all that I
have commanded. So that here is a double teaching injoined, one to preach or
teach them the Gospel, that Jesus is the Christ, as Philip did the Eunuch, Acts
8. 36, 37. and then baptize, and then teach duties commanded by Christ. And for
what Spanheimus says, That this may in its manner be ^i^ted to infants. For
when parents do give their names to Christ for themselves and their families,
their whole house is discipled, their children as well as themselves, it is
false. For then if a parent give his name to Christ for himself and his family,
and the whole house is discipled, thereby it will follow, that the wife, child,
servant, though infidels, are discipled, and so in fidels should be Christ's
disciples. But no where is in Scripture any made a disciple but by his own act
of learning. As for what Mr. M. adds to show that without teaching first, by
initiating into a Master a person may become a disciple, it is insufficient to
that end. For 1 Cor. 10. 2. though all our Fathers be said to be baptized into
Moses, yet not to be discipled, and the term (...) was discipled, Matthew. 27.
57. does not note a bare entering into Christ's School without teaching or
hearing of Christ, much less such an initiating as they give to infants without
any act of their own, and John 9. 27. Mr. M. himself paraphaseth thus, will ye
be his disciples, will ye profess him? which is an act of their own, of which
infants are not ordinarily capable, and it supposes some teaching and
learning, at least this, that Jesus is the Christ.

2. I argued from Mark 16. 15. to which our Translators refer in the margin at
Matthew 28. 19. as clearing the meaning of it, and generally interpreters show
thence how they were appointed to make disciples, to wit, by preaching the
Gospel, and so Mr. M. Sermon page 35. Express command there is that they should
teach the heathen and the Jews, and make them disciples, and then baptize them,
and Defense page 210. Their commission was to preach and baptize, and hereupon
from Matthew. 28. 19. is gathered, that none are to baptize but preachers. Whence
I argue, If the making disciples were to be by preaching the Gospel to them who
were made disciples, then by making disciples is not meant baptizing, nor
baptizing to be rendered discipling, For baptizing and preaching the Gospel are
not all one; But the making disciples is appointed to be and was by preaching
the Gospel to them who were made disciples; Ergo discipling is not by baptizing.

3. I argued from John 4. 1. in which it is confessed by the New Annot. edit.
1. on Mat. 28. 19. [ made disciples and baptized] answer to [ make disciples
baptizing them Mat. 28. 19.] now John 4. 1. making disciples is one thing, and
baptizing is another thing, though coupled with it; therefore the making
disciples is not baptizing, but a distinct thing.

4. The Commission of Christ is to be understood according to the Apostles
practice, unless we will say that either they understood not, or followed not
Christ's appointment; But their practice was to make disciples first by
preaching, and then to baptize, and no other mentioned, as Mr. M. grants in his
Sermon page 44. Ergo. I truly said, nor need Mr. M. wonder at it, or call it a
wild consequence, as he does Defense page 214. that if the Apostles had
understood Christ's Commission as Mr. M. does, baptize according to the rule of
circumcising, they might have saved a great deal of labor in preaching to the
baptized before they baptized them, and in baptizing females, since the rule of
circumcising did not require either. And though I grant it to be true, that
male and female are all one, yet in the rule of circumcising a difference is
made, and if that be the rule of baptizing infants, then in baptizing them male
infants should be baptized and not female.

5. If making disciples be by baptizing without preaching before to the
baptized, then non-preaching ministers may and do baptize rightly though they
preach not the Gospel; But this I suppose will be denied by Mr. M. Ergo.

6. If making disciples be by baptizing without preaching to them, then the
Spaniards in America who drove the Indians into the water to be baptized,
without teaching them or preaching the Gospel to them, did rightly, For they
followed Christ's rule thus expounded; But that is absurd; Ergo.

7. Mr. M. and other Paedobaptists say that the commission Mat. 28. 19. was the
commission for first constituting the Churches of the Gentiles: If then the
Commission be to be understood, make ye disciples by baptizing them, without
first preaching to them, then he had appointed them to constitute or plant the
first Churches without preaching, and then the Apostles gifts of tongues etc.
were unnecessary, they might have constituted Churches by hands, baptizing them
only without the use of those gifts; but these things are absurd, besides other
absurd consequences which follow on the exposition that discipling is baptizing,
or baptizing discipling, Mat. 28. 19.

Lastly many of their own grants and expositions before recited do so cross
this conceit, that as I said before, I thought none that had any wit would
embrace it, so now I wonder that such men as have taken it up did not better
make use of their wit, to decline so witless a shift. Only I perceive any
thing will erve turn to keep up the credit of Infant sprinkling.

SECT. IX.
The exception of Mr. M. Mr. Blake, Mr. Cobbet, nations are appointed to be
baptized Matthew 28. 19. and so infants, is refelled.

BUt there is yet another exception against my argument from Matthew 28. 19.
followed by many, that Christ bids them make nations disciples and baptize
nations, and consequently infants at least the species.

Against this I opposed, that all nations simply are not appointed to be
baptized, but disciples of all nations. So Beza annot. on Matthew 28. 19. Make
to me disciples out of all nations. The New Annotations on the Bible on Matthew.
28. 19. first edition, teach] Gr. make disciples of, as John 4. 1. all Nations,
not Jews alone but Gentiles also, Acts 10. 34, 35, 47. Mr. Baxter plain
scripture proof etc. page 327. when Christ says [ make me disciples of all
nations baptizing them] he means [ sincere disciples] Georg. Pasor Lexic. ad
verbum (...) Matthew 28. verse 19. (...), docete omnes gentes, h. ^. colligite
mihi discipulos ex omnibus gentibus.

Mr. Blake himself says, Answer to my letter chapter 11. sect. 1. he is ready to
subscribe to this interpretation as I lay it down in words by preaching the
Gospel to all nations make them disciples, and baptize those that do become
disciples of all nations. As for his exceptions, that the verb is transitive,
that (...) nations is in the accusative case, that it is boldness to put it
into the Genitive, that then the whole of the nation should not be appointed to
be baptized, and so not infants, I have answered them in my Postscript sect.
14. And I further prove that the nation entirely is not appointed to be
baptized.

1. For then the infidels of the nation should be to be baptized, for they are
a part of the nation.

2. Then the Apostles were not to baptize regularly till they baptized a whole
nation, yea all nations together, for so it is construed by them who make
nations entirely the subject of baptism according to Christ's institution.

3. The Apostles practice is an infallible comment on our Lord Christ's words.
As they practiced, so Christ meant; But they baptized not any entire Nation,
Country, City, or Tribe, but believers or disciples out of them; therefore no
other were appointed to be baptized. 4. If the baptizing of all the parts of a
nation, or a nation entirely, were appointed by Christ, then there might be
some rule to know when a nation is discipled, chosen, so as that it ought to be
entirely baptized; But there is no such rule, Ergo.

To none of these do I find any thing replied by Mr. M. but by telling me I
fall to my old artifice of framing many senses (which yet in this point were
but two) for which he blames me, as if it were blameable: whereas it is the
only way to clear truth to show the diverse senses of a speech, for avoiding of
ambiguity, according to that saying, Qui been distinguit been docet, he that
distinguishes well teaches well, and his not distinctly answering by showing
in what sense his speech is meant tends to nothing but the hiding of truth.

Then he tells me, That I vent my Criticisms, and undertake to show that (...)
signifies to teach cum effectu* or to teach till they were made Scholars (my
word was disciples) and that they were not to baptize till they were disciples,
and then says, But Sir, what need all these things? The meaning is plain that
other nations should be taken in likewise as the Jews according to Isaiah 19.
24. when other nations should by receiving and professing the Gospel come under
Gods wing, they should partake of the same Covenant which the Jews had before
enjoyed, he would henceforth be the God of them and their seed.

Whereto I reply, 1. That in his upbraiding me with venting my Criticisms, as
he calls them, about the word [ disciple ye] he excepts against me for doing
that which was necessary to be done, to wit, to clear the meaning of the word,
by which the sense of the text is manifested.

2. When he should answer the thing I alleged and proved, that nations are not
appointed to be baptized without any other circumscription, but disciples or
believers in them, he repeats his dictates as obscurely as before, bringing a
text impertinently, which does not at all say, that all the nation of Egypt,
that is, every man, woman, and child, that is an Egyptian, shall be his people,
but such as know the Lord, do sacrifise, vow a vow, return to the Lord, verse
21, 22. which was fulfilled either when after the return from captivity, in
Babylon, many of the Egyptians became Jewish proselytes, who were very probably
many when P^olomy Philadelphus appointed the Bible to be translated into Greek,
as Josephus l. 12. Antiq. c. 2. relates, or if it were fulfilled in the time of
the Gospel, the stories of the Church refute that conceit, that the whole
nation of Egypt were a national Christian Church, as the Jews before Christ's
coming, so as that all the people, men, women and children were Christians,
though it be true that God had his Church at Alexandria in Egypt somewhat
early, of which Mark is said to have been Bishop (of which more may be seen in
Seldom on Eutychius) and if that passage 1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church that is at
Babylon elect together with you, be meant of Babylon in Egypt, it is plain that
the Church there was an elect company chosen out from the rest, and therefore
not the whole City, men, women and children, and consequently not a nation
entirely; nor is there a word either in Matthew 28. 19. or in the places Mr. M.
compares with it Mark 16. 15. Gal. 3. 8 9. Romans 1. 16, 17. or Acts 11. 18. to
prove that any other of the nations should partake of the Covenant the Jews
before had enjoyed, than those that receive the Gospel, believe and repent, or
that they that believe should partake of the promises of the Covenant as it was
national, and contained the promises made to Abraham's natural seed, or that he
would henceforth be the God of the Nations professing the Gospel, and their
seed: But the texts all of them prove plainly that the term [ nations Mat. 28.
19.] is limited to those of the nations, that were disciples, or did believe,
Mark 16. 16. that did repent, Acts 11. 18. that believe, Romans 1. 16, 17. As
for Gal. 3. 8. I admire that not only Mr. M. but also the Assembly at
Westminster in their Confession of faith chap. 28. art. 4. to prove the infants
of one or both believing parents are to be baptized, should cite Genesis 17. 7,
9. with Gal. 3. 9. 14. which if it were alleged any thing to their purpose to
include infants as Genesis 17. 7, 9. then [nations] must be taken to comprehend
all of the nation, and [ the blessing of Abraham] meant of visible
Church Membership: whereas the text expressly expounds [ all nations] to be meant
of them [ which be of faith] and [ the blessing] to be [ justification, and the
promise of the Spirit through faith] inferring from thence, that God would
justify the heathen through faith. yea it is so frequent to understand the
term [nations] synecdochically for a part of nations, that I find no fewer than
eighty times, and of these at least eight in Matthews Gospel, the word [(...)
nations or Gentiles] in the New Testament, taken so as not to include infants,
in the speeches in which it is used. But of this I have said enough in my
Praecursor sect. 22. in my Postscript to M. Bl. s. 14. M. B. in his Praefest.
Morat. s. 22. says, that my speech he excepts against [that no one Country
were discipled] was meant by me not only of a past event, but also of a duty,
that it is not the Ministers duty to endeavor the discipling of any whole
nation (for then he must endeavor to disciple infants) nor a part of the work
of that commission; and this I confess is true, and I still think it; yea if it
were as Mr. B. would have it, that Christ had bid them disciple the whole
nations, even infants, then he had bid them preach the Gospel to infants, which
had been a command of a man not in his wits, and which the Apostles never
obeyed, and therefore I must blaspheme Christ if I expound the words as Mr. B.
does; nor does any promise of Christ foretell that he will make the whole of a
nation, even the infants, disciples. What is in his addition page 339, 340. I
know not: I had thought I had all his addition to his third edition when I had
his Friendly accommodation, and his Praefestinantis morator; what the reason is
I know not, but I cannot yet get his additions: yet I conceive in his addition
there is but a greater heap of impertinent texts.

He says of me, As for what he says of Moses and Magistrates, if you peruse
what I have said to that already, I think it will appear that he is no where
more vertiginous than in this.

To which I answer, I said that if Christ would have had a whole nation made
his Church as the nation of the Jews was, comprehending old and young he had
used Emperors and Kings to gather his Church as he did Moses to gather the
Jewish Church in the Wilderness by his authority, not Apostles and Preachers
by persuasion. What he says to it in his first edition, shall be (God
assisting) in its place fully answered, I may more truly say that in this
conceit of his, that Christ should bid the Apostles disciple infants, there is
giddiness, if not an higher degree of folly. And my speech is so agreeable to
reason, that if I be vertiginous in it, I shall then begin to turn Sceptique,
and question whether any thing be certain.

As for what Mr. Blake says about the rule of knowing a chosen believing
nation, giving title to infants of that nation to be baptized as the Jewish
infants were circumcised, I think there is no need to add any more to what I
say in the Postscript s. 15. since he confesses page 67. as the nations are
discipled, so they are to be baptized, and the infants of a nation are baptized
by virtue of a privilege from their parents, not from the nation: Though Mr.
Rutherfords words Temperate pleach. 12. concl. 1. arg. 7. Due right of
Presbyteries chapter 4. sect. 6. p^. 260, 261. do intimate that the children in a
chosen nation are holy with the holiness of the chosen nation, though father
and mother be as wicked as the Jews that slew Christ, who were certainly
unbelievers, and they must stand to this if either they will justify the
ordinary practice of baptizing any infants of any Athe^stical, profane
Sco^ters, Persecutors, and Blasphemers of God and Religion, if they were
baptized in infancy and are called Christians, or stand to their principle,
that the commission is to baptize all nations in the same latitude that the
Jews infants were to be circumcised, which was and ought to be done, though
the parents were such as Ahab and Jezabel. But however those of the
Congregational way, who say we are freed from the paedagogy of the Jews, and
deny that now there are national Churches by institution as the Jews were, and
that it is sufficient now to make a member of the Church because one is by
birth of this or any other nation, as then it was, because one was born of the
nation of the Jews, as Mr. Buroughs vindic. against Mr. Edwards aspersions
page 23. me thinks should reject the interpretation o^ making disciples all
nations, in like wise as the one nation of the Jews were circumcised, which was
by virtue of their birth, according to Gods appointment, as descended from
Abraham, or as joined to that people.

Yet Mr. Cobbet Just vindic. part 2. chapter 3. s. 4. argues thus. All nations are
the subject to be discipled and baptized by commission, and therefore at least
all the specifical parts of the nations, all sorts of persons in the nations,
but not all of every sort.

To which I reply, The consequence is not of any validity, all nations,
therefore all sorts of the nations, It follows not, all nations shall serve
him, therefore all sorts of the nations, all nations compassed me about,
therefore every sort of persons in a nation.

But, says Mr. Cobbet, I would know then why the collective nations are
mentioned under that title of nations rather than that of grown persons of the
nations.

To which I answer, the reason is because the thing said, suffiently shows who
of the nations are meant, and it is very frequent to restrain the extent of
speeches pro subject a materia, as the matter spoken of will bear it with truth
and sense. And that this is usual in the use of the term [nations] is showed
before.

As for what Mr. William Cook says in his Font uncovered page 14. children are
not to be excluded Mat. 28. 19. because children are a very considerable and
essential part of a nation, it is frivolous, For

1. If he mean by children infants, it is false that infants are an essential
part of a nation, it is possible there may be a nation which may have for some
time never an infant in it.

2. If it were true, yet it is not to his purpose till he proves that [ nations
Mat. 28. 19.] is not taken synecdochically for a part of the nations, those
that are of age to understand preaching of the Gospel, but that it must
comprehend every essential part in its full latitude.

And in like sort Mr. Nathanael Stephens his reasons taken not from the text,
but from his own conceit, That [nations] must be taken as [nation] was in the
application of it to the Jewish Church, and that otherwise there should be a
shortning of the Covenant, they have been often answered and showed to proceed
upon such mistakes as these, that the Church of Christians was to be modelized
after the fashion of the Jews, and the use of baptism was to seal such a
national Covenant, and that title to a Covenant made by God gives right to
baptism. And for his instances page 9. of his Precept for infant baptism, to
infringe our argument from John 4. 1. to prove that Mat. 28. 19. only disciples
actually made are the subject appointed to be baptized, they all proceed upon a
mistake of the reason, as if from the example there were gathered an universal
rule, whereas it is only brought, First to explain the meaning of the phrases
Mat. 28. 19. of making disciples and baptizing them. Secondly, that example is
brought not by it self alone (as Mr. Stephens brings it) but together with the
institution, and all the examples in the New Testament to prove infant baptism
irregular, but his single instances do not infer. And whereas page 10, 11. he
takes on him to show a certain rule to know a discipled nation, he should have
added initiating infants of that nation to baptism, and sets down their
public profession, he cleers not the difficulty, except he tell what
profession and whose makes it a public profession, whether when the
representative of it professes, or the King, or the Major part, or every
person of understanding, and if he mean these ways or any other, how he can
acquit the Apostles from swerving from Christ's rule, never looking after any
other than personal profession, nor baptizing any infant upon his imagined
rule, and if as he speaks, as the parents do now receive the faith, so far they
and theirs must go under the account of a discipled nation, if they profess to
bring up theirs in the faith, then though the children and servants be
professed infidels, yet the parents and masters being believers, and promising
to educate theirs in Christianity, these shall be baptizable because part of a
discipled nation; And when he says, Not only the families of those that truly
believe, but the families of others also that are willing to yield to the
Christian education, and to live under the tuition of a Godly Magistracy in the
Commonwealth, and the instruction of a powerful Ministry in the Church; so far
forth as they are willing to be guided by the Laws, and the Government of the
Church of Christ, and are no worse, so far they must go under the notion of a
discipled nation: and parents and children both be the lawful subject of
baptism: He speaks nothing but riddles leaving it to his Reader to study what
he means by so many [ so fars] whether he thinks all these do amount to a
profession of the faith, whether these do make a man a Christian complete, or
only an half Christian, what he means by [ and are no worse] and how such a
submission, as for ought I can perceive may stand with gross ignorance of
Christ, and at some times, as in Constantines and Theodosius his times was in
Pagans, before the Inquisition in Spain in many Jews and Saracens, and is at
this day in Spain, yea and England in many that know nothing of Christianity,
nor have any savor of the faith of Christ, can make a discipled nation, and
entitle to baptism, not showing any Scripture for what he says, but Abraham's
circumcising, Genesis 17. 12, 17. which how impertinent it is to this point of
baptism, is, and shall be more fully showed hereafter.

But I am necessitated yet to say something more to my teasing, and eager
Antagonist Mr. Blake, who speaks thus Vindic. foed. page 194. Mr. T. in his
Apology sect. 14. page 143. would fain fasten another interpretation on these
words, and make the Commission not to sound according to the Letter of the
words, nor yet according to the success by grace attained, but to his liking
and therefore is put to it to change the word (...) into (...) then all nations
must either be put by apposition (...), or with the preposition (...), and so
instead of disciple all nations, it will be make disciples in all nations. This
he thinks is very tolerable, because to disciple and to make disciples is all
one. But though they may be one in themselves, yet it makes a main difference
in the phrase, and with the additions of his preposition inverts the whole
meaning of the words, as to the thing in controversy, which is such a violence
offered to the Text, that is not to be endured in him, that is about to draw a
Logical argument for his advantage against his adversary.

Answ: What I do in expounding Christ's words is not only tolerable, but
necessary to be done to clear the meaning of them. I do no more than Beza, the
New Annot. and others. Mr. Blake me thinks allows my exposition in these words
a little before. The Apostles were to make disciples, to bring men into
Covenant with God, and being discipled to baptize them, sealing them as Gods in
Covenant; So John 4. 1, 2. when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that
Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John, though Jesus baptized not,
but his disciples. Here John made disciples and baptized them being made, the
disciples of Jesus made disciples, and baptized them being made; an outward
work then to make profession of the faith is sufficient to make one a disciple
and to bring him into the verge of the Covenant. In which he plainly asserts,
that Christ appointed and the Apostles practiced the making disciples by an
outward work to make profession of faith, and baptized them so made. Now if
this be the meaning of Mr. Blake, I see not wherein there needs be difference
between us. For whether we read make disciples all nations, or make disciples
of or in all nations, and this making disciples by an outward work, and
profession of faith upon that outward work are that which makes one a disciple,
and these are to be baptized that are thus made disciples, I shall not stick to
yield that Christ appointed, and the Apostles practiced by the outward work of
preaching to make disciples by the outward work of profession of faith, the
whole of all nations, and baptized them wholly being made disciples by
profession of faith: And I mean this as Pareus on Mat. 28. 19. Tertium mandatum
est de baptizandis omnibus gentibus, hoc est sacramento baptismi initiandis and
consecrandis omnibus iis qui Christo nomen darent. And herein I make the
Commission to sound according to the letter, and according to the success by
grace attained, without the least interverting the whole meaning of the words,
without any violence offered to the text. Nor do I expect any thing in this
matter to be endured in me but what I find agreeable to speeches of Be^^^,
Pareus, the New Annot. and M. Blake himself.

Yea but the text is to be expounded so as to comprehend every age of men, and
the term [all nations] is to comprehend the whole of every nation.

Answ. It is clear by comparing Mat. 28. 19. with Mark 16. 15. that [ make
disciples all nations] answers to [ preach the Gospel to every creature] which
later term is in show more comprehensive then [ make disciples all nations] But
I suppose Mr. Bl. will not be so absurd as to conceive that any other than of
humane kind are meant thereby, nor that any other of them are meant thereby
than those that were capable of hearing and understanding it, me thinks he
should not conceive Christ bid them preach the Gospel to every deaf man, every
natural fool, or mad man that have at no time use of reason, or men that
wilfully would not hear: yea methinks Mr. Bl. should yield further, that when
Christ bids them preach the Gospel to every man that is fit to hear, he did not
intend to charge them, that they must preach the Gosspel so as that every
intelligent person of mankind in the world must hear it from their mouth: For
then it had bin their sin being a breach of Christ's command, if every person of
natural understanding, whether of Jews or Gentiles, did not hear the Gospel
from them; which must have tied them either to sin, or else to search out every
Country, Continent, o^ Island be it never so small, every house in every City,
village, wilderness, and to preach Christ to them, wherever they were, which
had been according to the course of ordinary humane abilities altogether
impossible for them to do. I conceive Mr. Bl. will yield that in what sense it
is meant Col. 1. 23. the Gospel was preached to every creature under heaven,
that is it was preached to all sorts of persons that were hearers without
difference of Jews or Gentiles, in the same sense Christ bids them [preach the
Gospel to every creature] and [make disciples all nations] being the same
command as the comparing the texts shows. If [every creature] be not meant of
every creature universally and distributively, but of any sort or number of men
indefinitely, to whom they might and it was fit to preach, in like manner in
the same command thus expressed [disciple all nations] by [all nations] are not
meant omnes gentes totaliter totae, all nations whole and wholly, but any
persons indifferently in any nation whom they might, and were fit to be made
disciples by preaching, and to baptize them that were professing disciples of
Christ so made, which is the only sense that the success by grace attained to
makes good. Neither did the Apostles in the event preach the Gospel to every
humane person capable of hearing and understanding, they came not to every
Village, I^le, civil or barbarous, sure not to every house, yea sometimes they
were restrained, as Paul from preaching in Asia, Bithynia, Acts 16. 6, 7. nor
was there ever by the Apostles or any other the Gospel preached so successfully
as that there was ever one whole nation, I mean totaliter tota, comprehending
every individual humane person of that nation, discipled thereby, so as that
every one of the nation, not one excepted, did upon hearing the Gospel, freely,
or of their own accord, soberly, or in their right wits, seriously, or not in
jest, understandingly, or knowing what they spoke, become disciples of Jesus,
confessing him to be the Christ the Son of the living God.

But Mr. Blake goes on Vindic. foederis page 195. [ And as it is against the
letter of the text, so it is plainly against our Saviors scope and end in
giving this Commission. Mr. T. Examen page 130. says, This enlargement unto
all nations in this place was in opposition to the restriction Mat. 10. 5. now
in that nation to which there they were limited, the whole of the nation was in
covenant, all the Land was the Land of Immanuel, Isa. 8. 8. And consequently so
it was to be in other nations by virtue of this happy enlargement, or else the
opposition is utterly taken away, the meaning of the words clouded, and the
Apostles at a loss for understanding of them; for having spent their pains
before in a nation all disciples, and now having a commission for the
discipling of all nations, how shall they understand the words, unless the
whole of the nation where they come are to be discipled?]

Answ. The nation in which the Apostles according to the commission Mat. 10. 5.
6. before spent their pains, were the people of Israel, and to say that nation
were all disciples, understanding it of disciples of Christ, and of every
person of that nation, is to say the snow is black; For the contrary is
manifest by express Scripture John 1. 11. and 7. 5, 48. and 9. 28, 29. and 10.
20. and 12. 37 38. But, says he, The whole of the nation was in Covenant, I
grant that the whole of the nation were in the Covenants at Horeb, Exodus 19.
and in the plains of Moab by Moses his edicts from God Deu. 29. But what is
this to prove that the Apostles spent their pains in a nation all disciples,
every person or persons, even the infants of that nation were disciples of
Christ. Were all of the Jewish nation when the Apostles preached to them,
disciples of Christ, because in Moses his time many hundreds of years before
all were engaged in the covenants at Horeb, and the plains of Moab by Moses
authority? It is but a new nonsense gibberish to make these terms synonimous
to be disciples of Christ, and to be in covenant according to the manner of the
Jews being in covenant. And the reason of Mr. Blake is as frivolous, All the
Land was the Land of Immanuel, Isaiah 8. 8. therefore The whole of the nation
were in covenant, that nation were all disciples of Christ.

For first it is plain that [ the Land of Immanuel] there is not the people,
but the ground or earth they inhabited, because it is that, The breadth of
which the King of Assyria did fill with his wings, that is his forces, and did
pass through.

2. How does Mr. Blake prove that it was called The Land of Immanuel, because
the whole of the nation was in Covenant? It might be called Immanuels land,
when the Assyrians, Chaldaeans, and other strangers inhabited it, Israel being
expelled, because of Gods title to it, and the people might and shall be in
covenant when they shall not be in the Land.

3. But it is in my apprehension a mere whimzy, to infer the whole of the
nation was in covenant in Isaiahs days, therefore the nation of the Jews were
all disciples of Christ when the Apostles spent their pains in preaching
according to the commission Mat. 10. 5, 6.

4. There is no less dotage in the rest of his frivolous speech, that it [ is
plainly against out Saviors scope and end in giving the commission Mat. 28.
19. to understand, make disciples in ( I said of) all nations, that if the
whole of the nation be not in covenant in other nations as in the Land of
Immanuel by virtue of this happy enlargement, the opposition is utterly taken
away, the meaning of the words clouded, and the Apostles at a loss for the
understanding of them.]

All which are but vain words. The meaning is plain enough, as I conceive, it
was understood so by the Apostles, and has been so by Expositors, as I have
showed, even by the chiefest of the Paedobaptists, without any such
construction as Mr. Blake makes.

Mr. Blake goes on thus. [ And hereto accord the prophecies of the Scripture,
for the calling of the nations of the Gentiles, God shall enlarge Iaphet, and
he shall dwell in the tents of Sem, Genesis 9. 27. Sem was wholly in covenant not
by pieces and parcells, but universally in covenant, Iaphet is to come in
succession into covenant in like latitude; Psalm. 28. Ask of me, and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance and the uttermost parts of the Earth for
thy possession. It is not some among the nations of the heathen that are to be
the inheritance of Christ, but the heathen. To which agrees Revel. 11. 15. The
Kingdoms of the Earth shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his
Christ; Immanuel of old had one, now he shall have more Kingdoms; And they
become his no other way, than by discipling; Gods Ministers are his men of War
for subduing and captivating them, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. and Kingdoms are promised
them, not some in a Kingdom. Alexander would not sit down with such a conquest,
neither would Jesus Christ. If to possess some in a Kingdom be to possess a
Kingdom, then Antichrist of long time has had his Kingdom; All Kings shall bow
down before him, all Nations shall serve him, Psalm. 72. 11. All nations whom
thou have made shall come and worship before thee O Lord, and shall glorify thy
name, Psalm. 86. 9. Thou shall call a nation which thou know not, and nations
that knew not thee shall run unto thee, Isaiah 55. 5. There God calls the
nation, and the nation does answer Gods call. In that day Israel shall be a
third with Egypt, and with Assyria, even a blessing in the midst of the Land,
whom the Lord shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the
work of my hands, and Israel my inheritance. There Egypt and Assyria are in
equipage with Israel, all three sister-Churches; Israel without any
pre-eminence, either Israel then was not a nation of Disciples, a nation wholly
within covenant, or else there are to be national Churches, the whole of the
nation to be discipled and brought into Covenant. *]

Answ. Mr. Blake says, The prophecies of Scripture accord hereto, that Mat.
28. 19. they were to make all in a nation disciples, the whole of the nation
was to be discipled, and that the words were not otherwise to be understood. If
this reason were of force, where any thing is said of the nation it must be
understood of the whole of the nation, of every person in it or of it, even the
infants. Which how monstrous and wild a conceit it is will appear by multitudes
of instances. Matthew. 21. 43. The Kingdom of God shall be given to a nation
(contradistinguished to the Jews) bringing forth the fruits of it: If Mr. Blake
say right, there is a prophecy of a nation, the whole whereof every particular,
even infans should bring forth the fruits of the Kingdom of God, Mat. 24. 9.
Ye shall be hated of all nations for my name sake, that is, the whole of all
the nations, and if so, then of the Christians even themselves, who are a part
of the nations. Besides, if this were the meaning, the prophecy of Christ would
be contradictory to the prophecies Mr. Blake brings, in the latitude in which
he expounds the word [ nations] Mat. 24. 7. Nation shall rise up against
Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom, that is, if Mr. Blakes fu^ile dictates
were ought worth, the whole of the Nation and Kingdom, even the infants, should
rise up against the whole of another Nation and Kingdom, even the infants. Acts
11. 18. God has given repentance to the Gentiles, or nations, that is,
according to the rate of Mr. Blakes expositions, the whole of the nations, even
the infants. Acts 15. 3. The conversion of the Nations, that is, of the whole
of the nations, even the infants, ver. 17. All the nations upon whom my name is
called, that is, the whole of the nations, even the infants. The instances are
so many to show the futility of Mr. Blakes reasoning, that I hope either he
himself will discern his folly, and those that magnify him, his weakness
herein, or else me thinks the impudence of such reasoning should be exploded.

But to show further the vanity of his dictating, rather than disputing, He
mentions Genesis 9. 27. as a prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, but he takes
it as presupposed, but proves it not; and what exceptions ly against it will
appear in that which follows in answer to Mr. Cobbet. And then he says, Sem
was wholly in Covenant, not by pieces and parcels, universally in Covenant, if
he mean it of the Jews, in the sense wherein being in covenant is as much as
being disciples of Christ by profession, it is most palpably false: for they
disclaimed it, John 9. 28. But were it granted that they were in Covenant
wholly, yet where is there a word to prove that Japhet is to come in succession
into covenant in like latitude.

Again he says, Psalm. 2. 8. It is not some among the Nations of the heathen,
that are to be the inheritance of Christ, but the heathen.

In which speech either he deals deceitfully or unskilfully. For whereas to [
it is not some among the nations] he opposes [ but the heathen] he should, if
he would speak congruous sense, have said [all of the heathen] for [ah] is
opposed to [some] But instead thereof he says [but the heathen] which is
either to delude the unwary Reader in that indefinite expression, as if it were
all one with an universal, or to trifle, since [some of the heathen] may be
called [the heathen] it being but an indefinite term, and does not stand by any
rule of Logic necessarily for [all heathen] and therefore it is all one as if
he had said, It is not among some of the nations, but among some of the
nations. Besides, what sense is there in these words [ some of the nations of
the heathen]? What are the heathen but the nations? Heathen, Gentiles, the
Nations, are all terms of the same sense, answering to the same words in Greek
(...), and therefore to say [ some of the nations of the heathen] is all one as
to say [some of the nations of the nations] which is to trislle. Then Revel. 11
15. is brought in, which prophecy is not to be fulfilled till the seventh Angel
sounds, till then he shows not That Gods Ministers have Kingdoms promised them,
not some in Kingdoms. And even then The nations were angry, and the Wrath of
God was come, and the time of the dead to be judged, ver. 18. which sure was
not in John's days, ^or is it to be imagined to be fulfilled in our days. His
talk of Christ as emulating Alexander the Great, is most vain. Christ conquers
those whom his Father has given him, be they fewer or more, and sits down with
that conquest, until his foes be made his footstool, but it is most false that
there is any Scripture that tells us, that all the Kingdoms of the world shall
be Christ's, so as that the whole of each nation shall be disciples of Christ,
or willing subjects to him. For then at his coming he should have no enemies
to put down, none to condemn. No doubt Antichrist, yea and the Devil too, has
had of long time a Kingdom, some its likely in most or every Kingdom, yea even
where Christ's Kingdom has been. Does not Christ say, The Angel of the Church
of Pergamus dwelt where Satan's throne was? Neither Psalm. 72, 11. nor Psalm. 86.
9. nor Isai. 55. 5. says, That the whole of the nation shall be disciples of
Christ, and if the prophecies were understood in that latitude, they were most
palpably false. Nor is Isa. 19. 24, 25. certain to be a prophecy of the call of
those people in the times of the Messiah, but may be understood of the
succession of Proselytes thence after the return from the Captivity, and if it
were, yet there is not so much as the term [nation] nor is it absurd to deny
Israel to be a nation of disciples, or a nation wholly within covenant, as
being within covenant is equipollent to being disciples of Christ; nor can
national Churches, consisting of the whole of a nation, even the infants, be
proved thence, or by any History. The whole of the nation to be discipled, and
brought into covenant, is a mere fantastic dream.

M. Bl. yet ads, These prophecies or a great part of them I produced in my
Answer of Mr. T. passing by other in silence (as having nothing to reply) he
marvels that I am not ashamed to produce Psalm 72. ver. 11. Psalm. 86. ver. 9.
to prove that the whole of the nations, even infants, must be included, Matthew.
28. 19. As if it were foretold that the whole nation, even infants, should come
before God and worship. It is strange if Mr. T. be ignorant, that prophecies in
the old Testament of the glory of New Testament times, are in Old Testament
phrases by way of allusion to the worship of those times, set forth to us. Now
it was the practice of the people of the Jews, for their males of growth and
strength to appear before the Lord, and neither females no^ infants, as
Ainsworth on Exodus* 23. 17, observes, yet they appeared in the name of females,
and their females and children were in Covenant together with them, Deuteronomy. 29.
11. so that as the rest of the prophecies to which Mr. T. has nothing to say,
so these two prophecies (against which he excepts) speak fully for the
discipling of nations in the New Testament times.

Answ. Mr. Blake construes my omitting to except against the allegation of the
other prophecies besides Psalm 72. 11. Psalm 86. 9. as if I had nothing to
reply, whereas being indeed in that writing necessitated to be brief, I thought
best to answer those that seemed to have most show for him: But now he is
answered in all. I said I marvelled he was not ashamed to produce them as he
did: but he seems past shame.

He says Vindic. foed. page 329. That an eminently learned man lately observed
that I had donum impudentiae. Who that eminently learned man is I know not, nor
do I care. Till there be given a reason of this censure it cannot better me,
but will have a show of malignancy to me, if not vanity also in the Censurer
and Relator. And ill will seldom speaks well: He may bestow his censure more
rightly elsewhere. I say still, it is a shameful thing to abuse Scriptures as
Mr. Blake does to understand by nations the whole of the nation, even infants,
when, if they be so understood the Scripture should in that sense be most
palpably false; for it should foretell a thing that neither was nor will be. I
conceive myself not ignorant of what Mr. Blake says, and though I grant all he
says, yet it covers no part of his shame in abusing the text. For even in his
allusion, the whole of the nation, females and infants, did not appear before
the Lord, and therefore were the extent of the prophecies as large as that they
are conceived to allude to, yet the whole of the nation, even infants, were not
included. And this is enough to show the futility of his talk about discipling
nations, which in his sense never was. Nor is there one reason given by Mr.
Blake for his exposition, and reasons sufficient are given for mine, and I may
retort Mr. Bls. words upon him, All indifferent men may challenge their reason
that heed him, and when I am taken with such frivolous dictates as his are, I
expect my friends should conclude that I dote.

SECT. X.
That infants of believers are not disciples appointed to be baptized, Mat. 28.
19.

THe last exception against the minor in my Argument [that infants of believers
are not disciples of Christ appointed to be baptized Mat. 28. 19.] is by
denying it, and asserting on the contrary that they are disciples and appointed
there to be baptized. But this is so sorry a shift, so contrary to the notation
and use of the word in the New Testament in the text, to the Apostles practice
which best expounds Christ's commission, to their own or fellows confession
elsewhere, that it looks like the putting a face on a thing when there is small
hope to hold it.

Mr. Rutherford Divine right of Presbyteries page 268. See you doubt not of a
warrant for baptizing children who are not disciples; For then the Apostles
from this place had no warrant to baptize the infants of believers.

Nevertheless because such men as Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Baxter have put this text
in the front to prove infant baptism by it, I shall lay down sundry arguments
against that abuse of the text, and then examine what they say about this. That
our Lord Christ did not mean by [disciples to be baptized Matthew. 28. 19.]
infants either of believers or unbelievers, I prove.

1. from the notation of the word (...) a verbal noun, which comes from (...)
has learned. Mr. B. Plain Scrip. proof* etc. page 92. acknowledges it to have
denomination from the act of learning. Mr. Blake Vindic. foederis page 205.
They are still styled in New Testament-Scriptures, Believers from the faith
that they profess, Saints from the holiness to which they stand engaged,
Disciples from the doctrine which they profess to learn, and Christians from
him whose they are, whom they serve, and from whom they expect salvation.

Whence I argue. They are not disciples as Mat. 28. 19. who do not learn or
profess the learning of Christ's doctrine; But infants do not learn Christ's
doctrine; Ergo they are not disciples. The major is proved from the notation
and use of the word before confessed, and intimated in that speech of the
Apostle Ephesians. 4. 20* which shows, that to be a Disciple is to be one that learns
Christ. The minor is manifest, from the want of capacity to learn, and from
sense, to which it is apparent that they regard not, heed not, understand not
any thing of Christ, as by other signs, so by the difficulty to teach them when
they come to years.

To this what Mr. M. replies is answered before. Mr. B. part 1. chap. 2. says
You must understand that one may be called a disciple, 1. in a large sense
relatively, as being of the number of those that belong to Christ as Master and
King of the Church, and destinated or devoted to his oversight and rule, and
teaching, for the future: thus believers infants are disciples, of which I
shall give you proof anon.

2. Sometimes the word is taken in a narrower sense for those who are actually
learners. But commonly applied to men at age it includes both relation and
subordination, and also actual learing, but the former principally: but applied
to infants it intends the relation at present and actual learning, as one end
of it intended for the future.

To which I reply, 1. I take it for granted that it is sometimes taken for
those who are actually learners.

2. That the term [disciple] commonly applied to men of age includes actual
learning.

3. That applied to infants it intends the relation as present, and actual
learning as one end of it intended for the future.

Wherein letting pass the uncouth expression that [the word in tends an end]
and taking his meaning, I observe,

First, that he makes the term [disciples] to be meant in one manner, when it
is said of men of age, and another when of infants. Which me thinks is as
absurd as that he charge Mr. Bedford with page 300. that he made one end of
baptism in the aged, another in infants, one covenant to parents, and another
to infants, as if the aged were one sort of disciples meant Mat. 28. 19. and
yet the same word includes another sort of disciples in a clean different
sense. It would be known of which sort of disciples he understands it, for
certainly there is but one sort of disciples there mentioned: and if he will
stand to his words in that place* he must understand it of disciples upon
instruction.

Secondly, That he sets down the sense of a word, and yet produces no place
for the present where the distinction is put, but refers us to another place,
which his Reader must seek, and when he has sought all his book he shall find
but one text Acts 15. 10. and that miserably abused by him. Of which in its
place.

Thirdly, That he acknowledges page 92* and here, that the denomination is
from the disciples act of learning, yet will have it imagined that an infant
may be a disciple without his own actual learning, only from his belonging to
Christ by Gods covenant, and men's destination and devoting to learn hereafter.
But it is to me unconceivable that the denomination which is from the act
inherent in the person should be without the act inherent in the person from
some acts of another, and those acts not putting the form denominating in
actual being, yea when oftentimes the form denominating is never in act. For by
Mr. Bs. doctrine, Gods covenant, and man's devoting make a disciple, and yet I
think notwithstanding the covenant, and man's devoting, many thousands, yea the
most part of infants whom he would have baptized never actually learn by reason
of death or disaffection, yea many expressly renounce it. Were Gods covenant
absolute to every true believers infant that he shall be a disciple, yet for
the present it does put nothing actually in the person to whom the promise is
made, no more than election does put actually any thing in the elected.
Praedestinatio ni^ ponit in praedestinato, Aq. p. 1. q. 23. art. 2. Gods
purpose of a thing does not put it in being, Mr. Bl. Vindic. foed. page 89.
Most truly Mr. Cobbet Just Vindic. part. 2. cap. 2. Election does neither make
a man holy, but only in^e^^ionally, nor give him actual Church right. And this
may in like manner be said concerning Gods promise or covenant, by it self
considered, it does assure something for the future, but put nothing in present
being. The covenant is to a person before he is born, as to Isaac and Jacob,
shall it be said, that before they were born they were actually disciples, and
had actual Church right? I confess they might be called disciples or believers
in possibility, but not actually. Gods election and promise denominate a man
elected and a child of the promise (which are terms of the same extent, Romans 9.
8.) but not justified, converted, regenerated, or actually a believer,
disciple, or visible Church member. But this is yet more in consistent with Mr.
Bs. bypotheses, who when he assigns the covenant which he will have to make an
infant actually a disciple, makes it only the conditional covenant of grace
(as I shall show hereafter) and that covenant is upon condition of faith, and
this he will have to belong to all men whether believers or unbelievers, and me
thinks he should not say all men are actually disciples, visible Church
members, though God has made that covenant with them which he seals in
baptism, which he often says to be only the conditional covenant, and ^eckons
it my prime error that misleads me in the point of baptism, that I make
baptism seal the absolute covenant of grace. And yet he charge Mr. Bedford p.
300. 301. as with an absurdity following his tenet that baptism should seal one
covenat to the Father, another to the son. If then the covenant make not others
actually disciples, then neither insants. Idem qua idem semper facit idem.
Again, a conditional covenant cannot make an actual disciple, till the
condition which is actual faith be put. Conditionale nihil ponit in esse.
Therefore the co^ditional covenant sealed in baptism cannot make an actual
disciple. Nor is it to be said, the parents faith is the condition of the
covenant for the child.

For 1. it being not the condition of the covenant to the parent that another
should believe for him, neither is it the condition for the child, except Mr.
B. will fall into the absurdity he charge on Mr. Bedford, that one covenant
should be to the Father, and another to the child, sealed in baptism.

2. A child, the father believing, shall be actually a disciple before it is
born, for a conditional proposition, the condition being put, becomes absolute.
Now it is his child, and he believing before it is born; Ergo.

In like manner it may be said of another devoting or destinating an infant to
be a disciple, that is no act of the person denominated, it can only make a
disciple intentionally; a persons devoting is but his wish, or desire, or
promise, and shall that make a child actually a disciple? yea destinating and
devoting is before the child is conceived or born, as Hannah did devote Samuel,
was Samuel therefore actually a disciple and visible Churchmember before he was
born? many of those whom the parents destinate and devote to be actual learners
in after time, yet never are such: yea many of them are express disclaimers and
opposers of that doctrine; shall these be called actual disciples, from their
parents wish, or hopes, or promise?

Again, he makes the term [ disciple] applied to an insant to note a relation
present, actual learning as one end of it intended for the future. I confess
that [disciple] notes a relation between the teacher and person taught, yet it
seems to note a passion as its form or quiddity, so that if any should ask who
is a disciple, I should say, one that has learned, and what it is to be
discipled, it is to be taught or learned, and so does import a passion, and is
to be put in that predicament, and the relation is as they say secundum dici,
not secundum esse. But were it granted that the whole essence of a disciple did
consist in relation, I would fain know what shall be the foundation of his
relation. Logicians say, To relation there is requisite a foundation, as
begetting, two terms, as Father and Son, and a respect arising between them
from that foundation, as fatherhood It is an unheard of thing that a relation
should be without a foundation, a Father without begerting, an actual Father
without actual begetting. It is true, a man may be p(...)lly a Father without
actual begetting, but to make an actual F(...) without actual begetting, is
oppositum in opposito. Mr. B. Saints everlasting; est, part 1. (...). 8. sect.
2. To be the people of God without regeneration is as impossible as to be the
natural children of men without generation. Now what should be the foundation
of the relation of a Disciple of Christ but learning of Christ of an actual
Disciple but actual learning, I know not. Future learning, being acording to
Mr. B. the end intended, is not in being, perhaps will never be, and therefore
it is in my apprehension a most illogical and absurd conceit which Mr. B. has
hatched, to obtrude upon us such a notion of a Disciple, as supposes a
relation without a foundation, and contrary to Grammar, to call a person a
Disciple who has learned nothing, no not so much as to know or own his
Teacher. To say a person may be a Scholar before he learns, serves not turn, to
avoid the force of this Reason: For the term [Scholar] coming from (...),
leisure or vacation from other exercise, may be without actual learning, but
(...) is a Verbal Noun from (...), has learned, and Disciple a discendo, from
Learning; and therefore as it is absurd to call one learned or a Learner,
without Learning, so it is absurd to call one a Disciple without actual
learning. But I rest not on the notation alone, but proceed to the use of the
word (...), a Disciple.

2. I argue thus. The word [ Disciple] Matthew. 28. 19. is to be understood as it
is understood all along the New Testament; But all along the New Testament it
is applied to those that addicted themselves to some as Teachers, followed
them, learned of them, no where to an insant, who does none of these. Ergo,
Infants are not Disciples, meant Matthew. 28. 19. The major is plain from the
rule of understanding words, that it is to be according to the use of them. The
minor is proved thus. The Disciples of Christ are understood as the Disciples
of John and the Pharisees, Luke 5. 33. as the Disciples of Moses, John 9, 28.
of the perverters, Acts 20. 30. But in all these places, and in all the rest,
they are termed Disciples of John, the Pharisees, Moses, and the perverters who
addicted themselves to them, followed them, learned of them, no where an
infant, who does none of these; Therefore the term [Disciples of Christ] notes
only such, and no where an infant.

3. I argue thus. They that are not termed believers, are not Disciples; But
infants of believers are not termed believers; Therefore they are not termed
Disciples. The Major is proved from the equipollence of the term [Disciple] and
[believers] in the New Testament. Calvin institut. lib. 3. cap. 2. sect. 6. Cur
respondet quod passim Evangelistae sideles and discipulos ponunt tanqu im
synonyma, ac-praesertim Lucas in Actis Apostolorum saepius, Acts 6. 1, 2, 7.
and 9. 1, 10, 19, 25, 26, 38. and 11. 26, 29. and 13. 52. and 14. 20* 22, 28.
Which thing is strongly dispured by Chamier, 2. Panst. Cath. tom. 3. l. 12 c.
9. s. 15. against the Papists implicit says, that none are believers but
disciples who learn and know. Which he confirms from Matthew. 28. 19. in these
words, Nimlrum disertum erat Christi mandatum, Matthew. 18. (...), Docete, sive
discipulos facite omnes gentes. The minor needs not proof, believing being an
act of the intellectual part, supposing the use of reason which infants
ordinarily have not, at least in such things they cannot be said ordinarily to
be behevers; nor is the term believer any where in Scripture applied to them.
Rightly says the same Chamier, Panstr. Cat. to^. 4. l. 12. c. 9. sect. 53.
Infantes potentia tantum sideles sunt, actu nemo nisi adultiv.

4. This is further confirmed by comparing Matthew. 28 19. with Mark 16. 15, 16.
where the same Commission is expressed, given at the same time, in somewhat
different words, which therefore without all contradiction the one expound the
other. Now what is said Matthew. 28 19. [ Make Disciple of all Nations] is in
Mark 16 15. [ Preach the Gospel to every creature] and what is said Matthew. 28
19. [ baptizing them] is Mark 16. 16. [ Whosoever believes and is baptized
shall be saved] which apparently shows that [(...) them or Disciples] are the
same with [ believers] and consiquently not insants.

5. Which is further confirmed by Philips answer to the Eunuch (...)ling him,
that if he did believe, he might be baptized, Act ^* 7. which shows that Philip
understood Christ's Commission to be to baptize believers and none else; But
infants are not such ordinarily; Therefore they are not ordinarily to be
baptized. Mr. B. himself page 300. says, Now for the aged a Disciple and
believer are all o^e Mark 16. ^6. what Mr. Blake speaks Vindic. foed: ^ag 4,
3. of insants being Disciples as to the participat^^n of Ordinances, and
elsewhere of being believers virtually, though not formally, is without
Scripture proof, which terms none Disciples (...) right to participate of
ordinances, but from Learning, (...) believers who are not so formaly, nor do I
know (...) w(...) infants may be called virtually believers, Then (...)ing is
said to be virtually such, though not formally, when it has, though not the
quality in its kind, yet has it ability to produce it, as the sun they say is
not hot in its self formally, yet it is hot virtually, because it can produce
it in another; But I presume he will no say this of an insant that he is
virtually a believer because he can produce it in another. If he mean it in
another, sense, he should show how an infant may be said to be virtually a
believer, and prove that sense out of Scripture, and not abuse men with a
nonsense distinction, if he mean to clear truth. I shall need no better proof
against him, to show infants are not to be termed Disciples and believers, than
his own words, Vindic. Foed. p. 205. All visible Professors that except the
terms of the Covenent are believers, Saints, Disciples, Christians; so they are
styled in New Testament Scriptures, believers from the faith that they profess,
Saints from the holiness to which they stand engaged, Disciples from the
Doctrine which they profess to learn, and Christians from him whose they are,
whom they serve, and from whom they expect salvation: of which terms according
to his own explication none can be attributed to infants of believers.

6. That infants of believers are not Disciples appointed to be baptized, Matthew
28. 19. is proved from the means of making Disciples, to wit, by preaching the
Gospel to them, as appears by Mark 16. 15. For what is Matthew. 28. 19. Make
Disciples of all Nations, is Mark 16. 15. Preach the Gospel to every creature.
Whence I argue, Those Disciples which Christ has ordinarily appointed to be
baptized, an such as are made such by preaching of the Gosepl to them. Rightly
says Mr. Collings Vindic* Vindic. page 145. How i^ one made a disciple, but by
conversion? and when is a man converted, but when he is brought to believe? But
infants of believers are not made disciples by preaching of the Gospel, as is
of it self manifest, and acknowledged by the adverse party, who make them
Disciples by an imaginary Covenant, and their parents profession; Ergo, they
are not Disciples appointed by Christ ordinarily to be baptized.

7. Those are appointed to be baptized, and no other, whom the Apostles did
baptize, for the Apostles practice shows how they understood Christ's
Commission, and rightly says Mr. Norton, respon. ad Apollon. c. 2. page 34.
35. Religio est nobis judicare Apostolos in baptizando observasse regulam a
Christo latam Matthew. 28. 16. religion binds us to judge the Apostses to have
observed in baptizing the rule made by Christ Matthew. 28. 19. But they baptized
no other than repenting and believing Disciples of Christ, no infants, Ergo.

To say that in Christ's and the Apostles days there were no infants which they
might baptize, is neither true, nor consistent with their own allegations of
Mat. 19. 13, 14. Acts 2. 39. and 16. 15. To say that at first gathering the
Church they were not to do it, but after, is to make them faulty in not
observing the commission of Christ, as they expound it, that even in the first
planting of the Church they were to baptize disciples immediately and remotely
such, as Mr. Baxter speaks; and to hold that the Apostles practice is not our
pattern, and that the first Church was not best ordered, though it was indeed
the purest reformed Church, and therefore the solemn covenant ties us to
endeavor the establishing the worship of God according to it. To say, infants
were baptized by them but not recorded, is without proof, or any likelihood of
truth, and tends to derogate from the fullness and perfection of the Scriptures.

Out of all which I conclude, that infants, even of believers, are not
disciples appointed Matthew. 28. 19. ordinarily to be baptized.

SECT. XI.
Mr. Cottons allegations in his Dialogue, the first chapter, to prove infants
Disciples, are showed to be insufficient.

AGainst this Mr. John Cotton in his Dialogue, entitled, The Grounds and Ends
of Baptism, etc. chapter 1. disputes thus.

That all the children of the faithful (or which is all one, all the children
of the Church, for the Church is a congregation of the faithful) that they are
all of them disciples, may appear by the testimony of the Prophet Esaias, who
speaking of the times of the Church in the New Testament* All thy children
(says he) shall be taught of God, Esa. 54. 13. and if they be taught of God
then are they disciples, for that is the meaning of the word disciples.
Disciples are taught or learnt of God.

Answ. 1. It is supposed but not proved that the tossed v. 11. is meant of the
Church of the N. T. and not of the people of the Jews after the Captivity.

2. The phrase of [ children of the Church] is not a Scripturephrase, nor that
I know is the Church made a mother, though Jerusalem, which is above be called
the Mother of us all, Gal. 4. 26. which seems to be meant of the Evangelical
Covenant.

3. It is supposed that to be children of the Church, and to be children of the
faithful, are one, yet Mr. Cobbet in his Just Vindic. makes them only the
Church seed, who are children of persons inchurched, otherwise, though the
parents be faithful, yet they are not the Church seed. Besides to be [children
of the Church] is not all one with to be natural children of believers. For the
Church does not beget or bring forth by natural seed, but by spiritual, to wit,
the word of God, 1 Peter 1. 23. and children are begotten in the womb of the
Church by the Spirit, and therefore said to be born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.
29. by the promise or covenant of the free woman, v. 30. And indeed the New
Annotations on Isaiah 54. 13. has thus, And thy Children shall be taught of
the Lord] By the outward Ministry of the word, and inward cooperation of the
Spirit, Jerem. 31. 34. John 6. 45. 2 Cor. 13. 3. 1 Cor. 2. 10. 1 John 2. 20,
27. Calvin Instit. lib. 3. cap. 2. s. 6. Denique non frustra Deus apud Iesaiam
ha^ not a disoernit filios Ecclesiae ab extraneis, quod omnes erudiet [ verbo]
ut sint ab ipso edocti.

4. It is supposed that the Church whose children those are is the visible
church as such.

Whereas 1. in Scripture no Church is called the Mother but Jerusalem above,
Gal. 4. 26. which is the mother of us all, and that is either the Evangelical
covenant, or the invisible Church. The Churches children are Christ's seed, and
they are those whom his Father has given him, Heb. 2. 13. made disciples by
his Word and Spirit. Our Lord Christ where he cites this passage of the
Prophet, John 6. 45. applies it to those that are drawn of the Father, and whom
he will raise up at the last day, ver. 44. who are only the children of the
invisible Church. Diodati annot. on John 6. 45. all not all and every
particular person, as it appears by ver. 44. and 65 but all the elect and
children of God. No^ is Mr. C(...) shift, rather than answer, of any moment,
when he says, For look what promises are made to the invisible Church, they
are for their sakes offered to all the members of the visible Churches, whereof
the lively members are the chief.

For 1. He does alter the term in the objection, which was [ made] not [
offered] wherein both he, and Mr. George Philips before him, deal not rightly,
so speaking as that it may be taken, that to be in covenant; to have the
covenant made, is all one with to have it offered: Whereas it is offered not
only to the children of the visible Church, but to many professed unbelievers,
as Acts 13. 46. Now this answering is a way to delude Readers, when the
objection is, that the promise is made only to the children of the invisible
Church, to answer the promises are also offered to the members of the visible,
and when it is expected that it should be proved the promise is made to
conclude that it is offered.

2. Mr. Cotton dare not say that promise to be made to any but those that are
children of the invisible Church, and therefore it can be meant of no other,
and so no other taught of the Lord and disciples, which will not reach to the
natural children of visible in churched believers.

3. [ Thy children] is not all one with [ thy infants] Mr. Cotton denies not,
that the meaning in part may be of men of years, and if so no necessity to
understand it of infants, and then his argument falls, which is to prove
infants to be disciples.

4. Besides, our Lord Christ, where he cites John 6. 45. the prophet, leaves
out the word [ children] and applies the teaching of God only to true
believers. Omnes, says Grotius, quibus sermo Evangelii annuntiatur.

5. Were it granted Mr. Cotton that all believers infants were taught of God by
secret indiscernable teaching, yet this being such, cannot be applied to the
disciples meant Mat. 28. 19. who are disciples by preaching the Gospel, and
known to be such by their profession.

But Mr. Cotton tells us, The infants or children of the faithful are not to be
excluded from the number of the children of the Church. For the same Prophet
speaking of the same Church, fetches in infants among the blessed ones of the
Church, and blessed with such spiritual light and life from Christ, as if they
had lived an hundred years in the Church Esa. 65. 20. There shall be no more
(says he) then^^ forth an infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled
his days. For the chi^^ shall die an hundred years old, but the sinner being an
hundred years old shall be accursed. How shall the child die as at an hundred
years old, but that he is so well instructed, and enlightened by Christ, and
thereby as capable of entrance into heavenly glory, as a grown disciple of an
hundred years old?

Ans. 1. Were M. Cottons paraphrase granted, yet the conclusion follows not
thence, that therefore infants are disciples to be baptized according to Mat.
28. 19. or as he speaks, children of the Church. For to be so well instructed,
and enlightened by Christ, and thereby as capable of entrance into heavenly
glory as a grown disciple of an hundred years old, may agree by extraordinary
inspiration to one that is only of the invisible Church, and not of the visible
Church as disciples meant Mat. 28. 19.

2. Mr. Cotton, when he says, [ how shall the child by as at an hundred years
old] does sl^ly intimate as if [ as] were in the text: whereas it is not so,
but (...) the child or boy shall die an hundred years old, or the son of an
hundred years. Which without any allegory has a plain sense as the New
Annotations express it, He that is now a child shall attain to those years ere
he die. Which was accomplished in the return from the captivity according to the
prophecy of Zechariah chapter 8. Vide Grotius 4. and therefore we need not run to
any allego* annot in Ze^. rical interpretation, nor refer it to the times of 8.
4. the Messiah, either after the resurrection or before, of which Hieronym in
Locum.

3. Were an allegory allowed, yet not only in Hierom, but also in Calvin,
Piscator, and others, there are va^iety of senses different from Mr. Cotton, so
that in alleging these texts he trifled more than became so grave a man. But he
goes on thus.

The Apostle Peter reckons infants of the Church for disciples Acts 15. 10.
If the infants of the Church had not been disciples, the false Apostles could
have pretended no power to have ^ut that ordinance upon them.

Answ. 1. [ infants of the Church] is a phrase the Scripture uses not, and i^
serves only to possess the unwary reader with this conceit, as if the children
of believers inchurched, as they speak, were children of the Church; whereas
none is a child of the Church till taught the Gospel and made a believer.

2. It is untruly suggested, as if the false Apostles pretended power to
circumcise infants of Christian disciples from this chat the infants were
disciples: But ver. 1. 5. show plainly that they alleged that the Gentile
disciples were tied to observe the law of Moses, and so to be circumcised, both
they and their children.

But, says he, Peter acknowlegeth them disciples, but the yoke of circumcision
was too heavy for them, as drawing upon them the yoke of the Ceremonial Law.

Answ. There is not a word of Peter acknowledging the infants disciples, but
the believing parents; nor is the yoke of circumcision said to be too heavy for
them now* as if it were not so (...), but it (...) such as neither the
Apostles, nor their Fathers Were able to bear, much less Gentiles.

But (...) Christ Mark 10. 14. Luke 18. 16. (...)) is the Kingdom of God,
which argues that even little children are members of the Church here.

Answ. It is proved in my Postscript ^. 20. that Matthew. 19. 14. the Kingdom of
heaven, in Mark 10. 14. Luke 18. 16. the Kingdom of God, is meant of the
Kingdom of Glory: But it follows not that therefore infants are members of the
Church here, many belonging to the invisible Church, which belong not to the
visible, and vice versa, as abortives, still born infants, converts at the
point of death, etc. are of the Kingdom of Glory, who are never members of the
visible Church here.

But, says he, Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God, as a little
child (to wit, as a little child receives it, for so much the Grammar
construction requires) he shall in no wise enter therein.

Answ. It is untrue, that the Grammar construction requires, that it should be
understood thus, that a little child receives the Kingdom of God, but only
this is meant, that none shall enter into the Kingdom of God, but such as have
such an humble mind, free from ambition, as a little child has, as our Lord
himself expounds it, Mat. 18. 3, 4.

But, says he, Christ's testimony of them and his carriage toward them, show
that little children born in the Church are accounted disciples of Christ, and
therefore commanded to be baptized with their believing parents.

Answ. Mr. Cotton himself confesses, that it does not appear that their
Fathers, who brought them, were baptized themselves; how are they then said to
be children born in the Church, or to be baptized according to rule? wherefore
his own words show it to be uncertainly, and therefore insufficiently alleged
to prove that the infants of believers are among the blessed ones of Christ,
such as of whom his Church and and Kingdom consists, and so come under the
fellowship of his disciples, whom Christ commands to be baptized. And in very
truth in that there is nothing apparent, whether the parents brought them or
others, whether the parents were disciples or not: nor is any thing at all
ascribed to the parents but to Christ's indulgence in this action, and it
appears Christ did not command them to be baptized, nor spoke any thing as
intituling them to discipleship and baptism, though he said, Of such is the
Kingdom of God, this text is not only impertinently brought to prove the
discipleship and baptizability of believers infants, but also makes to the
contrary, that infants are not disciples nor baptizable, since if they had been
so Christ would have so declared on this occasion, which was opportune for it.

But there is yet another argument in that chapter of Mr. Cottons, and it is to
this effect, That the Commission Mat. 28. 19. appoints believing parents to be
baptized, and would infer, that in Gods account, and in Scripture phrase,
parents themselves are not reputed of God to be baptized, if their children
remain unbaptized.

Answ. But will any man believe Mr. Cotton in this, that in Scripture phrase
parents are not reputed of God to be baptized if their children remain
unbaptized? Scripture speaks of thousands baptized, and mentions not the
baptizing of any of their children under that relation as their children, shall
we believe Mr. Cotton that those phrases of Scripture, that say they were
baptized, speak false? and that they were not reputed of God to be baptized,
because there is no mention of their childrens baptism? many believers were
baptized their children being infidels, Mat. 10. 35. were not the parents
reputed in Gods account baptized because the children were against it? But let
us hear Mr. Cottons goodly proof in his own words.

Surely, says he, in the old Testament a man was accounted of God as
uncircumcised himself, if his children were uncircumcised: for so it is written
in Exodus 12. 48. that if a man will come and keep the Passover, all the males
in his house must be circumcised: and the reason given, is, for no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof, which plainly argues, that a man is
uncircumcised himself, and (as an uncircumcised person) is to be debarred from
the Passover, until all his males be circumcised. If then our Lords Supper
come in the room of the Passover, and our baptism in the room of circumcision,
look as he that had not circumcised his males was accounted as one
uncircumcised himself, and so to be debarred from the Passover, so he who has
not baptized his children is accounted of God as not baptized himself, and so
to be debarred from the Lords Supper.

Answ. That baptism and the Lords Supper come in the room of Circumcision, and
the Passover, is often said, but never proved. But if it were granted (though
I still deny it) yet Mr. Cottons inference is not good, till it be also
yielded, that every rule of Circumcision, and the Passover is a rule to us
about Baptism and the Lords Supper, which me thinks he should not maintain. Nor
do I think he can give any reason why in this the rule should bind more than in
others. Yea did he consider it, he might have perceived, that if the proportion
be stretched according to this rule, no parent must be counted baptized, nor to
eat the Lords Supper, except he had not only all his children baptized; but
also all his Servants. For the males to be circumcised were not only children,
but servants also, and so those must be baptized who are out of covenant, and a
national church must be fo^med like to the Jews, which I think were hated of
him as the blind and the lame were of David's soul. And methinks it should
follow, that if it happen (as it may happen many ways, especially in new
England, where many baptized persons may not have their children baptized,
because the parents are not Church Members) the infants be unbaptized the
parent is to be baptized again, because counted of God, and according to
Scripture phrase, if Mr. Cottons dictates hold, unbaptized.

Which being absurd, I count his inference (If therefore you forbid baptism to
children, you evacuate the baptism of their parents, and so make the
Commandment of God, and the Commission of the Apostles, and the baptism of
believers, of none effect, together with that other passage of his page 4. If
godly parents do withdraw their children from the covenant, and the seal of the
Covenant, they do make void (as much as in them lies) the Covenant, both to
themselves, and to their children also. And then will the Lord cut off such
souls from his people, Genesis 17. 14.) to be mere Mormoes or bugbears to fright
children, though I am afraid they are used for a further evil end to incite
Magistrates a against Antipaedo baptists, and to justify their hard dealing with
then in new England.

That which Mr. Cotton adds, That if we gather no infant are disciples from
Mark 16. 16. compared with Matthew. 28. 1^* because believer and disciple are
terms of the same sense, and i^ fants not believers, it would follow, that no
infant were capable of salvation any more than baptism, I have answered in my
Praecursor s. 6.

That which he speaks of the Gospel, That the promise of being God to believers
and their seed is to be preached as Gospel according to Mark 16. 15. and if his
allegations of Acts 16. 31. Luke 19. 9. Gal. 3* 16, 17. be right, and his words
true p. 22. God has promised salvation to believers, and their seed, and house
also, is so palpably false, that Mr. Marshal and Mr. Geree do both disclaim It
as contrary to Protestant doctrine, as I show in my Apology s. 9.

That which he says page 24. ('That the expounding baptizing into the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost Mat. 28. 19. thus, baptize them into the true and orderly
profession of that which they have been taught and believed, is to assert that
we are to be baptized into the name of Creatures for profession is an act of
our own and so a creature, which he counts an effect of Gods judgment taking
men in their own wiliness, while they turn the glorious name of the blessed
Trinity into the weak performance of a Christian duty, is a frivolous quillet
unfit for so grave a man, James chapter 5. 14. To anoint with oil in the name of
the Lord, id est, says Beza, invocato nomine Domini, the New Annot. by calling
on the name of the Lord, which is a work of their own: Do they therein turn the
name of the glorious God into a Creature? But enough of this childish chapter
of Mr. Cotton, in which I find so little worth answering, that were it not for
the esteem he had, and his acquainting me with this piece in his letter to me,
I should have chosen to have let it pass as not worth the labor bestowed in
answering it.

Mr. William Cook in his Font uncovered page 13. brings Acts 21. 4, 5. To prove
that infants in their mothers arms were reckoned among disciples, and makes the
enumeration there to answer Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Ezra 8. 21. And whereas it
might be said that the children are distinguished from the disciples, he
prevents this by retortion their wives are distinguished from disciples, yet
might be disciples, so the children.

Answ. 1. The places are no way parralel in the matter, nor exactly in the
enumeration made, in the former there is mention of servants, none here, all
were of duty there to enter into covenant the whole nation together, not so
here, in the later place no mention of wives, and the business was a solemn
humiliation for them upon their return from captivity, but here only a
courteous accompanying of Paul to the ship.

2. I grant the wives are not necessarily excluded from being disciples, nor
children by the enumeration Acts 21. 5. nor are they necessary to be included:
but how does Mr. Cook prove the the children, babes carried in arms, or such
little ones as had not abilities of understanding? More likely, this thing
being done by common consent, the wives and children were of years to conceive
what they did, whether already baptized disciples or persons catechized and
expectants it is uncertain.

I shall now, finding nothing needing more answer in Mr. Cobbet part 2. chapter 3.
s. 4. but what will fitly come in when I answer Mr. Baxter, pass on to the
answering Mr. Baxters third chapter of the first part of his plain Scripture
proof, etc. where he thus argues.

SECT. XII.
Mr. Bs. allegation of Acts 15. 10. to prove infants disciples is fully
answered and his arguments retorted.

ALL that are Christ's disciples ordinarily ought to be baptized; But some
infants are Christ's disciples; Therefore some infants ordinarily ought to be
baptized. He tells us how he means by [ disciples] which meaning of his is
before proved not to be the meaning of the text, and then says, His major is
evident in the text from the conjunction of the two commands: Go make me
disciples, baptizing them. If any shall be so quarrelsome against the plain
tezt to say, It is not all disciples that they were commanded to baptize, but
only all that were made disciples, and this making was only by teaching.

I answer, 1. If I prove infants Disciples, I sure prove thereby they were made
so, or else they they had never been so.

2. By teaching the parents and children were both made disciples, the parents
directly, the infants remotely or mediately: if they be proved once to be
disciples, it will easily follow it is by this way. He that converteth the
parent, makes both him and his infants disciples incomplete or in title; This
therefore lies on the proof of the Minor.

3. But I would say more to this, but that Mr. T. ( as I understand) has in
his Sermons professed, That if we will prove that infants are Christ's
Disciples, he will acknowledge that they ought to be baptized: the like he
granted to me; and well he may.

Answ. 1. It is well Mr. B. grants that to go make disciples, baptizing them,
are two Commands, and that there is a conjunction of them, whence it follows,
that he appoints not baptizing till the making of disciples, nor of any but
disciples made as Christ appointed.

2. It is no quarrel against the plain text, but the very plain doctrine of the
text to say, It is not all disciples (visibly or invisibly, directly or
remotely, completely, or incompleatly, in reality or in title) that they were
commanded to baptize, but only all that were made disciples, and this making
was only by teaching or preaching the Gospel to them Mark 16. 15.

3. It is true, I have often granted, that if it be proved infants are Christ's
disciples made by preaching to them the Gospel, they ought to be baptized. But
when I granted this, it did not come into my thoughts, that Mr. B. would ever
have hatched, much less have printed such wild nonsense fancies as here he
does, of a disciple by title without learning, like a King of Jerusalem without
reigning* or the Popes Bishop of Chalcedon without overseeing, of teaching
remotely in the Parents conversion without any personal teaching in themselves.
For which fancies he neither brings a text of Scripture, nor any approved
Author, nor any other besides himself thus speaking. Such distinctions are but
mere abuses as are without any instance of such an use of terms. And to show
the grossnesse of this foppery of Mr. B. which a School* boy may easily discern
that has gone no further than Qui mihi discipul^s. I argue thus,

1. If he that converteth the parent makes the infant a disciple, then either
because the infant is an infant, and then evrey infant should be made a
disciple by that conversion; or because his child, and then every child is made
a disciple, yea though he be a professed infidel; or both, and then it would be
showed what grant there is to the child while infant, which cease when grown
up: where the relation of a disciple in his sense is appropriated only to
infant child. Yea all the plea is, by teaching the parents and children were
both made disciples, therefore this relation comes from being a child of such a
one: But the professed infidel child is the child of the Father; therefore also
a disciple in title, and to be baptized after Mr. Bs. doctrine.

2. If children be made disciples remotely and mediately according to the
command Matthew. 28. 19. in that the parent is converted, and that the teaching
of the parent is the teaching of the child, then it follows, he that teaches
the Father has done his duty of teaching, though he teach not the child
himself, and so a preacher need not at all go and catechize each child but only
preach to parents. It would be ill with Kederminster if it should be so there.
But this follows according to Mr. Bs. exposition of Christ's command Mat. 28. 19.

3. It will follow as well, that he that baptizeth the Father baptizeth the
child, for there is a conjunction of these commands, and the baptizing is to be
correspondent to the teaching; if then the teaching the parent is the teaching
the child, then is the baptizing the parent the baptizing the child according
to the command, and so the command is only to baptize in another him who is
taught in another, and it is a gross transgression of Christ's command to
baptize him in himself, who is only a disciple in another.

4. Forasmuch as Mr. B. does not limit the child's being a disciple or teaching
remotely to the next parents being converted, he that shall teach the
Grandfather, great Grandfather, etc. teaches the child, makes him a disciple,
yea according to his doctrine page 101. he that converts the Master of the
house makes his servants, and those that are at his dispose, though not his
children, (whom he would have baptized) disciples, for sure he would not have
them baptized that are not disciples. Now I appeal to any man of understanding
whether this be not as gross and pernicious a delusion as Heart the Jesuit held
(so much exagitated in the conference by Dr. Raynold chapter 2. divis. 7.) That the
Pope preaches by another, to say he that teaches the parent teaches the
child, Assuredly had I ever dreamed that Mr. B. had such fantastic, if not
frantic notions, I had denied his major, and do now expressly deny it in his
sense, All that are Christ's disciples incompleatly, in title only, remotely by
the parents conversion without their own ordinarily ought to be baptized, and
expect it to be proved by him ad Graecas Calendas. Nor would I have laid the
stress of the argument on the proof of his Minor, if I had understood his
deceitful gibberish, by which he detestably abused many people, and perverted
Christ's words. But it is my lot to answer such a writer and I follow him.

He next goes about to prove his minor thus, [ That some infants are Christ's
disciples, and so called by the Holy Ghost is most evident to any that will not
grossly pervert the text or overlook it, in Acts 15. 10. why tempt ye God to put
a yoke on the neck of the disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we were able
to bear? now who were these disciples? no doubt those on whom the false
Teachers would have laid the yoke. And what was that yoke? It is plain it was
Circumcision, as necessary and as engaging them to keep the Law. And whom would
they have persuaded thus to be circumcised? Why both the Parents and Children
in that Age, and only the Children in all following Ages ordinarily. So that
thus I argu, Those on whose necks the false Teachers would have laid this yoke
were Disciples: But some, yea most of those were infants on whose necks they
would have laid this yoke: Therefore some Infants are Disciples, and so called
here. The major is plain in the Text.]

Answ. The minor of Mr. Bs. Argument, that Infants are Christ's Disciples,
should not be understood of Disciples in that sense, that Christ appoints
Disciples to be baptized, Matthew. 28. 19. Discipleship in Mr. Bs. sense in title
without learning, by remote teaching in the Parents conversion, being a sense
unknown to the Scripture, and a mere figment of Mr. Bs. brain, is falsely said
to be a scribed to infants by the Holy Ghost, or to have any evidence in
Scripture for it: nor do I think any do more grossly pervert the Text, Acts 15.
10. or overloook it more than Mr. B. But let us look a little nearer on Mr. Bs.
arguings: he premiseth three Questions, and answers them; concerning which I
grant his answer to the first, that those were Disciples on whom the false
Teachers would have laid the yoke. In his second Question and the Answerly
sundry fallacies, 1. in that he puts the Question about the yoke what it was;
whereas the Question that should have cleared the difficulty had been, what was
the putting on of the yoke, (which Mr. B. does I fear sophistically omit) the
point in question being who are meant by [ Disciples] and it being resolved by
Mr. B. Those on whom the false Teachers would have laid the yoke, the
Resolution must be not by knowing barely what the term [ yoke] imported, but by
knowing how they would lay the yoke, or what the act was of the false Teachers,
termed, laying a yoke on their necks. Were the act effected or attempted, or
intended only, it is that we must know what act it was, whether such as infants
were the passive subjects of, or whether such only as persons of age were
capable of? And here I conceive two ways they might be said to lay the yoke,
one by cutting with their own hand off the little skin of the privy member,
either of Parents or Children, or both, according to the rite of Moses Law; the
other by teaching, persuading, charging Parents that they and their Children
should be circumcised, or else they should not be saved; the former had been an
act of their hands, this latter of their tongues; the former only can prove
infants to be meant by [ Disciples] if this latter be meant, then infants are
not meant by [ Disciples] for they were not subjects capable of that act. There
was no act either effected or attempted on infants, but only the act of the
hand using an instrument to cut off the skin. If they had attempted to act on
infants the later way, by telling sucking children, you are to be circumcised,
and to keep Moses Law, they had done rather like mad men than cunning Seducers.
Mr. B. himself, when in the next words [ And whom would they persuade to be
circumcised?] and when after he confesses, that which the false Teachers did,
was Teaching, does plainly intimate that the false Teachers act, in putting on
the yoke, was only of the tongue, not of the hand, and therefore not infants
the passive subject of it, and so not meant by Disciples. Yea, the Text it self
clears what their act was, when it says, v. 1. They taught the brethren, v. 24.
They trouble^* them with words, subverting their souls, saying. And this is
enough to show the foppery of Mr. Bs. and others, arguings hence to prove
infants Disciples, had they any mind to heed what is spoken. Those only are
meant by Disciples who were Patients or passive subjects of the act of laying
on the yoke: that is Mr. Bs. own major in effect: but infants were not such,
for they were not taught, nor troubled with words, nor had their souls
subverted by the sayings of false Teachers; therefore they were not the
Disciples meant Acts 15. 10. 2. Concerning the Answer to the Question, as he
lays it down, [ That the yoke was Circumcision, as necessary, and as engaging
them to keep the Law,] it may be meant either of the command concerning
Circumcision, and so it is granted that the yoke was Circumcision, that is, the
command of Circumcision propounded, and taught as necessary to the Disciples,
that they might be saved, and engaging them to keep Moses Law; or by
Circumcision is meant Circumcision in act, or actual Circumcision, as passively
received in the flesh, and this it seems Mr. B. understands, since it was it
which was to be put on infants, and it only, in which sense it is not meant
Acts 15. 10. as I have showed. 3. The terms [ as necessary, and engaging them
to keep Moses Law] may be understood variously, either as necessary and
engaging them in the opinion of the circumcised, so that the sense is, they
would have laid the yoke on the necks of the Disciples, so as that the
Disciples should have received circumcision with this opinion that thereby they
were engaged to keep Moses his Law, and in this sense it is true, the yoke was
the command of Circumcision to beget this opinion, or else in the opinion of
the Teachers or Circumcisers only, and so it is false, that the yoke was
actual Circumcision as necessary, and engaging to keep Moses Law, they did not
only teach or circumcise, so as to have an opinion of this necessity, but so
as to endeavor to possess those they would lay the yoke on, that it was
necessary, and they were engaged to keep Moses Law. As for his Answer to the
third Question, according to the plain sense of the words, it is false, that
they would have persuaded the children, I mean infant children, to be
circumcised: For though they would persuade the Parents to be circumcised, and
then to circumcise their children, yet that they would have persuaded the
children, that is, that any of them went to an infant and would have persuaded
him to be circumcised, is false, and the thing would have been ridiculous.

As for the argument from Acts 15. 10. as it was framed by Mr. M. I did Exam.
page 135. deny the major, and gave my reason, it is not said, they would put it
only on Disciples, it is more probable they endeavored to put it on the necks
of all, whether Disciples or others, as a thing universally necessary to
salvation, v. 1. which Mr. M. in his Defense overthrows not, but puts it off
without answer, only imagines that then I cannot evince from Matthew. 3 5, 6.
Acts 2. 42, etc. that John and Christ's Disciples baptized only penitent
believers. But I presume Mr. M. will be better advised than to make it alike
argumentative to prove all were Disciples on whom the false Teachers would have
put the yoke, from Acts 15 10. and to prove that there was Baptism in the New
Testament but of penitent believers, from the perpetual course of the history
thereof, in the former Disciples being only mentioned occasionaly in
condemning a fact done to them, in the other are set narrations of Acts done in
the Church of God, and therefore there would have been a defect in the
narration if there had been any other than penitent believers then Baptized,

But Mr. B. pleads thus, If any will say, that it is not all, but some of those
on whom they would have laid the yoke that are here called disciples, that is
only them at age, I answer, Then it is but some only whose Circumcision the
Apostle and the Synod does conclude against, that is those of age. For he
speaks against laying the yoke on none but Disciples, And then for any thing
the Apostle says, or this Synod, all infants might be circumcised still: which
is a most gross absurdity, when the very business of this Synod was to decree
against the necessity of Circumcision and the Law. To which I replied, I denied
the major as expressed by Mr. M. thus [ all they upon whose necks those false
Teachers would have put the yoke of Circumcision are called Disciples and to be
called Disciples] because I conceived they would by their teaching put a
necessity of circumcision even on unconverted Jews who are no Disciples, yea
upon all persons whatsoever, holding of all sorts of persons that except they
were circumcised and kept the Law of Moses they could not be saved. And in like
sort I deny the major of Mr. Bs. Argument if it be universal, all those on
whose necks the false Teachers would have laid the yoke mentioned Acts 15. 10.
were Disciples. Nor is it plain in the Text, there is no more plain in the Text
but this, that the persons expressed Acts 15. 10. on whom the false Teachers
would have laid the yoke were Disciples. but it does not follow that they would
have laid the yoke on none other than are there expressed, as when it is said,
Christ would have gathered the children of Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 37. though
none but the children of Jerusalem are there expressed, yet it follows not all
are the children of Jerusalem whom he would have gathered. Nor does that
imaginary gross absurdity follow which Mr. B. would fasten on this denial of
his major. For 1. there are in the Synods letter both v. 24. Condemning the
false Teachers Doctrine, and v. 28. 29. laying no other burden on them to whom
they wrote, plain pasages exempting old and young from Circumcision, though v.
10. were left out. 2. Even in that, v. 10. Peter reproves their putting a yoke
on the neck of the aged, he does determine parents not bound to circumcise
their children, and this is a conclusion against Circumcision of infants, as A
canon against Priests marriage is a Law against their wives living with them;
and the concluding against a practice in some upon a common reason, to others
is a general prohibition, as the Apostles determination Acts 6. 2. is a
determination against the like in others. But however, this is enough to answer
Mr. Bs. Argument; and some perhaps would yield his minor, yet I deny it, and
doubt not to show that in the thing wherein he is most confident, in so much
that in his Epistle before his Saints Everlasting Rest, he makes me with others
play the Devil in accusing my own children as no Disciples, when God says the
contrary, ( O utinam!) Acts 15. 10. he is an egregious Trifler.

To prove his minor, he thus argues, I prove it was the Infants also, thus, If
it were Infants also whom the false Teachers would have had to be circumcised
as necessary, and as engaging to Moses Law, then it was infants also on whom
they would have laid the yoke; but it was infants also whom they would have had
circumcised, etc. Therefore, etc. The Antecedent is undeniable. But it is the
Consequence Mr. T. denies; for he says, It is not Circumcision as necessary,
and as engaging to Moses Law, which was the yoke, but it was the Doctrine of
those Teachers. But was Mr. T. of this mind when he wrote these words? Exam.
p. 101.

Answ. 1. Should the Conclusion be granted him, that they were infants also
whom the false Teachers would have had to be circumcised, etc. yet since he
grants, that they would have had the Fathers circumcised, they only may be
meant by [ Disciples] though Circumcision were yielded to be the yoke. 2.
Circumcision is no way necessary, that I know, but as commanded, nor engaging
to keep Moses Law, but as taught, and yielded to. And therefore I know not what
sense Mr. Bs. words have, that it was infants also whom the false Teachers
would have had to be circumcised as necessary, and as engaging to Moses Law,
but one of these, they would have them circumcised, having this opinion, that
it was necessary, and did engage, or that they taught Circumcision as a
necessary command, and as engaging to Moses Law, and in this latter sense I
should not have said, (if I did say it) that it is not Circumcision as
necessary, and as engaging to Moses Law, which was the yoke, but it was the
Doctrine of those Teachers; but rather have said, it was Circumcision as
necessary, and engaging to Moses Law, which was the yoke, that is, the Doctrine
of those Teachers. But because Mr. Bs. expression is du^ious, or nonsense, and
that which he mainly bends himself to prove, is, that it was not the Doctrine
which was the yoke to be put on Disciples, (for then there would have been no
color to expound [ Disciples] of infants) but Circumcision in act, or acted on
the flesh, though as a blind he add those words, as necessary and engaging to
Moses Law, therefore I denied the Consequence, as if those words were left out,
which indeed he himself leaves out in the proof of his Antecedent, proving
only they would have had them circumcised, without saying any thing, to prove
they would have had them circumcised under this formal consideration or
respect, as yielding to the necessity of it, and engaging themselves thereby to
keep Moses Law. But if he put in those words in the minor, in this sense, I
deny it also. As for the Consequence there is no proof brought for it to
confirm it, but by overthrowing the reason I gave of denying it, so that had I
given no reason of denying it* there had been brought no proof. But as yet I do
not apprehend, though I had granted him, that Circumcision was the yoke, and
not the Doctrine, (which I do not) that yet it would have followed, that if the
false Teachers would have had the infants circumcised they were those also on
whom they would have laid the yoke, for they might have attempted to lay the
yoke of Circumcision on the Parents, and so the laying on of the yoke might be
only the circumcising the Parents, though they would have also the infants
circumcised. But it being true, that I gave that reason of my denial of Mr. Bs.
Consequence, that I may the more abundantly show the futility of his foolishly
magnified dispute, I will engage with him even upon that point also. And to
clear my meaning, it is true, Exam. page 101. I said, the yoke, Acts 15. 10.
was Circumcision, as Mr. M. himself declared, page 39. of his Sermon, and all
the legal Ceremonies, and the reason why I used that expression was, because I
alleged Mr. Ms. words. But that I meant not Circumcision in act, or as acted on
the flesh to be the yoke, but Circumcision in command, as commanded and imposed
on the conscience, appears by the words following: if it be a privilege to be
free from Circumcision it is a privilege to be free from any Ordinance in the
room and use of it, it was the Ordinance then, I made the yoke. And my mind is
expressed thus, page 135. The putting the yoke of Circumcision is not actual
Circumcision in their flesh, for that they were able to bear for many Ages, but
the necessity of it on men's consciences to salvation. In my Antidote, sect. 6.
I deny it to be actual Circumcision, but sometimes call it the doctrine or
opinion of the necessity of it. In my Book of Scandalizing I call it the
Ordinances of the Jews. In my Praecursor, page 10. the doctrines and commands:
but most plainly I express my self in my Praecursor, page 74. in my Answer to
the 27th absurdity Mr. B. charge me with, page 208. of his Plain Scripture
Proof, etc. where I make it the yoke of Doctrine, or the command of
Circumcision, and show, that not only Grotius, but also Pareus, Piscator,
Diadati, the new Ames. Bell. Enerv. Tom. 4. l. 6. c. 7. Th. 11. Protest. Acts
15. 10. Lex Mosis dicitur jugum importabile, and Chamier
Annot. so expressed it. This then is my constant judgment, 1. That the Yoke,
Acts 15. 10. is not actual Circumcision or Circumcision in act, that is, as
acted on the flesh, which alone serves for Mr. Bs. turn to prove Panstr. Ca^h.
tom. 3. l. 11. c. 15. spends a whole Chapter to prove against the Papists that
the yoke there is the Moral as well as the Ceremonial Law. Yea, Mr. B. himself
Direct. 10. for peace, page ^1. has these words, They were therefore said to
be in bondage to the Law, and the Law was said to be a yoke, which neither they
nor their fathers were able to bear, Acts 15 10. Vide Pareum Bell. Cas^ig de
Justific. l. 5. c 14. is the common Doctrine of Protestants to interpret the
yoke of the whole Law, intolerable, because of the curse.
infants Disciples, for no more would they have done to infants. 2. That the
putting the yoke is teaching the necessity of it, or the command of God still
binding their consciences, of which act the infants were not subjects
recipient. 3. That the yoke as from the false Teachers was the Doctrine, or
command of Circumcision and other Precepts of the Law, which sundry learned men
in their notes on Matthew. 11. 29. gather to be meant by the yoke, comparing
these places with 1 John 5. 3. what is Matthew. 11. 29. called Christ's yoke, is 1
John 5. 3. called his Commandments, and doctrinal commands, or as the
expression is, Matthew. 15. 9. Doctrines, commands, are called Burdens, Matthew.
23. Luke 11. 46. Rev. 2. 24. As it is taken passively, that is, to be received
by the person yoked or taught is the opinion of the necessity of these unto
salvation, or as Mr. B. himself after calls it the judgment of it. 4. That by
the Disciples are meant the converted Christians of the Gentiles called the
Brethren, v. 1. those that from the Gentiles turn to God, v. 19. The brethren
of the Gentiles, v. 23. Mr. Blake Vindic. Foederis, page 208. Complaint is
made, Acts 15. 10. that those that urged the necessity of Circumcision put a
yoke on the necks of the Disciples, which neither they nor their fathers were
able to bear; they urged it upon all in visible profession, and not upon
regenerate ones alone. 5. That by their necks is meant not their flesh or skin,
but their consciences. Let Us now see what Mr. B. brings to prove the yoke Acts
15. 10. to be actual Circumcision, or in act, that is, acted on their flesh,
and not the doctrine or command of Circumcision, or that the putting the yoke
was in their flesh by cutting off the skin, not in their consciences by
teaching.

1. Says he, The Text says so three times over, [that it was Circumcision as
necessary and engaging to Moses Law, that was that yoke] v. 1. They taught the
brethren, Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be
saved: and v. 5. They taught, it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the Law of Moses: and v. 24. saying, Ye must be
circumcised, and keep the Law.

Answ. There Is not a word in either of the three Verses, that says so expressly,
or by any good consequence, that the yoke v. 10. is Circumcision actual or in
act, that is, acted or to be acted on the flesh. Mr. B. me thinks if he could
have made any good inference from thence, for his Conclusion, should have
formed it, being not ignorant that in my Antidote I bring these very verses and
words to prove the contrary.

2. Says he, It appears evidently from the same, v. 10. the yoke which neither
our fathers nor we were able to bear, that which neither their fathers nor they
were able to bear, was the yoke there meant: but it was Circumcision as
necessary, and engaging to keep the Law, and not the Doctrine of the false
Apostles, which their fathers and they were not able to bear, therefore, etc.
The major is in the Text; the minor is plain; 1. In that there is no mention in
the Scripture of the Fathers being so burdened with that false doctrine; but
that there is mention enough of their being burdened with the Law, and
Circumcision as engaging to it. 2. It was true and good Doctrine before Christ
which these false Apostles taught, viz. that except they were circumcised, and
kept the Law, they could not be saved: I mean as to the Jews it was true, ( for
I will not now meddle with that great controversy whether the Gentiles were
bound to keep Moses Law. I know not what Grotius, Franzius, etc. say on one
side, and Cloppen burgius, and many more on the other.)

Answer. This passage I also allege against Mr. Bs. opinion, in my Antidote
sect. 6. to prove that it is not Circumcision in act but in command or doctrine
that is there meant by the yoke. But that we may determine the thing it is to
be considered: 1. Who [ We and our Father] are: 2. In what part or respect, and
how it was intolerable. Doubtless by [ we] the Apostle means the modern Jews,
and by [ our Fathers] the Jews of former times. The intolerableness was not to
their flesh, as Diodati speaks, for the labor in observing it, for though it
be true that it was very irksom to observe Circumcision, and the Rites of Moses
Law, yet Circumcision was possible to be born, especially by an infant, though,
in the end and intent of the circumcisers it was done as necessary and engaging
to keep Moses Law, yet the infants being not sensible thereof, it was not
intolerable to them. And the Apostle Paul, Phil. 3. 6. speaks of himself, as
touching the righteousness of the Law, blameless. But it was intolerable to
their minds and consciences, by reason of the imperfection of it to quiet the
conscience, and the condemnation it bound to for not keeping it in, says
Diodati locum. And therefore it was the Command and Doctrine that was
intolerable to persons on whose consciences the Law was imposed, not the acting
Circumcision, or Circumcision acted, which alone was put on infants, and
consequently the yoke is not what was imposed on infants, but on persons taught
and commanded. As for Mr. Bs. reasons, the first he himself answers by his
second. For he says that doctrine was true to the Jews before Christ,
therefore sure the Fathers were acquainted with it, it was doctrine known among
them whether the Scripture mention it or no; and whether it were true or false
if it were received by them it must needs be burdensome to them. And for his
second: 1. That it was true doctrine to the Jews before Christ that except they
were circumcised after the manner of Moses they could not be saved, and that it
was needful to circumcise them, and to Command them to keep the Law, v. 1. 5.
is in my apprehension diametrally opposite to Paul's doctrine, Gal. 2. and 3.
and 4. and 5. Romans 3. and 4. and 10. Phil. 3. concerning the non-necessity of
observing the Law for justification, justification by faith without the works
of the Law both in Abraham's, David's, Moses his time. 2. If the doctrine were
true to the Jews, it was the more intolerable, it wouldly the more heavy on
their consciences, finding themselves unable to observe it; therefore this
reason is against Mr. B. and proves the doctrine was the yoke.

But he adds, Mr. T. says it was the Pharisees doctrine of being justified by
the Law which was the yoke. But I answer, 1. the Pharisees were not of so long
continuance as to be the burden of the Fathers by their doctrine. 2. these in
the Text taught but a necessity that those who believed in Christ should be
circumcised and keep the Law: so did not the Pharisees.

Answ. 1. Those in the Text taught not only a necessity that those who
believed in Christ should be circumcised, and keep the Law, by way of Precept,
but also of means, that except they did so, they could not be saved, and that
was still taken by the Apostle in the Epistles to the Romans, Galatians,
Philippians, as the Doctrine of Justification by the Law. And that this was the
yoke which was so intolerable, Acts 15. 10. appears by the next words, ver. 11.
But we trust or believe to be saved by the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, even
as also they. The term [(...), but] being adversative, shows the Apostles
assertion, v. 11. to contain an Antithesis to their Thesis or Doctrine, that
is, whereas they impose this intolerable yoke of Doctrine, that without
Circumcision, and keeping the Law, Disciples cannot be saved, We believe they
may be saved by the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, purifying their hearts by
faith, v 9 without the observation of Moses Law. 2. It is not true, that they
taught only a necessity that those who believed in Christ should be
circumcised, and keep the Law; as if they exempted others. For though there is
mention only of their teaching the Brethren, yet doubtless they held a like
necessity of it, or rather a greater, for Jews. whether converted or
unconverted, as for Christian Gentiles. 3. But were it true, that they taught
but a necessity that those who believed in Christ should be circumcised, and
keep the Law, yet the Doctrine might be an intolerable yoke both to Disciples,
and to the Ancestors from whomsoever they learned it. Whose Doctrine soever it
were, yet it was a yoke intolerable to present Disciples and the Predecessors
of former Generations. 4. The antiquity of the Pharisees is variously conceived
by Writers; it is conceived that Sect began three hundred years before the
birth of Christ, by some higher; sure they were ancient enough to burden the
Fathers, that is, the Ancestors of the modern Jews, when Peter spoke those
words. 5. Were it that others spoke that Doctrine, and burdened the Fathers
with it, yet it might be well called by me the Pharisees Doctrine, who taught it
afterward. 6. That Mr. Bs. willingness to cavil may appear, let v. 5. be read,
and there it is said, The false Teachers were of the Sect of the Pharisees. 3.
Says Mr. B. The Doctrine is no further a yoke than as it has reference to
Circumcision, and keeping the Law, in practice, and as it prevails to bring
them to the belief and practice; therefore it is evident, that the Doctrine is
not the yoke; but the judgment and practice which that Doctrine did teach them;
else it would be in the power of men to yoke and burden us at their pleasure:
But till we obey it we are free from the yoke; therefore the yoke lies not in
the Doctrine, but the obeying.

Answ. This Argument however faulty, yet it plainly crosses Mr. Bs. purpose;
for his aim is to expound the yoke, so as that it may be said, to be laid on
infants, and so they be reckoned for Disciples; but if it be that the judgment
and practice which the Doctrire did teach were the yoke, if the yoke didly in
obeying, as he here says, then the yoke was not put or endeavored to be put
on infants, the false Teachers neither did put nor endeavored to put any thing
on the judgment or practice of infants, nor to have brought them to obeying.
What was to be done to them was not to be done by false Teachers, but the
Parents; there was no act to be done on the infants minds, consciences,
judgments, but on their flesh, nor were they to be active in practice, or
willing in obedience, but merely passive, and likely very unwillingly. And
therefore I infer from Mr. Bs. own Argument, If the Doctrine were no further a
yoke, than as it has reference to Circumcision, and keeping the Law, in
practice, and as it prevails to bring them to the belief and practice, that
the yoke is the judgment and practice, which the doctrine did teach, that it
lies in the obeying, then it is no yoke to infants, then it is not
Circumcision as acted but as taught and yielded to, then it was not to be put
on infants, and consequently no infants are meant by the Disciples, Acts 15.
10. But for the thing objected, as I have said before, the doctrine may be
considered either in se, in it self, as it came from the Teachers, or in the
event to the persons taught, being yielded to by them: It is true, the doctrine
was not a yoke to the Disciples eventually, till the Disciples yielded to it,
but it was in it self a yoke, and might so be called before, as the truth of
Christ is the Gospel or glad ^idings in it self, and may be, and is often so
called, though it prove not so to all that hear it. Wherefore I have sometimes
called the yoke the command, sometimes the doctrine, sometimes the necessity of
observation, sometimes the opinion of the necessity, and all these in different
respects are rightly made the Yoke, in respect of God the command and necessity
of observance, of the Teachers the doctrine, of the persons yoked the opinion
and judgment, when it becomes such in the event, not only in fieri, but in
facto esse, yet no way barely Circumcision acted on infants, and consequently
they not Disciples, Acts 15. 10. which conceit is plainly overthrown by Mr. Bs.
own Argument.

4. Says Mr. B. [ That which this Synod did decree against, and Peter here
spoke against, that was the yoke here meant. But it was Circumcision as
needful, and engaging to keep the Law, which this Synod decreed against, and
Peter here spoke against: therefore this Circumcision was the yoke. The minor
is evident in the the three verses before named, and in the whole Chapter. Who
dare say that this Synod did not decree against Circumcision and keeping the
Law? And the major is as plain; And yet the very sum and strength of all that
Mr. T. has to say against this Text is here, which seems apparently to me to
be but a mere cavilling with the plain Scripture.]

Answ. All this may be justly retorted. That which this Synod did decree
against, and Peter here spoke against, that was the yoke here meant: but it was
not barely Circumcision as acted on infants, but Circumcision as taught, the
command, doctrine, obligation, necessity of it to salvation, and opinion of
that necessity urged on Disciples by teaching, which this Synod decreed
against, and Peter here spoke against: therefore this doctrine, command,
obligation, necessity, opinion of Circumcision and keeping the Law urged on
persons taught was the yoke, and not barely Circumcision as acted on infants by
parents, after the manner, and by virtue of Moses Law. The minor is evident in
the three verses before named, and in the whole Chapter. Who dare say that this
Synod did not decree against the command, doctrine, obligation, necessity,
opinion of Circumcision, and and keeping the Law? And yet the very sum and
strength of all Mr. B. has to say against this Text is here, which seems
apparently to me to be but a mere cavilling with the plain Scripture.

But he adds of me, [ He says that the Synod decreed against Circumcision but
by consequence, and not expressly; and that the thing they directly and expressly
decreed against, and Peter spoke against, was not the yoke it self, but the
putting the yoke on them, which was the act of the false Teachers in Teaching.]

Answ. That which the Synod decreed against, and Peter spoke against, I say was
not barely Circumcision as acted on infants, no^ Circumcision acted on infants
immediately, but the command, doctrine, obligation, necessity and opinion of
necessity of Circumcision, and keeping the Law to salvation, and consequently
the infants Circumcision, which how or in what sense they are the yoke, and
what the putting on of the yoke is, has already been often showed.

But says Mr. B. [ 1. If this were granted, yet neither directly nor
consequently do they decree against the circumcising of any but Disciples, and
therefore infants must needs be part of those Disciples.]

Answer. That which Peter spoke against was the practice of the false Teachers,
v. 10. The decree of the Synod was expressly, 1. a condemnation of the false
Teachers practice, v. 24. 2. A release to Gentile Disciples of other commands
called bardens save only some excepted, v. 28, 29. Acts 21. 25. And it is true
that these decrees are directed only to the Disciples of the Gentiles for the
freeing of their consciences. But it is false that they decree against the
circumcising of none but Disciples. It is true the decree is not for the
release of burdens to any but Disciples: But he that releaseth the burden that
is the command of Circumcision to the Father who is a Disciple, does withal by
plain consequence free the child from Circumcision, and yet the child no
Disciple.

2. Says Mr. B. But the Text expresses actual Circumcision three times over.

Answ. And it expresses also keeping the Law, does it therefore follow that
the yoke, Acts 15. 10. is the actual keeping the Law, and that this might be
put on infants.

3. Says he, [ It is undeniable in the 28, 29. v. that it was matter of their
practice, as directly as the false Apostles teaching, and much more which was
decreed against. It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no
greater burdens than these necessary things: that ye abstain from meats offered
to Idols etc. Mark 1. their practice is the thing decreed upon expressly, and
not the doctrine of the false Teacher (though that is implied) they do not say
we do not decree, that they preach so no more, but that you abstain, etc.

Answ. 1. Mr. Bs. speeches seem to enterfer, when he says, v. 28 29. It was
the matter of their practice as directly as the false Apostles teaching, and
much more, which was here decreed against, Does he not confess that the false
Apostles teaching was directly decreed against, though not so much? yet
presently he bids, Mark, that it is not the Doctrine of the false Teachers that
is decreed upon expressly (though that is implied) yet by [ directly and
expresly] he seems to mean the same. 2. What if v. ^8, 29. decree not expressly
against the Doctrine of the false Teachers, yet if it were implied it was
decreed against. 3. If it were not expressly decreed upon, v. 28, 29. Is it not
enough that it was expressly decreed against, v. 24.? 4. Though they do not say
v. 28. we decree that they preach so no more, yet when they say, It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us to lay upon you no greater burdens than these
necessary things, this is an express decree against the Doctrine of those false
Teachers, v. 1. Except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses ye cannot be
saved, and v. 5. that it was needful to circumcise them, and to command them to
keep the Law of Moses.

2. Says Mr. B. This is it also which is here called [the burden] in the
sense, no doubt, with that which before was called the yoke, no greater burden
or yoke. And can any impartial man's conscience tell him that the only chief
question here debated and determined was, whether the false Apostles should any
more preach such doctrine. and not rather whether the Disciples ought to be
circumcised and keep the Law of Moses.

Answ. If the burden and yoke be the same, then the yoke v. 10. is not that
which was put on infants. For the burden v. 28. is called [ Command] v. 24* and
this was opposite to the false Teachers saying to command them to keep the Law
of Moses v. 5. and by burdens elsewhere are meant Commands o^ Doctrine, or
Doctrinal Commands Matthew. 23 4. Luke 11. 46. Rev^l. 2. 24. now Commands were
not attempted to be put on infants who could not understand them. 2. If the
practice were the yoke, then it was not on infants who were not urged to
pract^e but to suffer, specially taking in what Mr. B. before said, it was the
judgment and practice which the Doctrine did Teach which was the yoke. And to
his questions I say, the false Teachers Doctrine and the Disciples practice
were both in question, and both determined in the Synod, and therefore both
decreed against, and so the doctrine is the yoke in respect of the yoakers, and
the judgment and practice in respect of the yoaked.

4. Says Mr. B. It was the Church of Antioch and not the false Teachers that
sent to Jerusalem for resolution. 5. And it was to the brethren, and not to the
false Teachers that the Synod did direct their letters, and decrees: therefore
it was the Disciples practice that is more directly decreed against (or at
least as much) than the Doctrine of the Teachers.

Answ. Be the Conclusion granted, yet the Doctrine is decreed against, and
consequently is meant by the yoke v. 10. even according to Mr. Bs. argument,
That which the Synod did decree against was the yoke here meant. But does not
Mr. B. in these words plainly intimate that Disciples are the same with
brethren, to whom the letters were directed, which sure were not infants? It is
true the Church of Antioch, and not the false Teachers, sent to Jerusalem for
resolution, and that the letters were directed not to the false Teachers, but
brethren called believers, Acts 21. 25. yet they sent about the false Teachers
Doctrine, and the decree and speech were against that Doctrine: even as the
decrees or Canons of Councils are against the doctrine of Heretics though sent
to the Churches. From all which I infer that Mr. Bs. reasoning is frivolous,
and while he oppose^h i^, his own arguments prove, that the Doctrine of the
false Teachers is the yoke. But he has not yet done.

6. Says he, If it were granted as Mr. T. would have it, that it is only
putting on the yoke that is here expressly decreed against, and the yoke or
practice it self but only by consequence, then he would make this Synod so
weak as to leave the matter imperfect and obscure, which they were to determine
expressly: and perhaps it might put him hard to it to prove that consequence:
For it will not always follow that what may not be taught may not be practiced,
as I could show in several cases.

Answ. I hold the Synod to decree expressly against the yoke, understanding by
it the Doctrine of the necessity of Circumcision, the obligation and opinion of
its necessity, and the pu^ting of the yoke, that is the Teaching this Doctrine
to Disciples, and by consequence against the Gentiles believing Parents
practice of circumcising their Infants as of duty, nor do I know how any other
way Mr. B. can gather it from the Epistle of the Synod than as I do; sure in
all the Epistle I find not any other way to prove Gentile believers are not
bound to circumcise their children, but by urging the words v. 24. 28. 29 in
which parents are not discharged of circumcising infants expressly in so many
words, But by consequence. And yet the matter is not left imperfect or obscure,
but there is an express determination against that which was the occasion of
the Synod, to wit the Doctrine of the false Teachers, v. 24. nor is the
consequence hard to infer, if the Apostles give no command to the Gentile
parents to be circumcised* and to keep the Law, then parents are not tied to
circumcise their infants, there being no necessity or duty to them who have no
command or burden put on them. Mr. B. mistakes in conceivng I framed the
consequence thus: What the false Apostles might not teach, the parents might
not practice. And therefore though he could show in many more cases than he
can, that it will not always follow that what may not be taught may not be
practiced, the consequence as I frame it may be clear, and the determination of
the Synod express and perfect.

But he adds: 7. And me thinks we may be allowed to prove baptism of infants by
consequence: if this Synod assembled of purpose about Circumcision and the Law
did yet leave them nothing but consequence against it.

Answ. I never said, that the Synod left nothing but consequence against
Circumcision and the Law; nor did I disallow at any time the proving of infants
baprism by consequence, but have often declared the contrary, though Mr. M.
most unbrotherly charged me with it, page 3. of his Defense, but absolved me of
it, page 205. as I show in my Apology, sect. 11. and in my Praecursor, sect. 8.
But having so long expected some proof by consequence for infant baptism, and
finding upon trial in so many Authors as have occurred nothing worth the name
of a proof, I conclude there is no such thing, but that Paedobaptists, and none
more than Mr. B. do only gull the world, and which is more to be detested, the
godly, and of those, many that are teachers of others, with flourishes and
shows, instead of proof, in so much as some who are of able parts magnify his
book about infants baptism as excellent, whether it be out of rashness, or for
advantage sake to themselves, find it upon strictest examination to be but a
mere cheat.

But Mr. B. has one string more to his Bow. 5. Further, says he, that it was
Circumcision it self as needful, and as engaging to Moses Law, which is here
meant, is plain in Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3. No doubt either those that mis-taught the
Galatians were the same with those or their companions teaching the same
Doctrine, and therefore Paul there decideth the same cause; and mark what he
calls the yoke, Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free,
and be not entangled again with the yoke of bondage. Behold, I Paul say unto
you, that if ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify
again to every m^n that is circumcised, that he is a debtor to the whole Law.
Is not he wilful that yet will say, the yoke is only the Doctrine of the
false. Teachers, and not Circumcision as engaging to keep the Law.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. before p. 17. said, that it is evident the doctrine is not the
yoke; here when he says, Is not he wilful that yet will say that the yoke is
only the doctrine of the false Teachers? He does plainly intimate that he
excepts not against the holding the yoke to be the Doctrine, but the holding it
to be only the Doctrine of the false Teachers, which is me thinks to
contradict himself, and to overthrow what he contends for, to wit, the yoke is
that which was put on infants: but the Doctrine was not put on infants, and
therefore if the Doctrine were in part the yoke, and this not put on infants,
then the yoke was not put on infants, then it is not absurd for me to expound
the yoke of the Doctrine of the false Teachers, and his Arguments against that
Exposition are answered by his own concession. 2. If it be true, that either
those that mis-taught the Galatians were the same with these false Teachers,
Acts 15. 1. or their companions teaching the same Doctrine, then it is most
false which Mr. B. teaches, page 16. It was true, and good doctrine before
Christ, which these false Apostles taught, viz. that except they were
circumcised, and kept the Law, they could not be saved; I mea^ as to the Jews
it was true. Now the Doctrine of those that mis-taught the Galatians, was
justification by the Law, as appears by the Apostles opposition, Gal. 2. 16,
21. and 3. 5. 11, 18, 21. and 4. 21. and 5. 4. and this was the same with the
Doctrine of the false Teachers, as appears from Acts 15. 1, 9, 10, 11. and Mr.
B. confesses it to be the same. But that Doctrine the Apostle denies to have
been true and good before Christ to the Jews, Gal. 3. and 4. and elsewhere, and
therefore Mr. B. contradicts the Apostle, and his speech overthrows the Gospel,
and avows keeping of the Law necessary to justification and salvation, to have
been true and good Doctrine to the Jews before Christ. 3. He is not wilful but
considerate, that by the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1. understands not
Circumcision as acted on infants, that is the bare passive reception of
Circumcision, of which only infants are capable, no nor perhaps Vide Dr. Field
of the Church, l. 3 c. 1.
(for that is disputed) all willing receiving of Circumcision as the Habassi^e
Christians do, but the willing subjecting to Circumcision according to the
command of Moses, and the Doctrine of the Teachers that urged it as necessary
for justification and salvation. For herein, 1. they have many of the best sort
of Protestant Writers on their side* 2. They have these Reasons for them, 1.
Because the exhortation, Gal. 5 1. is inferred from his determination in the
precedent Chapter, from v 21* to the end, to wit, that the Covenant of the Law
did beget to bondage, and that they were children of the free woman, and
therefore the yoke of bondage is not simply Circumcision as acted, but as Mr.
Dicson expresses it, the yoke of the Covenant of Works and legal Ceremonies.
2. Because [ if ye be circumcised, v. 2.] is expounded rightly, if ye be
willingly circumcised, upon the opinion, and according to the Doctrine of the
false Teachers to seek justification thereby, as the reasons of the Apostle, v.
3. 4 do evidently show. 3. Otherwise Timothy might be said to be entanged with
the yoke of bondage when he was circumcised, Acts 16. 3. which being so, this
Argument (as all the rest of Mr. Bs. Arguments) is against him. For if the
false Teachers were the same, and the yoke the same, Acts 15. 10. Gal. 5. 1.
and the yoke, Gal. 5. 1. be not Circumcision as acted on infants, but the
Covenant of Works, and Circumcision as taught and yielded to by the circumcised
under the notion of necessity for justification, and obligation thereby to keep
the whole Law, then the yoke was not that which is put on infants, nor any
infants meant by Disciples, Acts 15. 10.

SECT. XIII.
The Arguments are vindicated, which are brought to prove infants not meant by
Disciples, Acts 15. 10.

BUt Mr. B. proceeds, Well, but Mr. T. has one argument for his conceit, and
but one that I have heard, and that is like the conceit it self. If (says he)
putting on the yoke be only by teaching, then the yoke it self is only the
Doctrine, and consequently it was to be put on none but those that could be
taught. Answ. 1. I deny both the Consequences, and he will never prove them.
For, 1. by [ putting] he confesses is meant [ an endeavor to put] therefore
it must be more than bare Doctrine. And if by Doctrine they persuade the People
of the necessity of practice in so doing, they put on them both the mis-belief
and the practice.

Answ. Mr. B. it seems either did not read, or not heed, or forgot what was in
Examen. page 135. when he says, he had heard but of one Argument for my
conceit, though it be his mere ignorance that makes him call it my conceit, as
if it were my peculiar conceit; whereas his own conceit is scarce any thing
older than himself, and mine agreeable to the Exposition of the best and elder
Interpreters. And however when Mr. B. wrote this he might know of no more
Arguments against his conceit, yet there are more i^ my Antidote, sect. 6. to
which with this here I shall review his Answers. My Argument in form is this,
They only are meant by Disciples, Acts 15 10. who were to be the subjects
passive or recipient of the act of the false Teachers whether effected or
attempted, that is of that which they would have done to them. But no infants
were to be the subjects passive or recipient of the act of the false Teachers
whether effected or attempted, that is of that which they would have done to
them. Ergo. The major is plain to common understanding, according to all Rules
of Logic and Grammar. So we argue, they must be meant by all men, John 12. 32.
when Christ says, I will draw all men to me, who were the subjects recipient
of the act of drawing. Every particular man is not the subject of Christ's
drawing, therefore [ all men] does not note every particular man. Innumerable
such Arguments are among Writers Ecclesiastical and Civil, nor is there any
thing more plain to common understanding The minor is proved thus: the only
act of the false Teachers by which the yoke was to be put on Disciples was
teaching, or that which they would have done to them was only teaching. But of
this act no infant was the passive subject. Ergo. The former is confessed by
himself in calling it persuading, and if it were not, the Text proves it, v. 1.
5* 24* The minor is manifest, they were neither capable of it, nor were the
false Teachers so senseless as to endeavor it. But let us view Mr. Bs. Answer.
He denies this consequence, if the putting on the yoke be only by teaching,
then the yoke it self is only the Doctrine. But this is not my consequence,
but this, if their act of putting on the yoke were only Teaching then the
terminus, at least immediate, must be Doctrine in respect of the agent, and in
respect of the patient learning, as if the act of the Sun be Teaching, the
immediate terminus is heat, although other effects follow, as dryness or the
like; so if the false Teachers did put the yoke on the Disciples by Teaching,
they did put Doctrine on them, and if they received it they learned that
Doctrine, although other effects followed, as disquietnes of mind, etc. which
may be comprehended under the metaphor of a yoke. By Teaching parents, an
infant is not cut or cicumcised, no not though the parents receive the
Doctrine, he may have no child to circumcise, or no strength, or the like: no
though it come to pass that the child be circumcised, yet this is not done by
the false Teacher, but by the parent. If then their act was only teaching,
then the product result or terminus must be Doctrine, though there were other
consequents to follow. But Mr. B. denies also this consequence, that if the
yoke were only doctrine, it was put on none but those that could be taught.
Whereto I reply, he may as well deny the Snow to be white, as deny it: Can any
put Doctrine but on Persons that can be taught? What is this but to hold that a
Person may have Doctrine put on him, that cannot be taught, which is a mere
contradiction, all one as to say, He may be taught that cannot be taught. But
he will forsooth give us some Reason of his denial as wise as the rest. For, 1.
by [ putting] he confesses is meant [ an endeavor to put] therefore it must
be more than the bare doctrine. Answ. 1. I confess not by [ putting] is meant [
an endeavor to put] though I confess that Peter accu^eth them only of their
endeavor to put the yoke. 2. If I had confessed it, yet Mr. Bs. Reason is
foolish, for it would rather follow, that it is less than bare Doctrine, the
endeavor to put being less than putting. Yet it is not true that I said, The
yoke notes bare Doctrine, without any other effect, but that the yoke notes
doctrine, command, opinion of obligation, and necessity, and perhaps
disquietness, trouble, care, fear consequent. However they that put the yoke by
teaching did put doctrine on whom they put the yoke, the putting the yoke being
nothing but teaching. That which follows, And if by doctrine they prevail to
persuade the people of the necessity of practice in so doing, they put on them
the both the mis-belief and mis-practice, is as little to purpose. For, 1. to
put on them the misbelief is to put on them the doctrine, for doctrine is put
on by being learned or believed.

2. They that do prevail do put on the mispractice it may be in the event, but
not barely by their putting on their doctrine, for it may be they may both
teach, and that effectually, so as that the person do learn or mis-believe, and
yet not mis-practice through many intervenient impediments, yea though he do
mis-practice, yet the mis-practice is not the terminus of his teaching, nor is
he the mis-practicer, it is not his act logically or physically, though it be
his morally, that is, the fault of it be imputed to him, as arising from the
Doctrine be taught. However if it be by persuading and by producing mis-belief
and mis-practice, they only are the subjects of it who mis-believe and mis
practice, which being not verified of infants, they are not meant by Disciples,
on whom the yoke is put.

But Mr. B. gives a Reason of his denial of the latter consequence, and it is
this, 2. The latter consequence is as false; For he that persuades a parent to
circumcise himself, and his child, does as properly put that burden of
Circumcision on the child as on the parent. Though he teach only the parent,
yet by teaching the parent he puts the burden on both.

Answ. 1. If the putting the yoke be Teaching or persuading, sure he only is
the subject of his putting the yoke, who is the subject of his Teaching, (as if
we say the killing there was wounding by the sword, it folows he was not there
said to be killed who was not wounded by the sword) though it may be true also
that another agent by another act may put the burden on one not taught. 2. But
were Mr. Bs. speech true, yet it is nothing to his wi^less denial of the later
consequence, for the consequence is thus, if the yoke were only Doctrine it
was put on none but those that could be taught, which may be undeniable, though
it be granted, that he that Teaches only tho parents, yet puts the burden
both on parent and child. 3. Yea Mr. B. does grant it by supposing that he
Teaches only the parent, that Doctrine is put only on the parent. For what
is it to put Doctrine on any but to Teach him? And therefore if the yoke were
only Doctrine, sure it was put on none but such as could be taught, unless we
imagine that Doctrine can be put on those that cannot be taught, which is all
one in my apprehension as to say they may be taught who cannot be taught. And
therefore if there be any silly wranglings in the dispute between us, sure Mr.
B. does wrangle here either as a silly man or as a most perverse man in denying
this consequence, and in his whole arguings about this Text, when confessing
the yoke to be not only the Doctrine but the judgment and practice also of
Circumcision, and that the false Teachers would put it only by Teaching, yet
does imagine he can persuade his reader to be so silly as to conceive that they
did any thing to infants or that infants are any of those Disciples mentioned
Acts 15. 10.

And here I shall enforce the arguments of my Antidote sect. 6. The first is ad
hominem. He counts it a heinous offense that I take the word [holy 1 Cor. 7.
14.] in a different sense than it is used six hundred times in the Scripture,
and yet ^e takes the word [ Disciple] used three hundred times in the New
Testament, and of those about one hundred in Lukes writings for one that is a
Disciple by owning a Teacher and his Doctrine, in another sense o^ rather
nonsense acception for one that is a Disciple in title, incomplete, without
actual learning for present, that is for a mere relative without a foundation,
and brings no place in any Author for this sense but this, and therefore I may
more justly use his conju^ing speech p. 83. requiring men that are not of
desper (...) resolutions and prostituted consciences to consider faithfully how
they can answer the Lord Christ for perverting so solemn an institution as that
is Matthew. 28. 19. by their baby sprinkling, when the very words of Christ,
practice of the Apostles, constant use of the word [Disciples] throughout the
New Testament, common consent of Interpreters shows Christ appointed Disciples
only to be baptized ordmarily, who were made such by preaching the Gospel,
upon pretense that infants are called [ Disciples Acts 15. 10] in a sense
different from what Luke uses it elsewhere even in the precedent and following
chapters, and that sense or rather nonsense selfcontradicting acception devised
of late by Mr. B. without any ancient Author I know, or any reason from the
Text. That which Mr. B. replies is as frivolous. 1. He says infants are called
Disciples Acts. 11. 26. They are there part of Christians and Disciples; but
this is false there is not a word in the Text that soundes to this sense, that
infants are any part of the Christians or Disciples there mentioned, yea there
is that which is plainly to the contrary v. 29. Then the Disciples, every
manaccording to his ability, determined to send relief to the brethren. If
every one of the Disciples determined to send, and no infants determined to
send relief, then no infants are part of the Disciples. 2 Says he, the case is
not alike, In 1. Cor. 7. 14. I argued about the meaning of the word [ holy]
here we are agreed about the sense, that it signifies one so related to Christ
as their ^aster, the difference is about the application of this term. But this
is false that I agree with him about the signification and sense of the word [
Disciple of Christ] as it notes a relation to Christ as Teacher, yea I utterly
deny it notes such a relation as Mr. B. fancies in title without actual
learning or owning Christ as Teacher, in which sense it is no where taken in
Scripture or any Ancient Author I know. 3. Says he, However I am certain, if
we have not the name elsewhere, yet we have the description and names of the
same signification, they are Church members, Gods people, his servants, and
therefore Disciples. Answ. 1. This does not at all avoid his own charge of
prostituted consciences, etc. in another case, he charged these things on me
for using the word [ holy] in a different sense from what elsewhere it is used,
though I brought a term of the same signification Mal. 2. 15* and cogent reason
out of the Text for my interpretation, and therefore by his own Law to me, he
is to be charged as he charge me for doing the same, though it were true he
had the description and names of the same signification. 2. It is not proved,
no nor can be proved, the terms [ Churchmembers, Gods people, Gods servants] to
be of the same signification with [ Disciples of Christ] 3. There is no: so
much as one Text in the New Testament, which alone is written in Greek by the
Holy Penmen, and therefore the fittest if not the only way to show the
meaning of a New Testament term, brought to prove infants under the New
Testament to be caled Churchmembers, Gods people, Gods servants.

4. The consequence shall be examined in that which follows.

Besides I argued from the Text, the putting the yoke on the necks of the
Disciples is the same with that which is mentioned v. 1. they taught the
brethren, and v. 5. they said it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the Law of Moses, and v. 24. certain which went out from
us have troubled you with words, subverting your souls, saying ye must be
circumcised and keep the Law. Now is any man so senseless as to think they did
these things to infants? Again the Text. v. 1. 23. calls the Disciples v. 10.
brethren, says v. 9. their hearts were purified by faith upon the hearing of
the word, which none but those that are resolved to outface a plain truth would
aver to be meant of infants, therefore neither the term Disciples, v. 10 fi^h
what is said of the brethren is meant of the Disciples v. 10. To this all the
reply I find in Mr. B. is this page 252. And your bringing some passages of the
chapter not applicable to infants does not prove that therefore the rest is
not, no more than several passages in Deuteronomy. 29. applicable only to the aged,
will prove little ones were not taken in to be Gods people.

Answ. It is true, the bringing some passages of the chapter not applicable to
infants does not prove that therefore the rest is not: if I had made such an
Argument I would give him leave to use his Rhetoric of silly insipid arguings.
But my arguing is this, The same thing which is expressed, v. 10. by putting
the yoke on the necks of the Disciples, is expressed v. 1. by teaching the
brethren, v. 5. by saying to them it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the Law of Moses, v 24. by troubling with words,
subverting their souls, saying, ye must be circumcised and keep the Law, and
the same persons which are expressed by Disciples, v. 10. are termed v. 1.
Brethren, are said v. 9. to have their hearts purified by faith, v. 19. those
of the Gentiles that were turned to God, v. 23. Brethren of the Gentiles; But
these things were not done to infants, nor infants comprehended under these
persons, in these places, which express the same thing, and the same person,
which is apparent by the narration, Peter reprehends the same thing in the same
persons, v. 10. which is related v. 1, 5, 23, 24. the occasion of his speech
was the same fact, the drift of his speech is to condemn the same fact, the
determination of the Council is against the same practice, the same persons are
in all these places spoken of, and this is proved by Mr. Bs. first Argument,
who brings v. 1, 5, 24. to prove Circumcision to be the yoke, v. 10. which
Argument supposes the same persons and things meant, v. 10. which are meant,
v. 1, 5, 24. But not one of the things said there is applicable to infants. How
then can any man imagine that the same act being meant in all the places, it
should be meant of the act of Circumcision, v. 10. and not v. 1, 5, 24. and the
same persons meant, they should be infants meant, v. 10. and not v. 1, 5, 24?
Is not this to make the same act and the same persons not the same, which is a
contradiction? I know not how men conceive of my intellectuals: But I am still
possessed of this to be so good proof, that I should as soon doubt of other
common notions as of this, and as soon believe that the Moon is made of green
Cheese, as believe Mr. B. affirming that Peter meant infants by Disciples, Acts
15. 10.

I added further, if the putting on the yoke had been Circumcision, it had been
to be done not on their necks but elsewhere, the yoke was put not on their
flesh, but on their consciences, their souls are said to be subverted, their
minds troubled, v. 24. not their flesh pained by the putting on the yoke, it
was done by words, v. 24. not by a knife or such like instrument. Again, the
yoke v. 10. was such as neither the present Jews nor their fathers were able to
bear: but Circumcision put on infants was tolerable. I argued also that Christ's
doctrine is called his yoke, Matthew. 11. 29. I alleged the testimonies of Pisc.
sch. on Acts 15. 10. Grot. Annot. in Acts 15. 10. calling it the Law and
Doctrine, that the yoke of bondage, Gal. 5. 1. is the Doctrine or Covenant of
the Law, which genders to bondage, Gal. 4. 21, 24. That Circumcision is not the
yoke without subjection of mind or opinion to it, which are not verified of
infants. These things he says are answered already, but where I know not: if
he mean in his Argument before, he may see his Cannon turned against himself.

I said, all the color Mr. B. has from this Text to prove infants disciples,
is by conceiving the yoke to note barely and precisely the cutting off a little
skin. To this he answers, I must say it is but one of your fictions. Did you
over hear me talk of such a thing? Cutting that skin is not Circumcision, as
the word is used for a Sacrament. The end, signification, and engagement go
into the definition of Circumcision. And if from hence you would infer, that it
is only the aged that are capable of signification and engagement, you may
strait conclude that no infant was ever circumcised.

I reply, it is no fiction of mine, but a truth, whether Mr. B. talked or
thought of it or no, that all the color, that is show of reason Mr. B. has
from this Text to prove infants Disciples, is in taking the yoke for the
cutting off a little skin. For his proof is from what was done or endeavored to
be done to infants; but that was only the cutting the little skin. Mr. B.
would have the yoke to be actual Circumcision, or Circumcision as acted, and
that was nothing but the cutting off the little skin. It is true, Circumcision
in the users is more than the cutting off the little skin, there is the end,
signification, and intended engagement, but as infants receive it, as it is
acted on infants, the yoke can be no more than the loss of the skin and the
soreness following, they neither are taught, nor discern the end, signification
or engagement, and Circumcision as it includes these is as I say in my Antidote
Circumcision not as acted on infants, but taught persons of years; nor was it
my objection that Circumcision as a Sacrament was only the cutting off a
little skin, but as it was acted on infants, and the imagined ^oke endeavored
to be put on infants Acts 15. 10. which sure Peter never blamed them for, and
therefore it is not the yoke there meant. Mr. Bs. talk of Circumcision as a
Sacrament, and what is the definition of it as a Sacrament, as it leads to a
dispute about the notion of a word not found in Scripture, so being besides the
present business, I shall let it pass.

Lastly I added, that if it were granted that the term [ Disciples Acts 15. 10]
noted infants, then only male infants, for they only were to be circumcised,
therefore female infants should not be thence proved Disciples, nor to be
baptized. To this he answers, That is as much as I needed, when my position was
that some infants are Disciples and to be baptized. I reply, It is not as much
as he needed, unless he understood his position only of some male infants. 2.
Says he, I should hence prove, that if males are Disciples, then certainly
females, both being Church Members till Christ, though but one circumcised. I
reply, 1. It is more than he can prove that those who were Church Members in
the Jewish Church are Disciples of Christ in the New Testament to be baptized.
2. If he could prove it, yet not from Acts 15. 10. it being certain no more can
be proved thence to be Disciples, than are there called Disciples, which Mr. B.
himself will not say of female infants. I conclude still, that in this arguing
of Mr. B. I find nothing but froward, and, I had almost said, impudent
wrangling against a plain truth, that the Disciples Acts 15. 10. were only the
brethren converted, and the yoke the Doctrine the false Teachers would have put
upon them, and the reader, of whosoever education or tu^^^age, if he be not
otherwise blinded, may perceive with his own eyes the slightiness of Mr. Bs.
arguings, and how superficially he has handled this business. I go on to
review the next, which is no better.

SECT. XIV.
Infants discipleship is not proved by Mr. B. from Lev. 25 41, 42. which speaks
of the Israelites being Gods servants.

MY second Argument, says Mr. B. to prove that some infants are Disciples, is
this, If no infants are Disciples, then it is either because they are not
capable, or else because God will not show them such a mercy; But neither of
these can be the cause; Therefore that no infants are Disciples is false
Doctrine. Mr. T. to this gave this Answer [ that the reason why they are not
Disciples is because they have not learned.]

Answ. It is true, in the dispute at Bewdley finding Mr. Bs. vein of disputing
to run upon a captious way of endeavoring to bring me to such absurdities ^n
appearance as would stir up passions in hearers against me as lessening Gods
mercy to their infants, and then aggravating these imagined absurdities,
turning to the people with his wonted exclamations, and other Rhetoric
(whereby he has befooled not only those parts, but a great number of shallow
heads throughout the Land) which I found to be his course in his first argument
in chapter 6. now printed to prove his Ordinance of visible Church Membership of
infants unrepealed, with which he began, when he should have first proved such
an Ordinance and its continuing in force out of Scripture, it being an indirect
way, though popular and taking, to prove a thing done by God, because we
conceive it fit to be done, and having been tired with answering three or four
hours his long hypothetical Syllogismes, and those sometimes brought to prove an
hypothetical proposition, contrary to the use of schools, not allowing me to
ask a question for clearing his terms, neither allowing me time to consider of
his reasonings, nor at first liberty of repeating, I did thus answer to this
argument, hoping though (...) vain to reduce him to a proof of infants of
Discipleship from the notation or use of the word, which is the only genuine
and clear way of proving infants to be Disciples; ordinarily to be baptized,
according to the institution Matthew. 28. 1^.

But, alas, says Mr. B. that such an answer should satisfy such a man! I
reply, Alas, that such an answer should not satisfy such a man! Is this any
third cause says Mr. B.

Answ. What need any man assign any cause at all why infants are not
Disciples, but because the term [Disciple] agrees not to them? If Mr. B. should
prove in like manner infants to be believers, what need the respondent show any
other cause than this, that they have not faith? so even since Mr. B. himself
acknowledges the term Disciple page 92. to have its denomination from the act
of learning, it is a sufficient* yea the most direct and proper way to show
infants not Disciples, because they have not the act of learning, which (...).
B. should have overthrown if he would have proved, as he should, infants to be
Disciples. But then he might have been hindered in his vagaries and popular
discourses, which with his Rhetorical exclamations were that he most minded to
use, and been brought to discover his nonsense acception of the word [
Disciple.] But says he, or is it not evidently reducible to one of the former?
For if their unlearnedness hinder them from being Disciples, either it must be
because it makes them or shows them incapable, or because God will not show
the unlearned so great mercy.

Answ. It is neither because unlearnedness makes or shows them incapable,
nor because God will not show them that mercy: But because what ever their
capacity be, or Gods intent toward them, they have not yet that which alone
denominates Disciples. If his disjunction were good he should prove that
capacity of a title, or Gods intention of showing mercy, without actual
learning or professing Christ, is enough to denominate a person a Disciple of
Christ, which is so manifestly contrary to all the use of the word in the new
Testament, and to expositors of Matthew. 28. 29. that I am now bold to say, that
it is no better than height of impudence after so evident proof to maintain so
gross an absurdity. But I am necessitated to follow Mr. B. in his vagaries.

1. If infants, says Mr. B. are capable of being Gods servants, then they are
capable of being Disciples. For as they signify here the same thing and denote
the same sort of persons, so there is the same capacity requisite to both: or
if you will make a difference, there is more required to a servant than to a
Disciple. But infants are capable of being Gods servants: this is plain; For
the Lord God himself does call them his servants, Levit. 25. 41. 42. they are
commanded in the year of Iubile to let their brother that was sold to them, and
his children, depart; and the reason is added [for they are my servants] that
infants are here included among [his children] cannot be denied or doubted of
(Mr. T. began to deny it, but he quickly recalled it) Is not here then
direction enough to help us to judge of the mind of God, whether infants are
his servants and Disciples or no? Does not God call them his servants himself?
what more should a man expect to warrant him to do so? men call for plain
Scripture, and when they have it they will no^ receive it; so hard is it to
inform a forestalled mind. It may be some may say, They were then capable of
being Gods servants, but they are not so now. But this were a wretched answer.
For their capacity was the same then and now: Infants then were like infants
now.

Answ. It is certain that the term [ servants of God] is not always equipollent
to [ a Disciple of Christ.] For Jer. 43. 10. Nebuchadnezzar is called Gods
servant, and the heavens, Psalm. 119. 91. But then when it is taken in the sense
the Apostle uses it, Romans 6. 16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey, and
therefore unless he means by [ servants of God] men voluntarily obeying the
Gospel, yea and visibly appearing so to do, I shall deny his consequence, and
his dictates, that either Acts 15. 10. or Matthew. 28. 19. a Disciple and a
servant of God in his sense signify the same thing, or denote the same sort of
persons. And if more be required to a servant than a Disciple, it follows that
a person may be a Disciple and yet not a servant of God, and so the terms are
not reciprocal, and his consequence so much the more infirm. As for his minor
it is denied, understanding it of capacity of infants while infants in an
ordinary way, and of being Gods servants in the sense used Romans 6 16. in which
alone it is equipollent to a Disciple. As for the Text Levit. 25. 41, 42.
though it be plain Scripture, yet there is nothing plain or obscure in it for
Mr. Bs. purpose, to prove that the infants of believers of the Gentiles now are
Gods servants in a sense equipollent to a Disciple, Matthew. 28. 19. For. 1. the
passage is meant only of Hebrews, as Exodus 21. 2. is expressed, and the Text
it self shows it. 1. From v. 55. where it is said, unto me the children of
Israel are servants, they are my servants whom I brought out of the Land of
Egypt, in which are two discriminating notes differencing them from others, 1.
That they were the children of Israel descended from Jacob by natural
generation, 2. that they were brought out of the Land of Egypt by God. 2. v.
44. 45. do explain it, where God allows them to take Bondslaves of the Vide
Seldom de jure na^. etc. l. 6. c. 8.
heathen that were round about them, and of the children of the strangers that
did sojourn among them, which is the description of Proselytes of the Gate,
that is, such as acknowledged the God of Israel, but did not submit to
Circumcision, and the observation of Moses Law, of which sort was Cornelius,
Acts 10. 2. Such an ones children were not Gods servants in the sense there
meant. Yea, Ainsworth in his Annot. on v. 42. cites Maimony resolving that an
Israelites children begotten on a Canaanitish bondwoman are but Canaanites in
every respect, not Gods servants in the sense there meant. 2. What is said
there is said not only of Infants but also of Parents, yea though they were
idolaters, as those that worshipped the golden Calf, or joined themselves to
Baal Peor, or who hardened their hearts, and could not enter into Canaan for
unbelief, Heb. 3. 18, 19. even the wo^st of them with whom God was not well
pleased, which were not true of servants of God in a sense equipollent to a
Disciple of Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. 3. Diodati expresses in his Annot. on Lev.
25. 42* in what sense they are called Gods servants, to wit, in as much as none
could get sovereign Dominion over them to prejudice his, therefore they are
there called Gods servants in this respect only, in that they were to be
disposed of not as men would, but as he would, who had right to them by his
purchase, in bringing them out of Egypt. So that they are called Servants of
God, in that place, not out of any either voluntary obedience to his Precepts,
or peculiar right to visible Church Membership, but in respect of Gods
sovereignty over them to dispose of them as Hebrews, which was not belonging to
believers or their children, or other Nations not joined to the policy of the
Hebrews. And therefore I still say, Mr. B. does but trifle as a man that
superficially looks over a Text, when he talks so vainly as he does of
direction enough to help us to judge of Gods mind, whether Infants are his
Servants and Disciples or no. Nor is it true which he says, that the capacity
is the same then and now. For though infants then were like infants now, yet
the judicial Laws of Moses, and the peculiar condition of the Hebrews is not
now as then.

But he goes on. May I not make this a third Argument of it self? If God call
Infants his Servants, though they can do him no service, then we may call them
so too: for we may speak as God does: but God does call them so; therefore we
may.

Answ. The Conclusion is granted: he may call Hebrew infants Gods servants in
the sense meant, Lev. 25. 41. But if he call the children of Gentile-believers
Servants of God in a sense equipollent to a Disciple, Matthew. 28. 19. He must
bring better warrant than that Text, or else I shall deny it, slighting his
vain censure of a forestalled mind, and conceiving rather it verisied of
himself. As the Man thinks, so the Bell tinketh.

Again, says Mr. B. If God call Infants his Servants, though they are
incapable at present of doing him service, then we may call them Disciples,
though at present they are incapable of learning. But God does so call them;
therefore we may, etc.

Answ. If God call infants his servants according to the Apostles description
of a servant, Romans 6. 16. then I confess infants may be called Christ's
Disciples, but not if only according to the sense of Lev. 25. 41.

Mr. B. goes on. Has he a good wit now or a bad mind, that can raise a dust
for the darkning of so express and plain a Text? and yet still call for
Scripture proof? I will deal faithfully in telling you Mr. T. his answer to
this* and that upon deliberation, in his Sermon after the Dispute. 1. He
distinguishes of Servants of God de ^ure and de facto. 2. Between Servants
actively and passively; and says, that here the term Servant is meant
passively and not actively, that is, such as God uses: and that they are
called Servants here in no other sense than the Heavens and the Earth are,
Psalm 119. 89, 90. They are thy Servants; Are they therefore Disciples? (says
he) what ridiculous arguing is this? So Mr. T. O what cause have we all to look
to the tenderness of our consciences in time, before engagement in a sinful
cause has benumbed them, and made the Word of God to be of no force to us? I
know shallow brains are incapable to discern the weakness of the silliest
Answer: they go that way as their affection does bias them: their approbation
of an Argument or Answer is no credit to it. But let any man of a tolerable
understanding, and conscience not seared, but weigh-seriously this Answer, and
I dare warrant he will think it a bad cause that must be underpropt by such
palpable abuse of Scripture.

Answ. I loath to take notice of such base insinuations, far unworthy of a
christian brother or an ingenuous scholar, but that thereby Mr. B. has more
prevailed to hinder the entertainment of the truth I maintain, than by any
arguments he has brought. And were it not that the Law of Charity forbids me
to put the worst construction on things, I see so much as might move me to
retort upon himself his insinuations against me, as if I had a bad mind, and a
seared conscience, and a bad cause, and that I darken so express and plain a
Text, and so palpably abuse Scripture because of my answer about this Text. I
will not deny him to have a good wit, nor impute to him a shallow brain, I wish
his judgment were as good as his fancy, and that with his quickness of
apprehension he had more considerateness in his determinations, and especially
about the meaning of Scripture; if it were so, the Church of God might have
much more benefit by his labors than it has, nor would his polemick writings
especially, have so many crudities in them as there are. As for this present
business I think that intemperate zeal to the cause he thinks good has so
transported him that he shows much want both of ingenuity of spirit, and
clearness of understanding, which he has in other writings, and that however
he does often pretend love to me, yet his gall does so overflow when ever he
speaks of me, that he can neither give aright interpretation of what I do, nor
of what I say. But to the matter. I had said in my Sermon, and in my Antidot
sect. 4. that what is said Levit. 25. 41. is nothing to our children, it being
spoken peculiarly of Hebrew children. To this in his reply page 182. 248. he
tells me. 1. The Jews infants were infants, and our dispute you know was of
the species.

Answ. The Jews infants were infants its true, and so were the Canaanites
infants, yet not servants of God, as Levit. 25. 41* is meant. 2. The dispute
was not as it was first managed between me and Mr. M. nor as it was by Mr. Bs:
first argument borught to an issue, of the species, whether any infants
indefinitely or any ones infants whatsoever were to be called Disciples of
Christ and to be baptized, but whether the infants of believers, of whom his
meaning is in his first argument, however he make his position, that some
infants are to be baptized. 3. whatever his position were, yet his words in
his Epistle to the people of Kederminster were that God says our children are
Gods servants, which is palpably false, he saying it of the Hebrews children as
such; and not of ours.

2. says he, I have proved that our privileges are greater than theirs (and
you deny it not) and that this was not perculiar to them.

Answ. if it be granted that our previleges are greater than theirs, yet it is
but in some respects, and therefore there is no good argument, if it be
confessed God shows more mercy to our children therefore he gives them every
such privilege as the Jews had. God shows mercy to ministers of the Gospel more
than to the Priests of the Jews, yet it follows not, our children must have
such privileges of continuance in office, inheritance and c. as they had. That
what is said Levit. 25. 41. was peculiar to the Hebrews, is so clearly proved,
that it has a show of impudence to deny it. 3. says he, it proves that there
is nothing in the age to make them incapable, or else the Jews infants would
have been incapable.

Answ. It proves that there is nothing in the age to make them incapable of
being Gods servants in the sense of Levit. 25. 41. But it proves not that they
are capable of being Gods servants ordinarily as the title is used Romans 6. 16.
and is equipollent to a Disciple, Matthew. 28. 19.

But says he, How have the believing Jews lost this privilege or Proselytes of
the Gentiles?

Answ. 1. This privilege was belonging to the unbelieving Jews while it
continued, as well as the believing. 2. If it be lost (as I think it is) it is
lost by the dissolving the judicial Laws of Moses, and the national policy the
Jews had.

But says he, where you talk of servants in this sense and that sense, they
were so servants as to be visible Church-menbers, and that is all that I
contest for. They were reckoned among Moses Disciples, and so are ours to be
among Christ's Disciples or Christians (as Moses Disciples also in some sort
were Christ's Disciples.)

Answ. The sense in which the Jews children were called Gods servants is not
all one with to be visible Church Members, nor Moses Diciples, as is proved
above where the genuine sense is showed. But to the distinctions I used in my
Sermon and Antidote, I deny not that I used both distinctions, and they are
usual in schools. The former is used by the Author of the New annot. on Deuteronomy.
22. 24. the later is common, in the differencing of active and passive scandal,
Conversion taken actively and passively, Mr. B. himself, p. 81. distinguishes
of being sanctified actively and passively. But he thinks the application to be
a palpable abuse of Scripture. For, 1. He (meaning me) says they were servants
of God de jure, but not de facto, in right, out not in deed. But a servant is a
relation, that is the form of it, servus est Domini servus. And have they only
a right to this relation? who then or what hinders them from possessing the
relation which they have right to? Is it not God that gives them right to this
relation? And is not that to give them the relation it self? I would he would
tell us what more he gives them that have th^^ elationo it self de facto, (
for I suppose he dare not interpret it of a future right.)

Answ. I said in my Sermon as Mr. B. has printed it page: 181. that the meaning
is not that infants are actually servants, but in right, to me, he does not
speak what they did, but of Gods right and interest he had in them: which is so
plain a truth that I supposed he could not have sound any matter of exception.
But Mr. B. is so quarelsome with me that he will either find or make a Knot in
a Bulrush. 1. He renders de facto in deed, as if I had said, they had relation
of right, but not in deed, that is not in possession: whereas my meaning was
plainly expressed, they were not actually servants in respect of what they did,
or in respect of the act or fact of service. 2. he misunderstands it as if I
spoke of their being servants of right, that they had the right of being Gods
servants so as to claim it as a privilege on their part, whereas I meant it and
expressed it in respect of Gods right and interest in them, though I deny not
the other to follow. To his questions I answer. They have a right and
possession of that relation, and it is given them by God with the relation, and
to those that have the relation in fact, or as I spoke actually in respect of
what they did. God gives this more to them that are his servants by reason of
his right in them, that they have actual obedience to him, according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 6. 16. His servants ye are to whom ye obey.

2. Says Mr. B. whether they are servants actively or passively is nothing to
the being or form of the relation; they are servants of God still. And it seems
by this answer, that if God had called infants Disciples never so often Mr. T.
would have put God off with this distinction, and said, they are Disciples
passively, but not actively. For 3. What reason can he give why they may not be
called Disciples in a passive sense as well as servants? 4. Does not God bid
his Apostles baptize those that were Disciples without distinguishing? or does
he bid them baptize active Disciples, but not passive ones? Where is that
distinction in the command?

Answ. Mr. B. is so inured to his spiteful language, that my giving him an
answer to his objection and clearing the words Lev. 25. 41. is termed by him
putting off God with a distinction, as if I answered God, and not Mr. B. But to
the matter. 1. Though servants actively and passively may be both called
servants, as a slave bought with money, but sick and weak, who never did
service actually, may be called his Lords servant, because at his dispose, yet
not univocally, as they speak in Logic, in comparison of him that does
actually service, because he is a servant but in one respect, whereas he that
is a servant not only by being at his Lords dispose for his Lord to assign
what he will for him, because of his propriety in him, but also does service
actively for his Lord, is in a double respect a servant, of which the later is
that which is principal, and from which the denomination is primarily and
principally taken, as the relation of a son is principally from generation,
though analogically in some respect an adopted son have that title. 2. But were
it supposed the term did univocally agree to both, yet the question being
whether Infants be Disciples, and the argument being brought from the title of
Gods servants to prove them Disciples, the term [ Servants of God] passively
taken for one that does not voluntarily any service to God, but only is at
Gods dispose, is not as much as [ a Disciple of Christ] which signifies one
that has learned Christ, and professes himself to follow his teaching. And so
it is a clear answer, that infants are not proved to be Christ's Disciples by
being proved to be passively Gods servants, except they be also proved to be
actively such, and that (...) obeying the Gospel, and professing that
obedience. What ever seems to Mr. B. (whose imaginations of me are still to the
worst) If I had found God call once Infants Disciples in the sense, Matthew. 28.
19. I should quickly have yielded there is no need of such a distinction of
active or passive Disciple, si^h I find the title given to none but such as
are actual learners, and that is a reason why Infants may not be called
Disciples in a passive sense as well as Gods servants. For use is the rule of
understanding words, and Christ bids us baptize only Disciples that are actual
learners, and profess Christ their Master, as appears both by Christ's words,
Mark 16. 16. in which he expresses that by [ he that believeth] which he did
Matthew. 28. 19. by [ a Disciple] and by the practice of the Apostles, who best
understood Christ's precept, and by the constant use of the word [ Disciple] in
the New Testament, as is proved above. Nor needs there be any such distinction
of active and passive Disciple in the command, because the word [ Disciple] is
not used passively, though [ Servant of God] be.

5. Says Mr. B. But I shall be bold to take it for one of Mr. T. his fictions,
and a mere falsehood, that Infants are here called Servants passively only,
till he have done somewhat to prove it; to which end he has not spoken one
word, as thinking it seems that he spoke to men that will take his word. Why
may they not be called Servants from the mere interest of Dominion that God
has to them? and authority over them? Are Infants the Kings Subjects or
Servants in a passive sense only? Is it not foundation enough for the relation
of a servant, if God will own them so, and number them with his family of mere
grace, though he should make no use of them at all? or if there must be more:
may they not be called so, as being destinated to his service for the future?
And so they may have the relation before the service; which is common with
those men that buy children with their parents for their future service. So
Eccl. 2. 7. read it.

Answ. How egregiously does Mr. B. trifle, who expects I should prove, who was
but the Respondent, and that also which is apparent to common sense, that
infants are not servants of God actively in obeying his precepts, or as I said
in my Sermon, in freely and voluntarily giving service to God and doing what he
(...)s, who neither know nor hear Gods precepts, and looks I should prove what
he agrees with me in! For when I said in^^^ts are servants from Gods right and
interest in them, though they do no service, Mr. B. as if I said no such thing
pu^s many importinent questions to me, as if he would by them know my mind in
that which I had plainly though more briefly expressed, to wit that the Jews
infants were Gods servants. 1. Of right, because God had a right, propriety or
perculiar interest in them, he had purchased them otherwise than he had done
other people. 2. Passively, so as that their bodies and liberties were at his
dispose, not allowing men to dispose of them, as he did to dispose of others.
As for the question may they not be so called as destinated to his service for
the future? I conceive not; destination to his service for the future does not
either there or any where else that I know, give denomination to a servant as
actually such: no^ does I think any thing in the Text lead us to such a reason
of the denomination, but to that which I have set down. And to his question,
Are infants the Kings Subjects or servants in a passive sense only? I answer,
yes, while they are infants, and should question his intellectuals that should
deny it; and when he calls it my fiction and mere falsehood, that infants are
here called servants passively only, it seems prejudice against me makes him
count that a fiction and falsehood in my mouth, which is current enough when it
comes from his own pen. But Mr. B. is not yet reconciled to me, there is more
anger yet behind. For thus he speaks.

6. But the grossest is yet behind, (as the worst error is still at last, and
the further a man goes out of his way the further he goes amiss) would any man
think that such a man as Mr. T. can possibly believe that infants are called
Gods servants in no other sense than the Heavens and Earth are?

Answ. May I not take up the Poets words, Tantaene animis coelestibus irae? Is
Mr. B. so waspish as to be still humming and buzzing about my ears, and
stinging me with his mis-representations. It Is true, to show that the term [
servant of God] is not equipollent to [ a Disciple of Christ] I instanced in Ps
l. 119. 91. where the Heaven and the earth are called Gods servants in a
passive sense, but my words (as he himself printed them) are not, infants are
called Gods servants in no other sense than the Heavens a^^ earth are: yea I
mentioned Nebuchadnezzar called Gods servant Jerem. 43. 10. after the
allegation of Psalm. 119. 91. And yet if I had said so I know no error in it,
much less gross erour, or grossest of all. But Mr. B. asks placet. Well! room
for Mr. B. Let me a little reason this case, says he, 1. Are the Heavens only
passive servants of God? Is that good Philosophy? Answ. Since Mr. B. is either
in his reasoning or posing vein, I shall enforce my self with what patience I
can to read his childing Lecture, and to answer his questions, though he would
not answer mine at the Dispute, when he should. To his first and second I
answer affirmatively. It is not good Philosophy to say, the Heavens only
suffer, and act nothing: but it is very good Philosophy, and Divinity too, that
the Heavens are only passive servants of God, when they do Gods will, they do
it not with consent of will, as when the stormy winds fulfill Gods word, Psalm.
148. 8. they do act, but not actively obey God. Herod and Pontius Pilate did
what Gods counsel determined, Acts 4* 27, 28. yet were not active servants of
God, but passive, the doing of Gods will was besides their intentions So
Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 43. 10. Sennacherib, Isai 10. 5, 6, 7. Joseph's brethren,
Shimei, Absalom, etc. are servants of God in this sense. And in this sense the
Heavens are Gods servants, as Mr. B. might have perceived by the joining the
earth with them, which moves not, or rather in this passive sense, because they
are at Gods disposing.

2. Says he, What if the Earth and Infants were both called Gods Servants
only in a passive sense, because God makes use of them? Is it therefore in
the same sense? Answ. Yes. Mr. B. Is it the same use that God makes of both?
Answ. No, and yet it is the same sense. Again, Mr. B. What if Christ were
called Gods servant for his suffering? Shall we say it were in no other sense
than the Earth is so called? when the use and sufferings are so unlike?

Answ. No, for if Christ were called Gods servant for his suffering, I would
call him an active servant of God, not a passive* For though he in his
suffering were passive, and Divines call it passive obedience, yet he did not
obey passively, that is, against his will, or without consent of will, as the
Earth does, but actively, out of his free and voluntary intention, and consent
of will. Be the use and suffering never so unlike, those persons or things may
be in the fame sense passive servants of God, whose sufferings or use
accomplisheth Gods will without their intention, and they active servants in
the same sense whose use or sufferings are with intention and consent to
accomplish the will of God, though their use or sufferings are much unlike. But
he has not yet done posing or ch^ding me.

What if I prove, says he, (as me thinks with Mr. ^. I might easily do) that
the Heavens are Gods servants actively, and Christ also is called his servant
actively? Does it follow that they are servants in the same sense, when the
action is so unlike?

Answ. Yes, for I never took the identity of sense to presuppose necessarily
likeness in the actions. The same sense is when words signify a like meaning,
whatever likeness or unlikeness there be in the actions of the subjects to
which the Predicate is attributed. And I pity Mr. Bs. oscitancy that does not
observe such obvious things, but troubles others with such frivolous questions.
But yet there are more of these demands to be answered.

3. Says Mr. B. Has not God prevented all these Cavils by joining Parents and
Children together in the same title? He says of Parents and Children both
together, they are my servants: where it is evident that both therefore have
the same kind of relation. And will he say that the Parents are only passive
servants?

Answ. Yes, in that place, according to the explication before given; and I
conceive that God has prevented all Mr. Bs. Cavils against this exposition,
even in that he joins Parents and Children, (who can be no other ways servants
of God) together, in the same title; besides other passages of the Text do show
it, as I have alleged above.

4. Says Mr. B. Or if all this be not enough, yet look further, where God
himself tells you the reason why he calls them his servants, (who knows better
than Mr. T.) They are my servants which I brought out of Egypt, etc. Gods
interest and merciful choice of them, and separation to himself, is the
reason. When God calls us his servants, it oftn^r signifies the honor and
privileges of that relation, which in mercy he calls us to, than any service we
do him therein. Are the Heavens Gods servants, because he brought them out of
Egypt, and separated them to himself as a peculiar People?

Answ. Mr. B. is a strange man, most shamefully dealing with me, who suggests
to the world of me as if I took no notice of that in the Text, which in my
Sermon as it is printed by himself, page 181. was observed in the first place
with advice to my hearers to mark it, and urged it to that end that I might
show this was peculiar to the Hebrew children, and therefore impertinently
brought by Mr. B. to prove our infants Gods servants as there it is meant much
less as [ Gods servants] is a term equipollent to [ a Disciple Matthew. 28. 19.]
all which he seems not to take notice of, but in stead thereof after a dictate
or two without proof, he puts to me this frivolous question, Are the Heavens
Gods servants because he brought them out of Egypt, and separated them to
himself as a peculiar people? To which I answer no, but what then? cannot
therefore the Heavens be said to be Gods servants passively, that is, at Gods
dispose, because they were not brought out of Egypt as the infants, Levit. 25.
41.? The reason is given there in respect of the subject, why they were Gods
servants when other people were not, not on the part of the predicate, as if
none were servants but they that were brought out of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar is
called Gods servant, Jer. 43. 10. for going into Egypt there executing Gods
will on the Egyptians; though he had no intention of doing any thing for God.

5. Says Mr. B. yet if all this be not enough, he that will see may be
convinced from this. The Jews and their infants are called Gods servants in a
sense peculiar as chosen and separated from all other: the Gentiles at age were
not so Gods servants as the Jews infants were. If God call these infants his
servants in no other sense than the Heavens and the earth, then it seems in the
year of Jubilee men must release the earth from its service to them: But Mr. T.
knows that even the Gentile servants that were actively so were not to be
released in the year of Jubilee: and therefore the Jews and their infants are
called Gods servants in another sense than the Heavens or the heathens either;
even as the chosen separated people of God and members of his family. or else
how could it be a reason for releasing them in the year of Jubilee any more
than for releasing any other? But no Scripture can be so plain, but a man that
has a mind so disposed may find some words of contradiction.

Answ. It is true, and Mr. Bs. cavils about this Text apparently preve it. But
this with all the rest is not enough to convince me that the infants of the
Jews are called Gods servants actively, as the term [ Gods servant] is
equipollent to [ a Disciple Matthew. 28. 19.] though I would see it, yet I
cannot, no not by Mr. Bs. spectacles, even by this last reason. I confess that
the Jews infants were Gods servants in a peculiar manner, other than the
Gentiles at years, yea though godly, as Cornelius, Acts 10. 2. that God for
this reason required their release from bondage at the Jubilee, and yet why it
should follow, that if the Earth be called Gods servant passively, as the Jews
infants, it must be released by men from service at the year of Jubilee, I see
not. If it were formed into an Argument, it would rest on this or the like
Proposition, They to whom the same thing is predicated, in the same sense must
have all other things predicated on them alike: which is so absurd a thing,
that me thinks Mr. B. should disclaim it, and yet his reason turns on that
hinge. To show its absurdity, Magistrates are called Gods, Jehovah is called
God in one sense in respect of rule, else the term [ God] should signify
nothing common to both. Does it therefore follow that what is said of
Magistrates must be said of Jehovah, that he must die like men, or else the term
[ God] cannot predicate on both in the same sense in which [ God] is taken for
one that rules? This and such like mistakes of Mr. B. even then when he runs
with full curreer show his heedlesness, and overliness in handling
controversies, which require a man of more insight in the meaning of the
Scripture, and more circumspect in observing the consequents on his sayings and
reasonings than I find him. But I follow him, not doubting to overtake him in
long tunning, (...).

SECT. XV.
That Infants are not proved to be Christ's Disciples, from being Subjects to
Christ, Christians, belonging to Christ, Luke 9. 47, 48. Matthew. 18. 5. Mark 9.
41.

THe sum of the next Argument is, Infants are capable of being Subjects of
Chrsts kingdom, therefore of being his Disciples. The reason of the Consequence
is, that Christ's Church is as properly called his Kingdom as his School, all
Subjects of Christ in his visible Kingdom are Christians, all Christians
Disciples, according to Acts 11. 26. Infants are capable of being Subjects in
any Kingdom on Earth, nothing can be showed to prove them incapable, they were
actually Subjects of Christ's Kingdom before his coming in the flesh.

To all which I answer, Its enough to deny the consequence since infants may be
subjects which imports only something passive, whereas [ Disciple] imports
action, which agrees not to infants. But I distinguish, subjects of Christ's
Kingdom may be so called from active or passive subjection, visibly or
invisibly, by extraordinary or ordinary operation. I deny infants to be
subjects of Christ's Kingdom actively, visibly, by ordinary operation through
Preaching the word in which sense alone the term [subject of Christ's Kingdom]
is equipollent to [a Disciple Matthew. 28. 19.] and in which sense alone the
consequence is true. Though in common speech arising from the fond conceit as
if baby-sprinkling made them Christians, infants are called Christians, yet in
Scripture none are called Christians till they believe. Christiani non
naseu^^ur sed fiunt. Our Infants are children of Christians, But not themselves
Christians till they believe in Christ. Acts 11. 26. is so far from proving
infants called Christians, or Disciples, that both v. 26. and 29. prove the
contrary, as was showed above. Though infants be reckoned as parts of human
Kingdoms, yet it follows not they are parts of Christ's visible Kingdom or
Church. For then natural fools, yea the mostungodly professed unbelievers, must
be subjects of Christ's visible Kingdom or Church, because such are subjects of
human kingdoms. I have seen Ephesians. 5. 24. and see nothing there for Mr. Bs.
purpose, but against him, there being no subjection there meant but what is
willing, which infants have not, except by extraordinary operation unknown.
Infants whether of believers or unbelievers are capable of being Christ's
subjects passively, or actively by extraordinary secret invisible, and unknown
operation, but not actively, visibly by ordinary means for want of the use of
reason. This consequence will never be proved by Mr. B. Infants were members of
the Jewish Church, therefore visible Church members of the Christian Church. To
this argument, Infants were Disciples in the Jewish Church, Ergo, God will show
the like mercy now, I answer by denying his antecedent, which he would prove
from John 9. 28. we are Moses Disciples in opposition to Jesus Disciples, But
infants were Moses his Disciples. This proposition I deny, and Mr. B. has
brought nothing to prove it. The Text mentions none as Moses Disciples but
persons of years, and therefore there is no need of further answer to his
argument.

3. My third argument says Mr. B. to prove some infants are Disciples, is this
from Christ's own words. If Christ would have some children received as
Disciples, then they are Disciples; But Christ would have some such received as
Disciples; Therefore some such are Disciples. All the question is of the
antecedent and that is plain in Luke 9. 47, 48. compared which Matthew. 18. 5.
and Mark 9. 41. He that receives this child in my name receives me. Here
observe. 1. It was the child himself that Christ would have received. 2. He
would have him received [in his name] now that can mean no less than as a
Disciple: when they are baptized it is into his Name: And that which in Luke is
called [receiving in Christ's name] is expressed in Mark [one that belongs to
Christ] and in Matthew [in the name of a Disciple] though some of these places
speak of infants, some of others: yet compared, they plainly tell you this;
that to receive [in Christ's Name] and [as belonging to Christ] and [as a
Disciple of Christ] in Christ's language is all one, for they plainly express
the same thing intended in all. So that Christ has encouraged me to receive
children [in his Name] Luke 9. 47. And he expounds it to me, that this is to
receive them [as belonging] to him, and as [Disciples] I know some frivolous
answers are made to this: but they are not worth the standing on. Mr. Blakes
Argument hence remains as good as unanswered.

Answ. What Mr. Blake alleged in his Birth privilege, p. 21: about these Texts
was answered in my Examen, page 134. and what he replied in his Answer to my
Letter, cap. 11. sect. 5. was refelled in my Postscript, page 145, 146, all
which I have reviewed with what Mr. Blake refers to in his Repulse of Mr.
Blackwood, page 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. and do not find wherein my answer in my
Postscript is deficient, and therefore see no reason to be moved by Mr. Bs.
vain talk that Mr. Blakes Argument hence remains as good as unanswered, and do
conceive it more abundantly answered than such a far-fetched argument deserved.
Yet Mr. B. brings it again into the field, and Mr. Blake Vindic. Foederis, page
414. says, he will forbear to make any rejoinder to the Reply of my Apology,
page 145. because Mr. B. has here done it for him. Now what says Mr. B. He
says, I know some frrivolous answers are made to this; but they are not worth
the standing on.

To which I reply, if the Answers be more frivolous than the Argument they are
not indeed worth standing on. But let us see what kind of Argument it is. 1.
Mr. B. should have concluded that Some Infants are Disciples, and he concludes
that Some Children are Disciples, or else he means by [ some such] in the minor
and conclusion others than by [ some Children] in the major, now some Infants
and some Children are not all one. 2. The phrase in the middle term [ received
as Disciples] may be understood two ways, 1. thus, that Christ would have them
received as being Disciples, and in this sense I grant the Consequence, but
deny the minor, understood of some infants. 2. That he would have them received
with such tenderness and love as is given to Disciples, though they be not
Disciples. And in this sense I might grant the minor, and deny the Consequence
of the major, though I think the minor is not true in that sense. And to Mr.
Bs. proof of this, I say, 1. the (...), Matthew. 11. 1^. (which is less than
(...)) notes a little child that could call to his fellows.
word (...), Luke 9. 47. does not note an infant always. For Jairus his
Daughter though twelve years old, is called (...), a little child, Mark 5. 41*
42. And yet that age might be a pattern of humility, seldom are children of that
age ambitious, though they be impatient. And that the little child Matthew. 18.
2. was not an infant but a person of some years, is made probable, in that
Christ is said to call him, and to set him, or make him stand in the midst of
them. 2. Beza says, Perhaps it should be read (...), such a little child. So
the Syriack Interpreter reads, and it is very probable by comparing it with
Matthew. 18. 5. where the words of Christ are related, and there it is (...), one
such little child, and Mark 9. 37. (...), one of such children. 3. But if the
reading be allowed as the Copies now have it, yet it is not unusual that
[(...), this] is all one with [(...), such] as on the other side (...) is 2
Cor. 2. 6. all one with (...). So in the same Chapter (...), Luke 9. 26. is not
meant of one particular person, but of one so qualified, and in like manner 2 Timothy 3. 5. (...), from these turn away, that is, as our Translators well render
it, from such turn away, and v. 6. (...), is rendered [ of this sort] There are
more of the like, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14. 2 John 7. 1 John 2. 22. Luke 8. 14, 15, 21,
etc. So Grotius in Luc. 9. 48. (...), id est, (...), Ut apud Matthaeum, quomodo
and hic Syrus interpretatur. And this may be confirmed by reason thus, If
(...), Luke 9. 48. must be expounded of this little child, then the speech of
Christ is to be understood only of that one individual little child and no
other, for in that sense it is a Pronoun demonstrative, and so notes a
demonstrative individual, as Logicians speak, and so it shall note not only
the child himself, as Mr. B. observes, but even that particular little child
then present, and it would only import a privilege appropriate to that little
child, and agreeing to no other, whereas the sense is manifest from the words
there, and other places, Matthew. 10. 40. Luke 10. 16. John 13. 20. to be this,
whosoever shall receive any one that comes in my Name, though he be as mean and
as inconsiderable as this little child, receives me; and therefore it is
added presently, For he that is least among you all, the same shall be great,
which shows that by [ this] or [ such a little childe] he meant the Apostles,
whosoever receives any of you, though as mean as this little child, or such a
little child, receives me. 4. There are sundry things in the Text, and in
parallel places, which do evince, that the receiving the little child, neither
is nor can be meant of a little child in respect of age, much less an infant.

As, 1. that it is supposed that the little child here meant may be received
in Christ's name, but that agrees not with the meaning of the speech as there is
meant to understand it of a little child in age. For receiving in Christ's name
presupposes coming in Christ's name, as John 5. 43. 2 John 10. etc. that is
either professing Christ's name or Preaching or acting in Christ's name. And that
this is presupposed here, Luke 9. 48. appears partly by the phrase receives
him that sent him, which intimates this to be the force of the speech, he that
receives one such little child sent by me receives me, and he that receives
me receives him that sent me, and partly from the very next v. 49. where John
is said to answer and say taking occasion, as it seems by the relation from
Christ's words, Master we saw one casting out Devils in thy name, which words
intimate that he understood* receiving in Christ's name to be meant of one
acting or speaking in Christ's name, and thus is the phrase [ in my name, in the
name of the Lord] often used Matthew. 7* 22. and 21. 9. and 23. 39 and 24. 5.
which thing is more fully confirmed by Mr. Bs. parallel place. Mark 9. 37, 41.
It is plain that Mark sets down Christ's words upon the same occasion of their
contention for pre-eminence which Luke does, and the same words v. 37. and
there expresses it, whosoever shall receive one of such little ones in my
name, which cannot be meant of that little one then set before them, but of his
Apostles and others who should be as mean as such a little one, and v. 39.
expounds [ in my name] of acting in my name, and v. 41. whosoever shall give
you a cup of cold water in my name because ye are Christ's, that is, ye are sent
by Christ, or act for Christ, which shows v. 37. to be meant of the Apostles
not little children in age, but such as did act for Christ though mean as
little children. The same may be proved from Matthew. 10. 40, 41, 42. 2. Again,
the receiving of the little child proves it is not meant of a little child in
age. For what is the receiving? It is, 1. by hearing Luke 10. 16. 2. By
entertaining upon travayl, as Luke 9. 52, 53. they did not receive him by
making ready for him, and Mark 9. 41. by giving a cup of cold water, which was
no small kindness to a travailer in those dry and hot Countries. But what
kindness had this been to a little child in age as an infant, that travayls
not? On the contrary, not receiving is expressed Matthew. 10. 14. Mark 6. 11. by
not entertaining them into their house nor hearing their words. so the New
Annot. on Matthew. 10. 42. [ he that receives you] Luke 10. 16. John 13. 20.
that hears your Doctrine willingly, and entertaineth you, which receiving
agrees not to infants, nor any other receiving mentioned in the Gospels that
has such a blessing assured to it as here. 3. The reward annexed, to wit, the
receiving of Christ shows the receiving of a little one in Christ's name, to be
another thing than the receiving of a little infant in Christ's name, that is,
after Mr. Bs. silly conceit, the receiving into the visible Church by baptizing
it. For then the greatest blessing, that is, of receiving Christ and his Father
should be annexed to so poor a thing as may be done by every poor Presbyter, or
Curate, how ill mannerd soever he be; the baptizing, that is, as now its used
and defended, the sprinkling of a little holy water on an infant. 4. It appears
that a little infant is not meant Luke 9. 48. from the description of the
little child there meant. For Mr. B. himself compares that speech in Luke with
the like, Matthew. 18. 5. Now such a little child Matthew. 18. 5. is expressed v.
6. one of these little ones which believe in me, (not as Mr. Cobbet in his Just
Vindication, page 117. fondly conceives without any other Author that ever I
heard of besides himself, one of those little ones, who are the little ones of
them that believe in me. For then it should be either (...), or (...), or some
such supply, and it would be ridiculous to imagine the scandalizing to be of
infants, the penalty of which is ^eavier than to have a millstone tied about the
neck, and to be cast into the Sea, that little infants are those not to be
despised, whose Angels behold the face of Christ's Father, v. 10. The little
ones Matthew. 18. 6. are called Christ's brethren, Matthew. 25. 40. answering to
them that believe) and v. 3. one that becomes as a little child, v. 4. one
that humbles himself as this little child, which it is mere dotage to expound
of little infants. Again Mr. B. referrs to Matthew. 10. 41. and there the little
child received is a Prophet, and a righteous man. Hereto I add the expressions
of many writers. Piscator (to whom Mr. Blake refers) Analys. Luc. 9. 48. innuit
amorem suum ^rga demissos animo in exemplo pueruli praesentis. Schol. in Matthew.
18. 5. propter nomen meum, propterea quod in me credit, Beza annot. in Matthew.
18. 5. puerulum talem (...), id est, quempiam ita se demi^t^ntem ut puerum
referat: nec enim proprie de pueris agit. Par^^s in Matthew. 18. 5. dicit, qui
susceperit unum ex parv^lis talibus, hoc est, unum ex vobis pueri instar
humiliatum. Diodati on Matthew. 18. 5. [ one such] namely, a true Christian that
shall have laid aside all worldly pride, whereby he is become abject in the
sight of the world. New Annot. in Matthew. 10. 42. [one of these little ones] who
newly made profession of religion: on Matthew 18. 5. one like such a child in
the qualities before mentioned. Mr. B. himself confesses that some of these
places speak of infants some of others: yet says ^e, compared they plainly
tell you this; That to receive [in Christ's name] and [as belonging to Christ]
and [as a Disciple of Christ] in Christ's language is all one; for they plainly
express the same thing intended in all. From whence I infer, that if the same
thing be intended in all, and all express the same thing, then is no other
thing intended or expressed, Luke 9. 48. than what is expressed and intended
Matthew. 18. 5. Mark 9. 41. Matthew. 10. 42. and then, it is certain that Luke 9.
48. is not meant of a little infant in age, nor the receiving such as agrees to
such an infant, since it is certain that Matthew. 18. 5. Mark 9 41. Matthew. 10.
42. are not understood of either of these, and it follows upon Mr. Bs.
confession that some of these Texts speak not of infants, that none of them
speak of infants, since they all express and intend the same thing; and thus Mr.
Bs. own observation refu^es himself. But says he, when they are baptized it is
into his name.

Answ. Mr. B. it seems would have this the sense: whosoever receives to
Baptism in my name one little child receives me to Baptism, which should
imply it to be a grateful office to receive him to Baptism, and the offending
Matthew. 18. 6. and despising v. 10. should be not admitting to Baptism, and when
it is said [whosoever] shall receive one such little one, it would imply it to
be a grateful work for any person though no Minister to receive to Baptism,
and an ungrateful work for any to refuse to baptize. I grant that in the places
named to be such a little one, Matthew. 18. 5. to belong to Christ, Mark 9. 41.
to be a Disciple of Christ, Matthew. 10 42. note the same sort of persons, yet I
deny that proposition, which is the hinge of Mr. Bs. proof, [every one that
belongs to Christ is a Disciple of Christ] For the holy Angels, those yet
uncalled whom his Father has given him, John 17. 10. belong to Christ, and yet
are not to be called Disciples of Christ. And therefore I infer, that Mr. B.
has no encouragement from Christ's exposition of these Texts to account infants
Disciples, and what he collects in his own fancy without the Text is frivolous
and self contradicting, so little worth the standing on, that for my part I
think this sheet of his Book, what ever be said of the rest, worth no more than
a sheet that is made thur is piperisque ^ucullus, yet he cannot forbear but
must add more of this frivolous stuff.

In answer to this objection, Infants cannot learn, and therefore cannot be
Disciples, he adds thus much more. 1. They can partake of the protection and
provision of their Master (as the children of those that the Israelites bought)
and enjoy the privileges of the family and school, and be under his charge and
dominion, and that is enough to make them capable of being Disciples.

Answ. What privileges of Christ's family and school, infants enjoy, I know not,
what ever they be what ever protection, provision, rule, care is for them, yet
this is not enough to make them Disciples, as Christ meant, Mat. 28. 19. till
they have learnt, or profess learning of this Lesson, that Jesus is the Christ;
all that is said here of Children may be said of slaves bought with money, they
are all then with him Disciples of Christ, though professed infidels.

2. They are, says he, devoted to learning, if they live: however they are
consecrated to him as their Master, who can teach them hereafter, and that is
yet more.

Answ. I may add, they may cry, as Cyprian, and his sixty six Bishops alleged
for their Baptism, and suck, and smile, and play with the mother, and that is
more than this, but neither the one nor the other any thing to the denomination
of a Disciple of Christ.

3. Says he, I wonder you should be more rigorous with Christ in this case
than you are with men. Is it not common to call the whole nation of the Turks
both old and young by the name of Mahometans, or Disciples of Mahomet?

Answ. What a pretty passage is this to set out a man as rigorous with Christ,
who expounds his words Matthew. 28. 19. according to his constant language in all
the Evangelists, because he allows not infants to be called Disciples, as if
Christ forsooth did plead for infants discipleship, and I were so stiff, as
that I would not yield to him. But he thinks I will allow Mahometans children
to be called Mahomets disciples, for it is the common use, and why not then we
and our children by the name of Christians and Disciples of Christ. Answ. I
confess I think the common use now is to call the Turks young and old
Mahometans, and in Chorographical relations, English, French, etc. are called
Christian Nations, old and young, termed Christians: but neither do I find the
common use to be to call infants either Mahomets or Christ's Disciples, nor if I
did, should this sway me at all to allow infants discipleship according to
Matthew. 28. 19. till Scripture use of the term [Disciple] applicable to that
sense can be showed.

But Mr. B. has more of this childish arguing. And when a man hired a
Philosopher to teach him and all his children, were they not all then Disciples
of that Philosopher? They are entered under him as their Master for future
teaching, are at present in the relation of Disciples.

Answ. It is no such strange thing to hear of a Physician taking a stipend to
cure a man and all his children, but to hear of a Philosopher hired to teach a
man, and all his children, even his infant children, and counting them
Disciples, and entering them under him as their master, is so strange to me
that it seems to me somewhat like a tale of a man of Gotham. Yet if there were
any such thing acted by wise men in sober sadness, it is nothing to prove
infants Disciples in Christ's or his Apostles language. But the prettiest part
of this Comedy or poppet play of Mr. B. is yet behind.

4. Says he. And truly I wonder also that it should go so current that infants
are not capable of learning, the mother is a Preacher to the infant, partly by
her action and gesture and partly by voice. Answ. And why not by smiles, and
kisses and whipping? But what then? They can dishearten and take off from vices
and teach them obedience. Answ. It Is true they can still them from crying: but
how they can take them off from vices and teach them obedience to Gods Command
I am yet to learn, it may be nurses may better inform me than Mr. B. Me thinks
says he, we should not make an infant less docible than some brutes. What does
Mr. B. mean by this? Does he think they that deny infants to be Disciples allow
brutes to be Disciples? A parret I think will sooner learn some words of
Christ's than an infant, yet I think neither learn any thing of the Doctrine of
Christ till they understand it. But I am referred to nurses, who he says, will
tell me more in this than he can, It may be so; yet sure nothing to show that
any have made their infants learn the Doctrine of Christ. He adds. And what if
they cannot at first learn to know Christ? even with men of years that is not
the first Lesson: if they may be taught any of the duty of a rational creature
it is somewhat. Answ. If they do not learn to know Christ they learn not that
which should make them Disciples of Christ. It is somewhat indeed that they can
learn to kiss the mother, stroke her breasts, etc. but what is this to make them
Disciples of Christ? And if they can learn nothing of the parents either by
action or voice; yet Christ has other ways of teaching than by men even by the
immediate working of his Spirit.

Answ. It Is true, and he may make infants Disciples, nor do I deny it to be
done invisibly, but it would be a greater wonder than yet Mr. B. has had for
all his wonderments, a very prodigy that any of them should become a visible
Disciple. It Is true they may learn something of God very young and are to be
bred up in the nurture of the Lord. But that in their infancy at two or three
days old they are learners of the things of God, of the admonition of the Lord
from mothers and nurses is a fiction like Galilaeus his New World in the Moon,
or Copernicus his Circumgyration of the earth.

Mr. B. tells us he might argue further, All that are saved are Christ's
Disciples, some infants are saved, Ergo. And I might answer him, that they may
be saved, and yet no visible Disciples according to the meaning of Christ
Matthew. 28 19. But since he has put this off to another time I shall take a
little breathing from Mr. B. and set him aside a little while till I have heard
what his seniors say further for their baby-baptism.

SECT. XVI.
Dr. Featley and Mr. Stephens arguings from John 3. 5. for Infant Baptism are
answer^d, and Baptism showed not be a cause of Regeneration, and Mr. Cranfords
words considered.

THere are some other Texts brough^ to prove an institution of infant baptism
out of the New Testament which I shall take in though the Assembly and the
chiefest I have to do with in this controversy do omit them. The Ancients were
wont to allege Joh. 3. 5. to prove infants are to be baptized after Christ's
appointment, or rather the reasonableness and necessity of the Churches
appointment. Augustine in his writings often joins Romans 5. 12, and John 3. 5.
as the reason of infant baptism Lumb. Sent. 4. Did. 3. allegeth some as making
the institution of baptism to be John 3. 5. The Papists commonly allege John 3.
5. for the necessity of infantbaptism, Becan. Manual. l. 4. c. 2. Mandatum
habemus, Joan. 3. 5. They are refuted by the Protestants, as Chamier tom. 4. l.
5. de bapt. c. 9. yet Vossius these. Th. de paedobapt. these. 7. brings it, to
which being in Latin I have answered in Latin in my Refutation of Dr. Savage
his supposition, though contrary to my expectation not yet printed, Dr. Featley
in his Dipper dipped, p. 10. 43. makes it one of his prime arguments for
infant baptism, p. 10. he thus argues. If none can enter into the Kingdom of
God but those that are born of Water and the Spirit; that is, those that are
baptized with Water and regenerated by the Spirit, then there is a necessity of
baptizing children, or else they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, (that is
ordinarily) for we must not tie God to outward means. But the former is true.
Ergo, the latter. And page 43. none ought to exclude the children of the
faithful out of the Kingdom of Heaven. But by denying them baptism (as much as
in us lies) we exclude them out of the Kingdom of Heaven* For as Christ
affirmed to Nicodemus, and confirmed it with a double oath or most vehement
asseveration, Amen, Amen; or verily, verily (I say unto thee) except a man he
born of Water and the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Ergo,
we ought not to deny them baptism.

Answ. This arguing is the same in effect notwithstanding the Doctors mincing
it (which is but a little) with that which the Papists bring for their horrid
tenet of Exclusion out of the Kingdom of Heaven of infants dying unbaptized.
For he holds that there is a necessity of baptizing children or else they
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God ordinarily. In which assertion he denies
any infants entrance into the kingdom of God ordinarily without water baptism.
And no more is said as I conceive by the more moderate Papists, such as Biel,
Cajetan, Gerson, cited by Perkins in his preparative to the demonstration of
the problem. But no marvail the Doctor; who was addicted to the Common Prayer
Book, concurred thus far with the Papists: For in it the Doctrine of Augustine,
and others is retained, of asserting the necessity of infant baptism because of
original sin and Christ's words, Ioh. 3. 5. as appears by the Preface appointed
to be used before the solemnity of Baptism. But Protestant Divines do generally
refute this opinion, as e. g. Chamier Panstr. Cath. tom. 4. l. 5. de Bapt. c.
8. etc. teaching that infants of believers are ordinarily holy, and admitted
into the Kingdom of Heaven, though dying unbaptized? But to answer his
Arguments, 1. it is known that Calvin, Piscator, and many more do take [water]
metaphorically, and the conjunction [(...) and] to be exegetical not coupling
differing things, but expounding what is meant by [ water] as if he had said,
that water which is the Spirit, as when it is said Mat. 3. 11. He shall baptize
with you the Holy Ghost and with fire, that is, with the Holy Ghost, which is
as fire. And this they conceive as necessary, that the speech of Christ may be
verified. For simply understood it is false, since the Thief on the Cross,
sundry Martyrs and others have entered into the Kingdom of Heaven unbaptized.
And this Exposition Chamier Panstrat. Cath. tom. 4. lib. 5. cap. 9. has taken
upon him to maintain against the opposites to it, and if true the objection of
Dr. Featley falls, which rests on this, that there a necessity of waterbaptism
is imposed on all that shall enter into the Kingdom of God. Nevertheless I
confess my self unsatisfied in this Exposition. 1* Because I do not think that
Matthew. 3. 11. by [ fire] is meant the Holy Ghost as being like fire in his
operation on every sanctified person: but that the words are an express
prophecy of what Christ also foretold, Acts 1. 5. and was accomplished at
Pentecost, Acts 2. 3. when the Holy Ghost filled them, and fiery cloven tongues
sat upon each of them. 2. Because if it were parallel to that place, and [
water] were used metaphorically, (as is said by them) and exegetically added [
water] should be after, and [ spirit] before, as Matthew. 3. 11. [ spirit] is
first, and [ fire] after, and after the usual manner of speaking, it should run
thus, except a man be born of the spirit and water, if it were to be expounded
of the spirit which is as water. Dr. Homes animadv. on my Exercit: page 30.
allegeth Bullinger, saying, Omnes pene de baptismo, Ioh. 3. 5. interpretantur,
to which he adjoyns Bullingers, and his own consent.* For these reasons I am
much inclined to expound it of the Element of Water. Yet, 2. am very apt to
conceive, that forasmuch as Mr. Seldom de jurenat. and Gent. juxta discipl.
Heb. lib. 2. cap. 4. tells us that when the Jews did initiate Proselytes by
baptizing them with water, they called it Regenerating, and that Christ, when
he taunts Nicodemus with dullness in being a Master in Israel, and yet not
knowing of Regeneration, but by imagining a natural New Birth, when
Regeneration was frequent in baptizing Proselytes among the Jews, insomuch that
by it they taught a person lost his natural relations of kindred as he shows,
lib. 5. c. 18. and has these words in the place above cited, [ tamet si de ea
quae spiritu fit non solum aqua loqueretur Christus] our Savior meant baptism
of water, not according to his Apostles practice, but the Jews, and that the
sense is this, Except a man be born of water, and of the spirit, that is,
Except a man be not only born again by water, as ye Pharisees regenerate, when
ye make Proselytes, but also by the spirit, as I do beget again he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of God, although he may enter into the Commonwealth or policy
of Israel: which sense nevertheless does not assert a necessity of their
water-regeneration, but only of Christ's spiritual regeneration, and the
insufficiency of the other by it self, which is so much the more probable,
because I find (...) used for (...), that is, and for but, Motth. 11. 19. and
12. 39. Acts 10. 28. and (...), Acts 26. 29. seems to answer to [not only but
also] yet because I find not a place every way parallel, I only propound it
to be examined. But 3. it being granted that it is meant of Christ's
water baptism, yet Papists themselves make not such a necessity of it as is
without limitation and exception, and therefore they put in some one, some
another restriction, which Chamier in the place alleged reduces to four: 1.
Unless the person be baptized either with the baptism of water, or some other
thing instead of it, as the baptism of blood and spirit. 2. If they may be
baptized, and they despise it. 3. If they be not baptized with that
Regeneration which is by water, though it may be otherwise also. 4. If they be
neither baptized in deed nor desire. Why may not then this limitation be added,
Except a man be born again of water, that is, except such a person of whom
baptism is required, according to my institution, be born of water, when he may
have it, and its cleared to him to be his duty, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. And indeed this and such like speeches Mark 16. 16. John 3. 18,
^6, etc. that require faith as well as baptism, are to be understood of persons
to whom the Gospel is preached, and do or may hear it, and speak not of
infants, whom we find not that God enters into the Kingdom of Heaven any other
way than by his invisible election and operation of his Spirit. And it is
observable, that whereas John 3. 5. our Savior joins water and spirit as means
of Regeneration, yet v. 6. he names only the spirit, omitting water; whence
may be gathered, that water is not of such universal unrestrained necessity,
that in no case a person is not born again without it, nor admissible into the
Kingdom of God, yet such as is necessary ordinarily to those to whom the Gospel
is preached, and their duty made known. Whence in answer to the Doctors
argument I say, that his speeches are to be thus limited at least, none can
enter into the Kingdom of God ordinarily without baptism, to wit, of those to
whom the Gospel is preached, their duty made known, and Baptism may be had; and
to his later Argument I answer, by denying that children are excluded out of
the Kingdom of Heaven by denying them Baptism, since those unbaptized persons
only are excluded who are appointed to be baptized, to whom the Gospel is
preached, the duty of Baptism made known, and they may have it administered to
them, which cannot be said of infants.

Mr. Nathaniel Stephens in his Book entitled, A Precept for the Baptism of
Infants out of the New Testament, having premised some thing about the Text,
John 3. 5. page 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. about the necessity of baptism of water,
and the efficacy of it, in which many things are merely dictated, and very
slightly handled, he would infer page 23, etc. a Precept for infant baptism
from John 3. 5. because infants are guilty of original sin, where the disease
is there is need of the remedy, when Christ does press a necessity of washing
both by water and the spirit, he does not this so immediately in reference to
actual sin, as in reference to birthsin, and to the natural pollution in which
infants are born. The same is the plea of Mr. Thomas Fuller in his Infants
Advocate, c. 13.

Answ. That either baptism of water or Circumcision are made the remedy of
original sin is more than I find in Scripture, though it go as current among
many of former and later times. It is true our Lord Christ says, Except a man
be born of Water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God,
John 3. 5. and he assigns this as a reason thereof, v. 6. That which is born of
the flesh is flesh, but that either thereby he intended to make baptism as the
remedy of sin, or of original sin rather than actual is more than appears, For
though our Lord Christ v. 5. make regeneration to be by Water and Spirit yet I
conceive regeneration is by the Spirit only as the cause, by baptism of water
only as the sign, whereby the person baptized testifies that he is born again
by the Spirit. Now a remedy is a cause and not a sign only: no man calls that
which is only a sign of cure a remedy, but that which does operate for
healing. That baptism of water is not the cause of regeneration appears. 1.
Because v. 6. our Savior giving the reason of the necessity of regeneration
and the effect of regeneration, leaves ou^ [ water] and mentions only [ the
Spirit] 2. Because the person baptized is supposed to be born again, to be a
repenting and believing person before he is baptized: But if baptism were the
cause it should be before regeneration, (for the cause is before the effect)
and so men should be baptized before they are believers, or repenting persons,
which is absurd, and contrary to the Scripture, Mark 16. 16. Acts 2. 38. etc.
and contrary to the order of Christ that persons should be made Disciples before
they were baptized Matthew. 28 19. 3. Because it is altogether inexplicable how
the use of water can be a cause either principal or instrumental to work a new
birth or inward change on the soul; If it be said, that it is by virtue of Gods
promise, it is meet that promise should be showed, that at, by or upon the use
of baptism, God has promised to regenerate persons. That it is a sign of
regeneration will not be I suppose denied; for it is made the sign of
repentance (which is all one with regeneration) and therefore called the
baptism of repentance Acts 19. 4. because as Beza on v. 3. baptism was symbolum
resipiscentiae, the token of repentance. And so in like manner it was the sign
of faith, and therefore the Apostle Gal. 3. 27. says, That as many as were
baptized into Christ had put on Christ, that is, had by the sign of baptism
testified their putting on Christ by faith. And in this sense it is termed the
washing of regeneration (if baptism be meant by it) Tit. 3. 5. because by that
washing the person baptized testifies his regeneration. And Romans 6. 4. We are
buried with him by baptism into death, that is, we by being under water
testify our dying to sin conformably to Christ's death and burial. And in this
sense Paul is bid Acts 22. 16. to wash away his sins, that is, by baptism to
testify his purging from his sins. And so Christ is said to sanctify and
cleanse his Church with washing of water, Ephesians. 5. 26. that is, as Beza Annot,
in locum, as representing what he entirely does effect within. Mr. James
Cranford in his Epistle to Mr. Thomas Bedford printed at the end of the
Friendly Accommodation between Mr. Bedford and Mr. Baxter, says, that he
conceives the ground of Anabaptism to have been the erroneous Doctrine de nudis
signis, in which he is more confirmed by what I answered once to an Argument
drawn by him from Ephesians. 5. from the efficacy of baptism to enforce the
baptizing of infants, that if that Tenent could be clearly proved, I would no
longer oppose that practice. Concerning which I say, I remember not all that
passed from me in the Dispute he mentions, I did think that which I put down in
my Exerci^* sect. 11. had been his Argument. But this I still say, that could
it be clearly proved that Christ ever appointed baptism of water taken
severedly from the preaching of the Word to be the cause of Regeneration, or
that God had assured that by outward baptism with water he would confer
regenerating grace to an infant, I should not oppose the practice of
Paedobaptism. What Mr. Bedford has produced for the efficacy of baptism, has
been answered by Mr. Baxter in his Appendix to his Plain Scripture, etc. Nor
does it appear to me that Mr. B. is of his mind, notwithstanding what Letters
have past between them now printed, and the syncretism yielded to in the
printing of the Friendly Accommodation, and leaving out the Appendix. Dr.
Burges his Treatise of Baptismal Regeneration, has been freely censured by
many. Dr. Jeremiah Taylour in his Discourse of baptism has like an Orator
rather than a Disputant pleaded for infant baptism from the efficacy of
baptism, more from speeches of the Fathers than from the Scripture. Sure I am,
baptism was appointed by Christ, and used in the examples of the Scripture, as
a testimony of Repentance, of faith in Christ, no cause of either. And
therefore I deny baptism to be the remedy of original sin, or the cause of
Regeneration, or that Christ intended to assign the use to baptism to heal
original sin, or to testify the freedom from it without actual. These things
have been delivered by Augustine, and taught by the Romanists and Lutherans,
but by many other Protestants disclaimed and refuted; and therefore Mr.
Stephens, Mr. Cranford, Mr. Bedford, etc. in using this Argument do but
symbolize with the Papists, and revive what many Protestants of best note have
exploded.

SECT. XVII,
The 31. Chapter of Mr. Bs. Plain Scripture Proof, etc. is answered, and Mark
10. 13, 14, 15, 16. is showed to make nothing for infants visible
Church Membership and baptism, and his description of visible Church Membership
is considered, and his Argument from Deuteronomy. 29. showed to be insufficient.

THere are yet some other Texts which are brought by Paedobaptists out of the
New Testament, for an institution and practice of infant baptism. Mr. B. Plain
Scripture Proof of infant baptism, part. 1. cap. 31. brings Mark 9. 36, 37. to
prove that, Christ has expressly assured us that he has not repealed the
privilege of infants visible Church Membership, and upon it falls to his
Rhetoric, and tells us of his boldness in adventuring on this rule. All which I
judge frivolous; nor needs it any further answer, there being no new Argument,
and what he before spoke of that Scripture is answered before Sect. 15. where
it is showed that Mark 9. 37. by [ little childe] is not meant one that is so
in respect of age, but in respect of quality, and that the receiving is not
meant of baptism, but entertainment in receiving the Doctrine brought, and
showing kindness to their persons.

But he adds, And it is not once but often that he has thus manifested his will:
in the very next Chapter he does it more fully yet, Mark 10. 14, 15, 16. And
they brought young children to him that he should touch them; and his Disciples
rebuked those that brought them: but when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased,
and said to them, Suffer ye little children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you, whosoever shall
not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child he shall not enter therein:
and he took them up in his arms, put his hands on them, and blessed them. And
is not here enough to satisfy us yet, that he does not cast all infants in the
world out of his visible Kingdom or Church? but that it is his will they should
be admitted? Will any say that it was not infants in the former Text and this
that Christ speaks of? Did he take any but infants into his arms? Was it not
plainly them that he did bid them receive (in the former Chapter) and was it
not them that he would not have to be kept from him? And was it not them that
he bid should be suffered to come (that is to be brought) and was it not them
that he blessed?

Answ. Mr. M. in his Sermon had alleged this Tex to prove, that the infants of
believers even while they are infants do receive the inward grace as well as
grown men. I answered, 1. It is doubtful whether those little children Mark
10. 14. were infants. 2. Whether it be said of them, Is the Kingdom of Heaven.
3. Whether they were believers infants. 4. Whether the Kingdom of Heaven be
said to be of them in their present estate or their future. 5. The reason why
of them is the Kingdom of Heaven may be referred to Christ's blessing, not to
their Parents faith 6. That Christ's action in this was proper to him, as the
great Prophet, and extraordinary, and therefore not fit to make a constant rule
for an ordinance, and if it be to that use it is more apposite to establish
confirmation than baptism, since Christ did neither baptize, nor appoint them to
be baptized, though he said of them is the Kingdom of Heaven. In all
likelihood, if infantbaptism had been according to Christ's mind he would have
taken this occasion to appoint it, which he not doing, it is very probable that
he would not have it done.

To all which Mr. M. in his Defense page 221, 222. replied only this, that
they were dictates and brought in to little purpose, whereas there is nothing
said by me without reason and some proof, and yet I being a respondent it was
more than my business necessitated me to produce so much, a denial being
sufficient for the respondent. And whereas he says I grant enough to serve his
turn, that the Kingdom of Heaven did belong to those infants and concludes that
their infants in their infantile age are capable of inward grace, and some of
them actually partakers of it, and this is enough for him, and that more than
this cannot be said of grown men who are visible professors. To it I say,
Though I should grant that the Kingdom of Heaven did belong to these infants,
yet it serves not his turn to prove thence that the infants of believers are
visible Church Members, and that believers infants have right to baptism,
except it be proved that their parents were believers, that the Kingdom of
Heaven for that reason did belong to them, and in this thing was intended by
Christ, the establishing a settled rule for infants interest in the Church and
baptism. Capacity of inward grace is not denied to infants, no not to Turks
infants: whether any of them be partakers actually of inward grace is not
determined: nor is it true that no more can be said of grown men: for the
making of visible profession may be said of grown m^n, which cannot be said of
infants.

But Mr. B. is eager for infant baptism as conclusible hence, lets see what he
says. First he begins with his Rhetoric, which commonly supplies the want of
proof. Then he heaps ^p seven or eight inte^rogations, and takes all for
granted which he demands. But to them I say.

To the first, 1. I except against his expression which infinuates as if by
denying that infants are visible Church Members they were cast out of Christ's
visible Church, whereas it is one thing not to reckon them in and another to
cast them out, which is but once used in Scripture 3 John 10. and this phrase
serves only to provoke passion. 2. It is so far from being true that there is
enough in those Texts to satisfy that Christ would have infants admitted into
his visible Church, that it is rather true on the contrary that there is enough
against it. To his other questions, I answer. 1. By denying that they were
infants he would have received Mark 9. 37. 2. whether they were infants he took
in his arms, whom he would not to be kept from him, but suffered to come to
him, and whom he blessed, it is uncertain. Piscator, Estius, etc. conceive they
were young ones that could come of themselves being called. But be it granted
they were infants, lets see what Mr. B. gathers thence.

Hence, says he, I argue thus. 1. If Christ would have us receive infants in
his name, then we must receive them as belonging to him and his Church. But he
would have us to receive them in his name* therefore etc. 2. If he that
receives an infant in his name receives himself, then some infants are to be
received in his name; and those that refuse them sin: But the former is true,
therefore the later.

Answ. 1. Both the conclusions might be granted and yet Mr. Bs. cause not
gained, the former, because infants may belong to Christ and his Church, to
wit, the invisible, and yet it not be proved thence they are visible
Church Members; the later, because they may be received in Christ's name as by
harboring, feeding them, and yet not be admitted to baptism. 2. The minor in
both Syllogismes is false: For the Text Mark 9. 37. speaks not of infants in
age to be received, but of believers that are humble, and low in condition as
infants, particularly of his Apostles.

3. Says Mr. B. if Christ was much displeased with those that kept particular
infants from visible access to him, then (though they could not keep them from
his visible grace) I think he will be much more displeased with those that keep
all the infants in the world from visible access to him in his Church now
(though they cannot keep them from the invisible Church:) But the former is
true: Therefore the later.

Answ. The conclusion is granted. For what visible access to Christ in his
Church now can be but by profession of faith I know not. If Mr. B. know of any
that keep infants from professing faith let him threaten them, and spare not.
But that which he tells us that we keep infants from visible access to Christ,
because we baptize them not for want of profession of faith, is but a squib
that may affright women and children, when intelligent persons laugh at it.

4. Says he, If Christ command us to suffer them to come, and not to forbid
them, then those sin against his express Command that will not suffer them to
come but do forbid them, (for it is a standing Command and speaks of infants,
and not of these individuals only; and there is now no other visible
admittance to Christ but by admitting into his Church and to be his Disciples)
But etc. therefore etc.

Answ. The conclusion is granted without any detriment to our cause: we forbid
not any to come to Christ. There Is no coming to Christ no was those little
children came, that is, to come to his person for blessing, cure, or teaching
by himself in the flesh. There Is no coming to Christ now but by hearing his
word, and believing in him, as John 6. 35. is expressed. If any forbid infants
to do so let him bear the blame. But we forbid infants to be baptized till they
come to Christ, that is, till they believe, and we are sure we have the
Scripture for us, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. Acts 8. 37. Ephesians. 5. 4. Gal. 3.
26, 27. A thing so known that all that heretofore baptized infants did take
this as unquestionable, that believers only are to be baptized, and therefore
to justify infant baptism they run into wild fancies, as that they believe in
the Church, in their Parents, in their sureties, in their being baptized. But
Mr. Bs. hold is in his Parenthesis, against which I except, 1. that his speech
of [ admitting into his Church, and to be his Disciples] supposes that a
person is first admitted into Christ's Church, and then to be his Disciple,
whereas no man is rightly admitted into Christ's Church, who is not first a
Disciple. 2. That he says, This Luke 18. 16. is a standing Commandment. But
this we must take on Mr. Bs. word, there is nothing in the Text, or in Mr. Bs.
writing to prove it. Nor is it likely. For if so, me thinks the Apostles and
the Writers of the New Testament should not have been so negligent as neither
to observe this command after this time, nor to have recorded any act done by
the Apostles according to that command. 3. That Chists speech is of the species
of infants, and not of these individuals only. 1. Is said without proof, yea
it is more probable that (...), is as much as, Suffer these little children to
come to me, and that because, as Paedobaptists urge, (...), of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven, (which is the reason of Christ's injunction) is meant of
those infants. 2. Were it granted not to be meant of those individuals only,
yet this is all that can be thence proved, that if after that time other
infants were brought to Christ in that manner to be touched by him, they should
be suffered. It may be granted, that there is now no other visible admittance
to Christ but by admitting into his Church. But this is enough to prove that
there is now no such visible admittance to Christ as those Mark 10. 14 had, who
were admitted to Christ's person to be touched by him, and not into his visible
Church by baptism.

5. Says Mr. B. If of such be the Kingdom of God, then of such is the visible
Church: but the former is true. Therefore, etc.

Answ. The consequence is denied. Of infants in the mothers womb, as Jacob,
John Baptist, etc. is the Kingdom of God, and yet the visible Church is not of
such.

But says Mr. B. Here they have two cavils against the plain sense of the
Text, 1. By [such] is meant [such for doc^ble^ess and humility] To which I
answer, 1. Then it seems they are so docible and humble, that the Kingdom
belongs to them. For if it belong to others, because they are such as them,
then it must needs belong to others also.

Answ. Mr. Bs. censure of the Answers I gave as cavils is as the rest of this
his Dispute rash and inconsiderate. For the very words Mark 10. 15. do
directly* lead to that sense I give, and the words of Christ Matthew. 18. 3, 4.
plainly expound wherein they that enter into the Kingdom of God must be like
children. But to the matter of his Answer, 1. The conclusion is granted, nor
was it ever denied by me, that of some infants is the Kingdom of God, and
particularly of those whom Christ blessed, but yet not because of their
docibleness and humility, but because of Christ's blessing. Nor do I allow Mr.
Bs. consequence, that if the Kingdom did belong to others, because they are
such as them, then it must needs belong to them also. For the Kingdom of Heaven
did belong to others, because they are such as them in the properties common to
them with other children. But the Kingdom of Heaven did belong to them as
blessed by Christ, not in respect of docibleness and humility. It may be it
will be said, that then little children have those properties for which of them
may be the Kingdom of God. I answer, it does not follow: but this only follows
that there is such teachableness and humility in little children in other
respects, which other men imitating and expressing in spiritual things, and so
becoming such as they are by analogy and resemblance, in that respect belong to
the Kingdom of God.

2. Says Mr. B. Does Christ say, To such as them in this or that respect
only, and not to them, (or says he) not in general, To such? even to such as
he took in his arms and blessed? He would not have taken up, and blessed any,
for a mere Emblem of such as were blessed; he would not have taken up and
blessed a Lamb or a Dove as Emblems of humility and innocence. If Christ say,
[of such] is the Kingdom, I am bound to take Scripture in the most extensive
sense, till there be a plain reason to necessitate me to restrain it. And
therefore must understand it [to such] both of that age, or any other age. Who
dare think that the word [to such] is not rather inclusive as to them than
exclusive? If I love humble poor men, and my servants keep them from my house
because they are poor, and if I chide them for it, and say, Suffer such to come
to me, and forbid them not, for my delight is in such: who would so interpret
this speech as to think I would exclude them, while I command their admittance?
And that I meant other humble ones, and not these?

Answ. Does Mr. B. say, To such in general in respect of age only belongs the
Kingdom of God. If he do say so (as his words seem to import) then it follows,
that to every infant, whether of believers or unbelievers, elect or reprobate,
belongs the Kingdom of God: If not, then he must say as I say, if he will speak
truth, that 1. To those infants belonged the Kingdom in this respect only as
they were blessed by Christ, or elect. 2. If it be applied to other infants, it
can be applied to no others but such as are blessed by Christ, or elect. 3. And
for other persons, that under the term [of such] are meant also persons of age
like them in humility and teachableness is so manifest from v. 15. Matthew. 18.
3. 4. 5. that it is nothing but cavilling in Mr. B. thus to carp at my plain
and clear exposition of the words agreeable to the most approved expositors, as
Beza Annot. ad Matthew. 19. 14. talium (...)] id est, horum and similium ut supra
18. Piscat: sch* in Matthew. 19. 14. talium] (...), quales scilicet sunt isti
pueruli, nempe credentes in me and demisse de se sen^ientes* confer. supra, c.
18. 2. and seq. that I omit others. Neither do I, nor need I say, that Christ
took them, or blessed the little ones for a mere Emblem of such as were
blessed, or that he might, by like reason with mine, have taken up and blessed
a Lamb or a Dove as Emblems of humility. And though Mr. Bs. rule may be
questioned, whether a man be bound to take Scripture in the most extensive
sense till there be a plain reason to necessitate him to restrain it, yet I
gainsay it not, to understand [ to such] both of that age or any other, and I
allow that Christ meant those, and other humble ones, and that the term [ of
such] is both inclusive, including more than those particular little ones; and
exclusive, of those that are not elect or blessed by Christ. And though I
maintain by firm Arguments in my Postscript to Mr. Blake, sect. 20. that by the
Kingdom of Heaven, as in Matthew. 19. 14. or of God, as Mark 10. 14. Luke 18. 16.
is meant the Kingdom of Glory, (which Mr. B. denies not) yet were it allowed
Mr. B. that it is meant of the visible Church, it is not true of all infants of
believers, that of them is the visible Church, for infants in the womb, as
Jacob, are of the Kingdom of God, that is the invisible Church, yet not of the
visible, much less of the species of infants, as Mr. B. speaks. For then every
individual infant should be of the visible Church, though the Parents be
unbelievers, which Mr. B. me thinks should gainsay: and therefore there is
plain reason necessitating to restrain the speech of Christ, as I do.

3. Says Mr. B. When Mr. T. makes their docibleness the thing intended by
Christ, he forgot that he judged them incapable of being Disciples. Why may not
those be Disciples who are not only docible, but exemplary for their
teachableness.

Answ. Mr. T. tells Mr. B. he did not forget, but thinks Mr. B. did not heed.
The docibleness allowed to infants was in things natural, such as are to know
the Nurse, imitate gestures, to be stilled from crying when rebuked, etc. but
not in things spiritual, to know Christ to be the Son of God, the Messiah, etc.
which are necessary to denominate them Disciples of Christ. Yet such
teachableness, and humility only negative, in not ambitiously affecting
pre-eminence are sufficient for Christ to propound them as examples or
similitudes rather, to direct his Disciples to imitate in another kind.

Their second Objection, says Mr* B. is that by [the Kingdom of God] is meant
the Kingdom of Heaven. And I think so too: but then if the Kingdom of Heaven
belong to such, much more a standing as members in the visible Church: For what
is it to be a member of the Church visible, but to be one that in seeming or
appearance, or to the judgment of man, does belong to the invisible Church or
the Kingdom of Heaven? For the Church is but one, and the difference respective
as I showed before: therefore both visible and invisible, both military and
triumphant are called in Scripture [ the Kingdom of Heaven or of God] If a man
be known (or any sort of men) to belong to the Church invisible, then they
visibly belong to it; and then they are visible members (...) the Church: so
that this proof is more full for infants Church Membership, than if it had been
said, they may be visibl^ Church Members. For it says much more of them which
includes that.

Answ. Mr. B. thinks it seems with me that by the Kingdom of God is meant the
Kingdom of Heaven, that is, of Glory, or the invisible Church; which if true,
then of no infants but elect is the Kingdom of God, for no other are of the
invisible Church, or enter into the Kingdom of Glory. And if so, not the the
very species of infants but particular persons, and of these not all perhaps
but a few of the infants of believers, perhaps more of the infants of
unbelievers are of the Kingdom of God. But however he thinks it will follow a
majori, that if of infants is the Kingdom of God, that is the invisible Church
or Kingdom of Glory, then much more they have a standing in the visible Church.
To which I say, 1. If this Argument were good, it could only prove those
infants to be of the visible Church who are elect. 2. It can prove it only of
those who in seeming or appearance, or to the judgment of men do belong to the
invisible Church, or be known to belong to the invisible Church. But no infants
in particular are known to belong to the invisible Church, nor is there any
note whereby any infant in particular may be discerned to be of the invisible
Church, which may make it seem or appear to the judgment of man, Ergo, there is
no infant, no not according to Mr. Bs. own description, has a standing in the
visible Church. The minor of this Argument I expect should be denied, but it
will concern them that do deny it, to show us out of Scripture, where God has
given us any sign, though but probable, to judge such an infant to be of the
invisible Church of the elect, such a one not. If any say Gods covenant and the
Parents faith. I reply, God has plainly declared Romans 9. 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13,
18. that he has not made any promise to the natural seed of Abraham, that he
will be their God in respect of saving grace, much less to the natural seed of
every or any believer of this time, but that notwithstanding any covenant he
has made, he takes the seed of unbelievers to be his children, and leaves the
seed of bellevers to be hardened: and this appeared plainly in Jacob and Esau
of the same Parents believers, born together, yet one loved, the other hated,
and the Gentiles called, when the Jews were rejected. We say truly the book of
life is a secret which belongs to God, who has hidden it, yea has so ordered
it by the strange variations of his calling, that his judgments should be
unsearchable, and his paths past finding out, Romans 11. 33. And therefore no man
has warrant from Gods Word to frame any judgment concerning this or that
infant to be of the invisible Church. But because Mr. B. says somewhat to prove
his consequence, let us consider what he brings. That which he says is, 1. The
Church is but one, and the difference respective. 2. He that says that they
belong to the invisible, says much* more, even that which includes that they
are visible, (if I understand his obscure expressions) Church Members. 3. That
to be a member of the Church visible, is to be one that in seeming or
appearance, or to the judgment of man, does belong to the invisible Church, or
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Answ. 1. It is true, the universal Church of the elect is but one, and the
difference respective, yet the difference such, that all the invisible are not
of the visible Church, nor all the visible of the invisible; nor by any good
consequence can it be made good, they that are of the invisible are much more
of the visible, no not when they are known to be of the invisible Church. The
first is manifest by instances, the spirits of the just made perfect, elect
persons yet unbegotten, yet uncalled, called, but not yet showing it are of the
invisible Church, but not of the visible: on the other side, secret hypocrites
are of the visible, but not of the invisible. And the last Assertion is
manifest, in that though it is more to be of the invisible Church than of the
visible, yet that which denominates a person of the visible Church does not
agree always to a member of the invisible Church. But Mr. B. thinks the
contrary to be true, and accordingly frames an explication of what it is to be
a member of the Church visible, which I must not call a definition, for that is
excepted against by him, Praefestin: Morator, sect. 11. as if in Logic any
descriptions or explications of words or things were not usually called
definitions, though imperfect. Let Us examine it however. He tells us here what
it is to be a visible Churchmember, which because he does elsewhere more fully
express, I shall have an eye on the writings elsewhere, and so much the rather,
because in this mistake of his lies much of the fallacy of Mr. Bs. second
Argument. In his Praefest. Morator, sect. 11. He says, when he distinguishes
the Church into visible and invisible, He does not divide the genus into the
species, sed aequivocum in sua aequivocata: but I think he is mistaken in this;
for then a term is equivocal, as Arist. Categ. in the beginning tells us, When
the name is only common, but not the reason of being, or the definition
according to that name; but the definition of the Church of Christ, even that
which Mr. B. himself says, All Divines are agreed on plain Scripture, etc.
page 82. that it is a Society of persons separated from the world to God, or
called out of the world, does agree to the visible Church, and therefore the
term [ Church of Christ] is not an equivocal term, but a genus, whether
univocal, or analogum. And I add, says he, that the reason of the appellation
given to the visible body is, its seeming to be the same with the mystical; or
that the name is given secondarily, borrowedly from the mystical to the visible.

Answ. I grant that the Church invisible is famosius or primarium Analogatum,
that is, the invisible Church is more truly, or in a greater degree of
propriety Christ's Church than the visible, yet do not think the name of the
Church is given secondarily, borrowedly, from the mystical to the visible. For
the original meaning of the word] [(...), translated Church] being [an
assembly, or meeting, or congregation of people in one place] (who are an
object visible) I conceive that the term [ Church first agrees to the visible
Church, and secondarily to the invisible, yea in exact speech the invisible
Church now are called [ the Church] in order to their meeting, or (...), or
General assembly at the last day, for Heb. 12. 23. these are joined together,
(...), the General assembly and Church, or as it is termed 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1.
(...), our gathering together unto Christ, at which time the visible Church and
invisible will be all one visible company, (...) one sheepfold one Sh^pheard,
John 10. 16. nor do I conceive the reason of the appellation given to the
visible body is its seeming to be the same with the mystical, but because by
their words and actions discernible by sense they own Christ as their Lord
without any consideration of their election or reprobation, sincerity or
hypocrisy, Christ's approbation, or non-approbation of them. And that the
seeming to other men to be of the invisible Church, is not the reason of the
appellation of a visible Church or Churchmember, I gather hence, because a
person may seem to be of the invisible Church, yea may be known to be of the
invisible Church of Gods elect, as for instance, Jacob and John Baptist in
their mothers womb seemed, yea were known to be of the invisible Church of Gods
elect, Luke 1. 15. yet not of the visible. For sure they were not visible
Church Members, when they were not visible men. Yea there may be many visible
men who may seem, with great probability upon signs of their conversion wrought
on them, to be of the invisible Church, and not of the visible as a number of
Indians hearing Mr. Eliat, or Mr. Mayhew* preach, and showing affection by
tears, smiting of their breasts, lifting up their eyes to Heaven and such like
actions, have seemed, from these sensible expressions, of their own, to be
elect persons, such as God intended to save, and yet I think no man will say
that at that time they were visible Church Members till they afterward made
profession of faith in Christ. Mr. B. goes on thus, So that if you ask me,
whether it be certain or only probable, that infants are members of the
visible Church? I say, certain. Answ. If Mr. B. mean it of the sorts or as he
calls it species of infants, it may easily appear by this Review that it is so
far from being certain [that infants are members of the visible Church
Christian] that it has scarce a show of probability. If he mean it of the
individuals, I say that according to Mr. Bs. own sayings, there is no certainty
that any infant is a visible Churchmember. For according to him to be a
member, of the Church visible is to be one that in seeming, or appearance, or
to the judgment of man, does belong to the invisible Church, or the Kingdom of
Heaven, But this belonging in seeming appearance, or to the judgment of man is
uncertain, its but a judgment of probability which any man, has of any man's
belonging to the invisible Church, Mr. B. himself plain Scripture etc. p. 73.
says, Therefore even Cardinal Cu^anus calls the visible Church Ecclesia
conjecturalis, as receiving its members on conjectural signs. Therefore there
is no certainty of it that any particular infant is a visible Churchmember. If
it be said that the seeming is certain, though it be not certain that they
belong to the invisible Church, I reply, so it may be said that if Turks
infants seem to be of the visible Church, though to a fool or frantic man, the
seeming is certain. But I suppose Mr. B. means that it is certain and not only
probable to considerate men to whom things are not certain of which they have
not certain evidence, that infants are visible Church Members. But this
(understanding it of particulars) is not certain upon any good evidence that
they are members of the Church invisible, and therefore it is not certain they
are visible church members since by Mr. Bs. description, to be a visible
Churchmember is to seem to be of the invisible Church, and therefore as the
seeming to be of the invisible Church is, so is the visibility, both uncertain
and as most probable, and so all baptizing of infants is upon uncertain grounds
and therefore a man cannot do it in faith he being uncertain he does his duty:
which thing is also made good elsewhere from Mr. Bs. concessions Antipaedobapt.
part. 1. sect. 35. But Mr. B. thinks he has sure grounds, and therefore he
added! If you ask me, what is it that directly or immediately constituteth them
such members. I answer, their visible or audible, that is their external
engagement by Covenant to Christ: This (performed by the parent for them) is it
on their part; supposing Christ's title to them, and the offer of himself in
Covenant.

Answ. I grant that the visible or audible that is their external engagement by
Covenant to Christ does make the persons so engaging freely, seriously,
soberly, and understandingly, visible Church Members. But that the parents
performing this for the child does make the infants such directly and
immediately, is an assertion not proved by Mr. B. nor is it true, nor
consistent with the descriptions of the visible Church and sayings about it,
which Protestants of note give, nor does it as here and elsewhere set down by
Mr. B. yield any sure ground to know certainly any particular infant to be a
visible Churchmember. That I may make good these in their order. Two things
are supposed and one thing named as directly and immediately constituting
infants visible Church Members. The things supposed are, 1. Christ's title to
them, 2. The offer of himself in Covenant to them. But there is nothing but
ambiguity in these expressions. For 1. it is uncertain whether he mean that
these are supposed when the parent does perform the engagement for the child
that Christ has a title to them, and that he does offer himself in Covenant to
them: or whether he mean that the parents engagement does constitute the child
a visible Church member, if Christ have a title to it and offer himself in
Covenant to it. If in the former sense, then it had been enough to have
mentioned the parents act without that supposition; if in the later, then what
ever the parents act be yet no man is certain of the childs visible
Church Membership by it alone without the other two. 2. What title of Christ to
them he means whether by election and gift of his Father to him, or by his
Spirit, which he that has not is none of his, Romans 8. 9. or what other title
he means I am uncertain. 3. What Covenant he means whether the absolute
Covenant of grace belonging to the elect, or the conditional Covenant to all
upon condition of faith, or the national Covenant made to Abraham, and the
people of Israel, o^* what other besides I cannot tell how to determine. 4. How
the Covenant is offered except by Preaching to them or by some secret work of
the Spirit I cannot imagine. 5. It is somewhat uncertain whether the external
engagement that may make the infant a visible Churchmember must not be of a
parent that is a real and sincere believer, or whether a dogmatical faith
serves turn. Sure in his plain Scrip. etc. chap. 29. part. 1. He makes a real
faith necessary in the parent to that sanctification without which the child
is not holy, that is a visible Churchmember. 6. Whether he make the parents
engagement to constitute immediately infants born or unborn also visible
Church Members is uncertain. Lets see what we can gather elsewhere I cannot for
present find a place where he more fully expresses himself than in his plain
scrip. etc. page 336. of the first edition, whereas says he, some stick at it
that I make the condition of the infants Church Membership and justification to
be wholly without him in the faith of the parent; I answer them. 1. That it is
evident in all the Scripture that God puts a very great difference between
the children of the faithful and other men's. Which I grant, but withal that
this is true only of the sincerely faithful and not only inexternal
profession, and yet not so as to count any a visible Churchmember in the
Christian Church for the parents faith. 2. Says he, that he makes such
promises to them, and gives them such privileges as I have expressed in this
Book. But if he mean by the promises those of the Covenant of grace, I say,
they are made only to elect and true believers, if other promises of temporal
blessings they are not made to the children of mere seeming believers but true
believers, nor do they at all reach to visible Church Membership or
Justification of children. These privileges are no where promised to the
children of believing Christians though sincere merely because of their parents
faith. And therefore that which he adds. 3. That this is to them as they are
the children of the people who believe, is false, And when he says. 4. And
that he never requires any condition inherent in the infant, that I find in
Scripture, yet others conceive an inherent condition required in an infant Heb.
12. 14. and elsewhere. But he adds, And does not this plainly tell us, that the
parents faith is the condition? if the parent be a believer, the child is
entered the Covenant, the father entering it for him, and his Deuteronomy. 29. If the
parent be not a believer, the child is left out: And what other condition can
be imagined?

Answ. If the Scripture had required no inherent condition in the infant, yet
it had not followed that the parents faith is the condition of the infants
Church Membership and justification. For there are other ways, to wit, their
election, Christ's death for them, which are a vouched as sufficient to their
justification without the consideration either of any inherent condition in the
infant, or the parents faith. Nor is it true, that if the parent be a believer
the child is entered the Covenant, the Father entering it for him and his, and
that if the parent be not a believer, the child is left out. For if it be
meant of the Covenant of grace it is most false, that if the parent be a
believer the child is entered the Covenant. Esau was the child of Isaac a
believer, Ishmael of Abraham, yet neither entered into the Covenant of grace,
neither justified by the parents faith? if it were so then they were entered
into the Covenant of grace and justified, and after out^d, which infers falling
from grace. Not is there any such Covenant of visible Church Membership which
if the parent be a believer the child i^ entered in. Nor is there a word Deuteronomy.
29. to prove it. There is nothing there set down but a narration of Moses his
^enewing the Covenant with the children of Israel in the Land of Moab, beside
the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb. It is true it is said v. 10, 11,
12, 13. They stood all before the Lord, the Commandors and the men, then the
little ones, wives, strangers, hewers of wood drawers of water, that they might
enter into Covenant, but that, 1. The parents peculiarly as parents did enter
into Covenant for their children appears not: but rather that the entering of
the Covenant was by the Rulers in behalf of the subject, as the league with the
Gibeonites was by the Princes in behalf of Israel, whereto they were bound
Josh. 9. 15, 19. nor is there any consideration of a Father entering into
Covenant for his child more than of a Husbands entering into covenant for his
wife, or a Masters entering into Covenant for his servant, and therefore if
this fact were good to prove, if the parent be a believer the child is entered
the Covenant, the Father entering for him and his: it is good to prove that if
the Husband, or Master be a believer, the wife, and servant are entered into
Covenant, the Husband and Master entering it for them and theirs, and so wives,
and servants shall be visible Church Members, as well as infants of believers,
by the faith of Husbands and Masters. 2. If the parents faith procure this
privilege for the child then either because it is his child, and then it
procures it for the child while it is his child though the child be at years
and an infidel, for then it is his child, or else upon condition the child
agree to it, but then the privilege belongs not to infants, and there is an
inherent condition required, to wit, the childs consent besides the parents
faith: if it be said that it procures it to the child while a^ infant, but not
when it comes to years how can this be true that the parents faith or
covenanting should immediately and directly constitute them visible
Church Members when infants because they are their children, and the covenant
is made with them and their children (as they say) and yet they not visible
Church Members while they are children? surely, the immediate cause continuing,
the effect continues, and therefore if the parents faith with the covenant)
make the child in infancy a visible Churchmember it must also make it a
visible Churchmember at years though an infidel. 3. Whereas it is supposed by
Mr. B. that the parents as believers entered the covenant Deuteronomy. 29. it rather
appears by Moses his preface v. 2, 3, 4. that* Moses did therefore draw them
into this solemn Covenant, because they were to that day unbelievers, 4. It is
false, that this entering into covenant did make them Church Members. For. 1.
The end of it was to prevent them from backsliding v. 18. to Idolatry, and to
prevent Gods forsaking them thereupon, v. 13. 2. They were Church Members
before both by Gods special separating of the whole nation to be his people,
and the solemn Covenant at mount Horeb, and so were members of that Church as
part of that nation. 3. If this entering into covenant made them there
Church Members visible then it made their posterity also then visible
Church Members, for with them also was that covenant made, v. 14* 15. and so
persons should be made visible Church Members before they are born. 5. If it
were true, that that covenanting made them visible, Church Members of that
Church, yet it advantageth no whit to prove infants now visible members of the
Christian Church, which is not national as that was, nor gathered by the chief
Magistrate as that was, nor enjoined such a national Covenant as that, but
consisting of particular believers of all nations, gathered by the Preaching of
the Gospel and voluntary personal covenanting for themselves only testified by
their being baptized into Christ. If any ask whether a national covenant or a
covenant of parents for children be now allowable? I answer, I deny not but
such a national or parental covenant may be allowed, and in some cases
covenient, yet I say that it makes not all the subjects and children
Church Members, nor binds them without their consent any farther than the
matter of the covenant it self binds. As for that which Mr. B. says, if the
parent be not a believer the child is left out, it is false, if we understand
it in respect of Church Membership of children at years they may be in the
Church visible though their parents were unbelievers and left out of the Church
though believers; if of justification, it is false both of infants and children
of years. And it is utterly untrue that in the Christian Church children are
made visible Church Members by parents faith, or left out because of their
unbelief. For, 1. There is no word of Scripture that says so. The three Texs
Acts 2. 39. Romans 11. 16* 17. etc. 1 Cor. 7. 14. are fully discussed already in
the first part of this review, and what Mr. Blake has replied shall be
examined (God willing) in that which follows. 2. No one passage of the New
Testament does show that any infant was reckoned for a visible Churchmember of
the Christian Church in the New Testament, but many show they were not. 3. If
the infant children of the faithful had been accounted in the Apostles times
visible members of the Christian Church there had been some thing done by the
Apostles and other holy men to have preserved their right, but no practice of
baptism on them, nor any other act can be produced that the Apostles or other
holy men did to preserve such a right, Ergo. 4. The Covenant of the Gospel is
with particular persons made believers out of all nations, their gathering by
Preaching the Gospel to them, which evidently show that God intended to take in
persons into the Christian Church upon their own faith, and not in a national
way as he did the Church of the Jews. 5. The Texts (besides the three
forenamed) brought by the Assembly Confess. of faith, chapter 25. art. 2. to wit,
Ezekiel. 16. 20, 21. Genesis 3. 15. Genesis 17. 7. and the Texts brought by Mr. B. (not
here examined) to wit, Matthew. 23. 37, 38, 39. Revel. 11. 15. Heb. 8. 6. and 7.
22. Romans 4. 11. Exodus 20. 6. Josh. 7. 25, 26. Deuteronomy 13. 12, 13, 14. Psalm. 37. 26.
Number. 31. 17. Dan. 6. 24. Deuteronomy. 20. 16, 17. Deuteronomy. 28. 4, 18, 32, 41. Mal. 2. 15*
are so palpably impertinent to prove the visible Church Membership of infants
now, that I am in a demur with my self, whether it be fit for me to bestow any
more pains in showing the impertinency of them. 6. The speeches of Protestants
of note do make the persons own profession that sign whereby they are judged,
and from whence they are termed of the visible Church. Synops. Profess.
Leydens. Disp. 40. sect. 32. Ecclesia visibilis appellatur, non tam quia
homines ipsi visibiles sunt, sed quia ipsorum ordo, professio and communio
sensibus exponuntur. Dr. Prideaux Lect. 9. sect. 3. visibilis dicitur Ecclesia
ratione communionis sensibilis membrorum inter se. Mr. Marshall himself in the
Sermon at the Spi^^le, April 1652. styled by Mr. B. that late excellent, honest
solid Sermon for unity, page 15. has these words. Secondly, that part of the
Church which is upon the earth in regard that the very life and being of it and
of all the members of it ly in internal grace, which cannot be seen, in that
respect the Church of Christ is called an invisible Church* but now as the same
Church and members does make a profession of their faith and obedience sensibly
to the eyes and ears of others in that respect it is called a visible Church;
but the visible is not one Church and the invisible another Church, but merely
the same Church under several denominations, the one from their constituting
graces, the other from the external profession of them.

There was lately a printed sheet brought to my hands entitled, The profession
of the Church, etc. which is owned by Mr. Richard Baxter in his Christian
concord, in the Preface of which are these words. And because Ministers cannot
well know who are members of the Churches, and who not, and so must be ignorant
of the extent of their charges and duties without an expression of their
peoples consent. Hence I argue, 1. If Ministers cannot know who are members of
the Churches and who not without an expression of their peoples consent, then
they cannot know infants to be members of the Churches, who express no consent.
2. Then the parents faith upon which they were baptized without their own
consent expressed does not make them visible Church Members, for if it did they
might know them by their memory and registers that they were Church Members. 3.
Then they are not rightly baptized by him without their consent. 4. Then it is
not true which Mr. B. writes plain Scripture etc. page 280. And do you not see
it fulfilled before your eyes? Are not Bewdley, Kederminster (meaning all the
people ^lder and younger) etc. and England* ( till of lat^) as fully Christ's
Disciples and so Church Members, a^ the Jews were in Covenant with God and so
Church Members? which if true Mr. B. may know who at Kederminster are
Church Members without their expressed consent, even all the inhabitants, and
that his charge is extended to all. 5. Then the gift of visible
Church Membership is repealed ^ith in the Common wealth of Israel all the
posterity of Israel were Church Members. 6. By his new course of distinguishing
the professing and subscribing parioshi^ers of Kederminster as Church Members
from the rest as not his Church Members, he gathers a Church out of a Church
and separates some Disciples from others, and does himself make a like division
in his Church (though not in so justifiable a way as he charge so fiercely on
me and others. Which I conceive to be little less than a retractation of his
own tenet about infants vis^^e Church Membership, and clearing of his
opposites. Lastly, by Mr. Bs. determinations there is no certain way to know a
particular infant to be a visible Churchmember. For in his determinations
there is no resolution, nor according to his grounds do I think can be given a
certain resolution whether the parent be such a one to whom the Covenant is,
whether he have that faith which may entitle his child to visible
Church Membership, whether the immediate parents engagement be necessary or a
remote parents engagement be sufficient, whether the engagement must be open in
the face of the Congregation, or it be sufficient that it be done privately,
when it must be, at Baptism, or at some other time, whether it need not be as
o^^ as he has children to be admitted visible Church Members, whether the
baptizer may account him a visible Churchmember, whose parents are dead,
absent, unable to come, or to express their engagement and so baptize him,
which with many other doubt^ would ^^^a^d the course of Ministers and people in
their profane infant sprinkling, if they did not with a blind obedience rest
on Mr. Bs. unproved dictates, but searched after the truth considerately and
impartially. But I pass on.

6. Says Mr. B. hence I further argue thus: I^ Christ were much displeased
with his Disciples for keeping infants from him, then he took it as a part of
their revealed duty that they should not forbid them: But the former is true,
therefore the later. Whence I further argue: if it were the Disciples known or
revealed duty not to forbid them to come to Christ* then they must needs take
it also for a revealed truth that infants in specie ( and not those numerical
only) should not be forbidden to come, ( for they could not know that those
individuals should be admitted but by knowing that infants should be admitted)
But etc.

Answ. The conclusion of the former argument may be granted, and yet the
seque^e of the later argument denied. For they might know it either by some
particular sign from Christ or some particular instinct of the Spirit, that it
was their duty to permit those infants to come to Christ, and yet not permit
any more.

But says Mr. B. Yea further. 7. If it were the Disciples revealed duty to
admit infants to come to Christ for this very reason, because of such is the
Kingdom of Heaven, then it was no secret but a revealed truth, that of such was
the Kingdom of Heaven: But the former is true. For Christ would not be angry so
much with them for not knowing that which was never revealed, on for not
admitting them when they had no means to know them to have right of admittance.
The consequence is evident the ^^for^, and so (...) follow (...) that if it
were then a revealed truth, that of such is the Kingdom of Heaven; then they
were visible members of the Church. For that sort of men that are known to
belong to Heaven ( though it be not known of the individuals) do visibly belong
to the Church; ( as I think none dare deny.)

Answ. 1. According to their exposition who understand [of such] only those
that are like little children in affection, and disposition, and not of those
particular little children then brought, much more according to their
exposition who by [of such] understand these individual infants and no other,
they might know those infants were to be admitted, and yet have no knowledge of
an universal rule for admitting^ other infants at other times. 2. But be it
granted that not only of those individuals, but also of other infants is the
Kingdom of Heaven, yet I deny they were visible Church Members* And for his
proof, I dare deny that which he f^ndly thinks ^^n^ dare deny, that they that
are known to belong to Heaven (...) visibly belong to the Church. Abraham and
(...) and J^^^^ are known to belong to Heaven, yet I do not conceive do visibly
belong to the Church. And the same is true of all the spirits of the Just* made
perfect, of elect infants ^^born, J^^^s unce^led etc. I know none ^^iung to the
visible Church but such as sensibly have professed faith in Christ. Am^s: Med.
Th. l. 1. ^. ^1. sect. 24, 25, 26, 27, (...) militant visibilis ^^su sc. vel
sensu externo. (...) prae^ect. (...) Eccl. page 246* Ecclesia aliquando
denominatur, ab^iis q^^ (...) quaeque* ^n sensum incurrunt Piscat ^^^or. ^o^*
19. 10. visi^il^ appellatur quat^ru^ ^er^^s h^bet no^^^ in oculo^ (...) (...).
Mr. B. himself Praefest in* Morator, sect. 11. By [ visible] I m^an th^^ which
is discernible by the understanding, median^^ sensu. Therefore that sort of men
that are known to belong to Heaven do not visibly belong to the Church, unless*
they are known so b^ some sensible expression, yea of their own* which is not
true of infants, much less o^ the sort of them, or any sort of being, no sort
of beings being visible, but only singula^s.

Mr. B. goes on thus, 8. But the chief evidence in the Text lies here; if
because that of such is the Kingdom; therefore it was the Disciples sin to keep
them back; them it must needs be the very species of infants that Christ means,
are of the Kingdom, (and not only the aged humble) but therefore it was the
Disciples sin to keep them back, (and their duty to admit them, or else Christ
would not have been much displeased with them) because that of such is the
Kingdom; therefore it must needs be infants themselves that are of the Kingdom.
The reason of the consequence lies here; It would be no sin (...) the
Disciples to keep away from Christ those that were (...) m^er Emble^s of the
saved. For else it would have been the Disciples sin to have forbidden all the
Sheep or Doves in the country to have been brought to Christ to l^y han^s on.
This is plain and convincing to me.

Answ. The conclusion i^ granted, that it was the infants, if they were infants
that were brought to Christ themselves, and not only the aged humble resembled
by them, that are of the Kingdom Mr. B. needed not to have cast away so much
pains in ^r^ving it against me, who do in my Postscrip^ sect* (...) say, I
stick not to that Exposition of not including those infants. But I think Mr. B.
would prove, that not only Christ said of those infants, but of the very
species of infants is the Kingdom of God* Which speech of his has in it sundry
absurditie^. 1. He seems to make infants a distinct species from the aged:
whereas in ^og^ck [ (...), mankinde] is species i^ a, the lowest k^^^^ in the
Predicament of substance; and it is a Rule in that Art* ^ha^ Se^ and Age (...)
v^riant speciem, do not vary the kind. 2* When he says, the very species are
of the Kingdom, since he grants, that by the Kingdom is meant the invisible
Church* his words s^^m to (...)* that all infants are of the invisible Church.
For the very species c^^preh^nd all the individuals, and then he must hold^ all
infants are elect* (for only the elect are of the invisible Church) and if
after they be reproba^e then election is rev^cable, and the elect may not be
saved. But if he mea^ it odely of some of that sort, and particularly all the
infants of believers neither is that t^^^, since the contrary is manifest in
Esau. But if he mean no more than this, that of some elect infants, yea and of
others than those particular infants is the Kingdom of God, I should not stick
to grant it, nor need Mr. B. thus trouble himself to prove it, though I think
his consequence is not good. For it might be their sin to keep back those
infants from Christ, if Christ did by any sign discover his mind to have them
brought, though it were not to declare their title, or any other infants title
to the Kingdom of Heaven, but only to use them as Emblems. Nor is Mr. Bs.
reason forcible, that then it might have been their sin to have forbidden Sheep
and Doves to be brought to Christ. For it may be granted, that this might have
been their sin, if Christ had in like manner declared his mind by any sign
concerning such Sheep, that they should be brought to him. Mr. Bs. arguing runs
upon this supposition, that the Apostles might know it was their duty at all
times to permit infants to come to Christ from a general truth, that of all
infants (at least of believers) is the Kingdom of God, (which he neither
proves, nor can prove) whereas the Apostles fault might be in not heeding some
particular thing he had then by some words or other sign made known of those
infants then brought, or not considering Christ's Office, and constant practice
of doing good to all, specially to infirm and diseased persons, such as those
infants might be, and as some conceive were, and accordingly brought to be
cured by Christ. But Mr. B. is not yet come to that he would have.

9. Says he, Those that Christ took in his arms, laid his hands on, and
blessed, were visible members of his Church, and not mere resemblances of such:
but some infants Christ took in his arms, laid his hands on, and blessed:
therefore some infants were members of the visible Church, (and consequently
Christ has not repealed the Church Membership of infants) and they were not
mere resemblances of such. For would Christ have blessed so a Sheep or Dove? or
are they blessed of Christ, and yet not so much as visible members of his
Church? Sure there are none visibly blessed without the visible Church. And it
was not these only; for I have proved, it was the Disciples duty to admit
others to the like blessing.

Answ. I do not say, that the infants Christ took in his arms were mere
resemblances of visible Church Members, and therefore Mr. B. in seeking to
prove it still follows a false sent, proving what is not denied. But the other
part of the conclusion is denied by me [ to wit, that some infants were members
of the visible Church] and that part of the major, [ those that Christ took in
his arms, laid his hands on, and blessed, were visible members of his Church]
and for his proof, that [ none are visibly blessed without the visible Church] I
deny it, nor does he bring any thing to prove it but his own words, sure it is
so. But I count it false. For Jacob visibly blessed Pharaoh, Genesis 47. 10. and
yet Pharaoh was not of the visible Church. When Christ did raise Jairus
daughter, heal the daughter of the Syrophoenician, I conceive they had a
visible blessing, and yet were not of the visible Church. And if it were the
Disciples duty to admit others to the like blessing, yet there is neither in
the Text nor elsewhere a word to prove, it was their duty to admit them to the
like blessing by any other than Christ himself, and his own laying hands on
them. Or if it were imagined, that Christ intended this should be a Rule to the
Disciples for their conferring a like blessing on infants, yet that it must be
a Rule to successors, and if to successors, to all Ministers to do it, or that
they must do it by baptism, and not rather as the Bishops did it in
Confirmation, by laying on of hands, has not the least shadow of proof; but
rather the contrary is more likely. And accordingly Jancerus, and Concilium
Senonense, as Chamier tom. 4. Panstr. Cath. lib. 4. cap. 9. sect. 3. the
composers of the Interim, as Osiander Epit. Hist. Eccl. Cent. 16. lib. 2. cap.
68. page 451. relate, gathered the institution of Confirmation from thence.

But Mr. B. adds, And it is yet more considerable, that all the three former
Evangelists make full mention of these passages of Christ; and therefore it is
evident that they were not taken for small circumstantials, but Doctrines of
moment for the Churches information. They are recorded also in Matthew. 18. 2, 3,
4, etc. Matthew. 19. 13, 14. Luke 9. 47. Luke 18. 16, 17. I desire any tender
conscienced Christian, that is in doubt whether infants should be admitted
members of the visible Church, and would fain know what is the pleasure of
Christ in this thing, to read over the Texts impartially, and considerately,
and then bethink himself, whether it be more likely that it will please Christ
better to bring or solemnly admit infants into the Church, or to shut them out;
and whether these words of Christ so plain and earnest will not be a better
plea at Judgment for our admitting infants, than any that ever the Anabaptists
brought will be to them for refusing them.

Answ. Mr. B. wanting proof falls here to his Rhetoric, which elsewhere he
falsely charge on me as my fault, but is indeed the chief part of his Book,
and prevails much with the most of Readers. But it is the property of childish
persons to be affrighted with such mormo's. I grant that the passages of Christ
were by the Evangelists taken not for small circumstantials, but Doctrines of
moment for the Churches information: yet not teaching infants visible
Church Membership and baptism. What ever Christian I be, I have read over the
Texts impartially, and considerately as I think this and other writings show,
and I do declare in the presence of God that these passages do confirm me in
this truth, that it is not the will of Christ that infants should be baptized,
because he neither baptized, nor appointed these to be baptized, and that the
words of Christ here are so impertinent that they are more likely to be a plea
against infant baptizers who on such weak conjectures go against the plain
institution of Christ Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15. 16. and the constant use of
the Apostles and first ages. And I do further declare that on my most serious
studies I do resolve notwithstanding the evasions they bring, that the plea
they make hence for infant baptism, and that which is alleged of their being
Disciples, visible Church Members, in the Covenant, does as well tie them to
admit them to the Lords supper as to baptism, and that in refusing to admit
them to baptism we have as good a plea and better at Judgment then they have in
refusing to admit them to the Lords Supper. Nor is it to me any other than a
sad sign either of injudiciousness or slothfulnes in searching after the truth,
or prejudice, or adhering to men's sayings out of reverence of their persons, or
faction or some such like evil quality both in Ministers and people even those
of tender consciences that they still retain so gross an abuse as infant
baptism is upon such weak reasons as they do, and neglect yea and oppose the
baptism of believers so manifestly Commanded by Christ and practiced by his
Apostles. But I must follow Mr. B.

But what says Mr. T. against this? why. 1. He says, it was some
extraordinary blessing to them that Christ intended Apol. p. 149. Answ. 1. it
was a discovery of their title to the Kingdom of Heaven. It was such an
extraordinary blessing that included the ordinary. If extraordinary blessing
the^ much more ordinary. 2 It was such as the Disciples should have known that
these should be admitted to, or else Christ would not have been displeased.

Answ. It is true I give this reason why I conceive that [of such] included
those infants as conceiving from the circumstances of the thing that Christ
intended some extraordinary blessing to them, and declaration concerning them.
And in my Examen page 147. I say, Christ's action in this business is proper to
him as the great Prophet of the Church and extraordinary, and therefore yields
no ground for an ordinary rule of baptizing infants by the ordinary Ministry,
no more than Christ's whipping buyers out of the Temple, though related by the
four Evangelists, for an ordinary practice answerable thereto. Now this is not
denied by Mr. B. But he says, it was such an extraordinary blessing as included
the ordinary: if extraordinary blessing, then much more ordinary. But 1. these
things are said without proof. 2. Their falsehood is showed, and the rest is
answered before.

He adds, But Mr. T. says, Apol. page 151. That [the reason of Christ's anger
was their hindering him in his design, not the knowledge they had of their
present visible Title; this is but a dream.] To which I answer, 1. Mr. T. is as
bold to speak of Christ's thoughts without Book, and to search the Searcher of
hearts, as if he were resolved to make Christ's meaning be what he would have
it. 2. What Design was it that Christ had in hand? Was it any other than the
discovery of his mercy to the species of infants, and to those among others?
and a presenting them as a Pattern to his followers, and to teach his Church
humility and renovation, and to leave them an assurance against Anabaptists,
that it is his pleasure, that infants should not be kept from him.

Answ. 1. There was no such boldness in my speech as Mr. B. rashly, and like a
calumniator charge me with, but such as must be granted true, if we conceive
Christ to have acted as a rational being that propounds an end or design in his
actings. 2. The last of the designs Mr. B. mentions, assuring that it is his
pleasure that infants should not be kept from him; meaning by not baptizing
them, is his figment. His design I knew without searching Christ's heart
immediately by reading his facts, which show his ends to be 1. the blessing
those infants. 2. Teaching Doctrine concerning such. 3. Showing himself thereby
the great Prophet of his Church, and bestower of blessings.

3. Says Mr. B. How did the Disciples hinder Christ's design? Not by hindering
him immediately, but by rebuking those that brought the infants. 4. If this
were no fault in them, why should Christ be displeased, and much displeased at
it? And how could it be their fault to hinder people from bringing infants to
Christ, if they might not know that they ought to be admitted? And could they
know of Christ's private intents and designs? Were there but this one
consideration hence to be urged, I du^st challenge Mr. T. to answer (as far as
modesty would permit a challenge) that is, if Christ had intended only that
humility or docibleness should be commended from these infants as an Emblem to
his Disciples, then it could be none of their fault to forbid bringing of them
to Christ; for how could they know what use Christ would make of them? or by
what Emblem he would teach them? or when he would do it? All the creatures in
the world may be Emblems of some good; and must they therefore permit the
bringing of all to Christ? Christ had not told them his design before hand to
teach them by these Emblems; and when they knew his mind they desisted.

Answ. They might know Prophets did bless persons even little ones, they knew
that Matthew. 18. 2. Christ had before familiarly used a little child, and so
was not averse from them, they knew or might know that Christ was the great
Prophet that was to come into the world, that he made it his work to do good,
that he did permit all sorts of persons that came for healing or other
blessings to come to him, and therefore it was their fault to hinder Christ in
this design, and to hinder any that came to him for his blessing. I neither say
that his design was only to teach humility by these as an Emblem, nor that
they knew or might know what use Christ would make of these infants. Mr. Bs.
challenge is upon a mistake, as if I affirmed, that Christ would have those
infants brought only to teach humility by them, when the very words he cites
are to the contrary. I am weary with answering such mere cavils of a man, who
if he were not set on wrangling, might by heeding my words answer himself.

5. Says he, If it had been only for the present design, then Christ would
have spoke but of those individual infants, and have said, Suffer those now to
come: But it appears from the Text, 1. that it was not those individuals more
than others that the Disciples were offended at, or disliked should be brought;
but the species, or those infants because infants. 2. And that Christ does not
only speak against their hindering those individuals, but the species, and lays
them down a rule and command for the future as well as for the present that
they should suffer little children to come to him, and not forbid them.

Answ. It is in all the Evangelists (...), which notes the children then
brought, and no other, though I deny not but this fact and the reason thereof
were a rule for the future as well as for the present, yet not either for the
Apostles or any Successors to lay hands on them, or baptize them; but for them,
if any more infants were thus brought to Christ's person, that his own hands
might be laid on them, that they should permit it.

6. Says Mr. B. And he does not command this upon the reason of any private
design, but because of such is the Kingdom of Heaven.

Answ. Mr. B. still mistakes me, as if I had said [private design] that is a
design proper to those infants only; whereas my words were [present design]
which I show before what it was, and thereby it may be easily conceived I meant
such a design as tended to show his Office, readiness to do good, and interest
that infants and such as were like them might have to the Kingdom of Heaven.

7. Says he, And where Mr. T. says, It was not from any knowledge they had of
their present visible title; I answer, Who said it was? Did Mr. Blake? No; but
it was a thing the Disciples ought to have known, that infants are welcome to
Christ, and that of such is the Kingdom, and therefore because of such is his
Kingdom, they should not be kept from him? God will not be much displeased with
men for being ignorant of that which they ought not to know.

Answ. Mr. Blake in his Answer to my letter had said page 90. They (the infants
brought to Christ) had a present visible title such as the Apostles ought to
have known, and this he gives as the reason why Christ was so much displeased
with the Disciples forbidding them to be brought. To which my words are rightly
opposed. Nor is any thing put on Mr. Blake But his own words. If Mr. B. will
not say that Christ's anger was from any knowledge the Apostles had of the
infants present visible title, then he must acknowledge the Apostles had no
knowledge of the visible Churchmembership of infants then, or visible title to
one Church privilege which shows that in Christ's Church no infants were then
counted visible Church members, else these could not but know it. Nor is there
any thing in the Text that shows that Christ was angry with them for not
knowing this, nor did this teaching inform them in this, nor did Christ admit
them as Mr. Blake says, to a Church privilege, nor if it were true that the
blessing were a Church privilege common to all Church Members, yet infants were
as capable of baptism as of it, since the institution of baptism is otherwise.
To me it is a strong presumption that the Apostles understood not Christ's words
and deeds as importing Church privilege conferred on those infants which did
infer a title to baptism, as Mr. Blake imagins, in that the Apostles did not
baptize them, which is confessed by some paedobaptists, and appears both in
that no such thing is enjoined them by Christ, or related as done by them, and
what was done to them is related as done by Christ himself who did not baptize
John 4. 2. and it is said Matthew. 19. 15. when he had put his hands on them he
departed thence, and with him his Disciples, as appears by the speeches of them
upon occasion of the young man's conference with Christ, which presently
followed. Now if the Apostles knew not such baptizability of infants there is
no likelihood that Christ's words or blessing proved such baptizability. If they
did know it, and yet did them not right, no doubt Christ would have been more
angry for their not baptizing them, then for rebuking those that brought them.
And whereas Mr. B. blesses Christ for his discovery concerning infants as he
construes it, I bless God that has showed me the frivolousnes of Mr. Bs.
arguings, and I say of such as are led away with such trifling reasons, as the
Apostles said 1 Cor 14. 38. If any man be ignorant let him be ignorant. As for
his observation in the close of the chapter its like the rest. For Christ's
calling his Disciples little children and the Apostles so calling Christians
shows love and tenderness, but not that infants are visible Church Members, no
more then Christ's calling the same his Lambs and sheep, John 21. 15, 16, etc.
shows that sheep and Lambs are visible Churchmembers. Thus much for answer of
that chapter of M. B.

SECT. XVIII.
The 41. Chapter of Mr. Blakes Vindic. Foed. about Christ's speech of little
children, Matthew. 19. 14. is answered, and my sayings in my Postscript
vindicated.

MR. Blake since the publishing of my Postscript to my Apology in reply to his
Answer to my letter in his Book entitled Vindic. foed. c. 41, 43. sect. 1.
has published somewhat that is to be further examined. He says, They looked
upon Christ (as it seems) as a great Prophet highly in favor with God, and
such were wont to bless in the name of God, and their blessing was highly
prized, and hands were used to be imposed on persons in blessing, Genesis 48. 14.
which I allow. He sets down six positions, the first of which having confirmed,
he speaks thus of me. Mr. T. brought his reasons against this, to have nipt all
in the bud, but those he has quit, and is brought to confess that he
contradicted himself in them, and has not a word to excuse his false quotation
out of Mark, concerning scandalizing, only excusing himself that he delivered
himself doubtfully in them. Apol. 149.

Answ. It is true I brought in my Examen p. 146. Piscators reasons in his
Observe. 11. on Matthew. 19. 14. to prove the little children Matthew. 19. 13. 14.
not to have been infants, but boys who were capable of instruction, which it
is true I say in my Apol p. 149. I d^d not stick to, nor need I since at first I
said Examen page 145. only, It is doubtful whether these were infants or no.
Nor is it truly said by Mr. Bl. that I excused my self, as if I had been in a
fault. For it is true which I alleged, not only Piscator conceiving they were
not infants, but Estius also Annot. ad Marc. 10. 13. saying it is not certain
that they were infants which could neither speak nor g^. Which very
doubtfulness does weaken the argument thence for infant baptism, yet I had no
reason to stick to that, there being other answers sufficient besides. Not is
it true which he says, that I am brought to confess I contradicted my self in
the reasons brought, and that they were my reasons, for I expressly said they
were Piscators reasons, and therefore though Piscator should contradict my
exposition of Matthew. 18. 5. in those reasons I need not own it, much less do I
confess that I contradict my self in them, as Mr. Blake falsely charge me as
one that cares not what he prints so he may fully me with a black coal. Nor was
any false quotation out of Mark used by me, I only brought Piscators words and
de quali non scandalizando ibidem monet, which if he misapplied to infants, and
thereby crossed my interpretation of Matthew. 18. 5, 6. he opposed himself,
though I think neither Piscator nor my self, were guilty of any
self-contradiction, but Mr. Bl. of mistake and calumny. Mr. Bl. says he knows
not that any in print has maintained it that little children brought to Christ
were diseased so as to have need of cure. But there is now a Book in folio
written by Mr. Samuel. Fisher entitled Baby baptism mere babism, in which p.
134: are these words, that he should touch them, and put his hands on them and
pray, no question 'twas in order to healing, for 'twas at a time when he healed
many others, if you compare this passage as it is in Matthew. 19. with the first
and second verses of the chapter: yea v. 15. it is plainly expressed what he
did, i. e. he laid his hands upon them and departed thence; besides Luke says,
they brought little children to him also that he should touch them: which [
also] shows that others were brought too, as sick folks commonly were, because
virtue went out of him, so that as many as touched him were made perfectly
whole. Nor do I think Mr. Blakes reasons sufficient to countervail the other:
For though the Disciples well knew that it was usual with Christ to cure those
that labored under infirmities of all ages, yet they sometimes showed their
unwillingness to have persons trouble Christ about diseased persons as Matthew.
15. 23. Luke 10. 39. and whereas Mr. Bl. says, the Evangelist would never have
concealed this reason and mentioned another, if he mean it of the reason why
the Disciples rebuked the bringers of the little children, the truth is the
Evangelists mention no reason at all of the Disciples rebuke, if he mean it of
the reason why Christ would have them brought, such reason stands well with
this, that the children were diseased, brought to Christ to be cured, and cured
by Christ.

I had said, there is no certainty only conjecture that they were the children
of believers, Mr. Bl. sets down his third position thus, These were infants of
such parents that were in Covenant with God, which he proves Matthew. 19. 1. and
15. 24, 26. Romans 15. 8. This farther appears by that which they requested for
these infants: This Mr. T. seems to yield; they came (says he) to Christ upon
the conceit that he was a Prophet, and so they might bring children to him to
be blessed; And farther says, if this reason prove any thing, it is that the
childrens parents were Jews, Apol. page 150. which is all that we contend for;
the Jews as yet were in Covenant.

Answ. 1. The reasons of Mr. Bl. some of them prove rather the bringers to be
Jews than the parents. 2. The proving the parents to be Jews (if any do prove
it) is not a proof that they were believers, for there were a great part, if
not the greatest part by much of the Jews unbelievers, John 12. 37, 38. And
what he says, The Jews as yet were in Covenant, if he mean it of all the Jews,
and of the covenant of grace in Christ it is palpably false, contradictory to
the Apostles determination Romans 9. 7, 8. where it is expressly resolved that all
the natural children of Abraham and Israel were not at any time children of the
promise: If he mean it of any other covenant, or promise of God, or of some of
the Jews, it would nothing avail him for his purpose, though his Proposition
were granted him.

His fourth Proposition is thus expressed, These infants themselves were in
covenant, and stood in relation to Christ, bearing his name, and being of his
people; and were not as Heathens in their present state without Christ, aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise.
This is evident by their free admission by Christ, and the reason by him given.
When this was pressed upon Mr. T. in solemn disputation, he took time to
consider, and after more than two years in his Examen, we have an answer which
shame will not suffer him to own. But in his Apology does disclaim, yet not
convinced by Mr. M. my self, or any other: it is enough with me, if the truth
is confessed; if the truth may have the honor, I am satisfied.

Answ. Were I nor sufficiently acquainted with Mr. Bls. charges without cause,
I should be jealous of my self that there is some thing done by me which might
occasion this imputation. What was pressed on me in the disputation in London,
Anno 1643. and what time or for what reason I took time to answer after 10.
years elapsed, I cannot trust in my memory to inform me. What answer I gave in
my Examen which in my Apology I disclaim, and shame will not now suffer me to
own, concerning this proposition of Mr. Bl. and its proof, it is such a riddle
to me that I cannot yet tell how to understand it, except I have Mr. Bls.
heifer to plough with. Sure I am, this kind of crimination which Mr. Bl.
uses, is very unsuitable to a clear and solid disputant thus by dark flirts,
and quips to abuse me; But I think it best to slight his charge, presuming
intelligent men will be little moved with it. As for his position, the terms
being ambiguous, and especially the term [in covenant] being used (as I often
complain) in such variety of senses or rather sometimes nonsense by
Paedobaptists, that it seems to be used by them to elude rather than to inform,
it may be either granted or denied as the terms are explained, and if this did
occasion me to take time to answer it I did therein prudently, and if after two
or ten years my answers be various they are so upon due considerations; For
present I grant, those infants (if they were infants) mentioned Matthew. 19. 14.
were in the covenant of saving grace, stood in relation to Christ as chosen in
him, and in that respect bare his name as his bre^heren, were of his invisible
people, not as heathens in their present state without Christ being given to
him, nor aliens from the Commonwealth of the Israel of God the invisible
Church of the elect, nor strangers from the covenant of promise, that is, the
covenant of promise commensurate with election of grace, and this I grant to be
evident of those particular persons if not by their free admission to Christ,
yet by the reason by him given, it being supposed that [(...), of such] is
meant of them as well as of those that were like them in humility. But if the
position be understood of being in covenant either by their own act of
cove^anting, or that which is called by Paedobaptists in their nonsense or
proper gibberish the outward covenant, or that it be meant that they stood in
relation to Christ as visible members of the Christian church in their present
state while they were infants, I deny it to be true, or that it is evident by
their free admission by Christ, and the reason by him given.

Mr. Bls. fifth position is, They were admitted upon a common right, equally
belonging to all infants of covenanting parents, and not by virtue of any
extraordinary privilege, peculiar to them, and not common to other. This is
plain, says he, 1. By the general admission which he gives to infants on this
occasion; Suffer little children come to me, and ( as Mr. T. more than once
observes) Extraordinarium non facit regulam communem, here is a general Rule,
all have admission, and therefore there is nothing extraordinary. 2. It was
such a right that the Disciples of Christ ought to have understood, as plainly
appears by Christ's sore displeasure conceived against them, for forbidding
their admission to him, and that must be a known right, and not secret.

Answ. 1. There is not a word in the Text to prove that they were admitted upon
any right to their admission as due to them, and which might be claimed for
them, but they were admitted out of grace. 2. There is nothing in the Text to
prove they were the children of covenanting parents, or that they were admitted
out of any respect at all to their parents state, whatever it were. As for Mr.
Bls. reasons. To the 1. I say, The words are a Command only for those little
children, (...), Suffer the little children, to wit them brought to come to me;
nor does it appear by any after instance of Christ or his Apostles that this
was understood as a general rule, that all should have admission. 2. Were it
granted that this rule of Christ did reach to others besides those then
brought, yet there is nothing in the Text to prove this rule of admission to be
only of infants of covenanting parents or to these or any other by reason of
right from their covenanting parents. Yea rather if any right be intimated it
is the personal right of the infants, for of such is the Kingdom of God. 2. It
is true, the Disciples of Christ ought to have understood they were to be
admitted, But that this was the reason why they ought to know they were to be
admitted because of their known right is imagined but not proved. And how or
for what reasons they might know they were to be admitted is showed above in
answer to Mr. B.

Mr. Bl. adds, Mr. T. indeed says, They were not admitted out of any known
right common to others, but a perculiar privilege as being elected, for which
he quotes Piscator; when as he has heard (and replies nothing) that Piscator
syllogistically concludes the contrary.

Answ. I said not, they were admitted out of a peculiar privilege as being
elected, nor for this did I quote Piscator, and therefore in my animadversions
in my postscript I made no reply to Mr. Bl. in this thing. My words in my
Examen page 146, 147. were these. 4. Let it be granted they were the infants of
believers and that it is said, of these is the Kingdom of God, it may be as
Piscator observes referred not to their present estate, as if for the present
they were in the Kingdom of God that is believers and justified; but that they
were elect persons, and so in time of them should be the Kingdom of God: in
which I do not at all assign the reason why the little children were to be
admitted to come to Christ, nor do I quote Piscator for it, and therefore Mr.
Bl. mis^ecites my words, but show how it might be true that of those infants
was the Kingdom of God, yet in their present estate they neither believers nor
justified. Against which Piscator is so far from concluding syllogistically (as
Mr. Bl. says) that disputing against the Lutherans affirming infants to be
believers because of Christ's words, Matthew. 19. 14. in his Observe 11. out of
that v. he says thus, Deinde etiamsi ponatur, sermonem hic de infantibus esse:
tamen non potest hinc certo concludi illos praeditos esse ^ide. Et^nim
infantium potest esse regnum coe^orum, etiamsi non credant, dummodo sint
electi: which are the effect of my words. And for the rest that follows in Mr.
Bl. about Christ's design, and the Disciples duty to know it, and their sin in
being ignorant of it: there is answer before in the answer to Mr. B. Nor is
there a word in my writing that tends to this, that either they knew or were
bound to know the election of those infants, or that Christ was angry with them
for not knowing it: I have often said, it was either because they heeded not
some particular intimation of his mind concerning those infants, or some
general truth concerning Christ's Office, and his readiness to do good to all
sorts of persons, as there was opportunity offered, from which he ought not to
be hindered by them. I do not confess, as Mr. Bl. says of me, that elect
infants might be baptized, were they known: but that elect infants being actual
believers, if they were known might be baptized, and therefore I need not fear
Christ's displeasure for not admitting elect infants to baptism, no not though
they were known to be elect, except they were known to be believers, much less
for not admitting to baptism those that are neither known to be elect nor
believers: But Mr. Bl. has just cause to fear the displeasure of Christ for
admitting to baptism those that are neither known to be elect, nor believers,
but infants of Parents who are manifestly children of the Devil,
covenant-breakers, etc. according to his Doctrine in opposition to Mr. Firmin
Vindic. Foed. cap. 47. which is a higher degree of profanation of the Ordinance
of Baptism, than many Paedobaptists fall into.

Mr. Bls. sixth Position is, They are here admitted by our Savior Christ to a
Church-privilege. This appears Numb. 6. 22, 23, etc. to the end of the Chapter.
The Israel of God are under the blessing, little ones are ordered to be
received to this blessing, little ones therefore are of his Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.
9. These are the blessed of the Lord upon this account, Jer. 31. 23. children
are within this number, they are the inheritage of the Lord, Psalm. 127. 3. and
consequently admitted by our Savior Christ to this privilege of a blessing.

Answ. 1. Mr. Bls. Position is ambiguous, 1. It is uncertain whether he mean it
of Christ's laying on hands, or his prayer also, and blessing with it, which is
the Church-privilege. 2. Whether he make it a privilege of the visible or
invisible Church. 3* Whether he will have these to be a constant
Church-privilege. 4. To whom he will have it a Church-privilege. 5. By whom it
is to be done since Christ's ascension, whether by Apostles only, or Bishops,
or Presbyters. All the proof he brings for blessing, as a Church-privilege, is
the prayer of Aaron and his sons, for the whole congregation of the children of
Israel, which how it proves Christ's laying on of hands, and praying or blessing
of a few little children, (when Christ was neither Aaron nor any of his s^^s)
to be a Church-privilege, such as was Aaron and his sons blessing, which
belonged to the Levitical Priesthood, I see no^. Mr. Bls. arguing is like as if
his wits went a wool-gathering. This, says he, appears Numb. 6. 22, 23, etc.
What is that which he says appears? It should be his sixth Position, They are
here admitted by our Savior Christ to a Church-privilege: but his conclusion
is, Little ones therefore are of his Israel; and this is proved by a syllogism
that is either faulty in that there are four terms, or else it is in the second
figure of all Affirmatives. If it be said that Mr. Bl. infers from that and the
rest his Position, neither is that true: for his conclusion is this, and
consequently admitted by our Savior Christ to this privilege of a blessing;
which though not denied by me, yet is neither his sixth Position, nor any thing
in the Texts he brings proves it, which are all impertinently alleged by him,
and the last especially, which he seems to understand, as if they were said to
be the heritage of the Lord, as if they were the Lords peculiar possession,
whereas the meaning is Psalm 127. 3. that children are such a blessing to
parents, that they are an heritage given by the Lord, as Ainsworth rightly
expounds it; and so an house-privilege rather than a Church-privilege is there
meant, as the words following show.

Mr. Bl. had said, page 91. of his answer to my Letter, there is no direct
precedent for baptism in particular, but for Churchprivileges of which infants
are capable, on which I inferred, if [ but] be adversative, (which must be
granted if Mr. Bl. speaks sense) then Mr. Bl. grants that infants are capable
of Churchprivileges, not of baptism. To this Mr. Bl. replies, 1. that I make a
great triumph of his speech. 2. That I leave out that which would fully explain
his meaning. 3. That his meaning is, this act of Christ is no direct precept
for baptism, but of Church-priledges in general. 4. If I can make it good that
baptism is no Church-privilege I have wrested this Argument out of his hand,
and that this Text as to the Argument falls, otherwise it is of force and an
undeniable consequence.

Answ. 1. I said truly, that grant which Mr. Bls. words (if he understand
himself) implies, overthrows all his dispute, and is a triumph (if it be to be
so called) on a victory. 2. I left out nothing which being put in would have
hindered the inference I make: but Mr. Bl. as if he were ashamed of his own
words, leaves out in his explication the words [ of which infants are capable]
from whence I made my inference. 3. His own explication makes the matter worse.
For, 1. if this act of Christ be a direct precept of Church-privileges in
general, then it is of baptism in particular, being a Church-privilege, that
which is said of the Genus being true (as Logicians say) of the species,
Quicquid praedicatur de genere praedicatur de specie. Whence it follows Mr. Bl.
speaks in consistencies. 2. It follows also, that if it be a direct precept for
to admit infants to Church-privileges in general, then it is to admit them to
the Lords Supper, to Ordination, for these are Church-privileges. If he mean no
more than this, that they are to be admitted to prayer for them, and that is
the Church-privilege he means, I should grant it, and accordingly when desired
I do both publish the names, days of infants birth, and pray for them. 4. What
he would gather from hence, by necessary consequence I wrest out of his hands,
I think easily, without gratifying Socinians, Antibaptists, (who if they
triumph over Antipaedobaptists, and beat them down with their own weapons in
the parts w^^re Mr. Bl. lives, the more shame for them, who betray by their
unskilfulness so good a cause) with this, that baptism is no Churchprivilege.
His Arguments are thus formed, cap. 43. sect. 1. They which are admitted to
Church-privileges have right to baptism, the leading* privilege; but infants
are admitted to Church-privileges, Mark 10. 14. Matthew. 19. 14. Luke 18. 16.
Infants therefore have right to baptism.

To which I answer, if he mean by [ Church-privileges] any other than prayer,
and the laying of hands on them by Christ; I deny the minor; if he meant it of
them I deny the major. And whereas he makes baptism the leading
Church-privilege, I grant it is so in order to the Lords Supper, yet to be
among the catechized, commended to God in prayer, may be antecedent
Church-privileges to baptism.

His other Argument is this, The children of the Kingdom, that with others make
up the Kingdom of God, have right to baptism; but infants are the children of
the Kingdom that with others make up the Kingdom of God, Mark 10. 14. Matthew.
19. 14. Luke 18. 16. Infants therefore have right to baptism.

To which I answer. The phrase [ Children of the Kingdom] I find diversely
used, Matthew. 8 12. it is appropriated to the Jews, and it is spoken of them
which shall be cast out into utter darkness. But Matthew. 13. 38. it is meant of
the elect, who shall be saved. In the former sense, the major is manifestly
false, and the minor can be only true of Jews infants: in the later sense the
major Proposition is true of children of the Kingdom who are visibly such by
their profession of faith in Christ; and the minor is false; if it be meant of
such as are invisibly children of the Kingdom, the major is denied, and the
minor is granted.

Mr. Bl. adds somewhat more about the meaning of the words of Christ, [ of such
is the Kingdom of Heaven] And first he says, The particle [ such] cannot here
have reference to their qualification, that those that were qualified as these
(in humility and meekness) had their interest; so are Sheep and Doves as well
as infants, not proud nor revengefull.

Answ. This reason is not of force to prove that [ such] cannot here have
reference to the qualification of meekness and humility. For being so expounded
[such] notes others than the infants, to wit, men that are humble and meek
positively, as infants are negatively, and this cannot be said of Doves or
sheep, yet infants may be included as Beza does Annot: in Matthew. 19. 14. talium
(...), id est, horum and similium, ut supra. 18. which is plainly proved by our
Lord Christ's own words Mark 10. 15. where [ of such v. 14.] is [ whosoever
receives the Kingdom of God as a little child v. 15.] and so it is meant
Matthew. 18. 5. as I have proved above. Nor is Mr. Bls. reasoning of force, That
which the Disciples took to be an impediment of force to hinder infants, and a
just ground of those that brought them, is that which Christ understands in
this reproof of the Disciples and admission of their infants* But it was their
want of growth, their littleness, which the Disciples took to be a just
impedinent, and which occasioned their reproof, Ergo. For the conclusion may be
granted, yet this proves not that by [ of such] is meant in respect of quantity
only, not of quality, but only that in the words before [ suffer little
children to come to me] quantity is meant not quality, for in those words only
is the reproof of the Disciples, and Christ's admission of infants. The other
are a reason of his command, which is good if by [ such] be meant likeness in
quality as well as agreement in quantity. And for Mr. Bls. paraphrase, it is
but his own conceit, that the little children had no need of cure, or that the
Disciples rebuke was after his model. But enough of this before.

Mr. Bl. excepts against me for saying, the Kingdom of Heaven is meant of the
Kingdom of glory, and that on this hinge the answer to the whole argument
turns. He says, I had six exceptions against the orthodox interpretation of
this scripture in my Examen, being hunted out of all the rest I think to find
s^m sh^lter there. But this is his figment, for though I of mine own accord
expressed some only as doubtful, and let pass others for more ample
conviction of the invalidity of the vain arguing, called falsely Orthodox
interpretation of this Text by paed baptists, yet I did not so much as
relinquish one of the exceptions, much less have been hunted from them, as Mr.
Bl. after his pedant que fashion talks. But in opposition to me he first says,
That all hangs not on this, appears, in that our Savior had said enough in his
order for admission of these infants on which we can build our conclusion. And
then brings his argument, which being answered before there is no need of any
more reply to this. Yet I add, that of the argument drawn by Mr. Bl. page 91.
of his answer to my letter none that are int^ressed in the Church of Christ
which is his Kingdom may be denied an admission to it by baptism, but infants
have their interests in the Church of Christ which is his Kingdom, and
therefore may not be denied admission by baptism; the hinge did turn on this
point, that by the Kingdom of Heaven is meant the visible Church, into which he
would have infants admitted by baptism; and my speech is true of that Argument.

Mr. Blake adds, Secondly, for his Reasons there is not force in them, 1. Says
he, The kingdom of God must be understood Mark 10. 14. as it is v. 15. and Luke
18. 16. as v. 17. and Matthew. 19. 14. as it is in both those; This I prove,
because our Savior from their estate infers a likeness to them in others for
the same estate, Apol. page 150. This Argument howsoever it carries more color
than usually is found in Mr. T. his Reason, yet it is not conclusive. It may be
taken more largely in Christ's argumentation, and in a more restrained sense in
his words of instruction and application, as in a place much parallel I shall
show, 1 Cor. 6 1, 2. There we have the Apostles reproof, v. 1. and his Reason,
v. 2* as in the Evangelists we have Christ's assertion confirming his reproof,
v. 14 and his application, v. 15. Now [Saint] in the Apostles reproof is taken
more largely than it is taken in his Reason. A visible Saint is meant in the
first place, a real and glorified Saint in the second; visible Saints may judge
in small matters, for real Saints in glory shall judge the world, shall judge
Angels; and so it may be here, infants have their present title to the visible
Kingdom; and men qualified as infants, shall only enter the Kingdom of Glory.

Answ. I see Mr. Bl. so pertinacious in what he has said in this argument,
that he is cedere nescius, he knows not how to yield to any thing against his
dictates, though it be never so plain. He denies not Mark 10. 15. Luke 18. 17.
must be understood of the Kingdom of glory for the reason given by me in my
Postscript The proposition being false, being understood of the visible Church;
many proud persons entering therein, as Simon Magus, Diotrephes, etc. But
denies it to be conclusive, and therefore must deny the major. But he answers
nothing to the proof of it, because our Savior from their estate infers a
likeness to them in others for the same estate. Whence the argument arises.
The same estate is meant Mark 10. 14. which is mean v. 15. This is proved from
the inference of Christ which is, as of little children is the kingdom of God,
so whosoever does not receive the Kingdom of God as a little child shall not
enter into [(...), it] or the same estate, the relative particle plainly notes
it to be the same. But the estate Mark 10. 15. is meant of the Kingdom of
glory, which is proved, because otherwise the proposition were false: nor is it
denied by Mr. Bl. therefore the argument is most plainly conclusive. Mr. Bls.
answer is either upon a wilful or heedeless mistake of my argument as if it
were only from the identity of the words in both verses, whereas it was taken
from the sameness of estate gathered by the force of our Saviors whether
application of v. 15. as Mr. Bl. terms it, or inference from what he had said
v. 14. and the relative [(...), it.] I deny not that it is frequent according
to the figure in Rhetoric termed antanaclasis to use terms sometimes in the
same verse elegantly in a different sense: but it cannot be so here for the
reasons given. And yet Mr. Bls. instance 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2. is not right: For 1
Cor. 6* 2. the term [ Saint] does not note a glorified Saint. For the sense is
this, know ye not these now despised Saints shall hereafter judge the world, and
so though it be true that then they shall be glorified, yet the term [ Saints]
is attributed to them according to their present estate of debasement, in which
the very Emphasis is put. Besides if it had been so that in the one v. it noted
a visible Saint here, and in the other a glorified Saint hereafter, yet the
same persons were meant in both verses: whereas if Mark 10. 14. were meant the
visible Church, who are a number of persons, and v. 15. were meant an estate of
glory, there would be a greater difference than in 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2. and
therefore Mr. Bl. does not rightly say, the one place is much parallel to the
other.

Mr. Bl. goes on. His second reason, that Christ directs his speech to the
Disciples already in the visible Church, and therefore speaks not of the Church
visible, I know not how to make up into a reason; if I understood it, I would
either yield or answer it.

Answ. The reason is thus formed. The same is meant Mark 10. 14. which is meant
v. 15. as is before proved. But by [ the Kingdom of God] v. 15. is not meant
the visible Church, Ergo, neither v. 14. The minor is thus proved. By [ the
Kingdom of God] is meant that estate into which the Apostles had not but were
thereafter to enter into. For the speech is meant of them as well as others,
and directed to them, Verily I say to you, and so where the same thing is said
Matthew. 18. 3. it is said to and of them, Except ye be converted and become as
little children ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of the Heavens. But the
estate the Apostles were to enter into was not the visible Church, for that
they had entered into already, but the Kingdom of glory. Therefore by [ the
Kingdom of God Mark 10. 14.] is meant the Kingdom of glory.

Mr. Bl. adds, The third reason, that the speech Mark 10. 15. Luke 18. 17. is
like Matthew. 18. 3, 4* but there it is meant of the Kingdom of glory; Ergo, so
here, is answered already. If Mark 10. 15. Luke 18. 17. be like Matthew. 18. 3,
4. yet Mark 10. 14. Luke 18. 16. which we have in question is unlike Matthew. 18.
3* 4.

Answ. 1. If Mark 10. 15. be like Matthew. 18. 3, 4. then also Mark 10. 14. is in
like manner understood the Kingdom of Heaven, as Matthew. 18. 3, 4. For it is
understood of the same Mark 10. 14, 15. as is proved before. 2. Mr. B.
conceived them like by putting them together in the chapter before answered,
and the New Annot. and Diodati, whose Testimonies are alleged in my Postscript.
page 151.

Mr. Bl. adds, Thirdly, were it granted him, that the Kingdom of glory must be
understood both in Christ's reason and application, yet he is nothing helped.
Infants have right to the Church visible militant, bcause they are in a
capacity of entrance into the Church triumphant, Acts 2* 47. The Lord added to
the Church daily such as should be saved; not necessarily saved, but now
(having entered Covenant with God) they were in a capacity, and therefore added
as visible Church Members. Infants standing in this capacity ought to have
admission likewise.

Answ. It helps me much to answer the arguments drawn from Matthew. 19. 14. for
infants visible Church Membership, if by the [Kingdom of Heaven] be not meant
the visible Church, For then it is not there affirmed, that infants are visible
Churchmembers. Nor does Mr. Bls. reserve regain the loss, to prove it by
consequence, For his speech is not true, Infants have right (meaning of
admission) to the visible Church, because they are in a capacity of entrance
into the Church triumphant. Nor is it proved Acts 2. 47. where Mr. Bl. perverts
the meaning of the term (...), which is in English [ the saved] that is either
[ the saved from that crooked generation v. 40. by their effectual calling as 2 Timothy 1. 9. Tit. 3. 5.] or by an enallage of tense [ such as should be saved]
and that certainly or necessarily] as 2 Cor. 2. 15. not as Mr. Bl. they were in
a capacity to be saved, (for so were those that were not called) and therefore
added as visible Church Members. Nor is Mr. Bls. proposition gathered thence:
for neither is there any thing in the words to prove that then all were added
to the Church which should be saved, much less which were in a capacity to be
saved, or on the contrary that all that were added to the Church should be
saved: much less that their right to be added to the Church was from this, that
they should be saved; It is said, the Lord added to the Church such as should
be saved, it is not said the Apostles added them to the Church because they
were to be saved, yea v. 41. it is said, that even of those that were to be
saved, they gladly received the word; and then were baptized and added. So that
if the Text be rightly looked into there is nothing to be gathered thence of
the persons right to be added to the Church, or the Ministers duty to add to
the Church by baptism, persons merely upon this consideration, that they shall
be saved, but only that it is the course of Gods providence to add to his
Church such as shall be saved. I yet add that if Mr. Bls. proposition were
granted him, they have a right to the Church-visible militant who shall be of
the Church triumphant, yet this right cannot be claimed but by those who are
elect, and therefore from these Scriptures so expounded Matthew. 19. 14. Acts 2.
47. it cannot be proved that any other than elect infants are to be baptized
and to be added to the Church, not the natural children of true believers, who
are many of them non elect; nor can a Minister gather thence, he ought to
baptize any of them till he know they are elect, and shall be saved, and
therefore they rashly and profanely baptize from hence them, that they have no
knowledge of, that of them is the Kingdom of glory and that they shall be saved.

SECT. XIX.
Animadversions on Mr. Cobbets Just Vindic. part. 1. cap. 5. and the arguings
of Dr. Homes, Mr. Bailee, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Sidenham, from the words and actions
of Christ to little ones are answered.

HAving answered Mr. B. Mr. Bl. my two eager Antagonists I shall add
animadversions on Mr. Thomas Cobbet his Just Vindic. part. 1. chapter 4. sect. 1.
1. He says without proof that they that brought the infants mentioned Luke 18.
15. were pious minded parents. 2. He denies [ of such is the kingdom of God] to
be meant of the Kingdom of glory, the contrary whereof is proved in the next
section before against Mr. Blake. 3. He supposes, that these words [suffer
little children to come to me] being granted to contain a rule of suffering
little ones of that sort such as those are to come to him and the words [of
such is the Kingdom of God] being expounded of the invisible Church it must be
conceived that Christ must direct them to suffer members of the invisible
Church to come to him, and then that they may be known. But this is his
mistake; they that expound thus the words [suffer these little children and
other little children in age if any hereafter be brought to my person to be
touched, to come to me, and forbid them not as ye have don these. For however
they are persons that are not fit to be my hearers; yet of these now brought
and of some other infants which may be brought, and men of years like them in
quality is the Kingdom of God, the invisible Church or the Kingdom of glory
belongs to them] may avouch this exposition without supposing their election
must come under the cognizance of men, nor need they say that only such who
were elected, were, by this rule so exp^unded to be permitted, to come to
Christ. 4. That Christ spoke of those infants not as an extraordinary inspired
Prophet is said without proof; not is it likely, sit^ such blessings were never
given but by extraordinary inspiration, and Christ appoints not the admitting
of little children to any, no not to his Apostles, but himself. 5. That he
delivered an ordinary rule of ordinary practice and use afterward is said
without proof; nor is it likely, since we read no more of that practice by any
of the Apostles, nor any rule concerning it after this one act of Christ

Sect. 2. H^ denies that [of such is the Kingdom of Heaven might be spoken in
reference to the future, that is that they were elect ones, and should in time
be of Gods Kingdom, that is believers, or that they were such as God would
bless. For Christ's words are not, of such may, will or shall be the Kingdom of
God, nor that they were of his Kingdom, because such as he would bless: but
rather that they should not be hindered from being blessed of him, because of
such is the Kingdom of God.

To which I answer: that by [ the Kingdom of Heaven Mat. 19. 14. and the
Kingdom of God Mark 10. 14* 15* Luke 18* 16, 17.] must needs be meant the
Kingdom of glory is proved before, and then the sense can be no other than of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven, that is the Kingdom of glory belongs to such, as
Mat. 5. 3, 10. and as (...), does of* signify as Mark 9. 14, etc. And then it
must needs be an enallage of tense, as Mat. 18* 1. as Pisc. sch. on Mat. 18. 1.
est pro futurus est enallage temporis, or as Pisc. sch. on Matthew. 5. 3. ipsis
destinatum est and dabitur, and this is all one as to say they are elect, which
is Piscators term in his observation on Matthew. 19. 14. as I showed above in
answer to Mr. Blake, and thus [ of such is the kingdom of God] refers to the
present estate as elect, to their future as possessours of glory hereafter. And
so to Mr. Cobbets objection I answer, Matthew. 5. 10. it is not said, theirs
shall be the Kingdom of Heaven, but [ is] and yet it must be understood of
present title and future possession, so here. And for his exception at my
words, that the reason may be given why these infants did belong to Gods
Kingdom, because they were such as Christ would bless, is not avoided by
saying, they were blessed, because of Gods Kingdom. For both ways the reason is
good, they should not be hindered from blessing, because theirs was the Kingdom
of Heaven the end of blessing, or they should not be hindered from blessing
because he intended to bless them, and therefore theirs was the Kingdom of
Heaven. Either way that I intended to prove Examen page 147. is evinced, that
the reason why theirs was the Kingdom of Heaven is not from their parents faith
(which should have been if it were meant, as Paedobaptists would, of interest
in the visible Church) but Gods election or Christ's blessing.

I have often said, that if Christ's mind had been that infants should be
baptized, he would have commanded these little ones to have been baptized for
an Example. To this Mr. Cobbet answers, that according to our principles they
were elect, heirs of the kingdom of glory: now why should not or were not these
infants at least baptized?

Answ. Because though elect, yet were not believers or Disciples by profession.

But You would allow, says he, such to be baptized if of grown years.

Answ. No, until they were believers or Disciples, not barely because elect
and heirs of glory.

But You say, says he, that if by extraordinary revelation you knew an infant
to be sanctified, you would baptize it, because the extraordinary revelation
would authorize it, and the words of Peter, Acts 10. 47. and the institution,
Matthew. 28. 19. And then it would follow, 1. That persons may be Disciples
without being outwardly taught. 2. It is agreeable to the rule that persons
without personal profession of faith should be baptized. Albeit extraordinary
things done besides rule cross not ordinary rule; yet neither extraordinarily
nor ordinarily is any thing to be done, which is in it self contrary to rule.
3. It was the mind of Christ they should be baptized, as that they should be
instructed, though it be not expressed.

Answ. 1. It is true I grant in my Examen, p. 142, 158, 160. upon the grounds
mentioned, that an infant regenerated, united to Christ, sanctified by the
Spirit upon extraordinary revelation of this might be baptized; and the like is
said by Mr. Blackwood Apostolical Bapt. p. 51. And for those that have the
thing signified let them make it appear to any Church of Christ, and they
cannot deny their baptism. But yet it follows not that these infants might be
baptized which are mentioned Matthew. 19. 14. For though their election be
mentioned, yet not their regeneration and sanctification. Now Praedestinatio
nil ponit in praedestinato, and therefore it makes not Disciples or believers
at present, but assures it as future: but we are to baptize actual Disciples
and believers, not future.

But However, says he, they may be Disciples who are are not outwardly taught.

Answ. Who denies it? yet they must be learners of Christ in their own persons.

But then, says he, a person may be baptized without personal profession.

Answ. It is granted, when God supplies the absence of it by his revelation
otherwise: nor is this contrary to the Rule, since that is, to baptize known
Disciples, who are ordinarily known by their personal profession, though in
this case Gods extraordinary act supplies that want. Yet Mr. Cobbets saying is
not right, that neither extraordinarily nor ordinarily is any thing to be done,
which is in it self contrary to rule. For Abraham's killing his son was in it
self contrary to rule, yet upon extraordinary command it was to be done. And
for the third, though it might be conceived Christ's mind, that the children
should be instructed, though it be not mentioned, Luke 18. 16, 17. because it
was a duty of perpetual equity by virtue of the moral Law: yet baptising
infants being a mere positive rite, that has no reason or warrant but
institution, is not to be conceived Christ's mind, without some declaration,
which he neither then when he had so fit opportunity, nor at any time else
expressed.

There are some more things in Mr. Cobbet censurable, as that he makes the
infants paterns as well of receiving the kingdom at least externally, as of the
affection and disposition with which it is to be received; whereas, ^. the
words Matthew. 18. 3^4. do plainly make them paterns only of humility, and such
good dispositions as are in children fit to be imitated. 2. In Mr. Cobbets
sense the words of Christ would be false, [ whosoever shall not receive the
kingdom of God as a little child externally by an initial seal or some other
visible sign, as laying on hands, etc. shall not enter therein.] For then that
Popish Doctrine, or rather more rigid than Popish must be maintained, that no
unbaptized Martyr or other shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And in like
manner it is gratis dictum, without proof said [ of such like infants, like
them in covenant, and Church interest in God is his kingdom,] there being not a
word in the Text that leads to this paraphrase, and the plain meaning is before
expressed.

That which Mr. Cobbet says in answer to the reason of Piscator, Why they were
not infants because Christ called them; I conceive is not an answer. For what
he says, that things ascribed to the children are rather to be understood of
parents, and he instanceth in Levi's paying Tyths in Abraham, Heb. 7. is not
right. For, 1. that which is said of Levi is to be understood of Levi, not of
Abraham; for it were neither good sense nor to his purpose, to say, Abraham
paid Tyths in Abraham. 2. If things done by a parent and related by the Holy
Ghost as mysterious passages are imputed to the children, yet it is absurd to
understand in an historical narration of facts that to be meant as spoken to
the parents, which was spoken to the children. Other things I let pass, which
oppose not my dispute but others: and what things he speaks in answer to my
Objections, and what concerns the answering the imaginary absurdities arising
from our Doctrine in that chapter, I refer to another place. This is sufficient
in answer to what he says in opposition to me about that passage Luke 18. 16,
17.

Dr. Homes in his Animad. on my Exercit. page 57, 58. argues thus, To whom
indefinitely as such, Heaven and the blessing of and for Heaven belongs, to
them as such the seal of converance, and confirmation of Heaven and that
blessing belongs. For if the Land be mine the Deeds and Seals of Conveyance are
mine. But Heaven and the blessing of and for Heaven belongs indefinitely to
such little children, more, whiles little children; so the Text here expressly.
To them belong, or (which is all one) of such is the kingdom of Heaven, and he
took them in his arms and blessed them. Therefore to little children
indefinitely belongs the Seal of Conveyance or Confirmation of Heaven, and the
blessing of Heaven, which in the New Testament, according to the time Christ
spoke, is baptism.

Answ. Neither is it true, That baptism is the seal of conveyance of heaven,
and the blessing for it, that I find in Scripture, but the Spirit, Ephos. 4.
30. Ephesians. 1. 13. 2 Cor. 1. 22. Nor is it true, That heaven and the blessing of
heaven belong to little children indefinitely as such, that is as little
children. For then it should belong to all little children, nor to them as
children of believing parents, for it should belong to all children of
believing parents, but as they are elect. And to these I grant baptism belongs
when they are called, and believe, not before; as a conveyance may be made to a
child, yet he is not to have it in his hands till he come to understand it,
and is fit to make use of it. So that the major may be denied if [ the
belonging of the seal] be meant in respect of present use or possession. And
the minor is to be denied, if [ as such] be meant [as little children, or
children of believers] and the inference on the conclusion is denied, the seal
belongs to them, Ergo, baptism. Other arguments of Dr. Homes are answered in my
Apology page 102. though briefly yet sufficiently. Nor has Mr. Geree in his
V^ndiciae Vindiciarum chapter 10. brought any thing worth rejoyning in reply to my
answer to his sixth argument in my Apology page 101, 102. It is false which he
says, in admitting to ordinances we proceed not upon judgment of certainty but
charity, nor is a judgment of charity grounded upon hope of what a person may
be any rule to us in admitting to baptism, For if so, then hope of a profane
persons amendment were enough to baptize him. Mr. Baille^'s reasoning in his
Anabaptism page 149. [ since imposition of hands a seal of Christ's grace and
blessing, and of the Kingdom of Heaven belonged to infants; that therefore
baptism a seal of that same kind, when once the Lord had solemnly at his
ascension appointed it to be the ordinary seal of initiation into his Church
ought not to be denied to them] is but dictates. 1. He says, baptism is a seal
of the same kind with Christ's laying on hands, which he says without proof,
nor is it true. For. 1. Christ's laying on hands was an act extraordinary done
by Christ himself as the great Prophet, but baptism was an act of ordinary
ministration not done by Christ himself but his Disciples, John 4. 1, 2. 2.
Baptism was the duty of the baptized, Acts 2. 38. not only the baptizers, but
not so laying on hands by Christ. 3. If baptism be a seal of the same kind
with laying on of hands, then laying on hands is a seal, and a Sacrament of the
same kind with baptism, which is counted a point of Popery. 2. To shift off the
objection, that Christ appointed not those infants to be baptized, he allegeth
that Christ did after solemnly appoint it at his ascension, and since then it
ought to be done: which intimates that infants were not to be baptized before,
but after the ascension. But, 1. The appointment and practice of baptism was
before, if not as solemn, and the same use and order of it, and therefore this
reason is of no force why others should be baptized after, more than these
before the ascension. 2. It will follow that Jews infants were not to be
baptized till after the ascension of Christ, which overthrows his and other
Paedobaptists argument about the seal and Covenant, which if of any validity,
prove infant baptism as well before the ascension as after. 3. It is false,
that Christ at his ascension appointed infant baptism any more than before, the
commission of Christ and the Apostles practice show the contrary. Therefore I
deny his argment in the words set down as being without proof or show of it.
Mr. Thomas Fuller in his Infants advocate chapter 18 has these words St. John
adds chapter 21. 21. And there are also many other things which Jesus did which
are not written, amongst which for ought appears to the contrary, the baptizing
of these infants might be one of them; wherein he runs to the Popish plea for
their unwritten traditions, and forgets that besides what I have alleged before
to show those infants were not baptized, there appears something to the
contrary out of John 4. 1, 2. where it is said, that Jesus baptized not, but
his Disciples, and therefore the baptizing of those Infants could not be one of
the things which Jesus did though not written John 21. 21. His argument, they
were capable of a blessing, therefore of baptism; has been often denied and
answered before. There came to my hands also the Exercitation of Mr. Cuthbert
Sidenham, in which chapter 10. he terms Antipaedobaptism denying infants with scorn
a little water, and after, this Text Matthew. 19. 13, 14. if there were no more,
will fly in the consciences one day of the most confident contemners of
infants, and their baptism. To which I say, it shows too much youthful
rashness u^fi^ for a Teacher of a Church either to call Antipaedobaptists
contemners of infants, and their baptism, and their denying infants baptism
(which they do for ought he knows out of tender conscience of not profaning
Christ's ordinance) an act, of scorn, and to speak of the Texts flying in their
consciences, who know that he had more reason to expect the flying of this Text
in his conscience, who in this (as he does in the rest of his pamphlet) makes
the objection against his urging it for infant baptism so as that he might put
it off with a slight answer, For whereas Antipaedobaptists object, if Christ
hinted their right to baptism, why did he neither baptze them, nor appoint them
to be baptized by his Apostles? Mr. Sidenham leaves out the later part of the
objection, and answers. 1. He baptizeth none. 2. He did that which was an
ordinance usually, in those primitive times, administered after baptism and
equal to it in dignity, and so we may argue from this to baptism either
inclusively or a majori from the greater, he did such acts to them as are
equivalent if not supereminent. But does Mr. Sidenham indeed think such petty
arguings, which he knows not how to form in a Logic way, but in pathetick
Rhetoric, likely to ^errify our consciences so much, when he himself dares not
positively assert, that the laying on of Christ's hands did include and
presuppose baptism, yea he acknowledges it to have been extraordinary; and for
his way of proving a majori, he either is ignorant in Logic or else might
understand, that an argument a majori is not thus; there is conferred on such a
one a greater thing, therefore the less; Christ's blessing therefore right to
baptism; For then the argument were good, Christ blessed the infants which is
the greater, therefore he gave them the Lords supper, or made them Apostles, or
gave them the gift of tongues, which are the less. But an argument a majori is
a magis probabili, and so it is not more probable that Christ would have them
baptized, than that he would bless them, since they were not meet subjects of
the one as of the other. There is nothing else in that chapter but what has
answer before, this is enough to abate the insolency of this Scribler.

SECT. XX.
The practice of infant baptism is not proved Acts 16. 15. by baptizing a
household against Mr. M. Dr. Homes, Mr. Bailee, Mr. Cook, Mr. Sidenham, Mr.
Fuller.

ANother Text to prove the practice of infant baptism is Acts 16. 15. and the
mention of baptizing households elsewhere. From whence Mr. M. in his Sermon page
40. (though the Assembly leave it out Confess. of faith ch 18. art. 4.) would
gather examples of the new administration taking place just as the old, and so
the practice of infant baptism by good consequence. To which I answered in my
Examen at large, page 138. etc. 1. That the new administration is much
different from the old, to wit, baptism from Circumcision. 2. That the practice
of baptism in all the Evangelists is set down of singular persons. 3. That the
practice in the Acts of the Apostles is differently set down, sometimes of
singular persons sometimes of a City, sometimes of families. 4. Where households
are said to be baptized there is no mention of an infant and the circumstances
with other places do show that Luke does understand only the believers of the
house. What Mr. M. replied here to does yield so much as shows there is no good
consequence in this Argument. Households were baptized, therefore infants, since
he says, It may be granted that a house is sometimes taken for the grown
persons in that house. And what else he speaks that is to the point is briefly
answered in my Apology page 100. And in my Postscript sect. 19. I have
sufficiently answered Mr. Blake his arguing from households being the precedent
of baptizing, and what he says vind. foed. page 416. is answered before in
this part of the Review sect. 6.

Dr. Homes in his Animadv. on my Exercit. chapter 8. page 71. tells us that the
Syriak in the story Acts 16. 33. renders it, he was baptized and all the
childern of his house, and sure enough a son of eight days old is a son. And if
sons of the house then some sons of the Father of the house. But he might
consider that the same Syriak renders v. 32. they spoke the word with him, and
with all the sons of his house, which cannot be said of infants. Nor is it true
that the Doctor says, that the sons of the house are the sons of the Father of
the house. For as Tremelius in his note says, it is an Hebraism, in which the
son of the house is all one with the inhabitants in the house, servants as well
as children. As for the evasion which the Doctor and M. Cook in his Font
uncovered, page 18* have, that it is said [ all that were in his house, v. 32.
not, of his house] so that the word might be spoken to the prisoners and others
which ran in on the ^ame of the thing, and then he and his were baptized, v.
33. it is. 1. Without ground and unlikely, that the prisoners should be
reckoned in his house when the prison is named distinctly from his house, as v.
30. and 34. compared show, and he took such care about securing the prisoners
v. 28, 29. and then brought Paul and Silas out, v. 30. before he spoke to them
or they to him about salvation, nor is it likely that into the house of the
Jaylour could others get or would attempt it at that time of night. 2. Were it
granted yet it no whit avoyd^ the objection, which is, that either there were
no infants in the house* or else they spoke the word to them, which were
absurd. But says, the Doctor, they spoke the word to the infants, because they
should be the better for it, v. 31. To which I reply, this reason is most gross
it being contrary to all use of writers and Grammar construction to say he
spoke the word to infants, to whom he directed not his speech at all, only
because the speech might be for their good. Besides he spoke the word to all in
his house as he spoke to the Jaylour, it was the same speaking and Preaching to
the one and the other, and therefore if infants be there meant, the Apostle is
made as ridiculously to Preach to infants, as Francis the Friar is by the
Popish Legend to Preach to a brute. Besides the same Syriak renders v. 34* he
exulted, and all of his household in the faith of God, and Tremellius has this
marginal note, to a word sons of the house as a little before. As for what Dr.
Homes with Mr. Cook adds about rendering (...), all over his house, and
rendering (...), he did skip as in a dance of a Galliar with triumph, they are
such as having no other approved interprete^ for their author, nor indeed
agreeing with the gravity and seriousness of the business and the Jaylors
condition, are justly rejected as mere shifts to avoid the plain evidence from
that and many more places in my Examen page 139, 140. (which Mr. M. yielded)
that under the term [ houshold] persons of years only are meant by Luke. As
for what Mr. Baillee in his Anabaptism page 146. tells us, that infants are not
excepted; I answer, that infants are plainly excepted from being meant in those
speeches, if the things spoken of the household cannot be said of infants. But
then, says he, they will be excepted from salvation if they be not comprised
under the term [ house] since Luke* 19. 9. salvation is said to come to the
house, and Acts 11. 14. Cornelius and all his house should be saved by Peter's
words, and Acts 16. 31. upon the Jaylours faith he and his house should be
saved. I answer Though infants be not in those passages comprised among the
saved, yet it follows not by this interpretation that there is no other Tex out
of which we may conclude their salvation. And therefore all his inferences of
wrong to infants ^s excluding them from salvation. because they are not
included in the term [houshold] are but calumniatory And his other inferences
shall be showed to be vain in answering Mr. B. As for Mr. William Cooks
collections from Luke 19. 9. Acts 16. 31. in his Font uncovered, page 18. 19.
They require faith of the Jaylour, that he and his family might be admitted
into a saving estate. They said not that every one of his family must of
necessity actually believe and profess, that so his household might be saved
with him. So (as he did with Zacheus) God shows here by his servants that he
would deal with the Jaylour, not standing for the present on strict terms of
actual faith of all in his house, If the Governor believe, it is enough to put
the whole family into a saving estate inchoatively at least in respect of
admission into Covenant, neither are any to be excluded, but such as by
stubborn refusal of the Gospel offered deprive themselves of that privilege, I
except against them 1. That he makes one sort of salvation to the believers,
and another to his house in the same words and by the same means. 2. That he
imagines a salvation inchoative that shall not be consummate. 3. That he makes
a member of a family to have right to this salvation by the faith and
profession of the head of the family, if they do not express their dissent or
refusal of it. 4. That God at some time stands not on strict terms of actual
faith of all in a house for salvation. All which are gross conceits and
contrary to Mark 16. ^6. John 3. 17, 18, etc. In vain likewise does Mr.
Cuthbert Sidenham in his Exercit. c. 11. infer from these passages of saving
and baptizing houses, and instances in the old Testament of family Churches, as
if God had cast by an eternal decree this platform, baptism to be administered
to families, and so to children. And why not then to servants, and wives, and
friends? Are not they of the household? And why does not Mr. Sidenham take the
whole nation into a Church, when the whole nation was taken in formerly in
Abraham's posterity? Why does he gather his Church with such choice
distinguishing some from others? How does Mr. Sidenham cross himself when he
interprets Luke 19. 9. the Covenant is not made with him only but with his
house that is his seed, where he appropriates the term [ house] to seed, and in
the next page makes the term house a general phrase, which may sometimes
comprehend more, and will have [ all his, Acts 16. 33.] to note no servants,
which cannot be meant of servants, who are our own as goods and lands are, but
not of a man: but must firstly and primarily refer to his children who are
begotten of him; and it may be secondarily to his kindred. In which his strange
shiftings may be discerned, sometimes the term [ house] must note the whole
family of which servants and wives are a part, sometimes it must mean the seed,
and then straightway it must be a general word comprehending more, and then
(...), must be meant not servants for they are a man's own but not of a man, and
yet kindred secondarily must be meant, though they be not any more, no nor so
much of a man as servants. But if we ask Mr. Thomas Fuller in his Infants
Advocate c. 16. he will tell us, For the Jailer; That children (if he had any)
were comprised under the expression of all his, is sufficiently known by Satan's
interpretation, Job 1. 12. of Gods Commission, Behold, all that he has is in
thy power; and Gods co^senting thereunto, when permitting him by virtue
thereof, to destroy all Jobs children; concerning which passage I say. 1. If [
all his, Acts 16. 33.] must be expounded as Job 1. 12. all that is his, then
must the Jaylours sheep, and oxen be baptized as well as his children, for they
were comprehended under [ all that he had] 2. Though Jobs children were
comprehended under [ all that he had] yet there was never an one an infant: but
such as did feast, and might curse God in their hearts. As for Dr. Homes his
question, Is any Anabaptist sure there were no infants in these families? I
say, 1. It belongs to him to prove, who brings it for infant baptism, that
there were, and that they were baptized. 2. Yet we are sure from the words none
were meant but persons capable of hearing, and believers under the term [
house, Acts 16. 32, 34.] Yea, but says Mr. Sidenham, Those in his house are a
larger term, but when he sp^aks of the baptized he says all his or of him; But
how does it appear that [ all in his house] is larger than [ all his] or what
can he gather from it but this, that he spoke to more than he baptized; but
will Mr. Sidenham say, he baptized any to whom he spoke not? Yea, that a man
may see with what raw conceits these Scriblers abuse people, who read such
ind^gested Pamphlets with examination. His own observation excludes infants.
For if [ all that were in his house] ^e the largest term, then It comprehends [
all his, v. 33.] But it notes no infant: For he spoke not the word to any
infant. Therefore by his own observation infants are excluded. But enough of
the janglings of these wrangling Baby-sprinklers about this Text.

SECT. XXI.
That 1 Cor. 10. 2. proves not the practice of infant baptism against Mr.
Bailee, Mr. Cobbet, etc.

THere is another Text which is by Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Bailee, Dr. Homes, Mr.
Philips, and others produced for the practice of infant baptism, and it is 1
Cor. 10. 2. Mr. Bailee in his Anabaptism, page 149. argues thus, Infants were
baptized as well as their Parents by Moses baptism, Ergo, Infants as well as
their Parents ought to be baptized by Christ's baptism. The Antecedent is the
Apostles, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2* The Fathers baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea,
were the whole People as well young as old; for no doubt the infants went as
well through the Cloud and the Sea as their Parents.

Answ. 1. The Antecedent may be denied, because it is said [our Fathers] not
infants. But says Mr. Cobbet, This is spoken of the Church Fathers to Paul and
the Gentile Church Members, and the young ones were in after ages instruments
to convey Church-truths and blessings.

Refut. 1. It is not said our Fathers as we are a Church, none but Abraham that
I know is termed a Father to the Church of Christ, he being only named the
Father of the faithful, and they his seed: but either [ our Fathers] notes
simply the Ancestors that went before, as it is usual to call those our
forefathers who were before us in former generations, though they begat us not;
or else if it note their fathers in respect of natural generation, it notes as
Grotius in his Annot in locum, the Fathers of us, to wit, Hebrews. But it may
be said, that cannot be, ^ith Paul only was an Hebrew, and then it should be
my Fathers.

Refut. 1. It is not unusual to speak of persons in the second person by figure
of Communication or Enallage of persons, when the thing is not true of them but
our selves, and when the thing is not true of us but others; as when we say, we
have preached, it is meant of one person that speaks, and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17. it is
said, [ we which are alive, and remain] and yet none of those that wrote were
such, and so [ our Fathers] is no more than the Fathers. 2. But there is no need
of a figure: For the Epistle was written by Paul and Sosthenes, 1 Cor. 1. 1.
And for Paul there is no question he was an Hebrew, and Sosthenes being a Ruler
of the Synagogue, Acts 18. 17. And in like manner Crispus, v. 8. and Apollo, v.
24. whom he mentions 1 Cor. 1. 14. and 4. 6. were Hebrews, and therefore he
saying, [ our Fathers] might well mean our Fathers as Hebrews. 2. It does
appear the infants were not meant in that they are only meant, who were in a
state of pleasing or displeasing God, as appears by v. 5. but so were not
infants. 3. They only are said to be baptized to whom the same thing was
signified by the cloud, that is, signified by our baptism; but to the infants
nothing was signified by the cloud and sea, and passing through or under them,
for they were not subjects of instruction* capable to know a resemblance, Ergo,
infants* were not baptized. But says Mr. Bailee, They went through the Sea,
Ergo, they were baptized.

Answ. So did the beasts also, and yet are not said to have been baptized, but
those that did or might understand the signification of it. 4. They that are
said to be baptized, v. 2. are all said to eat and drink Manna and Water, and
that it was or might have been to them spiritual meat or drink, v. 3, 4. But
this is not to be said of their infants. For as Dr. Homes and Mr. Cobbet grant,
the infants did not eat Manna cakes, nor is it likely they did drink water,
having breast milk, much less is it true that they were spiritual meat or drink
to them, or might have been, Ergo, they are not meant by the Fathers baptized.

Nor is Mr. Bailees consequence good. For if the infants might be said to be
baptized with Moses baptism, yet it follows not they are to be baptized with
Christ's, since Moses his baptism was not formal baptism, but similitudinary
after a sort, they were baptized, that is, as Grotius Annot in locum quasi
baptiz^ti, as if they had been baptized; but a Rule holds not from
similitudinary to formal baptism. But Mr. Bailee would prove the consequence
thus, The Reasons which may be brought for the exclusion of infants from being
baptized with their Parents by Christ's baptism, militate as much against their
being baptized with their Parents by Moses baptism. Therefore if nowithstanding
they were admitted to the one baptism, they may as well be admitted to the
other.

Answ. The antecedent of this proof is false; for in that of Moses, the baptism
is only similitudinary in respect of a fact or event, which was no duty: but
formal baptism of Christ is a duty of the person baptized, Mark 16. 16. Acts 2
38. and 22. 16. which cannot agree to an infant though the other should. Nor is
such kind of shadowy, typical, analogical, similitudinary baptism any more a
rule about Christian baptism than Noah's Ark, which had the like resemblance, 1
Pet. 3. 21. And this Reason is confirmed from the Text. For if by [ Fathers]
are meant infants, v. 2. and they were baptized, and this must be a rule to us
now about baptism of water appointed by Christ, which was said of het
similitudinary baptism, then since the same are meant by [ Fathers, v. 3, 4.]
and they are said to eat the same spiritual meat and drink, which was Christ,
which is manifestly meant of the Lords Supper, by the same reason which Mr.
Bailee brings, infants must not be excluded from the Lords Supper. Yea, but
says Dr. Homes, They did not eat all the Lords Supper.

Refut. They did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual
drink, which if he deny to be meant of the Lords Supper he deserts Protestants
and other Divines acknowledging it, and may be refuted from the scope of the
Apostle, which is, to show that they had in a sort, in respect of signification
and use the same Sacraments with ours, and yet were not secured thereby when
they sinned. But Mr. Cobbet says, There must be a Synecdoche in the later, not
all the Fathers simply being meant, but such as were capable of making a
spiriual use thereof.

Refut. If [ all our Fathers] must be meant Synecdochically, v. 3, 4. then also
in v. 2. it being the same term in either, and the sense of them, v. 5. being
meant of as many, v. 3 4 as v. 2. Yea, but there is a bar put against infants
receiving the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11. 28.

Refut. There are more bars, and more express put against infants baptism, Acts
8. 37. Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16. Acts 2. 38. Ephesians. 4. 5 etc. which it seems
Paedobaptists will leap over, or break down, notwithstanding they are so
plainly set up by Christ and his Apostles to prevent their infant baptism.

That which Mr. Ainsworth in his Dialogue brings out of Psalm 77. 17. to prove
that the Israelites were indeed formally baptized with water, is upon mistake,
that the water there poured out was on the Israelites, whereas his own
Annotations on the places, and the words of the Psalm refer it to what was done
to the Egyptians, Exodus 14. 24, 25. And thus Junius and others conceive it. Yet
were it granted him, there must be a Synecdoche in the term [ all the Fathers]
for the reasons given, and otherwise beasts as well as infants must be said to
be baptized.

SECT. XXII.
Mr. Blakes Argument from Gal. 4. 29. is answered.

MR. Blake had in his Birth-privilege, page 9. argued from Gal 4. 29. for
infant baptism, and his passages in his arguing I censured as very gross in my
Examen, part. 3. sect. 2. which he seeks to make good Answer to my Letter, cap.
4. to which I reply in my Postscript sect. Yet he has thought good to
reinforce his allegation of that Text, and in his Vindic. Foed. cap. 43. sect.
1. he argues thus. Fourthly, They that by birth according to the flesh are in
the bosom of the Church have right to baptism; but infants by birth according
to the flesh are in the bosom of the Church, Gal. 4. 29. Infants therefore
ought to be baptized.

To which I answer, if he mean by [ the Church] the Church Christian visible,
and by [ being in the bosom of it] having actual visible Church membership, I
grant the major, and deny the minor, and for the Text Gal. 4. 29* alleged to
prove it, am no more induced by Mr. Bls. arguings to believe that it makes to
his purpose, than I am to think the Snow is black. For if it were to his
purpose, the words (...), should have this sense, even so now infants by virtue
of birth according to the flesh, as being the children of a believer by natural
generation, are visible members in the Christian Church, v. g. of Galatia,
which is as far from the meaning of the Apostle as East from West, if either I
or those Interpreters I meet with have not lost their common sense. This I
prove from the true supplement which must make up the words complete sense.
This will be understood by considering, that the whole verse is a compound
proposition of that sort which Logicians call comparative, as 1 Cor. 15. 22.
The terms (...) do show it to be a comparative proposition, and therein are two
parts, the first called the Protasis, then he that was born after the flesh,
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, that is (for I think Mr. Bl.
will not gain say this exposition) Ishmael who was born after the flesh being
the son of (...) the bondwoman, persecuted (whether by mocking or by some
crafty undermining device, (as Heinsius conceives) Isaac who was born after the
Spirit, by Divine virtue according to the promise, as Grotius I conceive
rightly explains it. The other part is called the Apodosis or rendering,
wherein that which answers to the forepart first held out is expressed, now
that always notes some agreement, correspondence, parity or likeness whether in
quantity, quality, action etc. But according to Mr. Bls. apodosis or reddition,
there is no such answerableness, or likeness as has the show of a comparison
of things equal or alike (as this is as the affirmative terms show) For who
would conceive any better then nonsense in such a speech as this, even as
Ishmael persecuted Isaac, so the children of Christian believers are visible
members in the Christian Church, it were all one as to say even as Esau hated
Jacob so godly men are heirs of Heaven, or have access to God, the absurdity of
which is so gross that I am amazed Mr. Bl. does not see it or will not confess
it, there being no likeness, or show of answerablenes either in the compared
subjects or in the compared predicates. Not in the subjects. For in the
forepart the term, he that was born after the flesh, is taken in the worser
part, as a term importing debasement, bondage, a curse, but in Mr. Bls. own
expression Vindic. foed* ch 40. the term [he that is born after the flesh]
notes in the better part a natural seed that inheri^s outward privilges yea and
that no small one to be a visible Churchmember by virtue of birth after the
flesh. And then in the predicates there is less answerablenes. For what
answerablenes between persecuting him that was born after the Spirit who
resembles the true believer, and having right to outward privileges as visible
Church Membership and baptism by being born of a believer according to the
flesh by natural generation, and this competent to infants? But the supplement
is this. Even so now the Jew who is carnal seeking righteousness by observing
the Law, and n^^ through the Spirit waiting for the hope of the righteousness
which is by faith, now persecuteth by words and deeds the Christian believer
whether Jew or Gentile, who is born after the Spirit, that is who by the Spirit
does wait for the hope of the righteousness which is by faith Gal. 5 5. This
supplement is cleared to be genuine from the scope and series of the Apostles
Doctrine before, and deductions after and the constant exposition of
interpreters. The Apostles Doctrine before is to dissuade the Galatian
Christians from affecting to be under the Law, v. 21. as the false teachers
endeavored to persuade them. And to that end he teaches them the allegory of
Hagar and Sarah, and their children; Hagar and Sarah represent two Covenants,
the one of the Law, the other of Righteousness by Faith; and the Children
represent the one the Justiciaries that seek Righteousness by the Works of the
Law, and are tenacious of that Covenant, the other bellevers in Christ, who
seek Righteousness by Faith in him, and stick to the new Covenant of Grace, in
which is promised the Just shall live by Faith. The former Covenant is a
Covenant of Bondage, and the Children thereof are in bondage with their Mother,
that is, they are not to inherit the promise of Righteousness; but the later
Covenant is free, and her Children are freeborn heirs of Righteousness. And
though the former Covenant had many Children while the Jewish Church stood, the
greatest part resting in the Law, and expecting their righteousness in
observing it, yet the new Covenant that was as barren, having none or very few
that were born of it, there being but few that looked for redemption by the
Messiah or the consolation of Israel, but followed the Pharisees Doctrine, of
conceiving themselves righteous by keeping the Law, now, being made known to
all Nations by preaching the Gospel, has many more children than the old,
innumerable believers of the Gentiles as well as the Jews, embraci^g the
Doctrine of the Gospel concerning righteousness by faith: and of this sort are
we, says the Apostle, v. 28. But it happens to us as of old, as Ishmael
persecuted Isaac, so now the carnal Jews who are Justiciaties persecute us who
are believers. And then follow deductions, one that it is Gods sentence to
reject Justiciaries, as not heirs of righteousness, v. 30. Another, the
ass^rting the estate of believers to be a state of freedom, v. 31. and hereupon
exhorts cap. 5. 1. that they should st^nd fast in their liberty wherein Christ
has made them free, and not be again entangled with the yoke of bondage, to
wit, the Law and legal Covenant. And that the constant exposition of
Interpreters is for the sense according to the supplement made by me, and not
according to Mr. Bls. conceit, may appear by alleging some of their words,
Hieronym. Comment. in Epist. ad Galat. lib. 2. cap. 4. thus paraphraseth the
words, Sicut ergo tum major frater Ishmael lactentem adhuc and parvulum
persequebatur Isaac, sibi circumcisionis praerogativam, sibi primogenita
vendi^ans: ita and nunc secundum carnem Israel, adversus minorem fratrem de
gentibus populum Christianum, sustollitur, infl^tur, erig^tur. Consideremus
insaniam Judaeorum: qui and Dominum interfecere, and Prophetas and Apostolos
persecu^i sunt: and adversantur voluntat^ Dei: and videbimus multo majores
persecutiones, quas nos, etiam historiae docent, a Judaeis in Christianos quam
a gen^^bus concitatas. Chrysostom. (...) Gorran. [It*a and nunc.] illi scilicet
qui secundum carnem vivunt ut Judaei and haeretici per sequuntur eos qui
secundum spiritum scilicet Christianos and omnes bonos. Perkins com. upon
Galat. 4. 29. These words are an answer to an objection, on this manner. We are
hated of the Jews, and therefore we are not the children of promise. The answer
is two fold, one in this verse thus, No marvel, this is the old fashion; it was
thus in Abraham's family. For Ishmael ( born after the ^lesh) persecuted Isaac (
born after the Spirit:) and so it is at this day. Pareus Comment. in Genesis 21.
12: Illusio Ismaelis adversus fra^rem significat, filios carnis persecutionem
intent^re filiis promission^^. P^scator schol. in locum. Ita and nunc carnalis
Israel spiritua em persequitur. Grot. (...)] Sic and nunc Judaei illis ritibus
addicti quos vultis imitari, maximo odio prosequuntur Christianos. Diodati.
Annot. ad Gal. 4. 29. But as] this singular privilege has a condition joined
unto it like unto that which happened unto Isaac who was scorned by Ishmael,
Genesis 21. 9. that is to say, that all Christians are likewise persecuted by the
Jews. Di^son. Cum enim in Abrahami famil^a is qui naturae vi ordinaria tantum
genitus est, persequutus est eum, qui divinitus and spirituali ratione est
genitus; Quid mirum, si idem nunc usu veniat nobis? Trapp. Com. on the place.
Even so it is now] And so also it is now, may we say at this day. For what do
Papists persecute us for else, but because we reject their justification by
works? which being determined I infer that Mr. Bls. arguing includes many
absurdities. 1. That when it is said, Even so it is now, and the term [ they
that are born after the flesh] is to be supplied, he by [ being born after the
flesh] means Birth by natural genoration of infants born of Christian Parents,
in which are many gross absurdities. 1. That he understands this said of
infants, which must then be said to persecute. 2. That he takes [ being born
after the flesh] in the later part to note natural birth: but that is clean
besides the Apostles meaning, who considers persons born after the flesh, not
as born by humane members and seed, but as born by a fleshly covenant.
Otherwise it should import no Allegory contrary to the Apostles speech, v. 24.
which tells us these things are an Allegory, that is, do speak or declare some
other thing than the narration according to the Grammar-sense imports, and that
is, to be born according to the fleshly covenant, that is, to embrace the
Doctrine of that covenant. 3. That [ to be born after the flesh] should import
birth of Abraham as a believer, and so natural generation of each child of a
believer in that respect, but then [ to be born after the flesh] would be
common to Isaac with Ishmael, to him that is born after the spirit, of the free
woman, by promise, with him that is born after the flesh of the bond woman; for
to be born of Abraham or a believer agrees also to Isaac, to him that is born
after the spirit, of the free woman, by promise; whereas to be born after the
flesh is taken in a sense from which Isaac and we, that is, Paul and other
Christian believers are excluded. For he infers v. 31. Therefore brethren, we
are not the children of the bond woman, which is all one with this, We are no^
born after the flesh, as it is expressed, v. 23. whence it is apparent that [
being born after the flesh] does only import the birth of the bond woman,
generation by Abraham being not considered in this thing. 4. Mr. Bl. does quite
pervert the Apostles intent in taking to be born after the flesh to import an
honor, and that it implies two things: 1. A birth of nature, a child by
lineal descent of such a father. 2. Outward Prerogatives that accompany such a
birth, as his words are Vindic. Foed. cap. 40. whereas the Apostle mentions
birth after the flesh as a debasement, takes it in the worser part, not as
importing a descent from the father, but from the mother, and that mother a
bond woman, and therefore the children servants or bond slaves by reason of
their being born after the flesh. I will use the words of Cameron in his
Conference with Tilenus, Die Dominica April 26. 1620. sect. 18. Contra vero
Ismael etsi patre libero attamen matre servanatus est, porro partus ventrem
sequitur, nascendi ergo condition servus fuit: tales scilicet sunt, qui Deo
cultum exhibent servilem fusticiarii: where he explains the Apostles words,
Gal. 4.

Against this Mr. Bl. excepts Vindic. Foed. cap. 40. 1. That I make the
Apostles parallel to look at the Allegory, and not at the History* when the
Text makes it plain that the Apostle looks at the History, then and now are
both Adverbs of time, and relate to Ishmaels jears in person, not to the
malignity of men of the covenant of works against those of the covenant of
grace: Here he is wholly silent, and answers in his Apology nothing at all.

Answ. I conceived in answering the second I had answered this exception. But I
now answer particularly. I conceived he meant by the history those words v. 22.
23. and the forepart of the 29. v. As then he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit. And by the parallel he meant the
later part of the 29. v. And the allegory to be that which answers to Ishmael,
to wit, to seek righteousness by the Law, and to Isaac, to wit, to seek
righteousness by faith: which may be seen in Bezas and Piscators Diagrams,
where Beza and Piscator make Ishmael (...), to answer, or to be in the same
rank as the type with the Justitiaries that seek righteousness by the Law,
which answers ^o Hagar, whose gneration is after the flesh, that is,
justification is by works, and are cast out of the family of God, excluded from
the inheritance of life as Ishmael from Abraham's, and Isaac to answer to
believers by virtue of the Covenant of the Gospel answering to Sara, whose
birth is after the Spirit, that is, whose justification is by faith, and so are
in Abraham's house and heirs of eternal life. Now it is true I do make the
history to be in the forepart of the 29 v. and the mystery or allegory in the
later: not but that I acknowledge there is a history in both parts of the verse,
as the Adverbs then and now show. But it is not the same history in the later
part of the verse which is in the former. For then there should be nothing
allegorized, yea there would be a mere tautology, if as Mr. B^. speaks, then
and now both adverbs of time relate to Ishma^s jeers in person, then the speech
of the Apostle is inept or rather false. For then it should be [As Ishmael in
person then jeered Isaac, so now Ishmael in person jeers Isaac] which is I say
still a gross absurdity. But the later part contains another history of what
was done in the Apostles time, where in the terms [ born after the flesh and
after the spirit] are allgorized, and applied to other sorts of persons, and
the term [ now] relates the malignity of men of the covenant of works against
those of the covenant of grace, as has been fully proved before against Mr.
Blake.

2. '^M. Bl. excepted, that I shut out the literal sense both from the history
and parallel, and bring in an allegorical sense in both, when the contrary is
evident in the Text, for though Ishmael be a Type of one under the covenant of
works, yet that Ishmael himself was a Justiciary, or that he sought
righteousness that way, and persecuted Isaac under any such notion, as a man
for Gospelrighteousness, Scripture has no word, or so much as any color.'^

Answ. This exception is the same in effect with the former, and in answering
this the former was answered in my Postscript, sect. 5. and now this is
answered by answering the former, yet I find a necessity to add something by
reason of Mr. Bls. unreasonable importunity. I take notice that Ishmael is
confessed to be a type of one under the covenant of works, and whether he were
himself a Justiciary is not material, though sure there is some color for it.
But this seems to be Mr. Bls. mind that in the parallel, Gal. 4. 29. there is
no allegorical sense, because Ishmael himself was not a Justitiary: which
reason rests on this conceit, that neither in the forepart nor the later part
of v. 29. by [ he that was born after the flesh] is meant any other than
Ishmael himself or in person, which how it makes the Apostles speech
tautological or false is showed before.

Mr. Bl. goes on, To this he answers, he shuts not out the literal sense from
the History but from the parallel, and that is so far from being contrary to
the Text, that it is expressly said, These things are (...), an Allegory. I
desire the Reader to take notice, what kind of interpretation Mr. T. will put
on this Text, and who will have him pass for an eminent Scripture interpreter?
(when Mr. B. is a man in his high censure defective in it) Then and now are
both Adverbs of time, and we must have a literal then and a mystical now, one
of them to answer the History and the other the Allegory; if my interpretation
be thus gross, I desire the Reader to disclaim it; either the H^story must be
wholly looked at in the parallel, or else the Allegory, there is that harmony
between the Apostles then and now that will not admit such divorce and
separation.

Answ. What I said of Mr. Bs. interpretations of Scripture in my Praecursor,
sect. 3. appears by this writing to be right, and will appear more hereafter.
Did he measure himself su^ modulo ac ped^, he would be more cautelous than he
is in expounding Scripture, and if he did take warning by my words the Church
of God would have cause to thank me for them, however he or Mr. Bl. take them.
I am sorry that the Reader and my self are troubled about such st^rtings rather
than arguings, which Mr. Bl. here and elsewhere uses, which sure do ill become
him, who should at the years he is now of rather weigh things than lightly pass
ever them with satirical quips instead of arguments. He may take notice that I
make no mystical Now, Gal. 4. 29. but in both parts the Adverbs of time are
literal, and yet the terms [ he that is born after the flesh, and he that is
born after the spirit] are without any absu^dity meant allegorically, as I have
both said and demonstrated.

3. Says Mr. Bl. I have told him, that he makes two contradistinct species of
birth, that both cannot be incident to one man, no more than a man be a brute
beast, or a brute beast a bird; when it is plain that here is not a
distribution of a genus into several species, but a distribution of a subject
according to its several adjuncts, of which I give several instances.

Answ. I said in my Postscript, that I not orely make birth after the flesh and
after the spirit contradistinct but also contrary. Contradistinct species may
be incident to the same person, the same man may b^ long and broad, just and
temperate, but not contrary, as white and black, just and unjust; [ Birth]
distributed into birth after the flesh and after the spirit must needs be a
genus, or an equivocal term, it cannot be any subject either quod or quo, it
being neither substance, quantity nor quality, but either action or passion,
action as from the mother, passion as in the person born. Now actions though
they are capable of various modifications, yet I do not think any Logicians
call them subjects, or their several modifications adjuncts: but the substance
whose action or passion it is, is the subject both of the action and passion,
and their degrees and modifications, and these are adjuncts of that substance.

Mr. Bl. adds of me, He is pleased to deny that it is a distribution of the
subject according to its adjuncts, and gives in the thing in dispute for a
reason. Then the same person (he says) would be born after the spirit and after
the flesh.

Answ. I give in this reason I confess: but I did not think this was in
dispute, but out of all dispute* the Apostle making them two sons born of two
mothers, v. 22. two several ways, v. 23. born to two several estates, v. 24,
25, 30. the one persecuting the other, and all these diversities are in the
persons which are Types, and in their Antitypes; and the Apostle thence
infers, that the one are not the other, v. 31. whence it follows, that birth
after the flesh and spirit are not adjuncts of the same subject, but contrary
attributes of several subjects.

Mr. Bl. proceeds* Presently he confesses that Isaac was born after the flesh
in the two senses I mention. And I am sure Mr. T. will not deny that Isaac was
born after the Spirit, and then either truth is very absurd, or else Mr. T.
has quit me from absurdity; but then he says, It is untrue in the Apostles
sense, for then he should be the child of the bond-mayd, not by promise, a
persecutor to be cast out, not to inherit. To which I answer, that my sense is
the Apostles sense, and Mr. T. his sense far from it: For though the Apostle
does indeed allegorize the Text, as Arias Montanus renders it, quae sunt
allegorizata, yet the Apostle in the parallel looks at the letter of the
history, as I have shown, not at the Allegory, which Mr. T. had not a face to
oppose, either he must deny now and then to be Adverbs of time, or else he must
allow of my interpretation, Ishmael did never as a Justitiary prosecute Isaac
under the notion of a follower of Evangelical righteousness.

Answ. I do confess Isaac was born after the Spirit, and that he was born after
the flesh in the two senses of Mr. Bl. for one born of natural parents Abraham
was his natural father, and in the sense more common in Scripture for the
outward prerogatives that accompany such a birth (though I do not find the
phrase, born after the flesh in this later sense in Scripture, not Phil. 3. 4.
Romans 9. 3. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 16. where the term [ flesh] is used and yet I think
only in the first place importing prerogatives, no where the phrase born after
the flesh in that sense) yet not in the Apostles sense, in which to be born
after the flesh notes birth without consideration of the father as by a mother
that was a bondwoman, and so no prerogative is intimated in it but a
debasement or deminution and so Isaac was not born after the flesh, that is not
of a bondwoman, by an usual way of generation, but of the freewoman by Divine
virtue according to a promise to her when past childebearing in the course of
nature. And this to be the Apostles sense is proved before, and Mr. Bls. sense
proved very absurd, and his reasons for it answered.

Yet he adds of me. After some concessions in full contradiction to himself, I
deny not (says he) but legal Justitiaries may be in the visible Church as
Ishmael in Abraham's house, though the Apostle make the parallel only in the
casting out, that they might not inherit, Apolog. page 114.) he says, if Mr.
Bl. would gather anything hence for himself, he must prove that the Apostle
makes some to be of the visible Church by virtue of being born after the flesh
as their prerogative, which is as wide from the Apostles meaning, as the East
is from the West, as far as the East is from the Sunrising, he should have
said, that is the thing that I have proved, and do maintain, I laid down by way
of Syllogism and have an Apology instead of an answer. Mr. T. has a notable
faculty in begging of the question in agitation. The Apostles full scope (I
confess) is another thing; but I still affirm that he occasionally expresses
that from whence this is evidently deduced, namely a distinction of births
literal not allegorical, which Mr. T. never will be able with any reason to
deny, till it can be proved that then and now look at the Allegory, not at the
History; I can prove from Luke 13. 16. that the Israelitish women are daughters
of Abraham, though it is plain that another thing there was Christ's main
intention.

Answ. Mr. Bl. continues to write at random. There Is no show of contradiction
much less a full contradiction in my words to my self. This may be true,
Justitiaries may be in the visible Church, and this also, To be born after the
flesh or to be a Justitiary does not import a prerogative giving title to be of
the visible Church, my speech was right, and needs not to be mended by any of
Mr. Bls. fl^^ts. He has a full answer to his Syllogism before, and so he had
before in the Apology, the strength of his arguing being thus expressed here,
The consequence is plain, birth of the flesh in the Church gave a Church
interest, which is denied to be proved from Galat. 4. 26. and was denied
before. And though being an answerer I need not prove, and therefore begging
the question is charged on me frivolously by Mr. Bl. For he only begs the
question who takes for granted that which he should prove (which is Mr. Bls.
fault who uses to d^ctate when he should prove) yet did I prove that the
Apostles scope is not only another thing than the asserting of a prerogative
of visible Church Membership by being born after the flesh, that is, being the
child of a believer by natural generation, but that he deduceth their casting
out of the Church from it, and that the birth after the flesh is taken in the
worser part as that which brings bondage not Church estate or Christian
liberty, nor does birth after the flesh respect the descent from a believer but
the bondwoman, and that this birth is in the Antitype allego^ical, and yet the
Adverbs then and now are Adverbs of time, and a history is related in both
parts of the 29. v. of Gal. 4. Generally interpreters take the words, even so
it is now, as meant of the Jews, which cannot be true literally: for they were
not born after the flesh, that is, of bond-women, but of free-women, which were
true Israelites, or daughters of Abraham, as Mr. B. here confesses.

Mr. Bl. proceeds. Secondly, he says that I say, such are in the bosom of the
Church, when the Apostle says, they persecute the Church, and are cast out: I
desire the Reader to consider, if this had any truth in it; whether it hold
with greater strength for me or him? They are cast out, and therefore they were
in, is my Argument: they are cast out, and therefore were never in, says Mr.
T. 2. The Apostle says no such thing, that they are cast out; Ishmael was in
the family when he persecuted, though afterward he was cast out of the family;
these are in the Church, though in case they continue persecution, they shall
in fine be cast out; now in present they have a being in it.

Answ. It is true that this was my second Exception against his gross
perverting of the Apostles words, [ even so it is now] as if the meaning were,
that by virtue of being born after the flesh, some infants, to wit, those that
are born of a believing parent are in the bosom of the Church, when the Apostle
says, 1. They persecute, which cannot be meant of infants. 2. In that they are
born after the flesh they persecute the Church, therefore he ascribes no
privilege to them, as accruing to them, by the birth after the flesh, but a
cursed practice. 3. That they persecute the Church, therefore while born after
the flesh they were not in the bosom of the Church, that is the Church
Christian visible. 4. That they are cast out, therefore not in the Church. To
the two first of these nothing is answered, the consequence of the third is
denied, he supposes they did persecute the Church, and yet remained in; which
is most palpably false: For this being apparently meant of the unbelieving Jews
that sought righteousness by the Law, and acknowledged so by Interpreters, it
is notoriously false, that they were in the bosom of the Christian Church,
while they did persecute the Church; yea, Saul himself was not after his
conversion taken in presently to communion with the Disciples at Jerusalem,
till they knew that he ceased to be a persecutor, Acts 9. 26. so that the words
[ even so it is now] expounded as Mr. Bls. words intimate [even so now by
virtue of being born after the flesh, that is, by natural generation born of a
believing parent, there are some even infants that are in the bosom of the
Christian visible Church, as members of it, and remaining in it, do persecute
the Church] are so false, and the Exposition so unsavory, that it is a wonder
to me, that neither Mr. Bl. nor the Prefacers to his Book take care to have it
left out. That which Mr. Bl. answers to the fourth thing in this exception is
of like stamp. 1. He says, It follows not they were cast out, therefore never
in. But my Argument is this, they were by reason of their being born after the
flesh cast out, therefore not for this reason in the bosom of the Church. 2.
That it follows, they are cast out, therefore they were in: which consequence I
deny, being understood of the Church Christian visible, and the particular
persons who are said to be cast out: for they are said to be cast out not from
what they had, but from what they might have had or others had; as Matthew. 8.
12. it is said, The children of the Kingdom shall be east out (of the Kingdom
of Heaven, v. 11. in which others were, and they not) into outer darkness. He
says also, The Apostle says no such thing that they are cast out, but
mentions a command of casting them out. To which I replied, As if Gods dictum
were not factum: if they were not cast out, why does the Apostle allege that
Text? My meaning was, Gods speech of the casting out of Hagar and Ishmael was
not a bare command, but such as included a sentence and decree of God, which he
took course to execute, and that the Apostle allegeth the Text not to prove a
duty, but to show an event, or fact of God. For as the Apostle allegeth it, the
casting out is of the legal covenant, and the children of it those that desired
to be under the Law, and their casting out is their rejecting from the
inheritance of righteousness and being Gods people: now this could not be any
man's duty but Gods act determining and accordingly accomplishing this sentence,
that righteousness shall not be by the Law, nor Justitiaries his people, and
therefore it is most absurd in Mr. Bl. to determine, that some by virtue of
being born after the flesh have a right to be in the bosom of the Church
Christian, when the Apostle determines they are for this reason rejected or
cast out.

I had, thirdly, excepted against Mr. Bl. as making those that are born after
the flesh, Gal. 4. 29. Abraham's seed, wherein he joins with Arminius in calling
them Abraham's seed who sought justice in the Law. Mr. Bl. Vindic. Foed cap. 40.
says, I join with Arminius, and that he follows Mr. Bayne. For says he, I
interpret it of a natural seed that inherit outward privileges, and never reach
the birth of the spirit, so Mr. Baines interprets it, the children of the flesh
here, are those only who in course of nature came from Abraham, Baines on
Ephesians. 1. page 140. quarto.

Answ. It is true Mr. Bayne has those words, but yet he excepteth page 139.
against Arminius as I do for calling legal justitiaries (who are meant by [they
that are born after the flesh, Gal. 4. 29.]) Abraham's seed. For there he thus
speaks. Beside that, though the sons of the flesh may signify such, who
carnally, not spiritually conceive of the Law, yet the seed of Abraham without
any adjoined is never so taken. It is true that Mr. Baines so interprets the
term [ children of the flesh, Romans 9. 8.] as Mr. Bl. has cited him, which
place he meant by [ here] but not the te^m [ he that is born after the flesh,
Gal. 4. 29.] yea page 138. he says, For though children of the flesh in some
other Scripture ( meaning Gal. 4. 29.) does note out justitiaries, seeking
salvation in the Law, yet here ( Romans 9. 8.) the literal meaning is to be
taken; a child of the flesh being such a one who descends from Abraham
according to the flesh. So that this is the thing that I except against Mr. Bl.
for that whereas by the consent of all, that I know, interpreters besides
himself [ they that are born after the flesh, Gal. 4. 29. in the apodosis there
even so it is now] do note legal Justitiaries who are there called the children
of the bondwoman, not called Abraham's seed (for those he had determined before
to be those of the faith, Gal. 3. 9. Christ's v. 29.) nor to inherit, but cast
out, he on the contrary, makes them Abraham's seed as Arminius does in his
Analysis of Romans 9. And ascribes to them the inheriting of outward privileges
as to be members of the visible Church in that they are born after the flesh.
Whereas the term [ born after the flesh] is taken in the worser part precisely
from the birth from the bondwoman abstractively from generation by Abraham and
importing no privilege, but a privation of privilege. As for Mr. Bayn, though
he interpret [ children of the flesh, Romans 9. 8.] of those only who in course
of nature came from Abraham, and proves there that it notes not legal
Justitiaries, because it is applied to Esau who is considered as having done
neither good nor evil. Yet Mr. Bl. wrongs him in two things. 1. In that he
says, Mr. Baine interprets it of a natural seed inheriting outward privileges,
whereas though Mr. Baine does interpret [ children of the flesh, Romans 9. 8.] of
a natural seed, yet not as inheriting thereby outward privileges. 2. That he
makes his exposition of [ children of the flesh, Romans 9. 8] to be his
exposition of [ those that are born after the flesh, Gal. 4. 29.] whereas he
expressly says, though children of the flesh in some other Scripture (which can
be no other than Gal. 4. 29. does note out Justitiaries, seeking salvation in
the Law. I confess Cameron in his Conference with Tilenus in the place before
cited makes Ishmael not only a Type of Justitiaries, Gal. 4. 23, 29. but also
Romans 9. 7, 8 9. and Isaac a Type of believers in both places, and Esau and
Jacob Types not of Justitiaries and believers, but of uncalled and called,
non-elect and elect, and so the resemblance to be different of the two former
brethren from the later; which to me seems not right: for me thinks the words
(...), have this sense, that the thing he had said before did not only appear
in Ishmael and Isaac, but also more fully in Esau and Jacob, which me thinks
imports, that the Apostle meant to prove the same thing by Esau and Jacob,
which he did by Ishmael and Isaac, and me thinks the long Parenthesis he
imagines from v. 10, to 30. agrees not with that expression v. 10. Not only so
but also, they being connexive particles, and so not agreeable to a
Parenthesis. But Cameron and all others I know, understand by [ those that are
born after the flesh, Gal. 4, 29.] legal Justitiaries. Mr. John Cotton Grounds
of baptism, etc. page 158. By such as are born after the flesh ( Gal. 4. 29.)
the Apostle does not mean such as are born by ordinary course of nature: but
such as are born and bred of the carnal seed of the Covenant of the Law; which
as it bego^ by Ishmael carnal confidence of his own strength, (or else he would
never have slighted and mocked the promised seed) so it begat in Cain and Saul
and Judas an utter despair of grace and salvation.

My fourth exception was, whereas the covenant of grace is made the reason of
baptizing infants; to be born of Hagar, that is, to be in the covenant of
works, should give a child interest into the Church of Christ. To this all
that Mr. Bl. replies is this, If Mr. Tombs his Gloss ( borrowed from Arminius)
must stand for the sense of the place, that to be born of the flesh, is to be
under the covenant of works, then it will hardly be avoided; but in case Mr.
Baines interpretation may stand of a birth in nature, according to the flesh,
then the Argument is valid.

Answ. That Mr. Baines does interpret no otherwise the term [ born after the
flesh, Gal. 4. 29.] than I do, is showed above: yet if it were true, that he
did as Mr. Bl. mis-allegeth him interpret [ born after the flesh, Gal. 4. 29.]
of those only who in course of nature came from Abraham, yet it is false that
either there or Romans 9. 8. he conceived this term [ children of the flesh] to
import a natural seed by virtue of it inherititing outward privileges, and
therefore the Argument of Mr. Bl. is not valid, though Mr. Baines were granted
to be rightly alleged by him. And for that he says, I borrow my Gloss from
Arminius: I answer, I have showed that I have deduced it from the Apostles own
words, and have the concurrent judgment of many Divines of best note, to whom
it is no disparagement, that in this Arminius joins.

SECT. XXIII.
Mr. Brinsley and Dr. Homes their conjecture from Hebr. 6. 2. to prove
infant baptism is refelled.

THere is another Text, to wit, Hebr. 6. 2. from which Dr. Homes Animad. on my
Exercit. page 58. and after cap. 10. would prove infant baptism, and with him
Mr. John Brinsley Doctrine and Practice of Poedob. page 76. etc. which if their
arguing were good, would not only prove the practice of infantbaptism, but
also that it is a principle of Christianity, and part of the foundation.

The arguing is to this effect, If the Doctrine of laying on of hands put after
the Doctrine of baptisms cannot be expounded of any other than the laying on of
hands for confirming the baptized in infancy than the Doctrine of laying on of
hands put after the Doctrine of baptisms presupposes infant baptism. But the
Antecedent is true, Ergo, the Consequent. The Antecedent is proved by parts, 1.
It cannot be understood of laying on of hands for healing or miraculous gifts
of the Spirit. For then the knowledge of the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit
should be put among the Principles of Christian knowledge, which is absurd.

To which I answered in my Exercit. page 22. that it is no absurdity to put
that among the Principles of Christian knowledge, those gifts being though by
extraordinary power, yet frequent in those days, and necessary to be known to
confirm young Christians, that Jesus is the Christ, because the Spirit thus
given was the great witness concerning Christ, that he was the Son of God, and
showed that he was gone up to the Father, else the Spirit had not descended, it
was it by which the world was rebuked, and the Saints established.

To this says Dr. Homes, that I by and by as good as confess it a eogent
reason, because I go about to prove that imposition of hands here mentioned is
for Ordination, because it was still in use, and to continue to be used.

Answ. The Doctor misallegeth my words: for I do not say positively as he cites
them, but comparatively thus; for it is more likely that imposition of hands
for Ordination, which was still in use, and to continue to be used, should be
there meant, than laying on of hands for confirmation after baptism of infants,
which has no Rule nor Example in Scripture.

2. Says Dr. Homes, Those gifts usual only in that little time of the
Apostles were not to be joined with, and put among the first Principles of
Christian Religion to be taught young ones to fit them for baptism, or to give
an account of their faith after baptism.

Answ. Those Principles Heb. 6. 1, 2. are not said to be taught to little ones
in age, but in knowledge of Christian Religion, nor are they said to be taught
to fit them for baptism, or to give account of their faith after baptism: they
may be principles and a foundation, though they were taught them after baptism,
and to establish themselves rather than to give account to others. Now for what
reason the knowledge of these might be a part of the beginnings of the Doctrine
of Christ to young Christians is given above. And there is in the Text that
which may induce us to conceive the giving the spirit by laying on of hands
meant, because v. 4. they that were enlightened, which many even of the Ancients
understood of baptism, commonly called by the Greeks [inlightning] are said, to
have tasted of the heavenly gift and to be partakers of the Holy Ghost, which
seems to be meant in respect of these gifts, and Paul Acts 19. 2. propounded
this as a Catechism question to certain Disciples at Ephesus, Have ye received
the Holy Ghost since ye believed? But I rested not on it, because the other of
laying on of hands for Ordination seemed to me more likely then.

2. Says Mr. Brinsley, Its not likely to be meant of laying on of hands for
Ordination, 1. Because that is not fit to be taught younglings, children,
novices, as milk, Heb. 5. 12. If this be milk, viz. the Doctrine of
Church Discipline, Church Officers, Church-goverment, etc. what shall we call
o^ count strong meat?

To this was answered, that however all the Doctrine about Church Discipline
might be unfit to be taught novices, yet laying on hands for Ordination being
an outward ri^e of continued use, it might be needful to be taught younglings
in Christian profession.

To this Dr. Homes replies, that no ingenuous man we^ghing and pondering things
will think that little children should be taught, as one of the first elements
of Christian faith the imposition of hands to ordain Ministers.

To which I say, many even of later Writers, whom me thinks the Doctor should
not deny to be ingenuous men do refer the laying on of hands, Heb. 6. 2. to
Ordination, Dicson on Heb. 6. 2. Ames Bell. Ener. tom. 3. lib. 3. cap. 1. th.
8. Cartwright Answ. to Rh. Annot. in locum. Thomas Hooker Survey part. 1. cap.
1. page 7. Noyes the Temple measured, page 70. Hudson Essence and Unity of the
Church, page 9. and Vindic. page 22. Dr. Hammond of the Keys cap. 4. sect. 28.
Chamier tom. 4. Panstr. Cath. lib. 4, cap. 10. sect. 38. recites the opinions
of Papists, as differing, some referring to Confirmation, some to Ordination,
some to giving the Holy Ghost. The New Annot. Diodati, speak as uncertain, to
which to refer it, Grotius refers it to all rites besides baptism* and the
Lords Supper, in Confirmation, Ordination, curing the sick, reconciling
penitents, blessing the married: and therefore whether little children were
taught the Doctrine thereof or no, many ingenuous men conceive it meant, Heb.
6. 2. 2. Though it might be conceived unfit for little children in age to be
taught, yet it may nevertheless be fit to be taught younglings in Christianity
meant, Heb. 5. 12. It seems to me to be as fit to be taught little children as
the Doctrine of Confirmation, and may be as easily learned by them as the
points about the Resurrection of the Dead, and eternal Judgment.

2. Says Mr. Brinsley, The very putting these two together [ baptisms and
laying on of hands] seems in Calvin's judgment to import some relation that the
one should have to the other, as in the other Principles which are by pairs.

To this I answered, that baptism and imposition of hands might be fitly
coupled, being both Ordinances for initiation, the one into the profession of
Christianity, the other into sacred function.

To this Dr. Homes replies, that imposition of hands initi^te^ but few, and
that long after they are Church members, and that Marriage might better be
coupled with baptism or imposition of hands and the Lords Supper.

Answ. If all this were granted, yet the answer stands good, that the joining
proves not Mr. Brinsleys sense necessary, which is enough for my purpose to
show the insufficiency of his Argument.

But Dr. Homes thinks to blow away all by avouching his and Mr. Brinsleys
interpretation, which he calls a naked and honest explication of the Text. And
that is, that the Doctrine of baptisms is the Doctrine which the catechized of
the heathens recited before their baptism, and the Doctrine of laying on of
hands was the Doctrine which infants of believers before baptized in their
infancy, after they were past childhood, rehearsed before the Church, upon
which they were received into the Church by imposition of hands.

Answ: He may well call it a naked interpretation, because it is brought into
the world without proof, there being nothing in the Text for it, and all the
show of proof is only the opinion of some late writers mistaken about the
practice of antiquity. Yea me thinks if the Doctor with his brethren of the
congregational way, as it is called, did believe this interpretation to be
genuine, they should admit their infant-sprinkled members by laying on of
hands, which yet I hear not that they do. But against this interpretation are
these reasons. 1. In it is supposed that the Doctrine of baptisms, and laying
on of hands is not the Doctrine concerning those rites, but the Doctrine
recited when those rites were used. But the Doctrine then recited being the
Doctrine of the resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment, and the
profession of repentance from dead works and faith toward God, if the Doctrine
of baptisms and the laying on of hands be the Doctrine recited by the baptized,
and confirmed at the use of those rites, it will be the same with the
resurrection of the dead and eternal judgment, repentance from dead works and
faith toward God, and so those several principles will be confounded. 2. The
Doctrine of baptisms was that which in those to whom the Apostles wrote was
laid before, which is intimated in the words v. 1. not laying again. But they
were Hebrews, therefore not, as the Doctor, Heathens that recited it at
baptism. 3. There Is no distinction in the Text as if some recited the Doctrine
at baptism, and others who had been baptized in infancy recited it at laying on
of hands, but the same persons had the Doctrine of both laid in them. 4.
There Is not a word of reciting the Doctrine at the several rites by the taught,
but the laying of the foundation of the Doctrine of those rites by the
Teachers. 5. The Doctrine of baptisms whether by them be meant those of John
and Christ, or other, and of laying on of hands is more likely and more
generally conceived to be concerning the use of baptism and laying on of hands.
But the Doctrine of the use of these was not recited by either sort of
catechized persons, though both sorts were taught both doctrines. 6. The
placing the words [ the Doctrine of baptisms and laying on of hands] in the
middle between faith and resurrection of the dead, is against the Doctors
sense, since the Doctrine of baptisms, being joined by apposition to faith and
repentance, the sense must be, that repentance and faith were the Doctrine
recited at baptism, not the resurection of the dead, which comes after, if the
Doctors sense were right. 7. This order leads us to conceive, that the writer
of that Epistle did orderly place the elements of Christianity in which
Christians were instructed, to wit, repentance and faith before baptism, then
the baptism of water, and the laying on of hands for the obtaining the Spirit
by prayer after baptism, and then the declaration of what they were to expect,
the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, wherein sentence should
pass on them concerning their everlasting state. 8. The terms [ of repentance,
of faith, of the doctrine, of the resurrection, of judgement] are all governed
of [(...), the foundation] as if they were possessed of it (as the Grammarians
speak) the word [ Doctrine] is not joined by apposition to [ faith] as if the
sense were [which is the Doctrine of baptisms] which must be the sense if the
Doctors interpretation be right. 9. Those interpreters which are brought as
giving us that sense which Dr. Homes and Mr. Brinsley all^ge are but late
writers, and such as speak only by ghess without proving the antiquity of the
use they mention out of ancient writers, or alleging any ancient writer
expounding the Text Heb. 6. 2. ^s referring to that use, Dr. Homes recites p.
59, 60. the words of Pareus, Calvin, Bullinger, Marlorat, Hofman, Theophylact,
Mr. Cotton, of all which there is none before the 16. Century but Theophylact
placed by Dr. Usher at the year 10 70. and his words with the words of Hofman,
and Marlorat do not at all speak of the use of laying hands on children of
believers baptized in infancy, and Bullingers words apply the laying on of
hands to the ordination of Pastors. So heedlesly did Dr. Homes write his
Anima^versions that his own authors he allegeth are not for him, or else
against him. And for Mr. Cotton he says only, There be that conceive and that
not improbable there was such an use, and that some judicious Divines have
conceived that use to be the reason of reckoning the laying on of hands among
the Principles, Heb. 6. 2. and he brings it to prove that then Elders were not
without laying on of hands, for all Church Members had hands laid on them, and
so might more freely lay hands on others: which speech if true, and the
inference be good, then women who were Church Members had hands laid on them,
and might more freely lay hands on others. But the New England Elders, of whom
I think Mr. Cotton was one, if not the very Penner of those answers, in the
Answer to the 32. Question page 69. say, If it were not so, then one of these
would follow, either that the Officers must minister without any Ordination at
all, which is against 1 Timothy 4. 16. Heb. 6. 2. So that there it is referred to
the same laying on of hands which is mentioned 1 Timothy 4. 14. which is indeed a
very common exposition of interpreters. It is true Calvin and Pareus refer it
to the use Mr. Brinsley mentions: yet Chamier tom. 4. Panstr. Cath. lib. 4.
cap. 10. sect. 39. allegeth with Salmeron, Justinian, Calvin, Beza, Aretius,
Piscator, concerning the initial laying on of hands upon the catechized to
prepare them to receive baptism, (for which use Dr. Hammond in his letter of
resolut. page 195. brings some places of the ancients) and Calvin in his
institutions l. 4. cap. 19. sect. 4. disallows Hieroms judgment, conceiving
that the laying on of hands for confirmation was an Apostolical Ordinance. Beza
says, that the Doctrine Heb. 6. 1, 2. was delivered when they met either to
baptize, or lay on hands on infants or adult persons; so that he speaks as one
not fully resolved. And indeed interpreters, as is showed above, are not agreed
whether to refer it to laying on hands on the baptized or the ordained, yet
very few of the Protestants refer it to the laying on of hands for confirmation
of them that were baptized in infancy, and the 25. Article of the Church of
England makes Confirmation one of those things which have grown of the corrupt
following of the Apostles.

I said in my Exercit. sect. 14. that if Hierom. tom. 2* in his Dialogue
against the Luciferians do assert that use of imposition of hands from
Scripture, yet he allegeth not Heb. 6. 2. for it, but the Examples of giving
the Holy Ghost by laying on of hands in the Acts of the Apostles.

To this Dr. Homes replies, 1. That however the antiquity holds good, that
imposition of hands was used to be after applied to them that have been
baptized.

To which I say, This being granted, yet as I show there and here the use of
baptizing infants is not proved thereby, nor does Hierom confirm Mr. Brinsleys
Exposition.

2. Says Dr. Homes, In that place he quotes other places than the Acts of the
Apostles, and speaks to our purpose thus, and then reciting some words of
Hierom, adds, so Hieronymus. Wherefore he supposes imposition of hands may be
on them that had the Spirit in baptism before: which is not denied by me, nor
do I see what that is to Dr. Homes his purpose to prove that the laying on of
hands Heb. 6. 2. is meant of believers infants before baptized, and then upon
their own profession received into the Church by imposition of hands. Yet
Chamier. tom. 4. Panstr. Cath. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 41. allegeth Hierom, as
referring the imposition of hands to the time of baptism, not some years after.

I said in my Exercit. page 23. but if it were supposed, that this imposition
of hands meant Heb. 6. 2. were on the baptized; yet this proves not the baptism
of infants in the Apostles days, unless it could be proved, that it was used
after the baptism of infants only for a confirmation either of the baptism or
the baptized. On the contrary, it is apparent out of Tertullian de corona
militis, cap. 3. that in the primitive times the baptized did make his
confession sub man^^ antisti^is, the Minister laying hands on him.

To this Dr. Homes says, 1. That the learned men before quoted gave us the sum
of Antiquity. But how little to the purpose their words are, or how destitute
of proof is showed above. 2. He cites in the Margin Tertul. de bapt. Cyprian.
Ep. 3. and 70. August. Tract. 6. on John's Epist. But none of the passages he
cites prove the use of laying on hands after the baptism of infants, which is
many years after baptism, but of laying hands presently after baptism. 3. He
excepts against my allegation out of Tertullian, that he there disputes for
receiving unwritten traditions, that he alludes to no Scripture authority, or
to any approved Antiquity: Which does no whit infringe my allegation: For
notwithstanding these things his testimony is valid for the practice of what
was done at baptism in his time, of which no doubt he was often a spectator.

4. Says he, [ Sub manu] is a Phrase that has so many senses as it is no ways
certain, that here [ Sub mann] [ under the hand] signifies imposition of hands.
Happily it may rather signify the Ministers lifting up of his hand in prayer: as
Pacianus has it, We obtain, says he, in Prayer pardon, and the Holy Spirit in
baptism by the mouth and hand of the Antistes.

Answ. The most likely sense is, the Bishop laying on his hand, as being
nearest the use of the phrase. Dr. Homes his sense is not likely, 1. Because
that which is said was done under the hand of the Bishop, to wit, the
protestation of the baptized, intimates that the Bishop did not then lift up
his hand in prayer, but hold his hand on the head of the Protestant. Nor is it
likely he would then be praying when he should attend to his confession. 2. Dr.
Homes shows not the phrase to be used elsewhere in his sense. For that which he
cites out of Pacianus is a different expression, by the hand, is not all one
with under the hand. And yet Chamier. Panstr. Cath. tom. 4. lib. 4. cap. 11.
sect. 28. refers that obtaining by the hand to the imposition of hands at
baptism.

I added further. And to save labor in reciting testimonies Chamier may be
seen, who in his Panstr. Cath. tom. 4. lib. 4. cap. 11. sect. 14. etc. at large
proves out of the Ancients, that the imposition of hands, which was after made
a distinct Sacrament called Cofirmation, was either a part or Appendix of
baptism, and cites many passages to show, that it was when the baptized was to
confess the faith, and renounce Satan.

Against th^s Dr. Homes excepts, that Chamier quotes but few, and those not of
credit. But though the Books some of them be not the Authors works whose names
they bear, yet many of them are of credit, yea all for what they are brought,
and for the purpose for which they are alleged however Dr. Homes scorn or score
with his nails those Fathers* if I may use his own words of my doing which is
more justly to be charged on himself. Dr. Homes grants there imposition of
hands presupposes baptism, precedent, though in men of ripe years, but he
should have added at the same solemnity joined with it. The other testimonies
are sufficient to show the practice in the Age in which the Writers of them
lived. But for Dr. Homes to say, that Chamier does not assert as from himself
or from antiquity, that imposition of hands was to be conjoined with baptism,
when he does at large undertake to prove, it was a part or appendix of baptism,
is too much boldness in the Doctor, much more to say, But rather tells us the
contrary, partly from himself, partly from the Authors he quotes, as that men
were reconciled in pen^nce by imposition of hand^, Sect. 53. which is nothing
to the business. For though imposition of hands in reconciliation might be
unconjoyned to baptism, yet what Chamier says stands good, that imposition of
hands for Confirmation was a part or appendix of baptism. And what the Doctor
adds, Sect. 54. that though Confirmation belongs to the solemnities of baptism,
yet after a while after baptism, is a plain confession of what I allege as
averred by Chamier, that that imposition of hands which after was made a
distinct Sacrament long after baptism, did formerly belong to the solemnity of
baptism: which shows how little regard the Doctor had to his own allegations.
But it is not Chamier alone who avers that anciently baptism and laying on of
hands were together; Salmasius also a man of very accurate study in Antiquity
in his Apparatus ad librum de Primatu Papae, page 84. speaks thus, Discat
igitur in Aegypto and in Graecia and in toto Orient confirmationem quae
separata est a baptismo non fuisse notam. Unus idemque Presbyter in omnibus
Orientis Ecclesiis simul and semel in baptismo conferendo etiam Chrismationem
cum manuum imposition^ ac signaculo Dominico dabat egressis e piscin^ sive
baptisterio: which he proves there* out of Severus Alexand^. Cyr^llus
Hierosolymitanus, and refers to more testimonies in his Treatise De Chrismate.
And he says, p. 1^4. Primis temporibus in Occidente Chrismatio and manuum
impositio sequebantur post baptismum, posteaquam a baptismo separata est
confirmatio aliquando in sola Chrismatione constitit, page 182. he proves in
Tertisllians, Cyprians, and others times, that Haetres erant baptismi hoc est
unius Sacramenti parts, lotio, unctio, and impositio manuum. Out of all which
I conclude, that the laying on of hands for the confirmation of children of
believers baptized in infancy, when they came to years, and professed the
faith, was altogether unknown in the Eastern Churches anciently, and in the
Western only in the declining times, and therefore notwithstanding Calvin and
Pareus his conceits there was no such thing meant, Heb. 6. 2. as baptism of
infants, and their receiving into the Church, many years after by laying on of
hands, there being no such things known in the days of that Writer, nor some
hundred of years after, and therefore Mr. Brinsley and Dr. Homes Argument from
thence for infant baptism is of no weight. I go on.

SECT. XXIV.
Dr. Hammond his way of proving infant baptism from the Jews baptizing
Proselytes children is showed to be vain.

DR. Henry Hammond in his Letter of Resolution to six Queries, in the fourth
Quere, Sect. 23. speaks thus, But there is no need of laying much weight on
this, or any the like more imperfect ways of probation, (meaning the example of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. of baptizing a whole household, Acts 16. 33. Christ's
reception of little children, Matthew. 19. 14. Mark 10 16.) The whole fabric
being sufficiently supported, and built on this Basis ( the customary baptism
among the Jews) and that discernible to be so, if we consider it first
negatively, then positively. First negatively, that Christian baptism, which is
an institution of Christ's, lightly changed from the Jewish custom of receiving
of Proselytes by him appointed in his lifetime, and settled a little before
his Ascension has nothing in the pattern, whence it is copied out, nothing in
the copy it self, as it is set down in the New Testament, i. e. in the words of
the institution, or in his or the Apostles practice, which does any way exclude
the Christians children from being part of that indefinite number, that ought
to be baptized, or for whom baptism was instituted by Christ. That there is
nothing exclusive of them in the pattern ( the Jewish custom of baptism) has
been sufficiently evidenced by the several branches of that already insisted on.

Answ. I like the Doctors ingenuity in his waving the imperfect ways of proving
infant baptism he mentions, and doubt not to show his own to be no better than
those he relinquisheth. The substance of his proof is this, as I conceive. The
Jews were wont when they admitted Proselytes to baptize them and their
children, and this is discernible to be the pattern of Christian baptism, and
that Christ's institution was but a copy according to that pattern, and therefore
infants to be baptized, the Apostles and the first Churches practice showing it
to be so. Concerning which I say, 1. It seems baptism was a custom of all
nations as well as the Jews. Grot. Annot. in Matthew. 3. 6. conceives that for as
much as strangers washed, not circumcised, were obliged by those Laws only
which God had given to all mankind, it is easy to be understood that baptism
was among old institutions arising, as I think, after the great deluge in
memory of the world purged. Whence that famous speech among the Greeks, The sea
washes away all the evils of men. Surely we read even in the Epistle of of
Peter, that baptism is answerable to the deluge. And Annot. in Matthew. 28. 19.
yea with prosane nations it was of old used, that they who would be initiated
were first washed all over their body, no doubt testifying thereby their
purpose of innocence. 2. By the passages cited by the same Author in Matthew 28.
19. Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, and Augustine allegeth
those nations custom for their practice; nor do I know that ever Dr. Hammond
or any other has alleged one passage in Scripture or any of the Fathers, that
might evince that the custom of baptizing or baptizing infants was derived
from the Jews initiating proselytes by baptism, but some passages in the
Fathers show rather that they took it as instead of Circumcision. Mr. Seldom de
Syned: Ebrae. Lib. 1. Cap. 3. page 40, 41. mentions some who have conceived
that the Jewish baptism in initiating Proselytes was in imitation of Christ's
example, though he do not believe it; and that Schickardus conceives they added
a certain Baptism to Circumcision to difference them from Samaritans, which I
allege to show that notwithstanding the Doctors supposition, that the whole
fabric of baptism is discernible to be built on that basis the customary
baptism among the Jews, yet many will conceive it needs more proof than the
bare recital of passages out of Jewish writers. I for my part conceive that
there was a custom of baptizing proselytes before Christ's incarnation among the
later Jews, but that either it should begin from Jacobs injunction to his
household Genesis 35* 2. or Gods Command, Exodus 19. 10. for the Israelites to wash
their clothes before the giving the Law (though the Jewish Doctors allege these
for it) I do not conceive, those places speaking of washing Jews by nature, not
proselytes, whereas the Jews baptized not Jews by nature, as Seldom l. 2 cap 4.
de Jure not. ac Gent. juxta discipl. Ebrae. Says, but by profession, nor do I
conceive Mr. Seldens exposition in his Book de Syned, l. 1. cap. 3. that the
sea was some vessel or receptacle of waters wherein they washed their bodies
before the giving of the Law Exodus 19. 10. but the read sea. For as the
drinking of the rock, is a relation of an accident of Gods providence for them,
signifying to them the Lords supper, so their passing through the sea declares,
not what they were enjoined to do, but what God did for them, that under the
cloud they passed through the sea, to signify to them the same thing that
baptism does to us, our safe passage to life by Christ, nor do I think Dr.
Hammonds exposi^ion sect. 7. page 181. right, that they were baptized into
Moses in the cloud and in the sea v. 2 i. e. were ( by these two great
solemnities, the cloud that gave them light by night, and a guard by day, and
the sea that was a wall to defend them, and a devouri^g deep to their enemies)
received and initiated into Gods Cove(...)der the conduct of Moses, as since
they are wont to be ini^^^^ed by baptism: For when it is said, our Fathers were
baptized, it is not mea^t were baptized as si^ce Proselytes were baptized among
the Jews, but as Christians were baptized, even as when he says v. 3. and they
did all eat the same spiritual meat, it is meant they did all eat the same
spiritual meat, with us Christians, that is, they had Christ signified to them
by the Manna they did eat, as we eat Christ spiritually in the Lords Supper.
There Is no more an allusion to a custom of the Jews in the one then in the
other, bu a narration of what happened to them by Gods providence, which the
Apostle interprets as signs to them of the same thing that baptism, and the
Lords supper are to us Christians. And therefore I conceive that the Scripture
does not make the customary use of baptizing Proselytes by the Jews as a thing
from God, or eyed by Christ as his pattern, but that the custom of baptizing
proselytes was a tradition of the Elders as the baptisms mentioned Mark 7. 3,
4. and many other things they held. Nor do I think it true that the customary
use of the Jews in baptizing proselytes and their children, was the pattern of
Christ's institution of baptism, and the Apostles and first Churches practice.
For according to the custom of the Jews set down out of Maimony and other
Jewish Rabbis by Mr. Seldom l. 2. de Jure nature. ac gent. etc. cap. 4 lib. 1.
de syned. Ebr. cap. 3. John Baptist, and Christ's Apostles should have baptized
no native Jews, but only Gentiles that embraced the faith, for after the
baptism Exodus 19. 10. the Jews did not baptize Jews but only proselytes.
Whereas not only John Baptist, but also the Apostles both before, and after
the ascension of Christ did baptize Jews as well as Gentiles upon their
profession of repentance and faith in Christ, as being agreeable to Christ's
institution Matthew. 28. 19. 2. Christ would not have avouched the baptism of
John to be from Heaven, and not from men, if it had been in imitation of and
conformity to the Jewish custom. 3. It is likely some where or other some
intimation would have been given of that custom as the Directory for Christians
in the use of baptism. 4. The institution and practice would have been
conformable to it. But the contrary appears. 1. In their baptizing no infants
of the Gentiles at their first conversion: whereas the Jews baptized only the
Gentiles infants at their first proselyting, not the infants of those who were
baptized in infancy. Seldom l. 2. de Iure not. etc. cap. 4. sed vero, non
aliter atque Israelitae ipsi filii proselytorum circumcidendi tantum erant nec
quemadmodum parents sive illi sive filiae baptizandae. Nunquam enim solennis
proselyti baptismus ille iterandus erat, nec in ipso qui primo baptizatus
(tamet si apostata factus in ritus Iudaicos rediret) nec in posteris. So that
if it be true that the Jewish baptism of Proselytes is the pattern of the
Christian, then no infant of Christian race is now to be baptized, but such as
were born when the first Gentile Ancestors were converted. Yea the Jews were so
far from baptizing any infants of proselytes born after the^r first convesion
and baptism, that they resolved, as may be seen in Seldom ubi supra, and Dr.
Hammond himself allegeth sect. 109. if a woman great with child become a
proselyte, and be baptized her child needs not baptism when it is born. So that
whereas the Doctor brings the Jewish custom as a pattern for Christian baptism
so as that it may be reasonably thought to belong to all that among the Jews
were usually baptized, his own arguing will prove that no infant of Christians
now descerded from Christian Ancestors, or born of parents formerly infidels
after the parents were baptized, should be baptized, because it is against the
Jewish custom of baptizing any child of a G^ntile infidel born after the
parents were become proselytes, and baptized; But secondly besides this first
and main thing wherein the Doctors pattern is incorgruous to Christian baptism
there are many more disparities, which show that the Jewish baptism of
pr^selytes was not the pattern of Christan baptism, As v. g. 1. The baptism of
males must be also with Circumcision and an offering. 2. There must be a kind
of court of three Israelites skillful in Law to approve it or else it is void,
Dr. Hammond sect. 114. Among the Jews, says the Gemara Babyl^* the infants
used to be baptized upon the profession or confession of the house of judgment,
the consistory, and the Gloss says, the Triumviri are set over baptism and are
necessary to it, and so they become to him a father. and Maimonides, he must be
baptized before the Triumviri. 3. It was not to be on the Sabbath or feast day,
or in the night. 4. The body must be washed not in a made receptacle of waters
as a vessel or font, but a natural one as a river, pool, well. 5. No part of
the body but must be washed, if any scab, or blood hardened or filth f^^ck on
the body so as that water could not come to the whole supersicies it was not
accounted right baptism, yet they allowed garments which separated not the
water from the body. 6. While the proselytes stood in the water the precepts of
Moses were recited by the three Israelites skillful in the Law, and he was to
take on him the observation of them all not one excepted, or else not accounted
a Proselyte. 7. A woman proselyte was placed in the water unto the neck by
women which baptized her, while the three Israelites stood after the manner
observing the baptism, yet they were to turn away their faces, and go away when
the woman came out of the water. 8. Elder Gentiles were made proselytes
according to their own choice, younger as males before thirteen years and a day
old, females before twelve and a day old according to the mind of their father
or the court to which they were subject were admitted to Judaism. The same
right was of a natural fool. Yet if a person under years when baptized did
after as soon as he came to age renounce Judaism, then he lost what privilege
he had by baptism either by assent of the parent or the court. 9. The baptism
did give them interest in the policy of the Jews as other Israelites, except
some things peculiarly reserved to natural Israelites. 10. Yet a servant
without his Masters consent was not made free. 11. A blessing was to be used at
baptism, but unless he were made free, not by the servant, but by the master.
12. A young one as an infant, whether taken or found, the Israelite that
possessed it might baptize it, either into the state of an ingenuous person, or
freed person, or a servant. 13. They taught that a person baptized was so born
again, that lying with his own natural sister was no incest. 14 If the person
be privily baptized, though before two, yet he was not counted a Proselyte. All
which may be seen in Seldom l. 2. de jure not. and Gent. juxta discipl. Ebr.
cap. 2, 3. 4. lib. 1. de Syned. Ebr. cap. 3. So that if the baptism of
Proselytes among the Jews be the pattern of Christian baptism, baptizing of
women must be by women, no one single Bishop or Presbyter must baptize, but
three at least, there must be no private baptism, no baptizing in Fonts or
Basins, no baptism without the whole body be washed, and so as that no filth or
scab hinder the water from coming to the skin, there should be no infants
baptized but at the first conversion of the parent, no Jew should be baptized,
none baptized in the night, on the Sabbath, or other Feast Day. In most of
which Christ, John the Baptist, and the Apostles varied from the Jews, and
therefore they took not their baptism for their pattern, and if they did not
make the Jews baptism their pattern in baptizing, neither are we to do so, but
to follow the rule of Christ's institution, and the Apostles practice, and not
the Jews use, which is not delivered in Scripture, and much of it according to
the superstition and dotages of their Rabbis, and was not a meet religious
Sacrament, but a kind of mixed rite partly religious, and partly civil,
intitling to Civil as well as Ecclesiastical right, and done by persons Civil
rather than Ecclesiastical, and so of a far different nature and use from the
Christian baptism. I think Dr. Hammond were he a Bishop would censure such
baptizing as the Jews used as irregular, and then he may well bear with
Antipaedobaptists, though they reject his new conceit of making the Jewish
baptism our pattern, and thereupon grounding the baptizing of infants. Himself
in his Practical Catechism lib. 6. Sect. 2. allows of sprinkling, though the
Jewish custom was dipping, yea they so precisely require it, that it was not
counted baptism, except the whole body were washed, and yet the Doctor
confesses, that by Christ's appointment the baptized was to be dipped in water,
i. e. according to the primitive ancient custom to be put under water, and the
words [I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost] he says, Being by Christ prescribed to his Disciples must
indispensably be used. So that when the Doctor pleases, the Jewish custom must
be the pattern, and when he likes it not, or the Bishops Canons otherwise order
it, he may vary from it: in one thing which Christ did not prescribe, as the
Doctor says, nor did the Apostles that we find so conceive it, yet Christ's
prescription must be indispensably used, yet in another thing though appointed
by Christ, and according to the primitive ancient custom, a dispensation is
allowed by the Doctor, because later custom varies from Christ's appointment and
the primitive ancient custom. Such a Lesbian leaden Rule the Doctor dictates
by, fit for such as have resolved rather to forgo Christ's appointment than the
Bishops Canons. It is conceived Christ instituted the Lords Supper, somewhat
like the Jews Postcoenium after the Passover Shall then the Jews after-Supper
be the pattern to the Christians in the Lords Supper? If so, the Lords Supper
must be in private, in the night, administered by the master of the house, no
more to receive than were usually at the Passover, not many hundreds, etc. The
Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 11. 23. in the use of the Lords Supper, sets down what he
received from the Lord, without mentioning the Jewish usage, which shows he
would have Christians in that rite keep to what Christ appointed, not what the
Jews practiced. And should it not be so in baptism also? It is conceived the
use of laying on of hands in Ordination, and the term [Presbyters] were from
the Jews: Must we then or may we take Rules from their practice in Ordination,
and not ty our selves to the Apostles Canons and practice? One Presbyter or
Doctor it is said, according to the ancient manner of the Jews, might create
another, and sometime by an Epistle or Books an absent person might be created,
as may be seen in Seldom de Syned. Ebrae. vet. l. 1. c. 14. Must these usages
of theirs be a pattern to Christians? The use of Excommunication came from the
Jews discipline into the Christian, yet so as that the same manner and effect
was not retained in both, says the same Authorin the same book, c. 7. Out of
all which I infer that in the use of those rites which were taken from the Jews,
and brought into the Christian discipline; yet our Rule according to which
Christians are to observe those rites, is to be taken from the words and
example of Christ and his Apostles, which I doubt not to make it appear do no
whit serve for Dr. Hammonds purpose.

Mr. Marshall in his Defense, p. 170, 171. thinks, this to be a good Argument,
that baptism belongs to infants as well as grown men, because, baptism being in
use before as an Ecclesiastical rite, though it begun to be a Sacrament of
divine institution when John was sent to baptize into the name of Christ, there
arespecial testimonies in the Talmud, which declare that infants both of Jews
and Gentiles were thus admitted, the male children by Circumcision and baptism,
the females by baptism, etc. especially since there is not the least hint given
in the word that when it was thus advanced to be a Sacrament it should not be
applied to those persons to whom before it was, viz. infants as well as grown
men.

But I think Mr. M. cannot find in the Talmud the Jews or their infants were
thus baptized since the time of giving the Law, Exodus 19. 10. I confess the
Gentiles infants were baptized as is abovesayd; yet as Mr. Ms. learned men
mentioned in his Defense, page 227. confess that the baptism of John and of the
Pharisees was for a different end, so Dr. Lightfoot Harmony part. 1. page 138.
says, the Jews baptism was clean of another nature from John's.And in the
second part of his Harmony on John 1. 25. page 76. he shows sundry differences
between them, and cites out of the Jewish Doctors some of those differences
before alleged; which are enough to show that our baptism is not to be
regulated by their practice. Sure it is a wonder to me that Mr. M. engaged to
reform the worship of God according to Gods Word, and in his Sermon on 2 Chronicles.
15. 2. Admiring that ever mortal man should dare in Gods worship to meddle any
jot further than the Lord himself has commanded, should yet in the point of
infant baptism follow the Talmud quite besides the Lords command. But I return
to Dr. Hammond.

SECT. XXV.
Dr. Hammonds elusion of Matthew. 28. 19. alleged against infant baptism is
refelled.

SEct 25. Ubi supra, he says thus, And in the New Testament I cannot foresee
any words that may come under suspicion of doing so, but those of Matthew. 28,
19. Goteach all Nations, baptizing them, etc. And those words being duly
weighed are far from doing so. For the phrase which is there used in the
original is a singular one, not duly expressed by our English [teach] It is
(...), make Disciples, or receive into Discipleship all Nations, baptizing them
in the Name, etc. making this form of baptism their ceremony of receiving them.
You may see the word explained in a parallel phrase John 4* 1. The Pharisees
heard that Jesus makes more Disciples and baptizeth than John, (...), where to
make Disciples and baptize is all one with (...), where the baptizing being
immediately annexed to the making or receiving Disciples, and the receiving
Disciples not supposing any precedent instruction, but, looking wholly on it as
subsequent (in like manner as in this place v. 20. (...) [teaching] follows
after (...), baptizing) all that are thus brought and received ad discipulatum,
to be for the future instructed, and instituted in the Christian faith, may
surely be received by baptism, the ceremony which is there prescribed by
Christ, with which to receive Disciples.

Answ. Though I conceive Dr, Hammond to ascribe more power to the Canons of
Prelates about the Sacraments than is meet, being one who has written in
defense of the Commonprayer Book, yet by this allegation of Matthew. 28. 19. he
seems tacitly to yield that if the words there include not infants under the
discipled, then there is something in the New Testament, which excludes infants
from baptism, although he say, Sect. 96. I do not believe or pretend that that
Precept of Christ does necessarily infer (though it do as little deny) that
infants are to be baptized. But me thinks if the Doctor will stand to his own
words elsewhere, he must acknowledge that by the precept of baptizing, Matthew.
28. 19. infants are excluded. For the Doctor says, Sect. 55. Christ's
institution makes dipping or sprinkling with water a Sacrament; which
institution is Matthew. 28. 19. and therefore the Doctor will have the words
there indisp^nsably used in baptism; and Sect. 92. he says, Baptism is a
Sacrament, that Sacrament an institution of Christ that institution not founded
in any reason of immutable truth, but only in the positive will of Christ, and
so that there is nothing considerable in this question, (or any of this nature)
but how it was delivered by Christ. And Sect. 94. that which was done by the
Apostles, if it were not a Rule for ever, yet was an effect of such a Rule
formerly given by Christ, and interpretable by this practice to be so. And
Practical Catech. lib. 6. sect. 2. he expounding Christ's institution, says,
that the words import that the person baptized acknowledges, makes profession
of believing in three, delivers himself to three, as Authors of his faith, and
to be ruled by the direction of this Master, and this he will have to be meant
by baptizing into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit: Whence I infer,
that if baptism be a Sacrament, and made so by Christ's institution, and that
institution founded only in his positive will, and the will of Christ be that
baptism be into the name of the Trinity, and this is when the baptized makes
profession of believing in three, to be ruled by them, and the Apostles
practice interprets Christ's rule; no infant that does not profess faith is
baptized into the name of the Trinity, nor was appointed to be baptized by
Christ, nor did the Apostles baptize them, and therefore they are not baptized
according to Christ's institution, and so no Sacrament to them. Yea, if the
positive will of Christ be the reason of baptism, they usurp upon Christ's
prerogative, who baptize otherwise than Christ has appointed and then if the
precept of Christ does not necessarily infer infantbaptsm (which the Doctor
ingenuously acknowledges) it does by manifest consequence deny it, since he
forbids that to be done otherwise han he has appointed, when he has
determined how it should be done. The Doctor when he says above, the words [I
baptize into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost] must be indispensably
used; me thinks by the same reason should conceive Christ's institution should
be unalterably used in baptizing those only whom he has appointed to be
baptized. But let us consider what shift the Doctor makes to elude the force of
Christ's institution, Matthew. 28. 19. that it may not be thought to exclude
infants from baptism. I grant that (...) is best rendered [ make Disciples] and
like it well, that he acknowledges [ makes Disciples, and baptizeth, John 4.
1.] is all one with [making Disciples, baptizing them, Matthew. 28. 19.] But I
deny, 1. that (...), is well paraphrased by [ receive into Discipleship all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name, etc. making this form of baptism their
ceremony of receiving them] For by it the making Disciples is made the same
with receiving into Discipleship or receiving Disciples, and baptism the
ceremony of receiving into Discipleship, which is as truly the act of the
baptized thereby professing or avouching his Discipleship. 2. That the making
or receiving Discipleship supposes not any precedent instruction, but looks
wholly on it as subsequent. For 1. that which in Matthew is expressed by, Go ye
therefore and make Disciples all Nations, is in Mark 16. 15. Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; which shows how they should
disciple all Nations. Now they who are made Disciples by preaching the Gospel
are made Disciples by precedent instruction. Ergo, the making or receiving
Disciples Matthew. 28. 19. supposes precedent instruction. 2. Such as the making
Disciples was Ioh. 4. 1. such is the making Disciples, Mat. 28. 19. For by the
Doctors confession they are all one. But that was by preaching, as is plain
concerning John, Matthew. 3. 1, 2, 5, 6. and concerning the Apostles, Mat. 10. 5,
6, 7. Ergo. Whence, 3. I further argue, That way the Apostles were to disciple
all Nations by which they were to disciple the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, but that was by preaching, Ergo, discipling supposes precedent
instruction. 4. From the use and notation of the word, which is so to teach as
that they learn, and so is used Matthew. 13. 52. (...), is rendered [ instructed]
by our last Translators, and can be no otherwise rendered than [made a Disciple
by teaching] So Acts 14. 21. it is said, Having preached the Gospel to that
City, (...), and having taught or made many Disciples. Whence, 5. it may appear
how the Apostles understood the Precept of Christ to preach the Gospel to
persons, and thereby make them Disciples. 6. A Disciple and a believer appear
to be the same by comparing Matthew. 28. 19. with Mark 16. 15, 16. For as the way
of making Disciples is more fully expressed by preaching the Gospel; so the
Disciple to be baptized is expressed by [ the believer] which is put before
baptism. Nor is it against this that after baptism they are to be taught,
Matthew. 28. 20. For that teaching is expressed to be the teaching the
observation of all that he commanded: But the teaching that makes Disciples is
the preaching the Gospel. So that the plain order and meaning of Christ's words
is this, that 1. the Apostles should not stay only within the Land of Israel,
but go into all the World. 2. That they should by preaching the Gospel,
declaring that Jesus was the Christ, make them Disciples, that is, taught
concerning Christ, or believers in him. 3. That they should baptize them. 4.
That they should then teach them to observe all his commands. Now infants are
not made Disciples by preaching the Gospel, therefore by Christ's institution
not appointed to be baptized, and therefore are baptized without his warrant,
and consequently unlawfully.

What Dr. Hammond says sect. 26. were it all granted him, yet it would no whit
avail to prove that an infant may be a Disciple appointed by Christ to be
baptized. For let putting to school be as early as the Doctor will imagine, yet
none is put to school till he does know his Teacher, and so none is Christ's
Disciple in the Scripture Language till he know Jesus to be Christ, and take
him for his Lord, which infants being not capable of, they are not Disciples,
nor to be baptized according to Christ's appointment. What he adds s. 27, 28. is
not right. For 1. it is not true, that a Disciple and a Proselyte are perfectly
all one. For a Proselyte notes one that is by birth an alien from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and comes to the Israelites to own their God, and be
part of their policy, not to be taught but to enjoy privileges with other Jews,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical. There is no mention of the Disciples of the
Priests, but of the Pharisees and Sadduces: But a Disciple of Christ is one
that owns Christ for his Teacher and Lord only for spiritual benifits. Nor
does the Holy Ghost at any time call Christians Christ's proselytes but his
Disciples, that we might not confound the notions of these terms. And though
the origination of the word [ proselyte] be from (...), to come to, and Christ
says, Suffer little children to come to me, and this infers their capacity of
proselytism, and the next words [ For of such is the Kingdom of God] suppose
them particularly qualified for it, yet that coming and imagined pro^elytism
being only for ablessing by prayer, and laying on of hands, not to be made
Disciples or baptized, this will not prove them capable of being made Disciples
according to Christ's appointment till by hearing the Gospel they own Christ as
their Master. The like may be said of the entering into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. 10.
which though in some sense it should be yielded, that infants may enter into
Covenant, that is, by their parents act engaging them under a curse or oath to
own God as theirs, in which sense the posterity then unborn did enter into
Covenant, v. 15. yet this is insufficient to prove, that such an entering into
Covenant makes infants Disciples or subjects of baptism according to Christ's
appointment. For in it such a discipling is enjoined as is by Preaching the
Gospel, and they only are Disciples to be baptized who are believers, and they
only are appointed to be baptized who in their own persons do enter into
Covenant, or engage themselves to be Christ's followers.

SECT. XXVI.
Dr. Hammond neither from 1 Cor. 7. 14. nor from Sayings of Ancients proves
that the Apostles baptized infants.

HEreto Dr. Hammond adds, to confirm his opinion of Christ's intention to
include infants in the institution of baptism for all Nations, and not to
exclude them from it, the passage 1 Cor. 7. 14. in which he imagines is a
remain and footstep of the Apostles practice of baptizing infants. 2. The
practice of the first and purest Ages of the Church, which received infants to
baptism, and either by so doing testify the Apostolical usage transcribed by
them, or else affirm, that they received it by tradition from the Apostles. In
both which how he is mistaken remains to be showed.

First he sets down this, which he cais A brief Paraphrase, though it be too
large for a Paraphrase, and takes in more than he can with any color show to
have any thing in the Text answering to it. His words of Paraphrase of 1 Corinthians. 7. 12, 13, 14. are these.

Verse. 12. If any Christian Husband has an heathen Wife, and she be desirous
to continue with him, he ought not to put her away, unbelief being no
sufficient cause of Divorce by the Law of Christ.

Verse. 13. And so in like manner, for the Christian Wife that is married to an
Infidel, if he be desirous to live with her, let her by no means separate from
him.

Verse. 14. For (beside the command of Christ, Matthew. 5. 32. which obliges to
this) other advantages there are of the believers living with the unbeleiver,
worth considering. For by this means it has often come to pass that the
unbelieving party has been brought to the faith by the company and
conversation of the believer; and considering the efficacy of good example, 1
Pet. 3. 1. and seasonable exhortation and instruction on presumption of the
great zeal (and consequent endeavors and diligence) that by the Law of
Christianity the Husband will have to the eternal good of any so near him, as a
Wife is, there is great reason of hope that still it may be so, that their
living together may produce this effect in the unbeliever, and the intuition of
that (more than possible) effect may reasonably move the Christian party not to
forsake the other voluntarily. And this one consideration, viz. the probability
that the conversation of the believer 1 Pet. 3. 1. should gain, i. e. bring the
unbeliever to the faith, and the reasonable presumption that it will be so, is
the reason why the young children of Christians, which cannot as yet be deemed
believers, are yet admitted to baptism, because by their living in the family
with Christian parents they probably, and by the obligation lying on the
parents ought to be brought up in the faith, and kept from heathen pollutions,
and the Church requiring and receiving promise from the parents) does
reasonably presume they will. And upon this ground it is, that though the
children of Christians are, yet the children of heathens are not admitted to
baptism.

Answer. This Paraphrase is many ways faulty, and far from the meaning of the
Apostle. 1. It puts in many things as explicatory of the Text, to which there
is nothing answerable in the Apostles words. For, 1. there is nothing that
answers to [ by this means it has often come to pass] Nor, 2. to these words [
by the company and conversation of the believer] yea the term [ believer] is
quite omitted by the Apostle, which considering the term [ unbeliever] twice
expressed seems to have been done wittingly, that it might not be taken, that
he ascribed the sanctification to the faith of the one party. Surely when men
specially in Arguments place the force of a reason in a term they use not to
omit it, as the Apostle does here, but to express it remarkably, and with
Emphasis. 3. All the words [ and considering the efficacy of good Example, 1
Pet. 3. 1. and seasonable exhortation and instruction on presumption of the
great zeal (and consequent endeavors and diligence) that by the Laws of
Christianity the Husband will have to the eternal good of any so near to him as
a Wife is, there is great reason of hope that it still may be so, that their
living together may produce this effect in the unbeliever, and the intuition of
that (more than possibly) effect, may reasonably move the Christian party not
to forsake the other voluntarily] are added without any thing in the least
intimated by the words of the Text, but the contrary, even according to his
exposition, who makes the term [(...) sanctified] refer to some past known
Examples, and therefore the forepart of the verse has not at all that which
answers to [ on presumption, etc. there is great reason of hope, etc.] which
import a contingent event for the future, not a thing past, which is always
certain. 4. The term [ young children of Christians which cannot as yet be
deemed believers] is more and otherwise than is in the Text, which has only [
your children] which is not restrained to infancy, nor does it appear, that [
your] does imply they were considered as Christians, so as that there should be
this construction [ your children are holy, because they are children of
Christians] distinguishingly from infidels, but [ your children] that is, the
children of you that doubt, who have had unbelieving husbands and wives, and
have had or may have children by them. So that the term [ your] only notes the
particularity and individuation of the persons, and if considered in any
respect besides, it is their doubting condition, or their having unbelieving
yoke-fellows. 5. There is nothing to answer those words [ because by their
living in the family with Christian parents they probably, and by the
obligation lying on the parents ought to be brought up in the faith, and kept
from heathen pollutions, (and the Church requiring and receiving promise from
the parents) does reasonably presume they will] 6. Nor is there any thing
answering to these words [ your children] which his own Paraphrase applies to
Christians children. So that the Doctors Paraphrase is beyond measure culpable
in respect of addition.

2. It is blameable also in omitting that which the Text expressly and
emphatically mentions, to wit, the terms [ Wife, Husband] when he says, [ the
unbelieving party has been brought to the faith by the company and
conversation of the believer, and after, the probability that the conversation
of the believer should bring the unbeliever to the faith] which may be meant of
a companion, brother, father, mother, neighbor. 3. There is much faultiness in
quite altering the importance of the Apostles words, by substituting instead of
were or should be] in the Apostles words [ ought to be, they will be] in the
Paraphrase. Which is the more blameable in that himself Sect. 82 page 257. does
more truly retain the force of those expressions in the Apostle, when he says,
[ The method of the Apostle must needs be this, unless there were, etc. '^would
certainly follow that their children were unclean] so that the pretended brief
Paraphrase of the Apostles words is very faulty, far from the Rule of a
Paraphrase, and instead of explaining does quite pervert the meaning of the
words.

2. For many other reasons the exposition of the Doctor cannot be right. For 1.
In his paraphrase of the Apostles resolution v. 12. he puts [ ought] and of v.
13. [ let her by no means] as if the Apostle did make it a necessary duty, that
they must continue together, whereas the Apostle answerably to their doubt does
only resolve them of the lawfulness of their continuing together, not of the
necessity of it, and so v. 14. is a reason of the lawfulness of it
notwithstanding their doubt, which appears from the resolution v. 15. [ If the
unbeliever will depart let him depart] which cannot be expounded otherwise than
thus, you are not bound to stay as you are not bound to cause her to depart or
to relinquish him, you are at your liberty. For the very next words [ a Brother
or Sister is not under bondage in such cases] do show that the resolution was
of liberty, not of duty, contrary to the Doctors paraphrase. Now that
resolution v. 15. is of the same form with his determination v. 12, 13. 2. He
makes the resolution to be of a duty v. 12, 13. yet makes v. 14. to be a motive
of the will, when he says, [ may reasonably move] as if the Apostle were not
deciding a doubt, but persuading the will, and that from such a thing as cannot
be reason of duty or liberty, but as it is by him expounded a persuasive to win
on the affections, not to settle the judgment, and yet p. 207. he says, [ the
unbeliever having been sanctified by the believer is used as an argument why
they should live together.] 3. He puts [ unbelieving Husband v. 14.] as if he
were another than he that is mentioned v. 13. for v. 13. the unbelieving
husband was at that present an unbeliever: But according to his sense
expounding v. 14. thus, [ it has often come to pass that the unbelieving party
has been brought to the faith by the company and conversation of the believer]
the unbelleving husband must be meant of one that was once an unbeliever, not
so then. Now then the Apostle should after this exposition give a reason why
the present believing wife need not leave her husband, because another
unbelieving husband by another believing wife has been brought to the faith.
Which wherein it could tend to any satisfaction for them that doubted whether
they might lawfully live together because of the present unbelief of the
yokefellow I see not. 4. Such a reason will appear the more unlikely to be
satisfactory, because as it has often happened that the unbeliever has been
won by the wife, so it has often happened to the contrary, and it is likely
the persons whom he resolved had complained, that they had small hopes of their
husbands conversion, and so the reason of their living together from experience
would be more likely to be retorted back thus, You perswde us to live together,
you tell us we may, because it often comes to pass that the unbeliever is
brought to the faith: But our experience is to the contrary, we see many not
converted, and our own are obstinate and hardened, and therefore this reason
does dissuade us, and resolve us that we may not live with him. 5. Hence
another exception is against this exposition, that it makes the Apostle to
resolve them of their duty or liberty by that which was a mere contingent event
which might be or not be. For this exposition makes the reason of their living
together to be from what had hapened and might be: whereas a contingent event
is impertinent to that end, to say, we may lawfully do such a thing, because
its likely such a good effect may follow. A contingent event is unfit to
resolve of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of a thing without some other rule,
things being unlawful or lawful not according to disagreement from or
agreement to Gods will of purpose what shall be, but his will of Command what
he requires to be omitted or done. Besides this contingent event here was
uncertain as appears v. 16. what know thou? implies, thou can not tell
whether thou shall save thy husband? Perhaps thou may. Nor does the Apostle
mention any promise it should be so, but mentions it only as a contingent
event that might be or not be. 6. Besides it is from such an event as is
impertinent to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of living together. For the past
conversion of others and the future conversion of our own yoke-fellows is
merely extrinsecal to our duty or liberty, though it be much to our
convenience, and therefore it is fitly urged v. 16. after the resolution of the
judgment v. 12, 13, 14 15. Is there any show of reason why I should live with
my own unbelieving husband, because another unbelieving husband was converted
by her, or because there is great reason of hope it will be so with mine? This
would intimate that future events make our present state or acts lawful or
unlawful, which is somewhat like the Turks conceit who judged, that pleases
God which succeeds prosperously, Knolls History of the Turks in Solomon the
magnificent.
and that to displease, which falls out unhappily. 7. According to this
Exposition, v. 14. should be the same Argument with v. 16. and so there should
be an unnecessary repetition of the same Argument. 8. By this exposition the
sanctifying of an unbeliever should be ascribed to a woman, whereas (though I
deny not that she is said to save, v. ^6. to win, 1 Pet. 3. 1. to convert,
James 5. 20.) sanctifying is never ascribed to any but God and his Spirit. So 1
Cor. 6. 11. Ye are sanctified by the Spirit of our God. 9. The word [ holy] is
expounded in a sense no where else found, nor is there any reason of that sense
by way of allusion or otherwise given by the Doctor, though according to him a
known fact is expressed which had another appellation used commonly even in
that Epistle, chapter 1. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. and 12. 13. For he expounds [ holy] by
[ are admitted to baptism] and so makes the Apostle in narration of a fact to
use a term to express what was in his conceit well known to them by a term not
imagined to note the thing elsewhere, when there was another term [ baptized]
used in the same Epistle and familiar to them. 10. He makes the Apostle to
infer the lawfulness or duty of living together from that contingent event,
which might with like probability be brought to pass by another than the
believing yoke fellow, even by the endeavor of a Father, Mother, Brother,
Sister, Companion, especially a Preacher of the Gospel. So that if this reason
were of force to conclude husband and wife might live together, because one may
bring the other to the faith, the reason might be as good for Father and
Daughter, Son and Mother, Brother and Sister, Companions, Preacher and people
to couple or live together, because it has been and there is great reason to
hope one may convert the other. 11. According to his exposition the Apostles
speeches were not right. For according to him the meaning should be unless
there were cohabiting, and there had been an unbelieving husband brought to the
faith by the wife, and vice versa the Corinthians children could not reasonably
be presumed to be admitted to baptism. 2. Upon this ground that an unbelieving
husband was brought to the faith by the wife and vice versa, and there is great
reason it might be so for the future the children of believing Corinthians
unequally matched were admitted to baptism. Himself page 257. says. This must
needs be the method of the Apostles arguing, unless there were some hope, that
the (...) of a believer should be a means to bring an unbeliever to t^^ says
'tw^^l^ certainly follow, their children were unclean, that is not admitted to
baptism. Now I think all Paedobaptists will disclaim as manifestly false this
proposition, That the believing Corinthians young children were not or could
not be, or it could not be reasonably presumed they should be admitted to
baptism, till the unbelieving yoke fellow were converted, or without hopes or
reasonable presumption, that he might be won to the faith by the believer. It
is such a toy as I cannot imagine they will own when they discern it. If they
do they must quite change their plea and practice about infant baptism, their
plea being from the imagined federal holiness of the child of one believer
without consideration of the others present or future faith, and their practice
being to baptize infants of one believer, though the other parent died or
should die in professed unbelief. And for the other proposition it is a like
false, that whether (...), note as much as hoc. posito, upon this ground as the
Doctor expresses it, or to be an Adverb of time noting when their children
were holy it is most false, that upon the ground of hopes of cohabiting and the
conversion of the unbelieving, yoke fellow, and experience of what happened,
the Corinthian believers younger children no^ deemed yet believers, were
admitted to baptism, or were reasonably presumed to be admitted, or that they
were then admitted to baptism when the unbelieving husband was converted, or
likely to be converted by the believing wife and not before. This proposition I
make no question other paedobaptists will disclaim, nor need I any other proof
against his sense than his own words against another interpretation brought in
as the Anabaptists, though I know none that so interpret it. I use his own
words page 257. sect. 82. mutatis mutandis. Now I demand of this pretended
interpretation, whether it be possible Saint Paul's argument should conclude in
this sense? Suppose the Corinthian parents of these younger children had been
one a believer, and the other an unbeliever, could it of them be concluded, if
they did not upon the hope of doing good one upon the other cohabit, their
children could not be holy by designation of the Church in baptism, to which
when they are brought by the congregation and admitted by the Minister they are
thus consecrated and devoted to God? This were absolutely to confine the
Churches designations to holiness and the Ministers admissions thereto to none
but the children of believers, as if the child of parents whereof one is a
believer were not thus holy, and admitted to baptism without experience of what
has been done in converting the unbeliever by the believer, and hopes it
should be so. It is known that admission to baptism depends upon Chrsts
institution, not upon such accidental conditions as is the cohabiting of the
parents, the experience of the converting some unbeliever by the believing
yoke fellow, and hopes so of theirs. 12. Unto all these I add, that I never
read or heard any Expositor ancient or modern so expounding, as this Doctor or
Dictator does, nor do I think he can show any. Sure I am Augustine. tom. 7. de
pec^. merito and remiss. c. 26. says, Ac per hoc et illa sanctificatio
cujuscunque modi sit, quam in filiis fidelium esse dixit Apostolus ad istam de
baptismo and p^ccati origin vel remissione quaestionem omnino non pertinet.

But let us consider what Dr. Hammond brings for this Paraphrase, Sect. 32. he
speaks thus, That this is the true importance of the Apostles words, and force
of his arguing does for the former part of it appear evident. First, by the
word (...), has been sanctified, which must needs refer to some past known
examples and experiences of this kind, or else there could be no reasonable
account given of the Apostles setting it in the Praetertense.

Answ. As Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase expresses it, (...) should signify not
only that an unbelieving husband has been sanctified, but also that there is
hope they will, and so it should note, not only some example past, but also
some to come, of which there can be a less reasonable account given than of
putting it in the Present-tense in English.

But says he, It is put in the Praeter-tense in Greek.

Answ. I presume the Doctor knows that enallage or change of Tense is frequent
in Languages, even in the Greek, though it abound in Tenses above other
Languages. In the same Epistle c. 11. 24 (...) in the Present-tense is put for
the Future, even in the same Verse (...), is rendered by Dr. Hammond himself,
Else were your chidren unclean, so that (...) must be put for (...) or (...),
and so an Enallage either of Tense or Mood, or both. And in the very next verse.
(...) is manifestly put in the Praeter-tense for the Present, as all
Interpreters I know render it, and the same enallage or change of Tense
Camerarius conceives in the term (...). And, which is chiefest, this sense
seems to be^it it best, there being no plainer and clearer than this, Therefore
the believer may live with the unbelieving yoke fellow; because the Husband
though an infidel, yet is to his own Wife, in respect of her, and to her
conjugal use, a^ if he were sanctified. But if it be in the Praeter-tense, yet
it may be understood of a past thing yet continued, as (...), John 3. 18. notes
an act still continued in force. So that notwithstanding the Doctors conceit,
yet there may be a very reasonable account given without understanding it of an
Example of another person sanctified heretofore by another Wife, which is very
far from the Apostles meaning, as I show before.

Secondly, says he, by the Phrase (...), by or through the Wife. This the
Preposition (...), so ordinarilly signifies, that it cannot need to be farther
testified, (in this notion it is that we here take it) whereas the notion which
by opposers is here affixt to it, that it should signify to ( that to which is
a sign of the Dativecase) [ sanctified to the Wife, ( as meat to the believer)
made lawful to her to live with] is never once found to belong to it, in the
New Testament, nor can with any tolerable congruity or Grammatical analogy be
affixt to it. All the places that are produced for this sense are commonly
mistaken. So Matthew. 17. 12. [(...)] is not fecerunt ei, they have done to him,
but on him or against him: so as (...) is used for (...), which is an ordinary
acception of it. So Acts 4. 12. There is no name (...), it is not [ given unto
men] but among men: and that is an ordinary notion of (...), for among, (...),
Is God among us? and (...), Christ among us, and many the like. So 1 Cor. 7.
15. God has called us, (...): It is not to, as the note of a Dative-case, but
unto peace, as (...) is again taken for (...). So Ga^l: 1. 16. to reveal his
own Son, (...): It is not [ to me] but [ by or through me to others] as it
follows, that I might preach him. And when it there follows, (...), it is not
[to but again among the Gentiles] And 2 Pet. 1. 5. (...), (...), is Add unto
your says virtue, etc. in the notion of (...) for (...), unto your faith, or
over and above that, (...), superadd virtue, or fortitude, or constancy, that
which in this time of persecution they stood so much in need of. And so still
the rendering it [to the Wife] will be without any one example, and the turning
it quite into another phrase, as if it were (...), without (...); which to do
without any necessity or reason (save only (...), to serve the opposers turn
upon the place, and support his false opinion, must needs be very unreasonable.

Answ. I subscribe to this last speech: But all that the Doctor says makes me
not to recede from the rendering of (...), 1 Cor. 7. 14. [ to] as noting the
Dative case, and being redundant. Not out of any necessity to serve my turn:
For if it be read [ in the wife and expounded as Beza does Annot. In locum
respectu uxoris, in respect of the wife, expounding [ is or has been
sanctified in the wife] thus, has been or is enjoyed in coniugal use lawfully
in respect of his wife, it will as well serve my turn. And in this sense (...),
is as much as erga toward, apud with, and is as much as (...), the sense that
(...) and (...) are used, 2 Cor. 13. 3. (...) v. 4. (...). But it will not
serve the Doctors turn unless he can prove that [(...)] must be renderd [by]
and notes the instrument, yea and [ by the wife] must signify [ by the company
and conversation of the believer] which supplement is not yet proved, no^ do I
think can be proved to be necessary. The reason why I still adhere to the
reading of [(...) to] is, 1. Because it seems to me the fairest, easiest, and
most congruous sense thus to expound it. The believer may abide with the
unbelieving yoke fellow. For though he be an unbeliever, and so in himself
unsanctified, yet in or to the wife or his wife he is as if he were sanctified,
it is all one in respect of lawful conjugal use as if he were sanctified. 2.
Because, though the Doctor deny it, yet I aver the notion of [(...) for to as a
sign of the Dative case] is found more than once in the New Testament, and may
with good congruity and Grammatical analogy be affixt to it. Of the which
places the first he brings cannot be eluded. 1. Because the same speech which
is Mat. 17. 12. (...) is Mark 9. 13. (...), and rendered by Beza in the former
place fecerunt ei they did to him. 2. whereas he says (...) is used for (...)
on him or against him, and that this is an ordinary acception of (...) for
(...), I grant that it is an ordinary acception to use (...) for (...), but not
in the sense he here conceives, to wit as (...) notes [ on or against a
person.] It had been meet the Doctor should have given at least one instance of
such a construction, which I do not yet believe he can do. However if he could,
yet me thinks it should satisfy that (...), notes no more than (...), and is a
sign of the Dative case, because Mark, who seems to have abbreviated Matthew,
so expresses it; and the common use of (...), when it notes dealings of man to
man whether good or bad is usually expressed by the Dative case: as Matthew. 7.
12, and 18. 12. and 20. 32. and 21. 36, 40. and 25. 40, 45. There is another
instance which I conceive cannot be eluded, to wit, Col. 1. 23. (...), which
was preached in every creature. Where, 1. There is no other sense than that of
the Dative case that has any tolerable conguity or Grammatical analogy affixt
to it. Mr. Den's conceit of preaching the Gospel in the Sun, Moon, etc. is so
wild that I presume, it will be easily rejected. For let men imagine the most
they can of Gods grace discernible in the creature, yet the Gospel in which
Christians hope and of which Paul was a Minister is not discernible thereby.
Nor is here any place for those conceits of putting [ in] for on, against,
among, over and above or the like] For the use of (...), to preach, is commonly
with a Dative case of the object, as 1 Cor. 9. 27. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Acts 8. 5. and
10. 42. Luke 4. 18. I deny not but 1 Timothy 3. 16. it is (...). But our
Translators have there renderd it [ unto the Gentiles] the vulgar [ praedicatum
est gentibus] Beza [ praedicatus est gentibus] as if there it noted only the
Dative case. And if there it should be [ among the Gentiles] yet it cannot be
so Col. 1. 23. because the object is in the singular number: But (...) when it
is for [ among] is joined still to a noune of the plural. It is true 1 These. 2.
9. it is (...), but unto you is no more than to you, and shows not only (...)
but (...) also notes the same with the Dative case without either preposition.
2. That which puts, this thing out of all doubt the phrase Col. 1. 23. answers
(as Beza Camerarius, Piscator, etc. conceive, and me thinks none should deny)
to that Mark 16. 15. where our Lord Chrst bids (...), preach the Gospel to
every creature, and there that which was expressed by (...) Col. 1. 23. is
expressed only by the Dative case without it Mark 16. 15. nor do I yet
conceive but that (...), Acts 4. 12 is better renderd [ to men] than among
men.] 1. Because the verb (...) in the several voices and other verbs of giving
have most regularly and constantly a Dative of the person after them, as both
Grammarians in their Syntaxes teach, and many instances in the New Testament
prove, as Acts 3. 16. and 4. 29. and 5. 31. 32. and 7. 5, 8, 10, 25, 28.
Besides many more there and throughout the sacred Writings. 2. Because if it
had been [ among men] it had been to be placed after (...), other; for so the
sense would have been clear, there is no other name among men given, but being
placed after given, it is to be expounded as referred to given, not to other,
and so must not be read among men, but to men. 3. It seems to me not good
sense, or not true, that Christ was a name given among men: for though he were
among men, yet he was given from above. 4. To all which I add the words of Beza
Annot. in Act. Apost. c. 4. v. 12. Inter homines, (...), Hebr. (...) beadam, id
est, hominibus ut recte convertit vet us interpres, and Ireneus quoque lib. 3.
cap. 12. sicut insra 7. 44. (...), non aliud declarat quam (...). Camerarius
renders it, Attributum hominibus. And for the other Text Gal. 1. 16. Me thinks
the Doctors exposition makes the Apostle tautologize ineptly, when he expounds
when it pleased God to reveal his Son, (...), not to me, but by or through me
to others. For what is it to reveal his Son by him or through him to others,
but to preach the Gospel to them? And is it not then to tautologize to say,
when it pleased God, that I should preach the Son of God to others that I might
preach the Gospel? Can preaching the Gospel be fitly said to be the end or
consequent of preaching the Son of God which is all one with preaching the
Gospel? And for 2 Pet. 1. 5. (...), there is no reason to imagine (...) to be
put for (...), since the simple and compound are usually put with the Dative
after them, as 2 Cor. 9. 10. Gal. 3. 5. and in other Authors. Nor do I find
(...), or (...), in any Author, and what the Doctor observes, that (...) notes
superadde, it rather confirms it, that as (...) notes over, so (...) notes to;
no^ is the Doctor I suppose ignorant of that Rule in Grammar, Verba addendi,
supplendi regunt Dativum. Besides these I have alleged in the first part of
this Review s. 11. page 96. out of the Septuagint. Deuteronomy. 28. 60. 2 Kings 7. 27.
plain passages of putting (...), so as to note the Dative case, with the
speeches of some learned men, whereto I add that Psalm. 68. 18. that which the
Septuagint has (...) (...), the Apostle has Ephesians. 4. 8. (...), which I take
to be more than enough to refute the Doctors speech that the notion wherein
(...) signifies To, which is a sign of the Dative caese is never once found to
belong to it in the New Testament, nor can with any tolerable congruity or
Grammatical analogy be affixt to it, and that he talks ad randum, when he
intimates, that by co^struing it so, 1 Cor. 7. 14. there is a turning it quite to
another phrase to serve the turn upon the place. The Doctor goes on thus.

Thirdly, this appears most irrefragably, by the express words added on this
Argument, v. 16. where [the unbelievers having been sanctified by the believer]
(used as an Argument why they should live together) is farther explained by
these words of an undoubted perspicuous sense; For what know thou O Wife
whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or how know thou O Husband whether thou
shall save thy Wife? where the word (...), save. which ordinarily signifies to
reduce, as it is 1 Pet. 3. 1. (...), to gain) to repentance from heathenism or
wicked life is set parallel to (...), sanctifying, and makes it clear what was
meant by it.

Answ. However the Doctor conceive, yet does it not appear to me probably, much
less irrefragably by express words, that v. 16. is added further as an
explanation of the words, v. 14. The unbelieving Husband has been sanctified
in the Wife. For, 1. though some conceive v. 15. to be put parenthetically as
Grotius, and that v. 16. belongs to the matter of v. 12, 13, 14. yet Beza,
Piscator, and others conceive that v. 16. has reference to the words v. 15.
God has called us to peace, that is, to live peaceably together, and as an
encouragement thereto v. 14. is added: none that I know besides the Doctor
makes v. 16. to explain the forepart of v. 14. 2. Nor is there likelihood that
the Apostle does use v. 16. as an explanation of the forepart of v. 14. it
being not his wont to express a thing obscurely, and than presently to express
it more plainly, or to use unnecessary repetitions in such short resolutions as
are here, especially there being not any thing mystical in it, but matter of
fact. 3. If he had made v. 16. an explanation of the words v. 14. The
unbelieving husband has been sanctified in the wife and vice versa, he would
have usdd (...) (...), as Romans 9. 8. or some such like term; But he uses 1
Cor. 7. 16. the expression (...), For how know thou? Which plainly shows
it to be a further argument to move them to live together, not an explanation
of a former speech: for [(...) for] is a particle showing it to be a further
reason of it. 4. It to me appears irrefragably, because according to the
Doctors exposition v. 16. does not explain the forepart of v. 14. For according
to him the word [ has been sanctified] must needs refer to some past known
examples and experiments of converting of other unbelieving yoke. fellows by
the believing parties, or else says he, There could be no reasonable account
given of the Apostles setting it in the Praeter-tense. But v. 16. For what
know thou O Wife whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or how know thou O
man whether thou shall save thy Wife? Mentions a thing to be, and that as a
possible but not certain event, and that concerning one that is an unbeliever.
Now that the words mentioning a possible uncertain event concerning others
should explain the words that speak of a thing past about others is out of my
reach: Surely it seems to me ridiculous to paraphrase, v. 14. The unbelieving
Husband has been sanctified in the Wife, thus, For what know thou O Wife
whether thou shall save thy Husband? and therefore I take the Doctors conceits
in this to be his dotage.

The Doctor adds, Sect. 33. Which being once yielded to be the true meaning of
the first part, there will then be little reason to doubt but that this of the
admission of the Christian children to baptism on this score, is the importance
of the later part, that and no other being it, which exactly accords with the
former reasoning, and it being not imaginable, that this should be here added
in that argumentative style [(...), whereas (or for) elsewere, etc. if it were
not an enforcing of the foregoing Position thus proved by him.

Answ. It is true the style is argumentative, and [(...), else were] shows the
latter part of the verse, 1 Cor. 7. 14. to be an enforcing of the foregoing
position of the same verse asserted, I say not proved by him. But that this
exposition [ else were your children unclean, that is, not admitted to baptism,
but now they are holy, that is, admitted to Christian baptism] exactly accords
with the former reasoning yielded, so as that the Doctors paraphrase being once
yielded to be the true meaning of the first part there will be little reason to
doubt but that this, of the admission of the Christian children to baptism on
this score is the importance of the later part, is so far from having any
color of truth, that in my apprehension the Doctors exposition makes the
Apostles words Are nam sine calce, sand without lime, that is without
connection. For what show of connection is there in this consequence, If some
other unbelieving yoke fellow had not been converted by the faith, diligence
and conversation of the believing party that then was, then the children of you
who are believers, but begotten or brought forth by one that yet is an
unbeliever had not been admitted to Christian baptism in infancy: but now, that
is upon this score that some former unbelieving yoke-fellows have been brought
to the faith of Christ by the faith, conversation and diligence of the
believer, they have been admitted to baptism? According to the tenor of this
reasoning these propositions should be included in the Apostles argument. The
children of a believing yoke fellow who is joined to an unbeliever had not been
admitted to Christian baptism, if some other believing yoke fellow had not been
brought to the faith. The children of a believer by a unbelieving yoke fellow
have been admitted to Christian baptism by reason that it has been usual that
other believers have brought the unbeliever to the faith. Whence will follow.
1. That at the first conversion of a people, at whieh time there is no
experiment of such events of the believing yoke-fellows bringing the infidel to
the faith, then the infants of the believer were not admitted to Christian
baptism: which is directly contrary to the Jewish batizing infants of
proselytes, which is only at first conversion, which yet the Doctor will have
the pattern of our Christian baptism. 2. That the Doctor derives a title to
baptism of this believers infant children from the diligence and happy success
which another believer has had, which is a thing merely extrinsecal to the
institution of baptism. For where did ever Christ say, Baptize those or their
children who are yoke-fellows to unbelievers, for some other believing
yoke-fellows have had good success in converting their yoke-fellows to the
faith? I can hardly forbear to call such reasoning a baculo ad angulum. On the
other side, the Doctors exposition makes the children of the believer joined to
the unbeliever not capable of Christian baptism, if there had not been some
experiment of a believer bringing to the faith the unbelieving yoke fellow, and
some hopes that the present unbeliever would become a Christian by the
diligence of the other yoke fellow, which would exclude the believers child
from baptism whose yoke fellow is deceased in unbelief, and so the conversion
of that person is hopeless. So that what ever pretenses are made for
infant baptism, no children (according to the Doctors exposition) of a believer
can be rightly baptized without proof of such experiment of the converting of
the unbeleiving yoke fellow by the believer; it would not suffice that the
conversion be by a Minister, etc. Now this being rare and hard to prove, it
will certainly make questionable, if not void most of the pretended infant
baptisms that are. Confident I am that no Paedobaptist ancient or modern
besides the Doctor ever asserted Paedobaptism on this score, which is the only
ground, if the Doctors exposition of the Apostle be right. The Ancients did
admit to baptism any ones child whether Pagans or Believers being brought to
them, as I show in my Examen part. 1. sect. 8. But I need say no more to refute
this exposition being the most unlikely of all that I have hitherto met with:

He tells us Sect. 34. What is thought fit to be brought for the eluding and
avoiding this interpretation will be most fitly considered anon in answer to
the Anabaptists plea.

Answ. The falsely so called Anabaptists have not allowed Dr. Jeremiah Taylour
to make their plea, nor do they all, if any of them frame their plea as he lays
it, yet it is showed above, that the Reply Dr. Hammond makes to overthrow their
pretended answer overthrows his own exposition.

But he goes on, Mean while for the confirming of it, it may be remembered,
what (...), holy is known to signify in the sacred dialect, not only an
inherent, but a relative holiness, being separate or set apart to God,
discriminated from common ordinary things, or persons, and as that belongs to
higher degrees of separation, the office of a Prophet or the like, so the
lowest degree of it is that of being received to be members of the Church, into
which all are initiated by baptism. And accordingly, all visible professors,
and not only those that are sincerely such, are in Ezra 9. 2. the holy seed,
and in the Epistles of the Apostles called (...), holy.

Answ. This being all granted confirms not Dr. Hammonds exposition, now they
are holy that is admitted to Christian baptism. The Doctor knows its no good
argument a genere ad speciem affirmative, the children are holy that is set a
part for God, discriminated from common ordinary things or persons, Ergo they
are set apart by the special way of baptism. And it being granted that all
visible professors, and not only those that are sincerely such are in Ezra 9.
2. the holy seed, and in the Epistles of Paul called holy (though that term
Ezra 9. 2. has a far different notion, as I show in this Review Antipaed.
part. 1. sect. 13, 25. from what the Doctor imagines) yet till the Doctor prove
infants to be visible professors he has not confirmed, that the taking of [
holy 1 Cor. 7. 14.] for [ infants admitted to baptism] is agreeable to the
Apostles language.

He adds Sect. 35. And secondly how the word (...), unclean, is used by St.
Peter, Acts 10. 14. for those that must not (as he conceived) be received into
the Church, as [Gods having cleansed] is Gods reputing them fit to be partakers
of that privilege. Whereby it appears how fitly receiving and not receiving to
baptism may be expressed by those phrases.

Answ. I deny not the fitness of the expressing receiving and not receiving to
baptism by the terms of holy and unclean, if the Holy Ghost had so thought
good. But su^e the Doctor is mistaken in the notion of unclean, Acts 10. 14.
For it is plain from Acts 11. 3. that an unclean person is in that place one
that was not only out of the Church, but also one that a Jew conceived he
might neither go into, nor eat with him, yea though he were a Proselyte of the
Gate, and owned the God of Israel. Now then if the same notion of unclean and
holy be 1 Cor. 7. 14. as is Acts 10. 14. an unclean person is one that a man
may not go into, nor eat with. which applied to infants is ridiculous; else if
the unbelieving yoke fellow had not been sanctified, that is, brought to the
faith by the conversation and diligence of the believer your children had been
unclean, that is, such as they might not go in to, nor eat with them, but now
their in^ants are holy, such as they might go in to and eat with them.

Thirdly, says he, how the word (...) which is ordinarily to sanctify, does
among the Jews ( whence this word (...), is taken) as when the high Priests
washing his hands and his feet ten times on the day of Expiation is called
(...) ten sanctifications, Joma, cap. 3. sect. 3. which being the word which
denotes the washing some part of the body, and distinguished in use from the
(...) which is the immersion of the whole body, may perhaps be an intimation,
that the primitive baptisms were not always immersions of the whole body, but
that sprinkling of some part the literal importance of the (...)
sanctifications might be sufficient.

Answ. If this reason were good, it would rather confirm this exposition [ The
unbelieving Husband has been sanctified by the Wife, that is, the unbelieving
Husband has been baptized by the Wife or washed] than this, the children are
baptized, for they are no^ said to be sanctified, but to be holy. And then the
Apostle relates it as a thing often used among Christians, that believing Wives
did baptize or wash unbelieving Husbands: which so expounded is a plain
testimony for women's baptism of their own unbelieving Husbands, and so has
better ground from this Text than infant baptism. What the Doctor draws in
besides the business, to put some color on their sprinkling instead of
baptism, is but a fig-leaf too narrow to cover the nakedness of their practice.
The Doctor himself page 180. makes the baptism which was a Jewish solemnity,
the washing of the whole body. And Sect. 71. page 185, 186. he says, Jethro
was made a Proselyte by immersion or baptism in waters, and the manner of this
immersion is said to be that they should be set up to the neck in water. And
page 184. Unless he be (...) baptized he is a Gentile. And out of Arrian the
Jewish Proselyte is called (...), dipped, and he that is only so in show not
in deed, (...), a counterfeit baptized person. In his Pract. Catech. lib. 6.
sect. 2. By Christ's appointment whosoever should be thus received into his
family should be received with this ceremony of water, therein to be dipped, i.
e. according to the primitive ancient custom to be put under water three times.
His words following intimating as if sprinkling were appointed by Christ
instead of it, are his own figment. Page 35. he makes the ancient manner of
putting the person under water, and then taking him out again, to denote dying
and rising again, with more of the like confessions, and even in this place
says, the washing some part of the body is distinguished in use from the (...)
(which answers to the Greek word Baptism) which is immersion of the whole body.
And yet the Doctor is not ashamed to say, that primitive baptisms were not
always immersions of the whole body, (which me thinks he should hardly believe
himself in) and because the besprinkling of some part (which I think is not
true, if sprinkling by water and not blood or ashes be meant, for the Priests
in their sanctifications dipped their hands and feet in water; is called (...)
sanctifications, to intimate as if any kind of sanctification of a part of the
body though but by sprinkling with water were baptism. It is a like abuse when
Christ bids baptize, to sprinkle only or pour water on the face as it would
be, when he bids to eat, only to chew in the mouth; or when he bids to drink,
to wet the lips only. But that to sprinkle is not to baptize, is elsewhere
asserted, Addition to the Apology, Sect. 22.

The Doctor goes on in his dictating way thus. Fourthly, it is known of the
legal uncleanness, contrary to those their sanctifications, that they were
the cause of removing men from the congregation, they that were so (...),
unclean, might not partake of the privileges of the Temple, till they were
washed and sanctified, and that is proportionable also to the notion here given
of it, that the Christian children are holy, i. e. not inherently, (they are
not capable) but in the account of God and men capable of separation for the
service of God, of being entered into the Church, into Covenant, which
denominates men holy, (as the Gentiles as long as they were out of it were
unclean and unholy, Acts 10.) now are they holy, i. e. it is the present
practice of the Church, that Apostolical Church of S. Paul's time, to admit to
baptism such infant-children of Parents of whom one is Christian, though not of
others.

Answ. It is said without proof, that the uncleanness excluding from the
Tabernacle and sanctification restoring are proportionable to the notion here
given of childrens being excluded or included in the Church. Why should
Cornelius be counted out of the Church by God or men, when God says, He was a
devout man, and one that feared God, with all his house, who gave much alms to
the people, aend prayed to God always, Acts 10. 2. It Is true, he was excluded
from the familiar society of the Jews according to their superstition, and so
unclean, but not accounted by God to be out of the Church, but in it. That
Christians children are denied to be capable of holiness inherently, will not
be granted him, much less his paraphrase on the words [ now are they holy] i.
e. it is the present practice of the Church that Apostolical Church of S. Paul's
time to admit to baptism such infant children of parents, etc. It will not
stand with his own exposition, as has been showed, and it makes the Apostle
relate a matter of plain fact in obscure terms. Augustine did disclaim this
interpretation Hierom and Ambrose gave another, and so did Tertullian de anima,
cap. 39. what he adds is frivolous. And to put all out of question, the aneient
Fathers which certainly knew the sacred Dialect, call baptism sanctification.
So Cyprian Epist. 59. Eum qui natus est bapt. zandum and sanctificandum, He
that is born must be baptized and sanctified; where baptizing is sanctifying of
infants. So Greg. Nazian. Orat. 40. Edit. Bill. page 658. (...), It Is better to
be sanctified without sense of it, I. e. baptized in infancy when they are not
sensible of it, than to depart or die without the seal of baptism. And again
page 648. (...), let him be sanctified from the infancy, I. e. baptized then.
And many the like.

For 1. That the Ancients of the third or fourth Century knew certainly the
sacred Dialect especially the Latin Doctors, me thinks the Doctor should know
them better than to assert it. He sure is not ignorant that in multitudes of
things later writers do find their many mistakes about the sacred Dialect, and
how few of them had any skill in Hebrew or Greek the Doctor is not ignorant I
presume. 2. In this very thing if those Fathers certainly knew the sacred
Dialect and from their use Paul must be interpreted, then the word [
sanctified] not the word [ holy] (for the Doctor does not show they used the
word [ holy for [ baptized] but the word [ sanctified]) must be 1 Cor. 7. 14.
as much as [ baptized] and then the sense is, The unbelieving husband is
baptized by the wife, and the unbelieving wife is baptized by the husband, of
the absurdity of which interpretation I need say no more.

The Doctor proceeds sect. 37. thus* This passage than being thus interpreted,
is a clear proof of the point in hand. And were not this the importance of it
there were no privilege imaginable, no sanctity, which could be attributed to
the infants of Christians which would not belong to the infants of heathens
also, which yet is here distinctly affirmed of the one and denied of the other
by the Apostle.

Answ. How absurd the Doctors interpretation is has been showed before, yet
were it granted him it would not be a clear proof for infant baptism, unless [
your children] were all one with [ your infants] which will not be cleared till
it be showed that the Corinthian Christians had then no children but infants,
or that he meant no other under that term then the infants. Which sure is not
according to the Jewish pattern, in which they baptized Proselytes children if
females under twelve, if males under thirteen, not according to their will, but
of the Father or court to which they were subject, I add, if the Apostle should
by [ holy] understand a privilege where upon they were baptized he should
conceive otherwise than the Jews did, who conceived all unclean, whom they
baptized, till by baptism they cleansed them and made them holy. And for what
he says that no privilege imaginable etc. I answer, 1. By denying that the
Apostle there attributes a privilege or sanctity belonging to the infants of
Christians, which would not belong to the infants of heathens. I have I
conceive in the first part of this Review demonstrated the contrary against Mr.
M Mr. B. etc. 2. If there were a privilege attributed yet it might not be
baptism. For. 1 That belonged according to the Fathers opinion and practice to
unbelievers children also, if they were brought as I show examen part. 1. sect.
7. 8, 2. There are other imagined privileges or sanctities belonging to them,
as, by some real actual inward holiness, by others federal external holiness,
by others holiness in hope and expectation.

He goes on. And as this evidently concludes such a custom, known and
acknowledged among Christians at that time: so it is directly the thing that
the Jewish practice, in which Christ founded his institution, has laid the
foundation of, in baptizing Proselytes and their children, and to which the
primitive Church conformed. And so though that Judaical practice taken alone
were not deemed any demonstrative evidence, that Christ thus instituted his
baptism for the Gentiles, yet being taken in conjunction with this Testimony of
the Apostolical practice, and the primitive usage it brings all the weight with
it, which a Divine Testimony imexpreted by practice can afford, which is as
great as any such matter can be capable of.

Answ. 1. It is false that Christ founded his institution in the Jewish
practice of baptizing proselytes and their children. If he had done so he would
have bid the Apostles, baptize Disciples and their children as the Jews did.
There is not any thing that is brought by the Doctor that proves it, yea if it
were the mind of Chrst to baptize Disciples and their children, as the Jews
did Proselytes, it would utterly overthrow all use of baptism of water after
the first conversion of Progenitors to be Christ's Disciples, none but they and
the children then born should be baptized, all Disciples and their infants
which descended from the first baptized should not be baptized with water being
clean or holy without baptism. For they baptized because they were unclean till
baptized, not because holy before. Nor did they baptize any of the posterity of
the first baptized though born but a few months after their first baptism. So
that this conceit of the Doctor would help much for the Socinian conceit, as if
water baptism belonged only to the age of the Apostles. 2. It is false that
there is any evidence in the Apostles words 1 Cor. 7. 14. of such a custom of
baptizing Christians and their children as was among the Jews of baptizing the
Preselytes and their infant's. Nor do I think ever any of the Fathers did
interpret the Apostles words as this Doctor does. Tertullians words in his Book
de anima cap. 39. are not as the Doctor says an exact parallel to the Apostles
speech 1 Cor. 7 14. as the Doctor renders and interprets it The terms candidati
sanctitatis or designati sanctitatis, or candidati side^, in Hieromes Epist.
153. to Paulinus do note, not that they were baptized as the Doctor interprets
[ Holy 1 Cor 7. 14.] bu^ that they were in expectation, as they that were
seekers for Offices in Rome, while they stood for the Offices were candidati in
Wh^e so the infants were as it were in expectation of being believers and
baptized, Quod veluti ambiunt, and expectant baptismum as Erasmus in his note
on Hierom Ep. 153. to Paulinus, or designed that is intended ^o be holy by the
parents, that is to ^e bred up to profess the Faith, and so to be baptized.
Both which senses do indeed oppose the Doctors assertion and show that they
were not baptized in infancy. And for that which the Doctor talks of Tertullian
as saying they were holy that is baptized ex s^minis praerogativa from the
praerogative of their birth, it is a manifest mistake as the very reading the
words show. For. 1. The holiness he ascribes to believers children was not
only by praerogative of birth, but also ex institutions disciplina, by the
discipline of their instruction, which is before baptism. 2. The praerogative of
birth the very words of Tertullian show to be no more but this, that believers
children were born without those idolatrous superstitions, which were used in
the birth of infidels children, which he there particularly recites. There is
no one of the Fathers interprets Paul as the Dr. Ambrose and Hierom interpret
the words of legitimation in birth, Augustine, what way soever he go, ^aith
expressly, the words belong not to baptism. 3. I is false that the Jewish
practice in baptizing Proselytes and their children laid the foundation of
infant baptism; neither the Scripture gives any hint thereof, no^ any of the
Ancient Christian writers, no not any of those the Doctor cites ever derives it
from the Jewish practice: But the speeches of Tertullian de bapt. cap. 8. of
Gregory Nazianzen Orat. 40. de baptismo, dissuading from it except in case of
necessity by reason of apparent danger of death, the very decree of the Council
in Cyprians 59. Epistle, the speeches of Augustine, Hierom against the
Pelagians, the words of the counterfeit Authors of the Book of Questions and
answers to the Orthodox imposed on Justin Martyr qu. 56. The questions ad
Antiochum imposed on Athanasius qu 114. the words of the Author of the
Ecclesiastic Hierarchy imposed on Dionysius Areopagita, the story of the
baptism of Gregory Nazianzen, the intended baptism of Augustine, when in danger
of death, tom. 1. confess. lib. 1. cap. ^1. and other evidences d^ show that
the Fathers took the baptism of infants not to have foundation in the Jews
practice, but in the conceit they had that baptism did regenerate, give grace
and save, and that it was necessary for them to enter into the Kingdom, and
that they were in danger of perishing if they were not baptized, and therefore
they practiced baptizing of infants in that ca^e. Which thing the Papists
avouch at this day, and in order thereto women's baptizing. The Protestant
reformers who composed the Common Prayer Book, do appear to have had the like
conceit, in that in the preface before public baptism they use the old reason
from John 3. 5. Romans 5. 12. for infant baptism, affirming infants to be
regenerate, and undoubtedly saved dying baptized, allowing Midwives to baptize,
till the words [ lawful Minister] were added in the Rubric after the
conference at Hampton Court, where had not King James overruled them the
Bishops had not yielded to that reformation; yet still they kept private
baptism, with that ridiculous use of propounding the questions of repentance
and faith to the infant, to which the sureties must answer in the childs
behalf, with profession of the childs desire to be baptized into the faith
recited, though the child were then crying when the words were spoken; and for
the sureties they had no desire to be baptized; and the Bishops and Presbyters
requiring it would have censured them as Anabaptists had they indeed minded
baptism according to Christ's mind: which thing was a mere mockery, as Chamier
calls it. Yet in the Rubric it self in the Common prayer Book in the title of
Public baptism it is confessed that the Ancient custom was of baptizing only
at Easter and Whitsuntide, and baptizing is acknowledged to have been by
dipping: sprinkling or pouring water on the face I do conjecture by reports and
such writings as I have seen, was most after the conference at Hampton Court.
Dr. Hammond himself in his Practic Catech. lib. 1. sect. 3. page 23. says, All
men were instructed anciently in the foundamentals of faith before they were
permitted to be baptized. And therefore for the present I shall put by the
answering of the stale and rotten allegations out of the Fathers for
infant baptism brought by the Doctor, because having said so much in my Examen
part. 1. and my Apology sect. 16. I presume those that are not willing to be
deceived will not be swayed with Dr. Hammonds, Mr. Bs. Mr. Ms. friends, or any
other citations from them, some being of mere counterfeit Authors, as Justin
Martyr, Pope Hyginus, Dionysius Areopagita, Athanasius, some suspected as
Origens words, some misinterpreted as Irenaeus and Tertullian, some the very
Authors show that they maintained infant baptism but in the case of danger of
death, as Tertullian and Nazianzen* Cyprian as he avouched infant baptism, so
he did rebaptization, and that as from the Apostles. Augustine as he avouched
infant baptism by Apostolic tradition, so he did also infant-communion. But of
these things if God will more hereafter if it appear necessary. This I take to
be sufficient for the present to answer Dr. Hammonds new device which he vainly
boasts to have all the weight that a Divine Testimony interpreted by practice
can afford, and is as great as any such matter can be capable of.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 1. line 7. read my Apology. p. 4. l. 8. r. Areo. p. 8 l. 15. r. Church.
p. 13. l. 10. r. in tersering. p. 17. l. 1. r. men's. p. 18. l 30 r. not. p. 22
l. 3. r. materially. p. 23. l 1. r. is. p 24. l 23 r. did. p 25 l 31. r. that.
l 32. r. Circumcision. p. 26. l. 11. ^. he. p. 27. l. 33. r. 17. 12. p. 28 l 8.
r. 12. p, 31. l 19. r. 15. p. 45. l 3. r. keep. p. 46. l. 33. r. superiors. l
35. r. ^o. p. 47. l 3. r. excommunication. p. 50. l 6, 7. dele will be proved.
p 51 l. 22 dele not. l. 25 r. paria, p. 52. l. 36. (...). 38. r. Mathematicis.
p. 53. l. 3. r. malits. l. 5. r. (...). p. 61. l 31. r. ^esute. p. 63 l. 16. r.
Janu 1. or in. p. 64 l. 38. r. is, or. dele can. page 65. line 2. r. he. page
68. line 6. r. Anti. page 69 l. 29. r. actus. p. 70. l. 6. r. Bishops. page 76.
line 4. r. fearful. page 86. line 20. r. gentes. page 87. line 4 r.
pe^cipitur. p 88. l. 21. r. arbitror. p. 99. l. 23, 24. r. renewing. p. 104. l.
29 r. There. p. 112. l 2. is it. p. 119. l. 1. r. miraculous. p. 126. l. 2. r.
serve. p 148. l. 16. r. 28. l. 20. r. accept. p 153. l 34 r. Disciple is. p.
162 l. 31. dele not. p. 170 l. 28. dele not. p. 171. l. 9. dele in, l. 10. r in
locum. p. 175. l 38. dele not. p. 179. l. 2. r. I find. p 182, l. 16. r.
heating. p ^91, l, 18, r, 19, p, 195, l, 37. r, peculiar, p, 197, l, 9, r,
relation, p. 220, l, 37, r, use of, p, 226, l, 9, r. them, p, 265, l, 35, r,
often, p, 276, r, without, p, 279, l, 1, r, the, p, 290, l, 9. r, 29, p, 294, l,
17, r, in, p, 306, l, 18, r, right, that the sea, 1 Cor. 10, 1, 2, p, 308, l,
28, r, before, p. 314, l, 17, r, (...), p. 321. l. 6. read them, p. 329. l.
29. read v. 16.

To be added after many, p, 220, l, ^9, what Dr. Ward and Dr. Davenant have
said for Regeneration and Justification of infants by baptism has been
accurately examined and ^^ervated by Mr, G^taker in Latin.


