Felo de Se. OR, Mr. RICHARD BAXTERS Self-destroying; MANIFESTED In twenty
Arguments against Infant Baptism, Gathered out of his own Writing, in his
Second Disputation of Right to SACRAMENTS.

BY John Tombs, B. D.

PSALM 64. 8, 9. So they shall make their own Tongues to fall upon themselves:
all that see them shall flee away.

And all men shall fear, and shall declare the work of God, for they shall
wisely consider of his doings.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, next door to the Sign of the Peacock in
Aldersgate-steeet, 1659.

To the Christian READER.
MAster Richard Baxter in his Second disputation of right to Sacraments, begins
thus; It may seem strange that after 1625. years use of Christian Baptism, the
Ministers of the Gospel should be yet unresolved, to whom it does belong; yet
so it is. And I observe that it is a question, that they are now very
sollicitous about, and I cannot blame them, it being not only about a matter
of Divine appointment, but a practical of such concernment to the Church. The
true reason hereof seems to be, that Ministers have for many Ages left the true
Baptism of believers which Christ appointed, and like Michal, instead of it
have substituted an Image or Idol of their own, to wit, Infant Baptism, Which
being quite besides the rule of Christ, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark 16. 15. and the
Apostles practice throughout the Acts of the Apostles, they have been at a loss
about the ground of it, and almost at Daggers drawing about the use of it. As
it happens to fellow-travellers, when they are all out of the right way, one
conjectures this way they should go, another that, and sometimes they are at
hot disputos and contentions about their way, and many by-ways are attempted,
yet still the farther they go the more out of the way, till they come into the
Road again: So it has been with Baptizers of Infants; they are fallen into
many new devices to maintain Infant Baptism, the ancients with the Papists
imagining that by it Gods grace was given, and that it was necessary to save
the child from perishing, the Lutherans that by Baptism a seed of faith and
some relative grace was given to Infants (to which Doctor Samuel Ward, Bishop
Davenant, Doctor Cornelius Burges, Master Thomas Bedford, Master James
Cranford, and others have of late much inclined) others opposing these have
fallen into as bad conceits of the Covenant of Gospel grace, as made to a
believer and his seed, Baptisms succession to Jewish Circumcision, and fetching
a rule from thence, as others from the Jewish Baptism. Master Baxter having
found these unsafe to rest on, sub they will bring the assertors to the
avouching Jewish tenets, has devised another (as he conceives) more refined
and subtle way, making Infants Disciples of Christ mediately by the parents,
or proparents (as his new term is) faith (which he never proves) and an
imagined ordinance or law of Infants visible Church Membership (no where
extant) unrepealed, and in following these by-ways, they have been at variance
among themselves. Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen only allowing Infant
Baptism in case of manifest danger of imminent death, others to take away
original sin, Baptizing all, weak or strong, believers or unbelievers children;
which had almost quite thrust Baptism of believers out of the World, and under
color of Christening, (as they fasly term their Infant Baptism) and making
Christian souls by throwing water on them, they have so polluted the Churches
of God with the dregs of the nations, I mean, innumerable ignorant, scandalous,
profane, superstitious haters, scorners, and persecutors of Christianity, that
nothing but the mighty power of God is sufficient to purge the Churches of God
of that loathsome and infectious filth, which these have brought into it. The
Papists themselves do in a sort confess that Infant Baptism is an aberration
from the first rule, in that they count it not perfect till their Mimical, and
ludicrous Sacrament of Confirmation be added, which was used with some
reformation in respect of the right, and disclaiming of some errors affixed to
it, and with the appointment of Catechizing by the late Bishops, and from them
termed Bishopping, though without any remarkable emendation of the intrusion of
ignorant, ungodly, unchristian persons into the society of Christians and the
Lords supper. Some of those who of late have sought reformation herein, begin
to devise how they may remedy this evil, and yet keep the multitude in their
Communion, by refining that which is called Confirmation. To this purpose,
lately is published by Master Jonathan Hanmer, An exercitation or Confirmation,
to which Master George Hughes, Master Richard Baxter, and Master Ralph Venning,
have prefixed their Epistles; concerning which, how he is mistaken in the
laying on of hands used by the Ancients, and the application of Heb. 6. 2. to
Confirmation after Infant Baptism, is perceptible by Sect. 23. of the second
part of my Review, and sundry passages in his own book, in which many things
besides are vented without proof, about difference between the Church of
Infants and Adult members, of the effect of Confirmation, of complete and
incomplete visible Church Members, etc. the errors of which it is unnecessary
to refute, there being no proof of them offered, but his own and other Divines
mistakes, and the main of the design being to set up another humane inventi^n,
which has no precept or promise of God, that he may uphold or color over an
old corruption. It pleased God lately to begin to bring the truth concerning
Baptism of believers to light in this Nation, which stirred up many to contend
for Infant Baptism, and having, as they imagined (though the three parts of my
Review now published do sufficiently show they are deceived) made that sure,
they have of late fallen to dispute whose Infants are to be Baptized. Mr.
Thomas Hooker, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Firmin, and others, pleading against the Baptism
of the Infants of the national and parochial Church Members, and some of them
restraining it to Infants of inchurched Church Members, and those who are
judged to be real visible Saints, have been opposed by Master Rutherford,
Master Cawdery, Master Blake, and others. Master Blake to maintain his tenet,
has asserted that a Dogmatical faith intitles to baptism: to oppose which,
Master Baxter, however in his Letter to me he pretends the unpleasantness and
non-necessity of meddling any more about the point of Infant Baptism, the want
of time and health for work of greater moment, that he might decline ^^^^ing
where his law of Infants visible Church Membership unrepealed is, and thinks a
man cannot justify it to lay out the hundredth part, or perhaps the thousandth
part of his time, study, talk, or zeal, upon this question, yet here he blames
not them that are sollicitous about it, being of Divine appointment and
practical, of such concernment to the Church, and has himself, besides his
Apology before this last year, published a large Book of disputations
concerning right ^o Sacraments, the second whereof is against Master Blake;
which though it was intended only to overthrow his tenet, yet indeed the
middle terms and proofs of his Arguments do beat down his own tenet of Infant
Baptism, and direct into the right way of restoring believers Baptism, To
demonstrate which, that those who have adhered to Mr. Baxter may see how ill
Master Baxter has dealt with them, and may, if God give them wisdom to discern
the truth, be brought into the right way of believers Baptism, is this writing
framed, in which thou have presented to thee, a remarkable instance of Gods
providence, in clearing truth by the Pen of its most eminent adversary, and of
his he^^^le^^ writing, not observing how his own Arguments against another
sight against himself. The urging thereof, is that way which Logicians ^^prove
of, and against the person is ever counted a good plea to Argue for his own
condemnation out of his own mouth, and in this matter is good as to the thing,
it being not only asserted by him, but also largely proved. In the publishing
hereof the^e is no more wrong done to him, then was done by Bishop Morton in
his Apology, in aliedging the Romanists words in their writings, as an Advoca^e
for the Protestants, against themselves, but much right to the truth and Church
of God; nothing i^ ^ere set down as his but his own words, what is added be may
discerned by the different letor some other mark. His caution, that he means
his propositions in the case of Baptism of adult persons, and that he has
elsewhere proved Infant Baptism, are without wrong to him left out, since his
Arguments do as strongly prove there should be none but Adult Baptism, as that
none should be Baptized upon the profession of a bare Dogmatical Faith; for
though his aim be only to prove that the faith professed which intitles to
Baptism must be justifying, yet his Arguments to prove this prove more, that
none but such as profess such faith are to be Baptized, and that this
profession is to be by each Baptized in his own person, and no other to be
Baptized. Not one Text he brings proves that a Parents or Proparents profession
does entitle to Baptism; what he has disputed elsewhere for Infant Baptism is
all now answered and published in the three parts of my Review; no where does
he prove (though that is it be should chiefly have proved) that in order to
Baptism a Parents or Proparents profession is by God allowed as the Infants
own, but still be supposes it, which is the main point to be proved, which
Logicians know is of all fallacies the grossest, to wit, the begging of the
question. Yet lately Master Baxter has Printed a book about Confirmation, in
which he dictates many things which he should prove, of Infant visible
Church Members and their privileges, and repeats his ol^ Arguments for Infant
Baptism, and acknowledging only his sorrow for provoking words, says he will
give some account, and in his preface to his book of Justification tells the
Reader, he shall yet vindicate his Papers written to me, where he gives some
reason also of Printing my Animadversions on his Aphorisms of Justification.
His sorrow for his provoking words is some good sign of Gods touching his
heart, and so far as belong to my person I heartily forgive him, though they
have been extremely injurious to me, to the tr^th and Church of God. And for my
Animadversions he has now Printed, he may understand that I intend (if God
vouchsafe me life, and strength, and leisure) to show the insufficiency of his
answers. If he give an account and vindicate his Papers, I expect he should do
it otherwise then he did in his Praefestinantis Morator, and his usual fashion
is. Let him do that which becomes a Replicant, set down mine own words to which
he answer, and answer them fully and distinctly without interrogations and
exclamations, proving such distinctions, definitions, assertions, expositions,
as I deny, and making good by solid proof his Arguments, which that learned man
mentioned in my preface to the third part of my Review counted not like an
Argument for Infant Baptism, and allows me to tell him, that if he will choose
his best Argument, he is ready to demonstrate his censure of his book to have
been just. In the mean time I judge it necessary that this book be Printed,
that if God shall vouchsafe him such mercy he may understand his error from his
own writing, and the Reader may judge whether the Lord does not now abundantly
refute Infant Baptism, and require him to practice that command of Christ of
being Baptized after believing, which however now reproached, was by all
Christians observed heretofore with much zeal and conscience of their duty and
honor, and is commended to him from Christ and his Apostles. Remember the words
of Christ, John 14* 15. If ye love me keep my commandments. Luke 6. 46. And why
call ye me Lord Lord, and do not the things which I say? Matthew. 15. 9. In vain
do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. Farewell.

LONDON, 12 th. Month, the 21. day, 1658. Thine in our Lord, JOHN TOMBS.

Felo de Se.
MAster Baxter of right to Sacraments, disp. 2. page 53. Argum. 1. If we must
not baptize any who profess not true repentance, then must we not baptize any
Infants; but the antecedent is true. Therefore, etc. The consequence of the
major, is manifest, since this proposition on which it depends, Infants profess
not true repentance, is manifest by sense. The antecedent is easily proved from
Scripture, and I know not whether any Protestant deny it. I prove 1. that
Repentance, 2. and such as is proper to the effectually called is necessary to
be professed by all that we may baptize; I will join the proof of both
together. Argum. 1. If John Baptist required the profession of true repentance
in men before he would baptize them, then so must we: but John did so,
therefore the consequence is clear. 1. For either John^ baptism and Christ's
were the same, as most of our Divines against the Papists do maintain (though
Zanchy, and some few more follow the judgment of the ancient Doctors in this)
or as Calvin Institut, says, the difference seems to be but this, that John
baptized them into the Messiah to come, and the Apostles into the name of the
Messiah already come. 2. Or if the difference be greater we may argue a
fortiori, from the more forcible: if John's baptism required a profession of
repentance, then much more Christ's; for certainly Christ required not less then
John, not did he take the impenitent into his Kingdom whom John excluded. The
antecedent I prove. 1. From Mark 1. 3, 4. He preached, (...), the baptism of
repentance unto the remission of sins. And doubless that repentance which is in
remissionem pecatorum, unto the remission of sins, is true special repentance.
One of our Divines, and many of the Papists have sound another evasion: That
is, that John did engage them to repent, but not requiring a profession of
repentance as foregoing baptism; but this is against the whole current of
expositors, ancient and modern, and 2. against the plain scope of the Text. The
words in Matthew. 3 6. are [they were baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their
sins] This confession was with, yea before their baptism; and this confession
was the profession of repentance that John required. Maldonate on the text,
having first railed at Calvin and slandered him, as turning baptism into
preaching, (as if he had expounded John's baptizing, not of water baptism but
preaching, when he only shows that both should go together) does tell the
Protestants that they cannot prove by this text that confession went before
baptism, because it is named after; but that he might not seem utterly
impudent, he confesses that the thing is true, and that is the sense of the
text, and this he confesses because he must rather be a faithful expositor,
then a subtle adversary. And if any should say that it is only confession
that is required, which is no certain sign of true repentance, I answer: When
John says* if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins] he to^k that confession to be a sign of true repentance, and our
expositors and the ancients before them agree, that it was such a confession as
was conjunct with a detestation and renouncing of the sin, and it is expounded
by that of Acts 19. 18. as Grotius notes, to have a special detestation of the
sin accompanying it, where to the word (...) is added (...), confessing and
showing their deeds. And it may suffice that the baptism to which this
confession was required, is the baptism of repentance.

But it is objected that in the 11. verse. of Matthew. 3. It is said by John [I
baptize you with water to repentance] Therefore it is but an engagement of them
to it for the future.

Answ. Our Expositors have fully showed that this signifies no more, but [I
baptize you upon your present profession of repentance, to newness of life] for
that this profession did go before is proved already, and then the rest can be
no more, than the continuance of repentance and exercise of it in newness of
^ife, which they are engaged to for the future: Only if any falsely profess it
at present his own confession is an engagement to it as a duty. Grotius says,
that [(...) potest non incommode exponi hoc modo, baptizo vos super professione
paenitentiae quam facitis, unto repentance may commodiously be thus expounded;
I baptize you upon profession of repentance, which ye make. The plain meaning
is in a word [I do by baptism initiate you into the state of repentance, or of
penitents] but Christ shall give the Holy Ghost (as it was poured forth) And so
(as Pelargus speaks in Matthew. 3. against Salm^ron) we maintain John's baptism to
be effectual, being the baptism of repentance to remission of sin: And that it
was true repentance that he required appears further by the fruits of it,
that he calls from the Ph^ri^ees, Matthew. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. Lastly, I shall prove
anon that God has not appointed us to baptize any upon a promise of repentance
or faith, before they profess actual faith and repentance, nor are they fit for
such a covenant.

Argum. 2. For the proof of the necessity of a profession of repentance before
baptism, is this: If Jesus Christ has by Scripture, precept, and example,
directed us to baptize those that profess true repentance and no other, then we
must baptize them and no other: But the antecedent is true, therefore to is the
consequent. All that requires proof is of the antecedent, which I prove from
an ^numeration of those texts that do afford us this direction (besides the
forementioned.)

1. Jesus Christ himself did by preaching repentance prepare men for baptism,
end for his Kingdom, as John before began to do, Matthew. 4. 17. so Matthew. 1. 15.
The Kingdom of God is at hand, repent ye and believe the Gospe^; and to that
end he sent his Apostles and other Preachers, Mark 16. 12. Acts 17. 30. Luke
24. 47. Repentance and remission is to be preached to all ^^tions in his name*
and baptism which is for the obsignation of remission of ^^n, according to the
appointed order, comes after repentance.

And when it is said by John. [I baptize you with water to repentance, but he
shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost] Matthew. 3. 11. Mark 1. 8. Luke 3. 16. It
implies that Christ's baptism comprehended John's and somewhat more. In Acts 2.
37, 38. When the Jews were pricked in their heart (which was a preparatorie
repentance) and said to Peter and the rest of the Apostles [men and brethren
what shall we do?] Peter says to them, Repent, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins] so that we must
require and expect true evangelical repentance to be professed before baptism.
For verse 41. its added [Then they that gladly received his word were baptized]
so that he baptized none that to outward appearance did not gladly receive that
word, which could not be without a profession of that repentance. And he that
hence persuades to repent and be baptized for remission, does in the next
chapter, verse 19. require them to repent, and be converted, that their sins
may be blotted out, showing what kind of repentance it is that he means; and
as the work of general Preachers to the unbelieving world is sometimes called a
disciplining of nations, which goes before baptizing them, Matthew. 28. 19, 20.
So it is in other places called a preaching of repentance and commanding all
men every where to repent, Acts 17. 30. an opening of men's eyes and turning
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they
may receive remission (obsigned in baptism) Acts 26. 18. 1. Repent and turn to
God, verse 20. And if it was the sum of Paul's preaching to the unbaptized
[repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus Christ] Acts 20. 21. So
that it is apparent that they took the profession or appearance of both faith
and repentance as prerequisite to baptism, and still this same repentance is it
that has the remission of sin connexed, Acts. 5. 31. Luke 24. 47. Its
repentance unto life, Acts 11. 18. And when the Apostles compare John's baptism
with Christ's, they still acknowledge John's to be baptism of repentance, Acts
13. 24. and 19. 4. and when the Apostle does purposely recite the principle of
our Religion he does it in this order. Heb. 6. 1, 2. [The foundation of
repentance from dead works and says toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms,
etc.]

Argum. 3. They that before they are baptized must renounce the world, the
flesh and the devil, must profess true Evangelical repentance (I mean still
such as has a promise of pardon and salvation) but all that are baptized must
renounce the world, flesh and devil, of which we shall have occasion to say
more anon.

Argum. 4. They that profess to be buried with Christ in baptism, and to rise
again, do profess true repentance; but all that are baptized must profess to be
buried with him and rise again, therefore, etc. The major is proved in that to
be buried and risen with Christ, signifies, A being dead to sin and alive to
God, and newness of life: and it is not only an engagement of this for the
future, but a profession also of it at the present. This with the rest we thus
prove, Col. 2. 11, 12, 13. In whom ye are circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting off the body of the sins of the flesh by the
circumcision of Christ, buried with him in baptism, wherein also you are risen
with him through the faith of the operation of God, who has raised him from
the dead, and you being dead in your sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh
has he quickened together with him, having forgiven you all trespasses. Where
note 1. that this is spoken to all the Church of the Colossians* and therefore
they are presumed to be what they profess and appear to be. 2. That the putting
of the body under the water did signify our burial with Christ and the death
and putting off of our sins; and though we now use a less quantity of water,
yet it is to signify the same thing, or else we should destroy the being of
the Sacrament. So also our rising out of the water signifies our rising and
being quickened together with him. 3. Note also that it is not only an
engagement to this hereafter, but a thing presently done. They were in baptism
buried with Christ, and put off the body of sin, and were quickened with him;
and this does all suppose their own present profession to put off the body of
sin, and their consent to be baptized on these terms.

The like we have in Romans 6. chapter 4. 5. Know ye not that so many of us as
were baptized into Jesus Christ were baptized into his death? therefore we are
buried with him by baptism into death, that like as Christ was raised from the
dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life; for if we have been planted together in the likeness of his death, we
shall be also into the likeness of his resurrection. Here also it is evident, 1.
that all the members of the visible Church are supposed to be baptized into
Christ, and into his death, and so to be buried with him by baptism into death
and planted together into the likeness of his death. 2. And that this is not
supposed to be only an engagement for the future, but a present entrance into
the state of mortification and vivification wherein they were to proceed by
newness of life; and therefore verse 5, 6, 7, 8, 11. they are supposed to have
the old man crucified with Christ that the body of sin might be destroyed, and
that henceforth they should not serve sin, and that they are so dead as to be
freed from sin, as to the servitude thereof. And that they must reckon
themselves dead to sin, but alive to God. He that reads the whole chapter
with judgment and impartialitie, will soon discern that true repentance and
abrenuntiation of the service of sin, was to be professed by all that would be
baptized; and that thereupon they sealed their own profession and covenant by
the reception of baptism, as Christ sealed his part by the actual baptizing
them; and that hereupon they are by the Apostles all called and supposed such
as they professed themselves to be.

Argum. 5. If it be the very nature of baptism to signify and seal both the
present putting off the body of sin, and present putting on Christ, then the
profession of true repentance must needs precede or concur with baptism: but
the former is certain; of which more anon. I conclude then that both Scripture,
and the very signs themselves, and the common consent of the Church do show
that true repentance and present repentance must be professed by all those that
we may baptize.

Page 62. Argum. 2. My first Argument was from the necessity of a profession of
true repentance. The 2. shall be from the equipollent terms, a description to
the thing described, thus: We must baptize no man that first professes not to
believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: But no Infant professes to
believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; therefore we must baptize no
Infant: The minor is manifest by sense. The major is proved from Matthew. 28. 19.
where this is made the form of the words in baptism, or at least the end, and
that which we must insist on* Calvin on the words yields the Anabaptists that
faith is put justly before baptism, nam alioqui mendax essot, figuraque
remissionem peccatorum and spiritus donum afferes incredulis, qui nondum essent
Christi membra. For otherwise he should speak false, and the figure should
bring remission of sins, and the gift of the spirit to unbelievers, who were
not members of Christ. And that, non abs re, Patris, Filii and spiritus
expressa hic fit mentio, quia aliter baptismi vis apprehendi non potest, quam
si a gratuita patris miserecordia initium fiat, qui nos per filium sibi
reconciliat, deinde in medium prodeat Christus ipse cum mortis suae sacrificio,
and tandem accedat etiam Spiritus sanctus per quem nos abluit and regenerat;
denique suorum omnium bonorum consor^es faciat. Not from the matter, here is
express mention made of the Father, Son, and Spirit, because otherwise the
efficacy of baptism cannot be apprehended, but by beginning from the Fathers
free mercy, who reconciles us to himself by his Son, and then that Christ
himself come between with the sacrifice of his death, and then at last the holy
spirit also approach, by which he washes and regenerates us, and last of all
makes us partakers of his benefits. It appears by comparing Matthew. 28. 19.
with Romans 6. 3. and 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14, 15. and 10. 2. that to be baptized into
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, is not only to be baptized by
their authority, but also to be thus initiated into the relation which the
Church stands in to them, and to be consecrated to the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, as Musculus, Diodate, the assembly of Divines Annotations, and the
generality of expositors do express. See Doctor Hammond, Pract. Catech. lib. 6.
5. 2. And especially on Matthew. 28. 19. Grotius at large, and that it
comprehends or presupposes a profession of believing Son and Holy Ghost. For
no man can devote himself solemnly by our ministry to the Holy Trinity, that
does not first profess to believe in them: therefore the Chuch over taught the
Catechumeni the creed first, in which they profess to believe in God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And before they actually baptized them, they asked
them whether they believed in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost? To which
they must answer affirmatively, or not be baptized. And all that are baptized
must first profess to believe in his Name, and so to receive him, and not only
promise to do it hereafter. I add that the same faith that is mentioned in the
ordinary Creed in the Church, is meant in the baptismal profession, and to be
required before baptism; this will be confessed. 1. Because the creed it self
has been this 1300. years at least professed before baptism. 2. because the
creed it self is but the 3. fundamental baptismal articles mentioned, Matthew.
28. 19. enlarged and explained on subsequent occasions (as Sandford, and
Parker, de Descensu have learnedly and largley proved, and Grotius in Matthew.
28. 19. proves out of Tertullian, etc. that the creed was not then in the form
of words as now, though the same doctrine was used in other words, to the same
uses.

Page 68. Argum. 3. The foregoing Argument was taken from the prerequisite
profession, the next shall be taken from the very work it self, viz. the
presenting and offering our selves to be baptized, and willingly receiving
baptism: thus,

If it be the very nature or appointed use of the ex^eanal part of baptism it
self (yea essential to it) to signify and profess (among other things) the
saving faith and repentance of the baptized, then true baptism cannot go
without such a profession. But the baptism of Infants is without such a
profession, therefore the baptism of Infants is not true baptism. The minor is
manifest by sense. The antecedent (which only requires proof) I prove thus:
It is of the instituted nature of baptism to be in general, a professing sign
as well as an engaging sign, de futuro, for the future: This I premise, as
granted by all Christians that I know of that have written of baptism, and then
let us consider of the several parts of the sign or external Ordinance, with
the signification of each; that it is essential to it to be significant and
obligatory on our part, as well as on Gods part, is commonly confessed. And 1.
the Minister does baptize him into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
and the party does consent thereto, 1. voluntarily offering himself to be
bapitzed, and then 2. voluntarily receiving that baptism. And his offer of
himself hereto, goes before the Ministers baptizing him, and his reception of
that baptism is essential to it: So that baptism essentially contains on his
part a signal profession of consent to that which is meant in the form used by
the Minister [I Baptize thee into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost]
And that is, that God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be mine, and I be theirs,
in the relations in which they are offered in the Gospel to Mankind; for all
confess that it is a Covenant that is here sealed, and so a mutual consent
which the signs are instituted by Christ to signify. Christ offers himself
to be related to me as my Jesus Christ; and by offering my self to baptism, and
by voluntary receiving it, I do actually profess my acceptance of his offer,
that is of himself so offered. God the Father offers himself to be my God
reconciled in Christ, and so my chief good: and by voluntary receiving baptism
I do signally profess my acceptance of him so offered. The Holy Ghost is
offered to be my Sanctifyer and guide; and by voluntary reception of baptism
into his Name, I do signally profess my acceptance of him so offered: So that
it is a most clear case, that baptism as baptism, according to its instituted
nature and use, does contain the persons actual signal profession of present
assent to the truth of the Gospel, and acceptance of God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost as therein offered. And it contains (as our Divines commonly
maintain) an actual signal profession that we there presently consecrate or
devote, or dedicate our selves to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost in the
foresaid relations. 2. Another part of baptism is, the Ministers washing the
person, and the person first offering himself to be washed, and after actually
receiving it, does thereby signally profess his consent. Now this washing does
essentially signify our washing from our former filth of sin, together with
the guilt; our putting off the old man which is corrupt according to the
deceitful lusts of the flesh. He that signally professes his present consent
to be washed by the blood of Christ from his former filthiness and guilt, and
to lay by the filthiness of flesh and Spirit, does co nomine profess saving
faith and repentance. But all that are baptized with the baptism of Christ's
institution, do by the very voluntary reception of baptism, so profess;
therefore they do thereby profess saving Faith and Repen^

3. Quad modum as to the manner; its commonly confessed by us to the
Anabaptists (as our commentators declare) that in the Apostles times the
baptized were dipped over head in the water, and that this signifies their
profession, both of believing the bu^ial and resurrection of Christ, and of
their own present renouncing the world and flesh, or dying to sin and living to
Christ, or rising again to newness of life, or being buried and risen again
with Christ, as the Apostle expounds in the forecited texts of Col. 2. and
Romans 6. And though we have thought it lawful to disuse the manner of dipping,
and to use less water, yet we presume not to change the use and signification
of it: So then, he, that signally professes to die and rise again in baptism
with Christ, does signally profess saving faith and repentance. But thus do all
that are baptized according to the Apostles practice: Therefore, etc.

Page 74. Argum. 4. If we must baptize none that profess not their consent to
enter themselves presently into the covenant of grace with God in Christ, Then
we must baptize no Infant, but the former is true; Therefore, etc. The
consequence is manifest, since it is manifest even by sense, that Infants
profess not their consent to enter themselves into the covenant of Grace with
God in Christ.

The antecedent I think will be granted by many of the Papists, and it is the
common Doctrine of the Protestants; and therefore as to them I need not prove
it.

I confess, some of the Anbaptists, and some few others, do question whether
baptism be a seal of the covenant of grace; but the quarrel is mostly, if not
only, about the bare word [Seal] for they confess that in sense which we mean
by sealing; and particularly they confess, that we do in baptism enter into the
convenant of God, and that it is a professing and engaging sign on our part, as
well as an exhibiting, notifying, confirming sign on Gods part. It is confessed
it is the covenant of grace we are to enter, and that there is but one covenant
of grace.

This Master Blake acknowledges, for all the mention of an outward covenant:
it is also a confessed thing on all hands that it is God that is the first
author and offerer of the covenant, that it is he that redeemed us, who made
the promise or covenant of grace upon the ground of redemption; and that it is
frequently called a covenant in Scripture, as it is a Divine Law or
constitution, without respect to man's consent, as Grotius has proved in the
preface to his annotations on the Evangelists: much more (out of doubt) is it,
that it is called a covenant before man consents, as it is a covenant
offered, and not yet mutually entered; in the former sense the word is taken
properly, but in another sense and for another thing then in the later. But in
the later it is taken tropically, viz. Synedochically, it being but a covenant
drawn up and consented to by God conditionally, and offered to us for our
con^ent. It is the same covenant that is offered to us and not another, that we
are called to consent to or enter in, and we cannot be truly said to enter into
covenant with God if we make a new one of our own, and lay by his; for that is
none of the covenant of God: he never offered it, nor will he ever enter it.

We are I hope agreed what the covenant of grace is, as offered on Gods part
(or else its great pity;) viz. that on the title of cre^^^n first and
redemption after, we being absolutely his own, it is offered to us, that God
will be our God (our chief good and reconciled father in Christ) that Christ
will be our Savior (by propitiation teaching and ruling us) even from the
guilt, filth, or power of sin, that the Holy Ghost will be our indwelling
Sanctifier, if we heartily or sincerely accept the gift and offer, that God
will consent to be our God, Christ to be our Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost
to be our in-dwelling Sanctifier, if we will but consent. This is no doubt the
gift or covenant so offered. These things being thus premised, I come to prove
not only the inseparability but even the identity of heart covenan^ing and
saving faith, and of signal external covenanting and the profession of saving
faith, without which we must not baptize any.

Page 79. Argum. 5. We must not baptize any without the profession of that
faith and repentance which are made the condition of remission of sins. But
Infants make no profession of that faith and repentance which are made the
condition of remission of sins, therefore no Infants are to be baptized; The
minor is manifest by sense, and the major I prove thus.

If we must not baptize any but intentionally for present remission of sin,
then must not we baptize any without a profession of that faith and repentance
which is the condition of remission. But the former is true, therefore so is
the ^uer; the consequence is past all doubt, for else we should imagine that
men may have present actual pardon without that faith and repentance which are
the condition of it, which subverteth much of the Gospel. The antecedent I
prove thus:

If God has instituted no baptism, but what is intentionally for the present
remission of sin, then we must not baptize any but intentionally for the
present remission of sin: But the former is true, therefore so is the later. I
say [intentionally] in contradistinction from [eventually, or certainly and
infallibly attaining that end] where further note, that I speak not of Gods
absolute decrees, as if his intention in that sense could be frustrate; but of
his ends as Legislator speaking of him after the manner of men, but principally
of the instituted end of his ordinances; that is, the ends which he requires
the Minister and People to use them for, and so it is our intention principally
that I mention. As the Gospel it self is said to be intentionally to save men,
and though it condemn most, that is besides the first intention and but by
accident; and though this be principally to be spoken of the prae-imposed
intentions of their conversion and salvation; yet Christ is pleased in the word
to ascribe such intentions to himself as attain not their ends, as professing
that he came not into the world to condemn the world, but that the world
through him migh be saved: That is, to condemn them is not his direct principal
intent, but only on supposition of their wilful final rejecting of him; and
thus he speaks partly in the habit of a rector or promiser, and partly as man,
or after the manner of men: and of the intention imposed on us there is no
doubt.

Now I shall prove the antecedent (for the consequence is past doubt:) And
first we are confirmed in this truth, because the Opponent (whom it concerns)
has not proved any other baptism instituted by God, but what is for present
re^ission of sins. If they can show us one Text of Scripture that speaks of
any other, we shall give up all the cause; but yet they have not done it that I
know of. In the mean time we shall prove the contrary, God has instituted but
one baptism: That one baptism is for the present remission of sins, therefore
God has instituted no baptism but what is for present remission.

The major is proved from Ephesians. 4. 5. There is one baptism. In the minor we
take the words [for remission] not to speak of somewhat accidental, or to be
intended only by the administrator, uncertainly or but sometime. And I prove
it from Scripture, Acts 2. 38. Repent and be baptized every one of you in the
name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift
of the Holy Ghost, as remission is here made the end of baptism so it is
present remission. For 1. It is such as is the consequent of the repentance
which Peter exhorts them to, but that was present remission. 2. It was to
precede the giving of the Holy Ghost in the sense there mentioned, therefore it
was present remission. Beza in loc. upon the place, says, [ in nomen Christi]
id est dans Christo nomen, cujus mortis, scpulturae ac resurrectionis simus in
baptizo participes, cum peccatorum remissione, nec enim hoc declarat formulam
baptismi s^d finem and scopum. In the name of Christ, That is, giving our name
to Christ, of whose death, burial, and resurrection, we are made partakers in
baptism, with the forgiveness of sins, for this does not declare the form of
baptism, but the end and scope. So Deodate [in the name] viz. [not only for a
mark of our profession of the Gospel, but also to participate of his spiritual
virtue in the washing away of our sins, with which he accompanies and
ratifieth the external ceremony in those who are his] Bullinger in loc. says,
Baptiz^ri in nomine Domini Jesu Christi, est baptismatis signo testari se
Christo credere ad remissionem peccatorum. To be baptized in the name of the
Lord Jesus Christ, is by the sign of baptism, to testify that we believe in
Christ for the remission of sins. 1. Mark, It is not only an engagement to
believe hereafter, but the profession of a present faith. 2. And that not a
common faith, but that which has remission of sin. 3. And this was not an
accidental separable use of baptism; but he makes this the very exposition of
baptizari in nomine Jesu Christi, to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ.
And thus he expounds the covenant, [ est enim baptismus pactum seu foedus
gratiae, quod init inter baptizandum nobiscum Christus] For baptism is an
agreement or covenant of grace, which Christ enters into with us, when we are
baptized. And that it is a professing sign of our true repentance, he shows
before [ and rectissime conjungitur paenitentia and baptismus, quia baptismus
paenitentiae signum est] and most rightly is repentance and baptism joined
together, between baptism is the sign of repentance. Calvin in loc. upon the
place, Per baptismum (ut Paulus docet) crucifigitur vetus homo noster, ut in
vitae novitatem resurgamus, by baptism (as Paul teaches) our old man is
crucified, that we may rise to newness of life. Romans 6. 4. 8. Item indutmus
Christum ipsum, G^l. 3. 27. 1 Cor. 12. and passim docet Scriptura esse
paenitentiae quoque Symbolum. Also we put on Christ himself, and the Scripture
does up and down teach it, to be also a badge of repentance. Calvin on Acts 22.
16. Non dubium est quin fideliter rudimentis Pietatis Paulum imbuerit Ananias;
neque enim ver^ fidei expertem baptizasset, nor doubt but Ananias did
faithfully instruct Pa^l in the rudiments of Piety, neither would he have
baptize^ him* if he had been void of true faith. John 3. 5. [Except a man be
born of water and of the spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God]
though we are agreed against the Papists, that Christ intends not here to
place the same necessity in baptism, as there is in or of the new birth by the
spirit; yet it is by most acknowledged, that Christ does here speak of the new
birth as signified by baptism, and so has respect to baptism, as the ordinary
confirming sign: And so the Text fully shows us, that baptism is instituted
to be the sign of our present regeneration, or else it could not be said that
we must be born [of water and the spirit.]

Calvin says, most are of Chrysostomes mind, who took it to be meant of
baptism: (and so did the generality of ancient Expositors) and though himself
and some more think otherwise, yet as long as they take it to be a metonymical
expression, the sign being put for the thing signified, it does as well
acquaint us with the use of baptism, as if it were a proper speech. Bullinger
in loc* upon the place, says [ Hanc Christi sententiam omnes pene de baptismo
interpretantur] almost all interpret this Scripture of Christ to baptism. Beza
believes, that the Text speaks of baptism either Christ's or some other, but
rather Christ's, Justly does Beza in Mark 1. 4. fall upon Erasmus sharply, for
saying [(...) [ in] praep^sitio praeparationem significat, non effectum: the
preposition in, signifies a preparation, and not the effect: Because
repentance and remission (says Beza) cannot be separated; so that he took it
not to be a common preparatory repentance or baptism.

Piscator on Mark. 14. says, Its called the baptism of repentance for
remission of sin, because John preached remission of sin to the penitent and
believers, praecip iebatque ut inhujus rei testimontum atque professionem
baptiz ^rentur. He concluded that they should be baptized, in testimony and
profession of this thing; and that is called (...) the baptism of repentance,
id est, qui resipiscentiae testificandae atque profitenda adbibebatur: Neque
enim baptizabat nisi eos qui confessione peccatorum ^dita, resipiscentiam suam
testatam reddebant: Caeterum nomine resipiscentiae per synecdochen membri simul
intelligenda est fides in Christum, that is to say, was used to testify and
profess repentance; neither did he baptize any but those who by confession of
their sins testified their repentance, but by a Synecdoche of a part for the
whole, is also to be understood, Faith in Christ, And on Matthew. 3. 11. Observe
he shows that Christ's baptism and John's are the same, in that both have the
same end and use, viz. obsignatio remissionis peccatorum and resipiscentiae,
The sealing of remission of sins and repentance; that is, as already extant, as
his judgment is often delivered; as in his Schol. on ver. 11. he expressly faith
[ In resipiscentiam, id est in testimonium resipiscentiae; ut nimi^um
susceptione baptismi testatum faciatis vor resipuisse, and indies magis ac
magis resipiscere velle: sed simul hic intelligendum, Joannem baptizasse quoque
in remissionem peccatorum, hoc est ut nimirum nomine Dei testatum faceret
resipiscentibus and in Christum credentibus peccata ipsis remissa esse propter
Christum agnum Dei] Unto repentance, that is, in testimony of repentance, viz.
that by receiving of baptism you testify that you have repented, and that you
will daily renew your repentance more and more; but withal we must here
understand, that John did baptize also for the remission of sins, that is, that
he might testify in the name of God, to the penitents and believers in Christ,
that their sins were forgiven them for the sake of Christ the Lamb of God. And
I pray mark his observation on Mat. 3. 6. 8. 10 concluding our present
question: [ Baptismus nulli adulto conferendus est nisi prius ediderit
confessionem peccatorum and fidei in Christum, ac praterea promissionem sanctae
vitae] Baptism is not to be administered to any of age, unless he first make
confession of his sins, and of his faith in Christ, and besides a promise of a
holy life, which he proves.

Calvin on Matthew. 3. 6. says [ Ergo ut se rite ad baptismum offerant homines,
peccatorum confessio ab illis requiritur, alioqui nihil quam inane esset
ludicrum tota actio] Therefore that men may rightly offer themselves to
baptism, confession of sins is required of men, otherwise the whole action
would be nothing else but sport. If I had charged the guilty so of making the
whole work of baptism Ludicrous, they would have been highly offended ( and yet
Paedobaptists do so.)

Paraeus on Matthew. 3. 5. shows that the order was that confession as a
testimony of true repentance go first, and then baptism for remission of sins [
confessio postponitur; sed (...) constructionis -- confessi baptizabantur: Pro,
cum con^essi essent peccata, baptismum accipiebant sacramentum remissionis
peccatorum: non prius baptizabantur, postea confitebantur -- Auditores igitur
primo in testimonium resipiscentiae confitebantur sua peccata, deinde
baptizabantur, tertio fide baptismi fructum suscipiebant remissionem
peccatorum. Docet hic locus varia. 1. Quod baptismus sit sacramentum
remissionis peccatorum, ex part Dei; spondet enim Deus ceu ju rejurande
baptizatis remissionem gratuitam peccatorum propter Christum. 2. Quod sit etiam
sacramentum resipiscentiae ex part nostra; restipulamur enim Deo fidem and
paenitentiam pro tanto beneficio. Confession is put after, but in construction
the first is to be last; those who confessed were baptized, for when they
confessed their sins, they received baptism, a Sacrament of the forgiveness of
their sins; they were not baptized first, and confessed their sins after, the
hearers then first confessed their sins in testimony of their repentance, then
they were baptized, thirdly by faith they received the fruit of baptism; the
remission of sins: this place teaches diverse things. 1. That baptism is a
Sacrament of the forgiveness of sins, on Gods part, for God promises as by an
oath, to those who are baptized, a free pardon of sin for Christ's sake: 2. That
it is also a Sacrament of repentance on our part, for we again engage to God,
Faith and Repentance, for so great a benefit; That is, both profess it at
present, and engage to continue in it; answering the interrogation credis? with
a credo, and not only a credam. Do thou believe; I do believe in the
present tense, and not only I will believe, in the future. Ad Sacramenta non
esse admittendos impenitentes. Hoc enim damus (Anabaptistis) in Ecclesiam
suscipiendos and baptizandes non esse nisi praevia confessione Fidei and
paenitentiae: quem morem and vetus servavit ecclesia, and nostrae hodei
observant, si vel Judaeus vel Turca adults baptismo sit* initiandus.
Impenitents are not to be admitted to the Sacraments: for this we grant to the
Anabaptists, that such are not to be required into the Church, nor to be
baptized, who have not first made confession of faith and repentance, which
custom both the ancient Church did observe, and ours observe at this day, if
either a Jew or a Turk of age is to be admitted by baptism. And on verse 7. he
says, Ex concione ipsa datur intelligi, multos illorum simulata paenitentia
etiam baptismum petivisse: Horum hypocrisin cum non ignoraret, non passus eos
latere in turba, nec ad baptismum indignos admisit, sed acri objurgatione,
hortatione and comminatione ad seriam resipiscentiam extimulat, and ad
baptismum praeparat. From the sermon it self its to be understood, many of them
also required baptism by a feigned repentance, when as he understood their
hypocrisy, he suffered them not to lurk in the crowd, neither admitted he to
baptism those that were unworthy of it, but stirs them up to a serious
repentance, by sharp reprehension, exhorting and threatening, and so prepares
them unto baptism; after he shows, that there are hypocritae manifesti quos
pastores admittere non debent sine examine, ne Sacramenta prostituant, sibi and
ecclesiae reatum attrahant, Manifest hypocrites, whom Pastors ought not to
admit without examination, least they prostitute the Sacraments, and contract
guilt to themselves and the Church. And page 56. against Maldonate he proves
the baptism of Christ and John all one; and when Maldonate says, that John
baptized in panitentiam, and baptismus praecedebat, paenitentia sequebatur,
unto repentance, and that baptism went before, and repentance followed,
(confessing that in Christ's baptism repentance precedes) he answers [that it
is faise, nam etiam in Joannis baptismo praecedebat paenitentiae, sequebatur
baptismus] For repentance did also precede in John's baptism, and baptism
followed.

2 Pet. 1. 9. It is said of the barren ungodly professor [That he has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins,] where I take it for a clear
case, that it is the baptismal washing which the Apostle there intends,
wherein all profess to put off the old man, and to be washed from their former
filthiness; for I suppose we shall be loath to yield that it was an actual
cleansing either of remission or mortification, which the Apostle means, lest
we grant that men may fall from such a state; and therefore it must be a
Sacramental washing, or cleansing, wherein the matter was appearingly and
sacramentally transacted. From whence it is plain that the Apostle took it for
granted, that as all the baptized were visibly Church Members, so were they all
visibly washed from their old sins; which shows both what was their own
profession, and what was the stated end and use of the ordinance. The Apostle
says not that [he has forgotten that he promised or engaged to be purged from
his old sins] but that [he was purged] from them. Paraeus in locum, upon the
place, says, [ A veteribus peccatis purgatum, hoc est se esse baptizatum, seu
se accepisse in baptismo purgationis signaculum. Omnes enim baptizati debent
purgari a peccatis, sicut dicuntur induere Christum, Gal. 3. mori cum Christo,
Romans 6. sensus est, qui se volutant in sceleribus, non recordantur se
baptizatos esse, abnegant ergo baptismum suum] That he was purged from his old
sins, that is, was baptized, or had received in baptism the seal of purging,
for all those who are baptized, ought to be purged from their sins, as they are
said to put on Christ, to die with Christ, the meaning is, they which wallow in
their sins, do not remember they were baptized, and therefore do renounce their
baptism. 1 Cor. 6. 11. the Apostle says of the visible Church of Corinth [such
were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are
justified, etc.] where it is evident, that all the visible members of the
Church are visibly washed, sanctified, justified: And I think it is clear that
by washing here he has some respect to their baptism. So that I conclude that
there is no baptism to be administered without a profession of saving faith and
repentance foregoing, because there is no baptism that ever Christ appointed
but what is for the obsignation of remission of sins, which is the consequent.

Master Blake, page 171. recites some words of mine containing this argument,
thus; That faith to which the promise of remission and justification is made,
must also be sealed to: Or that faith which is the condition of the promise, is
the condition in foro De^, in the Court of God, of the title to the seal: But
it is only solid true faith that is the condition of the promise of remission;
therefore it is that which gives right in foro Dei, in the Court of God, to the
seal. Who would think now but Master Blake had given some substantial answer to
this and other Arguments, when himself and some others are so confident of the
sufficiency of them? His answer is this: [To this I have answered, faith is not
sealed to, but remission of sins or salvation upon condition of faith; and when
I come to speak of the sealing of Sacraments, I shall (God willing) make this
more evident, that the Sacrament qua seal immediately respects our privileges,
not duties] Reply 1. Is here one word of answer to any real part of this
Argument. Is not this answer as little to the matter, as if he had talked of
another subject. I think it my duty to say that Ministers of the Gospel do but
proclaim to the Church the matter of our common lamentation, and the enemies
joy, when some confidently publish such kind of Disputations, and others are
satisfied with them; and I must say if all were such, they should never be
angered with one word of mine in opposition to their assertions, though they
would maintain that the Crow is white. 2. To that useless touch that he has on
a word (whose following explication might have spared him his labor) I may say
that our Divines have ordinarily maintained hitherto that there is a mutual
covenanting between God and us, (and no man more then Master Blake) and that
there is in the Sacrament a mutual sealing; the receiving being our seal, as
the act is Gods.

Page 88. Argum. 6. If baptism be instituted to be a seal of the righteousness
of that faith which we have yet being unbaptized, then must we baptize none
that profess not a justifying faith. But no Infants profess a justifying faith,
therefore we must baptize no Infants; The minor is manifest by sense. The
reason of the consequence is evident, in that we must use baptism only
according to its nature and to its instituted ends: The antecedent is proved
thus:

Circumcision was instituted to be a seal of the righteousness of that faith
which we have yet unbaptized. The consequence will not be denied by them whom
we now deal with: because they confess that baptism succeeds circumcision.
The antecedent is evident in Romans 4. 11. it being expressly said of Abraham to
whom circumcision was first given. I cannot imagine what they will say, unless
it be by recourse to the Anabaptists shift, to say that circumcision was
instituted to this end indeed, to Abraham himself, and others that were
sincere, but not to all that had right to it; but God here tells us the
established use and end of his ordinance, and in such relations, the end is
inseparable. And as God has not made many sorts of baptisms or circumcisions:
So neither many mere inconsistent ends (or separable) and we are likest to know
the true end of the institution, where the institution and first example are
reported to us. Calvin in loc. says, Duae denique ut baptismi hodie sunt, ita
olim circumcisionis erant parts, nempe, tam vitae novitatem, quam peccatorum
remissionem testari: Lastly, as there are two parts at this day of baptism, so
of old there were two of circumcision, viz. to witness, as newness of life, so
forgiveness of sins. Says Piscator, in loc. upon the place, Sicut olim
circumcisio signum suit faeleris gratiae, and figillum quo credentibus
obsignata fuit justitia fidei, hoc est, quo illi certiores sunt redditi, sibi
remssa esse peccata, propter futuram satisfactionem Christi, ac proinde se
babere Deam propitium ac foventem; ita caetera quoque sacramenta, etc.
similiter and finis seu scopus omnium sacramentorum unus idemque, viz.
obsignatio justitiae fidei, quae vulgo dicitur fidei confirmatio. Paraeus in
loc. says [ ita signum fuit dantis and accipientis respectu, etc.] Et
[Justitia fidei est remissio peccatorum fide accepta propter redemptionem
Christi] et [sic Sacramenta non sunt instituta justificandis, sed justificatis,
hoc est non infidelibus sed conversis, non igiturnisi conversione and fide sumi
debent: secus sigilla justitiae esse cessant: quid enim non babentibus fidem
and justitiam obsignarent? As circumcision was of old a sign of the covenant of
grace, and a seal whereby was sealed the righteousness of faith to believers,
that is to say, whereby they were certified that their sins were forgiven them,
by receiving of the future satisfaction of Christ, and therefore they had God
propitious and favoring unto them, so also the other Sacraments, etc. Also the
end or scope of all the Sacraments is as one and the same, viz. the signing of
the righteousness of faith, which is commonly called the confirmation of faith,
so it was a sign both in respect of the giver, and receiver, etc. and the
righteousness of faith is the forgiveness of sins by faith, received because of
Christ's redemption, and so the Sacraments are not instituted for those who are
to be justified, but for the justified, that is, not for unbelievers, but for
those which are converted, therefore are they not to be taken without
conversion and says, otherwise they were to be seals of righteousness, for
what would it seal to them, who have not faith and repentance?

Doctor Willet, in loc. says [circumcision then did not conser upon him that
grace which he had not, but did confirm and establish him in the grace and
faith received: the sacraments then non instituta sunt justificandis, sed
justificatis, are not instituted for those which are to be justified, but for
them which are already justified Parae.] Peter Martyr is large, and makes these
words Romans 4. 11. of Paul to be the definition of a Sacrament, to be a seal of
the righteousness of faith.

Page 91. Argum 7. We must baptize none but those that are first professed
Disciples of Christ. But none are professed Disciples of Christ that profess
not saving says in Christ, therefore we may not baptize any that profess not
saving faith in Christ: But no Infant does profess saving faith in Christ, as
is manifest by sense; therefore no Infant is a professed Disciple of Christ,
nor must we baptize any. The major is proved from Matthew. 28. 19. Go, Disciple
me all nations baptizing them] As for those that say, they are discipled by
baptizing, and not before baptizing, 1. They speak not the sense of that Text.
2. Nor that which is true or rational, if they mean it absolutely as so spoken,
else why should one be baptized more then another? 3. But if they mean that by
heart-covenant or Gods acceptance and promise they are Disciples before, but
not so completely till the covenant be sealed and solemnized, as a Soldier is
not so signally a Soldier till he be listed, nor a King till he be Crowned so
fully a King, or a man and woman so fully married till it be solemnized in the
congregation; in this sense they say the same that I am proving: men must be
first Disciples by the professed consent, before they are declared such by the
seals or public sacramental solemnization.

And that only the professors of saving says are Disciples, may appear by a
perusal of the texts of Scripture that use this word, and it will not only by
found that this which I maintain is the ordinary use of the word (which should
make it so also with us) but that no Text can be cited where any others are
called the Disciples of Christ. For the major and minor both observe Piscators
definition of baptism [on Matthew 28. 19.] Baptismus est sacrimentum novi
testamenti, quo homines ad ecclesiam pertinentes ex mandato Christi cultui very
Dei, qui est Pater, Filius and Spiritus sarctus per ministros verbi
consecrantur, and in fide remissionis peccatorum and spe vitae aternae
confirmantur. Baptism is a Sacrament of the New Testament, by which those men
who belong to the Church, by the command of Christ, are consecrated to the
worship of the true God, which is the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, by the
Ministers of the word, and are confirmed in the faith of remission of sins, and
of hope of eternal life. And he proves this description, per parts, by parts.
1. That is a Sacrament. 2. That it belongs to those that pertain to that
Church, and that only must be baptized, qui ecclesiam suerint ingressi, ac
fidem Evangelii prosessi, who are entered into the Church, and have professed
the faith of the Gospel. Which he proves from Mark 16. 16. He that believes,
and is baptized shall be saved. Vult ergo (says he) ut prius constet de
alicujus fide quam baptizetur, unde Act. 8. Philippus Evangelista non prius
baptizare voluit eunuchum illum Ethiopem quam is professus esse^ fidem Christi.
He wills therefore, that his faith be manifested, before he be baptized, whence
Acts. 8. Philip the Evangelist would not baptize the Ethiopian Ennuch, before
he had professed the faith of Christ. Calvin in loc. upon the place, says [
Bapti^^ri Jubet Christus qui nomen Evangelii dederint, s^que professi fuerint
discipulos, partim ut illis baptismus si^ vitae aeternae tessera coram Deo;
partim apud homines externum fidei signum: quem ad modum gratiam suam Deus hoc
sigillo nobis confirmat, ita quicunque se ad baptismum offerunt, vicissim quasi
data syngrapha obstringunt s^am sidem] Christ commands them to be baptized, who
have given up their names to the Gospel, and have professed to be his
Disciples, partly that baptism might be to them a sign of eternal life before
God, partly an external sign of Faith before men, and as God confirms his grace
to us by this seal, so whosoever offers himself to baptism, does reciprocally
engage his faith as it were by his bond. And after [ verum quia docere prius
jubet Christus quam baptizare, and tantum credentes ad baptismum vult recipi,
videtur non rite administrari baptismus nisi fides pracesserit] But because
Christ commands first to teach, then to baptize, and only will have believers
to be received to baptism, it seems that baptism is not rightly administered,
unless faith does precede. So that it is Calvin's judgment, that this very Text
which is the most notable copy of the Apostolical commission for the baptizing
of the Disciple nations does appoint that saving faith be professed before men
be baptized. Paraeus in locum, from Mark 16. 16. shows that the order is,
^redere and baptizari, to believe and to be baptized.

I agree with him and the rest in the main, that justifying Faith must be an
act of the Will (embracing or accepting an offered Christ) as well as of the
understanding, and that the profession of it must go before baptism.

But I shall further prove the minor from some other texts of Scripture, viz.
that they are not Christ's Disciples that profess not saving Faith. Luke 14 26,
27, 33. [If any man come to me and hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and
Children, and Brothers and Sisters; yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my
Disciple: and whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after me, cannot be
my Disciple: whosoever he be of you that forsakes not all that he has, cannot
be my Disciple] This is spoken of true Disciples in heart (the first
significatum) by him that knew the heart. From whence I argue thus:

[If none are Christ's Disciples in heart, nor can be, but those that value him
above all, and will forsake all for him if he require it, then none can be his
Disciples by external profession, but those that profess to esteem him above
all, and to be willing to forsake all rather then forsake him: But the former
is proved by the Text; the consequence is clear, in that the world has
hitherto been acquainted but with two sorts of Christians, or Disciples of
Christ; the one such sincerely in heart, and the other such by profession, and
the later are so called because they profess to be what the other are indeed,
and what themselves are if they sincerely so profess. And it is the same thing
professed which makes a man a professed Christian, which being found in the
heart does make a man a hearty Christian. John 13. 35. [By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another] Here Christ gives a
certain badge by which his true Disciples may be known. If only those that
love one another are true Disciples in heart, then only those that profess to
love one another are Disciples by profession. Joh. 8. 31. If ye continue in my
word then are ye (that is you will approve your selves) my Disciples indeed]

If only those are Christ's Disciples indeed as to the heart, that have the
resolution of perseverance, then only those are his professed Disciples that
profess a resolution to persevere. But therefore all this I have said, is no
more then we have ever practiced, when in baptism we renounced the world,
flesh, and devil, and promised to fight under Christ's banner to our lives end.
Says Piscator in John 13. 35. Si pro Christianis, id est, Christi Discipulis
haberi volumus, oportet ut nos mutuo quam ardentisaime diligamus, etc. If we
will be accounted Christians, that is, Christ's Disciples, we ought most
ardently to love one another.

Object. Any one is a Disciple that is willing to learn of Christ.

Answ. No such matter: in an improper sense you may so call them, but not in
Scripture sense; where 1. A Disciple and a Christian are all one, Acts 11. 26.
but every one that is willing to learn of Christ is not a Christian, therefore
not a Disciple. 2. A Disciple of Christ is one that will take him for the great
prophet of the Church [which whosoever hears not shall be cut off from Gods
people] and will learn of him as of the Christ: but so will not all that will
learn of him: for a man that takes Christ but for a common wise man, as
Socrates or Plato may be willing to learn of him: And so may be his Disciple in
another sense, but not in the Christian sense as a Christian.

Page 96. Argum. 8. We ought not to baptize those persons that do not so much
as profess their forsaking of the childhood and Kingdom of the Devil: But no
Infant does profess its forsaking of the childhood and kingdom of the Devil, as
is manifest by sense, therefore we ought to baptize no Infant. The mayor is
proved thus:

If we must baptize none but for present admission into the Kingdom of Christ,
then we must baptize none but those that promise a present departure from the
Kingdom of the Devil; but the former is true, therefore so is the later. The
antecedent is granted by those that I have to do with; the reason of the
consequence is evident, in that all the world is divided into these two
kingdoms, and they are so opposite that there is no passing into one but from
the other. The minor of the first argument I prove thus. All they are visiby in
the kingdom of the Devil, or not so much as by profession removed out of it,
who profess not a removal from that condition in which the wrath of God abides
on them, and they are excluded by the Gospel from everlasting life, but such
are all that profess not a justifying faith. The major is proved, in that it is
the condition of the covenant of grace performed that differenceth the members
of Christ's Kingdom from Satan's; and so it is that condition professed to be
performed that visibly differenceth them before men. It is the promise of grace
that brings them out of Satan's Kingdom, therefore it is only done visibly
to those that profess the performance of the condition: moreover to be out of
Satan's Kingdom visibly, is to be visibly from under his government, but those
that profess not saving faith are not visibly from under his government.

Lastly, to be visibly out of Satan's Kingdom, is to be visibly freed from his
power, as the executioner of Gods eternal vengeance; but so are none that
profess not saving faith.

The minor is proved from John 3. 36. Where it is plain, 1. That the unbelief
spoken of is that which is opposed to saving faith, even to that says which
has here the promise of everlasting life, 2. And that this leaves them visibly
under the wrath of God.

So in Mark 16. 16. compared with Matthew. 27. 19. In the later Christ bids them
make him Disciples, and in the former he describes those that are such, and
those that remain still in the Kingdom of Satan [He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned] Here it is
evident that the unbelief threatened is that which is contrary to [and even the
privation of] the faith that salvation is expressly promised to, and that all
that profess not this saving faith are not so much as professedly escaped a
state of damnation, and that this is the differencing character of Christ's
Disciples to be baptized [of which yet more afterward.]

Page 98. Argum. 9. If it be the appointed use of all Christian baptism to
solemnize our marriage with Christ, or to seal or confirm our union with him, or
ingraffing into him, then must we baptize none that profess not justifying
faith [because this is necessarily prerequisite, and no other can pretend to
union, marriage or ingraffing into Christ] But no Infant does profess justifying
Faith, as is manifest by sense; therefore we must baptize no Infant.

Both the antecedent and consequent are evident in Gal. 3. 27, 28, 29. For as
many of you as have been baptized in Christ, have put on Christ: Ye are all one
in Christ Jesus, and if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs
according to promise. Here 1. we see that it is not an accidental or separable
thing for baptism to be our visible entrance into Christ, our putting him on,
our admittance (by solemnization) into the state of Gods children and heirs
according to promise. For this is affirmed of all the baptized with true
Christian baptism. If we be truly baptized, we are baptized into Christ, if we
are baptized into Christ, then we are Christ's, and have put on Christ, and are
all one in Christ, and are Abraham's seed, and heirs according to promise. If
any object that the Apostle speaks this but of some of them, even of the
regenerate, because he says [as many of you] I answer,

It is manifest that he speaks of all, 1. because it was of all them that were
baptized into Christ, 2. he expressly says as much in the next foregoing words
[ ver. 26. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus] To
which the words recited are annexed as the proof [for as many of you as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ] the assumption is implied [but
you have all been baptized into Christ] therefore ye have all put on Christ,
and so in him are all the children of God. 2. Note that they are the special
gifts of saving grace that are here ascribed to all the baptized. 3. Note also
that all this is said and proved to be by faith. 4. Note also that it is
expressly said to be a justifying faith, before verse. 24. [that we might be
justified by faith.] Indeed this text affords us diverse Arguments. 1. The
Apostle supposes all the baptized to profess a justifying faith, among the
Galatians, therefore so must we suppose of others, and expect that they do it.
The antecedent is proved from verse. 24, 25, and 27. compared. 2. All the
baptized are said to have put on Christ, therefore they are supposed to profess
that faith by which Christ is put on: But that is only justfying faith. 3. All
that are duly baptized are baptized into Christ, therefore they are supposed
to profess that faith by which men are united, or ingraffed into Christ, but
that is only justifying faith; but the rest of the Arguments here will be
further touched on anon.

Master Rutherford says that Scripture no where calls Christ the head of the
visible Church as such, as it is after cited.

I conclude then that Christ has app^inted no baptism but what is for a
visible marriage of the soul to himself (as Protestants ordinarily confess)
Therefore he has appointed no baptism but for those that profess to take Jesus
Christ for their Husband, and to give up themselves to him as his espouse: but
this is a profession of justifying faith, for heartily to take Christ for our
head and husband is true saving faith, and proper to his own regenerate pecple
if any thing in the world be so; and no man can profess to be married to Christ
that does not profess to take him for a husband. Therefore for my part I never
intend to baptize any without profession of saving faith, Amen. And let the
Lord God say so too, that Mr. B^xter may baptize no more Infants, nor defend so
palpable an abuse, but may wipe away the reproach he has cast on Gods people
and ordinance: He goes on thus.

Page 100. Argum. 10. If Paul account all the baptized Saints or Sanctified men
dead with Christ and risen with him, such as have put on Christ, sons of God by
adoption, Abraham's seed, heirs according to promise and justified; then they
did all profess a true justifying faith. But no Infant did profess a true
justifying faith: if they did let it be showed when, and where, and to whom:
therefore no Infant was then baptized, nor are now to be.

The antecedent Master Blake confesses, and I shall prove it by parts. The
consequence is that which lies chiefly on me to prove, and I shall do both
together.

The Apostle in the beginning of his Epistle to the Corinthians, and in many
other places calls the whole Church Saints, 1 Cor. 6. 11. He says to them [but
ye are washed, ye are sanctified] That part of the antecedent then is certain;
the consequene I prove thus.

There are none called Saints in all the New Testament, but only such as were
in heart devoted to Christ by a saving faith, or professed so much, therefore
the word Saint in this case must signify only such. If any will prove a third
sort of Saints, viz. such as profess a faith not saving, they must do that
which I never saw done.

The first and most famous signification of the word Saints or Sanctified in
the New Testament, is only of them that are in heart devoted to Christ by true
faith; therefore the borrowed, or Analogical, or less proper signification
(call it what you list) must be of that which has the likeness or appearance
of this, and that is only the profession of it. Profession makes Saints
visible, or by profession, as hearty dedication to God by faith makes real or
heart Saints.

Master Blake adds [we read of Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. 33. And
they were taken to be Church Members as soon as they made profession, as they
ceased to be Jews or Pagans, and took them to the way of Christianity, as we
see, Acts 2. Acts 8. 12. 13. 38.]

Answ. 1. They renounced the way of ungodliness, and wickedness in general by a
profession of repentance, as well as the way of Paganism and Judaism in
particular. There were no Christians that professed not repentance toward God
from dead works 2. We believe that there were Churches of the Saints, and
therefore that none should be of the Church that profess not to be true Saints.
But prove if you can that there was ever either Church or Churchmember called
Saints in Scripture, that had not either special sanctity or a profession of
it. And as for those Acts 8. you cannot prove that any of them were either
called Saints or baptized without a profession of a justifying faith: as shall
further be showed afterward. The Galatians I find not called Saints, but to
call them a Church of Christ or believers is equipollent: and what Saints were
they? Why they were all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, having been
baptized into Christ, and put him on, and were all one in him, and were all
Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise, Gal. 3. 26, 27, 29. A Church
in Scripture sense, is a society of men professing true saving faith. And thus
we see what a Church was, and what Saints were, and what believers and
Disciples were supposed to be by the Apostles, and what is the signification of
these words in Scripture, for they are all of the same extent. Thus much I have
said to prove that all the baptized are accounted Saints, and therefore
professed a saving Sanctity.

The second title which I mentioned follows (of which I shall be more brief)
All the baptized are accounted to be dead and risen with Christ, even dead to
sin, and risen to newness of life; therefore they all profess a saving faith.
The proof of this is full in the two Texts already cited, Romans 6. and Col. 2.
11, 12. Romans 6. 3. etc. How shall we that are dead to sin live any longer
therein? Know ye not that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ,
were baptized into his death? Therefore we are buried with him by baptism into
death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
Father, so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been planted
together into the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness of
his resurection, knowing this that our old man is crucified with him, that the
body of sin might be destroyed, that hence forth we should not serve sin; for
he that is dead is freed from sin.

Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him.

Likewise, reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Here is a full report of the use of
baptism, and the profession of all that are baptized, and the state they are
supposed to be in. So that I cannot speak it plainlyer then the words
themselves do. So Col. 2. 11, 12. which I shall not stay to recite, because it
is to the same purpose, and before cited.

The third title mentioned in the argument is this: All that are baptized have
professedly put on Christ; therefore they have professed saving faith. The
Antecedent is expressed Gal. 3. 23. [for as many as have been baptized into
Christ have put on Christ] the consequence is proved in that to put on Christ
heartily, is to be made true partakers of him, and living members of him,
therefore to profess this is inseparable from the profession of saving faith;
yea by that faith he is truly put on. Putting on Christ is the same with
[putting on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true
holiness, being renewed in the Spirit of our minds, Ephesians. 4. 20, 21, 22, 23,
24. Col. 3. 10. It is putting on the new man which is renewed in knowledge
according to the image of him that created him] and putting on the Lord Jesus
Christ is put for the state of Sanctity in opposition to a fleshly life, Romans
13. 13, 14.

Says Calvin on this Text [ induere Christum bic significat virtute spiritus
ejus undique nos muniri, qua idonei ad omnes sanctitatis parts reddamur: sic
enim in nobis instauratur imago Dei quae unicum est animae ornamentum. Respicit
enim Paulus ad vocationis nostrae finem, quia Deus nos adoptans in corpus
unigenti filii sui inserit, and quidem hac lege, ut nos abdicantes priore vita
fiamus in ipso novi homines. Quare etiam alibi fideles dicit Christum induere
in baptismo, Gal. 3. 27.] To put on Christ signifies here to be defended in all
points with the virtue of the Spirit, whereby we may be fit for all parts of
holiness, for thus the image of God is renewed in us, which is the only
ornament of the soul, for Paul has respect to the end of our vocation, because
God adopting us, has ingraffed us in the body of his only begotten Son, and
that upon those terms, if we deny our former life, and become new men in him:
wherefore he says elsewhere, that believers put on Christ in baptism. And upon
Gal. 3. 27. he says [ Quum dicit, Christum induisse, intelligit Christo sic
esse infitos; ut coram Deo nomen ac personam Christi gerant, ac in ipso magis
quam in seipsis censcantur. When he says they have put on Christ, he
understands that they are so ingraffed in Christ, that they carry that name and
person of Christ in the sight of God, and are rather reckoned in him, then in
themselves. And he comes to the objection, How all that are baptized can be
said to put on Christ, when baptism is not effectual with all? And he answers
in sum, That to Hypocrites it is uneffectual, qui nudis signis superbiunt,
who are proud with the bare signs. But then he says, that the Apostle speaking
of these non resspicit Dei institutionem, sed impiorum corruptelam. He has no
respect to Gods institution, but to the corruption of the wicked. (But
doubtless it is Gods institution that we must look to in our administration)
Qaum autem fideles alloquitur, qui rite utuntur illa, tunc conjungit cum sua
veritate, quam figurant. Quare? neque enim fallacem pompam ostentat in
sacramentis, sed quae externa caremonia figurat, exhibet simul reipsa. Hinc
fit, ut veritas, secundum Dei institutum, conjuncta sit cum signis] But when he
speaks to believers, who use it rightly, he joins them with their truth, which
they typifie. Wherefore? for he does not make show of a deceitful pomp in the
Sacraments, but what the external ceremony figures, he exhibites together in
very deed. Hence it comes to pass that truth, according to Gods institution, is
joined with the signs. To the same purpose say other Protestants.

The next title mentioned in the Argument was, Sons of God. All that are
baptized are the visible or esteemed sons of God by says in Christ; therefore
they all profess that justifying faith to which that real or special sonship is
promised. The antecedent is expressed in Gal. 3, 26, 27. [For ye are all the
sons of God by says in Christ Jesus] which he proves in the next words [For
as many as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ] What Sons of God
are in Scripture sense may be seen, John 1. 12. Romans 8. 14, 15. Phil. 2. 15. 2
John 3. 1, 2. Gal. 4. 1, 2, 5, 7. and Romans 8. 17. [if sons, then heirs, heirs
of God, and joint heirs with Christ] was a good consequence in Paul's judgment
[In this (says John) the children of God are manifest from the children of the
Devils: Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves
not his brother, 1 John 3. 10. See also John 11. 52. Romans 8. 16. 21.

But Master Blake objecteth Romans 9. 4. [To them pertained the adoption] and
Gomarus his comment.

Answ. 1. Gomarus says not, that any were in either sense Sons of God without
a profession of a saving faith. 2. It was not after their unchurching or
unbelief, that the adoption is said to pertain to them, but before, and then,
let Master Blake prove [if he can] that any Israelites were adopted without
profession of that faith, which was then saving: I doubt not to prove the
contrary anon. And 3. If he could prove that such there were among the
Israelites, yet he will never prove that they are called Sons, though the
Nation were; because the denomination was principally from the true Sons, and
next from the professed ones: None are visibly sons that be not visibly true
believers.

The next title mentioned in the Argument is [ Abraham's seed] All that are
baptized are called Abraham's seed, Gal. 3. 17, 18, 19. Therefore they all
profess a justifying faith. The consequence is proved, in that none are
Abraham's seed in Gospel sense, but those cordially that are true believers, and
those appearingly that profess true faith. This is proved, Romans 9. 4, 6, 7.
Romans 4. 11. [that he might be the Father of all them that believe, that
righteousness might be imputed to them also] this therefore is a justifying
faith, and the privilege of the justified that is here mentioned. Its added
verse. 12, 13. [And the Father of circumcision to them who are not of the
circumcision, but also walk in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham yet
uncircumcised. For the promise that he should be heir of the world was not to
Abraham or his seed by the Law, but by the righteousness of faith -- Therefore
it is of faith that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure
to all the seed, even to that also which is of the faith of Abraham the Father
of us all.]

So Gal. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. [Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness: Know ye therefore that they which are of says, the same
are the children of Abraham; And the Scripture foreseeing that God would
justify the Heathen by faith preached before the Gospel to Abraham; In thee
shall all nations be blessed. So then, they which be of says are blessed with
saithful Abraham] So verse. 14. 16. [That the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the
Spirit through faith. Now to Abraham, and his seed were the promises made; he
says not, and to seeds as of many, but as of one; and to thy seed, which is
Christ, and so to those that are in him. It is hence most undeniable, that all
Abraham's true seed are justified, and have a justifying faith; and all his
professing seed do profess this faith.

The next title mentioned in the Argument is, [Heirs according to the promise.]
All the baptized were heirs according to the promise: None that profess not a
justifying faith are heirs according to the promise (either really or
appearingly) therefore none that profess not a justifying faith should be
baptized. the major is expressed, Gal. 3. 17, 18, 19. the minor (of which is
all the doubt) is proved from Romans 8. 17. where there is an express
concatenation of [children, heirs of God, coheirs with Christ, that suffering
with him shall be glorified with him] Gal. 4. 1, 6, 7. The heir is Lord of all
and a Son, and therefore has the Spirit of the Son, by which they cry Abba
Father. So Tit. 3. 5, 6, 7. [According to his mercy he saved us by the washing
of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost which he shed on us, etc. that
being Justified by his Grace, we should be made heirs according to the hope of
eternal life] The heirs then are regenerate, justified, and have the hope of
eternal life. So Ephesians. 3. 6. The Gentiles being made fellow-heirs, and of the
same body are partakers of the promise in Christ by the Gospel, even the
unsearchable riches of Christ, Heb. 6. 17. The heirs of promise have their
salvation confirmed by Gods oath. And Heb. 1. 14. they are called the heirs of
salvation. And Heb. 11. 6. 9. It is true justified believers that have that
title, and James 2. 7. [They are called heirs of the promised Kingdom] and 1.
Pet. 3. 7. they are called coheirs [of the same grace of life] So that to be
heirs in the first and proper notion is to be Sons that have title to the
inheritance of glory: and therefore to be heirs in the second analogical notion
is to be such as seem such by profession of that Faith which has the promise
of that glory.

The last title that I mentioned in the Argument was [Justified] Paul calls
all the baptized Church of Corinth Justified; None that profess not a justified
Faith are called Justified, therefore none such should be baptized. The major I
proved to Master Blake out of 1 Cor. 6. 11. [Ye are washed, ye are sanctified,
ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.]

Master Blake does not at all deny the major or the sense of the Text alleged
to prove it; but darkly in generals intimates a denial of the minor, silently
passing over that particular title [justified] as if he durst not be seen to
take notice of it. I confess its sad that good men should be so unfaithful to
the truth, which is so precious, and is not their own, and which they should do
nothing against ( as Master Baxter has done) but all they can for it.

Having gone thus far about titles, let me add another; the title [Regenerate]
Christ has instituted no baptism, but what is to be a sign of present
regeneration. But to men that profess not a justifying faith it cannot be
administered as a sign of present regeneration; therefore he has instituted no
baptism to be administered to such.

The major I have proved already in the first Argument, and its plain in John
3. 5. Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God] And so in Tit. 3. 5. where it is called the laver of
[regeneration] In both which though I am of their mind that think that the
sign is put for the thing signified; yet it may thence plainly appear what is
the thing signified, even regeneration, or the new birth: Yea so commonly was
this acknowledged by all the Church of Christ, that there is nothing more
common in the writings of the Fathers then to take the terms [regenerate,
illuminate, etc. and baptized] as signifying the same thing, or at least spoken
of the same person, which occasioned one of our late Antiquaries so stiffly to
plead that regeneration in Scripture signifies mere baptism, and that all the
baptized are regenerate.

I grant that it often falls out that baptism being misapplied seals not
regeneration at present, and that the same person may afterward be regenerate,
and his remembered baptism may be of use to him for the confirmation of his
faith. But this is not the institutes commanded use of it, to be so administered
at first, if the party profess not saving faith, though this review of it is a
duty, where it was so abused at first. The minor I shall take for granted,
while regeneration in Scripture stands so connexed to salvation; I know no
regenerate ones, but the justified, or those that profess to have a justifying
faith, nor has he proved any more.

Page 118. Argum. 11. All that are meet subjects for baptism, (are after their
baptism without any further inward qualification, at least without any other
species of says) meet subjects for the Lords Supper: But no Infant is a meet
subject for the Lords Supper, as is acknowledged, therefore no Infant is a meet
subject for baptism: Or thus, Those whom we may baptize, we may also admit to
the Lords Supper: But we may admit no Infants to the Lords Supper, as is
acknowledged by baptizers of Infants, therefore we may baptize no Infants.

The major Master Blake will easily grant me, and if any other deny it I prove
it thus.

1. It is the same covenant that both Sacrament seal, one for initiation the
other for confirmation and growth in grace; therefore the same says that
qualifieth for the one, does sufficiently qualify for the other, for the same
covenant has the same condition.

2. They are the same benefits that are conferred in baptism and the Lords
Supper to the worthy receiver. Therefore the same qualification is necessary
for the reception: The antecedents is commonly granted. Baptism uniteth to
Christ, and gives us himself first, and with himself the pardon of all past
sins, etc. The Lords Supper by confirmation gives us the same things; it is
the giving of Christ himself, who says by his Minister, Take, Eat, Drink;
offering himself to us under the signs, and commanding us to take himself by
faith, as we take the signs by the outward parts. He gives us the pardon of
sin, sealed and procured by his body broken, and his blood shed.

3. A member of Christ's Church, against whom no accusation may be brought from
some contradiction of his first profession, must be admitted to the Lords
Supper; but the new baptized may be ordinarily such: therefore if he can but
say, I am a baptized person, he has a sufficient principal title to the Lords
Supper, Coram Ecclesia, before the Church. [I mean such as we must admit]
though some actual preparation be necessary, unless he be proved to have
disabled his claim on that account either by nulling and reverting that
profession, or by giving just cause of questioning it.

4. The Church has ever from the Apostles days till now without question
admitted the new baptized at age to the Lords Supper, without requiring any new
species of faith to entitle them to it. I take the major therefore as past
denial: I must confess as much as I am against separation, I never intend to
have communion with Master Blakes congregation, if they profess not saving
repentance and faith, And if he exact not such a profession, I say still he
makes foul work in the Church, and when such foul work shall be voluntarily
maintained, and the word of God abused for the defilement of the Church, and
ordinances of God, it is a greater scandal to the weak and to the schismsticks,
and a greater reproach to the Church, and sadder case to considerate men, then
the too common pollutions of others, which are merely through negligence, but
not justified and defended.

Let Master Baxters own words judge him, who makes the same foul work in the
Ordinance of baptism by admitting Infants to it upon a Parents or Proparents
(as he terms them) profession, when all his proofs of the necessity of
profession to go before baptism are of the profession of the party himself to
be baptized, and this device of a Parents or Proparents profession instead of
the Infants, is his own invention that has not any intimation in Scripture,
and by his own proofs makes Infants capable of the Lords Supper, and perverts
the nature of Sacraments, which his own words do fully express, thus.

Page 123, 124. The first Argument of Master Gillespies 20. is from the nature
of Sacraments, which are to signify that we have already faith in Christ,
remission of sin by him, and union with him. The sense of the argument is, That
seeing Sacraments, (according to Christ's institution) are confirming signs
presupposing the thing signified both on our part and on Gods; therefore none
should use them that have not first the thing signified by them. Though I
undertake not to defend all the Arguments that other men use in this case, yet
this does so much concern the cause of baptism, which I am now debating, that I
shall give you this reply to it. What Divines are there that deny the
Sacraments to be mutual signs, and seals signifying our part as well as Gods?
And how ill do you wrong the Church of God by seeking to make men believe that
these things are new and strange? If it be so to you, it is a pity that it is
so; but sure you have seen Master Gataker's Books against Doctor Ward, and
Davenant, wherein you have multitudes of sentences recited out of our
Protestant Divines, that affi^m this which you call new.

It is indeed their most common Doctrine, that the Sacrament does presuppose
remission of sins, and our faith, and that they are instituted to signify
these as in being.

It is the common Protestant Doctrine, that Sacraments do solemnize and
publicly own and confirm the mutual covenant already entered in heart, as a
King is Crowned, a Soldier Listed, a Man and Woman married after professed
consent: So that the sign is causal as to the consummation and delivery (as a
Key or Twig and Turff in giving possession) but consequential to the contract
as privately made, and the right given thereby; so that the soul is supposed to
consent to have Christ as offered first [which is saving faith] and then by
receiving him Sacramentally delivered, to make public profession of that
consent, and publicly to receive his sealed remission. Master Cobbet [cited by
you] might well say, that primarily the Sacrament is Gods seal; but did he say
that it is only his, and not secondarily ours? And in the next words you do in
effect own part of the Doctrine your self, which you have thus wondered at, as
new and strange, saying; [I confess it is a Symbol of our profession of faith.

If you mean as you speak [taking profession properly] then 1. you yield that
the Sacrament is our symbol, and so declares or signifies our action as well
as Gods. 2. And it is not only a sign of our profession, but a professing
sign, and therefore a sign of the thing professed; for the external sign is to
declare the internal acts of the mind, which without signs others cannot know.
As therefore the words and outward actions (...) ^wo distinct signs of the
same internal acts, so are they two ways of profess^^^ My signal actions do
not signify my words (which are plainer signs the^, and therefore need not
darker to express them) but they both expre(...) mind; So that they are not
only symbols of our professi^^ as you spea(...)t professing symbols 3. And if
so, then they must be signs and professions of those internal acts, which
correspond with them.

The Fourth Argument of Master Gillespy is from Romans 4. 11. Circumcision was a
seal of that righteousness of faith; therefore so is baptism, therefore it
belongs only to justified believers. He that makes it the instituted nature
or use of circumcision to be a seal of righteousness of faith, which the person
had before, does make his circumcision a proof of his foregoing righteousness
of faith.

Page 133. You cannot show where ever the wicked are commanded to communicate
with the Church in the Sacrament, but in this order; First to be converted and
repent, and so baptized, and so communicate, Gillespy Aarons rod blossoming,
page 514, 515. The assumption [that baptism it self is not a regenerating
ordinance] I prove thus.

1. Because we read of no Persons baptized by the Apostles, except such as did
profess faith in Christ, gladly received the word, and in whom some begun work
of the Spirit of grace did appear (I say not that it really was in all, but
somewhat of it did appear in all.) Baptism even of the aged must necessarily
precede the Lords Supper.

Page 144. My Twelfth Argument is from Matthew. 22. 12. [Friend, how came thou
in hither, not having on a wedding garment? and he was speechless] To [come in
hither] is [to come into the Church of Christ.] By the wedding garment is
undoubtedly meant, sincerity of true faith and repentance, so that I may hence
argue:

If God will accuse and condemn men for coming into his Church, or the
communion of Saints without sincere faith and repentance, then it is not the
appointed use of baptism to initiate those that profess not sincere faith and
repentance. But Infants profess not sincere faith and repentance, as is
manifest by sense, therefore it is not the appointed use of baptism to initiate
Infants.

Page 145. The Thirteenth Argument is this: We must baptize none that profess
not themselves Christians; But no Infants profess themselves Christians, as is
manifest by sense, therefore we must baptize no Infants. The major is certain,
because it is the use of baptism to be our solemn listing sign into Christ's
Army, our, initiating sign, and the solemnization of our marriage to Christ, and
professing sign that we are Christians, and we do in it dedicate and deliver up
our selves to him in this relation as his own. So that in baptism we do not
only promise to be Christians, but profess that we are so already in heart,
and now would be solemnly admitted among the number of Christians; the minor I
prove thus.

1. No man is truly a Christian that is not truly a Disciple of Christ [that
is plain Act. 11. 26.] No man is truly a Disciple of Christ that does not
profess a saving faith and repentance, therefore no man that does not so
profess is truly a Christian. The minor I prove thus: No man is truly a
Disciple of Christ that does not profess to forsake all contrary Masters, or
Teachers, and to take Christ for his chief Teacher, consenting to learn of him
the way to salvation: but no man makes this profession that professes not
saving faith and repentance; Therefore no man that professes not saving faith
and repentance is truly a Disciple of Christ.

The major is evident in the nature of the relation, the minor is as evident,
in that it is an act of saving Faith and repentance to forsake other Teachers,
and to take Christ for our sole or chief teacher in order to salvation. 2. No
man is truly a Christian that professes not to take Christ for his Lord and
King, forsaking his Enemies: But no man does this but the professors of a
saving faith. Therefore, etc. 3. No man is a true Christian that professes not
to take Christ for his Redeemer, who has made propitiation for sin by his
blood, and to esteem his blood as the Ransom for sinners, and to trust therein;
but none do this but the professors of saving faith, therefore none else are
Christians. The major of all these three Arguments is further proved thus:

No man is professedly a Christian that professes not to accept of Christ as
Christ [or to believe in Christ as Christ] but no man does profess to take
Christ as Christ, that professes not to take or accept him as his Priest,
Teacher and King; therefore. etc. The major is plain in it self: the minor is
as plain, it being essential to Christ to be the Priest, Prophet, and King, and
from these essentials related to us and accepted by us, does our own
denomination of Christians arise, and that a bare assent without acceptance
does not make any one a Christian is past doubt, and shall be further spoken to
anon.

If baptism then be commonly called our Christening, and so be our entrance
solemnly into the Christian state, then is it not to be given to them that are
not so much as Christians by profession. And furthermore if a Faith defective
in the assenting part about the essentials of its object, serve not to
denominate a man justly a Christian, then a Faith defective in the consenting
or accepting part above the essentials of the object serves not to denominate
a man a Christian; but the antecedent is true, therefore so is the consequent.
The antecedent is proved, because else the Turks are Christians, because they
believe so many and so great things of Christ; and else a man might be a
Christian that denied Christ's death, or resurrection, or other essentials of
Christianity. The consequence is good, for Christianity is as truly and
necessarily in the will as in the understanding; consent is as essential an act
of covenanting as any. So that I may conclude that as he is no Christian that
professes not to believe that Christ is the Priest, Prophet, and King, so he
is no Christian that professes not to consent and accept him for his Priest,
Prophet, and King.

The fourteenth Argument is this: Our Divines ordinarily charge wicked men with
contradiction of profession which is made in baptism, and they expound many
places of Scripture, which the Arminians take as favoring their cause, to be
meant according to the profession of wicked men. But it charge not such
contradiction on persons baptized in Infancy, therefore it supposes no
profession or baptism of theirs: and if we must baptize none that profess not
saving faith and repentance, we must not baptize Infants, who make no
profession.

Page 177. Argum. 15. If all that are baptized must engage themselves to
believe presently (in the next instant) yea, or at any time hereafter, with a
saving faith, then must they profess at present a saving faith; or if we must
baptize none that will not engage to believe savingly, then must we baptize
none that will not profess a saving faith; But no Infant will profess a saving
faith, as is manifest by reason and experience, therefore we must baptize no
Infant.

The antecedent is Master Blakes Doctrine; who affirms, That it is not
necessary that they that come to baptism do profess a present saving faith, but
its sufficient that they engage themselves to believe by such a faith. The
consequence is proved thus*

1. It is not the beginning of saving faith which we are to engage our selves
to in the Sacraments, but the continuance, therefore the beginning is
presupposed in that engagement, and so we must no more baptize without a
profession of faith in present, then without an engagement to believe
hereafter; the antecedent is proved thus;

There is no one word in Scripture either of precept or example where any
person in baptism does engage, or is required to engage to begin to believe
with a saving faith, or to believe with a faith which at present he has not.
Show but one word of Scripture to prove this (if you can) if you cannot, I may
conclude, that therefore we must not require that which we have no Scripture
ground to require.

Let Master Baxter show but one word in Scripture to prove this (if he can)
that any person in baptism does engage or is required to believe, or profess to
believe that another, an Infant may be admitted to baptism by virtue of it; if
he cannot, I may conclude, that therefore we must not require that which we
have no Scripture ground to require, nor admit any Infant or other, by reason
of a Parents, Proparents, or sureties profession or promise to believe for an
Infant.

Page 149. Argum. 16. If there can be no example given in Scripture of any one
that was baptized without the profession ( and that his own, by his own self
and no other Parents, Proparent or surety) of a saving faith, nor any precept
for so doing, then must not we baptize any without it; but, the antecedent is
true, therefore so is the consequent, and therefore we must baptize no Infant,
who makes no such profession, as all examples in Scripture of any baptized are
of, and every precept for baptism requires. Let us review the Scripture
examples of baptism, which might afford us so many several Arguments, but that
I shall put them together for brevity.

1. I have already showed that John required the profession of true repentance
( by the baptized himself) and that his baptism was for remission of sin.

2. When Christ lays down in the Apostolical commission, the nature and order
of his Apostles work, it is first to make them Disciples, and then to baptize
them into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and as it is a making
Disciples, which is first expressed in Matthew. so Mark expounds who those
Disciples are by patting believing before baptism, and that we may know that it
is a justifying faith ( of the Disciple himself) that he means, he annexeth
first baptism, and then the promise of salvation, Math. 28. 19. Mark 16. 16.
[He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. This is not like some
occasional mention of baptism, but its the very commission of Christ to his
Apostles for preaching and baptism, and purposely expresses their several
works in their several places and order. Their first task is to make Disciples,
which are by Mark called believers. The second work is to baptize them, whereto
is annexed the promise of their salvation. The third work is to teach them all
other things, which are afterward to be learned in the School of Christ. To
contemn this order ( as Master Baxter does in Infant baptism) is to contemn all
rules of order: For where can we expect to find it, if not here? I profess my
conscience is fully satisfied from this Text, that it is one sort of faith,
even saving, that must go before baptism, and the profession whereof ( by the
Party himself to be baptized; He that believes and is baptized, not another
then the believer, make Disciples and baptize them, not others then the
Disciples made) the Minister must expect, of which see what is before cited out
of Calvin and I^scator.

I shall be amazed reading this passage, at the blindness of Master Baxter, if
he see not how unanswerably his own words overthrow Infant baptism, or his
hypocrisy, if being satisfied, as he says, in conscience of his own
exposition he do not deny Infant baptism, and bewail his alleging of Matthew.
28. 19. in his Book termed, Plain Scripture proof of Infants baptism, Part. 1.
chap. 3. And I pray God to deliver me from such hardness of heart, be adds,

That it was saving faith that was required of the Jews and professed by them,
Acts 2. 38, 41, 48. is showed already, and is plain in the Text. Acts 8. The
Samaritans believed and had great joy, and were baptized into the name of Jesus
Christ, verse. 8. 12. whereby it appears that it was both the understanding
and will that were both changed, and that they had the profession of a saving
faith (even Simon himself) Acts 8. 37. The condition on which the Eunuch must
be baptized was [if he believed with all his heart;] which he professed to do,
and that was the evidence that Philip did expect. Paul was baptized after true
conversion, Acts 9. 18. The Holy Ghost fell on the Gentiles, Acts 10. 44.
before they were baptized, and they magnified God. And this Holy Ghost was the
like gift as was given to the Apostles, who believed on the Lord Jesus; and it
was accompanied with repentance unto life, Acts 11. 17, 18. Acts 16. 14, 15.
Lydia's heart was opened before she was baptized, and she was one that the
Apostles [judged faithful to the Lord] and offered to them the evidence of her
faith, Acts 16. 30, 31, 33, 34. The example of the Jaylour is very full to the
resolution of the question in hand.

He first asks what he should do to be saved; the Apostle answers him;
[Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved and thy house] so that it
was a saving faith that is here mentioned. He rejoiced and believed with all
his house, and was baptized that same hour of the night, or straightway. It is
here evident that he professed that same faith which Paul required, Acts 18. 8.
[ Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue believed on the Lord with all his
house^ and many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized] Here we
have two proofs that it is saving faith that is mentioned, Those in Acts 19. 5.
were baptized as believers in Jesus Christ. In a word, I know of no one word in
Scripture that gives us the least intimation that ever man was baptized
without the profession of a saving faith. There is constantly this order in the
prescribed duty, that no man should seek baptism but a true believer, and no
man should baptize any but those that profess this true belief, Acts 8. 37.
Philip is determining a question, and gives this in as the decision [If thou
believe with all thy heart thou mayest] And to say that this is but de been
esse, meaning that it includes not the negative, [otherwise thou may not]
is to make Philip to have deluded and not decided or resolved. Use that liberty
in expounding all other Scripture, and you will make it what you please. A
Dogmatical faith is not the Christian faith, nor any where alone denominateth
men believers in Scripture. I remember but one Text, John 12. 42. where it is
called believing on Christ; and but few more where it is simply called
believing, but none where such are called believers, Disciples or Christians,
or any thing that intimates them, admitted into the visible Church without the
profession of saving faith. I conclude that all examples in Scripture do
mention only the administration of it to the professors of saving faith, and
the precepts give us no other direction; and I provoke Master Blake (as far as
is seemly for me to do) to name one precept or example for any other, and make
it good, if he can.

I conclude that all examples of baptism in Scripture do mention only the
administration of it to the same persons who in their own persons were
professors of saving faith; and the precepts give us no other direction. And I
provoke Mr. Baxter (as far as is seemly for me to do) to name one precept or
example for baptizing any other, and make it good, if he can, and if not, by
his own reason he ought to baptize no other, but must reject baptism of Infants
who do not in their own persons profess saving faith, and give over his vain
Plea of Parents or Proparents profession of saving faith, as entituling Infants
to baptism, which (unless his violence and wilfulness of spirit blind him) his
own words and arguments will enforce to do.

Page 156. Argum. 17. is from 1 Pet. 3. 21. [The like figure whereto even
baptism does also now save us: Not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but
the answer of a good Conscience toward God] whence I thus Argue:

If baptism be appointed for our solemn admission into a state of salvation, as
Noah's Ark received men into a state of safety from the Deluge, then none should
be baptized but those that profess that faith which enters them into a state
of salvation; but no Infant professes that faith which enters them into a
state of salvation, as is manifest by sense and reason, therefore no Infant
should be baptized. Here it is implied plainly that this is quoad finem
instituentis, as to the end of him that instituted it, the common appointed of
baptism, which the Text mentions, though eventually it prove not the common
effect through the errors of the receivers: and this appears, 1. In that it
was spoken plainly in the text of the very nature and appointed use of baptism,
and so of baptism as baptism, without any exception, limitation, or
distinction. Therefore it is not spoken of any different use that it is
appointed for to the elect, as distinct from its common use to others. Its
spoken of that signification and common use to which baptism is appointed, viz.
to save, else we shall never be able to understand the use of it, or any
ordinance from Scripture, if we shall take liberty to say [It is this to one,
but not to another] when the Scripture says no such thing, but speaks of the
nature and use of it without distinction. Else when it says, [circumcision is
a seal of the righteousness of faith] we may say with the Anabaptists, it was
so to Abraham, but not to all others [And when the Lords Supper is said to be
appointed for the remembrance of Christ] we may say, That is but to some, and
not to others, when as the Text plainly speaks of the stated use of the
ordinances to all. 2 And in the type it is clear; for it was not some only,
but all that entered Noabs Ark, that entered into a state of salvation from the
Deluge; therefore so it is here as to the commanded use. 2. When baptism is
said to save us, its plainly meant of the state of salvation that baptism
enters us into and not of baptism ex opere operato, by the work done,
effecting our salvation: And so baptism comprehends the state into which we
are solemnly by it initiated. As a woman that is married to an Honorable man,
or a Soldier listed under an Honorable Commander, is said to be honored, the
one by marriage, the other by listing. Where antecedent consent is the
foundation on both sides of the honorable relations, and the subsequent state
is the condition or state it self which is honorable, but the solemn signation
is but the expression of the former, and passage to the later.

3. Hereby it is apparent, that though the answer of a good conscience be the
principal thing intended, and that saves, yet the external baptism is here
included as the sign and solemnization, so that when the Apostle says [not the
putting away of the filth of the flesh] he means [not the bare outward act of
washing alone, or as such] but baptism as it is entire, having the thing
professed on ou^ part, together with the professing sign.

4. It is therefore but by way of signification, obsignation and complemental
exhibition, that baptism saves, it being neither the fast or principal
efficient or condition of it, but is valued as it is conjunct with the
principal causes and condition for the attainment of these ends.

5. It is not a mere remote means leading toward a state of salvation that
baptism is here affirmed to be, but an entrance or means of entrance into that
state of salvation it self. As the heart-covenant or faith does it principally,
so baptism signally and complementally. This is plain. 1. Because it is not
said to help us toward a state of salvation, but expressly to save. 2. Because
the type which is here mentioned, viz. the Ark, was such a means, that all that
entered into it for preservation from the Flood were actually saved from it.

All this laid together does confirm both the antecedent and consequence, of my
Argument. Calvin's words on the Text signify, 1. that no baptized men are
excluded from salvation but Hypocrites. 2. That they that are excluded from
salvation for all their baptism are such as did dep^ave and corrupt it, and not
justly use it.

Yet another Argument may hence be raised, thus. Argum. 2. If, according to the
institution, the answer of a ^ood conscience must be joined with baptism for
the attaining of its end, then we must admit none that profess not that answer
of a good conscience: But no Infant does profess that answer of a good
Conscience, as is manifest by sense: Therefore we must admit no Infant to
baptism. But the former is certain from the Text, for baptism is said to save;
that is, its appointed use, yet not the external washing, but the answer of a
good conscience does it; therefore this is of necessary conjunction, and
without it baptism cannot attain its end, but it is to be administered and
received only in order to the attainment of its end, and therefore never in a
way by which the end is apparently not attainable. What this answer of a good
conscience is, we shall further enquire anon. Both the common exp^sitions fully
confirm the point which I maintain. The assemblies Annot. recit: both thus:

[Hence by the answer of a good conscience we may understand that unfeigned
faith, whereof they made confession at their baptism, and whereby their
consciences were purified, and whereby they received the remission of their
sin, etc. Some understand by the answer of a good conscience, that covenant
whereinto they entered at their baptism, the embracing whereof they testified
by their unfeigned confession of their faith] viz. such a faith as is aforesaid.

Page 160. Argum. 18. No one may be admitted to baptism, who may not be
addmitted a member of the Church of Christ. No one may be admitted to be a
member of the Church of Christ without the profession of a saving faith;
therefore no one may be admitted to baptism without the profession of a saving
faith. But no Infant does profess saving faith, as is manifest by sense,
therefore no Infant may be admitted to baptism. I speak of such admission to
Church membership as is in the power of the Ministers of Christ, who have the
Keys of his Kingdom to open and let in, as well as to cast out. The major is
past question, because baptism is our solemn entrance into the Church, who were
before entered by private consent, and accepted by the covenant of God. All the
question is of the minor, which I shall therefore prove.

1. It is before proved that all the members of the Church must be such as are
visibly, solemnly, or by profession, sanctified from former sin, cleansed,
justified persons of God, the heirs of the promise, etc. But this cannot be
without the profession of a saving faith; therefore, etc. 2. This is also
before proved, where it was showed, that no other are Christians or Disciples.
3. In Acts 2. 41, 42. etc. The many thousand that were added to the Church were
such as gladly received the doctrine of saving faith and repentance, and
continued in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread and
prayer, and so far contemned the world as to sell all, and make it common. And
doubtless no man continued in those ways (of doctrine fellowship, prayer, etc.)
without the profession of saving faith and repentance, for the very use of
these is such a profession, of which says Calvin in Act. 2. 42. [ quaerimus
ergo veram Christi ecclesiam; Hic nobis ad vivum depicta est ^jus im^g^, ac
initium qui^em facit a doctrina, quae veluti ecclesiae anima est, (not as
barely heard, but as professed and received) nec quamlibet doctrinam nominat,
sed Apost^lorum; hoc est quam per ipsorum nanus silius Dei tradiderat: ergo
ubicunque personat pura vox Eva^gelii, ubi in ejus professione m^^nent homines,
ubi in ordinario ejus auditu ad profectum se exercent, illic indubio est
ecclesia etc. Quare non temere haec quatuor recenset Lucas, quum desserib^re
vult nobis rite constitutam ecclesiae statum. Et nos ad hunc ordinem eniti
convenit, si cupimus vere censeri ecclesia coram Deo and Angelis, non inane
tantum ejus nomen apud homines jactare] Therefore we seek out the true Church
of Christ: its image is here painted to the life, and verily it begins from the
doctrine, which is as it were the soul of the Church, neither does he name any
doctrine, but of the Apostles, that is to say, which the Son of God had
delivered by their hands, therefore wheresoever the pure voice of the Gospel
sounds, where men remain in the profession of it, where they exercise
themselves to profit in the ordinary hearing of it, there undoubtedly is the
Church. Wherefore Luke mentions these four things not without just ground, when
he would describe the duly constituted state of the Church, and its convenient
that we should endeavor to attain to this order, if we desire to be a true
Church in the sight of God and Angels, and not only to boast of ^he vain name
thereof before men. And verse. 47. it is said that the Lord added daily to the
Church such as should be saved. It describes them that were added to the
Church viz. that they were such as should be saved, or as Beza yields to
another reading [and so Grotius and many others] such as saved themselves from
that untoward Generation [ qui sese quotidie servandos recipiebant in
ecclesiam] Who daily added themselves to the Church that they might be saved.

The Church is the body of Christ, Col. 1. 18. 24. and none are members of his
body but such as either are united to him, and live by him, or at least seem to
do so. The Church is subject to Christ, and beloved of Christ, and cherished by
him: We are members of his body, of his flesh, and his bones, Ephesians 5. 24. 25,
30. And those that are against the general redemption, me thinks should be
moved with the consideration, that it is the Church that Christ gave himself
for, even the visible Church which he purchased with his own blood, Acts 20.
28. Ephesians. 5. 25. and he is the Savior of his body, verse. 23. But so he is not
effectively the Savior of the professors of a faith that does not justify:
(...) according to opinion, he is the effective Savior of those that profess a
justifying faith, and (...) of the sincere: but of others neither way.

Hitherto Divines have gathered from the plain Texts of Scripture, that there
is but one Church, one faith, and one baptism; and those that had this faith
really, were to be baptized, and were real members of the Church, and that
those that professed this faith, and so seemed to have it when they have it
not, are visible members of the Church, and are so taken, because their
profession is sensible to us; and by that they seem to have the thing
prof^ssed; but Pae^obaptists, and chiefly Master Baxter are fallen into new
conceits in these.

1. They feign a new Christian faith to themselves, to wit, a believing
immediate by the faith of a Parent or Proparent; so that before there was but
one Christian faith, and now they have made two. 2. And so before, there was
but one sort of real, serious, or sincere Christians, consisting of such as had
that real Christian faith, ( in their own persons) and now they have found out
another sort of them, to wit, believers by another faith. 3. So they have
feigned a new baptism, for the old baptism was for remission of sin, and burial
and resurrection with Christ, and to ingraffe men into the Church, which is the
body of Christ, upon the profession of a saving faith: But now they admit to
baptism, as they term it, Infants without any profession of saving faith, made
by them to seal an imaginary covenant of grace made by God to believing Parents
and their seed, without any covenanting or sealing by the baptized person, upon
a pretended title of Parents and Proparents faith, and instead of baptizing [as
of old they did] by putting under Water and coming out again, so as to resemble
Christ's burial and resurrection, and their conformity thereto, they call that
baptism, and say falsely they baptize when they only sprinkle or pour water on
an Infant without such dipping, as of old Master Baxter page 70. confesses was
used and expressed by the Apostle, Romans 6. 4, 5. 4. And they have feigned also
a new kind of Church: For the Church of Christ's constitution is but one, which
is called visible from men's profession, and invisible from the faith professed.
But they have made a Church which consists of a third sort of members; that
is, of men that neither have saving faith nor profess it, but only are
Infants, whose Parents or Proparents have faith.

5. To this end they have confounded the Church and the Porch, the Vineyard and
the adjac^nt part of the wilderness: those that heretofore were not so much as
Catechumeni, o^ men in preparation for the Church, but only designed to
holiness, and hoped and expected to be in after time when they came to
understand the Christian faith, Church Members, are now brought into it, and
are annumerated to true Christians, before they once profess themselves to be
such. 6. And hereby [ by Infant baptism] also one of the two sorts of teaching,
which Christ distinguishes, Matthew. 28. 19, 20. is taken away, to wit, that
teaching which draws men to Christ, and makes them Disciples, and persuades
them to receive Christ Jesus the Lord. For they take him for a Disciple ( so
Master B^xter of baptism, part. 1. chap. 3.) that is not learning to be a
Disciple, yea, though he do not so much as submit to learn, nor has learned
any preparatory truths, though yet he be not made a Disciple indeed, nor
profess to be.

Master Baxter is deeply offended with Master T. for denying Infants to be
Christians or members of the Church mediately, etc. But I shall say somewhat
more concerning those Infants that are asserted by him to be Disciples, who do
not so much as profess a saving faith, viz. that they are no members of the
Church at all, and are not so much as to be named Christians, nor to be
admitted into the visible Church. No man can prove that ever one man was
admitted a Churchmember in all the New Testament, without the profession of a
saving faith. Otherwise we should have two distinct Churches specially
different, or two sorts of Christianity, and Christians differing tota specie,
in the whole kind, because the profession by a Parent and Proparent which is
made by him, their qualification does make a difference specifical between such
Christians and Church Members, and other Christians and Church members. When
the Jailer Acts 16. 30, 32, 33, 34. was admitted into the Church by baptism, it
was upon the professing of such a believing, by which both he and his household
might be saved, as is before showed. And so of all others in those times.

Page 163. Argum. 19. If we once admit men to baptism without their own
personal profession, we shall be utterly confounded, and not be able to give
any satisfactory resolution whose profession may be a sufficient qualification
to entitle to baptism, and so never be able to practice the Doctrine of
Pae^obaptism, as being utterly uncertain what Infants to baptize. This might be
manifest by considering the several conceits of Paedobaptists, some whereof
make the faith of the Church sufficient, some the faith of albelieving Nation,
some of any ancestors, some of the sureties, some of the next Parents, some of
the Parent inchurched, some of the Parent or Proparent, and this they claim by
a covenant which they can extend to no other then the Parent, who is believer,
not only by Profession, but also really before God, which can be known to no
administrator of baptism ordinarily.

Paedobaptists speak so much and purposely of this point, particularly Master
Baxter of baptism, Part. 1. chap. 29. that one would think we may expect an
exact resolution of this point from him, if from any man, and yet he is
uncertain what to fix upon, and if he resolve on any thing it is without proof,
as is showed by Master T. Review, Part. 1. Sect. 35. 37. Exercit. Argum. 9. 11.
Review part. 2. Sect. 10. 12. 17. Part. 3. Sect. 50. etc. And I perceive that
the stress of the differences between Master Baxter and Master T. did rest much
in this, and no wise man will leave his grounds till he see where he may have
better ( especially when the grounds are so plain as those of the
Antipaedobaptists are from Christ's institution, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 15,
16. and the Apostles practice, which Master Baxter has here so amply proved to
be of the baptizing only of persons who themselves profess a saving faith)
unless he mean to be for nothing, or of no Religion. No man can tell where to
fix, nor what we must consent to, to procure a title, if we once forsake the
present ground of the Persons own profession of saving faith who is to be
baptized. What is said to the contrary is answered in the books forenamed, and
it is not meet to be still writing for those lazy Readers, that had rather
err then be at the pains of reading what is already written. None are
Disciples upon the account of your other faith, but of either saving faith or
the profession of it; none are Christians on the account of your lower kind of
faith, but only of saving faith or the profession of it. Once for all I let
you know, that I take saving faith to be the constitutive or necessary
qualification of a real or mystical member; and profession of that faith to be
the qualifying condition of visibility of membership. I confess still that the
sealis to others besides believers, but though the promise be conditional, we
must not seal to any but those that profess consent to the conditions; and
therefore not to any but those that profess to be true believers.

Page 190. I find by sad experience (to my sorrow) that a considerable part of
some Parishes, or Villages are ignorant of the Fundamentals. I have spoken with
abundance that that know not Christ is God or man, or either (but they say he
is a Spirit) nor that the Holy Ghost is God, nor why Christ died, nor that any
satisfaction is made for our sins, or any thing done, or necessary to their
pardon, but our own repentance and amendment, and with some that know not that
the soul goes to heaven before the resurrection, nor that the body shall ever
rise again.

Now I would know of Master Blake whether all the children of these Parents
must be baptized again or not? For certainly these have not a Dogmatical faith,
which is the thing that he says entituleth to baptism. And then what certainty
have we that any of our ancestors had a true Dogmatical faith: And I would know
of Master Baxter whether such children are not to be baptized agian? Sure if he
say no, how can he allow that baptism which is without a Profession of saving
faith? If he say yea, how can he assure himself that any of our ancestors had
right baptism? Me thinks few that hold Master Baxters Tenets should allow of
the baptism of the greatest part of English People who are no better then those
Master Baxter mentions, and yet neither Master Baxter nor other Paedobaptists
do baptize such when they come to profess understandingly the faith of Christ.

Page 195. My Twentieth and last Argument is drawn from the constant practice
of the universal Church of Christ. It has been the constant practice of the
Catholic Church from the Apostles practice till now to require that profession
of saving faith and repentance, as necessary, before they would baptize;
therefore it must be our practice also. But it is otherwise in Infant baptism,
as experience shows, therefore the practice of it is not right. For the proof
of the Churches practice,

1. I have already said enough about the Apostles own practice and the Church
in their days.

2. The constant practice of the Church since the Apostles to this day is
undoubtedly known. 1. by the very form of words in baptism, and 2. by the
history of their proceedings therein. 1. It is certain that the Church did ever
baptize into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And as I have proved
before, the voluntary seeking and reception of that baptism contains the
actual profession of saving faith. 2. It is certain that the persons to be
baptized (if at age) did profess to believe in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
3. It is also certain, that they did profess to renounce the Flesh, the World,
and the Devil. 4. And it is certain that they promised for the future to live
in new obedience, and thus they publicly entered the three stipulations;
Credis? credo: Abrenuncias? abrenuncio: Spondes? Spondeo. Do thou believe? I
believe. Do thou renounce? I renounce. Do thou promise? I promise.

It was the constant doctrine of the Fathers and the Church then, that faith
and repentance (given in vocation) did go first, and that Justification,
Adoption, and Sanctification followed after. And so they took this justifying
faith and repentance to be prerequisite to baptism, therefore they ever
required before hand whether they believed in God the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and renounced the Flesh, the World, and the Devil (as is aforesaid) and
caused them to profess this before they would baptize them. And as it is true
of the ancient Church, that they never baptized any without the profession of
saving faith and repentance, so it is true of all the Christian Churches in the
world that I can hear of to this day.

The Papists themselves do use the same words in baptism, as are before
expressed, and require a profession. And though their false doctrine force them
to misexpound their own words, yet custom hinders them from changing them; and
for the reformed Churches it is past all question, by their constant practice,
that they require the profession of a saving faith. The practice of the Church
of England till the late change, may be seen in the Common prayer book, wherein
all that is forementioned is required, even from the infant, to whom the
question is propounded, do thou renounce? do thou believe? will thou be
baptized? although they took the answer of the sureties as if it were the
childs, and say in the Catechism they now promise, and perform faith and
repentance by their sureties. In the confession of faith of the Assembly at
Westminster, cap. 28. and again in the shorter Catechism, profession of faith
in Christ, and obedience to him is the thing required. They add also in the
Directory [that all who are baptized in the name of Christ do renounce, and by
their baptism are bound to fight against the Devil, the world and the flesh.]

Calvin in Acts 8. 37. says [ Quod non admittitur Eunuchus ad baptismum, nisi
fidem professus, hinc sumenda est universalis regula, non ante recipiendes esse
in Ecclesiam qui ab ea prius fuerant alieni, quam ubi testati fuerint Christo
se credere. Est enim baptismus quasi fidei appendix: ideoque ordine posterior
est. Deinde si datur sine fide, cujus est sigillum, and impia and nimis crassa
est prophanatio.] That the Eunuch was not admitted to baptism till he professed
faith. Hence this universal rule is to be gathered, that those are not to be
received into the Church, who before were strangers from it, till they first
testify they believe in Christ: for baptism is as it were an Appendix to
faith, and therefore is later in order: then if it be given without faith, of
which it is the seal, it is a wicked and too gross a profanation. Here note. 1.
That baptism (as received) is the seal of our faith (how much soever denied by
Master Blake) as it is the seal of Gods promise as administered. 2. That the
constant order is that baptism follow faith. 3. And that it is no better then
an impious profanation of it, if it go without faith; that is. 1. if the party
seek it without the presence of faith. 2. if the Pastor administer it without
the profession of faith.

To like purpose speak many more, but to salve Infant baptism they say that
Gods promise to an Infant, whom they imagi^^^ be born in the Church, is instead
of profession, that for it they by a judgment of charity are taken to be
regenerate, and that it is as much as we have of persons of age, and is
sufficient warrant to baptize them. But 1. they prove none of these. 2. nor are
they true. 3. nor were they true would they warrant Infant baptism, when the
Institution is (as they confess) to baptize them who believe by the Preaching
of the Gospel to them, Matthew. 28. 19. Mark. 16. 16. whereby the inadvertency of
the generality of Protestant Divines in this point may be discerned, and by the
reading of this book all intelligent persons may perceive Master Baxters
deceitfulness or heedlesness, and, if he perfist in defending, Infant baptism,
his unreasonable pertinacie in his conceit, and, if he do not declare his
forsaking his Doctrine in his book of baptism, his impenitencie and unrighteous
dealing with the Church of God which he has injured.


