AN APOLOGY FOR Mr. TOLAND, In a LETTER from Himself to a Member of the House
of Commons in Ireland; written the day before his Book was resolved to be burnt
by the Committee of Religion. To which is prefixed a NARRATIVE containing the
Occasion of the said LETTER.

-- Diis proximus Ille est
Quem RATIO non IRA movet.
Claudian. LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCXCVII.

A NARRATIVE Containing the Occasion of the following LETTER.
I Promise not to give any account at this time of the Controversy occasioned
by Mr. TOLAND's Book, nor to enter into the Merits of the Cause on either side.
His Adversaries seem not yet weary of writing against him; and when they have
once done, it will be early enough then for him to reply, if he sees reason so
to do: For it would be an endless labor to make Answers severally to so many
as may concern themselves in this Dispute. My design is only to show what
Treatment he received from some People in Ireland, as far as that may serve to
set the Letter annexed to this Narrative in its proper light. And I shall take
care to insert nothing, but such notorious matters of Fact that no observing
Person in Dublin, or I might say perhaps in the Kingdom, can pretend Ignorance
concerning them, or deny them to be true.

Mr. TOLAND was scarcely arrived in that Country, when he found himself warmly
attacked from the Pulpit, which at the beginning could not but startle the
People, who till then were equal Strangers to him and his Book; yet they became
in a little time so well accustomed to this Subject, that it was as much
expected of course as if it had been prescribed in the Rubric. This occasioned
a Noble Lord to give it for a reason why he frequented not the Church as
formerly, that, instead of his Savior JESUS CHRIST, one JOHN TOLAND was all
the Discourse there. But how unworthy a Member soever of the Christian Religion
Mr. TOLAND may be, he is still so sensible of the Obedience he justly owes to
its most Divine Precepts, that he dares not allow himself to make any returns
in the same Dialect to what was liberally uttered against him in that place.
Jude 9.
We read, an Archangel was not permitted to rail against the very Devil; and if
Mr. TOLAND had not innumerable Passages of the Gospel to restrain him, yet the
Reverence all Men ow to their own Persons joined to the Rules of common
Civility, would be powerful enough to keep him from bestowing any indecent
Expressions or Reflections upon his Opposers. Nor is he such a stranger to the
former Ages or the present, as not to perceive that passionate or violent
Proceedings never yet gained Credit to a Cause; nor produced any other Effects
upon the Enemies of it, but to make 'em abhor it the more.

But when this rough handling of him in the Pulpit (where he could not have
word about) proved insignificant, the Grand Jury was solicited to present him
for a Book that was written and published in England. And to gain the readier
Compliance, the Presentment of the Grand Jury of Middlesex was printed in
Dublin with an emphatical Title, and cried about the Streets. So Mr. TOLAND was
accordingly presented there the last day of the Term in the Court of
King's Bench, the Jurors not grounding their proceeding upon any particular
Passages of his Book, which most of 'em never read, and those that did
confessed not to understand. Thus in the Reign of HENRY VI. one Bacon 's
Historical Discourse of the Government of England, Part 2. cap. 17. page 161.
JOHN STEPHENS was presented by a Jury in Southwark, as a Man, say they, we
know not what to make of him, and that has Books we know not what they are. In
the mean time those of either Sex who had any intimacy with Mr. TOLAND, or that
favored him with their familiar Conversation, were branded as his Proselytes,
and Lists of their Names industriously given about; although those worthy Persons
(for he always chose the best Company) had never discoursed him of Religion,
nor had many of 'em then seen his Book. And so far was he himself from making
his Opinions the Subject of his common Talk, that, notwithstanding repeated
Provocations, he purposely declined speaking of 'em at all; which made his
Adversaries (who slipped no handle of decrying him) insinuate that he was not the
real Author of the Piece going under his Name. But if they were serious, and
this was not another Artifice to make him own it, I would fain know what made
them so angry with a Man whom they ought therefore to despise: For if there be
any Poison (as I hope there is none) in that Book, the spreading of it in
Ireland is wholly owing to the Management of those, who would be thought most
to oppose it.

We must not forget that in a few days after the present Lords Justices of that
Kingdom landed, the Recorder of Dublin, Mr. HANCOCK, presented Mr. TOLAND to
their Excellencies after a very obliging manner; for in his Congratulatory
Harangue in the name of his Corporation, whereof by the way he spoke not a
word, he begged their Lordships would protect the CHURCH from all its Enemies,
but particularly from the TOLANDISTS, a Sect, I Am sure, those Noble Persons
never heard of before. The late Lords Justices, the Earls of Montrath and
Drogheda, were more neglected at least in the same Speech; tho all Ireland
cannot without the blackest Ingratitude but acknowledge, that they never lived
before under a more prudent, just, and peaceable Administration: For as they
gave no occasions of Complaint in their Government, so were there no Murmurings
against them but only of such, as, through a perpetual desire of Change, are
always Enemies to their own and the Country's Happiness. Mr. TOLAND being thus
made a Heresiarch in so public a place, where all the Nobility and Gentry of
the Kingdom then in Town were present, occasioned every body to hunt for his
Book which was very scarce; and his Enemies also took that Pretext of
denominating all his Acquaintance TOLANDISTS, how different soever they were
from him or one another in their Sentiments.

From the Pulpit, from the Jury, and the Court, he must take his next turn at
the Press, from whence there issued a Book said to be an Answer to him in
particular, and to all others who set up Reason and Evidence in opposition to
Revelation and Mysteries. This imports that Mr. TOLAND made Reason and
Revelation contradictory. But how well the Author of the said Book, Mr. PETER
BROWN, senior Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin, has proved this or the
rest of his Undertaking, is referred to the impartial Reader's Judgment. If
hard Language would do instead of strong Arguments, we might easily determine
who had the better end of the Controversy; and if you believe Mr. BROWN
himself, he assures you that if it can be shown where one Link of his reasoning
fails, Page 81.
he will make it up again so firm, that it shall never be undone. Indeed I don't
believe Mr. TOLAND designs to give him any trouble of that kind, so that his
Reasons are like to continue as good as ever they were. But Mr. BROWN'S Book
comes now under Consideration as it was one of the Machines invented to render
Mr. TOLAND dangerous or odious. And this he does not only by endeavoring all
along to prove him a most inveterate Enemy to all Revealed Religion; Page 79.
but he expressly solicits the Civil Magistrate to take a course with him, which
looks not very generous in an Answerer, how much concern soever he may pretend
for his Faith. In one place he says, Page 139.
I have no more to do here but to deliver him up into the hands of our
Governors. We may confute his Errors, but it is they only can suppress his
Insolence; we only can endeavor to heal those already infected, it is they
alone can hinder the Infection from spreading further. And afterward he adds,
Page 144.
Here again I would deliver him into the hands of the Magistrate, not moved by
any heat of Passion, but by such a Zeal as becomes every Christian to have for
his Religion. I am fully satisfied this murdering Zeal is not inspired by
Genuine Christianity; and as for his want of Passion, the Inquisitors
themselves show as much seeming Reluctance against killing or maiming of those
whom they procure to be condemned for Heretics. At the very instant they
deliver 'em over to the Secular Power, they address themselves to the
Magistrate in these terms; We most earnestly beseech you, my Lord Judge, that
for the love of God, and from a sense of Piety and Mercy, as well as out of
regard to our Entreaties, you would neither inflict the loss of Life or Limb
upon this miserable Creature Domine Judex, rogamus vos cum omni affectu quo
possimus, ut amore Dei, pietaris and misericordiae intuitu, and nostrorum
interventu precaminum, miserrimo huic nullum mortis vel mutilationis periculum
inferatis.
. Tho at the same time, if the Judge should take the holy Fathers at their word,
they would infallibly excommunicate him for his ready Obedience, whereof they
are so fond in all cases but those of Justice and Clemency, which is the Motto
of their Standard. Here we may observe how strangely Words of a good
signification may be detorted to countenance very ill Actions. Thus to abuse a
Man is in the Language of some termed Zeal, and so it is to murder him in that
of others; nor were the barbarous Irish wanting to sanctify their Massacre by
that Name.

But lest the broaching of simple Heresies should not serve the turn, Mr.
TOLAND must by all means be made the Head of a Sect, and of no ordinary one;
for, if you credit Mr. BROWN, Page 162.
he designs to be as famous an Impostor as MAHOMET. To confirm this Character,
which was well enough invented to amuse the People with vain Terrors, there was
a ridiculous Story handed about, whether true or false God knows; for Mr.
TOLAND remembers nothing of the matter. It Is said, in short, that about the
fourteenth Year of his Age he gravely declared he would be the Head of a Sect
ever he was Thirty; and before he was forty he should make as great a stir in
the Commonwealth as CROMWELL ever did. Risum teneatis. Here Is an old Prophecy
found in a Bog with a witness, and which Mr. HANCOCK and Mr. BROWN have
labored to fulfill in part, that superstitious Folks might trepidly apprehend
the event of the rest. Page 164.
Mr. BROWN says, The real design of this Man is plainly no other than what he
formerly declared, and what he openly affects, to be the Head of a Sect; and
doubts not but he has a great deal more to say, Page 166.
whenever this new Sect of his becomes so numerous that they shall outbrave the
Laws, and labor for a public Reformation of the Mysterious Doctrines of the
Gospel. Would any body believe this, did they not see it plainly owned in
Print? Page 121.
Nay he tells us that he has traced this Heresiarch from the time he first gave
out he would be Head of a Sect before he was thirty Years of Age, till he
became an Author, and from thence to his coming into Ireland to spread his
Heresies, and put his Design in execution. I assure him he wants two Years
still of Thirty, and if his Disciples (as they are called) take not other
measures than he did to erect that same Sect in Ireland, St. PATRICK may
securely possess his Apostleship in that Kingdom till Doomsday, which is an
Honor Mr. TOLAND does not envy him. I ought not by any means to forget here
the Sagacity of a certain Gentleman, who wondered at his Impudence for
presuming to set up a new Religion in their Country, where he had not a foot of
Land; which inclines me to believe he has met with better Records of the
Apostles Possessions than Mr. TOLAND could in all his reading.

Well then, if all this will not do, what shall we make of him next? He must even
be represented as dangerous to the Government; and truly so he is like to be if
Irish Presages hold good, for their Prophecies were never worth a farthing.
Page 172.
How far Men in power, says Mr. BROWN, according to their several Stations, are
obliged to intermeddle in point of Conscience, I shall not now enquire. But
sure I am in point of Policy it is become no less than necessary: for the
Writers of this strain have given broad hints that they are as little friends
to our Government, as our Religion. This Man can say that MAGISTRATES are made
for the PEOPLE, and every one knows what Doctrines of REBELLION Men are wont to
insinuate by this SAYING. O! is it thereabouts then? Why truly, the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience was exploded by this same Saying, which Mr. TOLAND
acknowledges to be one fair Quotation. JAMES the Second was justly abdicated
according to this Saying, because he was an Enemy to the People for whom he was
made a King; and our most Glorious Hero WILLIAM the Third, the Restorer of
Universal Peace and Liberty, was invested with the Supreme Power by the honest
People of Great Britain, for whose good he has indefatigably employed it ever
since, in vindicating, settling, and enlarging their Civil and Religious
Rights. Mr. BROWN has been pleased to say that Mr. TOLAND was proud of running
down three Kingdoms with one cross Question, Page 123.
which is, How can a Man believe what he does not know? and he that does so,
knows not what he believes. Now I would gladly be resolved by him, for whom the
Magistrates are made unless for the People? Were they made for themselves? or
whether the People were made for the Magistrates? Page 172.
But he adds, that this sort of Men deserve to be looked to, that their numbers
grow formidable; and makes little doubt but their design is at length to show
us, Page 173.
That all Dominion as well as Religion is founded in Reason. Let him assure
himself they will never begin to show that, for they have clearly proved it
long ago. What Dominion is not founded in Reason, must be doubtless
unreasonable, and consequently Tyrannical. There was nothing more reasonable
than for Men first to unite themselves into Societies for their mutual Peace
and Security against the Violence or Fraud of others. And as reasonable it was
that they should agree upon certain Rules, or frame Constitutions which were to
be the known Standard of every bodies Actions, and might serve for the Decision
of all their Differences. That there should be Magistrates or indifferent
Persons appointed to preserve those Laws, and see 'em put in execution (not
leaving every Man to be his own Judge) is not less reasonable still. And that
all due Honor and Obedience should be paid to those Governors by their
Subjects, is likewise most highly reasonable; so that I fancy we must
necessarily conclude all just Dominion to be founded in Reason.

At length comes from the North a finished Master of such Politics, and he
doubts not but Mr. TOLAND after all is a Jesuit. But his Book utterly destroys
all the Principles of Popery and Superstition. That Is nothing; for Jesuits to
unsettle us will preach against their own Religion. Now if Mr. TOLAND be a
Jesuit, he is certainly the most dangerous of the Order, and begun extremely
betimes. He was not sixteen Years old when he became as zealous against Popery
as he has ever since continued, and by God's Assistance always will do. From
Redcastle near Londonderry he went in 1687. to the College of Glasco in
Scotland; and upon his departure from it the Magistrates of that City gave him
Recommendatory Letters, wherein they took particular notice of his Affection to
the Protestant Religion. The day before the memorable Battle of the BOINE, he
was created Master of Arts at Edinburgh, and received the usual Diploma or
Certificate from the Professors. Then he came into England, and lived in as
good Protestant Families as any in the Kingdom, till he went to the famous
University of Leyden in HOLLAND to perfect his Studies; and upon his return
from thence lodged in a private House at Oxford till about two Years ago he
came to London, where, it is well known, his Company and Conversation were the
farthest in the World from being Iesuitical. Notwithstanding the whole series
of his Education, as well as his own Genius, did thus run in the most opposite
Channel to Popery; yet in Ireland that malicious Report gained upon some few,
because his Relations were Papists, and that he happened to be so brought up
himself in his Childhood, which was no more an Action of his own, than that he
was born there. So his Countrymen treated him in this respect like his
Majesty's good Subjects of Guernsey, who, when they are in France are called
English Rogues, and in England French Dogs.

The last Effort, except the charge of Socinianism, to blast him, was to make
him pass for a rigid Nonconformist. Mr. TOLAND will never deny but the real
Simplicity of the Dissenters Worship, and the seeming Equity of their
Discipline (into which being so young he could not distinctly penetrate) did
gain extraordinarily upon his Affections, just as he was newly delivered from
the insupportable Yoke of the most pompous and Tyrannical Policy that ever
enslaved Mankind under the name or show of Religion. But when greater
Experience and more Years had a little ripened his Judgment, he easily
perceived that the Differences were not so wide as to appear irreconcilable,
or at least, that Men, who were sound Protestants on both sides, should
barbarously cut one another Throats, or indeed give any disturbance to the
Society about them. And as soon as he understood the late Heats and Animosities
did not totally (if at all) proceed from a Concern for mere Religion, he
allowed himself a latitude in several things, that would have been matter of
scruple to him before. His Travels increased, and the Study of Ecclesiastical
History perfected this Disposition, wherein he continues to this hour: for,
whatever his own Opinion of those Differences be, yet he finds so essential an
Agreement between the French, Dutch, English, Scottish, and other Protestants,
that he is resolved never to lose the benefit of an Instructive Discourse in any
of their Churches upon that score; and it must be a Civil not a Religious
Interest that can engage him against any of these Parties, not thinking all
their private Notions wherein they disagree worth endangering, much less
subverting, the Public Peace of a Nation. If this makes a Man a Nonconformist,
then Mr. TOLAND is one unquestionably. And so he is, if he thinks the
Dissenters ought not to be molested in their Goods or Persons, nor excluded
from any of their Native Rights, because they have a different Set of Thoughts
from him or others, so long as none of their Principles are repugnant to good
Government. He believes them likewise to be a true and considerable part of the
Protestant Religion (for they have demonstrated themselves to be stanch
Patriots) notwithstanding any Error or Weakness whereof they may be guilty in
his Judgment. But this same reason will prove him as sound a Member of the
established Church of England; being persuaded the narrow Sentiments of a few
about Communion is not any professed Doctrine of that Church: nor would there be
any Separation from it in this Realm, were all others of his mind. It Is visible
this Declaration is not made to curry favor with one (as many do) while in
their Hearts they are devoted to the other side. But Mr. TOLAND's Opinion being
frequently demanded as to this Point, he now delivers it once for all; for he
will never condescend to court any body of Men with preference to all others,
further than he sees ground for it: and to this, as his settled Judgment, he is
resolved to adhere, tho it should hazard the inevitable ruin of his Fortune or
Reputation with all Parties.

Atheism is now become so common an Accusation in every Person's mouth, who is
displeased at the Rudeness of others for not complimenting him with their
Assent to his Opinions, that, although in it self it be the most atrocious and
unnatural Crime whereof a reasonable Creature can be guilty, yet is it not
otherwise minded than as a word of course which indicates a world of
Inconsiderateness and Rancor. When Mr. TOLAND used to be traduced in Ireland
for Deism with many other Opinions, and his Friends demanded of his Accusers
where they made those Discoveries in his Writings, the ready Answer always was,
that truly they had never read the Book, and by the Grace of God never would;
but that they received their Information from such as were proper Judges of the
thing. O how inseparable is Popery from Ignorance! And what is the source of
all Popery, but Implicit Belief wherever it is found? As to what the Author
of the Letter to a Convocation-man says of a Congregation de propaganda
Infidelitate, no body needs be ashamed of so good Company as the present Bishop
of Salisbury, the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Commons of England
themselves, whom he not only libels with most false and vile Insinuations, but
even his Majesty's own Person as a Prince of no Religion, which none that had
any Religion durst say of a King who is so great a friend to it by his
Patronage and Example. Mr. TOLAND was once writing an Answer to this Author;
but he laid aside his Papers when he understood that such able Men had
undertaken him, as the Reverend Dr. WAKE, and the Ingenious Author of the
Letter to a Parliament Man.

But some People not being satisfied, it seems, with all that past, and
thinking Mr. TOLAND should never have enough on it, concluded at last to bring
his Book before the Parliament. And therefore on Saturday the 14 th day of
August, it was moved in the Committee of Religion, that the Book entitled
Christianity not Mysterious, should be brought before them, and accordingly it
was ordered that the said Book should the Saturday following be brought into
the Committee. That day the Committee sat not; but the next Saturday, which was
the 28 th day of August, there met a very full Committee, wherein this business
was a great while debated. Several Persons eminent for their Birth, good
Qualities, or Fortunes, opposed the whole Proceeding, being of opinion it was
neither proper nor convenient for them to meddle with a thing of that nature.
But when this Point was without much Argument carried against them, they
insisted that the Passages which gave Offense in the Book should be read; so
those wonderful Objections were made which are cleared in the Letter subjoined:
and then the Committee was adjourned till the 4 th of September. That day,
after several Gentlemen had spoke to those Objections, they urged at last,
according to Mr. TOLAND'S own desire, that he should be called to answer in
Person, to declare the Sense of his Book, and his Design in writing it. But
this favor being peremptorily denied, an Honorable Member went to the Bar,
and offered a Letter to be read which he had received that Morning from Mr.
TOLAND, containing what Satisfaction he intended to give the Committee, had
they thought fit to let him speak for himself. But this was likewise refused,
and the Committee came immediately to those Resolutions, to which the House
agreed after some Debate on Thursday following being the 9 th of September,
viz. That the Book entitled Christianity not Mysterious, Votes of the H. of C.
of Ireland.
containing several Heretical Doctrines contrary to the Christian Religion and
the established Church of Ireland, be publicly burnt by the hands of the
Common Hangman. Likewise, That the Author thereof JOHN TOLAND be taken into the
Custody of the Sergeant at Arms (which he took care to prevent) and be
prosecuted by Mr. Attorney General for writing and publishing the said Book.
They ordered too that an Address should be made to the Lords Justices to give
Directions that no more Copies of that Book be brought into the Kingdom, and to
prevent the selling of those already imported. Their Sentence was executed on
the Book the Saturday following, which was the 11 th of September, before the
Parliament House Gate, and also in the open Street before the Townhouse; the
Sheriffs and all the Constables attending.

One very singular Passage we must not omit, which is, that the same day the
Book was to be condemned there came abroad a printed Sheet, wherein, to terrify
any body from appearing publicly for Mr. TOLAND, were contained the following
words: Now let those consider this, says the Writer of that Paper, whether
within doors or without; and whether the Vindication or even the excusing this
Book or the Author, A Letter upon Mr. Toland's Book to I. C. Esquire page 4.
or the ridiculing or otherwise baffling the just Prosecution or Censure of it
and him, be not truly the denying of our Savior before Men, and whether such
may not assuredly expect to be denied of him in the presence of his Father, and
the holy Angels, and all the World at the last day. This strange Denunciation
had no effect upon those who all along appeared in Mr. TOLAND'S behalf, tho
much out-number'd by those of the contrary Opinion. In the Committee it was
moved by one that Mr. TOLAND himself should be burnt, as by another that he
should be made to burn his Book with his own hands; and a third desired it
should be done before the Door of the House, that he might have the pleasure of
treading the Ashes under his feet.

I forbear making any Remarks here either upon the design of burning Books in
general, or this in particular; nor will I show, as well I might, how fruitless
this sort of proceeding has proved in all Ages, since the Custom was first
introduced by the Popish Inquisitors, who performed that Execution on the Book
when they could not seize the Author whom they had destined to the Flames.
Neither will I insist upon the great Stop and Discouragement which this
Practice brings to all Learning and Discoveries; but, without further
Digression, I shall now leave the Reader to peruse Mr. TOLAND'S Letter, and to
judge for himself whether it would have given him satisfaction, had he been a
Member of the House of Commons.

Mr. TOLAND'S Letter to a Member of the House of Commons in IRELAND, etc.
Dublin, September. 3. 1697. SIR,
WHen the Christian Religion is attacked by Atheists and others, they
constantly charge it with Contradiction or Obscurity; and Mr. TOLAND'S design
in the Publication of his Book was to defend Christianity from such unjust
Imputations, as he more than once declares in his Preface, and as he thinks it
every Christian's Duty to do, according to his Ability or Opportunity. If we
might judge of his Performance by his professed Intentions, we should conclude it
to be extraordinary good; but we must on the other hand reckon it as bad, if,
without further Examination, we regard the strange Outcries that are made
against it both from the Pulpit and the Press. That a Man should be run down
because it is the fashion, or by Interested Persons, and such as are influenced
by 'em, is nothing strange; for one way or other the like happens every day:
but that a Book should be condemned by wholesale, without assigning the
particular Faults or Mistakes in it, and by many that never read it, is visibly
unjust. What has contributed to make Mr. TOLAND (whom neither his Age, nor
Fortune, nor Preferment renders formidable) the Object of so much Heat and
Noise, and after what manner his Enemies of all sorts have treated him under a
zealous pretense, he is like very speedily to inform such of the World as will
please to concern themselves. But not considering the Honorable House of
Commons, or your self in particular, among the number of his Adversaries but as
his Judges, he thinks convenient to clear those few Points which are reported
to afford matter of Exception to some in the Committee of Religion. But, before
this be done, he desires that two or three Particulars may be a little
considered.

Mr. TOLAND, in the first place, is of opinion it portends much Happiness to
the Nation, that the Commons (who have all the right imaginable to it) should
take the cognizance of such things into their own Hands. And tho his Book
should, as it is very probable, happen to fall under their Censure, yet his love
to Mankind cannot but make him extremely pleased with the Consequences he
foresees must necessarily follow from such an authentic Precedent in this
Country, where it was most peculiarly wanting. Nor does he think it more
reasonable for him to be angry at his private ill luck, than it would be for
some to be out of love with Parliaments themselves (which is the best
Constitution in the Universe) because they are mistaken sometimes, and that an
Act is repealed in one Session which was established in another; not
considering that such an Inconvenience is infinitely overballanc'd by several
excellent Laws, and by the Remedy that may likewise be had to this pretended
Disorder from that very Court, upon better Information or Temper.

Secondly, Mr. TOLAND does not complain that he alone in the Kingdom is
disturbed for his Opinion, but is heartily glad that no more are troubled upon
that account. For as he takes Persecution to be one of the chief Marks and
Pillars of the Antichristian Church, so he looks upon an impartial Liberty of
writing and speaking whatever is not destructive of Civil Society, to be the
greatest advantage of any Country, whether the Learning, or the Commerce, or
the very Peace and Tranquillity thereof be considered. Yet it cannot but look
mighty odly to indifferent Persons, Left out in the Original Copy.
that all the Dissenters from the Established Church, that the Papists who
pervert Christianity it self, that several declared Socinian, ay and Iacobite
Pamphlets should escape the burning Zeal of those, who so furiously prosecute
one young Man only for the suspected Consequences of his Book, as if the very
Being or Destruction of all Religion depended upon the fate of him, or his
Writings.

Thirdly, As for the Errors commonly laid to Mr. TOLAND'S charge, they are so
various and inconsistent with one another, that no Man of ordinary sense could
possibly hold them all at a time; and being credited by his Enemies without
book, he may with more Justice deny than they can affirm them. He Is not
therefore obliged to take notice of any thing but what is alleged in formal
words, or plainly inferred from his Book. Indeed some Consequences an Author
might not perceive, which should render him the more excusable; but Mr. TOLAND
confesses he foresaw several Consequences of his Book, even to part of the
Opposition with which it has met, tho not that (after the Pulpits, Presses, and
Juries) the Commons of Ireland should likewise honor it with their
Animadversion.

Now what is said to have been objected in the Committee is, First, That the
very Title CHRISTIANITY NOT MYSTERIOVS is Heretical. Whether the Committee
decrees a new or declares an old Heresy, Mr. TOLAND neither knows nor is much
concerned to understand, being conscious to himself of neither. If the Title be
made good in the Book, it is orthodox or sound enough; and if not* yet he is
still to seek for the Heresy of it. If it be an old Opinion; Left out in the
Original Copy.
others would gladly be informed in which Century it was first taught, who the
Author of it might be, or by what Council it was condemned: and if it be a new
Notion, they desire likewise to know whether the House of Commons alone can
decree it Heresy, being yet perfect strangers to any such Power claimed by that
Honorable Body. But it is affirmed that by his Title he rejects the Mysteries
of the Gospel. If by Mysteries be meant the Doctrines themselves, he denies
none of them; but that after Revelation they are not mysterious or obscure, he
still maintains for the Honor of Christianity. A great many without doors very
wisely conclude that he believes not the Doctrines, because he thinks they are
plain, and therefore the more credible; for that is all he means by not
mysterious. But some People, otherwise credulous enough, believe no body
capable of rendering that clear and easy, which to themselves seems difficult or
insuperable.

It was likewise objected that he makes a doubt whether the Scriptures be of
Divine Authority. That bare Expression, If the Gospel be really the Word of
God, imports no such matter, but very frequently the contrary; as for example,
If the Gospel be true this frame of the World shall be dissolved, which is not
to question, but more emphatically to assert the truth of the Proposition. But
this, I confess, is nothing to the case before us. The words in the Conclusion
of the Book are these, Page 170.
Nothing contradictory or inconceivable, however made an Article of Faith, can
be contained in the Gospel, if it be really the Word of God: for I have
hitherto argued only upon this Supposition, for the Reason to be seen toward
the end of the Preface. The sense of the words then must be determined by that
Reason; and the Passage referred to in the Preface is this, viz. In the
following Discourse which is the first of three, Pres. p. 24.
etc. the Divinity of the New Testament is taken for granted. In the next
Discourse, etc. I attempt a particular and rational Explanation of the reputed
Mysteries of the Gospel. And in the third, I demonstrate the Verity of Divine
Revelation against Atheists and all Enemies of Revealed Religion. Now is it not
something strange that a Man should question what he takes for granted, and
which the Method he followed would not permit him to prove before his time,
that is, not form the Conclusion before the Premises? In one place he
positively affirms the Scriptures to contain the brightest Characters of
Divinity; Page 33.
but that the force of Calumny may evidently appear, let this other Passage of
the same Book be considered: Page 46.
What we discoursed of Reason before, says he, and Revelation now being duly
weighed, all the Doctrines and Precepts of the New Testament (if it be indeed
Divine) must consequently agree with Natural Reason and our own ordinary Ideas.
THIS every considerate and well-dispos'd Person will find by the careful
perusal of it, and whoever undertakes this Task will confess the Gospel not to
be HIDDEN from us, nor afar off; but very nigh us in our Mouths and in our
HEARTS. But this whole Chapter must have been transcribed, were all that is to
our purpose in it to be nicely quoted; for every word of it from No 22. to the
end, is a Justification of the Method and Style of the New Testament. Yet lest
any suspicion of Fallacy might remain where the Particle IF occurs, I demand
what Declaration can be conceived in stronger terms than the following Passage?
for you shall be troubled with no more, tho I might easily cite forty others
relating to this Head. The words are, Whether or no Christianity is mysterious
ought to be naturally decided by the New Testament, Page 88.
wherein the Christian Faith is originally contained. I heartily desire to put
the Case upon this Issue, I appeal to this Tribunal; for did I not infinitely
prefer the Truth I learn from these sacred Records to all other Considerations,
I should never assert that there are no Mysteries in Christianity. The
Scriptures have engaged me in this Error, if it be one; and I will sooner be
reputed Heterodox with these only on my side, than to pass for Orthodox with
the whole World, and have them against me.

It was likewise objected that Mr. TOLAND showed not a due Respect to CHRIST,
because he always styles him in his Book barely CHRIST, or at most only JESUS
CHRIST. If this be any Disrespect, the most Orthodox Divines are as guilty of
it in their Writings; and the Apostles themselves speak of him without any
additional Titles a great many times in the Gospel. It Is otherwise, I grant,
when some special occasion requires them to be more express; and when Mr.
TOLAND was declaring the Head of his Church, he says, Pref. p. 26.
I am neither of Paul, nor of Cephas, nor of Apollos, but of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST alone, who is the Author and Finisher of my Faith. And here I cannot
forbear admiring how Mr. TOLAND should be deemed an Arian or Socinian, seeing,
for ought appears in his Book, he may lay a better Claim to any other Sect,
except the Papists, than to them; for these three are the only Parties he
opposes by name. But if his Religion is to be really discovered by his Book,
it is utterly impossible he should be either an Arian or Socinian. They both of
'em (from different Notions) believe JESUS CHRIST to be a mere Creature God,
which Mr. TOLAND does not; and, to mend one Absurdity by a greater, they join
in paying their Deify'd Creature Divine Worship, which Mr. TOLAND judges
impious and ridiculous. His own words are these; Tho the Socinians disown this
Practice Page 27.
(of admitting Contradictions in Religion) I am mistaken if either they or the
Arians can make their Notions of a Dignified and Creature God capable of Divine
Worship, appear more reasonable than the extravagancies of other Sects touching
the Article of the Trinity; such as the Whimsies of EVTYCHES, GENTILIS, and the
rest. In short, Mr. TOLAND had no natural occasion to declare his Sentiments
relating to CHRIST's Person, that and the other particular Doctrines of the
Gospel being the Subject of the second and third Books he promises, and by
which alone his Conformity or Dissent with the Common Christianity is to be
discerned. Nor had his Adversaries from the Press run into so many gross
Mistakes, and been at the trouble of several no less unhappy than needless
Conjectures, had they but Patience or Phlegm enough to attend the Publication
of those Pieces.

It was objected also that he slighted the Sacraments (which is a term he never
uses) by making them bare Ceremonies. That he called 'em any where mere
Ceremonies he absolutely denies, tho he now affirms with all Christians, that
the Actions of breaking Bread and washing with Water are as much Ceremonial
under the New Testament, as Circumcision or the Passover were under the Old.
But when Mr. TOLAND had a just occasion to mention the Sacraments, tho not to
declare his Opinion concerning their Nature or Efficacy, it is evident he speaks
there of those numerous Ceremonies of Human Institution which were added to 'em
by the mistaken Zeal or Prudence of the Primitive Christians, Page 153.
who, as he says, not having the least Precedent for any Ceremonies from the
Gospel, excepting Baptism and the Supper, strangely disguised and transformed
these by adding to them the Pagan Mystic Rites; and of these appending
Ceremonies he gives a large Catalogue in that Chapter. But he is so far from
making any comparison between Christianity and the Orgies of BACCHUS, as was
likewise alleged, that on the contrary he severely handles those who blended
such Corruptions with pure Christianity. Page 153.
Thus, says he, lest Simplicity, the noblest Ornament of the Truth, should
expose it to the Contempt of Unbelievers, Christianity was put upon an equal
level with the Mysteries of CERES, or the Orgies of BACCHUS. To this may be
added another Passage, where he affirms he could draw his Parallel between
Heathenism and those early Superstitions much larger, Page 162, 163.
to show how Christianity became mysterious, and how so Divine an Institution
did, through the Craft and Ambition of Priests and Philosophers, degenerate
into mere Paganism. Here, you see, it is not the Christian Religion, but the
unwarrantable Additions to it, wherein JESUS CHRIST never had any hand, which
he compares with the Mysteries of CERES and the Orgies of BACCHUS. And what,
pray, is the main body of the Popish, Eastern, or other Superstitions, but the
continuance of those Rites of Heathen or Jewish Original which Mr. TOLAND
justly explodes? Or is any body that draws a Parallel between Heathenism and
Popery thought disaffected to Christianity? Indeed professed or disguised Papists
will accuse him of such a Crime, but no understanding Protestant can ever be
guilty of so much Weakness.

It Is possible more Exceptions were made to Mr. TOLAND'S Book in the Committee,
or these not all in this Order; but these were all whereof he could inform
himself, and of which he gives the most compendious and satisfactory account he
can: being as ready to do the same in relation to all other Objections that
shall fairly come to his knowledge. The greatest Hardship he complains of is,
that, being an Inhabitant of England, he should be molested in Ireland (where
he was only fortuitously born) for a Book he published in another Country. His
Errand hither, God knows, was neither to propagate nor receive any Doctrines,
new or old; and as he was far from ever designing to fix his constant Residence
here, so he thinks himself liable to be disturbed in any other place, whither
his Curiosity or Business may lead him, as in this Kingdom; which is a way of
proceeding hitherto unheard of in the World. I shall give you no further
trouble when I have told you, that I resolve always to continue an unalterable
Friend to Liberty, an Advocate for Religion without Superstition, a true Lover
of my Country, and in particular, Sir, your most humble Servant,

JOHN TOLAND.


THere was enough said in the preceding Letter concerning the Socinianism laid
to Mr. TOLAND'S Charge, and I doubt very much whether now there be any
Socinians in England; I am sure, no considerable Body of them: for the Theology
of the Unitarians, who vulgarly pass under that name, is very different from
that of SOCINUS. But these Unitarians in one of their latest Prints disown any
Service intended their Cause by Mr. TOLAND'S Book; and all Sects, we know, are
ready upon the least apparent Conformity to augment their own Numbers,
especially with such as they seem to value for their Learning or other
Qualifications. In The Agreement of the Unitarians with the Catholic Church
occurs the following Paragraph. P. 54, 55.
The (Bishop of Worcester's) eighth and tenth Chapters, are employed in
opposing, and, as he thinks, in exposing and ridiculing some Interpretations of
a few Texts of Scripture by the Unitarians; and attacking a few Paragraphs in
Mr. TOLAND'S Book, Christianity not Mysterious. I know not what it was to his
Lordship's purpose to fall upon Mr. TOLAND'S Book. But if he would needs attack
the Book, he should have dealt fairly. He should have discussed the main
Argument in it, and not carpt only at a few Passages; and those too so mangled
and deformed by his Representation of them, that I dare to affirm Mr. TOLAND
does not know his own Book in the Bishop's Representation of it. I do not
perceive, to speak truly, but that Book still stands in its full strength; if
it has not also acquired a farther Reputation, by occasion of this so
unsuccessful nibling at it. But suppose the Bishop had disarmed the Gentleman,
what is that to us? Do we offer this Book against the Trinity of the Realists?
Was it written with Intention to serve us? Does it contain any of our
Allegations from Reason, against the Trinity of Philoponus, Joachim, and
Gentilis? We desire him to answer to the Reasons in our own Books against the
Trinity of the Tritheists. But to these he says not a word, but only falls upon
Mr. TOLAND'S Book; in which, or for which we are not in the least concerned.
Nor do I think the Learned and Ingenious Author will hold himself to be
interested to defend that Christianity not Mysterious with which his Lordship
presents us. So far that celebrated Unitarian.

A good Temper and sound Judgment usually go together, and if the absence of
the former be no Demonstration that the latter is also wanting, yet
questionless it creates a very reasonable suspicion of it; for a bad Cause is
generally supported by Violence and ill Arts, while TRUTH establishes it self
only by Lenity and Persuasion. This is so certain that when an undiscerning
Person happens to be engaged on the right side, and employs Force or Calumny in
its defense, we always find he does it infinitely more harm than good. That
such as receive Gain or Honor by any thing should oppose those who go about to
destroy it, tho with design to introduce a better in the room of it, is no
great wonder tho it be manifestly unjust. Thus the Silversmiths of Ephesus
headed by DEMETRIUS raised a mighty Tumult against the Apostle PAUL for ruining
their Trade, which was solely maintained by Lies and Impostures at the expense
of the Peoples Credulity. The Primitive Christians were represented by the
Heathen Priests as Atheistical, Rebellious, Incestuous, and in a word, polluted
with all manner of Wickedness and Impiety; by which nefarious Artifices they
procured those innocent Persons to be cruelly persecuted with Infamy,
Confiscation, and Death it self in all its shapes. The Waldenses, Wicclifists,
Hussites, and the first Reformers were treated after the same manner by the
Church of Rome; and when they could not seize their Persons, they never failed
to load 'em with horrid, black, and monstrous Aspersions, that they might not
be wanting to prejudice 'em all manner of ways, as if this had been the very
Method prescribed in the Gospel to reduce the Erroneous. Thus we read such
accounts of LUTHER and CALVIN'S Lives published by the Monks of those Times, as
paint 'em worse than Devils, and that make their Doctrine as different from
what we know it to be, as the Historians were from telling Truth.

I am sorry to observe among us any Remains of that implacable and bitter
Spirit, tho such as distinguish themselves by their eminent Virtues retain no
tincture of so mean and base a Disposition. The Character which that most
excellent Person the late Archbishop of Canterbury has left on Record of the
Socinians (when he was strenuously arguing against their Opinions) ought to be
a Model which no body should be ashamed to imitate. He did not think to lessen
his own Reputation, or to hurt his Cause, when he frankly acknowledged them to
be a Pattern of the fair way of disputing, Four Sermon. against the Socin. p. 57,
58.
and debating matters of Religion without Heat and unseemly Reflections upon
their Adversaries. They generally argue matters with that Temper and Gravity,
says he, and with that freedom from Passion and Transport which becomes a
serious and weighty Argument: and for the most part they reason closely and
clearly, with extraordinary guard and caution, with great dexterity and
decency; and yet with smartness and subtlety enough, with a very gentle heat
and few hard words: Virtues to be praised wherever they are found, yea even in
an Enemy, and very worthy our Imitation. Yet this great Man, who so heartily
represents his Adversaries, was himself most scurrilously and unworthily
handled by his own and the Enemies of the Government. And here I must do
Justice to Dr. PAIN lately deceased, who, as he tells the World in his Letter
to the Bishop of Rochester, was desired by his Grace the present Archbishop of
Canterbury to answer Mr. TOLAND; and why should not every body that thinks him
in the wrong take the same liberty of writing against him, as he did to publish
his Thoughts before? Now if Mr. TOLAND'S own Judgment ought to be received in
this case, the Doctor has in his two Sermons said more against him than the
Bishop of Worcester, Mr. NORRIS, the Anonymous Oxonian, the Author of the
Occasional Paper, Mr. BEVERLY, Mr. GAILHARD, Mr. BROWN, or any other Answerer;
and yet instead of treating him like a Dominican Inquisitor, he uses, with some
little warmth, such Grave and Christian Language as shows his Metropolitan's
Judgment and Moderation in pitching upon him, as well as his own Skill and
Sincerity in the management of his Trust.

We must hold this Mystery of Faith, Dr. Payne's Sermon. p. 65, etc.
says Dr. PAIN (speaking to his Auditory) with a Christian good Temper, and
not lose that while we are contending for the other; nor let our Contentions
grow so warm and intemperate, so fierce and cruel, as to forget and violate the
plain Morals of Christianity, while we are over earnestly disputing for the
Faith of it; or perhaps only for some false and mistaken, or at least some
useless Opinions, and over-nice and subtle Controversies about it. This has
been the fault of those who have contended more for Victory than Truth, and
more for their own Credit and Vainglory than the Christian Faith; who tho they
may be in the right, as it is ten to one that they are not ( for Truth seldom
dwells with such a Spirit of Rage, and Pride, and Passion, but rather with a
quite other Temper) yet they greatly disserve the Cause they so unduly manage.
And as they are never like to convince their Adversaries, so they give others
just ground to suspect that they supply want of better Reason and stronger
Arguments with weak and impotent Calumny, with undecent and unbecoming
Reflections. This is as Criminal and as Unchristian as the Error or the Heresy
they are so zealous against; and it is to be doubted it is rather a false Fire
and a hypocritical Zeal, not for the Cause of God so much as their own; and
that this is kindled not from the Altar, but some other place, and blown up by
some private PIQUE and sinister Designs, that thus blazes out to such an
outrageous degree as to consume and destroy, not only its Adversaries if it
were in its power, but even the most vital and substantial Parts of
Christianity, even Peace, Love, and Charity; and contends for the Christian
Faith with such a most Diabolical and Unchristian Temper. This is very far from
the Spirit of Christ and Christianity; and however precious the Faith be, yet
the Apostle tells us, if we had all Faith, and understood all Mysteries, and
all Knowledge, yet without Charity we are nothing, however great we may be in
our own Thoughts. And such a Zeal of Sowrness and Bitterness, as it is
generally without Knowledge, so it is always without Religion; and tho it hold
the Mystery of Faith (and do not rather pervert and corrupt it) yet, to be
sure, this is not, according to the Apostle's Advice, in a pure Conscience.

There needs no more to be added in this place but a sincere acknowledgment
from Mr. TOLAND, that (notwithstanding any Prejudices he may be supposed to
entertain against Ireland) he met there, and had the honor to be acquainted
with a great many worthy Gentlemen, who by their extraordinary Parts,
Education, and Virtues, merit to be distinguished in any Country of the World.
He knows several Men and Women (and doubtless there are or should be more) who
don't confine all Salvation to the narrow Limits of a Sect, nor mistake the
affected Phrases of any Party for the only true Christianity: who neither hate
nor despise others for differing from them in Opinion, no more than in Features
or Complexion; knowing that no body can believe as he pleases, and it were the
highest Injustice to expect a Man should profess with his Mouth what in his
Heart he detests: Persons who can live easily with all Men, as being of one
Race, and fellow-Citizens of the same World; not denying any body the liberty
of improving the Happiness of the Society by his Invention, Learning, Industry,
or Example: And who, in a word, are not willing to deprive themselves of real
and certain Advantages for the sake of uncertain, contested, or useless
Speculations; as if one that wants it should reject the profer'd Service of an
honest and able Accountant, because he believes not a World in the Moon; or not
allow an Ingenious Man's Conversation to be agreeable, for ridiculing the Fable
of St. PATRICK'S Purgatory. As for the Public Peace, which is pretended to be
endangered by a TOLERATION, it has been disturbed or subverted in all Ages and
Places of the World, not either by Conscientious or Enquiring Men, but by those
who no less dogmatically than tyrannically impose upon their Understandings;
and who, in spite of all their Disguises, appear to be much more concerned for
SOVEREIGNTY than REFORMATION. It Is likewise clear as the Sun they were Mr.
TOLAND'S Enemies that made, or continue all the needless stir about his Book,
and not his Friends, who only acted defensively for the Common Liberty of
Mankind, but not upon his private account. Nor does he (who, one would think,
should know it best) believe any Persons in Ireland or elsewhere favored him a
jot the more for writing that Treatise; and if they did, he was never yet
informed of this accessory Kindness either by themselves, or others by their
Deputation: neither does he make returns of Love or Respect to any body living
upon this mere Consideration.

Qui statuit aliquid, part inaudita altera,
AEQUUM licet statuerit, haud AEQUUS est.
Seneca.
FINIS.

