TO THE Supreme Authority of England the Parliament Assembled. The Humble
Petition of diverse well-affected people, for themselves and in the behalf of
many thousands in this Nation.
SHOWS,
THat whereas in reference to their former Petition, humbly presented to your
Honors in December. 1650. desiring that all, both Free and Copyhold Lands in
your Dominions, may be made subject to pay all the owners or Inheritors just
debts, according to equity and reason, howsoever there be some kind of law yet
in full force to the contrary, it has pleased God so to move your hearts, as
that ye have Voted a very happy and hopeful Act for that purpose.

That in regard many, both of your Honors truest friends in all these
troubles, and other honest Creditors who are Imprisoned, and in great
distress, through want of that long expected Act, shall notwithstanding have
no relief thereby of their Debtors (whereof most are not only at liberty, but
many of them live richly, and some prodigally) unless your honors be pleased
likewise, to make the beginning of the time in the aforementioned Act, to be
according as was humbly desired in their former Petition, viz. either some
years before, or at least, about the end of Q. Elizabeth's Reign.

The premises considered, it is still your Petitioners humble and earnest
desires. That as your Honors have been pleased in much compassion to this
distressed Nation, to Vote such a just and needful Act, as that all Free and
Copyhold Lands may be made liable to pay all the Owners or Inheritors just
Debts, so ye will be also pleased, to vouchsafe that just extent of time for
the aforesaid hopeful Act to begin, which in their former Petition is humbly
desired, That both your Honors own true friends, and all those Creditors,
Prisoners and others, may thereby be relieved, who through want thereof are
exceedingly impoverished, and like to be speedily ruined, if either the same
Act should begin at a later time then is Petitioned, or otherwise be longer
delayed.

So shall they have, both new matter, and further cause to pray, and stand for
your Honors happiness and safety, in all your just Proceedings, whiles they
live or breath.

