A PLEA FOR Anti-Paedobaptists, Against the Vanity and Falsehood of SCRIBLED
PAPERS, ENTITLED, The Anabaptists Anatomized and silenced in a Public
Dispute at Abergaveny in Monmouth- shire Sept. 5. 1653. Betwixt John Tombs,
John Cragg, and Henry Vaughan, touching INFANT BAPTISM.

By John Tombs, B.D.

JOB II. 2, 3. Should not the multitude of words be answered? and should a man
full of talk be justified? Should thy lies (or devices) make men hold their
peace? and when thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed?

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, and are to be sold at his house at the sign of
Sir John Old-Castle in Py-Corner, 1654.

A Plea for Anti-Paedobaptists against the Vanity and Falsehood of SCRIBLED
PAPERS.
SECT. I.
The reason of this writing is rendered.

THere came newly to my hands a Pamphlet, wherein the Intitler speaks like a
vain braggadochio, as if the book had ripped up the Anabaptists (as he terms
them) and like a Prelate had silenced them, though there was but one whom with
any face it could be pretended that he was anatomized or silenced, who yet
speaks and writes for the truth, which these Opponents do endeavor to
disgrace, and rejoiceth that he lives to find that these men have no other
thing to charge him with than his contending for a reformation of that profane
abuse of infant-sprinkling, and that they have no other encouragement from him
to persist in their Paedobaptism, but a fond hope of his returning to that
sinful practice. The Libel has a Frontispice, which pretends to show the
manner of the Anabaptists dipping, but most falsely, since it represents it to
the eyes of the Beholders as if they held persons by the heels when they
baptize them, which is otherwise than their practice. The pretended manner of
Laying on of hands, and Washing of feet, is unknown to me, if they do use it,
yet they have such likely proofs from Heb. 6. 2. and our Saviors practice and
command John 13. as might have deterred the Author of this Frontispice from
exposing the ordinance of Baptism, and those other rites, to contempt, had he
any reverence to holy things, and regard to Chrisis appointment. But the
Frontispice of Dr. Featlies book, and this, with the Epistles and other
passages, do give occasion to intelligent persons to conceive that this sort of
men do make but a sport of Christ's Ordinance, and that they have little mind to
search for, or receive truth, but to expose them that are for believers
baptism, and against infantsprinkling, to the contempt of light and profane
wits, and to the hatred of the ignorant and superstitious common people. And I
conceive that this book is published by men of that spirit, who seek to make
odious the endeavored reformation of ignorance, superstition, profaneness,
and ungodliness, which abounds in those parts, and to uphold those either loose
or formal pretended Ministers, who take upon them to teach, but do indeed, as
Elymas the Sorcerer Acts 13. pervert the right way of the Lord. Surely did they
seek the truth in love, they would not so insult over tender consciences as
they do, encourage the looser sort, and deter the enquiring souls from the
ways of Christ, For my self, as I have found from others, so I deprehend in
these men the same unrighteous spirit, in their reporting my answers, and
publishing them in print, without my revising of them, though it were proposed,
and as I remember yielded, by one, that in a private way, I should have his
arguments sent to me in writing, and for the other after 2 Copies of his Sermon
sent me, yet I wrote to know whether he would own them, nor did publish any
thing though I had sent some animadversions on the notes I received, of which I
was told one copy was showed to Mr. Cragg himself, and not disowned by him. And
I do account it a shameful practice which these men, and another before have
used toward me, that after I have been drawn to a verbal extemporary dispute,
and no common notary agreed on, yet my answers are published by them without
ever allowing me the sight of them, that I might either own them or amend them,
before the printing and publishing them. But I see, faction so prevails with
them, that like as if they were of the Romanists minds, they allow themselves
liberty to use any arts as pious frauds to bear down the truth of
Antipaedobaptism. And this they do with so much insolency as may stir up the
inconsiderate to trample upon their Antagonist, and create prejudice against
the truth. Which has necessitated me in this have to write this.

SECT. II.
A view of the Epistles is taken.

WHo the J. T. P. or J. W. is I know not. What the first Epistle says of
Austins rule, it is neither true, for then the observation of an Easter, and
sundry other superstitious rites should be from the Apostles, nor if it were
true, is it true of infant-sprinkling that the whole Church held it, sprinkling
being not used in sundry ages instead of baptism, and infant baptism, as it is
now used, opposed by Tertullian, and Gregory Nazianzen, and only the Popish
doctrine (disclaimed by Mr. Cragg) of the necessity of baptizing infants to
their inheriting heaven, taught by the writers called Fathers. As false it is
that the baptizing believers (called by these Anabaptism) had its spring and
rise from Nicolas Stork, and others there named, it being commanded by Christ,
practiced by the Apostles, continued in the first ages without any
infant baptism, and when infants were baptized, it was very rarely, only in
case of danger of the neernesse of death to the infant, and when reformation of
other Popish abuses was sought, the reformation of this was sought with the
first, some hundreds of years before Luther. As vain is the assignation of the
causes of Anabaptism (which is indeed true baptism) whereas the true cause is
the shining forth of light from the Scriptures, and other Authors, not
discerned formerly as now.

The true reason why our books and practice are permitted is, because they have
at least so much appearance of truth as is sufficient to make wise men to let
them alone, lest they happily should fight against God. The Epistlers reasons are
but his own ignorant surmises.

Though disputes are useful, yet such unworthy artifices as I find in and after
them are a just reason for me to wave them, especially with such men as I have
met with. What the success has been of the disputes mentioned its not so
proper to me to enquire. The publishing of that at Bewdley in so unbrotherly
manner, has, I imagine, diverted many from the truth, who if they had not been
willing to be deluded, had never been caught with such a cheat as is the
mock-titled book, Plain Scripture proof for infant baptism.

The rest of the disputes have not gained (that I hear) any credit to
Paedobaptism, but on the contrary, among the intelligent. It is true I was
importuned to visit some friends at Abergaveny, and did preach there, and some
of the things the letter mentions I spoke, and do still avouch.

The two men mentioned were unknown to me, I slighted neither, though being
wearied with preaching I did forbear to speak much, and was willing to get into
a dry house from the rain. I was willing to have conference with Mr. Vaughan,
who seemed modest and intelligent. The other Opponent I found before to be a
man of talk, who could not blush.

That which the second Epistle writes of my being wounded, and vaunting, is
merely fabulous, and I think the like of the short time of conceiving the
Dispute and Sermon. It displeases me not, that the business should be truly
stated, which is the end of this writing, though it displease me that such
unworthy tricks are used to deceive people, as those which appear in the
publishing this Disputation and Sermon. I intend not to lengthen the business
by insisting on the falsity of the reports of my Answer: It is not improbable I
might in five hours dispute with one who talked so fast as to give no time to
consider of what he said, answer not so clearly as I would, had I had the
arguments to view and examine deliberately. I presume it will be sufficient,
for clearing truth, if either I show how my Answers are misreported, or how
they are to be amended.

SECT. III.
Mr. Vaughans dispute is answered.

TO begin with Mr. Vaughans dispute. Had it been framed into a Syllogism it had
been thus. They that were admitted lawfully into the Covenant of grace by
Circumcision, may be admitted into the Covenant of grace by Baptism; But
infants were admitted lawfully into the covenant of grace by Circumcision;
Therefore they may be lawfully admited into the covenant of grace by Baptism.

To which had it been thus formed I should have said.

1. That it is false that either by circumcision or baptism infants or other
persons are admitted into the Covenant of Grace, yea Paedobaptists themselves
suppose they are in the Covenant of Grace before, and therefore they are
baptized: Nor does Mr. Vaughan show how persons may be in Congruous sense said
to be admitted into the Covenant of Grace.

2. If it were true, yet it is certain that infants of unbelievers were
admitted by circumcision as well as infants of believers, and so his medium
proves as well the baptizing of unbelievers infants taken into a believers
house, as believers. But in the manner he framed his reason I denied the
consequence.

And when he urged, it must be either because the Covenant of grace made with
Abraham and his seed, is not the same in substance, withthat which is now
actually in force with believers and their children, or secondly because
baptism succeeds not in the room of circumcision, I did rightly say I could
deny your division. For there is another reason, viz. because there is not the
same command of baptizing infants as there was of circumcising them, and yet
that the disputation might proceed, I denied the consequence, for both those
reasons.

And to what was replied I answered rightly, that the Covenant now in force
according to Gal. 3. 14. was not to the natural seed of Abraham, but the
spiritual; nor is it true, That all the children of Abraham were circumcised,
for the females were not, or that They that were circumcised were consequently
admitted into the Covenant. For even Mr. Vaughan presently tells us, That
Ishmael though circumcised belonged not to the promise. Now what is it to be
admitted into the Covenant, but to be admitted to the promise or participation
of the Covenant? what he replied further, That the Covenant Genesis 17. 7. was
made alike, in the same extent and latitude, promiscuously with all the seed of
Abraham, even the natural, is most palpably false. For none but the spiritual
seed of Abraham, by believing, as he did, have the promise of righteousness,
which is the covenant of grace, and Ishmael is expiesly excluded Genesis 17. 19,
20, 21. and he grants himself, None but the children of Isaac were children of
the promise, nor were the Jews, who were broken off because of their own
unbelief, Romans 11. 20. comprehended in the covenant of Grace. Romans 9. 8.
proves clearly that the Covenant made to Abraham and his seed as it was a
covenant of Evangelical grace was not made to all his natural seed, and so not
to any of his natural seed, because they were by natural generation of him, but
because elect of God.

And it is false which Mr. Vaughan says, The children of Isaac (he should have
said Isaac, and after him Jacob) are not called children of the promise in
regard of any peremptory election, or aesignation to faith and salvation. For
the contrary is manifest from verses 11, 12, 13. Nor is it any thing contrary
to the absolute decree of reprobation, that Paul lamented, desired and prayed
for the Israelites, but his lamentation does rather prove it that they were
rejected, and desires and prayers may be even for that which may not be, as
when Christ prayed to have the cup pass from him. His reasons why the children
of Isaac are called children of the promise, are not to his purpose but against
him.

For 1. He does thereby tacitly imply that none but the children of Isaac were
children of the promise, and therefore none but they in the Covenant of grace.

2. If the reasons of the children of Isaac their being called children of the
promise were the inheritance of Canaan, and the descent of Christ, then only
Jacob was a child of the promise, not Esau, and so it remains, the Covenant
Genesis 17. 7. was not made to all the circumcised, nor they by circumcision
admitted into the Covenant Genesis 17.

3. After his explication, it is clear that the Covenant of grace made with
Abraham and his seed is not the same in substance with that which is now
actually in force with believers and their children, contrary to what he said
before.

4. After this doctrine none are now children of the promise, since there are
none that inherit Canaan according to that promise, nor from whom Christ
descends, and then if the promise be the same with the covenant of grace, none
are now admitted into the same Covenant, and consequently none to be baptized,
according to Mr. Vaughans reasoning.

What he says he might have added, That if none but the elect and faithful can
be admitted into the Covenant, there is no subject left for the ordinance of
baptism.

I deny it. It goes upon this mistake, that none are to be admitted but those
that are admitted into the Covenant of grace, and known to be so: Whereas
persons that are disciples and believers by profession at least, are to be
admitted to baptism, and no other ordinarily, whether they be admitted into the
Covenant of Grace, or not. Nor are we to baptize upon A judgment of Charity,
of thinking no evil, for then we must baptize Turks infants as well as
Christians, nor upon a faith in the seed, or the parents actual faith, but
their own profession.

It is not true, no not according to Mr. Vaughan's own grant, that they were
admitted into the same Covenant by Circumcision, into which we are now admitted
by Baptism, For we are not admitted into that Covenant which has the Promise
of the inheriitng the Land of Canaan, and descent of Christ from us, which he
before acknowledged to be promised in the Covenant, Genesis 17.

Neither need we say, that the circumcised had the righteousness of faith
inherently in themselves, or that of their Parents imputed to them, or that
Circumcision was a false seal. For neither is it said Romans 4. 11. of any man's
Circumcision but Abraham's in his own person, nor of his, that it was the seal
of the righteousness of faith to any but a believer. This was my answer, not as
Mr. Vaughan mistook me, that Circumcision was a seal only of Abraham's own
faith in particular. Nor is there a word Romans 4. 13. Genesis 177. Acts 2. 39. to
prove that the Covenant or Promise was the same, and alike, to Abraham and his
seed, and to us believers, and to our children. Nor is it true that 1 Cor. 7.
14. is meant of covenant holiness of children, nor does he bring any proof that
it is so. For that which he dictates, that there is certainly some special
privilege set forth to the children of believers, accruing to them from
believing Parents, is false, the Text ascribing nothing to the faith of the one
Parent, but to the conjugal relation. And for that which he says, it was no
news to tell them that they might have the lawful use one of another, I say,
though they might not doubt whether they might lawfully use one another when
both were unbelievers, yet it is manifest the believer doubted whether it might
be so still, and therefore the Apostles telling them it might, was an apposite
resolution of their doubt, whether it be to be called news or no: and their not
doubting of the legitimation of their issue is the very Reason from whence the
Apostle by an Argument ad hominem infers, the continuance of their lawful
copulation. And what I said of the use of the words sanctified and holy, 1 Timothy
4. 5. 1 Thessalonians 4 3 4 7. was right; nor do I think Mr. Vaughan would have urged
that Text, as he does, if he had read what I have written in the first part of
my Antipaedobaptism, in which is an ample disquisition of the meaning of that
Text, to which I refer Mr. Vaughan, and other Readers, who shall be willing to
search out the truth.

What I said, that if Baptism succeeded Circumcision, and thence infant baptism
be deduced, female infant baptism could not be thence inferred, for they were
not circumcised, is manifest, nor is it pertinent which Mr. Vaughan brings to
infringe it. For though Females be granted to be in the Covenant of
Circumcision, yet they were not circumcised, and if in the eyes of all Laws
whatsoever women are but as ignoble creatures, and so not circumcised, this
confirms what I allege, that by virtue of Baptisms succession to Circumcision
their Baptism cannot be inferred. What he thought to have told me about the
Proselites of Righteousness, and the baptizing of their Infants, I conceive I
have considered and answered in the second part of my Antipaedobaptism or Full
Review, now in the Press, in which the feebleness of Dr. Hammonds Proof is
showed.

It is neither true that Col. 2. 11, 12. is an explanation of what is meant by
the circumcision of Christ, in these words, being buried with him in baptism
nor any thing said of the analogy between circumcision and baptism, which Mr.
Vaughan says is so evident in this place, nor if it were does it prove that
our baptism succeeds the Jewish circumcision. And what he grants, that Col. 2.
12. Romans 6. 4, 5. Immersion and emersion in Baptism are alluded to, as the
custom then of baptizing; and that which he says, that indeed it seemed to him
that for some centuries of years, that Baptism was practiced by plunging; for
sprinkling was brought first in use by occasion of the Chinicks, taking what
further is manifest, and not denied, that sprinkling is not baptizing but
rantizing, it is manifest that in infant-sprinkling now in use there is a
mockery, when the Minister says, I baptize thee, and yet does not baptize but
sprinkle or rantize. And it was truly said by me that it is a nullity, it being
done neither on persons, nor in the manner Christ appointed to be baptized, as
the Spaniards baptizing the Americans was a mere nullity and mockery. Not do I
know why Mr. Vaughan should say, [ This concludes our selves and all our
Ancestors, even all in the Western Churches for fifteen hundred years, under
damnation] unless he imagine with the Papists infant baptism necessary to
salvation.

That which Mr. Vaughan says, p. 13. of the Churches power to alter any thing
from the Form of Christ's institution to be confessed by all Divines, and that
he is none that denies it, is not true, except he account none Divines but the
Papists. For I know none but Papists that do acknowledge that the Church has
power to alter Christ's institution. Nor in my practice do I acknowledge it. I
plainly tell Mr. Vaughan I do use to administer the Lords Supper in the
evening, and though. I do not say it was instituted by Christ to be in the
evening, yet because it is called the Lords Supper, and the Apostle takes
notice of the time, 1 Cor. 11. 23, etc. and the administering of it in the
morning occasions many to think they must take it fasting, and not a few that
they are first to receive Christ's body in the popish sense, I think it very
requisite the Lords Supper be administered in the evening. The Love Feasts I
find not appointed by Christ, and therefore might be altered. But in requital
of Mr. Vaughans advice to me, I advise him to take heed of that erroneous and
dangerous Tenet which avoucheth a power in the Church to alter Christ's
institution, which serves to justify Popish corruptions, and to condemn the
practice of all the Reformed Churches. I fear to embroil the Church of God:
they do it who oppose the truth. I am willing to submit to the judgment of the
Church when they agree with Christ, but to none but Christ, in what he has
appointed. It is neither true that the practice of infant baptism, much lose of
infant-sprinkling, has been fifteen hundred years: nor, if it were, is it so
strange a thing, that God suffered such an error as that is. I thank Mr.
Vaughan for his ingenuous grant, and his modest carriage, and with expressions
of my pity of his being misled by the conceit of the Churches power (by which,
what is meant is hard to say) conceiving I have answered him sufficiently, I
take my leave of him and pass on to Mr. Cragg. Concerning whom the Reader is to
be premonished, that by reason of his fast speaking, and many words, I was
often uncertain what to apply an answer to at the dispute.

SECT. IV.
Mr. Cragg's Dispute is examined.

AS for his Preface I let it pass. His first Euthymene; page.16: Some infants
may not be baptized, therefore some infants may be baptized, is so frivolous,
that I neither did then, nor do now think it worth any thing but contempt. For
if the reasoning were good, it must be resolved into this Syllogism, All that
may not be baptized may be baptized, Some Infants may not be baptized, Ergo,
Some infants may be baptized, there being no other way according to Logic
Rules to make it good. Any man of common sense might see the foolery of that
Argument. For if it be good he might in like manner say, Some infants may not
have the Lords Supper, therefore some infants may; some boys are not to be
ordained Bishops, therefore some are. I denied the consequence, and Mr. Cragg
not sensible of his folly prints a Syllogism, which shows he proved not what
was to be proved, which when I would have rectified by showing what he should
have concluded, he run on so fast in his vain prattle, that the Reader may
easily perceive I had reason to say, What would the man say?

The next Argument is concerning the essence of Baptism, which he says,
belonged to infants; therefore they may be baptized, and then insinuates me to
have been driven to absurdities in denying that Baptism is a relation, and
Austins definition of a Sacrament.

To which I answer, 1. This proposition the essence of baptism belongs to
infants, may have two senses, 1. That the Baptism of infants is true Baptism,
that is, is according to transcendental verity such as has the nature of
Baptism, and in this sense I grant the Proposition is true, and so it is true
that an infants eating bread and drinking wine is true eating and drinking the
Lords Supper, it has the essence of it; but this I did not imagine he meant,
and therefore denied his minor, till his next Syllogism showed he meant it, and
then I perceived I should have denied the major. But his quickness and
multiplying words would not permit me to recall my self. 2. The other sense is
this, the essence of Baptism, that is, that which is of the essence to right
Administration of Baptism belongs to infants, in which sense I denied it, nor
does his Argument from the definition prove it, for it is all one as to argue,
infant baptism is Baptism, therefore it is right Baptism. As for the
absurdities he imputes to me, I deny them to be absurdities. For I take Baptism
to be either an action or passion, though Christian Baptism have a relation
superadded, and so in the use is a sign, and the genus of it, which is of the
essence, I should make an action. As for the other absurdity, I do confess that
the term Sacrament being but a term invented by Latin Fathers may be laid
aside, nor is there any common nature of Sacraments expressed in Scripture. And
I confess I take Austins definition, if it be his, that a Sacrament is a
visible sign of invisible grace, to be but imperfect, since it may be applied to
the descent of the Holy Ghost as a Dove, Christ's washing of his Disciples feet,
a persons kneeling and holding up his hands to pray, the kissing of the Bible,
and many other actions which are not Sacraments, I confess I was weary of these
quirks, and imagining that he used them only to weary me, and blunt my
attention, and to make some oftentation of himself, I replied not to his vain
talk, but called for Scripture Proof.

As for that which he says, I denied all that were Church Members were to be
baptized, and yet affirmed it in my Sermon: in both I said true, the former
being understood of invisible, the latter of visible Church Members.

In the Argument page 24. Those whom God did promise before the Law, foretell
under the Law, actually receive into Covenant under the Gospel, those God did
appoint Church Members under the Gospel. But, etc. Ergo. Had not Mr. Craggs
quickness hindered me, I had showed the vanity of the major, as well as denied
the minor. For if he mean by [ Church-members] visible Church Members, and by [
actually receiving into Covenant] understand such an actual receiving as is
without any act of faith or Profession of the persons received into Covenant,
as I conceive he does, I deny the major. But I also denied the minor. In the
next Proof he changes the term [ of actually receiving] into [ being in
Covenant] Now there is a manifest difference between them, since a person may be
in Covenant, that is, have a Covenant made to him, who is not yet born, as
Isaak, Genesis 17. 21. But he is not actually received into Covenant till he be
born, and by some acts of his own engages himself to be Gods: receiving
importing an offering, which is to be done by Profession. As for his Proof from
Genesis 17. 7. I had many Exceptions against it. First, that if it be understood
of the natural seed of Abraham the everlastingness of it was but for a time,
and that time before the Gospel, as in the next Verse, the possession of Canaan
is promised to be everlasting, and yet the Jews dispossessed now of it. Which
Mr. Cragg grants, and therefore must needs grant that the Promise Verse 7.
though it be termed everlasting, yet it is to be understood only of a limited
time, as in other passages, Exodus 21. 6. and 12. 24 etc. if meant of the
natural seed of Abraham. Nor is he resieved by saying, They shall have Canaan
again, for however the Possession was not everlasting, that is, at all times,
particularly not in Gospel Times. As for his Proof of the continuance of the
Gospel Covenant unto the end of the world, to Abraham and his seed, the very
Text he allegeth, Gal. 3. 8. does manifestly express the thing promised to be
justification, and that of the Heathen, and that through faith, that had not
the man a face which could not blush, he would have been ashamed to have urged
it to prove, that Abraham's natural seed were promised to be in Covenant under
the Gospel. And his next allegation is as vain, that because Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11.
The whole congregation of Israel are said to stand before the Lord with their
little ones, to enter into Covenant, therefore the Covenant Genesis 17. 7. is to
continue to infant natural seed of Abraham to the end of the worlds whereas the
speech is only of a transient fact, not of a command, much less of a promise
of something perpetually future, and what is said of the little ones is as well
said of wives, hewers of wood, and drawers of water, and therefore if thence be
concluded a continuance of covenant to infants, a continuance of covenant to
wives and servants will be concluded.

His allegation of Heb. 8. 6. is as vain, For he brings it to prove, That if
infants were in covenant under the Law, they are in Covenant under the Gospel,
whereas the meliority of the Covenant is not placed in the extent to the sort
of persons, for then it should be extended to more sorts than the Covenant of
the Law was, but to the meliority of the promises, which were of better things,
or better terms, then the promises of the Law, but not to any other than elect
and true believers, and so not to infants as the natural seed of believers.

And for that which he says, This unchurcheth the one half of Christendom,
and leaves them no ordinary means of salvation, if he mean by Christendom all
that are commonly called Christians, I grant it, if the infants be the one half
of them, and their unchurching be in respect of visible Church Membership, but
count it no absurdity. nor do know what ordinary means of salvation he
conceives they are left without except baptism, which I take not to be an
ordinary means of salvation without faith, and therefore think it no
inconvenience to say that infants are without ordinary means of salvation,
which are the preaching the word, etc. yet are saved by the election of God,
redemption of Christ, and work of his Spirit.

What I said, that the Covenant under the Gospel was made only with the
spiritual seed of Abraham, was right, and determined so Romans 4. 11, 12, 16.
Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 3. 29. John 8. 39. etc. Nor is it true because the partition
wall is broken down, therefore there is the same Covenant national to the
natural seed of believers as was to Abraham, but that therefore as the Apostle
speaks Ephesians. 3. 6. The Gentiles (to wit believing Gentiles, Romans 1. 16.)
should be fellowheirs, and of the same body, and partakers of his promise in
Christ by the Gospel. Nor is it ture, That the Gospel Covenant is made with the
whole visible Church, as the Gospel Covenant is expressed, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12. And if I denied the Major page 29. in the first argument, I confess
I was mistaken through inadvertency, whether by reason of Mr. Craggs fast
speaking, or some humane infirmity, or some other occuirence now not remembered,
I cannot tell. But I deny the Minor understood of the Gospel Covenant, Heb. 8.
10. and the whole visible Church being taken without any Synecdoche for every
visible Churchmember.

But I perceive by Mr. Craggs words page 30. If the Church in regard of outward
administration of Ordinances (which is the question) were only the elect, etc.
that the terms Church and Covenant were so ambiguously used by him, that I knew
not how to conceive of his meaning, and his fast speaking would not permit me
deliberately to consider his words, and therefore no marvel I desired liberty
to explain my self, and to enquire into Mr. Craggs meaning, it being impossible
for me otherwise to answer appositely, and to make the disputation profitable
for finding out truth.

As for that which Mr. Cragg says, That it was the question whether the Church
in regard of outward administration of Ordinances were only the elect, it does
untruly suggest as if I so conceived, who, though I hold the Church invisible
are the elect only, and that the Gospel Covenant of grace, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.
is made to them only, yet have still granted that the Church visible consists
of others than elect persons, and that outward ordinances may lawfully be
administered to them upon their profession of faith in Christ. But Mr. Cragg by
confounding these terms [to be in Covenant, to be subjects of baptism, etc.]
misleads unwary hearers and readers.

The next text Mr. Cragg brought was Isaiah 49. 22. whence he would prove that
Infants should be Churchmembers under the Gospel.

To which my answer was at first (though it was otherwise taken) that it is a
prophecy that the Gentiles should bring back the Jews, not only infants but
others, from captivity, which the words before verse 19, 20, 21. and after
verse 24, 25. do plainly evince; and this is given as the meaning by the New
Annotations made by Mr. Gataker, who does on verse 23. say, it was fulfilled in
those Persian Potentates, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Ahasuerus. Nor is there in
the Contents of the Chapter (which Mr. Cragg without ground makes the judgment
of the Church of England) any thing to the contrary, but the words, which are
[18. The ample restoration of the Church, 24. The powerful deliverance out of
the Captivity] do rather confirm this. If any people laughed at this, they
showed their ignorance, and Mr. Cragg showed his heedlessness when he said,
That it was an addition to the text that the Gentiles should bring the jews,
when the very distinction of [ thy children] from [ the Gentiles] shows it
meant of the Jews, otherwise it should have been [their children] in the third
person, not [thine] in the second; nor can it be meant of Gods children as his,
for then it should be [mine] in the first person, for God speaks those words.
Though I deny not but the words may be accommodated to the times of the Gospel,
but not to Mr. Craggs purpose of bringing infants to baptism, which has no
color from the text. Which appears by considering Mr. Craggs answer to my
questions put forth needfully to clear the text.

For 1. if by [ standard] be meant [ baptism] which the Scripture never calls
Gods standard, and the bringing should be to baptism, then the sense should be
that Supreme Magistrates as Kings and and Queens should bringinfants in their
arms, and carrythem on shoulders to baptism, which no story ever mentions to
have been done, and is too srivolous to be made the matter of that prophecy.

2. The terms [ nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers] show it to be a Metaphor,
which Mr. Cragg granting, though it follow not, that nothing could be gathered
from it, yet it follows, that Mr. Craggs application, which is according to the
proper sense of the words, is not right. What I said, that it was fulfilled in
Hesters time, I said rightly, and Mr. Gataker before me in those Annotations of
his which are taken for the most incomparably learned, and Hester as a Queen
among the Gentiles, might well be styled a nursing mother to the Jews. I will
not trouble my self to examine Mr. Craggs dictates, but refer the Reader to the
notes of Mr. Gataker.

As for what I said, that though it should be understood of the times of the
Gospel, yet it might be meant of grown men persuaded by the preaching of the
Gospel, as Junius in his Annot. was true. Nor does the bringing in the bosom
being a Metaphor prove they were infants. And if so, the Church is spoken to,
and the children were both the Gentiles children, and yet [ thy children] that
is the Churches. And so there is no interfering in my words.

The next text was Isaiah 65. 20. in reading which Mr. Cragg left out those
words, nor an old man that has not filled his days, nor would read them, nor
the words following, ver. 21, 22. I perceived he meant nothing but fallacy, and
yet he added impudence to it in accusing me as urging it to deceive the people,
when his own course, in concealing what would have cleared the text, had a
manifest show of deceit, and mine of plain dealing.

As for his interpretation, There shall be no more an infant of days, that is,
infants shall not be incapable of the seal, it has no proof but his dictate,
and it is without all show of probability, there being not a word of any such
thing as ou^ward ordinances, but of peace, increase, possession, and long life,
as the verses before and after show.

The like is to be said of his interpretation of the other part of the verse,
The child shall die an hundred years old, that is, as an hundred years old, or
as well a Churchmember as if he were a hundred years old, when the term [as] is
added to the text.

To which he replied that I do put in [as] 1 Cor. 10. 2. and Romans 11. 19. But
this latter is false. I grant I do so interpret [baptized 1 Cor. 10. 2] because
otherwise the proposition were not true, and the sense is plain according to
this sense, were baptized, that is, their passage through the Sea and under the
cloud was to them as if they had been baptized, and so did Grotius expound it,
which is the same with that which others mean when they say, they were
Analogically baptized. But in Isaiah 65. 20. there is no need of such an
interpretation, and that I may use the words of Mr. Gataker Annot. on Isaiah
65. 20. The Syntax is familiar, and as clear as the daylight or Sunshine: the
child or youth (that now is) shall die the son of an hundred years; that is,
shall be an hundred years old when he dies. Nor is this contrary to the
Contents, which though they be entitled to the Church of England, yet there is
no Canon or Act of any Synod which did ever make them so, and who ever framed
them, yet I think it no disparagement to say that Mr. Gataker understood the
text as well or better than he: and this text was rightly made by me answerable
to Zach. 8. 4. nor is there either absurdity or ^ntruth, or blasphomy in my
interpretation: which might be showed by transcribing Mr. Gatakers
forementioned notes on Isaiah 65. 17, 19, 25. were it not I am forced to be
brief. What I said about Dr. Prideaux his use was true, that he would require
the respondent before he answered to read the text, and consider it, which is
necessary in Divinity disputes, however Respondents be restrained in other
disputes.

And for my Explosion at Oxford it is a mere figment, and that neither Dr.
Savage, nor the Doctor of the Chair, did avoid my argument by their answer is
manifest enough from Dr. Savage his own recital of his answer in his printed
book, and this had been showed in print ere this but that the Printer failed to
print my answer in the fit time. The frivolous conceit of my fear of Mr. Craggs
gunshot is foolish; I do not count Mr. Craggs arguments to be of so much force
as a Squib.

As for his argument from Mat. 28. 19. I answered, that all nations or whole
nations did not include every part, all nations being taken synecdochically for
the disciples of all nations.

As for his division I gave the genuine reason why infants are excepted from
the precept of baptizing, because they are no disciples. Nor was there any
defect in Logic when I did not reduce it to one of his members. For [capable
of baptism] and [disciples] are not terms subordinate, but distinct, though
without opposition. And though to be disciples made them capable, yet there is
a difference between the terms. I presume Mr. Cragg thinks baptized persons
already disciples, yet not capable of baptism.

What he says of me, That I found fault with him at Rosse for translating
(...) make disciples of all nations, I am as sure is his fiction, as that I
spoke any thing there to him. Nor will, I think, any man believe I should do
so, except he found me now crazed in my brain, that has either read my Examen
par. 3. s. 12. or 13. or shall read that part of my Review now in Press, in
which I often assert that translation, and largely answer objections to the
contrary in the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth, etc. of that book. In
which book I shall at large answer all that Mr. Baxter has said to prove
infants disciples from Acts 15. 10. As for what Mr. Cragg says here, it is
frivolous. For though v. 1. 5. there is mention of circumcision, yet not of
circumcision as acted on infants, but as taught brethren, and when the Apostles
v. 6. did consider of the matter, they did not consider of circumcision as
acted but as taught, and not only of circumcision, but also of imposing the
whole Law of Moses as necessary, which was the putting the yoke v. 10. and it
is ridiculous to conceive that those teachers mentioned verse 1. did attempt to
do any thing to infants, and therefore it is a mere wrangling to contend that
the disciples on whom they would have put the yoke, verse 10. were infants,
contrary to the constant use of the term throughout all the New Te^^ament some
hundreds of time.

As so: Mr. Craggs Arguments from Acts 2. 38, 39. it is false that the Apostles
inference is as Mr. Cragg insinuated, unless his argument have four terms, that
they may be baptized to whom is the promise. For the Apostle expresses a duty
in the imperative mood, not a ^ight in the indicative or potential, it is [ be
baptized] not [ may be baptized] as in Mr. Craggs Conclusion.

I excepted that those parents were not then believers, which Mr. Cragg
co^^^^ied in saying, They were believers in fieri, though not perhaps in facto,
which is all one as to say they were not yet believers, but in the way to it.
As for his saying, They were believers by outward assent and disposition,
though perhaps not by inward assent and habit.

I reply 1. if they were by disposition, how were they not by inward assent?

2. How does he know they were believers by outward assent and not by inward?
Does he know they were hypocrites?

3. What act did they show which expressed outward assent to the
acknowledgement of Christ as their Lord? what Mr. Cragg says he knows of me,
and tells of a ministers rule, is a fault he charge me with as not pertaining
to the dispute.

What he says, that Acts 2. 38. Repentance is not made a condition of being
baptized, is in my apprehension manifestly false. For the requiring Repentance
as first to be done, and then Baptism to be annexed does make it a condition of
baptism, as when it is said, Believe and thou shall be saved, belief is made a
condition of salvation. His talk about incomplete repentance, because they were
pricked in their hearts, as a sufficient qualification for baptism, does make
the Apostles speech as idle, which requires that which they had already, if Mr.
Cragg say true; But who will believe Mr. Cragg that the Apostle required no
more to baptism but an incomplete repentance or pricking the heart, v. 38.
Which it is said they had before? or that he took that as a sufficient
qualification for baptism, and yet required more as previous to it? Or who will
believe him that the 3000. Jews were baptized upon an incomplete repentance,
when the text expressly says, Then they that gladly received the word were
baptized? or that there was no new act of Peter, but a recapitulation of the
heads of his Sermon that he preached to them before they were pricked in
conscience, or were exhorted to be baptized, when the text says, with many
other words he testified and exhorted? Or that there was any, (...), putting
that as done after, which was done before, when the text does so expressly note
the order of time, (...), which our Translatours render [ then] and if it be
rendered [ therefore] it proves that which was done v. 41. to be consequent on
that which was done before ver. 40.

To the Argument, To whom the promise of grace belonged, to them baptism
belongs also: But the promise of grace belongs to believers and their children.
Ergo.

To this I answered out of the text, when they are called, or are believers,
not before, it neither belongs to fathers nor children without calling.

To this Mr. Cragg replied, 1. That the verb is in the Indicative present
tense, which implies, it is to them for the present, as well to your children
as to you. 2. The opposition is between them and their children as near, to
distinguish them as to whom the promise was at present from them to whom it was
afar of, that is in the future,

But all this is frivolous. For 1. the verb is in the Indicative Mood when it
is said, The promise is to those that are afar off, as well as when it is said,
The promise is to you and your children.

2. Their being afar off is not in respect of time, but of place or dwelling,
and the meaning is, they that are in the dispersion as it is called James 1. 1.
or if it were meant in the sense that it is used Ephe. 2. 15. (not Romans 2.
15. as Mr. Cragg miscites) yet they are said to be afar off in respect of Gods
favor, or their affection to him, not in respect of time.

Lastly, it is frequent, even in speeches like this, to put the Indicative mood
present tense, by an enallage of tense, for the future, as Matthew. 5. 10; 12.

I added, that by [children] is no necessity to understand infants, yet Mr.
Cragg contrary to the common use, as Ephe. 6. 4. Col. 3. 20. would have [
children] restrained to infants.

1. Because of the notation of the word, (...) is from (...) to bring forth,
which I think he says falsely is given sometimes to children in the womb, but
if it be, then it overthrowes his notation, for then (...) is not from (...) to
bring forth, for a child in the womb is not yet brought forth. But how does it
appear that (...) signifies properly a young child? or that child is analogum
to old and young? I had hitherto thought child and parent had been Relatives,
and that child signifies as well an elder as a younger. To that of the verb of
the present tense answer is before

How does Mr. Cragg prove that their children they had were young children? It
is vainly supposed that the Promise is to them and their children, as the Jews
children were in covenant with their Parents. The Text makes it to belong
neither to parents nor children, but those that God calls? Does Mr. Cragg think
that the unbelieving Jews had the promise? And yet they were in covenant in his
sense before, even the whole Nation? Or does he think that Christ's blood was
not avenged on them? If it were, How was the Remedy as large as the Disease?

Next Mr. Cragg argues thus, They that are holy with a Covenant-holiness are
capable of the outward visible part of blessing: But infants of believers are
holy with a covenant-holiness; Therefore they are capable of the outward and
visible part.

Of which Syllogism I might have denied the major, there being a
Covenant-holiness according to election, which does not always instate the
person in that which he calls the outward visible part of the blessing, by
which he means title to Baptism. But I denied the minor, understanding it of
the outward Covenant-holiness as they call it, which I truly said, is
gibberish, and however Vossius, Bullinger (for Grotius I think means otherwise)
conceive of it, or the Assembly, yet it is a mere mistake, and that holiness of
children which is mentioned 1 Cor. 7. 14. is truly said by me to be only
matrimonial holiness, or legitimation. And his argument out of Mr. Baxter I
justly retorted, that in six hundred times in which Holy is used in Scripture,
in none of them it is found for outward Covenant-holiness intituling to
Baptism: which is a right way of answering, though it be called indirect by the
Logicians. And as for that he replies that Romans 11. 16. I confessed at Ross
covenant-holiness is meant, I grant it, but not outward Covenant-holiness
intituling to Baptism, but that real saving holiness which is according to the
election of grace, according to which Jews elected shall hereafter be graffed
in again.

I said, Ezra 9. 2. Holy seed is all one with a legitimate seed according to
the law of Moses. Against this it is objected, that then the meaning should be,
The holy seed, that is the lawfully begotten Jews, have mingled themselves with
the seed of these Lands, that is the bastards of those Lands But I deny this
consequence. The sense is this, the holy seed, that is, those who were
descended by lawful generation of allowed women, these have taken to
themselves of the daughters of the nations whom God forbad them to marry, which
is plain out of the verse 1, 2. so that the people of the Land with whom they
mingled themselves, are not considered as illegitimate in there birth, but as
not allowed to the Israelites, and yet the holy seed is that seed which by a
right generation according to Moses law was legitimate. As for what he says,
that Iepthe was a Saint and yet a bastard, it is true, he was holy in one
respect as borne from above, yet unholy by natural birth. And whereas he
says, Moses had childeren by an Ethiopian woman, and yet not unholy, I grant
it: for the Ethiopian woman was not forbidden: nor were Rahab though a
Canaanitess, nor Ruth a Moabitess when they joined themselves to the God of
Israel prohibited, or there children illegitimate: yet this is not the same
with Covenant-holiness, intituling to Church-ordinances, but legitimation
intituling to be reckoned in the genealogy and inheritance of Israel.

The last argument Mr Cragg used was this, They that Christ took up in his
arms, blessed, said, the Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse
upon those that despised, and would not receive them, are holy with a
covenant-holiness; But Christ lock up little children into his arms, blessed
them, said, the Kingdom of God belonged unto them, pronounced a curse upon
those that despised, and would not receive them: therefore little children are
holy with a covenant-holiness.

In this Argument I denied the minor, after some debate about the way of
forming of it, in which I imagined that fallacy I do not now upon fight
deprehend, and particularly I denied, that Christ pronounced a curse upon those
that despised and would not receive them. Then he alleged Mat. 18. 2. whence he
argued, They to whom belongs the Kingdom of Heaven are holy and in covenant:
But to little children belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; therefore little children
are holy and in covenant. In which Argument any Reader may perceive he proved
not what I denied, that Christ pronounced a curse upon those that despised, and
would not receive little children or infants, and yet that Text he alleged did
not say of little children, that to them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven, but
those that were not to be offended, v. 6. despised, v. 10. were to be received
in Christ's name, v. 5. were not little children in age, but little ones in
spirit, which appeared in that they are said to be believers, v. 6. and to be
converted, and become as little children. To which, as the Relator himself sets
it down, Mr. Cragg said, The meaning is not, that the little children are
converted, which is a grant of what I alleged, that the little ones not to be
offended, despised, but received, were not little children in age, but
affection of humility. Mr. Cragg added, But it has relation to the Desciples
in the first Verse, who must be converted from their actual sins, and become as
little children which have no actual sin.

At which words it is true, I said, and that justly, O how unhappy are the
People that are seduced with these Toys, Are you not ashamed? To which he
replied, and it seems is not ashamed that it is printed, I see nothing worthy
of shame: whereas if this speech of his were true, then this is a truth, Except
men be converted from their actual sins, and become as little children, which
have no actual sin, they shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: for this
is the meaning of Christ's words, Matthew. 18. 3. according to Mr. Craggs
interpretation, which whosoever believes must of necessity despair of Heaven,
since as James says, Chap. 3. 2. In many things we offend all: and John 1.
Epist. chap. 1. ver. 8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us.

That which Mr. Cragg added, that the Disciples were believers which are meant
Matthew. 18. 6. and not the children, and yet says, his argument remains
unanswered, has more of impudence in it. For his argument being that Christ
pronounced a curse on them that despised and received not little ones in age,
and yet confessing that this was meant not of little ones in age, but
Disciples, believers in him, it is the height of impudency to say his argument
is unanswered, when his own confession answered it. Justly here, after five
hours time, having promised but one, did I breakoff, and having had experience
of Mr. Craggs meet cavilling at Rosse and Abergaveny, dwelling many miles from
that Town, and finding nothing in him, and those other Paedobaptists I have
answered, but a spirit of wrangling, I yielded not to any other Dispute, nor
shall for time to come, being now sufficiently taught by experience what
dealing I am like to have, yield to such disputes.

As for that which Mr. Cragg says, He was hurried to that extemporal discourse
through importunity, I do not believe it, being advertised before, that if I
came to Abergaveny he would oppose me. That the speech of him that said I
answered nothing, was the speech of an impudent, brazen-faced fellow, I think
any will judge who reads this my writing.

For Mr. Baxter, whatever his worth be, yet how justly I might say (though the
words set down were not used as the Relator expresses them) that I have
answered all he says against me, will appear in the Review of the Dispute
between him and me, and others, of which part of it is printed, part in the
Press, and the rest (if the Lord permit) shall not be slackned.

Mr. Craggs arguments from John 3. 5. Romans 11. and other places, if they be
not in his Sermon (to the examining of which I now hasten) yet are they in
other books answered by me: I shall take some view of his Sermon on which I had
made some Animadversions before, according to the imperfect Copy I had then,
and sent them to A ergaveny, but have them not now by me in London, yet however
in this straight of time I think it necessary to write thus much.

SECT. V.
Mr. Craggs Sermon is examined.

FIrst he says [and is baptized] page 72. to be a conditional qualification,
and yet in the dispute he denied that repentance is a condition of baptism Acts
2. 38. His observation out of Dr. Buckeridge p. 73. is frivolous, for the
Apostle 1 Cor. 12. 28. says as well of Apostles as of ordinary Pastors and
Teachers, (...) he for them, or, if he will, fixed them. But it seems Mr. Cragg
has a special tooth at Itinerants, though his Relator claw Mr. Cr. and Mr. W.
But what he says, that it is too strict an interpretation to expound Mark 16.
15. of men of age and understanding, excluding children, shows he little
considers what he says. For if it be so, then Christ, commands the Apostles
to preach the Gospel to infants, and since Mr. Cragg is bound to do so, he
shows that he sins against his own light, if he do not so. But how foolish it
would be for him to attempt it, his own words show, when he says, Infants are
not capable to be taught of men. And when he says, That infants only in actu
primo are capable of the first seeds of understanding, of profession of faith,
I would know, in what sense they are sensible of the benefit they have by
Christ. And whereas he grants, That baptism is necessary by necessity of
precept if conveniently it may be had, it is all I assested in my Sermen, when
I said all that would be saved must be baptized after profession. If Austin
were a hard Father to infants for holding they must be baptized or not see the
Kingdom of God, then Mr. Cragg cannot gather from John 3. 5. infants baptism.
From Mark 16. 16. is rightly gathered that believing is to be before baptism,
and yet from Mark 1. 4. it is not rightly gathered that we must be baptized,
before we can hear the word preached or repent; For the text does not express
that John baptized before he preached, but recites these two as connexed, yet
the latter is put first, not because first done, but because he was to set down
more amply what he preached.

Though we cannot know that the person to be baptized has a saving faith, yet
a saving faith is the rule of baptism to the person baptized, he should not
undertake that ordinance without a saving faith; and in respect of the
baptizer, so far as he can discern, he should require a saving faith of those
he baptizeth.

Dipping over head, or baptizing over head, after profession of faith, is no
invention of man, but the Command of Christ, practice of the Apostles, and
their Successors for many ages, and infant baptism was opposed many ages before
John of Leyden, who though he were otherwise not to be justified, yet I do not
remember that any has written he ever confessed that he had that doctrine from
Satan.

But Mr. Cragg says, Baptizing is in Greek any washing whether by dipping or
sprinkling. And he cites Ravanel who has made a Dictionary according to the
present use of terms. But he shows not out of any of the Pillars, as he calls
them, of the Greek tongue, that baptizing in Greek ever signifies to sprinkle.

He confesses that Casaubon in his notes on Matthew. 3. 6. distinguishes between
baptizing and rantizing or sprinkling, But says, The whole state of the
question is determined against me, because he adds, that their judgment is
deservedly long since exploded, and trampled down, that would have baptizing to
be by dipping, seeing the force and efficacy of this mystery consists not in
that.

But 1. by Mr. Craggs leave the question is plainly determined for me by
Casaubon, when he distinguishes between baptizing and sprinkling, for that is
the question, not wherein the efficacy and force of the mystery consists.

2. Though Casaubon were a very learned man, yet this speech of his is not
right. For we are to observe what Christ appoints, though the efficacy and
force of the mystery of Sacrament consist not in it, as we are to break bread,
not take a wafer-cake down whole, drink wine in the Lords Supper, because of
the institution, though the force and efficacy of the mystery consist not in
it. Mr. Craggs speeches out of Aquinas and Dominicus a Sato, are of no weight
with them who know who those Doctors were, to wit, Papists, and very unskilful
in the Greek language.

It is as vain which Mr. Cragg says the Israelites were baptized when their
feet did but touch the water, for the text says Exo. 14. 29. they walked upon
dry land in the midst of the Sea, and the waters were a wall unto them on
their right hand and on their left, and therefore their feet did not so much as
touch the water, much less were they sprinkled with it. And if the Israelites
were baptized in the cloud, and yet no water upon them, then the text 1 Cor.
10. 2. does not prove baptizing to be by sprinkling, but proves plainly that as
Hugo Grotius said they were baptized, that is, they were as if they had been
baptized, or as other, they were analogically baptized, that is in proportion,
or likeness, not formally, that is according to what is meant by that term.

It is without proof, yea false which Mr. Cragg says, Where is mention^^^^^^
in the Gospel of washing themselves, of Cups, of Vessels, of Tables, this
cannot be meant of plunging in water, so often, but rinsing. For water was not
so scarce but that they might do it by dipping as well as sprinkling. He might
have seen Ainsworth on Levit. 11. 32. who out of the Hebrew Canons tells us,
All that are unclean, whether Men or Vessels, are not cleansed, but by dipping
(or baptizing) in water: And wheresoever the Law speaks of washing a man's
flesh, or washing of clothes for uncleanness, it is not but by dipping the
whole body therein.

Me thinks Mr. Cragg should allow Anabaptists to make consequences though they
allow not his. And that John Baptists and Philips going down into the water,
proves something me thinks Mr. Cragg should not deny, since it cannot reasonably
be imagined they should go down, not to the water, as Mr. Cragg would have it,
but into the water, whereas for baptizing a person a man might easily have
fetched or taken water out of any spring to baptize with, if it had been so to
be done by sprinkling, and not by dipping. But if he please to see a book
entitled Of Baptism, written by an eminent man in the State, he might see many
of the prime writers, even leading Protestants, gathering dipping thence, as
used then in baptizing.

The like they do from John 3. 23. Of which whatever Geographer or Traveller
says, Enon (where John baptized) was a little brook that one may stride over
scarce knee deep, and therefore not capable of dipping (which does not follow)
deserves not to be believed in this.

Out of Romans 64, we do not press a necessity of dipping, because of the
resemblance, but from the resemblance alluded to show the use then, ingenuously
confessed by Mr. Vaugban, and therefore should be the use still. Nor does it
follow, we must ly^ three days and nights in water, the resemblance of Christ's
burial is to be continued though not the duration.

Whatever other resemblance there may be of our burial with Christ, yet we are
to follow the institution and practice set down in Scripture, from which he
that swerves (as Sprinkless do) do sin against Christ's command, whatever any
Divines or Assemblies of men say to the contrary.

It is well Mr. Cragg confesses, That if he were to baptize converted Turks or
Pagans of ripe age he might baptize them by dipping: it shows that it is only
for infants sake that the institution of Christ is altered, and so one
corruption has brought in another.

What he adds, Provided their garments were not first baptized or washed,
intimates he would have them naked, which Mr. Baxter would conclude to be
against the sixth and seventh Command, and he may do well to school Mr. Cragg
for it. His reason is as foolish, though the Garments be baptized in water, yet
are not baptized with that use that the person is, but by accident, nor
baptized as Bells to drive away Devils, Nor is by baptizing the garment any
worship done to it, as the Church of Rome does to the image: For then the
baptizing the body should be worshipping it, the Garments and body are not
worshipped at all by baptizing, and therefore foolishly is it compared to
Romish Superstition and Idolatry. He that affirms that baptizing without
dipping is not lawful, that it is will worship, that the sprinkling used is a
nullity, that notwithstanding such pretended baptism, yet baptism remains a
duty, speaks but truth. The decree of the Senate of Zurick was an unrighteous
decree, which, whatever state follows, it will draw the guilt of murdering
innocent persons on it, and Mr. Cragg by reciting it with seeming approbation,
does make it probable that he is a bloody-minded man, who would rejoice to see
innocent men, who out of tenderresse of conscience follow the plain rule of
Christ, so put to death: which its not unlikely to be the aim of his, or his
Accomplices printing this book against those he calls Anabaptists, that he might
stir up either Magistrates or furious common people against them.

Mr. Cragg says, He has resolved the former doubt, that baptizing is not
dipping, and yet page 81. the Authors he cites, and by citing approves, do all
make dipping or dying one of the first of its significations. Now he undertakes
to prove that infants may, nay ought to be baptized. And he begins as an
Advocate for infants with this childish preface, that those poor souls cannot
speak for themselves, as if in speaking for their baptism he spoke for them,
when he does thereby rather speak for that which is to their hurt, and calls
them poor souls, whom before he called Saints.

There is more in his pittyfull preface, He supposes, if the Apostles had been
asked, why they did not put down Infant Baptism in plainer terms, they would
have answered, that they thought none would have denied it. And I suppose they
would have answered, that they thought none would have affirmed it, being quite
against Christ's appointment, and their practice, who had then no such custom,
nor the Churches of God.

The rest, as it is taken from Mr. Baxter, so it is answered in the answer to
him now in the Press sect. 3. Lets view Mr. Craggs Arguments.

His first is, Those that are in Covenant with God ought to have the seal of
the Covenant which is baptism; But infants of believing parents are in Covenant
with God; Ergo.

He says, The former Proposition is firm by the confession of all Diviues,
even our adversaries, and cites five, but not where they say it, nor is any one
his Adversary in this point. It is true Ferus was a Popish Friar, though more
ingenuous than most of them. But does Mr. Cragg think we must take that for
true, which Protestants and Papists do avow without any proof from Scripture?
If so, then let us lay aside the Scripture, and read their books. But he might
know, and it is likely did know, that I (though I will not take on me the name of
a Divine) yet have denied, yea and proved his former proposition to be false
Exam. par. 3. sect. 1. Letter to Mr. Bailey sect. 3. Anti-pae lob. Or Full
Review first part sect. 5. which shall be fully vindicated (God assisting) in
the third part. Yea were his arguing good, it would prove infants were wronged
because they had not the communion. For I can as well from his own medium prove
that they are to have it, as he Baptism.

The Minor he takes on him to prove from Genesis 17. 7. But there is not a word
of infants of believing parents. But to prove it he ci es Cornelius a Lapide, a
Jesuit, for him, and yet had he not falsely translated his words, the words
would have appeared to be against him. For whereas he renders them in, The
spiritual seed to the faithful (which mars his sense) it is, In the spiritual
seed the faithful. So likewise Gal. 3. 8. though there be not the term Abraham's
seed, yet it is directly against him, for it asserts justification to the
believing Gentiles only from Abraham's promise, not a promise to them and their
seed. I deny not but that Isaac was in Covenant with God, that is, a child of
the promise, not only when he was but eight days old, but also before the
seventh, yea before he was born; but when he says, he had the seal (meaning
Circumcision) by virtue of the Lamb to be slain, it is strange Divinity to me,
who never heard or read that any person was circumcised by virtue of Christ's
death, but by reason of Gods command. And that which he says, Much more the
Children of believing Parents by virtue of the Lamb that is already slain,
which seems to intimate, that Circumcision is due to them much more, and that
by virtue of Christ's death, is a foppery like to the Authors ingeny. He says,
Deuteronomy. 29. 11. When all the People stood in covenant before the Lord, their
little ones are mentioned amongst the rest. And are not their wives, and
servants, hewers of wood, and drawers of water? Are all these in covenant with
God? How does he prove they were believers infants? The words v. 4. seem to
make to the contrary. It is no shift but a manifest truth, that those, Acts 2.
38, 39. to whom Peter said, The Promise is to you and your childdren, were not
then believers in Christ, when the words were spoken to them. For, 1. the
Apostle exhorts to repentance, therefore they had not yet repented, and so were
not believers. Mr. Cragg himself, page 78. in this Sermon says, Repentance is
a fruit and effect of faith, therefore according to him, not before it. And in
the Dispute, page 52. he made them believers in fieri, with an incomplete
repentance, though perhaps not believers in facto, 2. v. 40. he exhorted them
with more words, and then v. 41. some of them gladly received the Word, and
were believers. Yet Peter said to them before they were believers, The Promise
is to you and your children, nor is there a word in the Text that makes it
clear, that as soon as they were believers their children were in covenant with
them, and to be baptized.

His second argument is, Such as were circumcised under the Law may be baptized
under the Gospels: But infants of believers were circumcised under the Law;
Therefore they may be baptized under the Gospel. He cites Whitaker saying, all
the Anabaptists shall not be able to resist this argument.

I answer, notwithstanding so learned a man's conceit, it has not the force of
a feather so as to need resistance. To it I answer, 1. Indirectly by retortion.
Such as were circumcised under the Law may be baptized under the Gospel: But
infants of unbelievers, as the males bought with Abraham's money of the
stranger, not of his seed, Genesis 17, 12, 13, 23, 27. persons out of Covenant as
Ishmael, Genesis 17, 19, 21, 25. were circumcised under the Law: Ergo. If the one
be irresistible so is other. 2. Directly, by denying the Major if it be
universal; if not, the syllogism is naught, concluding from particulars. His
proofs are vain. That from Austin is of no force, unless it be supposed, 1.
That by circumcising under the Law, and baptizing under the Gospel, the grace
of God is conferred, which is a popish conccit. Circumcision did bind to the
keeping of the Law, but never that I find is the grace of God said to be
either physically or morally conferred by the Circumcision of each person
rightly circumcised. 2. It supposes, if infants be not baptized, the grace of
God is straiter in the New Testament than in the old. But that is false. For
the grace of God is as much without Sacraments as with it. Above two thousand
years before Abrham was circumcised there was neither Circnmcision nor Baptism
of infants, nor any other Sacrament instead thereof; Shall we say that Gods
grace was straiter before Abraham's time than since? As bad as the Schoolmen
were, who gave too much to Sacraments, yet they held, that the grace of God is
not tied to Sacraments.

That question from Heb. 8. 6. How were it a better Covenant, if all poor
infants that were in Covenant under the Law were out of Covenant under the
Gospel, runs upon these common mistakes, that to be circumcised or baptized is
all one as to be in covenant; all that were in covenant were to be circnmcised
or baptized; all that were not, were out of covenant; that the reason of the
circumcising or baptizing a person is his being in covenant, which are all
false, as I have proved Exam. Part. 3. Sect. 1. Letter to Mr. Baily, Sect. 3.
Antipaed. Part. 1. Sect. 5. and shall Part. 3. in many Sections, if God permit.
And to the question I answer from the next words, Heb. 8. 6. the new Covenant
is a better Covenant because it is established on better promises, though it
were imagined never a poor infant (as he childishly speaks) which yet I do dot
conceive, were in Covenant.

The next from Tit. 2. 11. supposes, If infants be not to be baptized, the
grace of God appears not to them, which is of no force, unless that popish
conceit obtain, that by it, and not without it, Gods grace appears to all. But
this is false, and not in the Text. Irenaeus words are not that Christ was a
little one, that little ones might be baptized from his example, for then he
would have been baptized in infancy, whereas he was not baptized till about
thirty years of age. We need not deny Christ's Redemption of infants, because we
deny their Baptism, there is no such connection between them. His saying of
little ones that they were the first Martyrs that suffered for Christ, is
false. For how were they Martyrs who testified nothing concerning Christ? That
of the Collect in the Common Prayer book on Innocents day, that they witnessed
only by dying is vain; For dying without some other expression does not
witness: nor did they suffer for Christ whom they knew not, but because of
Herod's beastly rage. This speech of Mr. Cragg smells rank of the Common Prayer
Book superstition in keeping Innocents day, which it seems Mr. Cragg yet
retains; But is nothing to the proof of his major, nor any thing hitherto
alleged. That which he says last, has most show of proof, that Baptism came
in place of Circumcision, the Apostle clears it, Col. 2. 11, 12. Ye are
circumcised with Circumcision made without hands, How is that? buried with him
in Baptism: but it is not true that he says, ye are circumcised with
Circumcision made without hands, in that ye are buried with him in Baptism:
these are predicated of the same persons, and so were conjoined, but yet not so
as to express how that the former was done by the latter, no more than by that
which follows, that therein they were raised by the faith of the operation of
God who raised Christ from the dead: yea it had been false, so expounded: for
how could it be true that they were circumcised without hands, in that they
were buried in Baptism with hands? Nor if this were granted, were it true, that
it is cleared by the Apostle that Baptism comes in the room of Circumcision:
For there is not a word to that end, yea the scope is to prove that we have all
in Christ without Circumcision, as v. 10. etc. show, and that Christ came in
the place of Circumcision, and the rest of the Jewish Ceremonies, as v. 17. is
expressed. And therefore the Apostle asserts the contrary, that no Rite but
Christ came in the room of Circumcision. If any ask why is v. 12. added, I have
answered formerly, and the answer is not gainsaid by M. Marshall, that it is to
show how persons come to be in Christ, and so to be complete in him, which he
usually ascribes to Faith and Baptism, Gal. 3. 26, 27. Romans 6. 3, 4, 5. and
they are put together, Col. 2. 12. so that if Baptism be conceived thence to
succeed Circumcision, Faith also is said to succeed it: which is more agreeable
to the expressions, Gal. 3. 23, 25. I add the Circumcision mentioned Col. 2.
11. is either Circumcision made without hands, or Christ's personal
Circumcision, therefore if the placing of Baptism after v. 12. prove its
succession to Circumcision, it proves only its succession to that made without
hands, which was not the Ceremony commanded, Genesis 17. or to Christ's
Circumcision, not to the common Circumcision of others. Yet were a succession
granted, this proves not, it must be in Baptism as in Circumcision, without a
like command, as I prove Antipaed: Part. 2. Sect. 2, 3. No more than because
the Ministers of the Gospel succeed the Priests of the Law, does it follow, the
Ministers children must be Ministers, anointed, etc. as it was in the Law. So
that Mr. Craggs irresistible argument is as easily blown away as a feather. And
I hardly imagine any Anabaptist so called to be so weak but that he is able to
answer it, by telling Mr. Cragg that his first Proposition is false, unless
there were the like command to baptize infants as there was to circumcise them.

If the third argument arise thence, it has its answer thence, that it is
frivolous talk in Mr. Cragg to speak as if denying infants Baptism were putting
out of the Covenant, disfranchizing, and circumcising, supposed being in
Covenant, was a seal of the covenant of grace. His proof that the Gospel puts
not infants out of the Covenant is true of the elect infants, and the covenant
of grace expressed in the Gospel. And yet his proofs are silly. New born babes
desire milk, little childeren are humble, and are proposed herein as paterns to
us, therefore they are in Covenant; whereas this is as true of infidels
children as of Christians, and therefore proves the one in Covenant as well the
other, and both these acts of little childeren are only natural, not virtuous,
and so give not evidence of their being in covenant; nor does the Gospel give
them large commendations beyond them of riper years, making them the Rule of
our perfection: For there is neither commendation of them, 1 Pet. 2. 2. nor
Matthew. 18. 3. nor making them the rule of our perfection, any more than Sheep
and Doves, Matthew. 10. 16. but only those virtuous qualities, which are
resembled by their natural qualities are propounded to us as our rule. His
testimony out of Bellarmine intimates that Bellarmine said, There is no
impediment to infants baptism, because the case is clear, as if Bellarmine
would not have said it, had the case not been clear, whereas it is more likely
to be false than true, because Bellarmine a Jesuit says it; yea it is
manifestly false; for the institution being only to baptize Disciples,
prohibits baptizing of infants, which are not such, but for want of being
Disciples incapable of Baptism.

But Mr. Cragg in his fourth Argument will prove infant baptism commanded,
Matthew. 28. 19. because Nations are commanded to be baptized. To this I answered
before in the Dispute, and my answer is, and was, Nations are not commanded to
be baptized without any other circumscription, but Disciples of the Nations,
Mr. Cragg confessed, page 48. (...)is, Ye shall make Disciples, and then
baptizing is of Disciples. His speech, Infants are not incapable of Baptism,
because they have not faith and repentance, because Christ was baptized without
repentance, is frivolous, for there is not the same end of Christ's Baptism and
ours, and therefore though repentance were not required of him, yet it is of
us, and the want of it makes infants incapable of Baptism. It is false, that
God requires no more of persons in Covenant, and born of believing Parents, to
their Baptism, but a mere objective power or receptability, as he calls it, as
was in the world at its creation, or in the regeneration, which he new makes
us. And it is merely false, that upon any such account as he speaks of, many
whole families were baptized, or that any infants were included. The very Texts
which speak of the baptizing of the households either there or elsewhere speak
of their fearing God, Acts 2. 2. that all the houseshould be saved by Peter's
words, Acts 11. 14. had repentance and the like gift with the Apostles, v. 17,
18. had the word spoken to them, Acts 16. 32. believed, v. 34, Acts 18. 8.
addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints, 1 Cor. 16, 15. Which show
no infants were meant under the household, for they did none of these things.

Mr. Cragg goes on Argument 5. They that are capable of the Kingdom and the
blessing which is the greater, are capable of Baptism which is the lesser: But
infants are capable of the Kingdom and the blessing which is the greater:
Therefore they are capable of Baptism which is the lesser.

To which I answer, The major is false: if it were true, it would follow
infants are capable of the Kingdom and the blessing, which is the greater,
therefore they are capable of the Lords Supper, Ordination to the Ministry,
Church Discipline, which are the less. Though into the Kingdom of Heaven
infants be admitted by God who knows who are his without any visible
expression, yet into the visible Church persons are not admitted without
visible testimony of their faith, of which sort were all added to the Church
Acts 2. 47. Not one of those Texts Mark 10. 13. to 17. Mark 9. 14, 36, 37. Mat.
18. 2, 3, 4. Matthew. 19. 13, 14, 15. Luke 9. 14 15. Luke 18. 15, 16. several,
nor all jointly prove, infants visible Church Members. The kingdom of God, Mark
10. 14. is not the visible Church, for into it such as are not humble, as
little children may enter, which our Savior denies, v. 15. but the same with
the Kingdom, v. 23, 24, 25. into which it is so hard and impossible for a rich
man or one that trusts in riches to enter, which is called v. 17, 30 eternal
life. It is false, that Christ says, The Angels of little ones in age see the
face of his Father which is in Heaven; But of little ones in spirit, who are
converted and believe in Christ, Matthew, 18. 3, 6, 10. for whose sake they are
sent, Heb. 1. 14. They are but Paedebaptists dreams, that the three Evangelists
recorded Christ's blessing little ones to check Antipaedobaptists, or to declare
that which Mr. Cragg calls a precious truth, though it be a very ly, and may be
gathered to be so even from the story. For sure if infants had been to be
baptized, Christ would have then appointed them to be baptized, and blamed his
Apostles for not doing it. And therefore Mr. Craggs questions are answered by
questions. 1. Does Christ take children in his arms. and would be have all put
out of his visible Church? Answ. Does Christ no more but take them up in his
arms, lay his hands on them, and bless them? And shall we presume to do more
without any warrant of his, even to admit them into his visible Church by
Baptism? 2. Would he have us receive them in his Name, and yet not receive them
into his visible Church, etc? Answ: Where does Christ ever bid us receive
little children in age? Where did he ever send them, that they might be
received in his name? must we make Christ's words to import that which we would
in another censure as a spice of madness, when he has told us plainly they
are his Apostles, and other Preachers he has sent whom we are to receive in
his name Mark 9. 41. Luke 9. 48. though they are as mean and contemptible as a
little child? How should children be received but by providing Nurses? would
Christ have us provide Nurses for little children? our Lord Christ expresses a
cup of cold water to drink, as some part of the reception in his name Mark 9.
41. Is this a thing fit to entertain an infant with? This is enough to answer
Mr. Craggs frivolous questions. And in answer to the words of Mr. Baxter, who
is the godly and reverend Divine he means, I say for my part, seeing the will
of Christ is that I must walk by, and his word that I must be judged by, and he
has given so full a discovery of his will in this point, I will boldly
adventure to follow his rule to baptize disciples professing faith, and had
rather answer him upon his own encouragement for not admitting by baptism those
he never appointed to be baptized, than to adventure upon the doing like Uzzah
upon mine own head that which does profane the ordinance of baptism, and
corrupt the Church of Christ.

Mr. Craggs sixth argument is; Infants are disciples; therefore they may be
baptized.

The antecedent he would prove from Acts 15. 10. in that it was circumcision
which was the yoke, which he proves from ver. 5. But he confesses it was not
circumcision only, but the attendants, and that it is no shift, but a clear
truth, that it is not circumcision as acted on infants, but as taught, imposed
on the consciences of believing Gentiles, with the rest of Moses his Law, as
necessary to salvation by some teachers (which cannot be said of infants) is so
manifest from the text, that I dare boldly say, they that assert that by
disciples Acts 15. 10. are meant, do but wrangle against clear light, and spit
against the Sun. That the text Isai. 54. 13. is not meant of infants of
believing parents, as such, but of such as having heard and learned of the
Father come to Christ, is plain from those words of our Savior John 6. 45.
alleged here by Mr. Cragg himself, as expounding the Prophet.

The seventh argument is, All that have faith may be baptized; But some infants
have faith; Therefore some infants may be baptized.

But 1. the major is not true of faith only in seed, or act secret, and not
made known.

2. Mr. Cragg alters the Conclusion, which should have been That all infants of
believers may be baptized; But then he durst not avouch the minor, that they
all have says, at least in semine the contrary being manifest from Scripture
and experience, He proves his minor.

1. From Matthew. 18. where he says, Christ expressly calls them believers. But
Christ calls not little children in age believers, ver. 6. it had been
ridiculous to threaten so heavy a doom to the offending of little children in
age, who are offended with none so much as Nurses for dressing, or chiding them
when they cry: but the Apostles and other Christian disciples are there meant.

2. They are said to receive the Kingdom of God Mark 10. that is, the grace of
God, remission of sins, and life eternal; now the Kingdom is not received, but
by faith in Christ. But only elect infants dying do receive the Kingdom,
either by faith in the seed, not in the act, or by faith in the act secret
only, and yet are not to be baptized till they make profession, not are all or
any children of believers, as theirs, elect.

3. Says Mr. Cragg, They please God, therefore Christ blesses them; but
without faith it is impossible to please God. Answ. The like argument is urged
by the Remonstrants at the Synod at Dort, It is impossible to please God
without faith, therefore election which supposes pleasing of God presupposes
faith; The answer is, that Heb. 11. 6. the pleasing of God is meant of the
works, as Enoch pleased God walking with him, and so infants please not God,
and therefore may be without faith, not of the persons, in which sense infants
may please God, that is be beloved with a love of benevolence, though not of
delight, without faith.

4. Faith must be allowed them, or not salvation, for faith purifyeth the heart
Acts 15. 9. and no unclean thing shall enter into heaven. Answ. Faith in the
seed is sufficient to make them clean, which is not denied may be in infants,
though neither Isai. 65. 20. says any such thing, and Austins words express
nothing but his own conceit according to the language of his time, but faith in
seed or act unknown does not entitle to baptism.

The eighth Argument was answered before by denying the major and minor, and
his calling those that expound 1 Cor. 7. 14. of legitimation gross Anabaptists
does but involve Melancthon, Camerarius, Musculus, etc. in the same censure,
and that it is no bastard, as Dr. Featley called it, but a genuine exposition
is demonstrated at large in my Anti-paedobaptism first part, and it is granted,
That Pagans children are holy in the Apostles sense if lawfully begotten; for
the sanctifiedness of the yoke fellow, and holiness of the children is not
ascribed to the faith of the one parent, but to the conjugal relation between
them. Romans 11. 16. The first fruits and root, are Abraham, not every believer,
The lump and branches are Abraham's children by election and faith, not every
believers, nor all Abraham's natural children: and the holiness is meant of
saving holiness, not mere outward visible holiness.

The breaking off and grassing in Romans 11. 17. are meant of the invisible
Church, in which sense Parents and children are not broken off or graffed in
together. See my Anti. paedobap. first part.

Nineth Argument tells us Of dangerous absurdities if infants should be out of
Covenant under the Gospel. But this is not all one as to be baptized; we may
grant them to be in the Covenant of grace, and yet not to be baptized, and to
be baptized, and yet not in the Covenant of grace. But let us view the
absurdities.

First, Infants (says he) would be losers by Christ's coming, and in a worse
condition than the jewish infants were, they with the parents were admitted to
the Seal of the Covenant, which was Circumcision, and not Parents with Children
to baptism.

Answ. 1. I rather think that by being not admitted to Circumcision the
condition of Parents and Children is the better by Christ's coming, since as Mr.
Cragg teaches here page 100. Circumcision is the yoke Acts 15. 10. of which
the Apostle says, Neither we nor our Fathers were able to bear it, and is so
far from being the seal of the Covenant of Grace, that (they are Mr. Craggs
own words) Circumcision was the seal or ordinance by which the Jews were bound
to observe the doctrine and the Law, meaning of Moses.

2. But were it imagined a pure Evangelical privilege, yet sure it is not such
a privilege, but Parents and Children did well without it, before Abraham's time,
and all the females from Abraham's days till Christ's. I suppose what ever
privilege it were, it was abundantly recompensed by Christ's coming without
infant baptism, except a mere empty title of visible Church Membership, which
yet will not stand them so much in stead, as to admit them to the Lords Supper,
be such an inestimable treasure as is not recompensed with the glory of the
Gospel now exhibited to spiritual persons, in spiritual benefits by the Spirit,
instead of the carnal Promises, Ordinances, and Church State of the Law.

The second is answered already, though infants be not baptized, Grace is
larger under the Gospel being extended to believers in all nations, then under
the Law to the Israelites and some few Proselytes.

The third is a speech that has neither truth, nor sobriety of expression, nor
proof, it is but a bugbear to affright the ignorant people to make use of such
as he is, and to make odious them that will not baptize infants, as counting
them as vile as the children of Turks, Tartars, or Canniballs, even as they
make them odious that will not bury their dead, as not affording them
Christian burial (though they are buried as Christ was without a Priest,) but
burying as dogs. But we know how to put a difference between Believers and
Pagans children in regard of the love God bears to us, some promises he has
made to us concerning them, the hopefullnesse of them by reason of prayers,
education, example, society, confirmed by many experiences that are
comfortable, all which things we should be contented with and not complain for
want of an imaginary privilege, which is indeed no privilege, but a damage to
our children.

I for my part look upon the children of believers unsprinkled, as precious,
and rather more hopeful than those that are. And I think Mr. Cragg, as hard a
conceit as he has of the Anabaptists and their children, yet would he be
ashamed to say as he does here of them, That they are as vile as the children
of Turks, Tartars, or Cannibals.

But that which he closes with, shows he was minded to affright the poor
ignorant people, as the Popish Priests did of old.

Fourthly (says he) They would be without God, without Christ, without hope in
the world; not the children of God, but would all be damned, for out of
covenant and visible Church (ordinarily) there is no salvation.

Answ. By Covenant, he means doubtless no other than the outward covenant,
which is not showed to be any other than baptism, and indeed we do no otherwise
put them out of the Covenant than by denying them baptism; which being
presupposed, Mr. Craggs speech must needs imply, that denying baptism inferrs
all this. Which cannot be true without conceiving, That all that are unbaptized
are without God, without Christ, without hope in the world, not the children of
God, but of the Devil, will be all damned, have no salvation. Which is not only
more than what the Epistler makes heinous in me, all that would be saved must
be baptized after profession (though it were understood by me only of
necessity of precept, which Mr. Cragg himself asserts to be imported Mark 16.
16.) but worse than Austin says, whom Mr. Cragg himself called the hard Father
of infants, and says went too far, worse than the Papists themselves speak of
the dying unbaptized. Which shows that he preached this Sermon with a bitter
and furious spirit.

His closing speech [ out of Covenant and visible Church (ordinarily) there is
no salvation.] if understood of the Covenant of saving according to election, I
grant, that neither ordinarily, nor extraordinarily is there salvation: if of
the outward Covenant (as they call it) that is, the outward administration of
Seals, it is certain there may be salvation, unless profane contempt or
wilful neglect against conscience do hinder salvation.

The speech, out of the Church is no salvation, has been interpreted by
Protestants of the invisible Church. A person of years that believes, though he
be joined to no particular visible Church, if there be not profane contempt,
or wilful neglect against conscience, may be saved. But they that are only
negatively or privatively out of the Church visible, merely for want of age to
understand the faith, and ability to make profession, may ordinarily, if by it
be meant frequently, constantly be saved, though they be not ordinarily saved
as [ordinarily] notes ordinary means, preaching the word and profession of
faith.

His last argument is, That which has continued since the Apostles times with
blessed success, must needs be lawful; But infant baptism has continued with
blessed success since the Apostles times; Ergo.

The minor is denied. The blessed success he proves not. In my Exercitation I
show many errors and corruptions which have come from it, not by accident in
respect of some persons that embraced it only, but even from the tendency of
the practice it self. I may ruly say that Paedobaptism has been as cursed a
root of corrupting the Churches, and losing the gifts of the Spirit conferred
at first commonly at baptism by laying on of hands, as I think (except some
few) any other corruption in the rites of Christian Religion. But Mr. Cragg
thinks to draw it down from the Apostles days.

He begins with words of Dionysius Areopagita, holy men have received a
tradition of the Fathers, which very words show it was not Dionysius Areopagita
mentioned Acts 17. he would doubtless have said, I have received it from
blessed Paul, not have told what other holy men have received from the Fathers,
whom Mr. Cragg vainly conceives to be meant of the Apostles. But the books that
go under his name have been so often by so many learned men, Papists and
Protestants proved to be mere counterfeits, that either it is much ignorance,
or much impudence that this is produced as his.

Salmasius sundry times speaks of them as certain, that the Author of them
was not till the fifth age. The Apostolical constitutions appear by many
observations of Scultetus, and others, not to have been written by Clement, but
of much later time. Irenaeus his words make nothing for Mr. Cragg, as he cites
them, nor as they stand in his own works. Origens speeches are in the Latin
books translated by Ruffinus, into which many things were foisted by him, and
these its probable were so as being so express against the Pelagians, nor do I
find he was ever alleged by Austin, who gathered the most Ancient testimonies
he could for Original sin and infant baptism. Therefore says Vossius in his
Theses of infant baptism, We less care for Origin, because they are not in
Greek. Cyprians testimony is granted to be in the third Century, and Ambroses
and Austins, and the Milevitan Councils and innumerable more, but all upon the
Popish errors of giving grace, and the necessity to save a child from
damnation.

Gregory Nazianzen and Tertullian before him dissuade from it, except in case
of danger of death in appearance near: out of which case the Ancients did not
baptize infants, and in that case the communion was given them: But otherwise
they baptized not infants, no not of believing parents, till they came to
years, and then they were first catechized in Lent, and then solemnly baptized
at Easter and Whitsuntide, as may be gathered even from the Common Prayer Book
in the Rubric before baptism.

It is most false that all ages, all Churches agree in infant baptism. Some
Churches never had it, some Churches five hundred years ago of the most godly
and learned that then were, did oppose it, and practice the baptism of
believers only. If Mr. Fox, and others did account Anabaptists heretics, it
was for other tenants than this. Mr. Baxter himself says no sober Divine did
ever reckon the Anabaptists as heretics merely for the error of rebaptizing,
Plain Scripture proof, etc. part 1. chap. 1. Yet Mr. Cragg bespatters
Anti-paedobaptism thus, it robs the Scripture of its truth, infants of their
right, parents of their comforts, the Church of its members, Christ of his
merits, God of his glory. Sure he has learned the art of him in the Comaedian
to calumniate boldly, imagining somewhat will be believed, though there be not
a word true. But there is more of this venom behind; That it is the mother of
many other errors; Hence sprung the Ranters, Socinians, Antitrinitarians,
Shakers, Levellers, they that are above Ordinances, Antiscripturians. Will any
believe that from the tenet which does so stiffly maintain an Ordinance should
spring the error of being above Ordinances? Or that the error of
Antiscripturians should spring from that tenet which does so strictly insist on
the Scripture? Let Mr. Cragg show any the least connection between
Antipaedobaptism and the errors he names, and he says something, else if only
the persons, and not the tenet be guilty of these errors he does but
calumniate. He might with like reason say, The Christian religion is the mother
of many other errors; hence sprung Ebionites, Cerinthians, Nicolaitans,
Gnostics, etc. Such kind of criminations are most stinking and base slanders;
unworthy a sober minded man, much more a Divine in a pulpit, speaking to many
people who examine not but take all for true, which such Rabbis talk with
confidence. The like may I say of the judgments of God. Those in Germany were
by war, the events that have happened in our days should teach us to be
sparing in our judging. Mr. Cottons speech was according to his prejudice.
Solomon Eccles. 9. 1, 2. Christ Luke 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. teach us more sobriety
than so easily to pronounce of Gods judgments. If we should judge of men and
tenants by outward judgments, Job had been condemned justly. One man had his
house burned that did not sprinkle his child, thousands have had their houses
burned who did, and perhaps upon occasion of that abuse, by means of provision
for the feast. May not we as well say. God thereby judged against
infant-sprinkling? Thousands have prospered after their refusing to baptize
infants, thousands have fain into calamities after they have baptized them. May
not we this way as well decide for Antipaedobaptists as against them? Divines
that maintain the Scriptures to be their rule should not thus judge of what is
true or false by Gods dealing with men's persons, which is often upon secret
reason, not discemable by us, but by his word which is our rule, and wherein he
has revealed his mind. The rest of Mr. Craggs speech is as vain. Does this
benefit come to parents, and children by infant baptism, that God is not
ashamed to be called their God, and the God of their seed after them, Heb. 11.
16. what a ridiculous conceit is this? The text says, that through the faith
of the persons it is, that God is not ashamed to be called their God, not their
God, and the God of their seed, much less a word of infant baptism, as if such
a benefit came by it. All the benefit he talks of that comes to infants is
either a mere empty title, or else it comes to infants as well without baptism
as with it. The Devils dealing if it be, as Mr. Cragg says, makes it appear
the faith is good into which the pretended baptism is, but not that the Baptism
is right.

Enough of this frothy, unconcocted Sermon, calculated for the ignorant and
superstitious common people, and the profane loose Gentry, who mind not
godliness in earnest, and for the blind Teachers of those parts, who know not
the Gospel, but mind their own profits more than the understanding of the
truth. From whom the Lord deliver the dark parts of this Land, and provide
teachers for the people after his own heart, that it be not as now it is in too
many parts, The blind lead the blind, and both fall into the ditch.

FINIS.

