To the Right Honorable the House of Peers assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of the Kinghts, Gentlemen, Ministers, Freeholders, and
other Inhabitants of the County of Kent.
Shows,
THat the Petitioners do with Joy and humble thankfulness acknowledge the good
Correspondency and Concurrence, which (by the blessing of God) this Honorable
House has held with the Worthy House of Commons, in passing the Bill to take
away the Votes of the Prelates in this Honorable House, and disabling them
from Temporal Employments; And for setting the Kingdom into a Posture of War
for its defense.

And the Petitioners do in like manner most humbly and heartily prosesse. That
they will ever honor this Honorable House, and to the utmost of their power
defend the same, so far as your Lordships shall continue to hold
Correspondence and Concurrence with the said House of Commons in all their just
desires and endeavors. Upon which the Petitioners do humbly conceive, greatly
depends the Peace and Welfare of this Kingdom.

And the Petitioners most humbly pray, That this Honorable House (declaring
therein your Noble Resolutions for the public good) would be pleased to go on
with the said House of Commons, to a through Reformation, especially of the
Church, according to the Word of God; To press dispatch for the aid of
Ireland; To expedite proceedings against Delinquents; To Vindicate Parliament
Privileges; To discover, remove, and punish evil Counselors; To deprive the
Popish Lords of their Votes; To difarm and search out Papists, and put them
into safe custody; To suppress Mass, both in public and private; To cast out
scandalous Ministers, plant painful Preachers every where; And discover who
are Church Papists, as well as known Recusants,

And the Petitioners shall daily pray, etc. This is the perfect Copy which was
presented to the House of Peers on the eighth of this instant February.



London, Printed for to Joseph Hunsco^t. 1641.


