A FEW WORDS OF COUNSEL AND ADVICE TO ALL The Sons and Daughters of MEN; More
Especially to the Children of Believers.

FROM The Motion of Gods Spirit upon my Heart, in the Love of God that they may
come to lead the course of their Lives in this World; so as to lay down their
Heads in Peace with the Lord, when time in this World shall be no more.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1687.

A few Words of Counsel and Advice to all the Sons and Daughters of Men, etc.
1. ADvice to Children that they learn the Fear of the Lord; and then they will
hate Pride and Arrogance, and every evil way, and then they will be in a
capacity to seek after the way of the Lord, which is found of them that seek
after it, which blessed be God many have found, and do walk in it, and do find
peace as they continue walking therein to their immortal Souls.

The beginning of all the Sons and Daughters of Men, should be to learn the
Fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of Wisdom, and to depart from
Iniquity, that is a good understanding, but to the Grief of my heart, I often
see, instead hereof, they learn Wantonness, Pride, Arrogance, and every evil
way: And take pleasure in walking in the broad Way which leads to
destruction; although the Lord by his Light and Grace has appeared to teach them,
To deny Ungodliness, and Worldly Lust, and to live Godlily, Righteously, and
Soberly in this present evil World; the which makes the hearts of many sad,
when we see after our often Endeavors and Labors we have bestowed, how
ineffectual it is to some Children of whom we had hopes concerning them in
their minority, when very young, that they might have continued as Paterns and
Examples to them that might follow them of good: But by reason of the liberty
they run into, for to gratify the fleshly mind, we are afraid we have bestowed
much labor in vain upon many of them, therefore a word in my heart to Caution
all to be wise, and consider their latter End; and be entreated to mind and not
slight the love of God to their Souls, that the Lord should raise up your
Parents, that they might be a kind of First Fruits unto God, in whom the Lord
has vouchsafed to place His Name amongst: and has made it Honorable. Oh,
prize the great love of God to them, and to you herein, that you have had not
only Nursing Fathers and Mothers for your Bodies but for your Souls also Oh,
the sorrow and trouble that is come upon many, to see their Childrens minds
lifted up after vanity, they being departed in a large measure from the Grace
of God. Oh, be awakened, I beseech you, Why will ye Die? The wages of Sin is
Death. Oh, be entreated to break off from your Sins by a timely Repentance: Let
none say, I am Young, and after I am more grown in years, I shall leave off
those superfluous things, and incline to be more sober: I warn all to have a
care how they make these delayed Proposals, lest to their woe and misery it
proves to be to all Eternity. For can the Ethiopian change his Skin, or the
Leopard his Spots? No more can they do well who are accustomed to do Evil. This
is written in true love to the Souls of young People that are in the motions of
sin, to exhort and entreat them to Repent of their misdeeds, and to cease to do
Evil, and to learn to do well, and then they may draw near unto God; and the
Lord has promised he will draw near unto such; and then life to your Souls
you will come to witness. And here you will come to receive from God life to your
immortal Souls. As many as comes to witness this, never had cause to repent
that forsook the Worlds Fashions, Customs, and Traditions. For such have
received an hundred fold in this life; and they have Faith in the Promise of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who has promised everlasting Life also. Therefore young
People be entreated to lay aside the sin of Pride, For as out of the abundance
of the heart the mouth speaks: so by the Immodesty, Pride, and Costliness of
Habit people wears, their hearts appear, For the Tree is known by its Fruit:
Therefore let none seek to cover their sins, for they that do will never
prosper. This is in a few words to warn all young People to Flee from the wrath
to come: For it will be more tolerable for those that were the Children of
Unbelieving Parents, who knew not the Truth as it is in Jesus, when you must
come to give an account to the Lord of the deeds done in the Body. Oh,
Consider, consider the Lords love to your Souls: the Lord has given you
warning after warning from his People, but many hardened their Hearts, and will
not hear reproof. Oh, that you that are Children of Believing Parents, may
become clean Vessels fit to receive and hold the heavenly Treasure. And you
that are believing Parents, may not be wanting to bring up your Children in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, and giving good Example. Much I could
write, my heart being opened by the Lord, but a word to the wise is sufficient;
but consider the many warnings you have had of late. The Ground that the Rain
often descends upon, and yet brings fourth nothing but Briars and Thorns. Oh,
consider what is said to be the end of it. This I have cast in as a ^ittle
Mite, who am a Traveller for the prosperity of Sion, and that Jerusalem may
become the praise of the whole Earth.

Blessed are all the Sons and Daughters of men that are come to love the Lord
with all their Hearts; and to hate Pride and Arrogance, and every evil way; and
that comes to love the Law of God written in their hearts; And whose hearts
are inclined to keep it, and are found Meditating in it Day and Night: These
are they that the Lord causes to grow and prosper, and are blessed in all
their Undertakings: And such are Trees of Righteousness, the planting of the
Lord, and they bring forth much fruit, to the Praise and Glory of the Name of
the Lord, whose Name is worthy to be exalted over all for ever.

Written the 20th day of the First Month, 1686/7. A. T.

A Short Testimony Sprang and Opened in my Heart unto all Young Men and Women,
who make Profession and Confession of the blessed Name of JESUS.
DEar and well beloved Friends of Truth, whom the Lord has Convinced of his
Blessed Way of Life, that only gives true Peace and Satisfaction to the
immortal Soul, and has gathered your hearts and minds, in any measure, into
the Covenant of Life, Peace, and Salvation,
it is in my heart to lay down in plainness something of the dealings of the
Lord with me, as the Lord opens me, and enlightens the eye of my understanding,
and brings things to my remembrance. Dear Friends, the Lord in days past, and
in years that are gone, convinced me of the vain Fashions of the World in my
(Trade or) Calling; but not being faithful to the blessed manifestation of
Light; nor giving up to the requirings of the Spirit of the Lord upon my mind;
but after some time, let in the Spirit of the World (for want of true hearty
obedience to the Lord) and gave the exercise of my mind and hands (to be a
Slave) to that Spirit that runs into the superfluities of things, altogether
needless, by which my understanding became darkened, by reason of disobedience
to the heavenly Call, in these things my Soul received a great wound. I hope I
need not mention particular things, but all Friends who are concerned, may
understand what I here hint at, as there is a waiting in the light of Life, to
feel what the Spirit of the Lord moves against: For, dear Friends, the Lord
has showed me, it is below the Nobility of the Truth which we profess, to be
as Slaves to that Spirit that runs into these changable things, for it is my
Testimony it is a destroying the Creation of God; and so it is as bad as
Gluttony and Drunkenness: And so, my dear Friends, who are convinced of the
blessed everlasting Truth, be faithful to the Lord, I dearly beseech you, as
one that have been near the brink of the horrible pit of Darkness, and have
known the stroke of God's dreadful correcting hand for disobedience, and have
somewhat been acquainted with the misterious wiles of Satan, the Enemy of all
Righteousness; Therefore, my dear Friends, I beseech you, whose hearts the Lord
has touched with his Love, be faithful to the Lord, and keep out of the vain
Fashions of the World, and take heed of that curious mind that can hardly be
pleased, but all wait for the feeling of the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of
God, that slays sin and cuts down Transgression, and pierces through the
Scales of the Serpent, for his Scales is his Pride, shut up together as with a
close Seal, for he is a King and Rules over all the Children of Pride:
Therefore Friends, watch against him, for he has many Snares, and many Gins:
Therefore, my dear Friends, wait low upon the Lord, that you may feel that
which stops Satan's Gins, and breaks the Bonds of the Wicked One, for whosoever
is overtaken with these Snares, it will lead such from the solid life; and so,
my dear Friends, I beseech you be modest and sober, that herein you may judge
them that run into that vain, proud, fantastical Spirit which is become as a
God amongst People; yea, as I may say the greatest God that many thousands of
People Worship, for that which is the chiefest exalted in the heart of Man, or
in the heart of Woman, that is their God, and that they worship, and that they
fall down unto, let it be of what nature soever it is; And therefore, my dearly
beloved Friends, I dearly beseech you, wait for the feeling of the
incorruptible Seed, that you may be true born Heirs of that blessed everlasting
Kingdom that shall never have an end, which comes not with observations, as
Christ said when he was demanded by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of Heaven
should come, he said, The Kingdom of Heaven comes not with Observations, not in
the Lo here, or the Lo there, but behold the Kingdom of Heaven is within you.
[Mark] He said to the Scribes and Pharisees (tho they did not believe in his
Name) that the Kingdom of Heaven was within them, but they were not in it (see
ye) so the Kingdom of Heaven may be in a man, and that man out of the Kingdom;
therefore Friends, let a true and a narrow search be made in every heart, and
wait for the feeling of that little Seed of the Kingdom, which was compared to
a grain of Mustard Seed, which is the least of all Seeds: But when it i^ grown
it is the greatest amongst Herbs, and becomes a Tree; so that the Birds of the
Air come and lodge in the Branches thereof. Another Parable our Lord and
Savior spoke unto them, The Kingdom is like unto Leaven, which a Woman took
and hid in three Measures of Meal, till the whole was Leavened; therefore let
all wait for this, that the old nature may be wrought out, by the Operation of
the word of Life, for it is as powerful in its Operation as ever it was, it is
not at all changed in its Nature or Property, but is the same: and it works the
same works in all them that dwell in the Love of the Truth, as ever it did in
ancient Days. Oh, there is an excellent virtue in this blessed Seed: Oh that
it were more known amongst the Sons and Daughters of Men; Therefore, my dear
Friends, Brethren, and Sisters, whose hearts the Lord has in any measure
touched with his Love. Oh, wait more and more for the feeling of this blessed
Seed, that a real work and through change, you may all come to witness by the
power of this blessed Seed of Jacob, the Noble Seed, the heavenly found Seed of
Abraham, to which all must bow or be broken by it; for whosoever falls upon it
shall be broken and tendered; but on whomsoever it falls it will grind them to
powder. And so, my dear Friends, this is the desire of my heart, and the
breathing of my Soul to the Lord, that all whose faces are turned Sion-wards,
may wait for the bringing forth of the Birth and Babe Immortal, and hearken to
its Cry. Oh, the Cry of the Babe Immortal, and the breathing forth of It unto
the Father; all wait this day to feel; then, I know, pure Praises and living
Thanksgivings will arise up unto the Father, naturally out of the mouth of that
Birth, for it is the nature of the Babe Immortal to breath unto the Father, and
to bless, praise and magnify the Name of the Father that begets it: and so, my
Friends, wait so upon God, that you may feel that holy Seed (which God has
sown in your hearts) to grow and to prosper; that it may bring forth fruit to
the praise of God, for have not our Souls been in a deep Travel, and our
Spirits pained within us, when we went weeping and mourning, enquiring the way
to Sion? And therefore, my Friends, whom the Lords Arm has in any measure
reached unto, Arise, arise, and shake your selves from the dust of the Earth,
and come up to the help of the Lord, against the Mighty power of Darkness (to
wit, the Devil) the grand Enemy of the Souls of all men, that i(...) you may
feel the arising of Sions Glory, for the Day of the Lord is broken forth, and
his blessed Day, his glorious Day sprung from on High has visited our Souls in
an acceptable Day, and in a time of need: blessed be the Name of the Lord our
God for ever. And as much as we have obtained mercy with the God of mercy: Oh,
my dear Friends, prize his Love, prize his mercies, and let them be as a double
engagement upon your Spirits to feat before him, that so you may feel the
aboundings and super aboundings of his Love flowing forth into your bosom
daily, so that none be as the careless Daughters of ^ion. But all be faithful
to your first Loves, not only remain in the ourward Courts, or in an outward
Conformity to the Truth, or covered with Self-righteousness, but that you may
be as (...) Savior upon Mount Sion that can never be removed, For ye are the
Salt of the Earth, but if the Salt have lost its Savor, wherewith shall it be
salted: it is henceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden
underfoot of Men, says our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; who said, I am the
Vine, ye are the Branches, and as the Branches cannot bring forth Fruit but as
they abide in the Vine no more can ye, except ye abide in me. So, my dear
Friends, wait for the feeling of his Light and Life, that ye may be kept in the
love of the Truth, that the Seed may take deep t^^^ downward, and bring forth
fruit upward, that the Plant of Gods renown, which his own right hand has
planted, may grow up in every ones Heart; for every Plant that my heavenly
Fathers Hand has not Planted, shall be plucked up, And every Tree that brings
not forth good Fruit, shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire: And so I
dearly beseech you all Young Men and Women, who are convinced of the Lords
blessed everlasting Truth. Fashion not your selves according to your former
Lusts in your ignorance, but let the time past be sufficient, whose adorning
(says the Apostle) Let it not be that of putting on of Apparel; but mind the
hidden man of the heart, which is a meek and quiet Spirit, which is with the
Lord of great Price; This was the Apostles wholesome exhortation and admonition,
For after this manner (says he) in the old time, the holy Women of old, who
trusted in God, adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own Husbands,
even as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him, Lord, whose Daughters ye are as long
as you do well, and are not afraid with any amazement; Therefore, Friends, take
good heed unto your selves, that ye love the Lord your God, that so the pure
fear of the Lord be lived in, that we may walk low before the Lord in the
Humility of our Spirits, that we may in all things adorn the Doctrine of the
Gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who has called us with an high
and holy Calling, for if we be not faithful to the Lord who has in mercy
reached unto us, then we do not answer the end for which we are Called. And so
the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, throughout, in Soul, Body, and
Spirit, that the God of all Grace, who has Called us into his Eternal Glory by
Christ Jesus (after you have suffered a while) make you per^ and Establish,
Strengthen and Settle you. To Him be Glory and Dominion over all who is God
over all, blessed for ever and for evermore.

Given forth by a lover of Truth, who desires the prosperity of Sions Seed, R.
N.

THE END*

