Ex AEd. Lamb. Feb. 29. 1663.
Imprimatur

Geo. Stradling S. T. P. Rever. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiep. Cant. a Sac.
Domest.

Saints no Smiters: OR, SMITING CIVIL POWERS Not the Work of SAINTS.

BEING A TREATISE, Showing the Doctrine and Atempts of QUINTO-MONARCHIANS, OR,
FIFTH-MONARCHY-MEN About Smiting Powers, to be damnable and Antichristian.

By JOHN TOMBS, B. D.

Matthew. 26. 52. Then said Jesus unto him; Put up again thy Sword into his
place: for all they that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.

LONDON, Printed by R. D. for Henry Eversden at the Greyhound in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1664.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD EARL of CLARENDON, LORD CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND.
BY Divine Providence declared in my Writings upon His Majesty's return into
this Kingdom, I was engaged in the asserting the Oath of His Majesty's
Supremacy, which drew upon me a necessity of arguing the point of taking any
Oath at all, in somewhat an ample Treatise about Swearing, which being
presented to him it pleased His Majesty to accept of. Since which time I have
employed much of my study in a Treatise of the Kingdom of God, and the seeking
it: But having made some entrance into it, and finding it likely to become too
large for the end intended, to wit, the undeceiving of those, who under
pretense of setting up the Kingdom of God, think it their duty to demolish all
present Powers as Antichristian, they being persons averse from reading any
thing that is prolix, I have chosen rather to cut this part out of the whole
piece, than to stay the finishing of the rest. Such as it is I presume to
present it to your Honor, (in humble gratitude for that voluntary unthought of
favor toward me, which moved you of your own accord and goodness to insinuate
to His Majesty your ancient knowledge, and later apprehensions of me, by which
means I have enjoyed that peace, which is through His Majesty's goodness yet
vouchsafed me) which I humbly crave your Honor to accept of from

Your Honors devoted, and deeply obliged Servant in our Lord, JOHN TOMBS.

The Contents.
1. THe Occasion of this Treatise is declared. 2. The words of
Quinto-Monarchians expressing their opinions about seeking Christ's Kingdom in
this Age are recited. 3. Their Doctrine about smiting Civil powers is proved
from Scripture precepts to be wicked. 4. The exceptions of Fifth-Monarchy-men
and others against the first Argument are refelled. 5. Suppositions implied in
the Quinto-Monarchians exceptions about the stone and its smiting, Dan. 2. 34,
35, 44, 45. are showed to be mistakes, or uncertainties. 6. Quinto-Monarchians
Hypotheses about the Civil Governments being from the 4th Monarchy, Rome and
the Dragon are showed to be groundless. 7. More Arguments are urged against
Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine from precepts and examples of holy persons. 8. More
Arguments are urged from Censures and determinations in the New Testament. 9.
Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine of smiting Civil Powers inciteth to resisting of
evil and self-revenging, forbidden by Christ and his Apostles. 10.
Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine tends to Murder and ruin of humane Society. 11.
The 9th and 10th Arguments from the meekness, peaceableness and patience of
Saints are urged, against the smiting work of Quinto-Monarchians. 12. The 11th
and 12th Arguments from the contrariety of the Martyrs example and agreement
with Papists Doctrine and practice, are urged against the Quinto-Monarchians.
13. The smiting work of Quinto-Monarchians is grounded on falsities or
uncertainties concerning the Agents, means, and time of the smiting, Dan. 2.
34, 35, 44, 45. 14. Many things are groundless and false, which the
Quinto-Monarchians suppose and take for Articles of their faith, concerning the
Fifth Monarchy and its setting up. 15. The claim which the Quinto-Monarchians
make to Civil Government on earth in the Saints before Christ's coming is false.
16. The Reasons and Arguments of Fifth-Monarchy Men for their separation and
engaging against Civil powers, are showed to be vain.
Saints no Smiters: Smiting CIVIL POWERS not the work of SAINTS. OR, A Treatise
showing the Doctrine and Attempts of Quinto-Monarchians to be Damnable and
Antichristian.
1. The Occasion of this Writing is declared.
IT was our Saviors injunction to his Disciples, Matthew. 6. 33. that they should
first seek the Kingdom of God; and it was his care to direct how they were to
seek it; to wit, by Prayer for its coming, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom,
suffering patiently for it, and living holily according to his Precepts and
Example: And accordingly the holy Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and Believers
in Christ have in the several Ages since Christ's appearing in the flesh
promoted the Kingdom of God by these means. Nevertheless (to omit other
Instances, whether of former or later times) there has been a company of men
in this Nation, noted by the Name of Fifth-Monarchy-men, or Quintomonarchians,
who have in Sermons and in Printed Writings asserted another way, which is like
the barbarous proceedings of Turks, or bloody Papists, of setting up the
supposed visible Kingdom of God by bodily weapons, fighting against all the
present Civil Powers on Earth as Antichristian, and in most cruel manner
killing all that oppose them, and determining this to have been the Generation
work they were to prosecute in this Age. By what degrees and means they came to
such monstrous Opinions they can best tell, who have been acquainted with them.
The cursed effects of such Opinions as have been hatched and vented by the men
of that persuasion, after sundry other attempts before that time frustrated,
brake out in the beginning of January 1660. in the City of London, a small
number of men dementate by those Conceits in a most horrid furious manner,
making a most bloody Insurrrection, in a most violent audacious way not to be
paralleled. Those Principles by which they acted and their Practices, were, to
my knowledge, opposed some years before in some of the Congregations to which
some of the Assertors had joined themselves, and they thence solemnly ejected,
and their Doctrine in the Confessions of Faith of those Congregations, and some
other Apologetical and Polemical Writings rejected and impugned.

And after that Insurrection presently those persons who were obnoxious to
suspicion and obloquy as abettting or fomenting that Attempt, by reason of
their dissent from the received way of Ecclesiastical Rites and Government, did
by humble Apologies and otherwise acquit themselves from that crimination.
Nevertheless, having met with some of the Writings of the men, whose Principles
animated that Rising; and fearing, that there may yet some sparks of that fire
lie unquenched, after the publishing of some Writings against the Papists, to
show the insufficiency of their proofs for the Truth, Visibility, Holiness,
Infallibility of their Church, Supremacy of their Pope, the certainty of their
unwritten Traditions* necessity of receiving the Trent Faith, and joining to
the Roman Church as it is now governed; and some other against Quakers about
the Light within each man, as an insufficient Rule to guide us to God; about
the Oaths of the King's Supremacy and Allegiance to him; and upon that occasion
somewhat an ample Treatise about Swearing; asserting, That under the Gospel
there is yet a lawful use of swearing; being now debarred of other Ministerial
employment, I have conceived it a necessary work to show the weakness of those
suppositions, upon which the Quinto-monarchians have been drawn to such an
hideous practice, as that accursed action forementioned was.

2. The words of Quinto-monarchians expressing their Opinions about seeking
Christ's Kingdom in this Age are recited.
THere was a Book printed, made in the year 1656. as is noted page 18. bearing
this Title, The Banner of Truth displayed; or a Testimony for Christ, and
against Antichrist, being the substance of several Consultations, holden and
kept by a certain number of Christians, who are waiting for the visible
appearance of Christ's Kingdom in and over the World, and residing in and about
the City of London. In the first page of the Epistle Dedicatory are these
words: And truly it evidently appears, that Rome and the Nations of Europe
(commonly called the Protestant, but are the Antichristian Countries) which are
the streets of the Great City, and Rome-Babylon, are the Akeldama, or Field of
blood. And some pages after mentioning powers since the rise of the Beast with
ten horns and ten crowns, and their success, it is said: Now for that we
apprehend, that the present Generation in which we live, is that time in which
this great work of Reformation (rending and tearing the very foundations of the
Beasts Civil power up by the roots; the fall of the tenth part of Rome's
Dominions; a great slaughter amongst the great men and implacable Enemies of
Christ; and the final result, the Kingdoms of the world becoming Christ's
possession) will begin; and that time in which the first dispensation of our
Lord's Kingdom shall take place; and that it shall not pass before these things
be fulfilled: Therefore we are against these Governments as now constituted,
and growing upon the old root of wickedness and bitterness, that (time out of
mind) have brought forth and produced nothing but bloud-Monsters; and to Rule
by those Laws that Bastards Tyrants and Conquerors have made for their Lusts
sake, in opposition to the Law and the Testimony, Isay 8. 20. We cannot contend
for any Government whatsoever that is of Man's erecting, building and planting,
where any thing of this old Foundation may remain and be left; and which good
men, moral men, civil men may exercise upon a merely civil account, (for all
men as they are men have lost their rights and privileges in respect of
Government in the first Adam; but Saints have regained them in the second Adam,
or Lord from Heaven) and by force and virtue of men's Laws (though but the best
of those Laws, and those called fundamental, so they are where no more
righteous is found) for the Lord will pluck up and destroy root and branch; and
the Lord will not have a stone of Babels confused building for a corner, nor a
stone for a foundation. We cannot therefore but (as in duty by our Allegiance
to this King bound) proclaim, That Jesus Christ is the only lawful and true
begotten Heir, and lawful King and Potentate of these three Nations, and of all
the Nations of the Earth, and (as he is the seed of Abraham) shall possess the
Earth; yea, and the very Gates of his Enemies; and that the sole Legislative
power of the Nations is, and does of right appertain and belong to him, and
shall be exercised by him, Dan. 7. 27. Jer. 10. 7. Isa. 9. 6, 7. Gal. 3. 16.
etc. Hence then it necessarily follows, That those beast-like powers now in
being in the world, and those (if any) which shall succeed upon that bottom
that Rebel-like will not assign their said power, Crowns and Scepters to this
great Monarch, are, and shall be deemed and adjudged Traitors, and proceeded
against accordingly, by virtue of this Kings Laws. And truly we are soberly and
humbly bold in the Lord Jehovah's strength to assert, That the Saints of the
most High (be they who or where they will) and faithful remnant, are a people
distinct from the world, and formal Professors, and are but Pilgrims and
strangers in this state of affairs, men of another Kingdom and World; and are
by themselves a Commonwealth, and Free State: and therefore it is to be
desired, from good and sound grounds, that they would exercise that Royal
Authority which God has given unto them, and invested them with, as they are
Saints by calling. And upon this account we humbly conceive, that it is lawful
for them to use all honest and just means to defend themselves and offend their
enemies; and to contend against those that do or shall oppose them in their
work and business, which is according to the pattern showed unto them in the
Mount, and Law of Christ, ordained and declared throughout the Scriptures. It
is observable, that we are even already arrived the overturning days; we mean
those times in which God will begin to smite the Governments and powers of the
great Image: which is a little after expressed thus; the total annihilation and
subversion of all the powers of this World, of what quality soever, ruling
either in Antichrists earth, or civil State, or in his Heaven, or Christ-state,
by the first dispensation of Christ's visible Kingdom, which we have spoken of,
or that of the stone. Hence it is, that we bear a constant and public
testimony against powers, as the subject of Gods displeasure, and that which
must be plucked up. We expect the Gentile Saints shall begin this great work.

In the Book it self, having p. 1. said They were resolved to proceed in their
way of Consultation for the clearing up these matters of their faith, and
principles of their hope, they thus write, That there is oppression in the
earth in all Nations, as also in England at this present time, is undeniable:
for, no man can say, that there is no oppression, unless we will also affirm,
that there is no Dragon in power, no Antichrist, Beast, Babylon, Whore, nor
false Prophet; which how absurd a thing it is let all judge. But the Man of Sin
is still in the Seat of Authority, and the Governments of these Nations are
Antichristian, therefore oppression is not ceased: Neither will there be any
lasting Cessation of cruelty, until the fifth Kingdom be set up; when the
whole Earth shall be at rest, and the fourth Kingdom, which divides it self
into two Iron legs; ten toes and a little horn, be wholly destroyed in all the
Laws, Constitutions, Governments and Relics thereof; for the Spirit and life
that is in that Beast, or Kingdom, is the Spirit of the old Dragon, who is the
Devil and Satan, that old Serpent, whose seed do continually war against the
Woman, which is Christ's Mystical body; there being great enmity between them
two* p. 4. That dispensation which Jehovah, by his providence has cast us
under, is, the overturning dispensation, the time of War, and beating of
Plough-shares into Swords, which Christ, and the Scriptures speak of; that day
in which Christ will appear in his stone, the stone of Israel, against the
powers of the world, to the end he may be invested in his possessions, which is
the Kingdom and Dominions, and their greatness under the whole Heavens; and
therefore we conclude that it is an unlawful thing, and therefore men ought not
to contribute to the upholding, and maintaining of those powers which shall be
broken by this dispensation, left happily they be found fighters against God.
p. 6. The will of man having been corrupted ever since the fall of man, the
Laws that proceed from that will must need be so. p. 11. We say the oppressor
which makes us to groan is Babylon, in her several parts and powers in England:
Rulers, Lawyers, Priests and Soldiers; for the present Government in England
must of necessity be confessed to be either a part of the ten Horns of the
ravenous fourth Beast, or else that wicked little Horn Dan. 7. Because they are
the last evil powers that shall be over the Nations of Europe, and therefore we
may safely conclude this to be an Assyrian, else we must conclude him to be a
part of that Kingdom, set up by the God of Heaven; but that cannot be, because
he rules by the Laws of his Predecessors, and shall Christ be beholding to
Antichrist for Laws? No certainly; he is of the fourth, and therefore we need
not run far to look this oppressor, having already found him to be the present
Government, with its dependents, and appurtenances, being a piece of that
monstrous Beast, whom the Dragon (i. e. the Devil Revel. 20. 2.) Assigns Power
and Seat, and great authority unto, who branches himself into so many
Monarchical Governments in the Nations of Europe, and which men would persuade
us to submit to as being lawful, and of God, but they execute the Laws of
Antichrist, and rule for him in Tyranny; oppression and persecution by politic
Laws which they make, and for which the Priests and Lawyers plead, and
mercinary Soldiers and Officers execute. p. 12. The persons oppressed, we take
it, are the most spiritual enlightened Saints in these Nations, whose spirits
and affections are stirred up to follow Christ in the work of the Generation,
the good interest now contended for, whom we call the Generation of public
spirited Saints. The administration of Christ's visible Kingdom and rule over
the Nations is endeavored to be suppressed in this juncture of time. And not
only the thing it self is opposed as dangerous, and endeavored by Matchiavil's
principle, argument and power, as heretical, as monstrous; but the Doctrine and
Gospel of that Kingdom and Office of Christ, (which shall be preached for a
witness to all Nations) is slighted and rejected by self-interested men, and
contemned by most. p. 13. They have made a Law that those that shall speak
against the powers must be Traitors, which in effect is to make those Traitors
that speak for this Kingdom. The conversion of the Gentiles and poor ignorant
sinners to the Faith of Christ's visible Kingdom is opposed. And p. 14 The
establishment of Justice and righteousness in the world: and therefore with us
arise for the lot of our inheritance; prepare therefore your victuals, your
purse, and your scrip, but especially your sword, though you sell your coat for
it. p. 23. The Parliament as being built upon the old foundation was a part of
the beast. p. 24. It is clear that the dispensation of the Stone shall begin to
smite the power of the Beast, or Civil power, and that quarrel is begun and
taken up and continued chiefly against that power. p. 25. Found to be from Hell
and not from Heaven. p. 27. The glass of the beasts powers being almost run out
in these Nations, what remains but that the Saints take into their own
possession the Kingdom and power (which is their birthright, as freemen of the
Commonwealth of Israel, and Heirs of the whole world with Christ, Gal. 3. 29.)
which the Beast and his powers has unjustly detained from them some hundreds
of years. p. 28. That the work of this Stone is a smiting work, or a work
wherein the Saints employed shall visibly appear in a military posture for
Christ, which we call the great combat between Christ and the Kings and Rulers
of the world. For the Saints shall fall upon, or smite that great Image, the
Feet and Toes thereof, and the whole Roman Monarchy, as now divided, or all
those powers, whose derivation is from Rome (others not excepted nor freed)
shall be thereby smitten, we mean the Kingdoms of the Romish Iron-legs, or the
Roman Kingdom divided into the Eastern, and western Monarchies, (wherein the
whole Dominion, Power and Monarchy of the Ottoman Family, or that of the Turks,
is comprehended) and the Beasts ten horns, or Antichrists civil powers
(equivalent to the ten toes) and also the little Horn, together with all powers
whatsoever that shall be found opposers of the Lords Kingdom, whether they be
of the golden Babylonish, silver Persian, brazen Grecian, or Iron Roman Dan. 2.
and chapter 7. Revel. 13. chapter 17. So that we comprehend the whole Kingdom of
Antichrist in the Civil Ecclesiastical parts thereof made up of Persons and
things. p. 29. The fifth Kingdom, which is Christ's, with its holy, just and
righteous Laws and Officers must arise with destruction to, and stand up in
place of the 4th. Kingdom, and the Laws and Officers thereof. p. 30. Because
it is the purchase of the blood, and death of our Lord Jesus Christ. p. 15. Now
then we say, that called the Ordinance of God, proves the Ordinance of the
Devil, and though the powers of the great Image might be taken for the
Ordinance of God, so long as they kept their pure, civil and unmixed state; so
says Paul, the powers that be (i. e. the civil powers of old Rome, tho a
bloody persecutor, and devourer of the creation and good heritage) are ordained
of God; yet when the power of Rome adulterated from its pure civil state, and
becomes a mixed Antichristian state, the Beast and a Whore then it is said of
that Beastly, Antichristian power, that the Dragon, or Satan gave him his
power, and Seat, and great authority; and what then is this save the Ordinance
of Hell? God has revealed this by his Spirit from his word, unto a little
remnant, who see the rottenness and hellish foundation of all the Civil powers
of the Beast. And how great an argument is this also to us that the rise and
work of the Stone is near? Which is principally against the Civil power. p. 52.
It is certain, that it is a duty in Saints to hate Gods Enemies; yea, and more
particularly to hate the Civil, or Beast-like power, because it is that which
upholds the great Whore, and is a fighter against Christ's Kingly office, even
with a perfect hatred, as we see and find a Remnant do at this day. p. 55. The
Lord will use, and engage his people to act in, and perform such a destroying
work upon the world, as this work of the stone is, namely the total commotion
and dissolution of the old Heavens, and old Earth, and all the created powers
ruling therein; because it is the decree, determination, promise and
appointment of the Father. p. 56. The Lord by these figurative expressions,
holds forth the dissolution of all old things formal Antichristian
Church State, Ordinances, Worship, Discipline, and Doctrine, all beast-like,
wordly Governments, Institutions, Laws, politic Constitutions, Powers, etc. In
a word, the Heavens, and the Earth of all the Nations Isai. 5. 30. p. 57. So
that Jesus Christ will admit of no competitors, but will have the sole
legislative power, and exercise of the chief Magistracy, and be Lord Paramount
over the whole Earth; and therefore God is engaged to appear with his smiting
Stone, to make way for this glorious Mountain of peace. p. 59. That all the
blood of Gods people is found in Babylon: For they (i. e. her Civil powers
Revel. 16. 6, 7.) have shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets Revel. 17. 6.
chapter 18. 24. and 19. 1. Jer. 50. 14. now therefore God by way of recompense and
retaliation has ordained, that the Saints shall be his instruments by which he
will execute his vengeance upon the powers of the World, who are all of them
Murderers: accordingly God commands his people (and it is their duty to obey)
to reward Babylon double as she rewarded them Revel. 18. 6. and they shall give
her blood to drink. p. 62. The call which the stone shall have to act in its
smiting work, is for the greatest part thereof now pertinent and fitly
applicable to a faithful remnant now extant in England, and fulfilled in and
upon them, and also seeing that the signs laid down in the word of God, for
the time of the end, are in a great measure now fulfilled, and accomplished in
Englands Remnant; therefore we conclude, and assert, that it is lawful and
warrantable, and is a duty incumbent for captivated Sion; and oppressed Saints,
to stand up in Gods name and fear, and deliver themselves, and that glorious
Gospel of the Kingdom; now by them declared to the world from persecution,
oppression, and that long Captivity and Bondage, which she has remained in;
and to break the Yoke of the oppressor, which is now upon her Neck, according
to the word and commandment of the Lord. Zach. 2. 7. Isai. 52. 2. We are
persuaded that the work of the Stone is the present work of this generation,
and our present work, and do accordingly exhort the Saints, to arise to fall
upon the enemy. p. 63. The Saints in order to this smiting work shall be
converted from all the Civil power and Rule of Antichrist; and the ten Horned
Beast, upon which the mystery harlot sits. p. 65. That it is their duty to
withdraw their Hands, Hearts, Affections, Purses, and prayers from the Civil
power, or power of the Beast; that they shall quit all their interest, and
claim, in, and to the old Heavens, and Earth, and state of things; shall
forsake Father Mother, etc. And shall convert Houses, Lands, Possessions and
Enjoyments (commanded to be prudently beat into Swords and Spears) into one
common stock, to be consecrated for the management of this great Affair. p. 66.
And in such a practice they shall be no loosers, Christ will give them an
hundred fold; even the spoil of all their great and rich Enemies, who are his
opposers, and in the end an eternal Crown. The Saints are, with Moses, to
refuse Court Honor, and favor, and preferment, Egyptians wisdom, Learning,
Revenues and great Riches: with David, to leave their common duties (as matters
of small value, and little concernment, in comparison of this noble, and worthy
employment) to fight against the Philistines (so are the Civil powers) or
common Enemy to the Commonwealth of Israel. p. 71 We do profess we cannot be
content, or satisfied until Christ's Kingdom flourish, but will (in Gods name
and strength) press forward till we come to the mark, which is the state of the
true rest (so we call that Kingdom and power) where the Saints shall cease from
all their labors, in and with Christ. p. 69. Does not the Lord call the Saints
to arise also unto the prey? p. 71. The work of God against Nations, Provinces,
Universities, Corporations, Cities, Towns, Kings, Rulers, chief Captains,
mighty Men, in Church and Commonwealth, Enemies of Christ's Kingly Office,
shall be the lesson of faithful Saints; the true way will be discovered and
made plain, all Rebels, and Traitors, open and profane, more close pretenders,
and formally Godly, discovered, hatred, in and among his Saints against those
several parts, forms, powers of Babylon; doleful howling, and mourning among
the Merchants of Babylon, who are the great and rich men whose hearts dwell on
the Earth. p. 75. The Saints must separate not only from the Romish Universal,
National, Provincial, and Diocesan Church State of Babylon, and Antichrist;
together with their Discipline, Doctrine, Worship and Ceremonies: But also and
more particularly (which is most properly a work precedent to be done by the
Saints in order to the smiting work of the Stone) from the national, and
parochial Parish Church State and assemblies, forms and classes, of this and
other Antichristian Nations; which we call the Politic (and no more than
Civil) Stratagem, and cunning invention of Antichrist: to divide unto himself
the whole Land for gain, whereby all men to the lowest rank, are compelled
forcibly to contribute to the maintenance of his false Prophet, and so
wickedness is established by a Law: Again further from those Churches that are
select, and more pure as being seemingly refined, which are the gathered in a
pastoral way (reducing things to primitive practice) so far as they are
corrupted and adulterated and found opposers of the Kingly Office of Jesus
Christ, in and over the whole world; and more especial in the Administration of
this part, or dispensation of that Kingdom, to wit, that of the Stone, or War
against his Enemies (for even in this generation there be a sort of people, and
those we hope godly, that do acknowledge and wait in the expectation of the
later, yea, and hold forth the personal appearance of our Lord as King, yet
nevertheless oppose and deny, and quite leap over this Stone and its work,
thereby endeavoring to render the Saints useless and incapable of destroying
Babylon) which must make ^way and without which we cannot attain to the
peaceable and more glorious Administration of this Kingdom, by removing those
Mountains, Hills, and powers of darkness, which do oppose and hinder it p. 76.
And from those humane, heathenish and Antichristian ways, means and helps, for
the attainment, whereof men study, and which they practice in the Schools, and
Universities of these Nations, as things necessary for the Fitting, Preparing
and qualifying a man (how carnal soever) to be a Preacher of the Gospel (as
they say) And this, together with the Offer of some large stipend or yearly
salary, and fat benefice is their call to Preach: therefore we disown and
abominate their qualifications, and their call as an accursed thing: Yet
mistake us not, we are not against humane learning, and the knowledge of the
languages, but do repute it honorable, good, and commendable; yet when it is
abused, and the plea of necessity put upon it, in that habit we utterly declaim
against it, as a derogation to the holy spirit, and its Office; who gave out
the Scripture, and imprints them in the hearts of the godly; for all scripture
is given by the inspiration of God, and cannot be convincingly and profitably
expounded by man's Art and Learning. p. 77. Separation is to be from the
parochial Church, and Hireling Ministry of England, their Ordination and
Institution: After they have for some time been trained up in the Arts and
Sciences of Egypt, in the Universities, they take their several degrees and
commencements, Masters of Art, Batchelors of Divinity, or godliness, and in
case they sit long under the skirts of the great Whore, she makes them Doctors
in Divinity, Men skilful, and perfect in Heavenly Mysteries: These are those
that during the defection and apostasy, are the Rabbis which look more after
the Fleece, than the Sheep; Lording it over Gods heritage: We therefore are
against those degrees, Offices, Places, and their vain (which are indeed
Blasphemous) Titles, which they arrogate from God, and Jesus Christ, the great
Prophet and Teacher of his People. Gal. 1. 1. Matthew. 23. 8. Joh. 3 9, 10. Rev.
1. 9. p 79. The enlightened Saints, or the more pure and holy part of those
called the gathered (and which are corrupted) Churches in these Nations, or
elsewhere ought to separate and withdraw from the more gross, dark defiled,
and corrupted part of the said Churches, because there are no Churches (or at
leastwise very few) of the pastoral way in these Nations, or elsewhere, but
have something of Antichrist in them; having forsaken and apostatized from the
primative and first love; and have, and do in many principles and practice
strike hands with the interest of Antichrist, and mystery of iniquity. 2 These.
2, 3, 4. p. 83. Our position we give thus, that in this ending time of the
mystical numbers, wherein the Stone shall arise, the Saints must disown, and in
the strength of God separate from, and (according to that power which God shall
give unto them by his Spirit) engage against all, and all manner of Civil power
of what quality soever; now lift up over the whole Earth, or any part, Kingdom,
Nation, or Corner thereof; together with all its dependents, Upholders, Laws
and Appurtenances whatsoever, whose derivation has been from Satan, ruling in
all the several Parts, Powers and Forms of the devouring fourth Beast: And
which are of and belonging to that Beast, though descended into the very
lowest, last and most refined and pretended Christian-like power of that Beast:
As having their root, and foundation upon Satan the great Dragon. p. 81, 82. We
account it a duty for the Saints to separate from all the forms, practices,
Doctrines, and spirit of the Antichrist in the world, in their Brethren in the
Churches, etc. And to be plain, we account him, and that spirit, which either
in act, or deed, wilfully, and obstinately denies the smiting work of our Lords
Kingdom Antichristian; inasmuch as that such would always have Christ, his
Saints, his cause in and on the earth a sufferer: But the Scripture clearly
manifests the contrary.

Agreeably to these positions, or rather exceeding them, are the speeches of
some whether Levellers, or Quinto-Monarchians, in the first and second part of
Pamphlets printed. 1648, 1649. p. 1. The creature man was privileged with
being Lord over other inferior creatures, but not over his own kind; for all
men being alike Privileged by birth, so all men were to enjoy the creatures
alike without propriety, one more than another. p. 3. The Beast has its power
from the Dragon. Revel. 13. 4. And the Dragon. Revel. 20. 2. is the Devil: so
that it is plain, that Kings are of the Beast, and the Beast is of the Devil;
and it is as plain, they that worship the King, worship the Beast; and they
that worship the Beast, worship the Devil. Revel. 13. 4. Now let us a little
behold our English powers, all that which is called Magistracy, is from the
Kings Patent; and his is from the Devil: for the Kings Predecessors, the
outlandish Bastard William, came to be King by conquest and murder, now
murderers are, says Jesus, the Devils Children; for, says he, the Devil was
a murderer from the beginning, and he abode not in the truth: Now Kings are
utterly against the truth, and persecutors of the Saints; for says Jesus, they
shall bring you before Kings, so that Kings are enemies unto the Kingdom of
Christ; taking licenses and grants, patents and Charters from the King, is
taking the Beasts mark. p. 8. We take this power of William the Conqueror, to
be that little horn in Dan. 7. 24. p. 13. Kings, Lords, and Commons the little
Horn. Part. 2. p. 5. Titles of honor are termed vain titles, forbidden by our
Savior as heathenish, although some good men were Kings, yet it was not in
regard to their Office, but persons, for in that they were Kings, they were
Tyrants. p. 6. It was wickedness in the Israelites, in advancing a man, one of
their own kind, in the place of a God, and so to Idolize their own flesh above
God. p. 7. Kings are the worst of men. p. 8. Lawyers being worse than the
Devil, who scorns to take a penny Fees, to torment any, but will do it freely.
p. 9. Pharaoh-like, they have their Juglers, who can play the Hocus Pocus, and
invent a thing they call Religion, like Jereboams Calves, who the first
invented state worship. p. 10. All those oppressors before named, do live
altogether out of Gods way, and in Rebellion to his Laws: first, because they
live without a calling, and so are idle, being Vagabonds, and wasters of the
creatures by drunkenness, pride, gluttony, and so but vermin in a Commonwealth,
and by their own Law ought to be put into a house of Correction, and to be made
work. Jesus Christ alone is Lord and King, over man, and all men are equals. p.
11. All men are to enjoy alike freedoms, and none more than another; so that
they are equal, and none have to do to command another, no more than another
him; but in a joint union and agreement: that any be set up, it is but a
trusted humane power; and they but servants to the whole, and may be removed at
pleasure. p. 13. There are Vice-Kings, viz. Those that are Deputies, as Mayors
in Cities and Towns Corporate, that are Kings of patents, which patents are
mere monopolies, and serve to inhance Trading and Commodities, in a few men's
hands, to beggar the whole; these take towls and customs of their brethren. p.
14. Why may not the Soldiers pull the Judges out of Westminster Hall, and take
all their rusty Records, Laws* etc. And make a fire on them? That so we may
have honest, godly Laws, according to the Scriptures and reason. In the preface
to the 8 last Sermons of Mr. Tillinghast, who was much for the Fifth-Monarchy,
are these words; Let none take offense at this language, for I cannot forbear
vilifying the Kingdoms of the fourth Beast, when my thoughts are upon the
magnifying of the Kingdom, power and glory of Jesus Christ our Lord. And if the
Virgin daughter of Sion (without any disparagement to her holy modesty) might
of old, be allowed by God himself, to despise the great King of Assyria, and to
laugh him to scorn; I know no reason to the contrary, but one of the Lambs
followers, may without breach of rule, in an holy triumph of faith, express
contempt of the Kings of the Earth, who are all of them the lovers of the
Mother of Harlots and Abomination of the Earth.

In the first Sermon. p. 2. Of the third edition 1659. Mr. Tillinghast says;
David's Kingdom was a type of Christ's Kingdom, and indeed, whereas this Kingdom
here Jerem. 33. 20, 21. Promised is shadowed forth by that of David, it does
hold thus much, that the Kingdom is not only a spiritual Kingdom, but an
outward visible Kingdom; for such a throne and Kingdom David's was* p. 14. Yet
the woman has not had her day upon the Serpent, but there is a time wherein
the woman must have a day upon the Serpent to break his head: therefore there
is such a Kingdom wherein the Saints of Jesus Christ shall crush all the
enemies of Jesus Christ in the world. p. 39. The Devil plays his game; thus in
the new Testament times, he made men to look for an outward Kingdom only, when
Christ was about to set up a spiritual Kingdom; and now that Christ would set
up an outward Kingdom says the Devil, look only to the spiritual Kingdom. p.
41. Gods Peoples faith is not grounded on fancies, but they see and know that
God is doing some glorious thing in the world, he is overturning Kingdoms, and
setting up the Kingdom of his Son.

Sermon. 3. p. 57. He conceives The work of Christ's visible Kingdom over the
world the work of the present time, one great article of our faith, the work
that God does call his Children to at this day (and he calls upon them from
Heaven to attend to) and that they are to expect it before Christ come forth,
and bring his Kingdom with him. p. 60, 61. He distinguishes in Christ's visible
Kingdom, between the Kingdom of the Stone, and of the Mountain; this he calls
the Kingdom of glory, wherein the Saints shall not work but receive, that the
working Kingdom of the Saints wherein Saints are by the Lord employed to do
some notable service against his coming; which is, the breaking down the great
Image, the bringing down all his enemies, that when he comes, he may find them
his footstool; for he is to fit at the Fathers right hand, until all his
enemies be made his footstool; it is a Kingdom wherein Plow-shaers are to be
beaten into Swords, there shall be wonderful use of Swords, Weapons of War, out
of Daniel 12. 12, 13. He gathers the beginning of each of these. p. 62. Truly I
look upon it as being a main and principal part of that faith once delivered to
the Saints, as touching the fifth Kingdom. p. 63. Though this Stone
fundamentally is Christ himself, yet considered as smiting the great Image, it
can be no other but Christ mystical, Christ in his members; and the cutting out
of this Stone, cannot be meant, as some would have it, of Christ's first coming.
p. 65. Now if it can be made appear, that that, with which the fifth Kingdom
does begin, the work of the great Image, the over-turning the Thrones of the
Kings, is to be performed by the Saints, as chief instruments in the management
of it; then it follows of necessity, there must be such a thing as the Civil
and Military power, to be in the hands of the Saints, and that before the day
of Christ's appearance, they must have this power in their hands, for the
performance of that work: and if so, then it is not evil for the Saints and
People of God to seek for it, to pray for it, to plead for it, for it is to come
into their hands for the doing of their work before the day of Christ's
appearance. And then endeavors to prove, that this work, with which the fifth
Kingdom does begin, is a work to be performed by Saints, as the chief and
principal instruments in the doing of it. p. 74. There Is the coming forth of
Christ, when his enemies by his Saints are made his footstool. p. 79. He gives
some figues that this work is near at hand, and p. 82. He makes this to be a
general sign; that never was there a principle, that did run so much among the
Churches of Christ, as this has done within these twelve months.

I have set down the words of those persons, that I shall oppose in their
positions, that I may not be thought to impose upon them. Out of them it is
manifest, that they assert, that all the powers, not only Ecclesiastical, but
also Civil and Military of the Nations, even the Protestant, as well as the
Turkish, and Romish Kingdoms, are Antichristian; and all their Laws, Officers,
Schools, Corporations, Titles, Privileges, Degrees, and ranks of men in their
politic and military, as well as Ecclesiastical state, Babylonish, from the
fourth Monarchy, and that those that they call public spirited Saints of this
age, distinct from Notional professors, and formally Godly; are to hate,
separate from them, deny any assistance to them, rise up against them to
destroy them utterly, to smite them, in order to the setting up a fifth
Monarchy of Christ's visible Kingdom on earth, that the Saints may be a free
Commonwealth of themselves, subject to no Laws but Christ's, and free from all
oppressions of men.

3. The Doctrine of smiting Powers is proved from Scripture Precepts to be
Wicked.
THis Doctrine is damnable and Antichristian, as is proved by these Arguments
following; whereof the first is taken from those Precepts of the New Testament
and the Old, which forbid such disobedience, vilifying, refusing assistance,
smiting of Powers over us, Dignities, Officers; but command Honor, Obedience,
Assistance, Fear, to Powers, Dignities, and their Laws, and may be thus formed.
That Doctrine is damnable and Antichristian which commends and urges
Practices and Actions contrary to the Precepts of Christ, his holy Apostles,
and other holy men in the holy Scriptures. This Proposition is of it self
manifest, unless that be not acknowledged damnable which is condemned by so
holy persons; nor Antichristian in a large sense which is flatly opposite to
Christ's and his holy Apostles express Doctrine. But the Doctrine, which
commends and urges such disobedience, vilifying, refusing assistance,
smiting of Powers, as the words of the forecited Authors, called usually
Fifth-Monarchy-men do, is contrary to the Precepts of Christ, his holy
Apostles, and other holy men in the holy Scriptures: Therefore that Doctrine is
damnable and Antichristian. The minor is proved from those Precepts which
expressly command Subjection, Fear, Honor, Assistence to them. Whereof the
first is that of our Savior Matthew. 22. 21. Mark 12. 18. Luke 20. 27. Where our
Lord Christ being by the Disciples of the Pharisees and Herodians, posed with
this Captious question, tending to entangle him in his talk; Is it lawful to
give tribute to Caesar, or not? After the showing of tribute money, and the
acknowledgment that it had Caesar's Image and inscription, our Lord Christ
thence inferring, that it was due to him whose Image and inscription it bare;
resolves them, that they were to render to Caesar, the things that were
Caesar's; to wit, Tribute, Honor, and that Subjection which was then given to
him as Emperor. Now it is known, that the Emperor, or Caesar, then reigning was
Tiberius Caesar, Luke 3. 1. Who came to the Empire by wicked practices, and not
only led a most vicious and wicked life in uncleanness, and Irreligion, but
also was a bloody oppressor of the Senate and people of Rome, as may be seen in
Tacitus his Annals, Suetonius in the relation of his life and other Historians.
Therefore the Doctrine, that teaches disobedience, denying of Tribute,
Honors, Subjection to Kings and Princes, as being Oppressors, Enemies to
Christ, that urges hatred, smiting of them is contrary to Christ's precept,
which requires Tribute, Honors, and Subjection to be given them, though by
wicked ways obtaining Empire, and most wickedly ruling, and putting Christ
himself to death.

The next text is that full and plain precept of the Apostle Paul, Romans 13. 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Where St. Paul requires of every Soul, therefore of the most
enlightened Saints, to be subject to the Higher, or Supreme Powers; who are
termed v. 3. Rulers, or Princes, such as bear the Sword. v. 4. Therefore Civil
Magistrates, who had power of punishing even with death, who were revengers
unto wrath upon him that does evil, and might praise them that did well;
therefore they were the Persons who had rule, who are meant by powers; for such
actions are only of Persons: it is not said the powers that should be, but
(...), the powers that are in being, though by evil means attaining it, and be
that bears the Sword, not he only that ought to bear the Sword, but he that
has it in Possession, though perhaps not rightly acquired; nor is it said,
every soul is to be Subject to the powers that are such as they should be, but
which are, nor to be good Rulers only, but Rulers, nor he that uses or bears
it aright, but he that bears the Sword, unto these the Apostle requires
Subjection of necessity. v. 5. And that necessity he explaineth to be not only,
because they can inflict wrath or punishment as is expressed. v. 4. But also
for conscience sake, that is, as St. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2. 19. For conscience
toward God, out of regard to Gods Ordinance. v. 1, 2. Who by his Providence
for man's good sets up and disposes of those powers, and also commands them
to be owned as by his appointment; for (...) signifies precept as well as
Providence, like as compound Nouns of the same theme do. 1 Cor. 9. 14 Heb. 11.
23. etc. And to these Powers, or Rulers, the Apostle supposes the paying of
Tribute, as the constant use of Christians, that then were, and that of right;
for they were Gods Ministers, or servants attending continually, unto this self
same thing, that is, their Good. v. 4. And therefore due to them, as wages for
their service to them, and wages that God assigns them, as being his servants
in keeping Peace, Order, righteousness among men, instead of God, who claims
this to be his Office, and Substitutes Civil Rulers to do it for him, and to
receive their Tributes and Customs, as his receivers. And therefore the Apostle
requires. v. 7. Christians to render to all their dues: Tribute, to whom
Tribute is due, Custom, or toll, to whom Custom is due; Fear, to whom Fear
belongs, Honor, to whom Honor appertains; whom the series of the context
plainly shows to be the Higher Powers, Rulers, that bear the Sword, which can
be meant of no other than Civil Magistrates, and Governors, such as Emperors,
Kings, Senates, and Officers, which either make or execuse Laws, belonging to
the Civil state. Now sure if Subjection, Tribute, or Poll-mony, Custom, or
Toll for Commodities, Imported, or Exported, Fear, or Reverence of their
Persons and Authority, and Honor, in respect of their preeminence and dignity,
be to be given to them; then it is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine to teach
disobedience, contempt, withdrawing assistence from them. The reasons which the
Apostle gives of Subjection to Powers, are also of much importance for the
Confirmation of the Obligation that lies on Christians to yield them Obedience,
Tribute, Fear of offending them, and Honor of their Persons and place; 1.
because they are Powers: now if there be no Subjection, they are not powers. 2.
They are Higher, Supreme, or Excelling power, therefore those over whom they
are, are to be Subject to them, or Ordered under them; or else they Usurp
another place. 3. They are of God, and what is of God should be owned, not
opposed. 4. They are Ordained, or Ordered of God, both by his wise Providence
disposing of such imparity, that there may be good order in humane society, if
all were equals, nothing sooner bringing confusion, and hindering common good,
as is apparent in Armies (from whence that word we translate Ordained, seems to
be taken) all right order requiring first and last, highest and lowest, without
which no useful frame, either artificial, or natural, can be erected, or made;
and also by his holy and just command, which requires superiors in place and
power to be Honored, Feared, Assisted and served by inferiors. 5. Hence the
Apostle infers, that resistance of them is resisting of Gods Ordinance, and
therefore it must needs be a great sin, not only to destroy them, smite them,
but also to withstand their power, or by contempt, or subtraction of due aid or
subsidy to weaken them; or to provoke them to anger, because it is contending
against God. 6. The Apostle upon the same reason denounces Damnation, or
Judgment from God, on them that do resist. For, as it is the Ordinance of God
that is resisted, so is it the Judgment or Damnation of God which is threatened
to be inflicted, in which respect as the word (...), or Jugment is used. Romans
3. 8. without mentioning God, so it is expressed. Romans 2. 2, 3. with mentioning
of him. 7. Subjection is further urged, and resistance is condemned. v. 3. from
the use of the Powers, or Rulers, who are not only by Office, but also in act,
not a terror to good works, but to evil. For though it were true those Rulers
that then were, in matters of Religion, and in things that pertained to their
own profit and lust, were toward some a terror to good works, and abettors of
many wicked and injurious practices; yet in the general, they did not terrify
sober, industrious, and peaceable persons, but those who did actions contrary
to them, and did reward and praise them that were useful for the Commonwealth;
and therefore they that did well, as Saints, or Christians should do, they had
no reason out of fear to resist them, but in well doing to expect praise from
them. 8. From their deputation from God to do justice, v. 4, 6. The Apostle
argues further the necessity of subjection to them, and the impiety of
resisting them, telling them, that the Ruler was God's Minister (...), three
times he gives him these titles, and that to do justice for him; and therefore
he that resists him, resists God, and this cannot be with impunity, God not
permitting his bearing the Sword for him to be in vain; but so ordering it,
that he is, and shall be an Avenger unto wrath unto him that does evil. All
these Arguments whereby the Apostle enforces his Precept, both for the
positive part, requiring subjection, and the negative denying resistance, do
show, that the Apostle was very earnest in pressing this duty of subjection to
civil Magistrates: which it is probable he did the more importunately urge in
this Epistle, because it was written to the Romans, who were Inhabitants in
that City, where were most oppressions and villainies committed of any part of
the world; and in that time, whether in Claudius or Nero's reign, in which the
Powers that were, the Caesar's, or Emperors and Rulers under them, were as
monstrously vicious, wicked, unrighteous, tyrannous and cruel enemies to
Christians, as in any time; and therefore the Roman Christians might be tempted
to think, that sure they were not to be subject to such, but were to resist
them.

Nor does the Apostle only in this place urge the duties of subjection, and
non-resistence of Civil Powers, but also strictly injoins Titus in his Epistle
to him c. 3. 1. to put the Christians over whom he was, in mind of this, that
they should be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates;
intimating thereby, that Christians had need to be minded of it, because it was
a necessary duty, notwithstanding provocations to the contrary.

To these Precepts of the Apostle Paul I shall add the plain Precepts of S.
Peter, 1 Epist. c. 2. v. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. where he thus charge Christians:
Submit yours^lves to every Ordinance of man, or humane creature, for the Lords
sake: whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men. As free and not using your liberty for
a Cloak of malic^ousness, but as the servants of God. Honor all men; love the
Brotherhood; fear God, honor the King. In which words S. Peter commands
subjection to every Ordinance of man, where as the Adversaries forbid
subjection to any humane Creature or Ordinance, any Government whatsoever that
is of man's erecting, building and planting. The Apostle bid, be subject for the
Lord, as Jehosaphat said to the Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Take heed what ye do,
for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment;
but the Adversaries say, subjection is against the Lord: The Apostle bids
submit to the King as supreme, or excelling; they say, submit not to the King,
he is not supreme, nor excels; none has any just title to rule now; Kings are
from the Dragon, the worst of men; the Saints are to smite them: he says,
Submit to Governors, as unto them that are sent by him; they say, submit not to
them, because sent by him, for they and all that own them are Antichristian:
The Apostle says, they are sent by him for the punishment of evil d^ers, and
the praise of them that do well; these say, they are sent to oppress the
Saints, and to uphold Babylon: The Apostle says, that so is the will of God,
that ye submit to Kings and Governors sent by him; they say, It is the will of
God, that ye oppose, smite them: The Apostle says, that ye may so put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men; they say, by so doing ye shall promote
the interest of Babylon: The Apostle joins these, Fear God, honor the King;
and in like manner Solomon, Prove. 24. 21. My Son fear thou the Lord and the
King; they say, Fear God, vilify, destroy the King.

Now it is to be observed, that the Caesar's, Powers, Rulers, Principalities,
who then bare the sword, the Kings and Governors then sent by the King, were
the Roman Emperors, Kings and Governors under them, who were all of them great
Idolaters, took the Title of Pontifex Maximus, as being chief about the Idol
service of Jupiter and other Heathen Gods, none of them Christians by
profession, or Jews, but enemies to both, and fierce and cruel persecutors of
Christians, and some of them so unrighteous, and vicious, that one of them,
particularly Nero, was adjudged by the Senate hostis patriae the enemy of his
Country, in whose time St. Paul and St. Peter are thought to have written
their Epistles, yet did they require subjection to them, and therefore to
teach, they are to be resisted, and smitten for those qualities, to whom the
Apostles notwithstanding them require subjection, honor, and payment of
tribute, is with most impudent face to gainsay the Apostles Doctrine.

And because that it seems out of doubt to them, that Ecclesiastical Rulers
should be vilified, opposed, as being Antichristian, being conceived to be
against their imagined Fifth-Monarchy, I will add the words of St. Paul upon
occasion of the High Priest Ananias his commanding them that stood by him to
smite him on his mouth for saying, I have lived in all good conscience before
God unto this day, whereupon he said to him God shall smite thee, thou whited
wall: for sit thou to judge me after the Law, and command thou me to be
smitten contrary to the Law? which occasioned them that stood by to say,
revilest thou Gods High Priest? In reply whereto correcting himself, St. Paul
said, I wist not brethren, that he was the High Priest, For it is written, thou
shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. I acknowledge there is not a
little difficulty to acquit St. Paul from falsehood, or dissembling in saying,
He knew not that Ananias was the High Priest; sundry ways are conceived which
may be seen in Mr. Gataker's Cinnus lib. 1. c. 6. I rest on that, on which
after Chrysostom, Cajetan, Isidor Clarius, Aretius, Mountagu, Gataker and
Heinsius Exercit: Sacr: lib. 5. c. 13. pitch, that by reason of the confusion,
that then was in the Government, the High Priests then not succeeding according
to the Law of God in the Family of Aaron, nor continuing during life, but by
bribes and evil arts being promoted and removed by the Kings, and Governors at
pleasure, insomuch that (as Heinsius speaks) it is manifest there was then such
Anarchy, that d^ily as it were they were and were not High Priests: Besides
Paul's long absence from Jerusalem, his unacquaintance with affairs there,
especially in the government of the Temple, and Council of the Jews (the place,
manner of sitting, habit not distinguishing him from the rest) it may well be
conceived that he did not then distinctly know Ananias to be the High Priest,
nor perhaps one of the Council regularly constituted: though it be said v. 1.
He earnestly beheld the Council. And it to me seems the more likely, that he
did not perceive him to be High Priest, because he directs his speech to them
with the same compellations as he did Acts 22. 1. under the titles of Men and
Brethren, without distinguishing him from the rest, or any respective speech to
them as a regular Court of justice, but as a company gathered together by the
chief Captain to accuse and examine him, not to judge him. Which is the more
likely, by reason of what he did v. 6. in bespeaking them under the title of
Men Brethren; and, perceiving them to be of different parties, he used art to
set them at variance, and to break up the Assembly in a confused manner, which
he would not have done, had it been a Court legally set. However we determine of
St. Paul's knowledge of Ananias, it is clear that he does not impute his speech
v. 3. to Prophetic liberty, as Grotius imagines when he says in his Annot. on
Acts 23. 3. utitur jure Prophetae, nor justify it, but corrects it, and imputes
it to his ignorance, and adds the command of the Law, Exodus 22. 28. For it is
written thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people, following therein
the Greek version, the whole verse being, Thou shall not revile the Gods, that
is, as is conceived, Judges, or God, nor curse the Ruler of thy People. Which
being alleged by St. Paul as in force, and applied to himself, as thereby
condemning his speech of opprobrious and threatening language, if it were not
excused by his ignorance, does plainly prove, that a Ruler of the People,
though an Ecclesiastic, and climbing to the place by indirect means,
unrighteously judging, opposing the truth, the Kingdom and Apostle of Christ,
yet should not be reviled, or with menaces terrified, or cursed, but being in
the possession of a Rulers place be regarded in words and actions as a Ruler.
To which I shall add some more passages of the old Testament, St. Paul's
allegation of this showing, that they are moral, and still binding Christians.
Eccl. 10. 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, or conscience, and
curse not the rich in thy Bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the
voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter. Eccles. 8. 2. I counsel
thee to keep the Kings commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of God. Out
of all which I conclude, that the minor of my argument is sufficiently proved,
that the Doctrine which commends and urges such disobedience, vilifying,
refusing assistance, smiting of Powers, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, or
military, as the words cited by me do, is contrary to the Precepts of Christ,
his holy Apostles, and other holy men in the holy Scriptures, and consequently
damnable and Antichristian.

4. The Exceptions of Fifth-monarchy-men and others against the first Argument
are refelled.
AGainst this Argument which overthrows also the Doctrines of Jesuited
Pontificians and other opposers, deposers, and smiters of Kings and other
Rulers, there are sundry exceptions taken. One exception is, that those
Precepts were for that time, when the Christians were unable to resist. But
this is prevented by the Apostles words, Romans 13. 5. Ye must needs be subject,
not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Another, that these Precepts
tie us to submit to these Rulers, and not to resist them, till they cease to be
Rulers, which they do when excommunicate, deprived by the Pope. But if the Pope
be comprehended under every soul, as Chrysostom conceived even the Apostles
were, then the Pope himself is to be subject to Rulers, and consequently cannot
depose them; nor has the Scripture given this power to the Pope, or Man, to
depose them, it being God's prerogative, as is said Psalm. 75. 7. God is the
Judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. Another evasion is, that
subjection is required to Rulers, while they are a terror to evil works, and
not to good, but not when they oppress, are enemies to Gods People, Christ's
Kingdom, then they cease to be Rulers; but this is prevented by the Apostle,
who says, the Powers that be are ordained of God, and therefore to them, as
they are, subjection is to be given; and resistance is forbidden by S. Paul.
But the chief exception is that which p. 51 of the Banner displayed is in these
words: Now then we say, that called the Ordinance of God, proves the Ordinance
of the Devil; and though the Powers of the great Image might be taken for the
Ordinance of God, so long as they kept their pure, civil, and unmixed state; so
says Paul, the Powers that be (i. e. the Civil Powers of old Rome, tho a
bloody Persecutor, and devourer of the Creation, and God's Heritage) are
ordained of God; yet when the Power of Rome adulterated from its pure civil
state, and becomes a mixed Antichristian state, the Beast, and a Whore, then it
is said of that beastly, Antichristian Power, that the Dragon, or Satan gave
him his power, and his seat, and great Authority; and what then is this save
the Ordinance of Hell?

To which I reply, If I understand them aright, this is their meaning, that the
powers of the great Image that is the Kings, Emperors and Rulers of the world
then ceased to be Gods Ordinance, and became the Ordinance of Hell, when that
was fulfilled, which we read Revel. 13. 2. which they take for granted was,
when the Empire of Rome, or the ten Kings that arose out of the division of it,
did give their power and strength, as it is Revel. 17. 13. unto the beast
mentioned v. 11. which it is without doubt with them to be the Bishop of Romes
pretended supremacy, dominion, Oecumenieal Vicarship, by which Christian
Religion was corrupted, mixed with Paganish, and Jewish rites, and the ten
Kings and their Kingdoms made dependent on the Pope. And consequently
subjection, and assistance is not due to the Civil, or Ecclesiastical, or
Military powers or Laws that now are, being built or erected upon the old
foundation of the fourth Monarchy in this supposed mixed estate, but they are
warranted and bound, as being the Stone expressed Dan. 2. 34, 44, 45. to smite,
destroy, utterly dissolve the powers of the fourth Monarchy (which they
conceive to be all the present) in their persons, Offices, Laws, Titles,
privileges and whole constitution, and to take to themselves all the power and
dominion in the earth in order to the erecting of the Fifth-Monarchy, which
they call Christ's visible Kingdom upon earth.

Now surely such a monstrous giant-like claim as this, exceeding any of the
proud claims of Nebuchadnezzar, or any of the Persian, Roman Turkish Monarchs,
had need of very good cards for it, some unquestionable Charter or grant of
Heaven, especially when it so flatly opposes such plain precepts as I have
alleged to the contrary, which unless they be proved to be relaxed or repealed
by a Divine sentence, testified by some infallible evidence of miracles or
otherwise, such as Christ and his Apostles had, do prove, that this claim, and
the Doctrine that teaches such practices, as they incite men to, is from the
Devil himself, who is the great Abaddon, or destroyer of the World. Sure
Christ, when he bid his Disciples teach men to observe all that he had
commanded, promising, to be with them all days unto the end of the world,
Matthew. 28. 20. And S. Paul, when he thus wro^^ to Timothy, 1 Epist. chapter 6. 13,
14. I give thee charge in the sight of God, who quickens all things, and
before Jesus Christ, who before Pontius Pilate witn^ssed the good confession,
that thou keep this Commandment (whereof Prayer and thanksgiving for Kings and
all that are in Authority, 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. Obedience to Masters, 1 Timothy 6.
1. are a part) without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord
Jesus Christ, did conceive their commands to be binding until Christ's second
coming. And since he only has power to repeal, release, dispense with a Law,
who has a power, either legislative, or declarative of Law superior or equal
to his; who gave, or at first Authoritatively declared it, it can be no less
than Pope-like, or Dictator-like arrogance in some persons, upon pretense of a
peculiar Revelation to them, no way demonstrated, but in an obscure claucular
meeting for consultation imagined to be communicated to them, determine, that
which St. Paul said was the ordinance of God, to be the ordinance of Hell,
because they say it, and to exceed the Pharisees in arrogance, whom our Savior
charge with hypecrisie for making the commandment of God of none effect by
their tradition; though it were the tradition of their Elders, or chief
Rabbis, or Doctors. Matthew. 15. 6, 7. This bidding defiance to all the Powers
of the Earth; and this taking on them, to make void so plain Precepts of Christ
and his Apostles, without any other proof than they bring, is in my
apprehension, one of the greatest pieces of pride and arrogance that I have met
with, and as great a delusion as I think this age has afforded.

5. Suppositions employed in the Quinto-Monarchians exceptions are showed to be
uncertain, as those about the Stone and it is smiting. Dan. 2. 34. 44.
NEvertheless let us examine what they say, of which some things are supposed,
some things are inferred. The things supposed and inferred are these: 1. That
the fourth Kingdom mentioned. Dan. 2. and 7. Is the Roman Empire; which I will
not deny, though there be not a few very learned men, that take the fourth
Monarchy to be the Empire of the successors of Alexander the great, and that
upon such reasons, as might make sober men not too peremptory in the contrary
opinion, much less to make the future smiting of it an article of faith, and
the visible Kingdom of Christ to succeed it. 2. That the Kingdom mentioned to
be set up Dan. 2. 44. shall be an external visible Kingdom on earth; which is
yet more doubtful, being more controverted among godly learned men: and that
upon such weighty considerations on both sides, as may make considerate men, if
not to suspend their judgment, yet not too resolutely to assert it, nor
obtrude it with such zeal, as the Quinto-Monarchians do, as an article of
faith, and build such mighty attempts, commotions in the world, and hopes on so
uncertain a foundation. 3. That, In the days of these Kings must be meant at
the end of the fourth Monarchy, when all the materials of the Image shall be
broken in pieces, and scattered so as no place was found for them: Whereas it
is far more probable, that it was set up when Christ began to Preach the
Gospel, as John Baptist and our Lord intimated, when he invited men to repent
and believe the Gospel, for the Kingdom Heaven was at hand; very likely
alluding to those places in Daniel chapter 2. 44. In their days the God of Heaven
shall set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed, and therefore called
the Kingdom of Heaven to distinguish it from the Kingdoms of men set up by
them, not by the God of Heaven; whereto the like is Dan. 7. 14. And seems to be
referred to the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which the Saints of the most High
do take, as the Author to the Hebrews chapter 12. 28. says, Wherefore we receiving
a Kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us have, or hold fast, grace, whereby we
may serve God acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear; which no man doubts,
to be meant of the receiving the Kingdom of Christ, by faith in him, upon the
Preaching of the Gospel. 4. There is a distinction made between the Kingdom of
the Stone, and the Kingdom of the Mountain, as if they were either several
Kingdoms, or at least of several conditions and qualifications; whereas the
text does distinguish them no otherwise than in their extent, not one
spiritual, the other visible and external, the one the working Kingdom, the
other the Kingdom of glory. 5. That the Stone, which must do the smiting and
breaking work, is not Christ personal only, but also Christ mystical with his
members, or to use the words of Mr. Tillinghast, Though this Stone
fundamentally is Christ himself, yet considered as smiting the great Image, it
can be no other but Christ mystical, Christ in his Members. But sure in this
they are mistaken, this work being made in scripture Christ's own peculiar work,
Matthew. 21. 42, 43, 44. Jesus says unto them, did ye never read in the
scriptures, the Stone which the builders rejected, the same is become the head
of the Corner? This is the Lords doing, and it is Mavelous in our eyes.
Therefore I say unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given
to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. And whosoever shall fall on this
Stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to
powder, or dash him to pieces. In which passage it is apparent that by the
Kingdom of God (which is to be conceived the same with that Dan. 2. 44.) is
meant the Kingdom which was then among the Jews, which was no other than the
spiritual Kingdom of Christ, and the Stone, whose work is to grind to powder,
or dash to pieces, (which is to be conceived to be the same, with the smiting
and breaking, Dan. 1. 34. 44.) is that Stone, which was rejected by the
builders, and should become the head of the Corner; which is no other but
Christ personal, who was crucified by the Rulers of the Jews, but raised up
from death and set at Gods right hand; and so became the Corner Stone of Gods
spiritual House or Church, as it is expressly expounded by Peter, Acts. 4. 11. 1
Pet. 2. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And of him it is said, that he shall change our vile
body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the
working, whereby he is able to subdue all things unto himself, Philip. 3. 21.
6. It is supposed, that this smiting work shall be by military Power, or by
fighting: Whereas, if the cutting of the Stone out of the Mountain, be the
setting up of the Kingdom, it must be without hands, Dan. 2. 34. 44, 45. by the
God of Heaven, and therefore to be done some other way, as Zech. 4. 6. The
return of the Jews, and their establishing in their Land under Zerubbabel
should be not by might, or Army, nor by Power, but by Gods spirit, or, as it is
said, Isai. 11. 4. Of Christ, that he shall smite the Earth with the Rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. By his
Preaching, or by his Angels, or by his Creatures, as by flaming fire he may
smite, as when it is said, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. The Lord Jesus shall be
revealed from Heaven, with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengence
on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence
of the Lord, and the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in
his Saints; and to be admired in all them that believe. And thus shall Gog and
Magog be smitten, Revel. 20. 9. When they shall go up on the breadth of the
Earth, and compass the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City, fire
shall come down from God out of Heaven and devour them. By these and other
means, the Stone may smite the Feet of the great Image, without swords, and
such like military weapons, and fighting, and that be fulfilled, which is
promised Psalm. 2. 9. Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, thou shall dash
them in pieces like a Potters Vessels. As he is described Revel. 1. 16. That
out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword, so he warns, Revel. 2. 16.
Repent; or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with
the sword of my mouth. Yea, when it is promised, v. 26, 27. He that overcomes
and keeps my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the Nations
(And he shall Rule them with a Rod of Iron: as the Vessels of a Potter shall
they be broken to shivers) even as I received of my Father: It is to be
understood of their prayers, as Revel. 6. 10. Revel. 8. 4, 5. Revel. 11. 5, 6.
as James 5. 17. Revel. 12. 11. Not of Arms, and Armies, he that reads Revel. 16
and 19. Chapters, wherein is foretold the destruction of the Beast, and the
false Prophet, may see more reason to conceive that Christ will do it by
Plagues, as God did the Egyptians by Moses, or some other invisible way without
the Saints; or if he use the Saints, he will do it by their Prayers and
Testimony, without other fighting. And therefore if it were granted; That
that, with which the fifth Kingdom does begin, the work of the great Image, the
overturning the Thrones of the Kings is to be performed by the Saints, as chief
instruments in the mannagement of it; yet it is not true, which Mr. Tillinghast
says in his 3. Sermon p. 65. Then it follows of necessity, there must be such
a thing as the Civil and Military Power to be in the hands of the Saints, and
that before the day of Christ's appearance, they must have this Power in their
hands, for the performance of that work. So that notwithstanding this pretense,
it is evil and horribly wicked, for them that have called themselves, the
Saints and People of God, to seek for it, to pray for it, to plead for it, as
the Fifth Monarchy Men have done, contrary to the plain precepts of Christ and
his Apostles, seeking for it by killing innocent men, under pretense of praying
to God, and keeping fasts, cursing their Governors, and pleading by revilings,
and false accusations, and most horrid pervertings of holy scripture, and self
magnifyings for a power, not belonging to them. 7. It is supposed, that if the
smiting work be to be done by men, it must be by Saints in their Notion. But
there is no proof of this, or rather the words of scripture do plainly tell us;
that the work is to be done by those Kings, which they conceive, they should
destroy as Antichristian, in order to the setting up of the Fifth Monarchy. For
thus we read Revel. 17. 16, 17. And the ten Horns, which thou saw upon the
Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God has put in their hearts,
to fulfill his will, and to agree, and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until
the words of God shall be fulfilled. So that whereas these men imagine such an
inconsistency with Gods purpose and glory to use the Kings and Governments,
which have supported the Whore of Babylon for her ruin, and therefore incite
men to such hatred, and emnity against them, and with much disdain, stomach,
and bitter zeal; not knowing what spirit they are of, do vilify, inveigh
against, and curse them, and seek their total abolition, glorying, like
frantic men, in their own satanical spirit and designs, they should rather
endeavor to do such things as might make Princes favor them, and hate the
Whore; and rather admire, bless and magnify the Providence and work of God, in
using them as instruments to pull her down, whose Predecessors out of their
blind devotion, set up the Whore, and to protect the servants of God, who were
by their Ancestors destroyed.

8. It is supposed that this smiting work is to be done by Gentile Saints, who
are such as they have characterized them. But this has no evidence to prove
it. For though I will not exclude the Gentile Saints from being meant Dan. 7.
18. 21, 22, 25, 27. Yet it is very probable (which Junius, Piscator and others
observe) that by Saints in those places are specially meant the Jewish People,
called, chapter 8. 10. The host of Heaven v. 24. The holy People, or People of the
holy ones chapter 9. 15, 16, 19, 24. Gods People, and their City Jerusalem called
by Gods name, his Sanctuary, the holy City, chapter 11. 28. 30. The holy Covenant,
chapter 12. 7. the holy People. Yea sundry of those, that are much followed in this
argument (as Mr. Mede Comment. on Revel. 16. 12.) do conceive, that by the
Kings of the East who shall have their way prepared for expedition against the
Beast; are meant the Jews. And sundry Prophecies there are in the Old and New
Testament, which do seem to foretell the Kingdom to be restored to Israel,
according to the question Acts 1. 6. And therefore the more likely, when they
are converted to Christ, if any Saints on Earth, to be chief instruments of
destroying Babylon, which has oppressed them, Or that fourth Kingdom, which
has been as strong as Iron, and broken in pieces and subdued all.

9. It is supposed, that this smiting work is the work of this generation, and
to be begun by the pretended public spirited Saints of this Nation. Whereas
Mr. Tillinghast himself Sermon. 1. p. 25. says, the work of Christ's Kingdom, the
glorious beginning of it, it shall be about the time of the Jews coming in: And
indeed the coming in of the Jews, shall be a very great advancement of this
Kingdom. I omit what Mr. Parker conceives of the Waldenses, and others, as long
since beginning and carrying it on. There is nothing yet appears, but a
violent, heady, presumptuous spirit in those persons, who have thought
themselves fit to begin the work, nor in the times, but the commotions that
have been, which gives color to this supposition.

6. Quinto-Monarchians Hypotheses about the Civil Governments, being from the
Fourth Monarchy, Rome and the Dragon, are showed to be groundless.
10. IT is supposed, That the Civil Powers that be are of old Rome, or the
Fourth Monarchy, or (as they speak) growing upon the old Root of wickedness
and bitterness, or being a remnant of the old foundation, which is their
expressions in the Banner displayed, [p. 1. There will be no rest till the
fourth Kingdom, which divides it self into two iron legs, ten toes, and a
little horn be wholly destroyed, in all the laws, constitutions, Governments,
and relics thereof. p. 29. The fifth Kingdom which is Christ's, with its holy,
just, and righteous Laws, and Officers must arise, with destruction to, and
stand up in the place of the fourth Kingdom, and the Laws and Officers thereof]
show to be the Laws, Constitutions, Governments and orders of the Roman Empire;
and they assert a Legislative Power, to make Laws to govern the Nations only in
Christ, and his Laws and Officers only are to have place; and in the Book
entitled The Standard set up, Printed 1657. p. 15. they say That the
Scriptures (being given by Inspiration of God with his Holy Spirit) are the
revealed will and Rule of this Legislator, to be constantly owned, and
submitted unto in times of War and Peace, as a constant standing Rule for the
inward and outward man (wherein are Laws, Statues, Precepts, and Judgments for
all cases, conditions, and actions of Civil, Military, and Spiritual concerns,
either in particular, or more general terms;) For so they were to the
Commonwealth of Israel, the only type of the Lambs Government. But these
suppositions in a great part are notoriously false. For the Government by King,
Lords, and Commons, as it is constituted in England, is quite different from
old Rome, whether under the Caesar's or Popes, not derived from them, but from
the Saxons of Normans, or some other of the ancient Rulers of this Island; nor
are the Laws of England, by which it is governed in civil Affairs, the Laws of
the Emperors, which are that which we call the Civil Law, consisting of the
Edicts and constitution of Roman emperors; nor the Canon Law, consisting of
Popes Decrees and Decretals: but the Common and Statute Laws of these Nations,
which he that reads the Chronicles of England, the Writings of Sir Thomas Smith
of the Commonwealth of England, Mr. Cambdens Britannia, Sir Edward Cooks
Institutes, the Preface of Sir John Davis to his Irish Reports, the Book of
Statutes, may easily perceive to have another original, and to be much
different from them. If there were no more but the daily practice of the Courts
of Justice, and the manner of choosing and making Judges and Officers to refute
this Calumny, it were enough to show the gross falsehood of this supposition.
And yet, were the Laws and form of Government the same with old Rome, they were
not therefore Antichristian, and we released from obedience to them: For, not
only Christ and his Apostles required obedience to them, but also S. Paul both
made use of them, and commended them, Acts 16. 37. and 22. 25. and 25. 10, 11,
16. which if they had been Antichristian, (as they give out clamorously, but
ignorantly) and to be opposed with greatest hatred, doubtless they would not
have done.

As for the other part of the supposition, though we grant, that our Lord
Christ is the supreme Legislator, and wherein he has determined any thing his
Laws are to stand in force, above and against all constitutions and Laws of
men, yet we find not that Christ did, or intended to make any particular Laws
for thousands of things which pertain to Civil Government, no, nor for many
things pertaining to Gods worship and Church Government, which yet require a
determination by some Laws or Rules for good order to be kept thereabout. When
one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my Brother, that he divide
the inheritance with me; he said unto him, man, who made me a Judge or divider
over you? Luke 12. 13, 14. Nor did the Apostles, or the Governors after them,
or Christians, as such, intermeddle with making laws or judging civil Affairs,
any farther than they were entrusted either by the Roman Governors, or
according to Christ's appointment, Matthew. 18. 15, 16, 17. or the Apostles
directions about composing differences between Christians. 1 Cor. 6. 1. etc. or
the exercise of Ecclesiastical censure, or miraculous power did require. Though
it is not to be denied that in aftertimes too much of this work was either
committed by Christian Emperors, or assumed by the Rulers, and Governors of
Christian Churches, especially by Popes of Rome to the great detriment of
Christianity.

As for the holy Scriptures, though we acknowledge their sufficiency for a rule
in matters of Faith and holy life, in order to the end wherefore they were
inspired of God, to wit, the honoring and serving of God, and our own
salvation: yet we do not find in them sufficient Laws in particular for the
governing of all civil Commonwealths, but that Judges and Officers
(notwithstanding what we find in the books of M^ses and the Prophets, and other
holy writings) would be to seek how to pass sentence, and to administer Justice
in thousands of cases that occur about Lands, Wills, Trades, and other Actions,
which concern human affairs and society; yea, they that have perused the
Talmuds, and writings of the Jewish Doctors, do find, that notwithstanding the
body of Laws given by God himself, yet by reason of the varying of cases, many
resolutions there are added by their Judges, or Lawyers, which they receive as
Laws. And this was thought so necessary, that God erected a Senate among them,
with strict injunction to the Jews to do according to the sentence, which they
of that place (which the Lord shall choose) should show them, and to observe to
do according to all that they informed them, Deuteronomy. 17. 10. which was in effect
all one as to empower them to make Laws for them. Sure notwithstanding the
written Laws of Moses, Solomon had been at a stand how to give sentence in the
case of the two Harlots, had not God given him an extraordinary Spirit of
wisdom to do Judgment, 1 Kings 3. 28. Nor can the Mosaical or Jewish Laws fit
the government of this Nation, unless there were the same distribution of
Lands, the same State of People, and neighbor Nations, the same manner of
Trade and living as they had. And it is to be considered, whether this
asserting of the Laws of the Jews as a constant standing rule to us Gentiles,
be not indeed the same error of Judaism, which was condemned by the Synod at
Jerusalem, Acts 15. and the writings of the Apostles, and counted as an Heresy,
which did evacuate the benefit of our Christian liberty, which Christ has
purchased, by losing of which we may forfeit our interest in Christ, and their
Laws be so far from being the only Laws fit for the Government of Christ's
Kingdom, that they may in many things be most unfit, and contention for them to
be imposed on gentile belivers more justly to be counted Antichristian, than
the Civil Laws of the Nations, which they so much oppose as Antiehristian, nor
can those Laws be fitted for the Kingdom of Christ, which they look for: For
that Kingdom will be, when all Christ's enemies shall be made his Footstool,
Christ shall personally reign, as they conceive, on earth, it shall be a
Kingdom, which shall have a s^at, s^nless, sorrowless, deathless, superiorless,
having no humane Ruling Majesty, no Church censures, no superiority of persons;
no fears; no wants; no desertions; no painful labor; no decay; no procreation
of Children, as Dr. Homes reckons them in his Resurrection revealed, lib. 5. c.
4. And therefore this supposition, and the inference that is made thereupon, is
false, and insufficient, and it would be not only a sin against God, but also a
most extreme degree of wickedness to destroy our Laws, Records, Government
upon this pretense, and all men are truly bound in conscience to defend them,
and to oppose those as Antichristian, and Enemies to Christ's Kingdom, who would
disanul them. As for the Commonwealth of Israel, its being the only type of
the Lambs Government, Gal. 6. 16. it is so in respect of the spiritual Kingdom
of Christ, in which believers are an holy Priesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, a Royal Preisthood to show
forth Gods praises, 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. and, if this reason be of validity to tie
us to their Laws, it will tie us to the Laws about the Jewish Temple,
Priesthood, Sacrifices, and the rest of the Ceremonial Laws; which were to
reduce us from Christ to Moses, and complete Judaism. As then it was a precious
benefit, which the Gospel brought, that the Gentiles were not tied to those
particular Laws of Religious service, which were required of the Jews, that
the Yoke was not put upon the Neck of the Disciples, which neither the Fathers,
nor the Apostles were able to bear, Acts, 15. 10. but that many things even in
Gods worship were to be determined by prudence of Rulers, according as might
best fit the service of God, with respect to the condition of several people:
so much more in Civil affairs, it was the great goodness of God, and a great
advantage to the furthering of Christ's Kingdom, among the Gentiles* that the
Gospel did not impose on the Nations, either the Mosaical, or any other
particular Laws, or Civil Government: but left them to their own Laws and
Government in such things; and required Christians to submit to them, without
which there is no likelihood, Christianity had been embraced as it was, nor
Christians to have subsisted, and been multiplied among infidels, as they were.
And therefore whereas the Quinto-Monarchians, have made such great stirs, as
they have done, not only for a reformation in Ecclesiastical discipline, and
worship, but also to bring the Government and Laws Civil to the Jewish
platform in the holy scriptures, (which is their Diana) they have therein
followed their own fancy, not the holy scriptures, but to the great wrong of
the Church of God, and injury to his name and truth, caused many to follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth is evil spoken of; so
that of them may be verified, which we read, Romans 3. 14, 15, 10, 17. Their
mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, their feet are swift to shed blood,
destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace have they not
known.

11. It is granted by them, that the powers of the great Image might be taken
for the Ordinance of God, so long as they kept their pure, Civil and unmixed
estate, so says Paul, the powers that be (i. e. the Civil powers of old Rome
tho a bloody persecutor, and devourer of the creation, and Gods heritage) are
ordained of God. In which passage they intimate, 1. that the Civil powers of
old Rome, were a bloody persecutor and devourer of the creation, and Gods
heritage. 2. That then they kept their pure Civil, and unmixed estate. 3. That
so long, though they were the powers of the great Image, yet they might be
taken for the Ordinance of God; according to St. Paul, Romans 13. 1. 4. That
therefore so long they were to be obeyed, and not resisted. For discovery of
the fallacy, that is in these speeches, it is needful, that it should be
inquired into, what they mean by the Civil powers of old Rome, keeping their
pure Civil and unmixed estate. The opposite estate is thus expressed, When the
power of Rome adulterated from it is pure Civil state, became a mixed
Antichristian state, the Beast and a Whore: the power of Rome, was in the
Apostle Paul's time, the power of the Emperors, whether Caius, Caligula,
Claudius, Nero, and the Senate, and Consuls of Rome, the Praetors, Kings,
Presidents, such as Herod, Agrippa, Pilate, Felix, Festus, and others under
them. The unmixed estate, seems to be their not taking upon them that, which
after the Emperors, or Popes did, when they became Antichristian. Now sure what
ever it were, that after the Civil powers of Rome assumed, or did, it is
certain, that they were, as it is confessed, the powers of the great Image,
bloody persecutors, and devourers of the creation, and Gods Heritage, and I may
add, as wicked and impure in their lives, as they were afterward, yea and as
Monstrously Idolatrous, as afterward. The Emperors then took to themselves the
Title of Pontifex, Maximus, which was kept till the Christian Emperors time,
and that Title imported their power and inspection about the Idolatrous rites
of the Romans, whereby they took charge of the worship of Jupiter, and other
Roman Deities, and were zealous for it so as to persecute them to death with
extreme cruelty, who would not offer incense to their Idols, nor swear by them;
yea they did some of them urge Jews and other people to worship either
themselves or their Statues as Gods, as Caligula, Domitian, and caused the
abomination and desolation spoken of by Daniel the Prophet, to stand in the
holy place, of which our Savior foretells, Matthew. 24. 15. And though the Popish
Idolatry in the worshipping of the Host, bowing down to Crucifixes, Images,
praying to deceased Saints, creeping to Crosses, adoring of Relics and other
superstitions of the Romanists be horribly impious, and their cruelty in
destroying them that will not adore their consecrated Host, be very satanical,
and so their power and the exercise of it whereby they take on them to condemn
as Heretics them that will not worship their Idols, and whereby Princes at
their beck do execute their sentences cruelly, be from Satan, or the Dragon in
the use of it in these things, yet it is doubted whether the Popish Idolatry be
greater, or so bad as the Heathenish Idolatry of the Romans in St. Paul's time.
Yea Dr. John Burges in his Answer rejoined to the reply to Dr. Morton's defense
of the Ceremonies, chapter 4. sect. 28. has maintained against Mr. Parker, that
the popish Idolatry is not as vile in it self as ever was any of Turks or
Pagans. And it is plain, that in the Revelation the power of the Emperors, as
they used it in persecution of Christians for not worshipping Idols, is
ascribed to the Devil before the pretended mixed Antichristian state, as well as
after. Revel. 2. 10. Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, when
he did it by the Pagan Emperors and their Officers. v. 13. I know thy works and
where thou dwell, even where Satan's throne is; and thou hold fast my
Name, and have not denied my Faith, even in those days wherein Antipas was my
faithful Martyr, who was slain among you where Satan dwells. On which says
Brightman, it is not obscure why it is called the throne of Satan. For the City
where the heathen Emperors had their seat, who professedly warred against the
Lamb, is called the throne of the Dragon, chapter 13. 2. so of the daughters and
lower Cities those which come nearer to the mind of this Prince, because they
yield a Palace more prepared for the Devil, are notified by the same name. And
Revel. 12. 3. where it is said, Behold a great red Dragon having seven heads
and ten horns, and seven Crowns upon his head, on its says Mede, A wonder or
representation of the Empire of Rome Heathen worshipping the Dragon; the large
Annotations on the Bible.

A great red Dragon, the Heathen Roman Emperors succeeding one another, who did
the Devil service, as in other things, so chiefly in persecuting the Church v.
9. chapter 2. 10. The like, if need were, might be showed to be the opinion of
Brightman, Diodat^, Pareus, Piscator and others. By which and many other
passages in holy Scripture it may appear, that the heathen Emperors had that
power, whereby they persecuted the Church of Christ from Satan, and were as
great Idolaters as those under the Papacy, and were as serviceable to the
Devil, and yet are granted to be the Ordinance of God, and though the Powers of
the great Image even the Iron legs, yet were not to be resisted, but the
saints, even every soul, the holy Apostles themselves not excepted, were to be
subject to them under pain of damnation, Whence it follows, that there is no
warrant for English pretended, or real Saints to smite the present Powers, to
oppose, resist, overthrow the present Laws, Government and Governors, though it
were yielded (which is not) that they were part of the fourth Monarchy, kept
not their pure civil and unmixed State, were oppressors, shed the blood of the
Saints, and what ever else the Quinto-Monarchians do object against them.
Doubtless however Sir Walter Raleigh have aggravated the cruelties of King
Henry the 8th of England, and perhaps others may represent in the most odious
manner the government of other Princes, yet they exceed not Nero, Domitian and
other of the Roman Heathen Emperors in cruelty to the Christian believers, nor
in uncleanness, and unrighteousness, and yet St. Paul and St. Peter and our
Lord Christ himself command subjection even to such. And therefore these things
cannot release the Quinto-Monarchians from subjection, but their pleas for
their smiting work are proved to be damnable and Antichristian.

12. It is supposed, when the power of Rome was adulterated from its pure civil
State, and becomes a mixed Antichristian State, the Beast and a Whore, (which
they conceive of the present civil powers of the Nations even the Protestant,
and particularly those of England) then it is said of that beastly
Antichristian power, that the Dragon or Satan gave him his Power, and his Seat
and great Authority, and what then is this save the Ordinance of Hell? To
examine this it is to be observed, 1. That they suppose it was the civil power
of Rome which is meant, Revel. 13. 1. 2. by the beast, and that it is meant of
the civil powers, since they became in name Christian. Which I will not
gainsay, because of the words of the Angel Revel. 17. 12. And the ten horns
which thou saw are ten Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet, but
receive power as Kings one hour with the beast, though there are, or have been,
that understand by it Heathen Emperors, before they embraced Christianity, or an
Emperor not yet extant, that I may omit other conjectures: and therefore this
is not to be taken as so certain, that on it should be grounded so strange a
work as the smiting of all the civil powers of Europe, which is deduced from
it. 2. It is supposed, that then the civil Powers were adulterated from their
pure civil and unmixed estate. By pure civil and unmixed estate they must mean
(if I be not mistaken) that before that time the Roman Emperors did not meddle
with the matters of Religion or of the Church: (which is most notoriously
false, for they took the title of Pontifex Maximus, ruled in the business of
the worship of their Gods, did forbid Christian worship, and persecuted
Christians to the death) And that they did afterward, which is also false. For
the Emperors Christian did reject that title, and demolished the temples of
Idols, promoted the Christian worship, contended with the Bishops that did set
up Images in the Churches, and if by the mixture be meant their assuming
Ecclesiastical power, I suppose these Objectors will not charge them with this,
it being to their great vexation, that the Bishops, especially the Bishops of
Rome claimed, and usurped authority over Emperors and Kings (as he does at this
day) to excommunicate them, and if they reconciled not themselves to them to
depose them, and many of the Emperors and Kings did contend against this
usurpation in many sore Wars. If by mixture of State be meant the assisting of
the Popes to destroy the opposers of the Papacy, I acknowledge it true, that
there were too many that did so. But in this there was no mixture of civil and
Ecclesiastical power, but rather a concurrence, the Ecclesiastical keeping to
themselves the judgment of Heresies, and putting upon the secular power the
execution of their sentence, whereby they did debase the civil power in making
it subservient to them, but made no mixture of State. Which appeared in that
some of the civil powers, that kept their civil government as before, yet did
oppose this usurpation in Popes and Prelates in making them their Executioners
to destroy those who were judged Heretics by them, and therefore this act of
theirs was the evil of those persons that did it, but not of the civil
Government it self. 3. It is supposed that then the civil powers were the beast
and a whore. Which no doubt alludes to that which we read Revel. 17. 1, 2, etc.
of the great whore that sits upon many waters, and v. 3. 7. the whore is
resembled by a woman sitting upon a scarlet colored beast, and v. 18. it is
said, and the woman which thou saw, is that great City, which reigns over
the Kings of the earth. Which few do deny to be meant of Rome, some of the
learned Papists themselves granting it to be meant of Rome, though they would
have it believed, that Rome is so called the Whore while it was heathen, not
since it became Christian. Others there are, chiefly Those of the Protestant
Churches, who do conceive by the Whore is meant Rome Papal, as conceiving the
descriptions ofher and her practices, cannot be applied to Rome as it was
Paganish, or Ethnic. Whether this, or the other, or any other opinion be
right, it is not needful now to discuss: It is sufficient, that the Civil
Powers of Rome, whether Ethnic, or Christian, or in a future estate cannot
well be termed the Beast and a Whore too, since the text makes them distinct,
or, if they may, yet sure the Civil Powers are not the Whore, since it is said.
v. 2. The Kings of the earth have committed fornication with the Whore, and the
inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication;
therefore, the Kings of the earth, and inhabiters of the earth, must not be
confounded, with the Whore. And v. 16. It is said, And the ten Horns (who are
ten Kings, which had received no Kingdom then. v. 12. And therefore not while
Rome was Ethnic, but after it is being Christian) Which thou saw upon the
Beast, these shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire: Therefore the Kings (which are the
Civil Powers) are not the same with the Whore, but, though at first beguiled by
her shall at last hate, and consume her, when they shall be undeceived.

4. It is supposed, that then the Power of Rome, when adulterated from its pure
Civil Estate became a mixed Antichristian state, or a beastly Antichristian
Power. What is meant by Antichristian state, or Antichristian Power is not easy
to resolve. It is true the Apostle John makes mention of many Antichrists that
should come in the last time, among which his words intimate, that there should
be a special Antichrist, that they had heard should come, 1 John 2. 18. And v.
22. He says, He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son, And chapter 4.
v. 3. He says, And every Spirit, that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is not of God: And this is that Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye
have heard that it should come, and even already is it in the world. And in his
second Epistle v. 7. For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a, or the Deceiver, and an,
or the Antichrist, which words seem to import, that those erroneous seducing
teachers, whether gnostics, or other, who were risen in that time, when these
Epistles were written, were, it is likely, called Antichrists from their
opposition to the true Doctrine concerning the coming of Jesus Christ in the
flesh-Nevertheless many of the ancients, in after ages, did often give hints of
the expectation of Christians, commonly entertained, whether from St. John's
words, or some other tradition, that there would arise some more remarkable
Antichrist, who should, whether by Power, or deceit, corrupt, or infest the
Church of Christ, beyond what was done in his days. And this has been
imagined by some of them, should be a Roman, the same with the man of sin, 2
These. 2. 3. That wicked, or lawless one, v. 8. the Beast, Revel. 13. 11. And
the Whore of Babylon, Revel. 17. 5. which in many ages the great corruptions in
the Popes of Rome, and their Courts, caused to be applied ever and anon, by
some or other of the best and learned of their times, to the Popes and
Papacy. And since the time of Luther, it has been almost generally received by
Protestant Writers of all sorts, that the Popes, and Papacy, especially since
Pope Boniface the third, usurped the Title of Ecumenical Bishop, as proper to
his See, and Gregory the seventh, the Power of deposing Emperors, and Boniface
the eight, the welding of both swords, Civil and Ecclesiastical, are the
Antichrist, Man of sin, Beast, and Whore of Babylon foretold, that he should
come, by St. Paul, and St. John. And not a few very learned, and sober godly
men, both of Bishops and Presbyters in England, Ireland, France, and other
Nations have asserted it by Preaching and writing; and have made it one of
their chief pleas, for their refusing communion with, and enmity against the
late Bishops of Rome, and the Papal Church, although some of late have thought
otherwise, and have endeavored to apply those passages to some other, whether
rightly, or not, I do not now determine. Whence it has come to pass, that as
the Papists, who still adhere to the Bishop of Rome, as Christ's Vicar, and St.
Peter's Successor, swallow down all that comes from Rome, be it never so vain
and erroneous: so on the other side those, who have been induced by the
arguments enforced from the places of holy scripture alleged to conceive, that
the Popes, or Papacy, or Roman Synagogue have been, and are the Antichrist, Man
of sin, Babylon, the Whore therein mentioned, have been apt to abhor any thing,
sometimes that which is otherwise right, which they conceive to come from Rome,
or the Pope, being terrified with the threatenings, Revel. 14. 9. 10, 11.
against those, who worship the Beast, and his Image, and recieve his mark in
their forehead, or in their hand, and warned by the voice from Heaven, Revel.
18. 4. Come out of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues. Which having been found by experience, to
be a very taking way, especially with the vulgar, and common sort of Scholars,
who are little versed in antiquity, and know not the true state of the Roman
Church in former ages, nor by what degrees, the corruptions thereof came to
that height they are now attained to, it is now a very common course with them,
who endeavor to render their opposites, their Doctrine, or practice odious,
and so to uphold their faction, to fasten on them, by clamor or calumnies, or
any other way they can, the name of Antichristian, Babylon, the mark of the
Beast, and to persuade men, that what they dislike, is from Rome, as being
sufficient without any other proof to make them abominable, and to be
destroyed. Thus in our days with us some have cried down prelacy, their
Liturgy, Ceremonies, Ordination, National Church, it is Government, Ministry,
Titles, and whatever belongs thereto as Antichristian; others have done the
like to the Presbyterial, Classical, Parochial Churches, their Ministry,
Directory, Government, Maintenence: others have done the same to the
Congregational, and in General, Seekers and Quakers, have in a Clamorous way
like Scolds bespattered all that is opposite to them, with this reproach of
Antichristian, and at last these Fifth-Monarchy men have furiously battered
Civil powers, and all that belongs to them, with the engine of this odious
brand of Antichristian and Babylonish, whereby much irreconcilable hatred,
enmity and opposition is raised among Christians, to the great damage of
Christian Protestant Churches, and states, and, without the great power and
goodness of God, making way for some accommodation of these differences, likely
so to weaken and wast us by intestine broiles, that we shall at last become a
prey to the common adversary. For my part it was still opposed by me long since
when Saltmarsh wrote, that I had proved Infant Baptism Antichristian, I made
him alter it, and when a meeting was for union between dissenters, I urged th^s
as one thing necessary, that the term Antichristian should be forborne, and when
Richard Hubberthorn entitled his book against my serious consideration of the
Oath of the Kings Supremacy, Antichristianism reproved, in my Epistle to the
Reader before my Supplement I not only showed the falsehood of his calumny, but
also endeavored briefly to show the evil of that course of defaming opposites,
and their tenants by that title. I deny not but that there is sufficient cause
given to Protestant Divines to charge the present Romanists with
Antichristianism in the arrogant title given to the Pope of Universal Bishop,
in the assertion of his supremacy over all Churches, his infallibility, in
their worship of Saints, Angels, Images, in their doctrines of invocation of
Saints, humane merits and satisfactions for sin: nor shall I deny but that
there may be found some practices, or doctrines among others, which may in a
qualified sense be termed Antichristian. But to make the Protestant Churches or
their Government Antichristian in State, and to be separated from, and to be
destroyed, when they hold the Faith of Christ aright, because of some
corruptions in points of Doctrine, or Worship, or Discipline, which overthrow
not the foundation of Christian Religion, is intolerable, much more to make
civil powers, who reject the Roman Popes supremacy, and their doctrine and
idolatrous worship to be Antichristian, from Rome, Babylon, from an imagined
mixture, that is not, or perhaps justifiable, shows either frenzy, or a mere
proud arrogant factious and quarrelsome humor in them, not to be born, the
title of Antichrist being (as may appear by St. John's words) to be applied to
seducing Teachers, not to civil powers though persecutors, as the Roman
Emperors then were, yet by St. Paul termed the Ordinance of God.

5. It is supposed, That then, when the Power of Rome adulterated from its pure
Civil state, became a mixed Antichristian state, the Beast and a Whore, a
Beastly Antichristian Power, that the Dragon, or Satan, gave him his Power, and
his Seat and great Authority. It is true that it is said, that St. John saw a
Beast arise out of the Sea, having seven Heads and ten Horns, and upon his
Horns ten Crowns, and upon his Heads the name of Blasphemy, and that the Beast
which he saw was like unto a Leopard, and his feet were as the feet of a Bear,
and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: And the Dragon gave him his Power, and
his Seat and great Authority. Which description being like that, whereby the
Babylonian Persian, and Greek Monarchies are characterized, gives occasion to
judge, that the Beast mentioned, Revel. 13. 1. 2. was to be some future Civil
Empire like to them, and the having seven Heads and ten Horns, and upon his
Horns ten Crowns, because of the descriptions, Daniel 7. 23, 24, 25. and Revel.
17. 3. 9. 12. Argnes, that it was to be the Roman Empire divided into ten
Kingdoms; nor is it to be denied, that Satan gave to this Beast his Power, that
is his forces, and his Seat, that is, Rome, and the Dominions belonging to it,
and great Authority, that is, Power to command, whereby the Idolatry termed
Blasphemy, which the Christian Emperors had cast down, was revived and the
persecution that for a time ceased, was renewed: But that this Power and Seat,
and great Authority was not given before by the Dragon to the Civil Powers of
old Rome tho a bloody persecuter, and devourer of the creation, and Gods
Heritage; is to be denied. For by comparing, Revel. 13. 1, 2. with Rev. 12. 3,
4. 7. It may be rather gathered, that Satan had given the same Power, Seat, and
great Authority to the Roman Emperors before, as he did to the Kings after,
though it were exercised in another manner, and upon other pretenses. The Power
and Seat, and Authority given by the Dragon, is not to be meant of Civil Power
to make Laws, and to execute them for the well-ordering of Commonwealths, and
Civil states, but the Power, Force, or Authority, which was usurped by
Nebuchadnezzar, when he set up a golden Image to be worshipped, and cast the
three Jews into the fiery furnance, and this may be gathered from, v. 4, 5. And
they worshipped the Dragon, which gave Power unto the Beast; and they
worshipped the Beast, saying, who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make
War with him? And there was given unto him a mouth, speaking great things and
Blasphemies, and Power was given unto him, to continue, or to make War forty
and two months. Whereby may be perceived, that the Power and Authority given by
Satan, was to speak great things, and Blasphemies, and to make War with the
Saints. And again of the two Horned Beast, v. 12. It is said, that he
exercises all the Power (...) of the first Beast before him, and causes the
earth, and them that dwell therein, to worship the first Beast, whose deadly
wound was healed; which cannot be understood of legal Power, such as we are
required to be subject to, but such wicked and unrighteous Power, as is used in
requiring adoration of Idols, and urging it either by mere force without any
Law, or by devellish Acts, to entice men thereto. Which was in the Roman
Heathen Emperors from Satan, who is said to cast the Christians into Prison,
Revel. 2. 10. by stirring up the Pagan Emperors and their subordinate Rulers to
do it, and yet their Civil Power, as is confessed, was the Ordinance of God.

6. It is supposed, that then when the Powers of the great Image, or old Rome,
became a mixed Antichristian estate, and not before, they became the Ordinance
of Hell, to which there is no Subjection due. But they do not tell us when this
was, nor can tell. And is it not then blind fury, that hurries men to such
frantic determinations as to date the relaxation of so plain a precept, as
that Romans 13. 1. is, from such a time, as they know not when it begins, and to
infer thence a warrant for some supposing themselves Saints upon no better
evidence, than their conceit of Gods Revelation of this by his Spirit from his
word, to attempt the smiting of all the Powers of the great Image Civil and
Ecclesiastical; whose derivation is from Rome (others not excepted nor freed)
the Kingdoms of the Romish Iron Legs, or the Roman Kingdom divided into the
Eastern and Western Monarchies (wherein the whole Dominion, Power and Monarchy
of the Ottoman Family, or that of the Turks is comprehended) and the Beasts,
ten Horns or Antichrists Civil Powers (equivalent to the ten Toes) and also the
little Horn, together with all powers whatsoever, that shall be found opposers
of the Lords Kingdom, whether they be of the golden Babylonish, Silver Persian,
Brazen Grecian, or Iron Roman, Dan. 2. and chapter 7. Revel. 13. Comprehending the
whole Kingdom of Antichrist in the Civil and Ecclesiastical parts thereof made
up of persons and things, though they grant that some of these were the
Ordinance of God, to whom every soul was to be subject, and those only to cease
to be, to whom the Dragon gives his Power, Revel. 13. 2. which who they are,
and when this Power was given by the Dragon, they are not able to give any
assurance of?

7. It is supposed, that the Civil Powers now, even in this Nation, are a mixed
Antichristian state, and that their Power is from the Dragon, since this
mixture, though not before. But with what color can they make those powers
Antichristian, who do maintain the faith of Christ? To have their Power from
Rome, who have denied obedience to the Bishop of Rome? To be a mixed
Antichristian state, who cause their subjects to abjure the Popes Supremacy? To
have their power from the Dragon, who do by their Laws and the Execution of
them, pull down the worship of Idols, and punish with death Diabolical Arts?
Quarrels perhaps are against the Kings Supremacy, over Ecclesiastical persons,
and in Ecclesiastical causes, as if it made a mixed Antichristian state, so as
that what is denied to the Pope, is given to the King: But this objection was
so fully answered by Dr. John Rainold, in his conference with Heart the Jesuit
in the Tower, chapter 10. that Heart himself was satisfied, that it was not so.
Perhaps some others imagine, that in the making of Bishops there is an
adulterating of the pure Civil power, and an Antichristian mixture of Civil and
Ecclesiastical power; but this also is but a mistake, that which is merely
Ecclesiastical, therein being left to Ecclesiastiques to do. Yet, were it
granted there were some mixture of Civil and Ecclesiastical power, that this
should make the Civil powers Antichristian, is without all reason affirmed.
Were the Fathers of the Family, or the firstborn sons, both Rulers
Oeconomical, and Priests to offer sacrifice, Melchizedec, a King and a Priest,
David a King and a Prophet, therefore Antichristian? will they count all
preachers who are masters, and parents, and husbands by reason of this
conjunction of these different functions in their persons therefore Antichrian?
Are not, or have not there been many of them, who perhaps have been of the
fraternity of the Quinto-Monarchians themselves, who have had commands in the
Army, and yet have been Preachers, yea taken upon them to be Elders in the
Churches, and to have had ordination by laying on of hands, who yet have not
been judged by reason of this mixture Antichristian? Are not then these men
very partial, who condemn that in one, which they do not in another, conniving
at, if not approving that in such as favor their party, which they do count,
and inveigh against, as a most heinous crime, deserving extermination in them
that side not with them? Much more abominable is it, that they should impute
that power, by which peace is kept, justice is done, humane society is
preserved, to the Dragon, and not see it to be from the Devil, that they stir
up hatred in the world, and practice murdering of innocent men, yea of those
who are by God made Rulers over them, whom they should obey, assist, and defend.

8. It is supposed, that the mixture of Civil powers by them imagined makes
them, who otherwise had been the Ordinance of God, to be the Ordinance of Hell,
and their power from the Dragon, though promoting Idolatry and persecuting
Christianity by the Roman Ethnic Emperors, did not make void their being the
Ordinance of God, nor the duty of Christians Subjection to them. As if the
shedding of the blood of the Saints, and setting up Idols were not more from
Satan, and more inconsistent with Civil powers than an usurpation of an
Ecclesiastic office, or Uzziahs presumption to burn incense: God would not
have David build him a Temple, because he had shed blood, not because he was,
as it is likely, Author of fetching the Ark to him in a Cart; and he and all
Israel attended the carrying of it, playing before the Lord on all manner of
instruments. Sure this Doctrine smells rank of Pharisaism to break the
Commandments of God for men's traditions, to disanul the duty of Subjects to
their Civil Parents, because of some supposed inordinate mixture. Yea is not
this the very venom of Antichristian Papal listing up of themselves above all
that is called God, not only to excommunicate, and depose Emperors for simony
(as the Popes termed it) because they gave Bishops investiture into their
Bishoprics, or for Heresy, or favoring heretics in not destroying them, but
also to proclaim War against them, and attempt to kill them by reason of
mixture, or not furthering, or opposing their Fifth-Monarchy? Lastly, these
men, by allowing only this smiting work on the civil powers, since their
imagined mixture, do evacuate all the rest of their arguments for justifying
it, whether from the Stones smiting Dan. 2. or taking the Kingdom, Dan. 7. or
such other, whether just or unjust, accusations, or exclamations against civil
powers which they make the reason of their smiting without this, and though the
scriptures, make not at all this to be any of the evils in them, or the reasons
of Gods, or man's hostility against them. To conclude them, though much more
might be said against this hellish Doctrine of smiting civil powers, it is
sufficiently demonstrated, that the suppositions and inferences of
Fifth-Monarchy-men, against the first argument are false and venomous, and the
conclusion stands good, their smiting is damnable and Antichristan.

7. More arguments are urged against Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine, from precepts
and examples of holy persons.
A Second argument against the smiting of civil powers, I draw from those words
of St. Paul 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2, 3. I exhort therefore, that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for allmen:
For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, or excellency, or eminent place,
or sovereign dignity; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our
Savior. Therefore, it is likely, has reference to what he had said before.
chap. 1. 18. Because of the Prophecies that went before of thee, that by them
thou might war a good warfare, I charge thee, and exhort thee, and first of
all I exhort thee; being to add other exhortations, or, as we read it, that
first of all, that is, as the chief or prime thing of all other; supplications
against evils, prayers for good things, intercessions for others, thanksgivings
be made for all men; all sorts of men, even for Kings, or Emperors (who were
then persecutors of Christians and promoters of Idol service) and all their
undergovernours, to the intent we may lead a quiet and peacable life free from
Invasions, Robberies, and Injuries in all godliness, and honesty, gravity, or
seemliness: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior.
Whence may be inferred, 1. That intercessions are to be made for the worst of
Kings, even the persecuting Emperors of the Fourth Monarchy, and for all that
are in authority, or dignity. 2. That there should be thanksgivings for them.
3. That this is good and acceptable in the sight of God or Savior. 4. That
this is a benefit to Christians, that they may lead a quiet and peaceable life
by means of Kings and persons in authority. 5. That to this Christian teachers
are to exhort. 6. That first of all they should do this, or exhort them to do
this first of all, or as chiefest of all. Whence I argue,

That work, and the inciting to it, must needs be damnable and Antichristian,
which is directly contrary to that, which St. Paul exhorts in the first place,
or chiefly to be done; this I should think none should deny, who acknowledges
St. Paul to have been an Apostle of Christ, and to have known and delivered in
this Epistle the mind of Christ: But the work of smiting civil powers, and the
Doctrine of Quinto-Monarchians, inciting thereto by accursing them, stirring up
hatred against them, exposing them to disobedience, contempt, opposition of
such as are under them, is directly contrary to that, which St. Paul exhorts in
the first place, or chiefly to be done. Which no man that is well in his wits
can deny, cursing, stirring up hatred against civil powers, exposing them to
disobedience, contempt, opposition of such as are under them, being as directly
contrary to praying, and giving thanks for them, as black to white, bitter to
sweet, and raising War, and taking up Arms, and smiting them being diametrally
opposite to leading a quiet and peaceable life under them, or by their means,
and counting this to tend to the promoting of Christ's Kingdom, contrary to the
Apostle who makes it a hinderance of godliness and honesty, and judging that to
be the generation work of illuminated, and the most sincere Saints, which is
contrary to what St. Paul says is good, and to expect, that God should reward,
and highly regard men for doing that smiting work, is contrary to what St. Paul
makes acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Now that Doctrine which is
thus contrary to St. Paul, must needs be damnable and Antihristian, and
therefore the conclusion follows, that the Doctrine of the Quinto-Monarchians
smiting work of civil powers, is damnable and Antichristian. I know no
exception against this, but what was against the former argument, and is
refelled, and therefore I pass on to a third argument.

The third argument I shall urge against the Doctrine of smiting eivil powers
is from the examples of Christ, his Apostles, the holy Martyrs and Saints of
the first and best ages of the Christian Church, which should be as a Rule to
the succeeding. Concerning the example of our Lord Christ it is manifest, that
our Lord Christ was Subject to his Parents, his Mother Mary, and his reputed
Father Joseph, Luke 2. 51. that though he pleaded immunity from paying the
didrachms, or shekles translated tribute money, Matthew. 17. 25. yet he paid it,
that he might not offend the Collectors, or Rulers who employed them, who,
whether they were the Officers of the Romans, or of the High Priest; and the
money paid for the use of the Temple, as Cameron in his Prelection on that
scripture argues; yet it shows he was voluntarily, though not necessitated,
resolved to have regard to Rulers of every sort, that he might therein be an
example to us of Subjection. Which is more fully proved by his answer to the
High Priest adjuring him, Matthew. 26. 63. by his confession before Pontius
Pilate, 2 Timothy 6. 13. mentioned as imitable by Timothy v. 12. And most of all
by his sufferings even unto death, in which the Apostle Peter 1 Epistle 2. 21.
Tells us, that Christ also suffered fo us, leaving us an example, (...) a copy
or written description, or impression, that ye should follow his steps, and
this is applied as an argument, why they should submit themselves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; not merely out of fear of punishment, but
in obedience to Christ's command, or conformity to his pattern, and these humane
Ordinances are named to be Kings, Governors sent by them, Masters not only
good and Gentle, but also froward. Whereby it is plain, that our Lord Christ by
his Subjection, both active and passive, imposes on all Saints Subjection to
all sorts of Rulers, whether Household, or Ecclesiastical, or civil in the
Commonwealth, as a necessary duty, and therefore the Doctrine of
Quinto-Monarchians teaching it as an incumbent duty, on the most illuminated
(as they fancy it) Saints to disclaim not only Ecclesiastical Rulers, but also
civil powers in order to their smiting work, and also to smite them is damnable
and Antichristian. Nor can here the pretenses of their being of the fourth
Monarchy, from Rome, Oppressors, Idolaters, Antichristian, salve the matter,
fith those Priests of the Jews, and Roman Governors, to whom Christ yeiled
Subjection, were as bad, and every way as obnoxious to their criminations of
the present Governors, as any now be. Assuredly the present Governors in
these Nations, cannot be charged with such things as Pilate, Caiaphas, and the
rest of those Governors, to whom Christ was subject, were chargable with without
extreme impudence. This argument is further confirmed from the examples of all
the holy Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors in the primative times of
Christianity. Instances might be given in James, Peter, Paul, who doubtless
could as easily have killed their persecutors as Ananias, and Sapphira, or
stricken them blind, as St. Paul did Elymas the Sorcerer, yet submitted
themselves to imprisonment, pleaded their cause before Roman Rulers, appealed
to Caesar, suffered even to death. In the times following the Christians served
under the persecuting Roman Emperors in their Wars, and though they were in
number many, dispersedover their Empire, and had Arms in their hands, whereby
they might in appearance have been able to have defended themselves against the
violence of their persecutors, yet they chose to suffer under the tyrannous
Emperors, that then were, rather than to rise up against them to revenge
themselves, because their Christian profession did forbid them, as Tertullian,
Apolog. c. 37. ad scapulam. c. 2. Cyprian ad Demetr. and others plead for them.

Out of these and other examples, which might be produced, we may argue thus.
That Doctrine which teaches men to do contrary to the examples and profession
of our Lord Christ Jesus, his Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors, Saints in the
first and best ages of Christianity, is damnable and Antichristian. But such is
the Doctrine of the Quinto-Monarchians, concerning their smiting of civil
powers, as is manifest by comparing them, therefore it is damnable and
Antichristian.

8. More arguments are urged from censures, and determinations in the New
Testament.
A Fourth argument I deduce from those places of holy scripture which censure,
condemn and denounce woe unto those practices, which the Doctrine of the
Quinto-Monarchians incites men to, and they magnify as the fruits of Gods
Spirit. The Apostle Peter 2 Epist. 2. 9, 10, 11. The Lord knows how to deliver
the Godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of
judgment, to be punished. But chiefly them that walk after the flesh, in the
lust of uncleanness, and despise Government, or Dominion, presumptuous are
they, self-willed: they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities: whereas
Angels, which are greater in power and might, bring not a railing accusation
against them before the Lord. Which is seconded by St. Jude v. 8, 9, 10.
Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise Dominion, and
speak evil of dignities. Yet Michael the Archangel, when contending with the
Devil, he disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a
railing accusation, but said, the Lord rebuke thee. But these speak evil of the
things they know not. In which passages those holy Apostles rank, the despisers
of Dominion, those that speak evil of dignities, not among the Saints, but
amongst the most accursed reprobates (though those Dominions and dignities were
as bad as might be, in respect of their personal qualities and actions) yea the
Archangels example is brought in as not daring to bring against the Devil
himself, when there was a contention about Moses his body, a railing
accusation; but referred it to the Lord to rebuke him, teaching thereby, that
such terms, as contain threatening, contempt, reproach of Governors, and
dignities, are altogether unsuteable to Saints, and such as they should not
dare to utter, though they contended with the Devil himself, much less with
men, that are in Power and Authority, much less to smite them, and directing
how to deal with them, when they be injurious, to wit, to defer their cause to
God for his suppression of them, and threatening woe to the practisers of
contempt of Dominion, and speaking evil of dignities. All which are contrary to
the Doctrine of Quinto-Monarchians, who revile, despise, threaten them, commend
the smiting of them, as the generation work, promise rewards to them that do
it. Whence I infer that Doctrine which animates men to such practices, as are
damned by the holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Jude, is damnable and
Antichristian. But such is the Doctrine of Quinto-Monarchians, concerning their
vilifying and smiting civil powers: therefore it is damnable and Antichristian.

If any object our Saviors answer, Luke 13. 32. to some Pharisees, who said to
him, get thee out and depart hence, for Herod will kill thee, bidding them, go
ye and tell that Fox, behold I cast out Devils, and I do cures to day and to
morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected; I answer, these words do not at
all contain any vilifying of the Kingdoms of the fourth Beast, or contempt of
the Kings of the earth: But a reproof of Herod's evil qualities of craft and
cruelty, and a professed resolution of his going on in his work with undanted
magnanimity, till the time came of his laying down his life, with a prediction,
that it should not be where Herod had jurisdiction, but at Jerusalem. As for
that which we read, Isai. 37. 22. This is the word of the Lord which he has
spoken concerning Sennacherib King of Assyria, the Virgin the daughter of Sion
has despised thee, and laughed thee to scorn, the daughter of Jerusalem has
shaken her head at thee, it gives no allowance for one of the Lamb's followers
to express contempt of the Kings of the earth; though they were all of them (as
they are unjustly charged) the lovers of the Mother of Harlots, and
Abominations of the earth; this being a breach of a plain rule in the New
Testament, requiring subjection to them, and condemning contempt of them, which
is not in a holy triumph of faith, but rather in a proud self magnifying, or
factious animosity, not a deriding of their threats, and Blasphemous
desparaging of God, as was that which the Prophet from God foretold the Jews
should do to a King, that had no Authority over them, but was an hostile
Invader of them, and by express warrant from God, but a vilifying of the powers
that are termed the Kingdom of the fourth Beast, as opposite to the Kingdom,
power and glory of Jesus Christ our Lord; though the Apostle Peter expressly
bid, Honor the King, even then when the King was of the fourth Beast, as they
speak, and opposite to the Kingdom, power, and glory of Christ Jesus. The
Prophet Isaiah never taught the Jews to vilify Manasseh his Kingdom, or
Authority, notwithstanding his reprehension of his wickedness, and prediction
of his calamity: And in like manner, though preachers called to that Office,
may in a fit way show Princes their sins, and declare their danger: Yet in no
sort are they to vilify their Authority, or contemn their persons. Nor may men
pretend the imitation of the holy Prophets boldness, unless they can show their
commission, and are endowed with their Spirit and power: Nor may men, who are
but private persons, take upon them to do as Christ did when he drove the
buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

Which will be more fully proved by a fifth argument taken from some
resolutions, or determinations of our Lord Christ, which condemn such attempts
and practices, as the Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine animates to, upon pretense of
zeal for Christ and his Kingdom. Luke, 9. 54, 55, 56. When Christ was to go to
Jerusalem, he sent messengers before his face, and they went and entered into a
Village of the Samaritans to make ready for him. And they did not receive him,
because his face was asthough he would go to Jerusalem, and when his Desciples
James and John, saw this, they said, Lord will thou that we command fire to
come down from Heaven, and consume them, even as Elias did? But he turned, and
rebuked them and said, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of. For the son
of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them. In which resolution
our Savior condemns the motion of James and John, to have fire come down from
Heaven, to destroy the Samaritans, for their not entertaining of Christ, in
imitation of Elias, out of zeal for Christ; because it was not out of the same
Spirit that Elijah had, nor agreeable to the end of Christ's coming, and his
Gospel, which were not to destroy men's lives, but save them. Now then the
Doctine of Quinto-Monarchians, which urges their smiting work, which tends to
the destroying of men's lives, and not the saving of them, out of a zeal, as
they conceive, for Christ and his Kingdom, though there be no other then a
private, or rather an haughty factious Spirit in them, is contrary to Christ's
resolution, and therefore indeed damnable and Antichristian. Nor has it indeed
in Christ, or his Apostles Doctrine, or example any warrant; but is an
imitation of that pernicious use of the later Jews, which was taken up in a
perverse imitation of Phinehas his act Numb. 25. of Elias, 1 Kings 18. 40. 2
Kings 1. 10. and some others, out of zeal for their Law, without Authority, to
destroy those things and persons, which they judged contrary thereto, as in the
stoning of Stephen, Act. 7. St. Paul Acts, 14. 19. etc. In which they were
carried furiously, and violently without any legal judicial proceeding, hearing
and sentence by Authorized Judges; which caused so many seditions, and such
outrages, as at last provoked the Romans to make a most horrid destruction of
that people, and ruin of that state. To which the Quinto-Monarchians opinon,
and practice has been too like, and, if not stayed, would bring the like
effect on Church and State with us. The other determination is that of our
Savior in the case of Peter's drawing his sword to rescue Christ in the garden
from the Soldiers, which came to take him, and striking a servant of the High
Priests and smiting off his ear, which our Savior disallowed, bidding him to
put up his sword again into his place: for all they that take the sword shall
perish with the sword, Matthew. 26. 52. where our Lord, who had bid them buy
swords, Luke, 22. 36. a little before, yet forbids the drawing of it, and
smiting off the ear of a servant of the High Priest, though it were out of zeal
for him, it being against an Officer by a person without Authority declaring
the evil consequence, which would follow on such usage of it. Now the
Quinto-Monarchians smiting civil powers out of pretended zeal for Christ's
Kingdom without any authority in a furious heart of spirit is much more
apparently contrary to Christ's resolution in Peter's case, and therefore is
censured justly to be damnable and Antichristian.

9. Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine of smiting civil powers urges to resisting of
evil and self-revenging forbidden by Christ and his Apostles, and to most
horrid Murders, and great confusions.
A Sixth argument against the Doctrine of smiting civil powers, in order to the
setting up of the Fifth-Monarchy, is taken from those texts of scripture, which
forbid resisting of evil and avenging our selves. Our Lord Christ. Matthew. 5.
38, 39. reciting out of the Law of Moses words interpreted, as allowing
retaliation of wrongs with the like, as those who threaten to others, that they
will give them as good as they bring, he on the contrary tells his Disciples,
But I say unto you, resist not evil: But whosoever shall smite thee on thy
right cheek, turn to him the other also. Which is not to be understood simply
and absolutely, as if that turning the cheek were to be done always in the act
it self: But in a comparative sense, rather than make a brawl or fight, take
further injury signified by the proverbial phrase of turning the check: now if
Christians be forbidden to fight, when they are injured, to recompense evil for
evil, then much more are they forbidden, being private persons, to whom the
sword is not committed, of their own accord to begin a War even with superiors,
and to proclaim it in order to procuring of good, as the Quinto-Monarchians
Doctrine moves Saints to. Likewise St. Paul, Romans 12. 17. Recompense to no man
evil for evil v. 19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but rather give
place unto wrath: for it written, vengeance is mine, I will repay it says the
Lord, v. 21. Be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good. 1 Peter, 3.
9. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing: But contrariwise
blessing; knowing that ye are thereunto called, that ye should inherit a
blessing: When David had cut off Saul's skirt, his heart smote him, and he said
unto his men, the Lord forbid that I should do this thing unto my Master the
Lords anointed, to stretch forth mine hand against him, seeing he is the
anointed of the Lord, 1 Samuel 24. 5, 6. The Lord judge between me and thee, and
the Lord avenge me of thee, but mine hand shall not be upon thee. As says the
Proverb of the Ancients, Wickedness proceeedeth from the wicked: but mine hand
shall not be upon thee. v. 12. 13. And David said to Abigail, blessed be the
Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy
advice, and blessed be thou, which have kept me this day from coming to shed
blood, and from avenging my self with mine own hand, 1 Samuel 25. 32, 33. Which
show, that herein both in the old and new Testament holy persons agree, that a
King is not to be smitten though in hostility without cause, by any of his
Subjects, though he were anointed to be King after him, that revenge of injury,
oppression or persecution, though it extended to the slaying the Lords Priests,
and to an endeavor to slay the anointed Captain of the Lords Host, is not to
be attempted by a private person or subject, but to be referred to the Lord.
Therefore the Doctrine of Quinto-Monarchians, urging subjects and private
persons to smite their superior civil powers, and to avenge the supposed
injuries and persecutions of Saints by their own hands, is contrary to
Christ's, his Apostles, and David's determinations in the holy Scriptures, and
consequently damnable and Antichristian.

That which I find alleged for their practice, is in these words, The Banner
of truth displayed, p. 59. All the blood of Gods people is found in Babylon:
For they (i. e. her civil powers Revel. 16. 6, 6.) have shed the blood of the
Saints and Prophets, Rev. 17. 6. chapter 18. 24. and 19. 1. Jer. 50. 14. now
therefore God by way of recompense and retalliation, has ordained, that the
Saints shall be his instruments by which he will execute his vengeance upon the
powers of the world, who are all of them murderers: accordingly God commands
his people (and it is their duty to obey) to reward Babylon double as she
rewarded them; yea, and double unto her all those plagues, deaths and stripes,
that she has inflicted on you, Revel. 18. 6. and they shall give her blood to
drink, and she shall be burnt with fire, for strong is the Lord that judges
her.

Wherein many things are taken as granted which are false, and the whole (if it
were granted) would be insufficient to acquit them from guilt of opposing
Christ's precepts in that way of recompense and retaliation, which they incite
to. 1. That all the powers of the world are murderers. Which proposition
contains such a crimination as God only is fit to charge them with, if it were
true, since he only knows all the powers of the world, and is privy to all their
thoughts, designs and actions. 2. That the civil powers of the world are
Babylon, or her civil powers. Now Babylon is termed the great, which shall
become the habitation of Devils, Rev. 18. 2. and, I think, it is undoubted with
all sorts of Writers and intelligent persons, that Babylon the great there
meant is the same with the woman, Rev. 17. 4. termed v. 1. The great whore,
upon whose forehead was a name, written, Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother
of Hariots, and abominations of the earth v. 5. which is interpreted v. 18. And
the woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns over the Kings
of the earth. Which commonly those who are acquainted with the Histories of the
times, in which St. John received his Revelation, even Papists themselves, do
take to be Rome, known to be the only City which sat on seven mountains as v.
9. is expressed and reigned then over the Kings of the earth. But how all the
powers of the world now in being, or the Nations of Europe, even the Protestant
should be Babylon or her civil powers, or, as elsewhere they say, the streets
of that great City, and Rome-Babylon, is unintelligible to me. Rome it self,
and that which is called the Patrimony of St. Peter, and the territories in
Italy now subject to the Pope may be termed Babylon, and the Civil powers
therein may be termed her Civil powers, and perhaps all the territories subject
to the Pope in Ecclefiastical affairs may be meant by the streets of the great
City mentioned Revel. 11. 8. because they yield subjection to the Roman Pope in
spirituals. But how the States which do reject the Pope's power in Temporals,
as the King of France, or the Duke and Senate of Venice, who stood out against
Pope Paul the fifth, when he interdicted them, because they would not repeal
their Laws, or release their prisoners though Ecclesiastics, should be termed
the civil powers of Rome-Babylon is not easy to be understood; much less, how
the Kings of England, Denmark, Sweden and such other Protestant States, Nations
and Princes as have rejected the Popes jurisdiction and authority, both in
civil, and Church matters, and impose oaths of disclaiming the Popes supremacy
in Spirituals, and their authority in Temporals through their Dominions on
their Subjects, should be nevertheless the civil powers of Babylon, and their
Countries the streets of the great City Rome-Babylon, is it conceiveable by me.
If the Predecessors of these did subject themselves to the Pope in former ages,
yet they are not therefore termed Babylon, but Kings of the earth who commit
fornication with her, and give their power to her; but neither of these can be
said of those Princes, though Successors to them, who have abandoned the Popes
errors and corruptions in Religion, and his jurisdiction wholly.

3. It is suggested, that all the blood of Gods people is found in Babylon: For
they (i. e. her civil powers Rev. 16. 6, 7.) have shed the blood of the Saints
and Prophets, Rev. 17. 6. chapter 18. 24. and 19. 1. Jer. 50. 14. And it is true
that Jer. 50. 14. it is said, put your selves in array against Babylon round
about; all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has
sinned against the Lord. But this is not meant of Rome-Babylon, nor of her
civil powers, but of Babylon in Chaldaea many thousand miles distant from Rome,
and long before these days, or St. John's, wasted. And yet it is not said of
that Babylon that it shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets, though I deny
not she is charged with the blood of the Inhabitants of Zion, Jerusalem-Israel,
Jer. 51. 35. 49. It is rather charged on Jerusalem by Christ, that she killed
the Prophets and stoned them that were sent unto her, that upon her might come
all the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel,
unto the blood of Zacharias Son of Barachias, whom ye, says Christ, slew
between the Temple and the Altar, Matthew. 23. 34, 35. 37. It is said Rev. 16. 4,
5, 6. And the third Angel poured out his vial upon the Rivers and Fountains of
waters and they became blood. And I heard the Angel of the waters say, thou art
righteous, O Lord, which wast, art, and shall be, because thou have judged
thus: For they have shed the blood of Saints and Prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And it is most probable (though there
be that conceive the Rivers and Fountains of water to have been the Cities and
Provinces of the Roman Empire under the Pagan Emperors, and that to them is
ascribed the sheding of the blood here mentioned) that this is meant of the
Papal Empire, since it is the same which is charged on the woman, Revel. 17. 6.
and Babylon Rev. 18. 24. who must be different from Rome Pagan, by reason of
the things said Rev. 17. 10, 11, 12. concerning the ten Kings, which had then
received no Kingdom, when St. John received this Revelation, but should receive
power as Kings one hour with the Beast, etc have one mind, and give their power
and strength unto the Beast: which could not be understood of the Roman Pagan
Emperors, who received not power and strength from Kings, but gave power to
them so, as that they ruled under them by their power, and therefore is to be
interpreted of later times; which the event shows to be most probable to have
been the times, wherein the Kings of Europe having divided the Roman Empire
into ten Kingdoms did yet all of them sooner or later adhere to and support the
Papal Dominion; which brought in errors, heresies, idolatries and
superstitions, which have, and yet do corrupt the western Churches, and for
maintenance of which a sea of blood has been shed by the instigations of
Friars, Jesuits and other Emissaries of Rome. Upon these especially Brightman,
Mede, and some others, conceived the third vial to be poured out. But all are
so far from making the Rivers which shed the blood of the Saints and Prophets,
to whom blood was given to drink to be the Civil powers; that Brightman makes
the pouring out of this vial to have been begun by Q. Elizabeth and the
Parliament 1581. making the reconciling of the English Subjects to Rome a
capital offense, and makes the then Lord Treasurer William Cecil the Angel of
the Rivers, by reason of the book put forth by him termed the English Justice,
wherein the putting to death of Romish Emissaries is defended. Which is also
the opinion of Mede, though he add also the memorable overthrow of the Spaniard
in 1588. the English and the Dutch (whom Robert Parker conceives resembled by
the Angel of the waters as seated in a watery Country) by sea and land,
abundantly pouring out the Cup of the mighty hand of God. But be the civil
powers the shedders of the blood Rev. 16. 6. and 17. 6. and 18. 24. and 19. 2.
yet it can with no color be charged on those civil powers, that have not in
obedience to the Pope acted this tragedy, but have opposed it, and avenged the
blood of the Saints by execution of just laws made against the Instigators and
actors in the shedding of the blood of Protestants. I cannot take upon me to
absolve the civil powers from the guilt of shedding the blood of Saints and
Prophets, as being ignorant how far any have been actors therein, or connived
thereat; nor do I know what Gods way may be of imputing the bloodshedding of
Saints and Martyrs, though by Ancestors hundreds of years ago, upon the
posterity succeeding. Christ's sentence against Jerusalem, Matthew. 23. 34, 35.
37. makes me astonished, and to say as David Ps. 119. 120. My flesh trembles
for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments, and with Daniel chapter 9. 8:
to say, O Lord to us belongs confusion of face to our Kings, to our Princes,
and to our Fathers, because we sinned against thee; Yet hoping that the Princes
and people of these Nations have been humbled, and are before God at this day
for the evils committed by their forefathers under the Papacy, I trust I may
add with Daniel v. 9. To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgivenesses,
though we have rebelled against him. Sure I am it is a bold presumption which
the Quinto-Monarchians have no warrant for, to charge the blood of Martyrs,
shed long before their times, on the civil powers of this Generation, unless
they were privy to some overt act, whereby they have showed their approbation
of it, and their readiness to tread in the same steps.

4. It is said, that therefore God by way of recompense and retaliation, has
ordained, that the Saints shall be his instrument by which he will execute his
vengeance upon the powers of teh world, who are all of them Murderers:
Accordingly God commands his people (and it is their duty to obey) to reward
Babylon double, as she rewarded them; yea, and double unto her with all those
plagues, deaths and stripes, that she has inflicted on you, Revel. 18. 6. And
they shall give her blood to drink, and she shall be burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord that judges her. To which I reply. 1. that all this runs
upon a palpable mistake, that the powers of the world, or the civil powers, are
the Babylon, which is to be rewarded double, Rev. 18. 6. whereas it is manifest
that the Babylon to be rewarded double, is that great mighty city. v. 10. out
of which Gods people are to come. v. 4. which is to be utterly burnt with fire;
though the inhabitants are also included, whose sins reached up to Heaven. v.
5. Glorified her self. v. 7. yet the civil powers of the world cannot be meant
there, since it is said. v. 9. And the Kings of the earth, who have committed
fornication and lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for
her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning, standing a far off, for the
fear of her torments. 2. It is another mistake as if God had ordained that the
Saints, or Gods people, without any other circumscription should be his
instrument, by which he will execute his vengeance upon Babylon. For though it
be spoken to the people of God, Revel. 18. 5. To reward Babylon as she rewarded
them, in the cup she has filled, fill her double, yet it be said, Revel. 17.
16. And the ten Horns which thou saw upon the Beast, these shall hate the
Whore and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to
agree, and give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God shall be
fulfilled. Whence it appears, that it is so far from truth, that the civil
powers of the world are Babylon, and are to be destroyed in order to Babylons
downfall, that they are distinct from Babylon, so as to stand a far off and
lament her some of them, and others are to be instruments of burning her with
fire. And therefore although the people of God, which are to come out of
Babylon, those who are with the Lamb, called faithful and chosen, Rev. 17. 14
may be with the Kings that burn her, and being escaped out of Babylon, may be
instrumental to its destruction, being joined with the Kings, yet it does not
appear, that God has ordained the Saints, who are only private men, and no
Kings, shall do it by themselves, by their own power, but in conjunction with
them or subordination to them, and therefore in the executing of vengeance on
Babylon, there will be execution by the civil powers of the world, not upon
them, and Saints are bound in order to this smiting work, to maintain civil
powers, not to smite them, or separate from them. 3. Though the words, Revel.
18. 6. be in the Imperative mood, yet it does not thence necessarily follow,
that it is Gods command to his people, which it is their duty to obey, or else
they sin against God, to reward Babylon, but it may be understood as a
prediction of what should be, not as a command of what ought to be done by them
as their duty, as the like expressions, Jerem. 50. 2. 14, 15. 21. 26, 27, 28,
29. (which are imitated Rev. 18. 4. 6. Revel. 19. 17. Isai. 56. 9.) are to be
expounded, or as a permission allowing a person to do it, as when St. Paul
says, 1 Cor. 10. 27. Whatsoever is set before you, eat, asking no question for
conscience sake: which does not enjoin them to eat whatsoever was set before
them, so as that, if they did not eat, it would be their sin; for then they
should be required to be gluttons; but is an indulgence to them, allowing them
liberty to eat as a thing not unlawful, but indifferent, which, unless further
admonished, they might eat without scruple of conscience. 4. That it is not a
command to the people, who did come out of Babylon, nor their act to reward
double to Babylon, and fill to her double, but a prediction of what shall be
done by others, may be gathered in that the reward to them, is to be construed
to have been the slaughter of them, and the cup, which Babylon filled, was the
cup of blood, which she was to drink of, Revel. 16. 6. now then those persons
who were rewarded, to whom this cup was filled by Babylon, are such as had been
put to death by Babylon, and therefore could not reward her double, or fill her
double in the cup which she has filled, unless they were raised from the dead,
and consequently could not be the same individuals, who are invited to come out
of Babylon, Revel. 18. 4. 5. Upon this consideration it is also probable, that
the rewarding, and filling, Revel. 18. 6. is ascribed to the Martyrs killed,
because God did it by reason of the cry of their blood, which is intimated by
the words, v. 20. Rejoice over her, thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and
Prophets, for God has avenged you on her, and other words, Revel. 11. 18. do
intimate the same. Which, if true, is nothing to the smiting work of the
Quinto-Monarchians, by military power turning their Plow-shares into swords:
but only intimates the efficacy of the blood of Martys to bring divine
vengeance on Babylon. 6. But were it granted; that the people of God invited to
come out of Babylon, Revel. 18. 4. were the same numerical persons, who are
commanded to reward Babylon double, and to fill her double in the cup, which
she has filled, and they are to do this by smiting with the sword; yet this is
nothing to the Fifth-Monarchy-Men in England, unless they should be in Babylon
at that time, when Gods people should come out of her, and did so come out of
her. And therefore there is no command, Revel. 18. 6. for them to smite till
then, but they are to put up their sword into the sheath, and to lead a quiet
and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty under their Governors, else
they will be guilty of resisting and self-revenging condemned by Christ and his
Apostles, which was to be proved.

10. Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine tends to murder, and ruin of humane society.
HEnce also a seventh argument is deduced, that the smiting work, to which the
Doctrine of Quinto-Monarchians incites, is wilful murder, yea the most horrible
murder that ever was, except his, who was a murderer from the beginning, John
8. 44. or theirs, who crucified the Lord of glory; For it incites to a
professed smiting, and spoiling of all the civil powers on earth, even those to
whom they are bound to be subject by all Laws of Religion, nature, country,
and reason, and to act these things with all extremity, out of imagined zeal
for Christ, which if it be not according to knowledge, is a fire of Hell, which
will hardly be ever quenched, and in prosecution thereof to smite those who
resist them, which must of necessity be all those who adhere to civil powers,
who will be doubtless the most conscientious Saints on earth, and the greatest
part of mankind, which must needs be wilful Murder and Robbery, if they have no
warrant to do it. But they have none; neither, Revel. 18. 6. nor any other
scripture, or Revelation of God, that we or they do know, nor Laws of nature,
or men do in the least warrant, or permit it, but all condemn it. And therefore
if they should be permitted to act their design (which God forbid) there would
be more destruction and wasting, than ever yet was made by men since the world
began, and more truly they might be termed Babylon, in whom the blood of the
Saints is found, than any civil powers yet extant; now murder-makes persons the
Children of the Divil, there being no sin more resembling him, John 8. 44.
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer; and ye know (says St. John, 1
Epist. chapter 3. 15.) That no murderer has eternal life abiding in him, therefore
such are no Saints, but Antichristian, and the Doctrine moving to it is
damnable and Antichristan.

To which I shall add an eighth argument taken from the direful effects, to
which the Quinto-Monarchians Doctrine of overturning and smiting civil powers
and Laws tends, which are all the miseries which anarchy and confusion brings
on the world, even to the destruction of the Church of Christ on earth, or
rather according to the project they propound, humane society, if not the
extirpation of mankind. For by taking away civil powers, safety of persons, and
all comforts of life are either taken away or much endangered. When the Prophet
Isaiah threatened calamity to the people of the Jews, Isai. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
He tells them, the Lord, the Lord of hosts does take away the mighty man, and
the man of War, the Judge, and the Prophet, and the prudent, and the ancient,
the Captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the Counselor, and the
cunning Artificer, and the eloquent Orator, and I will give Children to be
their Princes, and Babes shall rule over them, and the people shall be
oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbor: the child
shall behave himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the
honorable. Whereby it may be perceived that God took it to be a curse next
after the taking away the stay, and the staff, the whole stay of bread, and the
whole stay of water to take from the Jews their Rulers, Teachers, Nobles,
Scholars, and therefore there cannot be a greater calamity to a people, after
the destruction of the fruits of the earth, whereby famine comes than to smite
time their civil powers, and eminent persons, who have been the Protectors, and
Guides of the people. For then people become Murderers and Robbers one of
another, and all places are filled with fears, dangers, cries, and miseries of
all sorts. The evils we have felt in our own civil Wars, show what misery it is
to have Soldiers rule, and not Princes and Judges. And yet the evils we have
seen are small, in comparison of what the Jews felt by the factions there,
when Jerusalem was besieged by Titus; But the evils, which would come on the
world by the insurrection of the Quinto-Monarchians, if their project did take
place, would far exceed them, their design being an universal destruction of
them that oppose them in all the world, and when the conscience is perverted,
there being no stay to men's furious zeal. If any say, that they would only
smite oppressors of the Saints, I reply, by their own rules they are bound to,
separate from those Churches which are select and more pure, as being seemingly
refined, which are the gathered in pastoral way (reducing things to primitive
practice) so far as they are corrupted and adulterated, and found opposers of
the Kingly office of Jesus Christ, in and over the whole world, and more
especial in the administration of this part or dispensation of that Kingdom, to
wit, that of the Stone, or War against his enemies (for even in this generation
there be a sort of people, and those we hope godly, that do acknowledge and
wait in the expectation of the later, yea and hold forth the personal
appearance of our Lord as King, yet nevertheless oppose, and deny, and quite
leap over this Stone and its work, thereby endeavoring to render the Saints
useless and incapable of destroying Babylon) which must make way, and without
which we cannot attain to the peaceable, and more glorious administration of
this Kingdom, by removing those Mountains, Hills, and powers of darkness, which
do oppose and hinder it. Banner displayed p. 75. There are no Churches, (or at
leastwise very few) of the pastoral way in these Nations, or elsewhere, but
have something of Antichrist in them, having forsaken and apostatized from the
primitive and first love, and have, and do in many principle: and practices,
strike hands with the interest of Antichrist, and mystery of iniquity, 2 These.
2. 3, 4. p. 79. We account it a duty for the Saints to separate from all the
forms, practices, doctrines, and spirit of the Antichrist in the world, in
their brethren, in the Churches, etc. And to be plain, we account him, and that
spirit which either in act or deed wilfully and obstinately denies the smiting
work of our Lords Kingdom Antichristian; inasmuch as that such would always
have Christ, his Saints, his cause, in, and on the earth a sufferer: but the
scripture clearly manifests the contrary, p. 81, 82. now then, if men be they
never so holy, as they hope a sort of people be who oppose, deny, and quite
leap over the Stone and its smiting; (as they confess there are no Churches, or
very few of the pastoral way in these Nations and elsewhere, but have opposed
them) yet are Antichristian, they by their principles are to smite them, and so
must oppress Saints as well as others. And if any Saints be civil powers,
Ecclesiastical Rulers, Governors in Corporations, Graduates in Universities,
Pastors in Churches, (as no doubt thousands are who love the Lord Jesus, and
wait for his appearing and Kingdom) yet these must be smitten too. And who can
secure in such confusions as would arise upon the Quinto-Monarchians smiting
work, any man, yea of their own party, from violence, and slaughter, when there
is nothing but rage in private persons, whose proceedings are in heat of mad
zeal, without any distinction by legal trial and just judgment, or certain
Rule? Sure no Tyrants have ever done more mischief than this way of the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men would do, if it were prosecuted, nor is any doctrine more
hellish, Antichristian and damnable than this, that tends to overthrow all the
civil powers, Laws, Doctrines, Forms, Degrees, Offices in Church and State,
which these term the spirit of Antichrist in the world. And if it were
supposed, that these furious zelots should accomplish their design, after the
mixture of hypocrites, and the rabble of the worst, and most foolish men, who
could hope there would be any peace, good order or justice in the world, or any
remainder of sober men? The world would be an Acheldama, or field of blood
(which they impute to the Nations of Europe, even the Protestant) and the
prevailing persons (to use their own phrase) Blood-Monsters, and instead of a
visible Kingdom of Christ in the earth a solitude, Chaos, tohu vebohu, as was
before the first creation, and the Kingdom of Antichrist, or the Devil would be
set up under pretense of making Christ's enemies his footstool. What Laws,
Order, or Rule, tending to further Religion, or Righteousness, can any expect
from men of such cauterized consciences as not to discern the mischievousness
of such doctrine and practices as these have vented, especially after they have
inured themselves to shedding of blood and rapine with extremity?

11. The 9th and 10th arguments against the smiting work of Quinto-Monarchians
from the meekness, peaceableness, and patience of Saints.
TO these arguments, which have been confirmed, I shall add a ninth taken from
the opposition of spirit and practice, which their doctrine begets to the
precepts of meekness and peaceablness, which the Gospel requires of Christians,
and to which it assigns blessedness. Our Lord Christ in his sermon on the
Mount, Matthew. 5. 5. says, Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the
earth. v. 9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the
Children of God. v. 22. He forbids rash anger, contemptuous speech and
opprobrious language. v. 23, 24, 25. requires speedy endeavors of
reconciliation with adversaries; nor is it any thing against this precept of
Christ that he tells us, Luke, 12. 49. 51. I am come to send fire on the earth,
and what will I, if it be already kindled? Suppose ye that I am come to give
peace on earth? I tell you, nay; but rather division. For these expressions do
not show his approbation of division, but his foresight of it, not as a thing
which he affected, or as a thing desirable of it self, or which he studied to
promote, but as a thing which he knew was unavoidable in the event, that while
he endeavored to promote the truth of the Gospel by accident divisions would
follow, not from his doctrine, which was the Gospel of peace, but through the
perverseness of men's spirits, who would oppose it. But that it was the will of
Christ, that all Christian Saints should be meek, and peaceable appears from
the many precepts injoyning them in the Apostles writings, Romans 12. 18. If it
be possible as much as lies in you live peaceably with all men, Romans 14. 17.
For the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace, and
joy in the holy Ghost. v. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things which
make for peace. Gal. 5. 19, 20. The works of the flesh are hatred, enmities,
variance, wrath, strise, seditions, divisions or factions. v. 22. 23. The fruit
of the spirit is love, joy, peace, meekness. Heb. 12. 14. Follow peace with all
men. James 3. 17. The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable.
v. 18. And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.
1 Pet. 3. 10, 11. He that will love life and see good days, let him seek peace
and ensue it. From hence I argue, that doctrine is damnable and Antichristian,
which is opposire to Christ's, and his Apostles commands, approbation, and
beatification concerning meekness and peaceableness: But such is the doctrine
of the Quinto-Monarchians, which stirs up enmities and hostility among men,
teaches separations from men, even such as they hope are godly, from Churches,
gathered in a pastoral way, reducing things to primitive practice; and breaths
out nothing but Wars, and smiting of all that deny or oppose their smiting
work, which are as contrary to meekness and peaceableness, as hot to cold,
black to white. Therefore their doctrine is damnable and Antichristian. Nor can
they be acquitted by alleging such texts as, Psalm. 139. 21, 22. and 137. 9.
Amos. 5. 15. Hab. 2. 6, 7, 8. Revel. 17. 16. unless they can show all civil
powers extant, and those, whom they hope to be godly, Churches gathered in a
pastoral way reducing things to primitive practice, yet count enemies to
Christ's Kingdom, because they oppose that which these call the smiting work of
the Stone, to be indeed haters of God, and Babylon, and also that these are the
Stone, or the ten Horns that are to hate the Whore, and make her desolate. Till
this be done (which I expect to be done at later Lammas) we may say as Christ
did, ye know not what spirit ye are of: or rather determine, that they are
indeed of an Antichristian, or Diabolical spirit.

For a further enforcing of this argument I shall adjoyn a tenth, taken from
those many texts of scripture, especially in the New Testament, which both
require patience in the Saints, and assign blessedness to it, and make
suffering the portion of the Saints, and necessary to their entrance into the
Kingdom of God, and that to continue till Christ's coming, Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12.
Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake: for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you,
and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, rejoice and be
exceeding glad: for great is your reward in Heaven, Luke 21. 19. In your
patience possess your souls, Acts 14. 22. Paul and Barnabas confirmed the souls
of the Disciples, and exhorted them to continue in the faith, and that we must
through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. 2 These. 1. 4, 5. So
that we our selves glory in you in the Churches of God for your patience and
faith in all your persecutions, and tribulations that ye endure, which is a
manifest token of the righteous judgment of God, that ye may be counted worthy
of the Kingdom of God, for which ye also suffer. 2 Timothy 3. 12. Yea and all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Heb. 12. 6. Whom the
Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives James. 1.
4. Let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing. James. 5. 7. Be patient therefore, brethren, unto the coming
of the Lord. Hence I argue, those who teach smiting, when Christ and his
Apostles teach patience, those who count them Antichristian, who would have
Christ, his Saints, his cause in and on the earth a sufferer, though Christ,
and his Apostles call it Christian to suffer, and require patience until the
coming of the Lord, these teach doctrine, which is indeed damnable and
Antichristian. But so do the Quinto-Monarchians, as may be seen before Sest. 2.
Therefore the doctrine of their smiting work is damnable and Antichristian.

12. The Eleventh and Twelfth arguments from contrariety to the Martyrs
agreement with Papists.
THIS also leads us to an eleventh argument, which is from the constant
profession of the Saints and Martyrs, in all ages, that they were to suffer for
the Kingdom of God, not to fight for it, so speaks St. John, Revel. 1. 9. I
John who also am your Brother, and companion in Tribulation, and in the Kingdom
and Patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Isle that is called Patmos, for the
word of God, and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ. Where he makes these
conjunct the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, and styles himself their
Brother and companion in Tribulation and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus
Christ, therefore he took all that were Brethren to be companions therein, and
these to be conjoined together. This was the profession of the Saints, in the
times of the ten great persecutions, as may be seen in the writings of Justin
Martyr, Tertullian, Cyprian, and such as wrote Apologies for the Christians,
and the Acts and monuments of the Church; which relate their practice suitable
to their profession; even when they were armed, and were a considerable part of
the Emperors Armies, yet exposed themselves rather to butchery, than they would
attempt to fight. Yea when the Beast was risen, to whom the Dragon gave his
power, and his seat and great authority, from which time, as is showed before.
Sect. 4. the Quinto-Monarchians make civil powers not to be the Ordinance of
God, but Antichristian, and the Ordinance of Hell; yet the Holy Ghost foretells
not the smiting work of the Stone, or turning their Plowshares into Swords, for
the pulling down civil powers, and setting up the fifth Kingdom on earth, but
says, Revel. 13. 10 He that kills with the Sword must be killed with the
Sword. Here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints. Which shows that
even they were not to set up the Kingdom of Christ by fighting, but by patience
and faith. And Revel. 14. 12. after the prediction of the fall of Babylon, and
the daughter of those who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name, it is added, Here is the patience of the
Saints: Here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the faith of
Jesus, showing that even in those times the Saints would patiently suffer, not
avenge themselves by smiting, or by destroying civil powers seek to set up
Christ's Kingdom on earth, the contrary whereto is taught by the
Quinto-Monarchians, and thereby the generation of the just even the holy
Martyrs their profession and practice, is condemned, which is damnable and
Antichristian.

On the other side (which yields a twelfth argument) these ^enents of the
smiting of civil powers to set up Christ's Kingdom tend to the justifying, or
countenancing of the Popish, former and later doctrine and practices, wherein
they have challenged and usurped a power over Emperors, and Kings, to depose,
and deprive them of life, when they have opposed the Popes Authority, or the
Roman Church and Religion, which opposition was counted by them to be against
the Kingdom of Christ, and thought in ordine ad spiritualia, as they spoke,
they might dispose of their Kingdoms as the Vicars of Christ, and visible
Monarchs of the Universal Church. Which things these Fifth-Monarchy-Men count
Antichristian; and therefore their teaching and doing the like upon pretense of
setting up of Christ's Kingdom on earth, is by parity of reason, there being not
better proof for the one than for the other, damnable and Antichristian.

13. The smiting work of Quinto-Monarchians is grounded on falsities, or
uncertainties concerning the agents, means and time of smiting mentioned, Dan*
2. 34. 44, 45.
HItherto I have prosecuted those arguments against the Quinto-Monarchians
doctrine and practice which show it to be damnable and Antichristian in respect
of the act it self of smiting civil powers; I shall add further more arguments
against them, showing the falsity and uncertainty of those grounds and
principles, on which their determinations concerning separation from and
smiting of civil powers rest. The first whereof is, that before the
Fifth-Monarchy be set up, and in order thereto, before Christ's coming all civil
powers, that are now extant as part of the fourth Monarchy, are to be
disannulled. Which has no foundation but in their own fancy, or hatred of the
civil powers as withstanding their design. For it is said, Revel. 17. 16, 17.
That the Kings, which formerly supported Babylon shall hate the Whore, and
shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh and burn her with
fire. For God has put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to agree, and
give their Kingdom unto the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled, and
Revel. 18. 9. It is said, That the Kings of the earth, who have committed
fornication, and lived deliciously with her, shall be wail her and lament for
her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning: which shows, that Kings,
even those that have joined with Babylon, shall remain after her fall, yea and
some Kings shall be the instruments of her destruction. And the Apostle 1 Cor.
15. 24. tells us, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the
Kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all Rule and all
Authority and Power. Which words plainly intimate that before the end, when
Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to God even the Father, all Rule and
Authority and Power shall not be put down. Which may be also gathered from
Revel. 11. 15. where it is said, And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were
great voices in Heaven saying, the Kingdoms of the world are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever,
which is said v. 18. To be the time of the dead that they should be judged; and
therefore till that time there shall be the Kingdoms of this world, and
consequently civil powers.

A second is, That civil powers are to be dissolved by men. Whereas this is
still asserted in Scripture as Gods prerogative, that the most High rules in
the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, Dan. 4. 25. 32. 34,
35. and 5. 21. And even in the business of the fourth Monarchy, the stone that
is said to smite the image upon his feet, is said to be cut out of the mountain
without hands, Dan. 2. 34. 45. which is more likely to be meant of Christ, who
was cut without hands out of the mountain, that is, without natural generation
as other men, whether by the Mountain be meant Eternity, or Heaven, or the
Roman Empire, or the Universe of human kind, as I conceive, then of any other
man or men. And if it be meant of the Kingdom, as v. 44. does expound it, that
it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, it must be meant in
respect of Christ the King, whose dominion is set up by the God of Heaven, and
not by men, and therefore take it any way agreeable to the Text, the stones
breaking in pieces and consuming all the Kingdoms must not be expounded of
Subjects, now calling themselves Saints, destroying civil powers, to which they
are subject.

A third is, That men shall dissolve civil powers by fighting with swords,
which is very false: For the stone that smote the Image became a great mountain
and filled the whole earth; which if it be understood of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom, it smote the Image by preaching the Gospel, by which the power of the
Idols, who ruled in those Kingdoms, was cast down, and by it the stone became a
great mountain and filled the whole earth; if it be meant of smiting hereafter,
it is to be, as 2 These. 2. 8. it is said, that wicked one the Lord shall
consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of
his coming; or if it be meant of the Saints, as Mr. Thomas Parker conceives,
they are thus cut out by professed separation and victorious exemption without
hands, that is, by the only power and finger of Almighty God, as it is
interpretted, Dan. 2. v. 44, 45. Thus, says he in his Exposition of that
Vision, they began to be cut out anno 1160 in the Waldenses, and continue so
unto this day. And the extraordinary hand of God was seen therein, as the
strange arising, growth, prevailing of them does manifestly declare. But their
absolute cutting out an exemption from the power of Antichrist, is that which
is to be expected at the term of the slaughter of the two Prophets: when their
rising by the power alone of God Almighty, without the help of man is thus
described, Revel. 11. 11. And after three days and an half, the spirit of life
from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet; and great fear fell
upon them that saw them: and they ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud, and their
enemies beheld them. And the same hour was there a great Earthquake, and the
tenth part of the City fell, and in the Earthquake were slain of men, or names
of men (as in the Greek expounded by Mr. Mede, men of name) seven thousand,
presently after which it follows, The Kingdoms of the world, are become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ. Now be the Earthquake, as Mr. Mede
thinks, a great commotion of the Nations, and alteration of Politic Affairs,
or some thing else, it is caused by Gods power either without man, or only by
the witnesses and their testimony, and if the falling, and slaughter thereby be
in whole, or in part, the smiting of the Stone, Dan. 2. 34. 44, 45. (as it is
probable) it is not by fighting, sure not by such as overthrowes civil powers;
for they shall be altered and be instrumental to destroy Babylon, Revel. 17.
16, 17. And therefore this (which is the hinge on which the smiting work of
Quinto-Monarchians turns) being very uncertain, or rather very false, all their
inferences thereupon must of necessity be groundless and unwarrantable.

A fourth is, that the smiting work ascribed to the Stone, shall be by the
Saints, even those who are private persons, and that the civil powers shall be
smitten by them, to which they are subject, But for this they having nothing
but an obscure prophecy to rely upon, and it not agreeing with plain precepts,
which forbid resistance to the higher powers that are, this their impious
Collection is deservedly to be exploded and detested.

A fifth is, that this smiting work shall be done by the Saints before Christ's
coming, and in preparation thereto. But this agrees not with the Apostles words
1 Cor. 15. 24. where it is made Christ's work to put down all Rule, and all
Authority and Power, which will not be till the end, and then Christ, or his
Father shall put all his enemies under his feet, which cannot be the work of
the Saints. For one of the enemies is death v. 26. which none in his wits will
say can be destroyed by Quinto-Monarchian Saints; they perhaps may bring death
on themselves and others, but sure they cannot destroy death, who cannot raise
from the dead. Besides the scripture makes the coming of Christ and his Kingdom
comtemporary 2. Tim. 4. 1. therefore not to be effected by the Saints on earth,
by any preparatory work of theirs.

A sixth uncertainty or falsehood, which moves them to so much zeal for their
smiting work, is, that they have fancied it to be the work of the present
generation, which Mr. Tillinghast much insists on in his Sermon on Matthew. 16.
3. concerning the signs of the times; but upon how slender reasons may be
showed in what follows: sure when our Lord Christ made the time of his coming
unknown to Angels and the son of man, and known only to the Father, Mark 13.
32. he would have us not be curious to know it, but watch, that we be not
surprised by it. And since after all the labors of the learned and most
prying inquisitors all the Prophetical numbers about this thing of the ruin of
Babylon, and Christ's personal Kingdom on earth have been so uncertainly
calculated, that men's expectations have been deluded, it is great rashness for
any to pitch on a certain year or age, much more to attempt such audacious and
horrid things, as the smiting of civil powers in a preposterous way which
attempt of theirs becomes the more inexcusable, in that their own writing
entitled, The Banner of truth displayed, showed their uncertainty, and
unresolvedness both in the manner, extent and time of this smiting work. For
whereas they apply that of Dan. 2. 34, 35. 44, 45. concerning the stones
smiting of the great Image so that the Iron, the clay, the brass, the silver,
and the gold was broken to pieces together, and became like the chaff of the
summer threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away, that no place was
found for them: unto the Saints, even Gentile Saints smiting of all parts of
the fourth Monarchy, all the civil powers of Europe, which they count Roman,
Babylon, and Antichristian, yet p. 40, 41. they make the conversion of the ten
horns, Rev. 17. 16, 17. to be one gradation of the stones growth, which
although they would not have to be the present powers of the ten horns, nor yet
multitudes of people in the ten horns, but some out of all the ten horns, whom
the Lord will have mercy on, shall be chosen by Christ, in which respect it is
said the ten horns; yet they admit that the powers of the ten horns (which the
text expressly v. 12. 13. terms ten Kings, which had received then no Kingdom,
but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast, who have one mind, and
shall give their power and strength unto the Beast, and are according to them
part of the fourth Monarchy to be utterly destroyed) shall be subdued by the
Saints; and as now they are Antichristian, and fight for the Beast against the
Lamb, so shall they become Christians, and fighters for the Lamb against the
Beast, which is utterly inconsistent with the being broken in pieces together
by the stones smiting, so as to become like the chaff of the summer
threshing-floor, and the wind carry them away, that no place be found for them,
if the stones smiting them be their subduing by the Saints. And for the time of
the beginning of their smiting work, which p. 46. they make the ending time of
the mystical numbers spoken of by Daniel and John for the accomplishment of
those great things which God has declared by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets to be brought to pass in these later days, Dan. 12. 11. Rev. 11. 2,
3. 12. 6. and 13. 5. which they make a great argument and quickening motive to
the Saints to look about them, and for the stone to arise and smite the
completed Image, and break in pieces the iron teeth of the ravenous beast,
that so deliverance may be brought, they grant, this thing which they lay down
as a call to the stone is doubtful to most, and p. 47. tell us, that in this
particular their judgment and opinion do most accord with Mr. Tillinghast his
Calculation, according to which those things named and spoken of to come to
pass at the end of those numbers, would in all likelihood have their
accomplishment together with the said numbers the year of Christ 1656. But the
event disproving it, they will not engage further therein, but set down other
signs, which are signs only from themselves, and not from any divine
revelation, and yet p. 52. conclude, This present generation in which we live
is the ending time of those mystical numbers forementioned, and the expiring
time of Antichrist, wherein God will begin to put a period to the Beasts
tyranny and powers: And therefore cannot but assert, that the consideration of
these things is a great call and motive to the stone to arise, and be doing,
which work we call the fifth Kingdom in its first dispenspensation, preparing
way for the second and more glorious dispensation; But after mentioning the
complete and effectual call that the stone shall have to be a clear light into
that time it shall smite, and into the work of that time, together with power
from on high, whereby it shall be emboldened and fitted to smite as aforesaid;
and also a fit and leading providence or opportunity preparing way for its
breaking forth, with these golden characters of power, wisdom and glory: and
then adding some examples of Gods former providence, they say, let the stone
wait for the accomplishment of these particulars before it smite, and add their
humble conceit, and then mind those who at present are the gainsayers and
imbittered opposers (of this work, and yet hope and believe they are godly) of
this their faith and hope, lest they split themselves upon this stone, becoming
their rock of offense, and so their bodies and lives perish upon such an
account in this day of common calamity that hastes upon the whole world. By
which may be perceived their uncertainties in that, which they call their faith
and hope, wherein those whom they believe to be godly oppose them, and their
violence of spirit beyond all sobriety in moving persons so earnestly to that
smiting work in this age upon no better grounds than their own conjecture,
though they foresaw it would bring common calamity, and the bodies and lives of
godly persons perish by reason of their opposition to this Stone, which shows
they were resolved to smite all that stood in their way though godly, as it
fell out in the year 1660. Mr. Tillinghast in his first Sermon p. 26. says,
the work of Christ's Kingdom, the glorious beginning of it, shall be about the
time of the Jews coming in, and p. 39. says, the Lord make us wait on him for
his own time, and yet, Sermon. 3. gives signs of its being near even in this
generation, which he makes it the duty of Saints to observe, though not one of
the signs is from any Revelation of God, but from things which may happen and
have without such signification, as he would put upon them. I omit what Mr.
Mede in his letter to Arch-Bish^p Usher, and in other writings and many others
write of the mystical numbers in Daniel and in the Revelation, which I would
not have slighted so as to give See Dr. Homes Resur. reveal. lib 7. chapter 3.
no heed to them, it being not in vain, that the Holy Ghost has delivered them
to us: only this I conceive it very dangerous and unsafe to make them the
warrant or motive to such an attempt, as the smiting of civil powers, or the
beginning of any War against the known Rules of scripture and Laws of civil
Government, it being in it self wicked, showing bitter furious zeal without the
wisdom from above, and likely hereafter, as it has done formerly to others,
to bring destruction of soul and body on the agents, and much misery on others
whether opponents or neuters.

14. Many things are groundless and false, which the Quinto-Monarchians suppose
and take as articles of their faith concerning the Fifth-Monarchy, and its
setting up.
TO the uncertainties and falsities about the smiting work of the Stone,
whereby the evil of their attempt is demonstrated, I shall next add the
uncertainties or falsities of those things, which they make as articles of
their faith about the Stones, becoming a Mountain, and filling the whole earth.
Where. 1. they show their inadvertency in making Gentile Saints, who are but
subjects, the Stone meant Dan. 3. 34, 35. Excluding the Jews from being the
Stone in the beginning; whereas the Stone is expressly termed the Kingdom, which
shall stand for ever v. 44, 45. which cannot be understood of the Saints, who
are subject, they are not the Kingdom, nor do they stand for ever; though they
receive a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, Heb. 12. 28. But the Stone is Christ
the King, and his Dominion, which must fill the whole earth with Subjects,
Laws and Administrations of Rule and Justice, which cannot be said of the
Saints Gentile or Jewish. Which inadvertency causes them to speak confusedly
p. 19, 20. and throughout their Book termed the Baaner of truth displayed,
sometimes terming the Stone Christ, sometimes his Kingdom, sometime the Gentile
Saints sometimes the Jews joined to the Gentiles. Now the same Stone which
smites the great Image becomes a great Mountain and fills the whole earth; but
this is not true of the Gentile Saints, or Jew and Gentile joined together,
they become not a great Mountain, nor fill the whole earth, therefore they
smite not the Image.

2. That the Stone, or fifth Kingdom is an outward visible Kingdom, not the
spiritual Kingdom, which was begun by Christ in the days of his flesh is much
insisted on, as the chief ground of their faith and hope in this matter. But in
the Banner of truth displayed p. 20. in answer to the question what this Stone
is? They say, this Stone is called in Scripture the Kingdom of Christ, and the
Kingdom of Christ this stone, Dan. 2. 44, 45. Matthew. 21. 43, 44. which, they
say, has a twofold dispensation, i. e. 1. An internal dispensation, or the
inward Kingdom, which is the Kingdom of Christ in the hearts of his Saints, and
in and over his Church. 2. An external dispensation, 1. Of war, in subduing and
conquering his stubborn enemies and opposers in the world, whereby they shall
be compelled to yield, and shall become subjects though Kings and Princes. 2.
Of peace upon the earth, in and over the whole world; which is the new creation
and restitution of all things, where will be perfection and no sin; among the
Saints immortality, and no mortal nor corruptible thing, where death shall have
no sting, nor grave victory; but all shall be swallowed up in Christ's fullness,
which is victory. And for this they cite many scriptures in the margin. Now 1.
I grant that the stone, Dan. 2. 44, 45. is the Kingdom of Christ or of God,
Mat. 21. 43, 44. 2. The distinction of the internal and external Kingdom is not
denied. 3. Nor do I oppose the double dispensation of this Kingdom. 4. Nor do I
deny the description of either dispensation. But 1. hence I infer, that the
stone, Dan. 2. 44, 45. notes the internal Kingdom, or the dominion Christ had
by the preaching of the Gospel, termed the Gospel of the Kingdom, Matthew. 24.
14. meant Matthew. 21. 43, 44. For 1. that Kingdom is meant there, and no other,
which was to be taken from the Jews, but that could be no other than the
internal Kingdom, for no other Kingdom was then among them but it, therefore no
other is there meant. 2. That Kingdom was there meant which was to be given to
another Nation, meaning the Gentiles, but that was no other but the internal.
3. That Kingdom is there meant, whose fruits were to be brought forth by the
Nation, to whom it was to be given: now the fruits of the Kingdom are expressed
to be righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14. 17. which belong
to the internal Kingdom, and therefore no other there meant. Which thing is
also confirmed by other passages of Scripture, as namely that of our Savior,
Luke 17. 20. When he was demanded when the Kingdom of God should come, he
answered them and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with observation, or with
outward show, therefore the Kingdom of God meant in the Gospel, is not the
outward visible Kingdom, which the Quinto-Monarchians expect, which is also
proved from v. 21. where it is added, Neither shall they say Lo here, or lo
there: for behold, the Kingdom of God is within you or among you, which could
be no other than the Kingdom set up by the preaching of the Gospel. To which is
to be added Christ's good confession before Pontius Pilate, John 18. 36. my
Kingdom is not of this world: if my Kingdom were of this world, then would my
servants fight that I should not be delivered to the Jews: but now is my
Kingdom not from hence. Wherein our Lord Christ declares his Kingdom foretold
by the Prophets, not to be of this world, that is an earthly Kingdom, but a
heavenly, which is opposed to that which is of this world, John 8. 23. The same
thing might be gathered from the speeches of Christ, John Baptist, and the
Apostles in many places, especially the parables of Christ, which show that by
the Kingdom of God, or of Heaven, is meant that dominion Christ has over his
Church by his Word and Spirit, which being the same with the Stone, Dan. 2. 44.
45. it follows that it began in Christ's days on earth, and that the smiting
and filling the whole earth by the stone was effected by the preaching of the
Gospel, which prevails against the power of darkness, and brings into the
Kingdom of the Son of Gods love, Col. 1. 13. which I say not to exclude the
Kingdom of Christ by such external discipline or rule as is meant 1 Cor. 4. 20.
when the Apostle says, For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power;
but to show what kind of Kingdom is meant, Dan. 2. 44. 45. by the stone, which,
I may truly say, is become a stone of stumbling and rock of offense to the
Quinto-Monarchians, instead of the corner st^ne of the Kingdom of Christ, on
which they might be built to salvation.

2. I add, that Christ does smite his enemies by the material sword and by war,
and that there is such an external dispensation of it, in respect of which some
passages, which in the new Testament, speak of the coming of his Kingdom in
power are to be understood, as when he miserably destroyed those wicked men
which slew the Son of God and cast him out of the Vineyard, which is expressed
by the stones grinding to powder or dashing to pieces Matthew. 21. 41. 44. which
to be meant of the Jews, and their destruction by the Romans appears from Luke
20. 16. 18, 19. Matthew. 21. 45. The like is to be said of Christ's Kingdom in
destroying the persecuting Emperors and Roman Empire by the sword of their own
Soldiers, and chiefly by Constantine the great his victories over Maxentius and
Licinius, to whose time that is applied by Mr. Mede which we read Revel. 12.
10, 11. And I heard a loud voice saying in Heaven, now is come salvation and
strength and the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. And the like
is to be conceived at the making the whore desolate, Rev. 17. 16. it is not
denied, that this shall be by war, but none of these wars were or are to be
managed by Saints as Saints, OF private persons subjects to other Lords. The
Saints overcame the Dragon, Rev. 12. 11. not by war, but by the blood of the
Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not their lives unto
the death. It is said Rev. 17. 14. that the ten Kings shall make war with the
Lamb, which is most likely to be meant of their persecuting the Lamb's
followers unto the death, and the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, and therefore has all power in his hands of Angels
and men to execute his purpose, and they that are with him are called and
chosen and faithful, as appears by their adhering to the Lamb unto the death,
Rev. 2. 10. by which they are Conquerors, and are crowned: no where are they
said to overcome by fighting with the sword. As for the rewarding double by
Gods people to Babylon, Rev. 18. 6. it is answered before Sect. 9.

3. The description made of the external dispensation of the Kingdom in peace
may be allowed: But then it will not agree to the thousand years reign
mentioned, Rev. 20. 6. For in that time there shall not be such a reign over
the whole world, as that there shall be no enemies, nor sin; if so, how should
Satan, when he is loosed out of Prison at the expiration of the thousand years,
deceive the Nations which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog,
to gather them to battle: the number of whom is as the sand of the Sea, and
they go up on the breadth of the earth, and compass the Camp of the Saints
about, and the beloved City, and then fire comes down from God out of Heaven
and devours them, Rev. 20. 7, 8, 9? Sure these things show, that in the
thousand years reign the Kingdom of Christ shall not be so universal and
entire, but that in the four quarters of the earth, the Indians in the East,
the Tarters in the North, the Americans in the West, and the Moors in the South
shall remain a wicked people, and at last be raised up by the Devil to destroy
the people of God (which it is likely shall have a reign on the earth a
thousand years, when the Jews shall be converted, and the Turkish tyranny, and
Papal cruelty and delusions shall cease by such ways as divine providence
shall order) and then by divine vengeance from Heaven shall be destroyed. But
for the external dispensation of the Kingdom of God in peace as they describe
it, it can agree to no time, but the universal resurrection, and last judgment;
in which alone is nothing mortal, no* sin, which follows after the thousand
years reign and Gogs and Magogs destruction, Rev. 20. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

3. The Quinto-Monarchians suppose, That toward the end of the fourth
Monarchy, the stone, that is Christ in the Gentile Saints shall smite the Iron
legs and toes of the Roman Empire, and then begin the fifth Monarchy, which
after the smiting of them, the Saints shall take, and so be universal Monarchs,
or have the universal Kingdom, which shall stand for ever. Now they are quite
mistaken in the time and means of the stones smiting and the Saints taking the
Kingdom. For the smiting was to begin, as Mr. Mede observes in his Discourse on
Mark. 1. 14, 15. In the days of Christ on earth, when the fourth Monarchy was
at the height, not in its declining: For the stone, that is the fifth Kingdom,
was begun in the days of these Kings, that is the last of them, not after
them, and that our Savior plainly declares, when, after that John was put in
Prison, he came into Galilee preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God and
saying, the time is fulfilled and the Kingdom of God is at hand; Repent ye and
believe the Gospel. In which words our Savior declaring the time to be
fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God to be approaching plainly shows, that then
was the time of which Daniel said chapter 2. 44. And in the days of these Kings
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be destroyed; and
the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, it shall not have any successor,
but it shall break in pieces and consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand
for ever; it shall be unshaken, though the Earth and the Heavens be once more
shaken, Heb. 12. 26, 27, 28. And for the time of the Saints of the most high
taking the Kingdom, and possessing the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and
ever, Dan. 7. 18. it is expressed, v. 13. to be when one like the Son of man
came with the Clouds of Heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they
brought him near before him. which in the New Testament is applied to Christ's
second coming, Matthew. 24. 30. and 26. 64. Mark 13. 26. and 14. 62. Luke 21. 27.
Revel. 1. 7. Acts 1. 11. 1 These. 4. 17. which Mr. Mede in his fourth letter to
Mr. Hayn proves to be at Christ's second coming by the brightness of which shall
be the consumption of the man of sin, 2 These. 2. 8. and at his appearing shall
be his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. and then shall the Saints of the most high, which
overcome sit with him in his Throne, even as he also overcame, and is set down
with his Father in his Throne, Revel. 3. 21. To them he will give power over
the Nations, to Rule them with a Rod of Iron, so that as a potters vessel they
shall be broken to shivers, even as he received of his Father Revel. 2. 26. 27.
then the Kingdoms of the world shall be the Lords and his Christ's, and he shall
reign for ever and ever, the Lord God Almighty takes to him his great power and
reigns, and the Nations were angry, and his wrath was come, and the time of the
dead that they should be judged, and that he should give the reward unto his
servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that fear his name, small
and great, and should destroy them which destroy the earth, Revel. 11. 15. 17,
18. And Revel. 20. 4. the Thrones are said to be set as Dan. 7. 9. And they
sat upon them and judgment was given to them as Dan. 7. 26. and then the
Dominion or Kingdom given. To the Saints who are troubled rest shall be given
by God with the Apostles when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven with
his mighty Angels, 2 Th. 1. 7. The Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6. 2.
And Jesus said unto them, verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed
me, in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall fit in the Throne of his
glory, ye shall also fit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel, Matthew. 19. 28. Ye are they which have continued with me in my
temptations: And I appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto
me: that ye may eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom, and fit on Thrones
judging the Tribes of Israel, Luke 22. 28, 29, 30. And for the means of
obtaining this Kingdom as it is said, the Stone was cut out of the mountain
without hands, that is human help, so it is said, in the days of these Kings
shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, Dan.
2. 44, 45. which therefore our Lord called the Kingdom of Heaven, and gives the
reason, because his Kingdom was not of this world, nor from hence, John 18. 36.
but from Heaven. And where it is said, that the Saints of the most high shall
take the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever,
Dan. 7. 18. it is added v. 21, 22. I beheld and the same horn made war with the
Saints and prevailed against them; until the ancient of days came, and
judgment was given to the Saints of the most high; and the time came that the
Saints possessed the Kingdom. v. 26, 27. But the judgment shall fit, and they
shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto the end. And
the Kingdom, and Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom under the whole
Heaven shall be given to the people of the Saints of the most High, whose
Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all Dominions shall serve and obey him.
The Saints take it not by their getting it, but by gift, not by conquest, but
donation. Suteably in the new Testament, Luke 12. 32. Fear not little Flock,
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom: Matthew. 25. 24.
Come ye blessed of my Father inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Out of which passages we may well infer 1. that it is
great temerity in the Quinto-Monarchians to be so peremptory as they are, in
setting down the time of the Saints taking the Kingdom: especially, if we
consider, that when our Lord Christ was asked immediately before his ascension
into Heaven, Lord, will thou at this time restore again the Kingdom to Israel?
He said unto them, it is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which
the Father has put in his own power, Acts 1. 6, 7. wherein he gives us to
understand, that the times and seasons of restoring the Kingdom to Israel are
put by the Father in his own peculiar power, and therefore were not to be then
known to the Apostles, nor to us, till by the events showing the foregoing
signs, and the special instinct of Gods Spirit was showed the just period of
the mystical numbers, in which they are to be fulfilled. 2. We may infer, that
it is very great folly, pride and arrogant presumption for a number of Gentile
Saints in an Island or Continent to think to smite the fourth Monarchy by Arms,
which is to be destroyed by the Spirit of the Lords mouth, and the brightness
of his coming, and to take to themselves a Kingdom which God only can give, and
to set up Christ's Kingdom, which God makes his prerogative, Ps. 2. 6. Yet have
I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion, Ps. 110. 1, 2. The Lord said unto my
Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The
Lord shall send the Rod of thy strengh out of Zion: Rule thou in the mids of
thine enemies; and to think to do this by arms a feeble means, which is to be
done not by might, nor by power, but by his spirit. The monstrous arrogance of
this attempt is made the more heinous 1. because, when it has been begun
heretofore by any, they have found God against them, the Lord by his providence
dissipating their counsels and frustrating their attempts, so as that in fine
they have only brought ruin to themselves, and occasioned hatred of the ways
of God, and a hard hand in civil powers on the innocent. Which argument,
although it do not Universally hold, that what succeeds not well in the event
pleases not God, yet is good against these men, who have no other ground or
warrant to their attempts, but the opinion they have of Gods putting it into
their heart and assurance of his help, this being their own speech Banner
displayed, p. 89. So that we make our conclusion (with Manoahs Wife of old) if
the Lord were pleased to kill us (or suffer our enemies to kill us) he would
not have received a burnt offering, and a meat offering at our hands; neither
would he have showed us all these things, nor would [as at this time] have told
us such things as these, Judges 13. 23. which shows that the chief thing
animating them to that bloody attempt was the opinion they had, that their
determinations were of God, and that they were assured of help from him; which
was the very thing that Thomas Muncer, and Hacket, and such like unquiet
spirits were of Satan incited by, and ended in nothing but blasphemy of God,
and reproach of Religion. 2. Their abuse of scriptures wrested by unstable and
unlearned persons to their destruction, arguing from obscure passages against
plain precepts does aggravate their evil acts, it being no small evil to make
the holy scriptures, which are for humility, meekness, patience, trust in God,
peaceableness, an instrument to commotions, disobedience to superiors, shedding
blood, and such like horrid wickedness. So in the Banner desp^ayed p. 19. Mal.
3. 3. Rev. 14. 4, 5. are alleged to prove the Stone, Dan. 2. 34, 35. is Christ
Jesus in the pure sanctified and refined Gentile Christians; when the former
speaks of the Sons of Levi, and the other mentions the 144000. who it is likely
are the same with 144000. Revel. 7. 4. Sealed of all the Tribes of Israel: and
p. 59. the words of the Prophet Jerem. 51. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. spoken either of
Cyrus, or the King of Babel are alleged to prove, that the Lord has elected
and made choice of Zion his people to act in this work and service (of smiting
civil powers) unto whom he says thus, thou art my Battle-Axe and Weapon of
War. So extremely are they deceived and deceive others. 3. Which is the worse
in them, in that they urge their notions as matters of their faith, when yet
they use conjectural expressions, p. 40. Probable conjecture, p. 41. seems to
favor, p. 42. we do not ascertain or determine, only suppose, p. 44. This our
opinion. p. 48. we may probably conclude, p. 55. humbly conceive about them;
and sometimes vent inconsistencies, as that the stone is Christ, and yet the
Gentile Saints, the Jews excluded, though they shall be the stone when made a
Mountain, with many more uncertainties about the stone, the little Horn, Dan.
7. and other things too tedious to be insisted on. 4. To these we may add the
uncharitable conceits of their Governors, their Revilings of them, their
unquietness in separating from those that concur not with them, their
contention, and ejection from their society, such as do oppose them in their
heady and violent practices, all which show, that they are animated by the
infernal spirit, and not from above, and in all likelihood have received their
opinions and practices from Jesuits and Emissaries of Rome, who have crept
into societies of zealous Christians and sown their tares among them. The
Tenants about civil powers being too near of kin to one another.

15. The claim which Quinto-Monarchians make to Civil government on earth in
the Saints before Christ's coming is false.
HAving showed the sinfulness of smiting civil powers, the vanity of the
conceits about the Stone, Dan. 2. 34, 35. the falsity of the notions about the
fifth-Monarchy, I shall now examine their assertions about the Saints right to
the Kingdom on earth before Christ's coming; about which are held many false and
pernicious positions which I shall now discuss. The first is, that before cited
by me sect. 2. in these words, The creature man was privileged with being Lord
over inferior creatures, but not over his own kind; for all men being alike
privileged by birth, so all men were to enjoy the creatures alike without
propriety one more than another. Which position is manifestly false even
concerning the state of nature incorrupt. For even then the man was the head of
the woman, as the Apostle asserts 1 Cor. 11. 3. and proves v. 8. 9. from the
woman's creation: For the man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man:
neither was the man created for the woman, but the woman for the man; which
plainly proves a dominion and propriety of the man over and in the woman, who
is of his own kind, and the contrary Doctrine would infer not only polygamy,
but also community of Wives, which was the very Doctrine of the Nicolaitanes,
of which Christ says in two Epistles, Rev. 2. 6. 15. which thing I bate. The
same also may be said concerning Father and child even in nature incorrupt, if
there had been any child born in that state, they would not have been all alike
privileged by birth, but the creature man was privileged with being Lord over
his own kind, nor were all men to enjoy the creatures alike without propriety
but one more than another, the Father being privileged by birth above his
child, so as to be Lord over his child, and enjoy him with propriety, and not
another his child, nor he another: nor is it to be conceived, but that in
Goods, Cattle and Fruits of the earth, there would have been propriety in them
so, as that the Wife was to be at the Husbands disposing and allowance
concerning them, and the child at the Fathers.

2. The second (which is the Quinto-Monarchians opinion cited Sect. 2.) is that
all men, as they are men have lost their rights and privileges in respect of
Government in the first Adam. Which is false. For, 1. Our Lord Christ in the
point of divorce does determine, that divorces allowed by the Jews were not
right, because they agreed not with the law of marriage in the beginning,
Matthew. 19. 4, 5, 6. which argument of our Lord rests on this proposition, that
what law was made in the beginning was in force still, and consequently the
right of Government, which a Husband had above his Wife, a Father above his
Child, continue still. 2. If all rights and privileges in respect of
Government in the first Adam were lost, then they are still lost to them that
are not in Christ, which if it were true, all unbelievers would be usurpers:
But this is false. For 1. the government of Husbands over Wives remains to
infidels, the Author to the Hebrews chapter 13. 4. tells us, that marriage is
honorable in all, therefore in infidels. If not, then the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.
13. did not rightly determine, that the woman, which had a husband that
believed not, if he were pleased to dwell with her, was not to put him away, or
leave him; which supposes, that the right and power of a husband remained in
him, though an infidel; for, where the bond of marriage continues, the right
and privilege in Government belonging to it still continues. The same also is
to be said concerning the right and privilege of a parent in respect of the
child, it remains as well to infidels as believers, and also Masters over
servants. For even such as were evil or froward, from whom they were likely to
suffer, yet the Apostle 1 Peter 3. 18, 19. would have Christians to be subject
to them for conscience toward God; therefore they had a right of Government
over them, who were infidels, even by Gods appointment.* Yea the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men themselves in the Banner displayed p. 51. acknowledge, that
the powers of old Rome the a bloody persecutor were ordained of God, Romans 13.
1. and therefore even infidel powers have right and privilege of Government by
their own concession. And indeed the Apostles determinations 1 Cor. 7. 17, 18,
20, 21, 22, 24. are plain resolutions, that the Christian calling, does neither
make men free, nor servants, nor alter their civil relations, but that the
Christian is, as he was, neither better nor worse in that regard. 2. If
infidels were usurpers of Government, then what ever sentence they past, it was
unjust, though it were never so right in respect of the cause, it being done by
him that was no Judge, whereas the scripture makes even the infidel powers Gods
Ministers revengers, or doers of right unto wrath unto him that does evil. Romans
13. 4. 3. If they were usurpers, then did Christ ill to bid to pay tribute to
Caesar, to acknowledge Pilates power given him from above, John 19. 11. Paul to
appeal to Caesar, and to say, he stood before Caesar's judgment Seat, where he
ought to be judged, Acts 25. 10, 11. he should not have said, I think my self
happy King Agrippa, because I shall answer for my self before thee this day,
Acts 26. 2. nor to Felix, Acts 24. 10. Forasmuch as I know, that thou have been
of many years a Judge unto this Nation, I do the more cheerfully answer for my
self, he should have declined his audience, or sentence, as being coram non
judice, or have termed him a man, without any show of reverence, or respect, as
the Quakers are wont to do, or have termed him Antichristian, or Babylon, as
the Quinto-Monarchians do the civil powers now extant. In a word no honor
should be due to an unblieving Prince, though St. Peter bids, honor the King 1
Pet. 3. 17. and the arguments urged before Sect: 3. should be evacuated. 4. If
all right and privledges in respect of Government in the first Adam were lost
among infidels, so as that all infidel judges were usurpers, then among them
Judges were not unjust, though they did not right to the wronged, because they
had no power, and so the Judge, who feared not God, nor regarded man, had not
been rightly termed by our Lord Christ, an unjust Judge, Luke 18. 6. for not
avenging the Widow. Nor Pharaoh, or Abimelech, justly punished for not
restoring Abrams Wife, nor any just War between the King of Sodom and other
Kings, nor had Ephron the Hittite any just possession of the Cave Abraham
bought, nor any just contract between Isaac and Abimelech, nor did David justly
defend Toi against Hadadezer, nor is there any justice in contracts, or comerce
with infidels to be observed, nor they capable of doing right, or wrong, if
there be no just legislative power, or power of judicatory among them, but they
bear the sword, if not in vain, yet unjustly, and therefore are ill charged by
St. Paul, Romans 1. 28. To be filled with all unrighteousness. A third position,
which with inconsiderate men takes, as being in show agreeable with scripture,
and tending to Christ's honor, though as they mean and use it, it is both false
and pernicious, is, that Jesus Christ is the only lawful and true begotten
Heir, and lawful King, and potentate of these three Nations, and of all the
Nations of the Earth, and (as he is the seed of Abraham) shall possess the
Earth: Yea and the very gates of his enemies; and that the sole legislative
power of the Nations, is and does of right appertain and belong to him, and
shall be exercised by him, Dan. 7. 27. Jerem. 10. 7. Isai. 9. 6, 7. Gal. 3. 16.
etc. From whence it has been usual with the men of this persuasion, not only
to style Christ King Jesus (which is his right) but also to disavow any other
King but King Jesus, as if the owning of any other as King in these Nations
were indeed a renouncing Christ from being their King. Now it is to be granted.
1. That the Lord Jesus Christ not only as he is the Son of God, but also as
man, is of right, and is to be acknowledged the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, Revel. 1. 5. To whom all power in Heaven and Earth is given, Matthew. 28.
18. God has made him Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. He is Lord of all, Acts 10.
36. Nor is it denied that the texts quoted do belong to him: or that he is the
Heir of all the Nations of the Earth, as he is the seed of Abraham, to whom the
promises were spoken. Yet the words, Daniel 7. 27. mention his Kingdom not till
the judgment sit, and they shall take away the Dominion of the little Horn, to
consume and to destroy it unto the end; and therefore assert not the exercise
of the Kingdom there meant as yet. The words Jerem. 10. 7. are impertinently
alleged concerning Christ's being King of Nations as the seed of Abraham; sich
they are spoken only of the Divine nature in opposition to the Idols of the
Nations. The words Isai. 9. 6, 7. foretold Christ's Kingdom in the days of his
flesh, which Christ himself says, was not of this world, but such as belonged
to him as the Child born, of the increase of whose Government there should be
no end. The words, Gal. 3. 16. are true of Christ personal, but so also, as
that they have respect to all believers as Abraham's seed by faith v. 7. 29. and
that they are not to be understood of a visible Monarchy acquired by fighting
(of which the Quinto-Monarchians dream) but of the inheritance of the
righteousness, by faith, which should be to all Nations v. 28. in which respect
Abraham also is said to be the Heir of the world, Romans 4. 13. 2. It is not to
be denied, that all Kings ought to acknowledge Christ their superior, and
themselves to be subordinate to him, and that those, who will not acknowledge
the holding of their power, Crowns and Scepters under this great Monarch, and
for him, shall be deemed and adjudged by Christ as Traitors to him, and
proceeded against accordingly by him, according to his Laws; and the
threatening, Luke 19. 27. But 1. this will be done by him in such way as he
thinks good, he has not made any Saints on earth Judges over Kings, whether
they be Traitors to Christ or not, nor allowed them to proceed against them,
nor has he assigned any time wherein he will proceed against them before the
great day of judgment, in which he will judge the Saints as well as Kings, and
will damn them that pretending themselves Saints, shall take upon them Christ's
peculiar Office to judge their Kings, and execute judgment (that is outrage and
murder) on their Governors to whom Christ requires their subjection. Sure
Paul, when he reasoned with Felix, Acts 24. 25. did nor go about to terrify him
with threatening of any judgment, he, or the Saints on earth had, but minded him
of the judgment to come. Nor did our Lord Christ himself, either to Pilate, or
the High Priest use any menacing speeches, but only told the High Priest,
Matthew. 26. 64. Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting on the right hand
of power, and coming on the clouds of Heaven. 2. This will nothing concern the
King of these three Nations, nor any other Kings, or Rulers, who do acknowledge
they Rule under Christ, and Rule for Christ, and therefore cannot with any
color be adjudged as enemies to Christ by those, who have no cognizance of the
secrets of men's hearts, nor any way or power of judicature in such things, but
must leave them to the trial of the Universal Judge. 3. We grant, that, so far
as Christ has made any laws pertaining to civil, or Church Government, Kings
have no power to abrogate or alter them, but are bound, according to that
Authority they have, to see them executed and observed; yea and to repress
them, that pretend themselves Saints, as Traitors both to them and Christ, from
whom they have authority, who appose their power, and hinder their actings in
that which is agreeable to Christ's laws. For if they be not Officers under
Christ as mediator (which I assert not) yet they are Rulers under Christ as the
Son of God, and will be owned and assisted by him, in doing his work against
any that pretends himself Christ's Vicar, or lurks under the Vizour of a Saint.
But as I said before, Sect. 6. 1. The laws of Christ are not sufficient
without other laws to settle and order thousands of particulars whether
belonging to the Church, or Commonwealth, but that there is need of humane
laws to determine them. 2. That the Jewish laws are not fitted for the
Government of Christian states, and Churches of the Gentiles, except in some
few. 3. That the Lord Christ and his Apostles did of purpose leave us at
liberty concerning them, lest the Gospel should be hindered by them, and
permitted all Nations to order their own laws and civil Government according
to general precepts of the word and the exigence of civil affairs. 4. That to
tie men to Mosaical civil precepts, any further than the general equity of them
requires, would be to Judaize. 5. That the most holy Saints that are on earth,
are and will be bound to observe humane laws of their civil seperiors under
pain of God; wrath till Christ at his coming put down all rule and all
authority and power. 6. That it no whit detracts from Christ's supreme dominion
to have Kings to be Rulers under him, and therefore we abhor that speech cited
sect. 2. Jesus Christ alone is Lord and King, and all men are equals.

A fourth position deduced from the third, is, that the Saints of the most high
are by themselves a Commonwealth and Free State, which is somewhat like the
opinion of Papists who exempt men in holy orders from the secular power, and it
is not unlikely to have been instilled into the minds of Quinto-Monarchians by
some of the popish party; But is a false and foolish conceit, refuted by all
the arguments before produced, requiring subjection to civil powers, even such
as are evil, and proving, even agreeably to the state of mankind corrupt, that
civil power and natural power of government belongs to Infidels over Saints,
and therefore Saints cannot without injury shake off the yoke of allegiance and
obedience, which is upon them by the imposition of civil and natural powers,
though unbelievers. It is also foolish, For 1. it supposes Saints may be by
themselves, which is contrary to the express Doctrine of our Lord, Matthew. 13.
30. which tells us, that the tares and the wheat are to grow together until the
Harvest, which he expounds after v. 40, 41. that it shall be the end of the
world before the wicked and the children of the Kingdom shall be separated:
which he also teaches by another parable v. 47, 48, 49, 50. All those who are
for gathered Churches, though they would have none in Church communion but
visible Saints, yet are forced to acknowledge from these Scriptures, that they
must live together, whether they will or no, in the world, and therefore this,
and indeed the whole project of the Quinto-Monarchians, is but a fond dream,
and too like the Donatists and Circumcellions of old in Africa. But were it
granted, that there may be, or have been Plantations of godly persons unmixt:
yet experience has showed, that even amongst them differences quickly arise,
by reason of different apprehensions, and divisions and enmities, and in a
little time heats, animosities, factions, oppositions and other corruptions
follow. Besides, who can secure the generation following from corruption? Moses
and Joshuah settled the Commonwealth of Israel with order, laws, rites of
Religion, and all by immediate direction from God: yet quickly did they corrupt
themselves. The like may be said of the times succeeding David and Solomon. Our
own times yield like instances, that the posterity of the best and holiest
Planters, though free from many provocations, which the people have from whom
they remove, yet in an age do degenerate from their predecessors holiness, and
in their manners and government become like other people. And what we have seen
in our days, of the giddiness, shallowness, instability, selfishness of the
choicest men for government, and holiness, whom men could find in a Nation,
should me thinks awaken men from continuing in that dream, no better than the
fancy of a golden mountain, as if they might have a Commonwealth or Free State
or gathered Church by themselves on earth of pure Saints.

2. But were this feasible, that there were a Commonwealth or Free state of
incorrupt Saints by themselves on earth before Christ's appearing, yet without
such promise and provision made for them by Christ, as we yet have no assurance
of, they would not subsist long, but perhaps be, as the Historians phrase is,
populus unius aetatis, a people of one age, by reason of the weakness they
would have to resist their enemies, which would be more in number than
themselves, perhaps a thousand fold, and their enmity be increased as Pharaoh's
was to the children of Israel, and either oppress them or destroy them. If
after the thousand years reign the Devil could go out to deceive the Nations,
which are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them to
battle, their number being as the sand of the Sea, and they go up on the
breadth of the earth, and compass about the Camp of the Saints and the beloved
City, Rev. 20. 8, 9. It is much more likely, while Satan is at liberty and
millions of enemies infidel Pagans, cruel Mahometans, bloody Papists, profane
and vicious Protestants, unquiet and unruly members in the gathered Churches,
loose Libertines, and erroneous Revolters from pure worship, true doctrine, and
true Christian conversation in duties of love and righteousness, walk on every
side, that a small number of Saints in profession should have more enemies
against them, if they did live by themselves on earth, as an entire and
independent Commonwealth. If in Christ's retinue there were a Judas, can any
company of Saints secure themselves from hypocritical members, and their
treachery? Sure the little flock of Christ is more beholding to Kings and
Rulers, and Laws, and Government, though with some rigor and persecution, than
they are sensible of, or thankful for as they should be. We have seen how
unsuccessful endeavors have been to reform Churches, to rectify Governments as
we desire, how like Tinkers work alterations in them have been, that while one
hole is stopped two are made, how many various forms of Government have been
devised, whereof one has opposed the other, that while they have been
hammering on a new frame all has fallen to pieces, every one likely agreeing
about what they would not have, few about what they would have. And therefore
it would be more agreeable to the mind of God, for Christians now though under
many grievances and pressures to subject themselves peaceably even to hard
Rulers, and as God admonished the Jews in Babylon to pray for their peace, for
in their peace they should have peace, and to seek the peace of them, Jer. 29.
7. till God call them out of Babylon by his providence, and not either by
flying from them as enemies desert their station (wherein by their abiding they
might perhaps through their good conversation amend them, or by their patience
pacify them) or by reviling provoke them, or by conspiracies or tumults incense
them against them, much less after the Quinto-Monarchians furious manner take
up arms to make themselves a Free State, and Lords of the world.

The fifth position is, that Saints regained the rights and privileges in
respect of Government in the second Adam or Lord from Heaven, which position is
deduced out of the former, but is false and pernicious. For 1. it supposes
that the rights and privileges in respect of Government were lost in the first
Adam, which is before proved false. 2. That the second Adam, or Lord from
Heaven, has regained them: whereas there is no Text of Scripture that does
mention, that this was the end of his coming into the world to get for himself
or for his Disciples the actual regiment or government of the Natitions of the
world in an outward manner by making and executing Laws about civil affairs,
nor was this ever claimed by Christ or his Apostles, but when he perceived that
they would come and take him by force, to make him a King, he departed again
into a mountain himself alone, John 6. 15. and when one of the company said
unto him, Master, speak to my Brother, that he divide the inheritance with me,
he said unto him, man, who made me a Judge or Divider over you? Luke 12. 13.
14. which plainly shows Christ's refusal of meddling with civil affairs, though
it were but by speaking for one brother to another, yea and his disclaiming any
civil office or judicature as not belonging unto him. And his whole estate of
life, and deportment in the days of his flesh was altogether incongruous to a
civil government, or rule; nor did he ever disturb Herod, Pilate, the high
Priests or Elders of the Jews about their government, but only he once drove
the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple by special instinct, and rode on an
Ass into Jerusalem, to show his right as the Son of David, and freely reproved
the wickedness of the Jewish Rulers and Pharisees, yet still requiring those
that were healed of leprosy, to go to the Priests and show themselves to them
for a testimony to them, that he was not against the observance due by the Law
to them. It is indeed said Romans 14. 9. That to this end Christ both died, and
rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living. But this
cannot be meant in respect of civil government on earth, and the rights and
privileges thereof, but the spiritual rule he has over them now, and the
great dominion he shall have at the universal Judgment, when at the name of
Jesus every knee shall bow of things in Heaven and things in earth, and things
under the earth, and every tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to
the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. 10. 11. yea this thing was the very
stumbling block of the Pharisees, by reason of which they denied his Kingdom,
and his being the Messiah; because he did not take upon him civil rule, nor by
human forces subdue the Romans, as David the Philistines, but by invisible
power cast out Devils, healed diseases, rebuked storms, and multiplied loaves,
and did such other acts, and gave such laws as were altogether unsuitable to the
King and Kingdom which they fancied and expected. So that this conceit of
Christ's regaining the rights and privileges in respect of Government, which
was lost in the first Adam, meaning the outward visible government of the world
in respect of civil affairs, is but a Jewish opinion altogether disagreeing
with Christian Doctrine. It is true, that the Apostles minds did oftentimes
hanker after it, contending sundry times who should be chiefest among them, and
the two brethren James and John by their Mother asking the two nearest places
to Christ in his Kingdom: but they were checked by Christ expressly telling
them, that to sit at his right hand or his left was not his to give, but for
whom it was prepared of his Father, Matthew. 20. 23. showing thereby that in his
present state he had no such Kingdom, or Throne as they dreamed of, nor was to
have; nor the disposal of such places as they ambitiously sought, but told them
of their suffering afflictions, and to all his Apostles said, Ye know that the
Princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are great
exercise authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you v. 25, 26. yea
when they would know, who should be greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven, he
called a little child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said,
verily I say unto you, except ye be converted, and become as little children,
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, whosoever therefore shall humble
himself as this little child the same is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Matthew. 18. 1, 2, 3, 4. declaring plainly, that all affecting government, and
superiority in this world was contrary to his Kingdom, and therefore the
monstrous ambition of Quinto-Monarchians, of getting into their hands the
Kingdoms of this world, is as contrary to Christianity as bitter to sweet,
darkness to light, or rather indeed Antichristian, or Babylonish, being under
another disguise the same with the Popes claim of Universal Monarchy, as Vicar
of Christ, of having both swords Spiritual and Temporal, therein lifting
himself above all that is caled God, or is worshipped 2 These. 2. 4. It is true
that it is said, Heb. 1. 2. God has in these last days spoken unto us by his
Son, whom he has appointed Heir of all things; But this inheritance is either
as he is the Son of God, according to his divine nature, or his inheritance at
his exaltation into Heaven, in that sense, in which he is said to be made head
over all things, to, or for the Church, Ephesians. 1. 22. which is to be understood
in respect of that power over Angels and Men, so far as concerns their
Administation of all things, for the welfare of his Church, in neither of which
are the Saints Heirs with him. But in neither of these senses, nor in any other
sense, or place of scripture is he said to be the Heir of the world so, as that
he should regain the rights and privileges in respect of civil Government lost
in Adam, nor where Abraham is promised to be Heir of the world, Rem. 4. 13. is
it meant in respect of the civil Government of the world, but as the text
shows, that he should be Heir of the world, that is the blessing of
righteousness should be to Jews and Gentiles throughout the world, walking in
the steps of his examplary faith, whereby they become his seed.

3. It asserteth, that Saints regained the rights and privileges, in respect
of Government in the second Adam, or Lord from Heaven; which is a false and a
most arrogant presumptuous position. For, 1. If Christ have not regained it for
them, then they have not regained them in him. But that Christ has not
regained it for them, is already proved in overthrowing the second supposition;
therefore Saints have not regained in Christ the rights and privileges, in
respect of Government civil. 2. If Government civil were not lost in Adam, then
it is not regained in Christ, but civil Government and natural were not lost in
Adam, as is before proved in this section; therefore they were not regained in
Christ. 3. If the rights and privileges of civil Governments were not regained
in Christ to the Apostles, then they were not regained in Christ to any Saints;
For none had more regained for them by Christ than the Apostles, nor any of the
Saints excelled them; if any can show better charters, or patents from Christ
for such rights and privileges, then the Apostles, let them show them; the
holy scripture tells us, that God has set in the Church first Apostles, 1 Cor.
13. 28. they are in the foundations, Ephesians. 2. 20* Revel. 21. 14. But, that the
Apostles had not the rights and privileges in respect of civil Government on
earth, before Christ's coming in the Clouds, is proved before from Christ's
words, Matthew. 20. 25, 26. from Romans 13. 1. where every Soul, even an Apostle,
says Chrysostom, is to be subject to the Higher Powers, from St. Paul his
acknowledgments and example of subjection, from St. Peter's precept and example.
Whence we account the Popes of Rome to have the forehead of and impudent Whore,
when they claim in St. Peter's right, the Universal Monarchy of the whole
Church, and superiority above Emperors and Kings, and directly, or indirectly
in order to spirituals, power to dispose of civil Governments, to translate the
Empire, depose Princes, give away Kingdoms, command Emperors to make an
expedition to the holy Land, and many more things, as if they were his right,
as successor to St. Peter, to whom Christ promised the keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, not of earth. If this claim be justly, as it is, judged to be an
Antichristian, Babylonish usurpation, it is by parity of reason. More
Antichristian, and Babylonish for the Quinto-Monarchans to challenge the rights
and privileges in respect of Government to be gained to them under the name of
Saints, when they can show no such donation from Christ, or any act of
acquisition, whereby he obtained it for them, or any conveyance of it to them,
or any Saints till Christ's appearing; The Apostles shall sit upon twelve
Thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, but not till the regeneration,
when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his golory, Matthew. 19. 28.
termed his Kingdom, Luke. 22. 30. The Saints shall Judge the world, but not
till the time come they shall Judge Angels, 1 Cor. 6. 2, 3. In the interim
their condition is to be humbled under the mighty hand of God, that he may
exalt them in due time 1 Pet. 5. 6. James 4. 10. 4. If the portion of the
Saints which is regained for them by Christ be in spiritual blessings in
heavenly things, and no where in temporal Dominion in this life, then it is
false, that Saints regained the rights and privileges in respect of Government
in the second Adam, or Lord from Heaven, but the antecedent is true* as appears
by the many promises to them, which assign spiritual blessings to them as their
portion. Where the Apostle Paul mentions the blessings given to the faithful in
Christ Jesus he says, Ephesians* 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritural blessings in heavenly
places, or things in Christ, and then recites them without mention of any
earthly power or preferment. In the new covenant set down, Heb. 8. 10, 11, 12.
Spiritual grace is promised, but not earthly greatness, and riches as in the
old. Where our Lord Christ, Matthew. 5. assigns blessedness to holy persons, he
places it in other things, then the Kingdoms of this world. He says, v. 5.
Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, but no where the
Dominions of the earth. The Apostle says, 1 Timothy 4. 8. Bodily exercise
profits little, or for a little time, but godliness is profitable for all
things, or for every time, having the promise of the life that now is, and that
which is to come. But how to understand this our Savior tells us, Mark 10. 29,
30. There is no man that has left House, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father,
or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake and the Gospels, but he
shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, Houses, and Brethren, and
Sisters, and Mothers (which cannot be understood in the same kind, but in that
which is equivalent) and Children, and Lands, with persecutions, and in the
world to come, eternal life. We are Heirs with Christ, but it is, If so be that
we suffer with him, that we may be glorified together, Romans 8. 17. Whether
Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 23, 24. But all are not theirs to dispose them, or to rule over
them, they cannot dispose of life, or death, things to come, nor have rule over
Paul, or Cephas. But God does order and dispose them for their benefit in the
event, as it is said, Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to purpose.
The Saints shall inherit all things, but they must overcome first, Revel. 21.
7. By the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their Testimony, not loving
their lives unto the death, Revel. 12. 11. No where is there a promise of the
rights and privileges of civil Government to the Saints on earth. 5. If the
holy scripture makes it an ill character of a man, and an accursed condition to
have his treasure on earth, his portion in this life, his good things here, to
be his danger, and an ill foreboding sign to be rich, that the desire and care
of these things entangle and ensnare men, choke the word of God, that it
becomes unfruitful, then sure they have not regained the rights and privileges
in respect of Government in the second Adam. But the former is true, as is
manifest in these Scriptures, Matthew. 6. 19, 20, 24, 25. and 13. 22. Mark 10.
22, 23, 24. Psalm. 17. 14. Luke 6. 24, 25. and 16. 25. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10.
therefore also the later; and therefore we may more truly say, that the men who
make this claim, do indeed unsaint themselves.

6. If it be Gods design to have, for the most part the holy Saints to be of
the meanest sort, then sure they have not regained the rights and privileges
in respect of civil government and possessions in this life. But the former is
true, as appears by these Scriptures, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28, 29. You see your
Calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty,
not many, noble are called: But God has chosen the foolish things of the World
to confound the things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and
things which are despised has God chosen; and things which are not to bring to
naught things which are, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Jam. 2. 5.
Has not God chosen the poor of this world rich in faith, and Heirs of that
Kingdom which God has promised to them that love him. Therefore the Saints
regain not privileges of government in this life,

If the Saints and Princes of this world are often distinguished, then Saints
as such have not regained the rights and privileges in respect of government
in this life; But they are so distinguished, 1 Cor. 2, 6, 8. Therefore the
Consequent is right.

8. If Saints receive that Kingdom which cannot be shaken, then their interest
is not in the Kingdoms of this world that come to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6. But the
former is true, Heb. 12. 28. Therefore also is the later.

9. If Christ have made the Saints Kings and Priests to his Father, not to men,
a royal Priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, then that which Christ has effected for the Saints is not the gaining
of the rights and privileges in respect of civil government. But the former is
true, Rev. 1. 6. and 5. 10. 1 Pet. 2. 5. 9. therefore also the later is true.

10. If the Saints be exceeded in wisdom and power fit for civil government by
the men of this world, then sure Christ did not regain for them the rights and
privileges in respect of civil government in this world: For sure, if he had
gained the end he would have provided and ordered the means, as is done by him
in respect of the inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven or eternal life. But the
antecedent is true, as appears by our Saviors words, Luke 16. 8. the children
of this world are in their generation wiser than the children of light, and all
experience in all ages, which shows how few of them are fit for managing of
civil government, therefore the rights and privileges in respect of civil
government in this life are not provided for them.

11. If the rights and privileges in respect of civil government were gained
for the Saints, then doubtless Christ would have directed them in the way and
means to have attained them, but that he has no where done, but left all
Nations to their own constitutions and ways of government, therefore Christ
has not gained for the Saints the right to civil government.

12. If the rights and privileges in respect of civil government were gained
by Christ for the Saints, then they that are not Saints are not Governors of
right, then no King is rightly a King, no Master rightly a Master, no Husband
rightly a Husband, or Father rightly a Father, or Tutor rightly a Tutor, but a
Saint. But this is false as has been showed abundantly before, the Scripture
acknowledging, yea the Quinto-Monarchians themselves acknowledging even the
powers that were the Emperors of Rome, though bloody Persecutors of the Saints,
the Ordinance of God, therefore Government civil is not the Saints right and
privilege.

13. If the Saints had regained by Christ the rights and privileges in respect
of Government then they had right to require Tribute and service of men, and
consequently what they impose is due to them, and then they should not be
guilty of unrighteousness, theft, purloining, though they took from infidel
masters or other unbelievers. But the Scriptures make believers or Saints
culpable for extortion, theft, purloining, covetousness, defrauding as well as
others 1 Cor. 5. 11. Ephesians. 4. 28. 1 These. 4. 6. 2 These. 3. 6. 10. 12 Tit. 2.
10. therefore they have not the rights and privileges in respect of Government.

14. If the Saints have regained the privileges and rights in respect of civil
government in Christ, then either as Saints, or under some other consideration;
if under some other consideration, then it is not by reason of their sanctity
or their interest in Christ; if as Saints, then all Saints have these rights of
Government; and if so, a child that is a Saint, a Wife, a Servant, over an
infidel Father, Husband, Master, which would invert all order, and make void
all the precepts of obeying Parents, Ephesians. 6. 1. submitting to Husbands, Ephesians.
5. 22. obedience to Masters, Ephesians. 6. 5. all which are grossly absurd making void
the commandments of God for human traditions.

15. If the Saints have the rights and privileges in respect of government
regained in Christ, then either Saints by profession or real only: not the
former, for such are hypocrites, children of Hell more than others, and
therefore Christ has purchased nothing for them by his death or intercession;
not the later, for then rights and privileges in respect of government should
be a nemo scit, a thing which no man can judge of, but he who can search the
heart and try the reigns; but rights and privileges in respect of Government
are things necessary to be known, that we may know to whom we are bound to be
subject, to pay tribute, to address our selves to for justice, and other ends
and uses of Empire.

16. If Saints have the rights and privileges in respect of Government, then
those only have power to make Governors, as Kings and their Officers, who make
Saints, especially Preachers, Ministers, and Pastors of Churches. But the
Scripture makes this no part of a Ministers work, he is not to entangle himself
in affairs of this life, 2 Timothy 2. 4. this is never intimated to have been
done, or that it should be done: they are said to be of God, his ministers, not
the Ministers of the Saints or Pastors of Churches, nor did ever any pretend it
to be the right of Church Officers to constitute Kings and civil Governors,
till the Popes of Rome usurped that power to create the Emperors, whose
Predecessor Gregory the great acknowledged the Emperor Mauricius to be his
Lord, and the like was done by other Popes to the Emperors of Rome, until the
time of Hildebrand named Gregory the seventh, whom Becket in England followed
taking upon him to annul the English Laws, and asserting the Kings power to be
from the Church.

17. If the rights and privileges in respect of Government be the Saints, then
they cease to be Governors when they cease to be Saints, and so the opinion
heretofore charged unjustly on Wickleff, ^ee Bp. ^aveant's ^eterin. 30. p.
An^rew's esp. ad ^ellarm. polog. 13. p. 99.
that a Prelate or Prince falling into mortal sin should be disavowed, which is
even by Romanists decried; then might those that have power to excommunicate
and to declare them Heretics, Apostates depose them, yea then should Princes
be at the mercy, not only of Popes, but also of every Ecclesiastical
Consistory, yea they themselves should be bound in such cases to lay down their
Government, and Ecclesiastical Rulers and godly persons to abandon them as
being no Governors of right, because no Saints: which would make Governments,
which are the great supporters of human society, to be the weakest and silliest
invention among men, not like the Ordinance of God, by whom Kings reign and
Princes decree justice, Prove. 8. 15. but rather a device of Idiots, bring the
greatest confusions and mischiefs incident to human affairs, deter infidel
Princes to become Christians, if they see they must possess their Dominion at
the will of Ecclesiastics, with many other great absurdities. We find in
Scripture Kings have deposed Priests, as Solomon did Abiathar by Gods
allowance, but no where Priests to have deposed Kings with any approbation:
This has been but of late, a thing hatched at Rome, and fetched from Hell.

17. If the Saints have the rights and privileges in respect of Government
regained in Christ, then is temporal dominion founded in grace, But that is not
true, since it is given out of common providence for the good of human society,
not out of special love to the Saints: For it is one of the things that is for
the benefit of the bad as well as the good, as the shining of the Sun, and the
falling of the rain, Matthew. 5. 45. and therefore the benefit of it is sometimes
denied to the good, and granted to the bad, so that in these things all are
alike, one event is to the righteous and the wicked, Eccles. 9. 2.

18. If government of others were the Saints right, God would not have made
Saul King, nor David acknowledged him King over Israel, nor adjudged him to
death that slew him, nor would God have termed Cyrus his Shepherd, Isa. 44.
28. his anointed, Isa. 45. 1. nor Daniel have said to Nebuchadnezzar Dan. 2.
37. thou O King art a King of Kings, for the God of Heaven has given thee a
Kingdom power and strength and glory, or to Darius, O King live for ever, Dan.
6. 21.

19. If the Saints have regained in Christ the rights and privileges in
respect of Government, then all offices of government, or some only; if all,
then every Saint is of right a King, and so a King by inheritance, succession
or election, is no more a King than the meanest Saint, yea than a child, if a
Saint, and so no woe when the King is a child contrary to Eccles. 10. 16. then
one person has no more right to an office than another, which would introduce
anarchy, and take away all government, which is indeed the event to which
Fifth-monarchy-mens principles and actings tend, under show of the Saints right
to put power into the hands of the most violent Spirits, whereby all orderly
government will be demolished, and tyranny of a few, with the common robbery of
all, promoted. If some only have rights to some offices and privileges in
respect of government, who shall distinguish? how shall the right of each be
tried? what Court shall there be to decide controversies of this kind? Is there
any that has discerning of Spirits to find out each ones fitness? Is there any
Oracle of God, any Priest by Urim and Thummim, who can declare what is to be
done? Sure such devices are not of God, but of Satan, which tend to unsettle
things placed in order, and involve men in inextricable difficulties not to be
avoided without a miracle.

Lastly, If the Saints have regained rights and privileges in respect of
Government in Christ, then are those unjustly debarred from them who are
Saints. But the Quinto-Monarchians in their Banner of truth displayed do not
only declare the Saints are to separate from the Romish, Universal, national
Prelatical, Parochial Presbyterian Churches, but also from the congregational
Churches, though they hope godly, if they oppose them or concur not with them
in their smiting work, though they be brethren in the Churches, yet they
account him and that spirit which either in act or deed wilfully and
obstinately (as blessed be the Almighty they did both before by the
Quinto-Monarchians own confession and in the year 1660) denies the smiting work
of our Lords Kingdom (as they pretend it to be, though it be but their own
work, and for themselves moved by their own Phrenetick fury or intemperate
blind zeal) Antichristian, terming them formally godly, if they be not as
violent as themselves, and degrading them as if they had no sanctity, who are
not s^^dementate as themselves, which shows that they account them only for
Saints, that are of their spirit and mind, and appropriate the rights and
privileges in respect of government to those of their party, excluding those
who join not with them, though confessedly godly and brethren, for whom, they
cannot deny, Christ has regained as much as for themselves, which shows their
injustice, if not hypocrisy, and overthrows their assertion, that the Saints as
Saints have regained in Christ the rights and privileges in respect of
government, since they will have no Saints, but their own party to have regained
them.

The sixth position to which all their consultation and doctrine tends, and
which is indeed the venom and poison of all their tenants boiled up to the
height, is, that the Kingdom and power in these Nations is the Saints
birthright as freemen of the Commonwealth of Israel and heirs of the whole
world with Christ, Gal. 3. 29. whence it is that they say, it is to be desired
from good and sound grounds that they would exercise that royal authority which
God has given unto them and invested them with as they are Saints by calling,
which is to defend themselves and offend their enemies, and to contend against
those that do or shall oppose them in their work and business, which is to
smite powers and to take the Kingdoms of the world into their own possession,
the glass of the Beasts power being almost run out in these Nations, p. 27. the
call which the stone shall have to act in its smiting work, is for the greatest
part thereof now pertinent and fitly applicable to a faithful remnant now
extant in England, and fulfilled in and upon them; and also seeing that the
signs laid down in the word of God for the time of the end are in a great
measure now fulfilled and accomplished in England's remnant: therefore we
conclude and assert, that it is lawful and warrantable, and is a duty incumbent
for captivated Sion and oppressed Saints to stand up in Gods name, and fear,
and deliver themselves and that glorious Gospel of the Kingdom now by them
declared to the world, from persecution, oppression, and that long captivity
and bondage, which she has remained in, and to break the yoke of the
Oppressor, which is now upon her neck according to the word and Commandment of
the Lord, Zech. 2. 7. Isa. 52. 2. we are persuaded that the work of the stone
is the present work of this generation, and our present work, and do
accordingly exhort the Saints to arise, to fall upon the enemy, p. 62. Now
these positions, conceits, and exhortations are impious and vain. For, 1. it is
proved before, that their separation from their brethren, deserting their
Superiors to whom they owe subjection, their reviling and speaking evil of
powers, their taking up arms against them are not honest and just means. 2. It
is not proved that the smiting work Dan. 2. 34, 35. is that work which they
exhort to. 3. Nor is it proved to be the work of Saints as Saints. 4. Nor is
there any thing they produce, that shows it to be the work of this generation.
5. Nor any thing that shows that it is pertinent and fitly applicable to a
faithful remnant now extant in England. 6. Nor can any thing be deduced from
the signs laid down in the word of God (which they only say are in a great
measure fulfilled and accomplished in England 's remnant) for the time of the
end to warrant their acting, since no signs are sufficient for acting against
plain precepts without a clear Commission by extraordinary revelation or
miraculous power, much less when they are not wholly fulfilled, and that
accomplishment they are encouraged by is taken either from conjectural
calculations of mystical numbers, or from the heat of some (perhaps real
Saints) excited by the oratory and confidence of their magnified Teachers and
Leaders, opposed by other sober and considerate persons as godly, though not so
hot-spirited as themselves, which heat has cooled much, and many have been
withdrawn from them, as themselves complain and experience shows, which also
has proved, that they have much deluded themselves and others who have rested
upon their calculation of mystical numbers. 7. Nor is there any thing
deprehended in those, whom they call the faithful remnant in England, why they
should be called to this work rather than others of former time or in other
Countries. For though they magnify them that are of their party as precious
Saints, publick-spirited, selfdeniers, illuminated; disparaging others as
formal professors, leavers of their first love, and the like, yet experience
has proved them to be but as other men, or rather many of them to have been
worse than others, far from Saints and a faithful remnant, and by their
uncharitableness, rashness, cruelty, contempt of and disobedience to their
Governors, to have been more like Devils than Saints. 8. The falling off of
many, who perhaps inclined to them and favored their design, apprehending it
to have been at first out of good meaning and to a good end, but since finding
it to have been out of a factious spirit, and tending to blood and rapin,
likely to beget (when the rabble of loose persons, agents for Rome, and men of
desperate fortunes should with a show of sanctity and zeal for Christ join with
them) an horrible wasting and depraedation of men's estates (which these men as
holy as they would be taken to be, its likely aimed at, when they used those
words p. 66. In such a practice they shall be no losers, Christ will give them
an hundred fold, even the spoil of their great and rich enemies, who are his
opposers and in the end an eternal Crown) together with an universal enmity and
dreadful anarchy, have deserted them, is a good evidence of the madness and
impiety of their assertion and exhortation. 9. It is evident, that they have
been deluded in their conceits, and their wild positions and attempts by the
want of power and authority, which are necessary for that work, which they
imagined the faithful remnant in England called to. For as the Apostle says 1
Cor. 4. 20. the Kingdom of God is not in word but in power, and therefore there
being no such power of calling down fire from Heaven, of smiting the earth with
plagues, or any other extraordinary power, such as is foretold of the two
witnesses Rev. 11. or in the Prophets, Judges, or Apostles sent by God, we
cannot take their attempts or call to be any other than heady and rash, not
from Gods spirit, but fond opinion of the power of their prayers, because of
their vehemence (as Hackets was in Q. Elizabeth's days) and Satan's delusion of
them.

10. It is a very great delusion they are transported with, which makes them
imagine they shall by their arms subdue all the enemies of Christ, make them the
footstool of Christ, and take the Kingdom; which is made the work of God, when
he sends the rod of his strength, in the day of his power, in the day of his
wrath, Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6. which to attempt by themselves is a most
monstrous giantlike enterprise.

11. Nor is it a small vanity and folly in them to presume to antedate the
Saints exaltation before Christ's appearing, which is to be accomplished at his
coming and in his Kingdom.

12. It shows the want of sobriety in these men, that they abuse holy
scriptures and scripture expressions, altogether impertinent to their purpose,
for so evil purposes as they allege them. As for instance in applying those
words Zech. 2. 7. Isa. 52. 2. which are spoken of the people of the Jews, and
their delivery from the captivity of Babylon in Chaldaea, or some other
dispersion proper to them, to the people of England, which were never under
such captivity, making their subjection to civil Rulers Babylon, which is Gods
Ordinance, and exhorting them to deliver themselves by arms in the imitation of
them, who delivered themselves from exile by voluntary embracing of the
allowance of Cyrus and other Persian Kings. Their claim also of the Kingdom and
power in these Nations as the Saints birthright as freemen of the Commonwealth
of Israel and heirs of the whole world with Christ, Gal. 3. 29. is alike
ridiculous. For they are no otherwise freemen of the Commonwealth of Israel,
than in a Metaphor taking the Church of God for the Israel of God, and Church
members freemen of the Commonwealth: But this belongs to every Christian, at
least who is really such in the whole world, and then if freedom should infer
sovereignty, they should be Kings because freemen, which is a mere non
sequitur. Gal. 3. 29. speaks not of the inheritance of the whole world, but of
the promise, which is of the spirit v. 14. not of the dominion of the whole
world. The rest of their arguings are like these, as will appear in that which
follows.

16. The Reasons and Arguments of Fifth-Monarchy Men for their separation and
smiting civil powers, are showed to be vain.
IT remains now, that I consider what I meet with in the writings I have seen
for the Quinto-Monarchians separation from, and smiting civil powers, and
acting in the behalf of the Fifth-Monarchy, or visible Kingdom of Christ on
earth, as they term it, and the Saints taking it into their possession. The
reasons of their separation and engaging against all civil powers, are in the
Banner of truth displayed. p. 84, 85, 86, 87, 88. Whereof the first is this,
Because the Fifth Kingdom, which is Jesus Christ's and the Saints, together
with the Laws and Ordinances thereof, is to take place of the Roman Kingdom,
which is the Kingdom of the Beast and Antichrist (with destruction thereto)
together with all the Laws and Ordinances thereof, Dan. 2. 44. chapter 7. 18. 26,
27. Isa. 2. 3. 1 Cor. 6. 2. Heb. 12. 28. Answ: This is granted, and it is in
part fulfilled by the setting up of Christ's Kingdom by preaching the Gospel,
and is yet to be fulfilled at Christ's appearing; of the former of which, Dan.
2. 44. Isai. 2. 3. Heb. 12. 28. are meant, of the later, Daniel 7. 18. 26, 27.
1 Cor. 6. 2. None of the texts term civil powers in England the Kingdom of the
Beast and Antichrist, or the Roman Kingdom, nor prove the Fifth Kingdom, is to
be set up by separation from civil powers, or engaging against them; which were
to be proved, and therefore, if that which is said to be an undeniable truth
among the Saints, yet since those Saints are not infallible, and other Saints
perhaps doubt of it, as judicious as themselves, it should have been proved,
and also their inference thence cleared, unless they had been resolved to
deceive, or remain deceived.

2. Because the civil power is that which does oppose the righteous Kingdom of
Jesus Christ, not only deteining his right interest, title and birthright of
inheritance from him (as much as in them lies, which is as great an evil as if
they should effectually accomplish their wicked design) but also do make War
against the Lamb Christ Jesus, and the Saints his followers, Rev. 17. 14. Psalm.
2. 1, 2, 3. Are we the friends and subjects of Jesus Christ? Why then are we
found the friends and subjects of men? How can this be? Can we serve Christ and
Belial? Let Saints therefore be convinced of this, namely, that the civil
powers are Christ's enemies, it is they that labor to prevent the rise and
breaking forth of that Kingdom, and near unto the time of its firm
establishment, their combination will be very high and great, I saw the Beast
(which all grant to be the civil, or at leastwise the civil and Ecclesiastcal
power) and the Kings of the earth, and their Armies gathered together to make
War against him that Sat on the Horse, and against his Army, Rev. 19. 19. If
so, then it consequently follows, that it is the Saints great duty to withdraw
from this Beast, the Kings of the earth their Armies, strength and power,
neither are they (upon pain of his highness great displeasure) to maintain, or
help, and abet, or assist any such Armies, or powers who are raised, or
continued to make War against him, lest they be found Traitors secretly
assisting his enemies, and so fighters against his glory, power, Crown and
Scepter.

Answer. This is a very deep charge, but so confused and in Generals, that it
serves the more fitly to hide the deceit of the accusers, it being true, Dolus
versatur in generalibus, their's guile in accusations, which are only in
Generals tending to make any suspected, or accused, against whom they have a
prejudice, and the more defficult for the accused to defend himself. If it be
meant of the Popish Prelates and Princes, or Mohammedan, or Pagan, it is not
denied; if it be meant of the Protestant, civil and Ecclesiastical powers, it
should be showed, which of them, and in what facts they do those things here
charged on them. Perhaps they that are accused, are not guilty, or if they be
guilty, yet not of such facts as amount to what is here imputed to them. Sure
every injurious act to a Saint makes not the power an enemy to Christ, nor
every unrighteous Law, or Act, which may hinder the progress of Christ's
Kingdom, does so oppose the righteous Kingdom of Christ, as to be construed,
not only the deteining of his right, interest, title and birthright of
inheritance from him, but also making War against the Lamb Christ Jesus, and
the Saints his followers, much less to be taken for an opposition to Christ's
Kingdom, as much as in them lies, and as great an evil, as if they should
accomplish their wicked design. Possibly this opposition, which they accuse
powers of, is nothing else, but an opposition to the wild and frantic actings
of Fifth-Monarchy Men; which if so, they rather are to be said to further the
righteous Kingdom of Christ, than oppose it, and the Fifth-Monarchy Men be more
truly chargeable with the making War against the Lamb Christ Jesus, and the
Saints his followers. Possibly the Quinto-Monarchians do charge powers with
these things only, out of uncertain rumors and reports, yea perhaps only out of
prejudice, which is too too frequent, though it be but a Divelish practice, in
many that are reputed Saints. Surely these consulters in a secret conventicle,
where the powers cannot be heard speak for themselves, are not competent
accusers to arraign, and Judges too to condemn their superiors, if I may not be
allowed to call them their betters. This is indeed an intolerable and damnable
presumption both to God and Man. Nor is there any thing in the texts that is
for their purpose, the former, Revel. 17. 14. being meant only of those Kings
who received power as Kings one hour with the Beast, and give their power and
strength to the Beast, which sure cannot be meant of the Protestant Princes, or
Prelates, or Powers, it being expressly declared by the Apostles, Acts 4. 25,
26, 27. to have been fulfilled in the conspiracy of Herod, and Pontius Pilate,
the Gentiles and Princes of Israel, putting Christ to death. The other text,
Revel. 19. 19. is confessedly meant of Christ's enemies that shall be near the
time of the rise of the Kingdom of Christ; and therefore is madly applied to a
duty of Non-assisting, or ressisting present powers. It Is against all Rules,
but those of frayes, when Tinkers and Pedlers, and the rabble Rout fall to
fighting, to strike Richard for Robert, to oppose the present powers in this
Generation, the civil and Ecclesiastical, because the Beast and the Kings of
the earth, and their Armies shall be gathered together, to make War against him
that sat on the Horse, and his Army. No marvel men that thus argue, should
hate Lawyers and Universities, which would hiss out such Law and Logic; no
marvel godly Brethren desert them, when they vent such things, as befit Devils
rather than Saints, and better agree with the doctrine of Hell, than of the
Church of Christ; to whom that may be applied, which Christ says, Revel. 2. 9.
I know the Blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not, but are the
Synagogue of Satan. As for us who have not known the depths of Satan as they
speak, we judge we may be friends and subjects of men, even such as do oppose
the righteous Kingdom of Jesus Christ; if we do not concur with them, nor love,
nor favor, nor yield obedience to them in that opposition, we may be subject
to them in the things of men, though we oppose them according to our duty, as
did the three Children, Dan. 3. 16, 17, 18. in the things of God, when they act
contrary thereto. Nor need we fear to be charged with serving Christ and
Belial, or being found secret, or open Traitors to Christ, while we assist them
in matters of civil Government, and good order of Churches, though they be
adversaries to some truths we hold, or some practices, which we conceive, and
perhaps are, our duty. The power is not Belial always, when those that have
the power be men of Belial: A believing servant may serve with a good
conscience an unbelieving Master: enough has been said of this before. I am
ashamed that any that has the name of a Protestant, or Saint, should thus
argue, and it is altogether inexcusable in these men, who acknowledge in this
their writing that the persecuting powers in the Apostles days, were the
Ordinance of God, to which Christians should be subject, Romans 13. 1.

3. Say they, because the very life, well-being, rest and happiness of the
Saints both in the external and internal sense consists, and is laid and
wrapped up in the Kingdom of Christ, which is granted; they add, and not in this
Kingdom of Antichrist, and Babylonish state, which is a filthy and polluted
thing, Heb. 11. 26, 27. 2 Pet. 3. 13. But how does it appear that the present
civil powers are the Kingdom of Antichrist, and Babylonish state, or that
owning or assisting them is resting in such a Kingdom or state? Sure Heb. 11.
26, 27. 2 Pet. 3. 13. there is not a word to prove that, which they take for
granted; yea, we may perhaps better retort this reason, and say, it is the
happiness of Saints to separate from these Fifth-Monarchy-men, who, instead of
the Kingdom of Christ, would bring us into the Kingdom of Antichrist and
Babylonish state, by inciting us to separate from, and smite civil powers, and
charge them as denying the power and authority of Christ (who would have to
Caesar the things of Caesar given) even from this their own speech of
forbidding us to be under the power of men, which is, Gods Ordinance, Romans 13.
1. And though the followers of Christ ought to travel and cry, and be restless,
until the man-child be brought forth to rule the Nations, and until Zions
righteousness go forth as brightness, and her salvation as a Lamp that burns,
Mic. 4. 10. Isa. 62. 1. etc. yet are they not to give their goods, or to use
their endeavors to further the Quinto-Monarchians project: Nor do the words,
Micah 2. 10. warrant them to relinquish powers which be over them; but we may
justly exhort all holy persons in the words of Moses, Numb. 16. 24, 26. Get you
up from about the Tabernacle of the Quinto-Monarchians, who are seditious
against their Governors, as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram were, depart, I pray you,
from the tents of these wicked men (though pretended Saints) and touch nothing
of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.

4. Say they, Because it is prophesied of the Saints, that they shall take the
Kingdom, power and dominion from the Beast, Dan. 7. 18. 26. we therefore
conclude, that it is a duty incumbent upon the Saints of the later days, to
endeavor the translation of the Kingdom and power, from the Beast, to Jesus
Christ: else how shall they fulfill the Word of God, which is a sure word of
prophecy? now how can Saints be instrumental in this great work, except they
first perform this act of separation? which being done renders them in a great
measure ready for that which follows.

Answ: It is prophesied of the Saints of the most High, that they shall take
the Kingdom, and possess the Kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever; But it
is not said, that the Kingdom they shall take shall be the visible Kingdom on
earth, after or toward the time of the end of the fourth, or Roman Monarchy,
or that the Saints are the Gentile Saints, or the Gentile Saints of this Age,
or this Island, or of the City of London, or that they shall take it from the
Beast, or that the Beast is the civil power of England, or that they shall take
it by their separation, or smiting work, or that the Saints shall take away the
Dominion of the Horn to consume, and to destroy it unto the end, by some
fighting Act of theirs, or any such, as the Quinto-Monarchians design. But in
the reading and meaning of those words, there is so much difficulty, and
uncertainty, that no sober person would ever have made such an inference as
these men make from it. For first, it is not very certain whether the fourth
Beast be the Kingdom of the Seleucidae, or the Roman Kingdom, though I incline
to the later. 2. It is uncertain whether the little Horn be Antiochus
Epiphanes, or the Roman Papacy, though I incline to the later. 3. Nor is it
certain, that it is to be read, the Saints of the most High shall take the
Kingdom (which I follow with our interpreters, the same persons being to take
the Kingdom who are to possess it for ever) and not, as some read, they shall
take the Kingdom of the Saints of the most High; meaning, the four Beasts shall
take the Kingdom of the Jews. 4. Nor is it certain, that v. 26. when it is
said, they shall take away his Dominion, is meant of the Saints. For, 1. it may
be read, as Junius reads it, impersonally auferetur, it shall be taken away,
not they shall take away. 2. Nor is it likely, that this should be attributed
to the Gentile, or Jewish Saints. 1. Because it is an act beyond the power of
Saints to take away the Dominion, to consume, and to destroy it to the end, it
being the same with the slaying of the Beast, the destroying of his body and
giving it to the burning flame, v. 11, which is to be conceived to be done by
the fiery stream, which issued and came forth from before the Ancient of days,
v. 10. and therefore by the immediate hand of God, or his mighty Angels. And in
all likelihood it is then when he shall put down all Rule and all Authority and
Power, 1 Cor. 15. 24. which is made the act of God the Father, v. 28. 2. This
is confirmed, because it is said, But the judgment shall sit, and they shall
take his dominion away: Now the sitting of the judgment was, when the books
were opened, the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient of days did sit, v.
9, 10. which the comparing it with Revel. 20. 12. does evince to be at the last
Judgment.

3. This is also further proved, in that the dominion given to the Son of Man
after the destruction of the fourth Beast is said to be v. 13. 14. when one
like the Son of Man came with the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of
days, and they brought him near before him: which is to be understood, as Mr.
Mede proves in his Answer to Mr. Hayne, (and then the taking away shall be by
Christ) of the time, when he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty
Angels in flaming fire, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8. and shall consume the wicked one with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his
coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8. which is a work beyond the power of Saints with bodily
weapons, or any might of theirs to effect. 4. Where it is said, Dan. 7. 27.
that the people of the Saints of the most high shall have the Kingdom, it is
said, it shall be given them, not, they shall acquire it, or take it by their
forcible or any other acting. And therefore it is a most vain conceit, that
this thing is to be done by the Saints endeavor, or that they are to fulfill
the word of God, or to imagine, the word of God could not be fulfilled without
them, or they could be instrumental in this great work, or that their act of
separation from civil powers were necessary to it, or it or their smiting work
did render them in any measure ready for that which follows. There are other
uncertainties concerning the Saints, whether they be not peculiarly the Jewish
people, or the Kingdom taken, the spiritual Kingdom of Christ, which the Hebrew
Christians received, Heb. 12. 28. of which I have spoken somewhat before, and
now omit that which I have said, being sufficient to show the futility of this
fourth Reason.

5. Their fifth Reason is as vain as the former, yet because it is the Engine,
whereby perhaps well-meaning and tender consciences are frighted or drawn into
their way, it is necessary to be considered. Because, say they, there are
dreadful judgments pronounced in particular against those that shall be found
owning, submitting unto, and supporting of the Civil Power in the days of the
Lords more glorious manifestation of himself, and when he gives notice and
warning to all, of those judgments which then he is about to bring upon his
enemies, and by his Instrument proclaims the overthrow and downfall of
Babylon, Rev. 14. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. If any man worship the Beast and his Image,
and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of
the wine of the wrath of God, etc. and shall be tormented with fire and
brimstone, which is the plague and pains of Hell. Now we apprehend that this
Scripture will be fulfilled upon those who shall be found worshippers of the
Beast, etc. in the last ages of the world, and not long before our King begin
to take the power: For (mark it) upon the rise of the first Beast Rev. 13. 1,
2. with seven heads and ten horns, ten Crowns, etc. all the world wondered after
the Beast, v. 3. or as in v. 8. all that dwell upon the earth, whose names are
not written in the Lambs book of life, worship the Dragon and the Beast, v. 4.
Hitherto there is no mention of Image and Mark; but upon the rise of the second
beast that comes out of the earth, and has two horns like a Lamb, etc. v. 11.
the case is changed and grows more difficult and dangerous, for he does not
only v. 12. cause the earthlings to worship the first beast, but in process of
time (after he has deceived them by his great wonders and miracles) he makes
them that dwell on the earth make an Image to the first Beast, into which he
infuses life, and causes all that will not worship that Image to be killed;
proceeding further also, he causes all small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond to receive a mark in their right hand or forehead, and no man is permitted
to buy or sell save he that has the mark, or the name of the Beast, or the
number of his name, v. 13, 14, 15, 16. Now by this time we are come somewhat
near the end of his reign and the beginning of Christ's Kingdom. Now then we
observe from hence, 1. That the image, mark, name, and number of the Beast, are
of a later date than the first Beast, and his ten horns, and so consequently
men in former ages and generations might have worshipped the beast, and yet not
his Image, nor receive his mark, etc. 2. By how much the nearer his end is, by
so much the more dangerous it is to worship him, etc. 3. That those who in the
last days near unto Christ's coming, shall have all these marks, denotations,
and characters found upon them (that is to say, those that worship the beasts,
and) (mark the emphasis of the words) his Image, and receive his mark in his
forehead, or right hand shall drink the wine of Gods wrath, and shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone: so that we conceive it is the duty of Saints
to consider these things, and to separate from the beast, his image, mark,
number, etc. and to have no relation, affection, subjection to the beast, and
civil power, or any of its appertainers, though they lose their lives for it.
And then adds encouragements to adventure the loss of life, rather than incur
the danger of Gods wrath, with assurance of glory to such, as in doing that,
which they make the Saints duty, lose their lives, which is a device too like
that of the Jesuits, when they animate their Assassins to Regicide by promise
of absolution, merit, Martyrdom and Heaven.

Answ, I should not think it worth while to make any answer to this reason,
which proves that which is granted, that the worshipping the Beast and his
image, the receiving the mark of the beast in his forehead or in his hand, or
the name of the beast, or number of his name, or the mark of his name makes men
obnoxious to Gods wrath, and proves not at all that which is to be proved, that
to have relation, affection, subjection to civil power or any of its
appertainers is to worship the Beast and his Image, to receive the mark of the
Beast in the forehead or hand, to receive the mark of his name, his name, or
the number of his name, but that I find this is made commonly the pretense of
separations of every party, and their oppositions thereupon. Thus not only the
Protestants separate from the Papists, counting subjection to the Pope
receiving the mark of the beast; but also among Protestants dissenters term the
practice they dislike and are averse from, the mark of the beast; whence,
especially the common sort, who have most heat and least light, as they are
prejudiced, so they inveigh against their opposites as the beast, and the
owning them as the rereceiving his mark. So Brownists count any acknowledgment
of Bishops, receiving ordination from them, using the Cross, Surplice, kneeling
and such ceremonies as they injoin, going to Common Prayer, paying tithes,
being of a national or parish Church, with many more things, which they except
against in Prelatical, yea and Presbyterian and congregational government, the
worshipping the beast and receiving his mark: which being got once into the
heads of the common sort, who usually talk much against that which they
understand little, inflames them with hatred against those they judge to be the
beast, and that which they think is his mark; so as that without measure they
inveigh against them, delighting in satirical scotts and jests put upon them,
in tales that disparage them, are averse from any conference with them, or
hearing of them speak, and altogether irreconcilable to them. This fashion
which heretofore was only used against Ecclesiastics, the Fifth-monarchy-men
it seems have here taken up against the civil powers as useful for their
demagogical design, to affright the people and to hold them to their party. But
to show the vanity of it, it is to be observed, that they apply the threatenings
Rev. 14. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. to the worshipping of the second beast described
Revel. 13. 11. and to the times near unto Christ's coming; now that beast by all
the descriptions of it appears not to have gotten his power by the sword, as
civil powers have, but by deceit, as by pretended miracles v. 13. 14. whence he
is termed the false Prophet, Rev. 16. 13, 14. which stirred up the Kings of the
earth to make war against the Rider on the white horse, Rev. 19. 19, 20. the
Whore with whom the Kings of the earth committed sornication, Revel. 17. 1, 2.
which being plainly expressed to be Rome or at Rome v. 18. cannot be applied
with any show or color to the civil powers of England, or other Countries
besides Rome, especially the Protestants, they being no Prophets, nor using any
arts or devices to draw men to the worship of the first beast, or Dragon, or to
set up any foreign power, but seeking to uphold their own civil power, and
requiring the subjects to renounce the Popes supremacy, and power to depose
them* and therefore it is a most impudent false accusation to make the
Protestant civil powers to be either the beast, or the Kings that commit
fornication with the Whore, or the having relation, affection, subjection to
them and their appertainers the worshipping the beast or his image, or the
receiving his mark, name or number of his name. But they say,

6. We might also further add, because the Civil power is that which enforces
and compels the consciences and spirits of men to the Antichristian forms and
worship of Babylon: accordingly the great Harlot, or Mystery of iniquity (i. e.
Antichristian worship and Church state) rides upon the Beast, Rev. 17. 3. that
is, she has the pre-eminence, and makes the Beast use his sword for her
advantage, upon pain of excommunication, curses, and such like baubles.

Answ. The Beast which carries the Woman, Rev. 17. 3, 7. is said to have seven
heads and ten horns, and so is not the Beast with two horns like a Lamb, Rev.
13. 11. but the first Beast, Rev. 13. 1. of which they say, That the Image,
Mark, Name, and Number of the Beast are of a later date than the first Beast
and his ten horns, and so consequently men in former generations might have
worshipped the Beast, and yet not his Image, nor receive his mark, etc. But if
the Beast might be then worshipped, then might the Beast be worshipped, when the
Dragon gave him his Seat and Power and great Authority, Rev. 13. 2. at which
time they term the power of Rome the Ordinance of Hell, p. 51. And if then the
Civil power of Rome might be owned as the Ordinance of God, Romans 13. 1. when
they compelled men to worship their Idols; in like manner the Civil powers now
should be owned as Gods Ordinance, though they should compel men to the
Antichristian forms and worship of Babylon, which though idolatrous are not
worse than the Pagan worship, to which the persecuting Emperors did compel the
Christians. But however, this Reason may give some color for separating from
those Kings and States which use the Roman Inquisition, and force their
Subjects to go to the Mass, and to worship the consecrated wafer Cake, which
they call The Host, and the Body of Christ, and to acknowledge the Pope as the
Head of the Universal Church, and the Roman Church as the Mother of all
Churches, which may be truly termed the Antichristian forms and worship of
Babylon, the mystery of iniquity, the Antichristian worship and Church State:
yet this does not at all reach the Protestant Kings and Civil powers, who do
not enforce and compel men to these Antichristian forms and worship of
Babylon, nor support the great Harlot, nor let her have the pre-eminence, nor
use their sword for her advantage, nor regard her Excommunication, Curses, and
such like baubles, but use their power and sword against her, deride her
Excommunications, Curses, Indulgences, and Threats, and urge their Subjects to
disclaim her jurisdiction and worship. If any say that the Civil powers in
England do compel men to be under Diocesan Bishops and Priests, who have their
succession and ordination from Rome, and to be present at the Common Prayer,
which is nothing but the Mass translated out of Latin into English, and to be
members of a National Church, which is Antichristian; I answer, that neither do
the Bishops derive their succession from Rome, nor is their consecration as the
Roman, with any oath to the Pope, though Mr. Francis Mason have pleaded against
Champney the validity of their succession by the ancient Canons, which the
Papists allow; nor are the Ministers ordained by the Bishops, Priests to offer
sacrifice for the quick and dead, as Popish Priests; nor has the Common prayer
Book, the Sacrifice properly so called, the adoration of the host, invocation
of Saints, and other rites which make the Mass abominable, nor is the Church
of England made national as subject to the Pope or communicating with the Roman
Church in the Trent doctrine, and therefore are not chargeable with the
Antichristian forms, Church state and worship of Babylon, nor the civil powers,
which require conformity thereto, to be judged to compel men's persons to
Antichristianism.

But perhaps we shall find Mr. Tillinghast arguing to better purpose. That
which I meet with, as tending to the justifying of the Quinto-Monarchians way
is in the 3. of the 8. sermons published since his death. p. 57. of the 3.
edition; in which he tells his auditors, that he did conceive it to be one great
article of his and their faith, that the work that God does call his Children
to at this day (and he calls upon them from Heaven to attend to) had been the
work of Christ's visible Kingdom over the world; which he takes for granted, nor
in that do I at present oppose him, though I do not assert such a visible
Kingdom, as he believes; nor do I gainsay his distinction. p. 59. Of two parts
of Christ's Kingdom, one of the Stone, the other of the Mountain, used before by
Mr. Mede; but deny, that in the Kingdom of the Stone, the Saints are employed
in a glorious work for Christ to pluck down all, that Jesus Christ when he
comes may have his enemies his footstool, and that the command is, beat your
Plow-shares into Swords, intimating that in the time of this Kingdom, there
shall be wonderful use of Swords, Weapons of War. p. 60. But that which I
oppose is his speech. p. 63. And though this Stone, Dan. 2. 34. fundamentally
is Christ himself, yet considered as smiting the great Image, it can be no
other but Christ mystical, in his members; and the cutting out of this Stone,
cannot be meant as some would have it, of Christ's first coming, for these
reasons; first because the Kingdom of the Stone, it does arise in the days of
the ten Antichristian Kings; And in the days of these Kings shall the God of
Heaven set up a Kingdom. What Kings are these? These Kings are not the Four
Monarchies, for the Kingdom of God was not set up in the time of those
Monarchies, but in the fourth and last only; and here is spoken of Kings in the
plural Number; those Kings therefore, are the ten Antichristian Kings, which
are set forth by ten toes, where the work begins, and the first stroke is
struck; and are called the ten Horns in another place; and in Dan. 7. Those ten
Horns are interpreted ten Kings, and in the time of those Kings the Stone is
cut out, they are the ten Antichristian Kings; and if so, the Stone cannot be
so early cut out, as the birth of Christ, for that was long before the ten
Antichristian Kings had being, or existence in the world, therefore the Kingdom
of the stone must be cut out later.

Answ: These Kings cannot be meant of any other than the Kings and Kingdoms,
which the Kingdom of the Stone shall break in pieces, which are. v. 45. the
Iron, the Brass, the Clay, the Silver, and the Gold, and not the toes only; and
therefore must be meant of the four Monarchies, and not only of the ten
Antichristian Kings. And in the days must be understood Synecdochically one of
them, as when Jephthab is said, Judge. 12. to be buried in the Cities of Gilead,
that is, in one of them, Jonah was gone down into the sides of the Ship, Jonah
1. 5. that is, one of the sides; and of which Mr. Mede in his answer to Mr.
Hayn, has given more instances, and proved it to be meant of the last of those
Kings, which he determines to be the Roman, against Mr. Haynes holding it to be
the Kings of Alexanders Successors, and that it must needs be referred to
Christ's incarnation, or preaching, which he shows in his exercitation on Mark
1. 15. to have been by Christ himself signified, when he said, the time is
fulfilled, that is, the time foretold, Dan. 2. 44. And the Kingdom of God is at
hand, which the God of Heaven will set up. The plural Number notes not the ten
Horns, for these Kings can be meant of no other than the four Monarchies, or
Kings; which are mentioned in the plural Number, not because the Kingdom was
set up in all their days, but in the days of the last, into which the power
of the rest came, and by smiting of it they were all broken to pieces.

Secondly, Says he, Because Daniel does not see the Stone to smite, until such
time as he had a view and representation of the great Image in all the parts of
it before him: He saw it all come forth and exist in its state, before the
Stone smites; therefore I conclude that the cutting out of the Stone, was not
until every part of it was come forth, and was in being in the world. But if so
be we conceive the cutting out of the Stone to be as high as Christ's coming;
then was the Stone cut out long before the last part of the great Image (the
Iron and the Clay) was in being; and if the Stone was cut out so long before,
then did the Stone lie still, and not do its work for many hundred years, for
the very first stroke the Stone strikes, is upon the feet of Iron and Clay,
which it could not do before they were in being.

Answ: If the argument be good from the seeing together of all the parts of the
Image to the coexistence of the things represented, then all the four
Monarchies should exist together, because they were represented and viewed
together, which is absurd. It Is true, the Stone was not cut out till all the
Monarchies were in being, yet it was cut out before every state of the last
Monarchy was in being. The Stone is said to smite the Image in the feet, not
because it began not to smite till the last state and period of the
fourth-Monarchy: But because the former Monarchies were brought under the power
of the fourth, and rested upon the fourth as the head and other parts of the
body do upon the feet, and so by smiting it, the Whore is cast down. If this
reason were good, Christ's Kingdom should not begin till every part, or state of
the fourth-Monarchy were existent, and then the Saints should not begin to
smite till the existence of the last of the ten Kings, which is unknown to
them, and then he could not conclude it must be the work of this generation.

Thirdly, says he, because Daniels smiting stone that he speaks of in the 2.
chapter and his Ancient of days siting, that he speaks of in the 7. chapter they must
of necessity be one and the same, they are contemporary, for they do one and
the same work; the very work that is done by the one is done by the other. The
stone smites the toes of the fourth Monarchy, and Daniels Ancient of days
sitting, casts down the Thrones, and Judges and destroys the fourth Beast:
here is one and the same work, therefore they are one and the same time, the
time of the cutting out of the stone, is the same with the time of the sitting
of the Ancient of days. Now if they are the same in time, the stone cannot be
cut out so high as Christ's first coming, for the Ancient of days sitting it is
clear it is not till the ending time of the fourth Monarchy; then comes the
Ancient of days and sits in judgment, and casts down and destroys the beast,
and not before; therefore the cutting out of the stone cannot be the first
time, but at the close of the fourth Monarchy.

Answ. The casting down of the Thrones is not the putting down of the Thrones
of the ten Kings, but in allusion to the manner of settling or placing seats
for the Sanhedrin to sit on, it is said the Thrones were set (as it is observed
by Mr. Mede Comment. on Re^. 20.) and the Ancient of days did sit, or v. 26.
But the Judgment shall sit, which is the same with Rev. 20. 4. And I saw
Thrones and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. Now the time
of the sitting Dan. 7. 9. is the time, when one like the Son of man came with
the clouds of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him
near before him: And there was given him dominion and glory and a Kingdom, that
all people, nations and languages should serve him, which to be referred to the
time of Christ's second coming when all rule and authority and power shall be
put down, and every knee shall bow to him, is intimated by our Lord Christ
himself allusively to this of Daniel expressing his second coming by the coming
in a cloud, Luke 21. 24. in the clouds of Heaven Matthew. 26. 64. If then the
stone be not cut out till then, it will not be cut out till Christ's second
coming, and so no smiting work till then, which is absurd and contrary to this
Authors own tenet. But neither is it true, that the Ancient of days sitting,
and the stones smiting do one and the same work, if by the same work be meant
the same numerical action, the Agents being not the same, the sitting is of the
Ancient of days, who is not the same with the stone, but he that cuts out the
stone, or the God that sets up the Kingdom: If it be meant of the same work
that is the same event, fact or accomplishment, then there is no necessity, that
they should be contemporary, that is in the same age, as the building of the
Temple was the same work, yet not the time of laying the foundation and
finishing it the same; the raising up the fourth Monarchy was the same work,
yet not the several governments of it contemporary, and in like manner the
demolishing of it is the same work, yet part of it to be done by Christ at his
first coming and part at his second, and so the cutting out of the stone may be
at his first coming and the sitting of the Ancient of days at his second, and
it is not necessary that the Fifth-Monarchy should begin at the later end of the
Fourth Monarchy, or the smiting work be the overturning the Thrones of the
Kings to be performed by the Saints as chief instruments in the management
thereof, nor does it follow of necessity there must be such a thing, as the
civil and military power to be in the hands of the Saints, and that before the
day of Christ's appearance for the performance of that work, which is the thing
he contends for, and endeavors to prove by these eight reasons. First, Because
the work of breaking the great Image is done by the stone cut out of the
Mountain; it is not done by mountains considered as mountains, it is not done by
Nations considered as Nations, Kingdoms considered as Kingdoms: for then it
would be done by the Mountain; but it is done by a stone cut out of the
mountain, by a people picked out by God himself out of the Nations and Kingdoms
of this world, formed and united together by God himself, which shall fall upon
the great Image and break it to pieces; i'ts these that do this work; and
further it is cut out without hands, Dan. 2. 34. 45. that is without worldly
powers, but more immediately by God without the hands of men. Its clear it
shall be by the Saints as chief, principal and leading instruments, because
they are called the stone in relation to the Lord Jesus Christ called a stone,
of whose nature and image the Saints are partakers, not so the Nations between
whom and Christ there is no agreement.

Answ. This reason proves not the Saints to be meant by the Stone, nor that
they are to break the Image, but the contrary; For they are not cut out without
hands, but are begotten by men in the ordinary way of generation, nor, if this
Authors way should be meant of smiting the Image by civil or military power,
should they break the Image without hands, but with hands: not is there a word
in the Text that shows the Saints to be meant by the Stone, much less the
Saints of the later times of the fourth Monarchy or of this Nation, or that it
excludes Kings, who may be Saints and Christ's instruments to break the Image,
for they may be Saints; and if not, instruments of Christ, as Cyrus was, to
break the Babyloman Monarchy, and to restore the Jews, and therefore there is
no consequence in this reasoning, which is out of figurative expressions to
proper, though the thing be not interpreted so, but only imagined by this
Arguer without any cogent reason: It Is done by a stone cut out of the mountain,
therefore by a people picked out by God out of the Nations, for neither does the
Text expound mountain, by the Nations and Kingdoms of this world, nor by the
Stone a people picked out, but the stone may be meant of Christ personal, or his
Kingdom, as the text explains it, and he be cut out, that is, formed without
hands in his Mothers womb, as when David said, he was curiously wrought in the
lower parts of the earth, Psalm. 139. 15. and the Kingdom cut out of the
Mountain, that is, set up among men without hands by the God of Heaven, by the
preaching of the Gospel and by the power of his spirit, Zech. 4. 6.

The 2. reason from, Dan, 7. 21, 22, 25, 26, 27, is the same with the 4. in the
Banner displayed, and is fully answered before in this section.

The 3. reason is, That Generation of men shall destroy the Kingdom of the
Beast, in the time when his Kingdom is to be destroyed, that did bear witness
against the Beast for Christ, all the time his Kingdom stood. This is grounded
upon Revel. 11. Which tells us that the witnesses for 1260 days prophefied, in
the end of this time they are killed by the Beast, they rise up again, and
rising up they knock the Beast down, for immediately thereupon the tenth part
of the City fell, and there was a great Earthquake, and there were slain of
men seven thousand, and great fear fell upon all the rest, and they gave glory
to the God of Heaven, this is not done by worldly powers, but the witnesses,
therefore they that have born witness against the Beast, shall give the deadly
blow to the Beast.

Answ. If this reason were good, it should be done by the Saints, that have
been, not by those that shall be, by them risen again, not to be born
hereafter, by them that have born witness all the time the Beasts Kingdom
stood, not by them, that only stand up near the time of the end, it shall be
done by supernatural, or prophetical power, not by civil and military, which
this author contends for. In a word, in all this there is nothing but
uncertainty concerning these witnesses who they are, whether already existent,
or future, the Beast meant, the time of their prophesying, and the event, and
the manner and means of its accomplishing, and therefore this proof is ignoti
per ignotius, of a thing unknown by that which is more unknown, which is vain.

Fourthly, says he, The Angel that enlightens the earth with the glory of the
truth of the Lord, that is, that Angel, or instrument that shall ruin Babylon,
Rev. 18. 1. But the earth has not been enlightened with the glory of God, by
the generation of the world, but the world has been enlightened by the
generation of the faithful, that God has revealed his truth to, and this Angel
that enlighteneth the earth with the glory of God, gives the deadly blow unto
the Beast, there where light comes forth, God will carry on the work by those
hands.

Answ. The Angel is another Angel, therefore not the generation of the
faithful, coming down from Heaven, therefore not a man, having great power,
therefore not using humane Weapons, enlightens the earth with his glory, it is
not said, with the truth or glory of God, nor enlightening men by revealing
Gods truth to them, nor that he gives the deadly blow to the Beast, but only
that he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon is fallen,
therefore this proves not, that a company of private Saints in the ending time
of the Fourth-Monarchy shall destroy it by a military, or civil power, yea if
where light comes forth, God will carry on the work by those hands, all the
preachers of the truth shall be instrumental to the ruin of Babylon, and that
by preaching, not a company of private Saints by fighting.

The fifth reason from Revel. 18. 6. is fully answered before, sect. 9. The 6.
is, The work of God against Rome, shall be so managed as there may be singing
of Hallelujabs in the Churches, for the carrying it on: this is clear from
Revel. 19. 1. But now if this should be done only by the clattering of a
company of Nations falling upon the Beast, and ruining him, what singing would
there be in the Churches for this? What would there be more in this, then in
the work of Cyrus destroying Babylon, or in Alexanders destroying the Medes and
Persians Monarchy, or in the Romans destroying the Grecians Monarchy? For that
was a part of Gods decree, as well as this, what should the people therefore
now sing Hallelujahs more for, more than in those times? But because of the
difference of the instruments, things done in a more holy sanctified way to a
more pure end; and there shall be more of the Image of God appear upon those
that shall do this work now, and therefore they shall sing Hallelujahs;
otherwise, the work did not go beyond the work that had been done before.

Answ. When the work of destroying Babylon was done by Cyrus, there was singing
of Hallelujahs, as was foretold, Jerem. 51. 1. and that because it was the work
of God, who ever were the instruments. And indeed that is the reason expressly
given, Revel. 19. 1, 2. not this, which is here imagined contrary to the
express text, Revel. 17. 16, 17. yea it is more joyous to the Saints, and more
redounds to Gods glory, that he ruins Babylon, by those that did support her,
as that by death, procured by Satan, God destroyed him that had the power of
death. And this was Gods way in destroying the former Monarchies, and therefore
is more likely to be his way in destroying this, not a work by other means
then the former, though exceeding, or going beyond it in the conspicuity of it,
and consequents of it, and therefore occasioning more praise to God, and not
for the holiness of the instruments, which the text mentions not.

Seventhly, says he, The Kingdom of the stone, when it comes to smite Rome,
then shall be in it a resemblance (as it were) of the reign of Christ and the
glory of the Kingdom of the Mountain, therefore it is said in v. 6. For the
Lord God omnipotent reigns, which could not be said if the work were done by
a company of carnal Nations; and yet this is before the end, before Christ's
coming: for after this appearance, we have the Bride making her self ready, and
the Kings of the earth come together to destroy the Bride preparing for her
Husband, and then you have Christ coming forth in his fury, destroying his
enemies and rescuing his Bride: But before that day there shall be such a
glorious appearance in the world, and such power in the hands of the people of
God, that it shall be said when men look upon it, The Lord God omnipotent
reigns, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is King of the world, and King of Saints
reigns; therefore it shall be done by Saints as leading instruments.

Answ. Such an acclamation is usual upon any glorious work of God, as Exodus 15.
18. and in the Psalms often, and therefore it is but a vain conceit, as if that
speech could not be used unless the Saints were leading instruments. In this
book of the Revelation we have acclamations where no act is expressed of the
Saints, as Rev. 4. 8, 9, 11. and 5. 9, 10, 12, 13. and 7. 12. and 11. 15, 17.
and 12, 10. and 15. 3, 4. and 16. 5, 7. It Is granted that before Christ's coming
upon the ruin of Babylon there will be occasion of the acclamation Rev. 19. 6.
but not because private Saints shall destroy Babylon by their smiting work, but
because Gods power and might is thereby manifested, and the dominion of God
will be thereby promoted.

Eighthly, says he, Look through the old and new Testament, where ever we have
a description of the persons that shall do the glorious work of God at the last
day, and you shall ever find them described and characterized as Saints, as
Zech. 9. 13 against thy Sons O Greece, that is, against the Turkish power.
Obad. 18. 21. when all his enemies are brought down, and become his footstool,
then shall he come forth, and take the Kingdom, and the Kingdom shall be the
Lords; sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool: then
the Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, rule thou in the midst
of thine enemies, there is the coming forth of Christ, when his enemies by his
Saints are made his footstool. Micah. 4. 11, 12. Thou shall beat in pieces
many people. Jacob is his battle ax, Jer. 51. 20. Rev. 15. 2, 6. Rev. 14. 1, 2,
3, 4, 5.

Answ. Psalm. 110. 1, 2. it is not said, by the Saints Christ's enemies are made
his footstool, nor Jer. 51. 20. is meant of Jacob, but of Cyrus, or the King
of Babylon, as Mr. Gataker in his Annot. Zech. 9. 13. Obad. 18. 21. Micah. 4.
11, 12. if meant of a time to come, is to be verified of the Jews and not of
Gentile Saints, Rev. 14. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. if the same with Revel. 7. 4. is meant
also of the Jews, if of others, neither there, nor Rev. 15. 2. is any act
ascribed to them, but acclamation to God for his work: why the seven Angels
Rev. 15. 7. should be any other than holy spirits I see no reason, and
therefore this reason is impertinent, and none of them prove, that which he
undertook.

To the objection from Rev. 17. 16. that the horns shall do it, he answers, the
meaning is this, that the ten horns as conquered to the Lamb, and the power of
them being gotten into the power of the Lamb, so shall the horns be turned
against the Whore, which we cannot see at present. I reply, this is enough to
prove that they be not Saints as Saints that shall burn the Whores flesh with
fire, that Saints shall not do it without Kings, and therefore are not to
attempt it without them, much less to destroy them, that they are rather to
serve them, and to acknowledge what they have done, and may see, though they
see not all done they would have done. If for present they see not the horns
ruled by the Lamb (the seeing of which only prejudice hinders) neither do we
see such Saintship in the Quinto-Monarchians as by their own rules should
qualify them for the smiting work, or setting up Christ's Kingdom, but rather
such a spirit as tends to ruin it.

To the objection from John 18. 36. he says, my Kingdom is not of this world,
that is, of this Monarchy, all the world being put for the Roman Monarchy, Luke
2. 1. whereto I reply, Christ says his Kingdom is not of this world in
opposition to from above, as is manifest from John 8. 23. and the phrase not
from hence, and his proof from his servants not fighting for his rescue, which
is sufficient to show that his Kingdom should not be from his Servants, nor by
fighting, nor is the particle now used to intimate that either his Kingdom
should be from hence, or his servants fight, but only is used to declare his
present state without intimation of any thing concerning the future, as John 9.
41, etc.

He then adds something about the signs of the nearness of the Kingdom, and
omitting the computation of the time from the numbers left us in Scripture
(which I have considered before sect. 13.) there are ten signs set down of the
nearness of it taken from accidents and observations of men favorers of his
opinion and opponents of it, with his judgment concerning them, and their
signification, none of which, but may happen, and have happened concerning
other things, which have failed, and been found mistakes in the conclusion; and
being not certain evidences, or prognostics as miracles, prophesying and such
like signs, I therefore let them pass as things either false, and perhaps
unrighteous censures, or uncertain, and unfit for mine or any man's examination
or judgment but Gods only, and contenting my self to have demonstrated that the
holy Scriptures yield them no warrant to separate from or engage against the
civil powers set over them, I shall commend this work to the Lord for his
blessing, praying God to teach those who have been or are led away with the
Quinto-Monarchians opinion, to prove all things, and to hold fast that which is
good, 1 These. 5. 21.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 7. l. 39. r. and God's, p. 17. l. 2. d. to, p. 19. l. 4. r. Judge, p. 25.
l. 7. r. to determine, p. 27. l. 3. r. Dan. 2. p. 45. l. 13. r, then, p. 45. l.
7. r. our, p. 51. l. 39. r. heat, p. 57. l. 25. r. it is, p. 60. l. 28. d.
time, p. 65. l. 2. r. and agreement, l. 32. r. danger, p. 84. l. 22. r. oppose,
p. 90. l. 10. r. an, l. 41. r. spiritual, p. 94. l. 6. r. reins, p. 111. l. 10.
r. there is, p. 102. l. 4. these words are to be inserted, who oppose the Beast,
if the Beast be the Pope and Papacy. The next Psalm. 2. 1, 2, 3. cannot be meant
of the Protestant Princes or Prelates, p. 111. l. 40. r. whole.


