A POSITION CONCERNING PERSECUTION.
That Religion that persecutes a Righteous People for their Conscience toward
God, is not worthy to be joined to, but to be had in Abomination by all sober
People, as a Religion abhorred of God, and of all that truly know him.
This is manifest by that which follows.

1. FIrst, Its Pedigree or Race is thereby made manifest to be of the Evil one,
and of affinity with Cain, and the persecuting Pharisees. Cain was the first of
that Race that slew his Brother about Religion: and wherefore slew he him? even
because his own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous, says the
Scripture, 1 John 3.12. And even so it is now; The persecuting spirit seeks to
slay a People more righteous than it self. So it has been, so it is, and so it
will be, as long as that spirit is permitted to act its part: and when it has
done, it must be turned out with its first father Cain, and be a vagabond from
the Lord, and from the offspring of his People. Therefore consider and fear,
all ye that are tainted therewith.

The Pharisees, they gave place in themselves to the same spirit, under a
pretense of Zeal and Holiness, as if by persecuting they would root out
abominable Doctrines and Heresies contrary to Godliness, and contrary to
established Traditions, delivered them of God, and his holy Prophets: But they
perceived not in themselves that rotten root of enmity from whence this spirit
sprang, and was influenced and stirred up: And therefore instead of rooting out
what they would have rooted out, they rooted out themselves, out of the
Inheritance of God, and cut off their Names from being the Disciples of Christ.
And as it was with them, so will it be with all that follow them, in the same
spirit of Persecution: And a short time will henceforth manifest it. The
Pharisees thought to preserve themselves by rooting out and suppressing others,
but the Wisdom of God turned it quite otherwise. They said, If we let them
alone, all men will believe on this man, and join to him, and the Romans will
come and take away our place and Nation: therefore they thought Persecution was
the way to prevent that. But mark the Counsel and Wisdom of God: That way which
they took to prevent their ruin and scattering, even that thing provoked the
Lord to send the Romans to take away their place and Nation. And so that which
they feared came upon them, because they would not suffer the innocent Seed,
nor embrace it as the offspring of God. And these things were written for
examples to them that come after them; that they may be wise by others falls;
and may learn to kiss the Son, and his little ones, lest he be angry, and they
perish out of the way, when his wrath is but a little kindled, Psalm. 2.

2. Consider that this Spirit that persecutes, be it in whom it will, it is but
of the flesh, not of the Spirit of the Lord: for so the Scripture witnesses,
Gal. 4.29. But as it was then, he that was born after the flesh persecuted him
that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now. But, (mark the event!) What
says the Scripture? (that whereof one tittle shall not fail till all be
fulfilled) Cast out the Bondwoman and her son, (that is, he that is born after
the flesh and persecutes) for the son of the Bondwoman shall not be heir with
the son of the Freewoman. Mark! The portion of this Spirit that persecutes is
to be cast out; it shall not be Heir with Christ in his Kingdom.

3. Again, The Root of this Persecuting spirit is in that evil one which is
called Apollyon, not in the saving Spirit which has its name JESUS. Apollyon,
is Destroyer, ( Rev. 9.11.) the Spirit has given that name to that nature; as
he has given the name Savior or Jesus to the contrary nature. Thou shall call
his name JESUS, for he shall save, etc. And says he, The Son of man is not
come to destroy men's lives, but to save. Therefore the Destroyer can find no
place in him, he has no root nor foundation there; but the Persecutors Root,
from whence he springs, is in Apollyon, that spirit that is contrary to Jesus,
and shall go into Perdition.

4. The Persecutors of the Innocent for Conscience Sake, have not the knowledge
of God and of Christ. Joh. 16.3. These things will they do unto you, because
they know not the Father nor me. The reason why men persecute, is, because they
are ignorant of God. And their Persecution of others, is a manifest
demonstration of their ignorance of God. He that knows all men's hearts, and
comprehends all their knowledge, has spoken it. A prate or talk of God and his
Attributes, he accounts not the knowledge of God: for so, many Persecutors can
talk largely enough. But he that knows the Father and the Son, is by that
knowledge (according to the measure of it) sunk into the Nature of him known;
and his Image renewing thereby, will appear in that person that knows him. For
the knowledge of God is not a dead fruitless knowledge; but it is Life eternal,
and raises up life in man, that he begins to live in the Image of God, whom now
he begins to see and know. As he sees God, who is Light, so he begins to walk
in the Light, and becomes a Child of Light, not of darkness: As he sees God,
who is Love, and feels him so; so he receives the Image of his Nature by
Impression upon his spirit, from that Spirit of God that gives the knowledge of
God; and so he begins to live in that Nature also: and now being come to the
feeling of the true Love, and beginning to spring up in that (which indeed is
the true knowledge of God who is Love) he will now do no harm to his Neighbor:
Persecution now cease in him, being slain from the right ground, even from
his knowing and feeling what God is: But while this persecuting spirit remains
in any unslain and unsubdued, its an evident token that they are not yet come
to the true Knowledge of God, and of Christ, how highly soever they account of
themselves, or are accounted of by others, for Christianity; he that denies
this, must oppose the Words of the Son of God, who came to set Truth in the
Earth: and woe will be to him that is found in the gainsaying of the Truth that
he witnessed from the Father. So then, all Persecutors being destitute of the
Knowledge of the Father and the Son, what Religion can they set up, out a
persecuting Religion, which has not the Knowledge of God and of Christ in it?

Therefore let all that join themselves to Persecutors, consider to whom they
join themselves; It Is not to God, but to his enemies, that know Him not, nor
his Children, though they think they do God service in persecuting.

5. Again, Persecutors do not stand in wholesome counsel, as among men. Gamaliel
will rise up in Judgment against them; He was a wise Counselor; and he gave
this counsel in his time; Let these men alone: if their way be of men, it will
come to naught; But if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; and besides this,
lest perhaps ye be found fighters against God. Mark! here is a fruitless work,
and a dangerous work: fruitless in that they cannot overthrow it: and dangerous
in that they run a hazard of fighting against God, while they seek to
overthrow. So much Gamaliel could warn them of. But mark what was said to Saul,
and you will see further, that Persecution of the Innocent is beyond all
Perhaps, and is possitively a fighting against God, and no less than the
persecuting of Christ himself; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? You see
Saul was fighting against God, and wist it not. Therefore be warned, all ye
that persecute the Innocent for their Conscience toward God.

6. Persecutors and Rooters out even of the Tares, stand in direct opposition
and defiance to the Command of Christ; for he has said, Let alone. This very
Question of Rooting out, is plainly and punctually propounded, and resolved by
him under the Parable of the Tares, Mat. 13.28, 29. Shall we gather out the
Tares, say the Servants? No, says Christ, Let alone: And he has given the
Reason also, sufficient to satisfy any rational man; Lest ye pluck up
therewith Wheat: Rather than any Wheat be plucked up, he will have the Tares to
grow with it, until the Harvest. And he has told us, whose office that shall
be to gather out the Tares, and when, verse. 40, 41. What can be more punctual?

Therefore none can attempt that work without open presumption and defiance to
his Command: The Son of Man, who is the sower of the good Seed, knew that the
Tares could not be gathered out without danger to the good Seed; therefore he
has not permitted it to be done, for the good Seeds sake. Now this is the best
pretense that Persecutors can have for themselves, namely, To purge the Church
from the Tares that would infest the Wheat: But Christ himself has stripped them
of this shelter; and has put a bar to this work, for the good Seeds sake: and
indeed it is the good Seed commonly that Persecutors fall upon: Tares are but a
pretense, and that a rotten one too, seeing Christ has forbidden that. Now, if
they fall upon that which the Son of Man, the Seeds-man, has such care of,
consider how acceptable will this be to Him that has so expressed his care of
the Wheat: will not his Anger be kindled? Yes surely; for if his Anger may be
expected for not kissing the Son, Psalm. 2. much more for going about to kill
the Son, and to destroy Him.

The former Powers were told the danger of these things, but they not
regarding, but falling upon this Stone, have dashed themselves to pieces: and
so must all that follow the same steps; for the Scriptures shall be fulfilled.

7. He that hates his Brother, is a Murderer; and no Murderer has eternal
Life abiding in him, 1 John 3.15. Here is the height of wickedness, that which
God will not suffer to go unrevenged, namely, Murder: He that hates his
Brother stands in it; he stands a Murderer before the Lord; and is so
pronounced here by his Servant: for the root of Murder is alive in him in
hating his Brother. If the Persecutor of the Righteous say, he loves his
Brother whom he persecutes, he is also a Liar as well as a Murderer; For, Love
does no ill to his Neighbor, but teaches to do to him, as we would it should
be done to us. And therefore our Lord and Master, Christ Jesus, the innocent
Lamb of God, and our Leader, charged home these two things upon the Pharisees,
his Persecutors, who sought his destruction, and told them, Ye are of your
Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye are willing to do: He was a
Murderer from the beginning, and stood not in the Truth, because there is no
truth in him: When he speaks a lie, he speaks of his own; for he is a Liar,
and the Father thereof.

Consider therefore all ye that persecute the Innocent, and would cover it with
a lie, as the Pharisees would have done, who went before you in that nature; I
say, let it enter into your hearts, to take notice how you stand before the
Lord, that you are already pronounced Murderers in hating your Brother; and
fear the powerful hand of the Lord, and repent of the thoughts of your hearts
against the Innocent; For he that touches an innocent person, touches the
Apple of God's Eye: Let your hatred be turned into Love, and embrace the Son in
his Servants that fear Him, lest his Anger be kindled against you, and ye
perish out of his way, as others have done.

8. This is the great Character of the great Whore, namely to destroy and drink
the Blood of the Servants of the Lord: In her is found Blood, etc. And
therefore the nearer that any come to this, the more they partake with the
great Whore in her Sins; and the more they shall partake with her in her
Plagues.

9. Persecutors of the Innocent for Conscience sake, are usurpers of God's
Throne and Prerogative; for God requires that the Conscience be subjected unto
Him; and he has not given that Prerogative to any man or men upon Earth, to
have the Consciences of men subjected to them singly, but only wherein his
Authority binds them: and in matter of Worship, it is plain that his Authority
has set free all men from the Traditions of men. In vain therefore is that
worship that has no better a foundation than man's commanding of it. In vain,
says Christ (using the words of the Prophet) do ye worship me, teaching for
Doctrines the Precepts of men.

Therefore in this point our Liberty by Christ is proclaimed, and we ought to
stand fast in it: and he that requires the contrary, stands opposite to Christ
and his Work; forces men to that which Christ has proclaimed to be vain
worship; and also is an usurper of God's Prerogative, in seeking to have the
Consciences of men subjected unto him: And let all such usurpers of God's
Throne and Prerogative, consider, that God will not give his Glory to another;
but he will assuredly throw them out of his Throne, as a stone out of a sling;
and He will redeem the Consciences of his People out of the hands of all such;
for these are redeeming times; and the time draws on that the holy Apostles of
the Lamb long ago had an eye after groaning in themselves, and waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body: And there is something of this
secretly stamped upon the hearts of men; even to look after better things, a
better Kingdom, better times, though they put this far off from themselves in
the particular; for that noble spark of God in man, though it be imbondaged it
self in man, yet has in it a groaning after liberty, yea, after the liberty of
the Sons of God. There has been a time, and that a long time, granted to the
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, to sit in the Temple of God, over the Throne
of God, for the punishing of all them that love unrighteousness; and strong
delusions have been sent upon them to enslave their Consciences (their most
noble part) unto men, because they loved not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness; and so Antichrists kingdom is full of slaves: but that time is
wearing out, and passing over; and God will turn his hand against that proud
Spirit that durst usurp his Throne, and Prerogative over men's Consciences, in
imposing the matters of his Worship upon them, without his command, after their
own inventions and traditions, for the fulfilling of their own lusts, and
earthly ends, and advantages. When the King of Assyria had done God's scourging
work upon Israel, then the Lord takes notice of the proud heart of the King of
Assyria in that work, and calls him to an account for helping forward the
affliction, though upon a people that had transgressed: how much more will he
do it for a people that subject their Consciences in his Worship and Service
singly to him, and walk inoffensively and harmlesly among men in their
generation?

The Apostles of Christ Jesus, they durst not challenge power over men's Faith
and Conscience, in imposing upon them what the Spirit commanded not; which
thing of right had belonged to them, if to any, the Conscience and Faith being
that which their work was exercised about. Therefore for them to look for it,
whose work is to regulate the civil life of men, and to bear the Sword for
Transgressors, to keep them in peace, that they may not destroy one another,
nor the Righteous, this is an usurpation which the Apostles durst not challenge
to themselves.

10. Again, Persecution argues a want of Truth on that part that persecutes:
For wherefore do they fly to carnal weapons (such as the Apostles never used to
subdue error with) and lay aside spiritual Weapons, such as the Apostles did
use, and appointed to be used, for the stopping of the mouths of gainsayers? Is
it not because they distrust their own weapons, or find themselves foiled, and
not sufficiently defended by them, and therefore fly to Clubs, and Stocks, and
Prisons, and Fines, and Traps, and Snares, and such like carnal weapons, for
help? and so instead of laying their spiritual weapon to the Conscience, they
use carnal weapons against the body and life, and outward being of people, and
disturb and disquiet their outward life.

11. Therefore, lastly, consider the end of Persecutors: They put the Innocent
to trouble, therefore it is a righteous thing with God to render tribulation to
them again. God is pleased, now and then to give manifest examples of his
Justice upon persons that wrong and harm others; to let the Earth see, that
there is a Revenger of Wrongs, that takes notice: and this he does often for
one wicked man against another: how much more then will he avenge the Cause of
the Innocent, whom the World has nothing against (because their lives are
honest and unblameable) but only create Accusations and Traps against them in
the matters of their God? as Nebuchadnezzars Princes and Counselors did
against Daniel. I tell you he will avenge them speedily, says Christ Jesus.
Shall they subject their Consciences to God alone, to be guided and directed by
him, and shall they be ensnared and trapped by men for so doing, and will not
God avenge them? Yes surely, Their Judgment slumbers not, who shall so abuse
the Heritage of God, and usurp his Throne, to sit upon the Consciences of his
Servants. For consider, if it shall be imputed as so great a crime against men,
I was naked, and ye clothed me not; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; a
stranger, and ye took me not in; sick, and in Prison, and ye visited me not: If
that will be accounted so great a crime; what will be said then to them that
rob them of their Apparel, meat, drink, health, liberty? of whom it may be
said, I had meat for my self and Family, but you took it out of their mouths;
I had apparel, but you robbed me of it; I had a habitation, but you cast me
out of it; I had health and liberty, but you cast me into Prisons and holes,
and robbed me of both: for in as much as ye did it to one of the least of these
my Brethren, ye did it unto me. If the other shall be taken notice of that did
not help in time of need, what shall be said to these who did such injuries and
wrongs to the least of the Servants of the Lord! It is worthy of your most
serious thoughts to ponder it, all ye that would be rooting out, who have not
minded the Premonition of our Lord Jesus Christ to the contrary.

These things are written in love to the Righteous, who suffer Persecution; and
in love to the Unrighteous who do persecute, that (if the Lord please to give
you an ear) you may be kept from that great and desolating wickedness, which
often immediately foreruns a Peoples destruction. It was the topping up of
Isreal's sins when they were led captive into Babylon. It was the topping up of
the sins of the Jews also, when their Nation was left unto them desolate, after
the days of Christ. It almost ruined the Papists in England, even their
Persecution in the days of Queen Mary. And whether it was not the ground of
the late long Wars in England let wise men consider: As also, whether it was
not the desolating of that People that had been made successful in the Wars, by
the immediate hand and strength of God, beyond their own prudence and visible
power many times, as most parties have acknowledged. And now, if it be kept on
foot still, whether it may not presage Ruin and Desolation to them that
continue therein?

And it is to be minded by all, That No Law of man, or other pretense, will
excuse any man in this matter. He that partakes in Babylons sins, (whereof this
is none of the least) may expect to partake of Babylons plagues. And all are
guilty, as partakers, from the most violent actor in Persecution, to him that
stands by and consents thereto in his heart. Paul charged that against himself,
that he stood by and consented to the death of Stephen. To be angry with our
Brother without a cause, Christ brings within the Law of Murder; how much more
to persecute him without a cause will make one guilty?

Let these things be weighed in all you that have any regard of God or man in
your hearts, and let all bitterness and wrath and hatred be repented of, and be
cast out; and let the Love of God arise in your hearts toward one another, to
preserve the outward life of one another, as God does yours, lest the measure
ye mete to others be measured to you again.

W. T.

THE END.

