AN Awakening Voice TO THE PAPISTS, Declaring to them The Fallen State of the
POPE from PETER's, and of the Church of Rome from what it once was.

In Love to the Souls of those who have any Uprightness in their Hearts toward
the Lord (but through Ignorance are held in Bondage) that they may be Awaked,
and see where they lie.

And if any shall smother these things, lest they should come to the Sight or
Knowledge of that People, let them take heed, that they bring not upon
themselves the Guilt of their Blood.

William Tomlinson

Printed in the Year 1673.

AN Awakening Voice TO THE PAPISTS, Declaring to them The Fallen State of the
POPE from PETER's, and of the Church of Rome from what it once was.
WHen I look back, and view that pure State and Condition of that Ancient
Church of Christ, which was first planted at Rome by Paul (as I suppose) that
chosen Vessel of the Lord, and afterward Watered by him, and Refreshed and
Conforted, and Instructed, and Strengthened by his Ministry, and by his Epistle
to them, which is full of Heavenly Doctrine and Consolation; and when I compare
their State now with their Condition then, the words of the Prophet Isaiah
concerning Jerusalem, Isa. 1.
arise in my mind concerning Rome, How is the Faithful City become an Harlot!
It was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderers. Thy
Silver is become Dross, thy Wine Mixed with Water; thy Princes are Rebellious,
and Companions of Thieves, every one loves Gifts, and follows after Rewards;
they judge not the Fatherless, neither does the Cause of the Widow come before
them: Therefore thus says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the Mighty one of
Israel, Ah! I will ease me of mine Adversaries, and avenge me of mine Enemies.

As is befell Israel, so it has herein happened to Rome; That as they fell from
a more Entire State, to a Corrupt and Rebellious, so has Rome fallen from that
Integrity and Purity which the Church of Christ there, was first brought forth
in, to a Corrupt, Erroneous, and Dismally Dark Condition, and is become a very
Sink of Sin and Wickedness: And therefore the Words of the Prophet do every way
as aptly fit her condition, as they did the Israelites of old.

You that are of her Alliance, look not upon these words as Railing; for my
Heart is not in Bitterness against you; but in Compassion to you for your Good,
it desires to set before you something of the Danger you lie under, and
consider it not; being involved in Darkness by Principles that have risen out
of the Bottomless Pit, but were never taught by Christ, and thereby are you
held as in Chains under the Dominion of the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition.
Neither are these words Railing, as I shall make it manifest to you that have
Eyes to see, and Hearts to consider thereof.

I say therefore, in plain and open terms, The Popes, to whom you subject your
selves, they are not what you take them to be; nor can they do that for you
which you expect from them: They cannot give you Pardon for your Sins, being
themselves in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. Think not these
Harsh or Rash Words; I will prove them to be so, and that from Peter, whom they
boast of, as if they were his Successors. And do you also learn with me the
same Lesson from Peter, that you may the better know both your own state and
your Popes.

Take your Bibles and Testaments, if you have any, and read Acts 8. where you
will find, That when the Gospel was first planted in Samaria, there was one
Simon, who beforetime had used Sorcery in the same City, and bewitched the
people of Samaria, giving out, that himself was some great One; to whom they
all gave heed, from the least to the greatest, saying, This is the Great Power
of God (thus the blind people took the Powers of Darkness to be the great Power
of God) But this Simon the Sorcerer, beholding the Miracles which Philip did,
and hearing the Doctrine: of Life held forth by him, believed, and was baptized,
and continued with Philip as a right Discipie. Then the Church at Jerusalem,
hearing that Samaria had received the Word of God, they sent unto them Peter
and John, who prayed for them, that they might receive the Gift of the Holy
Ghost; for as yet he was fallen upon none of them, only they were baptized in
the Name of the Lord Jesus; then laid they their Hands on them, and they
received the Holy Ghost. Now Simon Magus (as we may call him for Distinction
sake) he was with them and remained all this while as a Disciple of Christ, and
undiscovered to be what he was: Well, how came he to be discovered? What was
the Discovery of him? (mark it) even that carnal thought of his Heart
concerning the Gifts of God, and the Mysteries of his Kingdom, that they might
be purchased with Money, and he manifested this his Thought by his Words, in
offering Money to the Apostles for that Power, to give the Holy Ghost, as they
did. Then said Peter to him, ver. 20, etc. Thy Money perish with thee, because
thou have thought that the Gift of God may be purchased with Money; thou have
neither Part nor Lot in this matter, for thy Heart is not right in the Sight of
God; repent therefore of this thy Wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
Thought of thy Heart may be forgiven thee; for I perceive that thou art in the
Gall of Bitterness and in the Bond of Iniquity. Observe, there was nothing at
all objected against him of his former Sorcery, in Way of Discovery of his
Condition, but only this present Thought of his Heart, that the Gift of God was
to be purchased with Money, Now if that Thought discovered such a Condition
then, it discovers the same now, and at all times, and in all Persons,
wheresoever it is found. It is a certain Discovery, and by it Peter certainly
perceived him to be in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity, and saw
that his Heart was not right in the Sight of God, and therefore excluded him
from having my Part or Lot in those matters of giving the Gift of the Holy
Ghost.

Now if any (...) what is this to the Pope? I answer, He has the same thought,
therefore he is in the same Condition with Simon Magus. That he has the same
thought appears manifestly because he sets at Sale the Pardon of Sins, a Gift
of God, which cannot be purchased with Money. If you say, He knows better, and
has not such a Thought as Simon Magus had. I answer either he has such a
Thought, or he has not. If he has not such a Thought, but knows better, and
that the Gift of God cannot be purchased with Money, then is he the vilest
Wretch and greatest Cheat in the World, to set that at Sale for Money, which he
knows cannot be purchased with Money, and so to delude the Souls of Thousands
and Thousands to their Perdition, in making them believe and depend upon his
Pardon, and to purchase it with Money. If he has such a Thought then he is
where Simon Magus was, in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. And in
the Authority of the Truth I declare him to be so, and that his Heart is not
right with God, and that he has neither Part nor Lot in this matter of giving
the Gift of God, which cannot be purchased with Money. And whereas he boasts of
Peter as being his Successor; by Peter's Words is he cut off from Peter, and
grafted into Simon Magus, and so is Successor in his Spirit to Simon Magus, and
what help can you expect from such a one.

You that are learned among the Papists, for shame a wake out of your
Sluggishness, and inform your People better, and let them understand the Danger
they are in, who thus hazard their Souls upon a Man that is one with Simon
Magus in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity.

Let it be granted you that Peter was at Rome, and that he and Paul abode
there, and instructed the Church there: What will this avail as to Succession
of Peter. It is not succeeding in Place or in any outward Concern that makes a
Man a true Successor of those Holy Servants of the Lord; but only a continuing
in the same Spirit and Doctrine. Now the Pope continues in neither, he is of
another Spirit, contrary to Peter's: Nor does he abide in Peter's Doctrine, as
will be manifest from Peter's Words. That he is of another Spirit is plain by
what has been already said, Peter judged him that thought the Gift of God
might be purchased with Money, he judged him by that very Thought to he in the
Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. But the Pope being blinded and not
savouring aright the Things of God, he does not judge so of them that have the
same thought now. If he did, he must needs judge himself to be such a one, and
all the Popes that ever have been, who have set to Sale their Pardons and
Indulgencies; for the Buying and the Selling of the Gifts of God for Money
arise both from one Thought, to wit, That the Gift of God may be purchased for
Money, and so both are in the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity. The
refore be not deluded in thinking him to be Peter's Successor, because he may
be in the same City, where Peter once was, and there usurp Authority over the
Consciences of People, which was never given of God. For he is a Stranger to
Peter's Spirit, yea and is grossly ignorant of, or rebelliously disobedient to
Peter's Doctrine, as I shall further demonstate from Peter's own Words, 1 Pet.
5. Peter writing to the Churches, exhorts the Elders of them after this manner.
The Elders which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder and a Witness of
the Sufferings of Christ, and also a Partaker of the Glory that shall be
revealed (now mark his Exhortation) Feed the Flock of God which is among you,
taking the Oversight thereof, not by Constraint, but willingly, not for filthy
Lucre, but of a ready Mind, neither as being Lords over God's Heritage, but
being Ensamples to the Flock; and when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye
shall receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not away.

From this Doctrine of Peter the Pope differs in many things.

1. He does not make it his Business to feed the Flock of Christ, as Peter did,
and as he exhorted other Elders to do, to whom he commends the Episcopacy, or
Care to watch over their Souls. And there was never any appointed Bishops among
all the Churches, by any of the Apostles, but in Order to that Work of feeding
the Flock. But the Pope has found out a new Work even to rule Nations with the
Carnal Sword, as the Princes of the Nations do, which was in plain Words
forbidden by Christ, Mat. 20.25, 26. Ye know that the Princes of the Gentiles
exercise Dominion ever them, and they that are Great exercise Authority upon
them, but is shall not be so among you. What can be spoken plainer? Therefore
Peter here exhorts the Elders, does not thunder them with a Domineering Bull,
as the Popes do, but exhorts them to their Duty. And Paul, he says plainly,
The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, 2 Cor. 10.4. Let the Pope show where
he has his Fellow among all the Churches of Christ in the Apostles Days or
for many Generation after, where any were chosen Bishops but to feed the Flock;
he is grown as far different from the Apostles, yea, from the many succeeding
Bishops of Rome after the Apostles Days, as a Leopard or Wolf is from a Lamb,
as may easily be made manifest.

2. He differs from Peter's Doctrine in desire of filthy Lucre; Not for filthy
Lucre, says the Apostle. But the Pope out of his desire of filthy Lucre, sets
at sale what he accounts the Gift of God, as is showed already, unless he will
blasphemously say, that the Pardon of Sin is not the Gift of God, but his own
exclusively. And I cannot think that the Pope is so palpable a blaspheming
Miscreant as to say so, though he blasphemes in other things, which he perhaps
is not aware of, and which may in due Place be minded, if God will. But here I
desire the Reader to note, that what is here said of the Pope, is applied not
to any one particular Man of them only, but to that State of the Popedom, which
makes them all guilty of these things that come into it.

3. The Pope has turned his Back of these Words of Peter, Not as being Lords
over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock. That he Lords it over
God's Heritage is so manifest in the World that I think few will deny it, it
being so apparent that he Lords it both over the Bodies, Souls, Consciences and
Estates of People. I think Kings and Potentates may bear Testimony of this, as
well as others, seeing they have felt his Power in dis-throning some and
enthroning others, and waiting attendance at his Gates till he was pleased to
look upon them. Oh Lucifer whether art thou risen! dare thou look Peter in
the Face? that Holy Humble Servant of the Lord, whom thou boasts of as his
Successor? No, that Pure, Holy Humble, Heavenly Presence of Peter, if thou
should behold it would smite thee to the Dust; thou art not able to behold
his Words without Guilt upon thy Conscience, much less his Presence. How can
thou look these Words in the Face, Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage?
If any shall say, he is not a Lord over God's Heritage; let him show how many
Degrees higher he can be then he is, and how he can Lord it more then he does
over Men's Bodies and Consciences, thundering out his Eulls against those that
break from under his Yoke, and flee from under his Bondage for the saving of
their Souls; and so setting his Subjects against them, and animating them to
destroy such.

4. And for being an Ensample to the Flock, he is far from that, from being
such an Ensample as Peter would have him; for certainly Peter who was so well
acquainted with the Lamb of G^d, Christ Jesus our Lord, would have Elders and
Bishops to hold forth his Example to the People, Meekness, Lowliness of Mind, a
Saving Spirit that came not to destroy but to save. Now if we look no further
then these principal things: How can a Proud Man be an Example of Humility? How
can a Lofty Mind that exalts it self beyond all Patterns of Holy Apostles or
Bishops, be an Example of Lowly Mindedness? How can be that smites Righteous
Men, be an Example of meekness in Suffering for Righteousness Sake? How can he
who destroys harmless Men's Lives who suffer for their conscience Sake, be an
Example of saving Men's Lives? He whose Principles lead to Blood, how can he
hold forth the Example of Christ the Savior, who came not to destroy but to
save? but the Popes have been Examples of the contrary, of Cruelty, of
Persecution, of Blood. Therefore from their Examples and Principles, what
Beating, what Stocking, what Imprisoning, what Tortures and Cruclties, what
Hanging and Burning with Fire and Faggot, what Massacrees and Inhuman
Butcheries have been committed and acted by their Subjects? Oh, the Cry of
Blood cries loud against thee, thou Bloody Mystery of Iniquity. And thou Froud
Lucifer who art got to the Top-Stone thereof, and binds all the Building
together and sits as Head, how is thy Countenance stained with Blood? the World
rings with thy Cruelties and Massacrees. Is this that wherein Peter bid thee be
an Example to the Flock? Art thou his Successor herein? for shame hide thy
Face, come down and hide thee in the Dust, and wash thy Bloody Face, that thou
may behold Peter with a better Countenance. Was ever any of Christ's
Disciples encouraged or countenanced from Christ to do so? But shall I set
before thee what Race thou art of, Thy Name is Apollyon, or at least wise thou
art grafted into that Spirit that is Apollyon or Destroyer, and quite out off
from Peter, for all thy Boasting of him, and thou art a Pattern of
Blood-Guiltiness, and not of Love in saving the Lives of Men. If any be minded
to take up the Pope's Cause for him, let him show where Apoll^on is to be
found; or Abaddon, as it is called in the Hebrew Tongue, both which signify a
Destroyer; let them show, I say, within all the Compass of Christendom (as it
is called) or among all that profess Christianity, where that destroying Spirit
is to be found that exceeds all others in destroying, if it be not among the
Papists. As for the Protestants (though they have too much tincture yet of that
Spirit) yet they have not committed such Cruelties and Butcheries of Massacrees
upon the Papists as the Papists have acted upon them; neither have they made
such Shambles of Papist's Flesh and Blood, as the Papists have made of theirs
in their public Cities and Towns, where they have had Power. So that neither
in Way of Judicature, nor in the confused Tumults of Massacrees have they done
like the Papists. When did they ever act like that which was done in our Nation
in Queen Mary's Days, or like the Massacres done in Ireland of later Years?
not to mention the many cruel and bloody Massacrees in Foreign Nations. Now
tell me, where must we find Apollyon, but where the greatest Destroyers be? and
he is their King over them. If you can find out another besides the Pope, or
that Spirit which acts the Papists in such Cruelties, I am willing to give Ear
to it; but if you cannot, then know by whom you are acted in such things, and
whose Example you follow; whether Peter's or the Pope's, for they are not both
alike, one holding forth Christ's Example, the other a quite contrary, after
which his Subjects walk, and therefore are they found so guilty of these
things. For if he did hold forth the same Ensample as Peter did, his Followers
would be likeminded; as it was and is with the true Disciples of Christ Jesus
our Lord, who take him for an Example, none of them are Destroyers of Men's
Lives for their Religion.

5. One Difference more still here appears between Peter and the Pope, from
these very Words of Peter before mentioned. The Pope has made a Distinction
among his Believers, thus, some he calls Clergy, and some he calls Laity: The
Flock or Body of his Believers he calls Laity, whereas Peter calls the Plock
that believed in Christ, and were to be sed and nourished with the Word of
Life, Peter calls them (...), or Clergy, that is Heritage or Lot, so he calls
the Body of true Believers God's Lot or Heritage, and the Pope applies that
only to his Clergy who are in his Holy Orders (as he accounts them) thus he
has cast off the Form of Peter's sound words, and has taken up another
unsound Form of Words contrary to Peter of whom he boasts. And the Protestents
have not yet reformed themselves thoroughly in that particular, but they still
call their Priests or Teachers Clergy, and the rest-Laity; as much as to say,
the Common People. Thus as the State of the Popish Church is fallen from its
Purity, so their Language is also changed with it. And seeing the Pope (who
boasts of being Peter's Successor) has thus degenerated from the written
Tradition of Peter; what safe ground can any have to believe him in those he
calls unwritten Traditions?

Thus you may see what a vast Difference there is between Peter and the Pope,
who pretends to descend from him. 1. Peter fed the Flock, and exhorted the
Elders who were to be Bishops over the Flock, to feed them. 2. Not to seek
after filthy Lucre (as the Pope does) 3. Not to Lord it over God's Heritage or
Flock (as the Pope does) 4. But to be good Ensamples to the Flock (which the
Pope is not) Such Bishops as these Peter appointed. And for any other sort of
Bishops, as Universal Bishop, or Lording Bishop, there is no footing in
Scripture for such a one, from any of the Writings of the Holy Apostles and
Servants of the Lord; but against them there is sufficient Testimony of
Scripture, as this of Peter, and that of Christ himself before mentioned, Mat.
20.25, 26. It shall not be so among you, says Christ. So also Paul, the first
Planter at Rome that the Scriptures mentions, and the Lords chosen Vessel
which, 1 Cor 8.6. To us there is but one Lord, Jesus Christ. I^ the World there
may be those that are called Gods, many, and Lords many; but to us who are the
Church of Christ and his Servants, to us there is but one Lord Jesus Christ;
not another Universal Lord, or Universal Bishop, nor any other Lords under him,
for to us there is but one Lord. Therefore these Lords greater or lesser,
universal or particuiar, cannot claim any right thereto over the Church of
Christ, from him, or from Peter, or from Paul, being denied by every one of
them. To whom then will they turn for their Foundation and Authority? Let them
look to it as they will answer it before the only Lord that bought us, that we
should be his Freemen and Servants to him, and not the Slaves of Men in our
Consciences, as they are made in the Mystery of Iniquity, Babylon the grear,
the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, Rev. 18.13.

Let us view this Mystery a little further which is headed with such a Monster,
that is got up above all Kings, Princes Emperors, and see how it suits with
that which was foretold of it by Paul that chosen Vessel of the Lord, 2 These.
2. He speaking there of the Day of Christ, satisfies the Brethren, that it was
not at hand, nor should come, till there had been a falling away first, and the
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition be revealed. And then gives them a little
touch of him, that he might be known when he appeared. And thus he describes
him, ver. 4. of that Chapter, Who opposes and exalts himself above all that
is called God, or that is worshipped: So that he as God sits in the Temple
of God, showing himself that he is God. This is the Apostles Description of him
that was to arise in the falling away, and was to be the Top-Stone in the
Mystery of Iniquity. Now let us make search, and see where we can find one that
answers this Description like as the Pope does. Who is there that sits in
the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, and exalting himself above
all that is called God, or that is worshipped? who is there that has risen in
the Apostasy, and does so besides the Pope? I know that some honest people
sensible of a Mystery of Iniquity working Inwardly in the Heart, and not
minding that which was to appear outwardly, do apply all Inwardly that is
spoken of it; but I must desire them and others to consider. 1. That the
Mystery of Iniquity here spoken of by the Apostle, was not yet risen in the
Apostles Days when he spoke of it, only he saw it working to get up: But it
was to be let or hindered, until he that did let was taken out of he Way or
he was an Enemy also that should let it, and therefore was to be taken out of
the Way; but the Inward Mystery of Iniquity in the Heart was always the same.
2. I would have them to consider, that the man of Sin, the Son of Perdition
which the Apostle spoke of, was not to be revealed till that which withheld
the Mystery of Iniquity was taken out of the Way. And so it had its appointed
time of working, of getting up, of being revealed, and of being headed by that
man of Sin; and also of being consumed and destroyed, as is evident from this
forenamed Chapter, 2 These. 2. I would not have any think that I speak against
the searching out of that Inward Mystery of Iniquity lying and lurking in the
Hearts of Men; but its my present Work to discover something of that false
Mystery that has risen up as a compacted Body pollitick or City, and is
headed by a particular person, in Imitation of the Body of Christ, and of
Christ the one Head thereof, but under that shape a Devourer and Destroyer, and
so has his Name Apollyon, and Son of Perdition. John calls him (...) Rev.
9.11. And Paul here calls him, (...), both from one root, which signifies
destroying, for he is a Destroyer, and must go into Destruction or Perdition;
and so Judas was called by the same Name, who betrayed the Innocent Blood; he
was called, (...), the Son of Perdition, but this must be another, and not
Judas; for Judas was gone to his place long before: but this Son of Perdition
was not yet risen; and rightly may this Shedder of Innocent Blood have the same
Name given him which was given to Judas, who betrayed the Blood of the
Innocent, seeing they both agree in one Spirit of committing Murder; there is
only this difference, that Judas had not a Mystery to act under, but this has
a Mystery of Iniquity to act his part under, which was not then risen in
Judas's time: and so that which then went for plain downright Treason and
Murder, now goes for something more plausible, that it may not be counted
Murder, but the just Judgment of God upon Heretics, or the just Censure of the
Church against Heretics: And then the people taught this bloody Tenent, That
it is no Sin to kill a Heritick, and so the great Murders of the Papists come
to be looked upon as good Service done to God. O horrid Mystery to make so
great a Crime, which is no where tolerated or countenanced by Christ or any of
his Apostles, but utterly forbidden, and the quite contrary taught by them; I
say, to make this look as a piece of Service done for God! So here the shedding
of Blood of Innocent persons has got a Mask over it, and is acted in a
Mystery. The greatest Crime how fair a pretense it has got! and so they that
are involved in this Mystery, they come to be drunken with the Blood of Saints,
and this stands as an inseparable Mark upon the Mystery of iniquity, Revel.
17.6. Blood of Saints, Blood of Martyrs. But how does this their Tenent and
Practice answer the Spirit of Christ Jesus our Lord, and of the Holy Apostles.
While he was in the Body, he went about doing good, but did no harm to any, nor
would suffer it to be done to any: And therefore he forbad James and John when
they would have called for Fire down from Heaven upon those that did not
receive him; it is said, he turned and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not what
Spirit ye are of; for the Son of Man is not come to destroy Men's Lives, but to
save them, Luke 9.55, 56. But you see that the Mystery of Iniquity is come for
another End, even to destroy Men's Lives. So when Pater drew his Sword and cut
of the Ear of Malchus, Servant to the high Priest, Jesus would not suffer it to
pass without healing it again, and says to Peter, put up thy Sword again into
his place, for all that take the Sword shall perish with the Sword, Mat. 26.52.
And Christ told his Disciples, that the time would come, that Men should put
them out of their Synagogues, yea and kill them, and think that in so doing
they did God Service, just as they do under the Mystery of Iniquity. But mark,
from what ground? These things will they do unto you, says he, because they
know not the Father nor me, John 16.3. So that you may see that Ignorance
(which among the Papists is counted the Mother of Devotion) is the ground of
murderring the Innocent. And such principles as this is part of that Smoke that
has risen, out of the bottomless pit of Men's Imaginations, and has darkened
the bright shining of the Gopel of Truth, and kept Men in the destroying
Nature, ignorant of God and of Christ. And he that opened this bottomless pit,
and let out such Smoke was a Star fallen from Heaven. The Angels or Ministers
of the Churches Christ called Stars, Apoc. 1.20. Now this was a star fallen, to
whom the Key of the Bottomless pit was given, who had power to open the pit.
This must needs be in the Churches of Christ, for there were the Stars. Now
what is the Use or power of a Key, but to let forth or shut in. This Star had
got that power that he could let forth smoke out of the bottomless pit: He
could establish Principles and Doctrines and Traditions of his own; and so open
the bottomless pit of Men's Inventions and Imaginations, for there is no bottom
to be found. And so here rises a smoke out of this pit which darkens the Sun,
the pure Light received from Christ. And so the bright Sunshine of Truth being
darkened with smoaky Imaginations of Men's Hearts, and Wisdom of the Flesh, out
comes the Locusts out of this smoke, who have Power to kill; and so comes in
the murdering Spirit again, which was once cast out by the Doctrine of Christ
and of his Holy Apostles. And the King over these murdering Locusts was he that
was the Angel of the bottomless pit, the Star that was fallen from Heaven, Rev.
9.1, 2, 3, 11. Thus you see whence was the reviving of the killing Spirit,
which had been prohibited by Christ: It was from a fallen Star, one that was
fallen from the pure Doctrine of Christ, and from an Innocent and Heavenly
Life, yet retained such Power from his place that he was in, that he could make
his own smoaky Imaginations take place, and his fleshly Wisdom, which works
contrary to the Wisdom of God. Thus this man of Sin being exalted above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped, you may understand what Power he
has, and whereto it tends. It works quite contrary to Christ Jesus and to the
Holy Apostles, though under pretense of honoring them, he bears up himself in
peoples Imaginations as Successor to them, and the chief Father in the Church
of Christ.

People open your Eyes, and be not so befooled with that doting blockish
principle, that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, but search the Scriptures,
and try all things, and hold fast that which is good, as you are exhorted in
the Scripture to do, 1 These. 5.21. And those at Berea that did so when Paul
preached to them were commended for it, and counted of a more Noble Spirit then
others, in that they would search and see with their own Eyes, and not take
things upon trust; therefore many of them believed, as you may read, Act.
17.10, 11, 12. Is it likely that Ignorance should make men more devout to God?
Have not the most knowing Men in the World been always the most devout to God?
Search the Scriptures from end to end and see? Begin at Enoch who saw Days
that are yet to come, so far of; was not be devout to God, think you, who had
this Testimony, that he walked with God? Was not Abraham devout toward God,
who foresaw the Day of Christ in his time and rejoiced? Did Moses want
Devotion? Did his being brought up in all the Learning of Egypt, or his great
Knowledge in all the Counsels of God make him less devout to God? Was David
less devout, because he made the Testimonies of the Lord his Delight and his
Meditation? and does not he pronounce him Blessed whose Delight is in the Law
of the Lord? Was Daniel less devout by understanding by Books the time of their
Captivity? O sottish principle, contrary to all Experience! have not the most
devout Men mentioned in Scripture been Men of deep Understanding in the things
of God? for shame you Teachers among the Papists, teach them better Doctrine,
and let it appear that you do so, by their Liberty and Boldness to search into
all Truth. For we know you do but lie if you say you teach them otherwise,
whilst they live according to that principle, and dare not search the
Scriptures. Do ye not remember that it was said of old, Hos. 4.6. My People are
destroyed for lack of Knowledge? What, do you delight in the Destruction of
people, that you keep them locked up by such a principle from searching the
Scriptures? Its a Doctrine to be abhorred by all Men, as fit only for Hell, and
the Kingdom and Children of Darkness, who hate the Light, lest their Deeds
should be discovered: But its not to be admitted among the Children of Light,
who are not of the Night, but of the Day, who love the Light, and bring their
Deeds to the Light, that they may be made manifest that they are wrought in
God. If the Pope and his Subjects were Children of the Day, they would not fear
the Light but love it, as all Children of the Light do. But being in Darkness
they love the Darkness, and its fit Doctrine for his Kingdom, to keep his
Subjects and Slaves in Darkness, lest they should discover his Abominations,
and so deliver their own Souls from under his Thraldom; for Ignorance is the
Mother of Devotion to him, and to the dead Forms of Worship, and vain
Repetitions and Traditions, which he keeps the People in Bondage to, for his
own Gain. But let him or any of his show from the Writings of the Holy Men of
God where ever such Doctrine was taught among them. Its he that has the Key of
the bottomless Pit that has taken away the Key of Knowledge, darkening the Sun
and the Air with his smoke: Its he that has let out that Doctrine out of the
bottomless Pit. Deliver your selves you poor deluded People, who are held
Captive in his Chains of Ignorance, under that serpentine Fallacy, that it is
the Mother of Devotion; for its only so to him, but not to God, who will have
the Knowledge of himself to be as the Waters that cover the sea, as he has
promised, and shall be fulfiled in due time. And therefore Peter opens to you
the Way to Knowledge, but this false Successor shuts up the Way to Knowledge.
Add to Faith Virtue (says Peter) and to Virtue Knowledge; and to Knowledge
Temperance, and to Temperance Patience, and to Patience Godliness, and to
Godliness Brotherly-Kindness, and to Brotherly-Kindness Love; for if these
things be in you and abound, 2 Pet. 1.
they make that you shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the Knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ; but he that lacks these things is blind and cannot see
far off, and in that Blindness would the Pope and his Agents keep you by
Doctrines of Darkness, lest you should see too far to be ruled by them.

If you did but quit your selves of that one principle of Darkness, and with
single Hearts search into Truth as the Bereans did, you would come to see many
more things of your own selves to be faulty. How easily might you see by the
Scripture the horrid Blasphemy of that Man of Sin, that such a one as Simon
Magus (who thinks that the Gift of God may be purchased with Money) should
claim so near Title to the unspotted, pure and holy Lamb of God, while he is in
the Gall of Bitterness and Bond of Iniquity; deluding your Souls with his
pretended pardons for Sin to rob you of your Money. But indeed he cannot sell
you that, nor give you that which he has no Power in.

Many other things are corrupted among you if I may not say all, and you are
far from that pure State in which the Church of Christ was at the first at
Rome. But these things were first presented in the Light before me to mind you
of, that if it be the good Will of the Lord some of you may have your Eyes
opened, that you may see to whom you enslave your Souls, and may flee out of
Babylon, lest you partake of her Sins, and so partake of her Plagues.

And if any of you shall be incensed against me for telling you the Truth, I
must bear it. For I write not these things in Contempt of any, or to vilify
any particular Person, but in Faithfulness and Compassion to your Souls, to lay
before you the State wherein you stand, enthrawled in your Spirits to a false
Power, no Successor of Peter, but of Simon Magus, a fallen Star, the Angel of
the bottomless Pit, King of the Destroyers, who has his Name Abaddon and
Apollyon, who is exalted above all that is called God, or that is worshipped;
and so seeing where you are, you that are simple-hearted, and have any Honesty
in your Hearts toward the Lord, you may be awakened to look about you, and to
quit your selves like men, and may seek after the Liberty of the Sons of God
and to serve him as his Free men, purchased by the Blood of Christ, from the
vain Traditions and Injunctions of men which the Lord has not commanded.

Other things still open themselves before me, which I would not hold back from
you, but as the Lord does open the Error of them to me, so to communicate the
same to you.

Your Beads, and set number of Prayers, and Crucifixes, and antic Crossings of
your selves, they are all Works of Darkness and of the Night, and not of the
Day, and will not abidethe Light. Think you that that God which searches the
Heart and Reins, and says, My Son give me thy Heart, that he delights in
Lip-labor, or in the Number of Prayers, insomuch that you stand in need of a
String full of Beads to count the number of your Prayers by? This is just to do
like the Heathen, who think to be heard for their much babbling and vain
Repetitions, which Christ forbad to his Disciples, Mat. 5.7, 8. And which the
Lord hated, and cried out against by his Prophets among the Jews. Isa. 1.15.
When you spread forth your Hands, I will hide mine Eyes from you; yea, when you
make many Prayers I will not hear; your hands are full of Blood. And its in
vain also for you, so long as you retain your Bloody Tenants, or Bloody
Thoughts, to expect to be heard of the Lord. God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth, for such the Father
seeks to worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. And they that so worship him they have a
better helper and remembrance then either Beads or Books. We know not what to
pray for as we ought, says the Apostle (to the ancient Church of Rome to whom
he writ) Romans 8.26, 27. But where is our Helper then? Not from Books or Beads,
but the Spirit helps our Infirmities. There was the Helper of the ancient
Church of Rome, and there is our Helper, one that knows the mind of our Spirit,
and makes Intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. There Is
the Helper of those that cannot tell how to utter a Word, and their groanings
are heard of the Lord, who searches the Hearts. And this Helper administers
Words also according to the Condition of the Heart, as there is need. But when
the Heart is far from him, then to draw near him with the Lips, this is but an
Abomination before him, and to offer up the Sacrifice of Fools, and so your
Beads are of no use, but in the offering up the Sacrifice of Fools. I wonder
that you your selves do not consider the Childishness, and Ridiculousness, and
Folly of them; they are so Ridiculous Childish Bables, that they are not worthy
to be mentioned by Christians, who should know a measure of the Spirit of
Christ in them to teach them to pray; know ye not that Christ is in you, except
you be Reprobate? reprobate to every good Work. But I shall come closer to your
Prayers then your Beads. Your Prayers themselves are all Abomination to the
Lord, with Beads or without Beads, by the help of Books or without them. Your
private Devotions or Prayers, and your public Prayers, all are Abomination to
the Lord, while your Hands are full of Blood, and your Hearts and Thoughts full
of Blood. Your Principles are bloody, your Practices are like them, full of
blood. Marketplaces, Stones in the Street will witness against you, that you
are a bloody People; your Prisons, your Inquisitions will witness against you,
and therefore your Prayers are an Abomination to the Lord. And it will not cure
the Sore; it will not hide your blood-guiltiness to say, they are Heretics;
they are Tares that we cut off, such as infest the good Wheat; they are
Troublers of the Church, and its no Sin to kill a Heretic. So indeed you are
taught, as by your Practices has sufficiently appeared to the World. But have
you never read what Christ said to those his servants who enquired of him,
whether they should pluck up the Tares or no, Math. 13.29, 30. How he forbad
them, saying, Nay -- Let both grow together until the Harvest, and then he
explains to his Disciples when the Harvest shall be, and whose Work it shall be
to separate the Tares from the Wheat. The Parable begins ver. 24. and ends with
ver. 30. And Christ's own Explanation of that Parable you may read from ver.
36. to ver. 43. where he says plainly, The Harvest is the End of the World,
and the Reapers (who are to do that Work) are the Angels. And so he reserves
that Work for them who shall be sufficiently able to distinguish Tares from
Wheat, Heroticks from true Christians. And therefore till then they are to be
let alone in the Field (which is the World.)

Now here are two contrary Lessons, your Masters say, you may kill Heretics,
and so instigate you thereto, and make you believe that you do good Service to
God and the Church thereby. But Christ Jesus the Lord, and our alone Savior
says, No, let them alone until the Harvest. Now choose which Master you will
cleave to; for you cannot serve both in their contrary Precepts. If Christ
Jesus be your Savior then follow him; but if the Pope and his Companions be
your Saviors then follow them, and continue in your bloody Principles, and
Practices, and bloody Spirits, and see if they can save you, who cannot save
themselves, nor give account unto God for what they do, seeing they go contrary
to his Commands; See if they can make your Prayers accepted, who are Men of
Blood themselves, and whose own Prayers are therefore an abhorring to the Lord.
Your Church is a Church of Blood, and therefore all your Prayers are an
Abomination to the Lord. Repent therefore in the first place, of your
Blood-guiltiness, whosoever of you has but consented in your Hearts to that
Act of killing for Religion; and cleanse your Spirits from that Scarlet Dye,
whosoever you be; and come before the Lord with Love in your Hearts for your
Enemies; and then your Prayers may find Access to the Throne of Grace. But if
you come otherwise with a Principle of killing and destroying in your Hearts,
you do but pray for your own Destruction, when you say, Forgive us, as we
forgive.

Nor will your Crucifixes, or Crossings of your selves prevail any thing with
the Lord, being but empty shaddows of things, whereby you evade the true Cross
of Christ, and cast it off your Necks. Its true, Constantine the great (so
called) he, as its recorded of him, used the Sign of the Cross in his Ensigns
in Battle, and that properly; to hold out against the Persecutors of
Christianity, that he openly owned and embraced that Christ who was crucified
upon the Cross, whom the Enemies therefore vilified, because of that manner of
Death, and crucified some of his Followers after the same manner in contempt of
him. But he was to honor him under the same Sign which they despised him for.
We may believe that that thing was prompted to him from the Lord; But its good
to consider his condition at that time, and how suitable it was to his
Condition and the times. Its true, there was that in his Heart that favored
and cherished the Christians, and which abhorred the Persecutions of the other
Emperors (for then was the Roman Empire divided among four, of which
Constantine was one) And especially his Heart rose against the detestable
Wickedness of one of the Emperors called Maxentius, who ravished the Citizens
Wives, and put many to Death unjustly. And so Constantine thinking how to
remove that Tyrant, cast in his Mind, what God he should choose to himself to
call upon as a Helper in that Work, in going against that Tyrant. And in this
his Deliberation and Care to effect this Work, its said, That abright Pillar
shining in Heaven was represented to him in form of a Cross, with this
Inscription, In hoc vince, that is, In this overcome. You may observe, that he
was wavering in his mind, what God to turn to for a Helper, being yet ignorant
of the true Helper; and therefore the Lord answered the Simplicity of his Heart
by a Sign, showing him, to whom to turn; and also gave him that despised Name
of Christ crucified, to war under; and by the outward Sign of the Cross, to
hold forth in the World the Crucified Christ, being at that day so despised.
And so being obedient to the Lord in holding forth that Name, and owning him
openly by that Sign, the Lord made him victorious and great. But now ever after
to make an Idol of the Cross, as if the Cross had done all for Constantine;
this is just like the doings of the Israelites; for whom the Lord commanded
Moses to set up a fore-running Sign of Christ crucified, even the Serpent in
the Wilderness; by looking up to which they should be healed who were stung
with fiery Serpents; for after the use of that brazen Serpent, and service of
it was ended, they went a whoring after it, admiring it, and idolizing it, as
if it had healed by its own Virtue. And just so do you, after the Sign of the
Cross, when the service of it is finished. And therefore as Hezekiah took the
brazen Serpent and stamped it to Powder, so ought the outward sign of the Cross
which you so Idolize be dealt with. The Cross of Christ which you ought to take
up daily, and bear about you, is, the Crossing of your own corrupt Wills and
Affections, and fleshly and carnal Liberties, and Looseness of the Tongue to
utter Vanity: You ought to cross your Wills in laying down your Necks to the
Yoke of Christ, in bearing the Reproaches of loose and ungodly Walkers, who
scoff at a Holy and Innocent Conversation; and also in bearing the Opposition
and Contradiction of such as may traduce you for withdrawing from those who
worship God after the Traditions of men, and have a Form of Godliness, but deny
the Power thereof. In these and such like things as these does the Cross of
Christ lie, not in a Childish Picture of the Cross, or antic signing of your
selves, as if the Power lay in that. Therefore become Men in Understanding, and
offer unto God a rational sacrifice, laying aside Childish things.

I have something still before me, to offer unto you for your good, for my soul
entirely desires your deliverance from under your bondage that you are in to
the man of sin. Your Images and Pictures, wherefore do you use them in your
approaches to the All-seeing God, who is present in all places, and searches
all hearts, and knows the thoughts of the heart? Wherefore, I say, do you use
them? If you worship them, then are you Idolaters. If you say, nay, we worship
them not, but only use them, as representations, to put us in mind of God, and
of Christ Jesus our Savior; then be ye witnesses against your selves. That
Christ Jesus dwells not in your hearts to imprint the living remembrance of
himself in you. Are you members of the Catholic Church, which is so surely
built upon the Truth, that all deserve to be burnt as Heretics that submit not
to your Traditions? And are you so forgetful of the Lord that you need Images
to mind you of him? Be witnesses. I say, against your selves, that God dwells
not in you, nor you in him; and that you have lost the Union which the Saints
once had and yet have with God; who therefore stand in no need of such things
to put them in mind of the Lord; for his loving presence in them keeps their
minds and hearts with the Lord. Therefore you are become strangers to God; and
to the holy Anointing which keeps abiding in him. And herein you are
degenerated from the first state of Believers, and of the Primitive Church at
Rome, who were led of the Spirit, and had the witness of the Spirit, witnessing
with their Spirits, that they were the Sons of God; and so walking with God in
the Spirit they needed no such thing to keep them in mind of God, nor did they
use any such things.

But wherefore, I say again, do you set Images and Pictures before you, when
you pray to the Lord? Is it to divert your minds that you should mind something
else besides the Lord in your prayers, lest you should serve the Lord with all
your heart, and with all your mind; or you set such things as mediators between
God and you? If so, then know that you have Chosen to your selves mediators
which God has not appoirted: but you have set up the devices of your own
hearts. If it be only to put you in mind of the Lord, then when you are put in
mind of him and go to pray to him turn from them, and put them out of your
sight, lest they divert your minds.

But wherefore must the Image of Mary the Mother of Jesus, and the Image of
Peter, or any other holy servant of Christ be set before you when you pray? Do
you worship their Pictures; Or do you pray to the Picture, or to them? If you
worship their Pictures, or pray to their Pictures, you are Idolaters. If you
pray to them that are represented by the Pictures, you make Gods of them, and
so still you are Idolaters. And you give them that worship which is only due to
God, and which Paul and Barnabas durst not take to themselves, when the men of
Licaonia would have done Sacrifice to them, but rent their clothes and ran in
among them, to constrain them, as soon as they perceived it. If you say, That
was Sacrifice, but this is prayer to them. I Answer, Is not prayer Sacrifice?
Is it not preferred before burnt Sacrifice? Is it not above the burning of a
Lamb, or an Ox, or above the burning of Incense? Is not the thing it self more
then the Type or Shadow? The Type sometimes is an abomination, though of Gods
own appointment, as Sacrifices, and burnt Offerings, and burning of Incense
was, Isa. 66.3. But the true Incense, the prayers of Saints never is so.
Therefore prayer is greater then sacrifice, which the Apostles abhorred to be
done to them: Nor would Petor suffer Cornelius to worship him, but took him up,
saying, stand up, I my self also am a man, Act. 10.25, 26. Neither would the
Angel of the Lord suffer John to worship him, when he fell down before his feet
to worship, but says to him, See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow Servant,
and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keep the sayings of this
Book: Worship God, Rev. 22.9. You may hence learn, if you be Ignorant of it,
That Angels, and the Prophets, and others that keep the sayings of this Book
are all Fellow Servants to God. And because they are Fellow Servants they ought
not to worship one another; the least Member is not to worship the greatest,
neither Saint nor Angel. That's the reason the Angel gives why he would not
suffer John to fall down before his Feet to worship; because he was but his
Fellow Servants. Do you think that Mary, or Peter, or John, or any other holy
Servants of the Lord would not say the like, if they were present, and see you
falling down to worship before their Feet, and to pray to them? would they take
the Honor of God to themselves any more then the Angel did? No surely, they
would not stand between God and his Honor any more then the Angel did. Your
falling down to worship them shows, that you are ignorant of that pure and holy
Spirit that dwelt and dwells in the Saints, which makes them Jealous of such
actions, lest God thereby should be robbed, of his Glory. There Is no right
Spirit will desire it, or delight in it, but be afraid of it.

Its the spirit of the Devil that delights to be worshipped, who would have had
Christ to fall down and worship him; and now would have Men to fall down and
worship any thing but God; and its that spirit which Men gratify, when they
worship any other but the Lord. Therefore turn from this Idolatry, and worship
the only Lord God who made you, the Heavens, and the Earth, and all the Host of
them, even all the Angels and Holy Men that are in Glory, who themselves fall
down, and worship him, and dare not take to themselves that which belongs to
God.

Will you make Gods of Men, and imagine them to be present (as God is) over the
Face of the Earth? It may be ten thousand Persons or more, in several parts of
the Earth, as far distant some of them, as the East is from the West, may be
all praying at once to the Virgin Mary, or to Peter, or some other; do you
think them to be present in all Places to hear their Prayers, as God himself is
present? If you do so think of them then how differ they from God in his
Omni-presence and Omni-science. If you say, No, they are not present every
where as God is; then (if they could hear Prayer) yet how many of these must
pray in vain to those who cannot hear them? I thus follow you to convince you
of your Error, if it may be. Away, away with your abominable Idolatry, in
making God's of Men, and praying unto them as if they were every where; and let
your Hearts turn to the Lord, who has created you, and in whom you live and
move and have your being, who upholds all things by the Word of this Power, and
who is present in all your Hearts, and Reins, and sees the Intents and Purposes
of your Hearts. Who though he made all things, and the Heaven be his Throne,
and the Earth his Footstool; yet humbles he himself to draw near unto his
Creature; and to this Man will I look (says he) that is poor and of a contrite
Spirit, and trembles at my Word, Isa. 66.1, 2. Therefore none need to be
discouraged, and pretend to make Mediators of the Saints, as if they themselves
were unworthy; for the poorer in Spirit that any one is, the nearer does the
Lord draw to that man. And he has appointed no Mediator between himself and
us, but one, even the Man Christ Jesus; for so the Apostle Paul has plainly
expressed it. 1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God (says he) and one Mediator
between God and Men; the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all,
to be testified in due time. Therefore they, they set up to themselves other
Mediators, they are gone from the one Mediator which God has appointed, and
follow devices of their own Hearts, and the vain Traditions of men which will
not profit them.

Lastly you give us all ground to think, that you are guilty to your selves, or
at least wise your Predecessors were guilty to themselves of breaking the
second Commandment by your Images and Pictures; or else what need they have put
it out of your Bibles, or out of the number of the ten Commandments? But it
looked them so full in the Face that they were not able to behold it, and
therefore expunged it out of your Bibles. It may be some may read it here, who
never read it in their Bibles, therefore I will set it down here for them to
read.

Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image, or the Likeness of any thing
which is in the Heavens above or in the Earth beneath, or that is in the Water
under the Earth. Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the
Lord thy God am a Jealous God, visiting the Iniquity of the Fathers upon the
Children unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me, and showing
Mercy unto thousnds of them that love me, and keep my Commandments.

This is that second Commandment, which your Books want, because your Practice
will not bear it, its written Exodus 20.4, 5, 6. If any be so bold as to say,
there is no such Commandment; let them consult with the Jews, and ask them
whether their Bibles have it in or no; for they can give you certain
Information in that point, and from them we have all received the old Testament.

Thus I have in Faithfulness laid before you, what was represented to me from
the Lord concerning your Condition. And God is my Witness, before whom I stand,
that I have not writ these things in Malice or Wrath against you, or any Person
among you, but in Faithfulness to your Souls, to let you see where you are.

And if any of you continuing in your bloody Principles and bloody spirit (for
you are noted for a bloody People) shall seek my Life for my Love to you, in
dealing plainly with you, in leting you know the Truth, and so add that also to
your Blood-guiltiness, I value it not upon this Account, in Testimony of the
Truth delivered to you, and of service to your Souls therein. And therefore I
subscribe my Name, who am a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, Meekness,
Humility, Love and Faithfulness in whomsoever I find them, and of all whose
Hearts are toward the Lord in Sincerity.

Written in the Year 1673. and in the 7th Month, By William Tomlinson.
THE END,

