To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London.
The humble PETITION of the Commons of the City of London, in Common Hall
assembled, June 27. 1681.
Shows,
THat We do with all thankfulness acknowledge the great and wonderful mercy of
Almighty God, in that notwithstanding the daily Plots and wicked Contrivances
of the Papists and their Accomplices, We do still enjoy our ancient and
undoubted right and freedom of assembling our selves together for the Choice of
some principal Officers of this City for the year ensuing.

And whilst we attend upon this duty, We cannot but with all gratitude remember
the great care, and faithful endeavors of your Lordship, the Aldermen, and
Commons in Common Council lately assembled in ordering an humble Address to be
presented to his Majesty; wherein was expressed your Lordships and their due
sense of the continued danger of his Majesty's Life, (which God long preserve)
and of the Protestant Religion, and of all our Lives, Liberties, and Estates,
by the Designs and Conspiracies, so long projected and prosecuted by the
Councils of Rome and its Adherents; in the pursuit whereof, they are chiefly
animated by the continuing hopes of a Popish Successor. And also your and
their just apprehensions that no effectual means can be provided against the
impending evils therein mentioned, but by the wisdom and advice of his
Majesty's great Council the Parliament.

And whereas it has come to our knowledge, that Reports, by mistake or
prejudice, have been raised, that the said Address did contein only the sense
and desires of a few persons, and not of the generality of this great City.

We do therefore most humbly pray your Lordship, that you will in such manner
(as shall seem best to your Lordships discretion) humbly represent to his
Majesty, that the Subject Matter of the said Address is also the true sense,
and does contain the humble Desires and Resolutions of his true and Loyal
Subjects the Citizens of his City of London, in this their Common Hall now
assembled. And that his Majesty would be graciously pleased to esteem it as
such.

And We having likewise taken notice that the same Common Council did at the
time of their voting the said Address, render their thanks to our late worthy
Members of the last Parliament, for their faithful endeavors to serve this
City, according to the Desires and Instructions to them given and made by Us at
the time of their Election. We do think it our duty at this time to testify
our full concurrence therein, and do return unto them our hearty thanks for the
same.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

This Petition was delivered to the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor immediately
after the declaring Thomas Pilkington Esquire Alderman, and Samuel Shute Esquire to be
Sheriffs of London for the year ensuing; and being read by the command of the
Lord Mayor to the Common Hall, had their general Consent and Approbation of the
same, which consisted of some Thousands of Citizens.

To the Honored Slingsby Bethel and Henry Cornish Esquires, Sheriffs of this
City of London and Middlesex.
WE the Citizens of the said City in Common Hall assembled, being sensible of,
and greatly satisfied with your faithful Endeavors to discharge those Offices
of Trust which we (not long since) called you to; and considering your wise and
prudent conduct and management of our Affairs within this City, especially in
maintaining and asserting of our undoubted Rights and Privileges as Citizens,
and continual provision of faithful and able Juries; especially in such a time
as this, when Innocence it self is not inrouded from the imputation of the
blackest Crimes; and the best and most loyal Protestants are exposed to the
utmost hazards by the Perjuries, Subornations, and Villainies of the Popish
Party and their Adherents. And we cannot at this time omit the mentioning your
fair Proceedings in our present Election of Sheriffs for the Year ensuing, and
dispatch of an unnecessary Poll, without putting us off by Adjournments to a
troublesome and weary attendance. Do offer and return to you our most hearty
Thanks, as the only Compensation we can at present make you; being confidently
assured that you will steadfastly persist in those your most faithful
Endeavors, as long as you shall continue Officers in this Honorable City.

This Address was presented to the Sheriffs at the same time; and being read to
the Common Hall, had the like Approbation.

LONDON: Printed for R. Baldwyn, in the Old Bailey. 1681.


