Le Tombeau des Controverses; A GRAVE FOR Controversies, Between the ROMANIST
and PROTESTANT, Lately Presented to the KING of France.

Englished by M. M.

With Allowance.

London, Printed by T. Milbourn, for Dorman Newman, at the Kings-Armes in the
Poultry, 1673.

Reader,
EXperience has taught me, that Authors are commonly injured by Translators,
which proceeds from their Ignorance sometimes, and sometimes from their
Carelessness and Neglect; how guilty soever I am of the first, I have made it my
business to avoid the latter. The Author has Writ in a generous and smooth
Style; what you find rough and unpolished (in this Version) I must own. I have
given you the true Sense and Meaning of this French Author, the Idiom and
Propriety of the Language would not suffer me to turn it Verbatim, in many
places.

I am sensible that I run the risk of being examined and censured by every one
that will take the pains to read both, and compare them; and I am as sensible
that it is but common Charity to pardon my faults and escapes (if he finds any)
since every ingenious man does so, almost to every Author he reads; I rest in
the Confidence of your Candor.

M. M.

Le Tombeau des Controverses; A GRAVE for CONTROVERSIES, Between the Romanist
and Protestant. Lately presented to the King of France, Englished by M. M.
SIR,
I Know you love the frankness of your friends, and to give you a Testimony of
mine, I beseech you send me your free thoughts of the Union of the two
Religions in France, which has been, and is still, so much discoursed.

I make no excuses for the trouble I am bold to give you; since I fancy, you
are (in some sort) obliged to me, for the task I impose upon you.

Your mind (which cannot live lazily and asleep) in all it is operations, applys
it self so cheerfully and to such noble Subjects, that those who busy you,
think they oblige you; since by it, they do service to Virtue and Piety, both
which you love.

They talk that the King will no more suffer two Religions in his Empire; that
he has often said, One King, one Faith, one Law; That he will order a
Conference of some Doctors of each Religion, that he will command them to
agree, and find an expedient for it; and when he has seen their Conclusions,
will command Peace by an Act of Union set forth by his Majesty; That the King
will send an express to Rome to obtain a liberty for this Conference; That he
is an enemy to sovereign Arbitration, and, in short, that he is resolved to see
all his Subjects live in the practice of one and the same Religion.

This news has given an Alarm to both parties; the Roman-Catholiques and the
Reformed or Protestants are almost equally frighted at it: The Reformed fear
lest the King should force them to follow those things which they abhor, as
some superstitions, so frightful to their Consciences, and some errors so
despised by their Reasons, that it is impossible they could ever consent to
them; and being constrained to mask their faith with the figures of hypocrysie,
their Souls would suffer mortal sadness and horrible inquietudes: The Romans
are tied, by custom, to the external practice of their Devotion, and make it as
well the glory of Religion as the comfort of their Souls: They fear lest the
King should banish with scorn, many customs to which they are besotted, and
reject them as actions very useless to that real Piety, which consists in the
true light of the mind and righteous affections of the heart.

The wiser sort have less terror but are not less troubled with the thoughts
of this Design; and because they believe not this enterprise fully resolved
upon by his Majesty, every one imagines some way how to break or bring it to
pass, as if the two parties were already upon the point of finding their
satisfaction or destruction. As for me, I profess to you, my mind cannot find
one thought which is fixed, upon a Subject of so high importance; hope and fear
equally share me, I beseech you therefore to contribute toward the calming of
these motions by letting me know your thoughts concerning it.

SIR,
YOur freedom would have appeared more pleasing if less presuming; but I have
no advice to give you, you will receive as little of that in the most abstruse
matters as in things of lesser moment, since you expect light from my darkness,
for your freedom with me in matters so curious.

Your mind will be surprised if you find any, and if you find none you will be
justly punished for your imprudent hopes; and for my self I shall be highly
revenged of you.

My Answer will have many distinct Articles to make you apprehend my thoughts
with the clearer distinctions, and in the same order which I have conceived
them.

1. The Uniting of all minds to believe the same Truths; is an effect which
proceeds but only from the first cause.

God only is the Father of Spirits, not only in respect of his Creation but in
regard also of his Sovereign Government; He is as well the absolute master of
it as of the Will, not to do violence to it, but to persuade and make it free:
It Is true then, that he only is able to make all men have the same thoughts of
Piety, as the Sun is only able to give Splendor to the Universe, when all the
several torches make diverse lights in diverse places, without ever produceing
one day.

2. I know that there are some unquestionable Truths which all men know and
none can dispute; In the first rank of these general Truths is placed the Idea
of a Sovereign Being, worthy Respect and Love.

But to come to this point which properly makes the center of Piety; the
Circumference of minds is so wide and stretched out, they have drawn so many
crossed and confused lines, that they have produced an infinity of distances,
figures, and oppositions.

In this multitude one may discern many lines which being drawn from the same
point carry the eye and apprehension just to the Center which is sought for,
all justly leading to an Union with God; they are different, they seem
opposite, but all are united by the production of the same effect; They seem to
represent the the Platform of a very regular Town, all whose streets lead to
the Church.

But the corruption of men (which consists of malice and ignorance) have drawn
lines so foolish and irregular, that they can never meet one another, nor lead
to that quietude which right reason requires and which joins mankind to God;
these lines touch regular lines but only in crossing them, and they even cross
one another; so, that it is impossible that they should meet in the same point,
or should lead to that which is the only just and true one.

The dread of Sovereign Power, the consideration of the weakness of mankind,
the love of the goodness of God, the esteem of his justice, the admiration of
his wise conduct, the meditation of his admirable providence, the hatred of
our own wickednesses, the aversion from, or abhorrence of our faults, the grief
for our past errors, the fears of approaching judgment; are diverse reasons,
all which brings or leads us to God directly.

But the adoration of Jdols or of creatures, under pretense that they represent
or that they contain the grandeur of Divinity, the Sacrifice of things stolen
or of humane blood, the affected ceremonies which pass as a law, (although
little beloved by the people) customary words or praises of God not joined with
a holy love, the practices which are established and protected by the interest
of some Authority, the gorgeous Ornaments to draw aside and divert the thoughts
of the people, and all the inventions which busy the mind about sensual and
material things, are irregularities which make us stray from true Piety,
though some people have been governed quietly by them.

3. One cannot easily Imagine a humane Power capable to recall Men from the
straying Paths which they have taken or will take; the design of reducing them
into a way that is good, is certainly, the task of one that must be both wise
and absolute; and for the execution of it, It Is necessary (methinks) that the
understanding of that man should be without any Clouds and Darkness, and his
Authority without Limits.

Private men have words to explain themselves, Reason to enlighten others,
Arguments to convince, and Demonstrations sufficient to persuade, Sovereigns
have Authority to command, and Power to force people; but yet with all their
Engines, it is very difficult or rather impossible to lead or drive men to
Heaven by one and the Same Way; the difference of Natures, the disposition of
the Genius, Customs, Interests, and Concerns, outward Shows, Fears, the
engagements of Honor and Friends cause such strange differences and
diversities in humane Souls, that all cannot be persuaded into the same
thoughts, nor touched with the same Reason.

I know that the grand diversity which we see in Nature, (which we know only by
its Accidents) may be also found in Morality and much more in Piety, because
but few know the true Essence of it. We cannot deny but all people apprehend
and seek after the same God; but who can hinder that one and the same Figure
should represent several objects, according to its diverse positions and the
several places in which the beholders are, or who shall hinder the Sun from
framing that diversity of representation according to the diverse Climates upon
which it shines?

Many have showed me their holy extravagancies speaking confidently of the
condition of the World before sin had made it miserable; they told me, that the
several motions of the Sun would have produced neither Winter, Darkness, nor
Death; that untilled ground would have produced neither Brambles nor Thorns nor
any noisome Plants; they had imaginations so finely ordered, that I could not
deny giveing their Idea the Image of a world made of Miracles.

I must believe that, but for the weakness, fantasticalness, and wickedness of
Man, we had known no defect in any Religion: But if we would re-establish this
happy Unity, (which is the consequence of perfect innocence) there must follow
two Miracles; an expulsion of Darkness and Malice from the minds of all Men.

The true Worship which is in Spirit and Truth, we commonly find to be laid
aside by ignorant Teachers or malicious Builders; if we see Truth in the most
considerable place of the Building, and if Truth does unite the two Walls at
the point of the Angle which is the most regular, then we may sing with the
Prophet, God alone Almighty and only Wise has done this thing before our Eyes,
his hand alone has done this work by this strong and glorious Arms.

The Princes who do or shall see this happiness in their Lands, ought to say,
this is the day which the Lord has made.

4. If it be true that our King and Monarch desires that there be but one
Religion in his Kingdom, he desires a very good thing; and no doubt the
excellency of his disposition, will make him propound and follow that way of
Piety which is most agreeable to Reason and most Spiritual, and which the most
generous and Christian Soul would choose to unite it self with God; mean
fortunes are aimed at only by mean people, but the most Illustrious reach after
Perfection.

5. All the Kings subjects who have rational Ingenuities, and Souls truly Pious
ought to approve, follow, and cherish this Design of his Majesty's, all ought
to contribute to this heavenly Peace; a house must needs be full of trouble, if
its inhabitants treat one another with censuring and fury and look upon one
another with the Eyes of Enmity; I find nothing so troublesome in life, as the
necessity of liveing with those men who Reproach one another with equal
Fierceness, as if their different thoughts in matters of Religion were
abominable Crimes, and who look upon one another as Reprobates, enemies of God,
servants of Satan, and destined to Damnation.

These sad Emotions produce such hellish Hatreds and such pressing Sadnesses in
the weaker Party; they bring forth such bloody Violences and cruel Inhumanities
in the most powerful Party; that these infernal Reproaches make a kind of Hell,
which torments the inhabitants of the same Country, the subjects of the same
Prince, the children of the same Father, the nearest relations in the same
Family, the friendships of the most sacred Alliances, every one sets himself to
curse his Brother, and would willingly take the satisfaction of ruining him.

I cannot think of this barbarous Zeal without sighing, and without some Horror
for these inhumane Men, who cease to be Rational when they would be esteemed
Pious; must our cruelty pass for a mystery of Religion? our infamous Vices for
the height of Virtue? must we our selves believe and persuade others that to
become good Angels we must act like Brutes?

Sure if men would follow right Reason, they would resolve to bear these
different Opinions, (which gives Piety so many and so various Shapes) without
Fury, Hatred, and Violence; certainly they would suffer with a prudent
Patience, the errors of the Night, still expecting that the Morning Star, or
the Sun it self should (in due time) discover all things with a true light.

But who can hinder the furious madness of these bitter Spirits, who run down
and consume all that opposes their Opinions? who can fix Notions in the weak
Vulgar, who having nothing but a spirit of chafe, or vapor, are hurried by
the little wind that puffs them.

Minds so ill managed, make in the same Family (of which the King is the Master
and Father) an army of Midianites who destroy each other, animating themselves
one against another, whilst the darkness hinders them from knowing themselves,
and in a tumult too which will not permit them to be able to know one another.
There is no need, (Dear Eutimius) to prove to you, that which you already know,
nor to represent to you what you see already; you may conclude easily by the
train of our Experiences, that if his Majesty desires one only Religion in
France, he desires a very good thing.

6. I cannot easily bear the Opinion of those who endeavor to maintain that it
does not belong to Kings to intermeddle with Religion, as if Piety and Holiness
were not used by great Ones: This apprehension is False, most Unjust and most
Malicious, it is the daughter of a wicked Politician, of an interested Cabal,
or of downright and crafty Tyrany.

Then Kings suffer themselves to be Cheated, when they are persuaded that all
that which has regard to Devotion is no part of their Empire, nor subjected to
their Government. This Maxim appears very sweet to those who would render
themselves Monarchs over Kings by the pretenses of Piety; the least incroaching
upon this matter stirs up, and animates their jealousy.

The Cardinal of Perroun being yet but the Bishop of Everuse was in election to
have public conference with Du Plessis Mornay; the Popes Nuntio Bishop of
Modena went to King Henry the fourth, and told him that this action of deputing
Comissaries in the matters of Religion was of Ecclesiastique Authority; and he
beseeched his Majesty not to be surprised at the request which he made to him.
The King contented him with assuring him, that no one should treat of the
Fundamentals of Religion, but of some little things only.

Popes have never been more stirred up against the Emperor Charles the fifth,
and consequently against Ferdinand his brother and Successor, then by the cares
which they had taken to reconcile the Estranged sentiments of Religion; the
Roman court maintained that these virtuous designs were ranked among wicked
Enterprises and rebellious Rashness.

The shortness of a Letter will not suffer me to write the Resolves of this
Debate; I will only tell you something of it, to satisfy mine own mind as well
as yours. The first practices of the World let us see, that the heads of
Families were the Princes and Priests of them; The two first sons of Adam (who
were Princes of the two great Families of the World) were both Priests,
although by a secret of divine Providence that of Abel was extinguished in his
person, it was repaired by the birth of Seth, continued by Enoch, and by all
those who were named the race or children of God.

After the ruin by the deluge, Noah remained Prince of his Family, did the
office of a Priest, and before that severe vengeance of the flood he is
represented to us as a Herald of justice, who condemned the World by preaching
against the wickedness of it.

Was not Abraham Father, Prince, and Priest of his Family; he was found worthy
to receive this praise in a strange Land by the principal men of the Country,
Thou art among us a Prince of God.

In the same Age the Prince of Salem bore the title Melchizedeck King of
justice, and he is signefied to us as a Priest of the most high God.

They say that God separated these two Governments after the going out of
Egypt, giving the politic to Moses, and the care of holy things to Aaron:
This Objection is ill grounded for two Reasons; the first is because Moses and
Aaron were of the same Family and Brother-Germanes, so these two Powers were in
a manner in the same person; and secondly, Moses who according to this opinion
was in the quality of King to govern the Politic did he not meddle with that
of Religion? He who censured Aaron vigorously after his sinful compliance to
the Golden-Calfe? who caused the Idol to be broke to Powder and made it be
disesteemed by those who had adored it, who received and gave all the orders
for the building of the Tabernacle and for the regulating of the Sacrifices,
and who condemned and punished him, who was found carrying wood on the holy day
of Rest? Moses took these cares, and these Authorities.

In the process of time the Kings of Judah, who have had the knowledge and zeal
of Religion have they not meddled with it? Joash, Ezekias, Aza and Josias, did
they not break the Idols to pieces, cause the Law of God to be searched for,
and re-establish the true service of the ancient Religion appointed by the
voice of God himself.

7. But to come to the times of the Gospel, Jesus, head and and finisher of our
Faith, did not take his birth according to the flesh in the Tribe of Levi but
in that of Judah, and in the house of David where is found the Royal Dignity of
the Hebrews; and he who ought to be eternal Priest according to the order of
Melchizedeck, has willed that his Pontifique grandeur, be in some manner
ingrafted upon the Royal; they published his Birth, they took off the shame of
his Death by the title of King, himself taking the quality of it when he
answered those who asked him, Art thou King, etc. Yes I am; It is then true
that the care of Priests and Kings cannot be judged incompatible; but it
behooveth us, to take singular notice of this splendid Alliance and of the
miraculous conduct of God in it.

We find not that Priests have become Kings and presumptiously sought after
Empires; but we find that Princes by their Birth or by the Election of Divine
Providence have been ordained Priests.

God has not permitted that high Priests should be made Kings to increase
their Vanity, but that Princes or Sovereigns should take upon them the
Pontifical care and title to enlarge and crown their Piety; Paganism it self
never saw the Roman Priests raised to an Empire, but the Emperors were bound
with the Title and Authority of Priests, and we may see in ancient Medals, they
did Engrave, Tib. Nero, Pont. Max. Traj. Imper. Pont. Max. Heliogabalus summus
sacerdos; in Rev. 5.10. he has made us Kings and Priests.

8. I do not pretend to maintain that all Kings ought to join to their
sovereign Empire all the actual performances of the Ministry of God, but I
cannot but believe, that they ought to have a most diligent care to maintain it
with Purity, or to re-establish it after any introduced Corruption.

Joshua was neither of the Family nor of the actual office of Priests,
nevertheless from that very time that the holy History represents to us his
Employ, which was to conduct the people in War; it gives us also to know the
commandment which God gave him to study the divine Law without ceasing, and to
turn neither to the left nor right Hand; he performed consequently all the
actions of a Prince who took care of Religion, he said to the Peoples,
Sanctify your selves; he ordered all the preparation for the Ark and the
Priests; in going to Jordan he commanded them by order from God himself, that
they should raise up a heap of Stones for a Pious Memorial of Gods Goodness,
and he Ehxorted the People to to serve God with thankfulness.

After that Christianity had tasted the Pleasure of Quietude for some Years,
did not Constantine the Great order the Bishops to assemble at Nice, where he
himself sat President in person, and the Bishops of those times made no
Scruple of proposing Eclesiastiques to the Prince, since they presented him
with an Account of all their Disputes; and though he would not judge of them but
cast the Writings into the Fire, yet his great Discretion was a prudent
Management of his Grandeur, either to Confound or Convert them: Those that
shall read that which passed in the Churches some Ages after, will see that the
Sovereign-Authority of Princes has regulated the conduct of Synods after they
had assembled them; the Emperor Arcadius sent Count Candigian to Rule in his
Name the Synod at Ephesus; that of Chalcedon had for its Sovereign President
the Emperor Mortian or the Commissaries whom he Deputed, and that of
Constantinople held in the Imperial Palace was governed by the order of
Constantine Le-Barbu the Emperor.

The celebrated Author of the History of the Council of Trent specified all
these passages to draw this conclusion in the second Book, that it was a custom
very proper where they governed with Liberty, which was when the world was
without a Pope, il che come e un uso molto proprio, diove si Governa in
Liberta, quale era all hora quando il mondo era senza Papa.

When the Empire of the West was governed by the house of France, Charlemaing
the Emperor preserved his Power Gloriously, which his Successors have lost by
too much yielding.

The Acts of the Council of Mayence held in the Year 813 under the Authority of
that Emperor, began with these Words to Charles Augustus Governor of the true
Religion, and Frotector of the Holy Church of God.

Another Council held at the same Place, gave the same Title to Lewis the
Emperor surnamed the Debonair; and in the Records of the Synod named
Francisque, we may read the procedings of Carloman under the title of Duke and
Prince of the French, who spoke in this manner; we have ordained Bishops in
every City, and have Established over them the Archbishop Boniface

All those who have any knowledge in History, know that the Bishops of Rome
(whom they give out and believe at present to be so soveraignly Sovereign) have
written to the Emperors as to their Masters, and asked Pardons or Favors, and
entreated to have Synods in the style of humble Suppliants.

We read that the Emperor Charlemaign took (without contradiction) the liberty
of choosing the Bishops of Rome.

The Books of Stella, Platin and of Sigonius testify that this right was
preserved a long time after.

When the Empire passed into the house of Saxony, Otho deposed. Pope John the
Thirteenth and put Leo the Eighth in his Place, and another Otho caused the
Eyes of John the Seventeeth to be put out because he resisted Bruno a Germane
named Gregory the Fifth which the Emperor had chose Bishop of Rome.

Let the Wise and Prudent search over the Antiquities in the Hebrew and
Christan Churches, and they will find that Princes have never made any scruple
to regulate Religion.

9. If Authority upholds my thoughts, reason, either natural or politic will
be advantageous to them; since that Monarchs cannot as sure themselves of the
welfare of their Country, the dignity of their condition, nor the quiet of
their minds if they take no care in the government of Religion.

Let us consider the condition of Sovereigns without having any respect to the
practice of Religion; we cannot deny that they are established in the conduct
of two things which appears more important in the politic state; the first is
War against a foreign enemy; the second is Justice against the wicked men in
his own nation: These two actions which ought to take up all royal Authority,
obliged the Hebrews (when they demanded a King) to say, that we also may be
like all the nations, and that our King may judge us and go out before us and
fight our battles Sam. 1.8.20.

But since one cannot reject the thoughts of St. Paul when he says that
righteousness is profitable for all things, one ought to believe that war is an
unhappiness, and that justice cannot subsist without true Piety; from whence it
was that the generous and wise Joshua, seeing himself ready to make war against
the Infidels heard these Words; Streng then thy self and be not dismayed, the
Lord is with thee whither thou go.

And when he went to do justice to Hacon he said to the People; Sanctify your
selves for to morrow, and say to the sinners, give I pray you glory to the God
of Israel; Joshua 7.19, 17; from whence I conclude, that the King who will
succeed well in both his politic Employs, ought necessarily to take a special
care to establish the true Religion, and to rule his conduct he ought to
remember that which God said to Joshua; Fortify thy self more and more to the
end thou may take care to do according to all the law which Moses my servant
has commanded thee, and turn neither to the right hand nor to the left that
thou may prosper whither soever thou go, Josh. 1.7.

He ought to remember the command of God, which orders that the King sitting
upon the throne of his Kingdom should take a Copy of the written Law, and read
it every day that he might learn to Fear the Lord: Let not his Heart be lifted
up above his brethren, let him not turn from this Law neither to the right nor
left hand; Let his days be long, and let him reign, him and his Posterity in
the midst of Gods people.

I know not how one can maintain, (after this reason confirmed by Sacred
Authority) that the King does an unjust Action if he takes care of Religion; is
it not the perfect Equity of the divine Law, which conducts principally the
orders of War and rules of Justice? and cannot one easily prove that War is a
tyrannick usurper or a savage beastliness, if not bridled by Religion? is it
not true that without Piety (which begets the fear of God), the Authority of
the Magistrate is barbarously Executed and unprofitably Established? for
without Religion men would be as imaged Lions, but Justice would destroy them
all if she were strong enough, but where she suffers all she is found weak: if
then the King is the first Captain and the first Magistrate of his Kingdom, he
may name himself and ought to appear the principal Bishop.

10. The King may find a great advantage in the words of St. Paul, who speaks
very Christianly, when he ordered that Subjects should be held under the Powers
Authorized by God, not only to shun the violence of anger, but to acquit
themselves also of the duties of conscience: This Doctrine establishes
obedience in the Subject more strongly by Religion than by Force. If then the
King will preserve himself in a just and full Authority, his care must be to
endeavor to Establish true Religion, which tyeth the Subjects more to his will
than Force, or Punishments, which make the People fear the effects of its
violence; judge consequently what is the Conclusion of the interested
hypocritical Party who leave the Princes but a mean power of making themselves
to be obeyed, in taking away from them the care of Godliness which is the
strongest and most sure power.

The fear of Punishment may hinder the riseing of rebels, but true Religion
will stifle the design, and not admit a thought of it.

11. When a Monarch understands that a good Conscience, is the strongest and
most assured Principle to hold the Subjects in a sweet obedience; and when he
is persuaded, that minds which are Led or conducted by true Piety, stifle all
the motions of Rebellion, by the fear of the judgments of God; his own interest
with the public peace will engage him to take care to establish Religion,
which hinders them from committing actions of disobedience. The well fare of
his State and the quiet of his Person ought to make him act so judiciously as
not to permit, that pretense to Religion should imprint in the minds of his
People, a false Godlyness, which inclines them to despise his Person and
Ordinances, under pretense of revengeing Gods quarrel, and protecting the
interest of the Church.

The Age in which we live as well as those which have gone before us, have
proved what dreadful effects false and interested Piety have produced against
our Kings; and on the contrary, the holy History, and some Chronicles of
State, show us how much a good Conscience and true Religion are respectfull to
their King, even in the hearts of those Subjects who are harshly treated by
them.

David being unjustly persecuted by his prince Saul, might have found an
occasion to take away his life secretly in the darkness of a Cave, but his good
Conscience obliged him to respect an unjust enemy, of whom he might have rid
himself, if he had not feared to offend against the justice of God; after the
mischance, or rather the decree of the judgment of God, that caused Saul to
perish, Conscience alone (produced and governed by a true Religion) obliged
David to weep for it, and to reveng the death of that wicked Prince, whom God
himself had rejected.

Religion truly Christian counsels such practices of patience and goodness,
with which he King ought to be satisfied, but that Religion, which persuades co
contrary maxims, is dangerous, and the King may render himself judge of it, at
least he may believe himself master in his own house without being subject to
those who would limit his power, and who teach the common people to watch for
an opportunity of revolting and disobedience.

Charles the 8th being at Rome in the time of Pope Alexander the 6th of the
house of Borgir, who became an odious, hated, wicked man, was entreated by all
the Cardinals (except two) to defend the holy Church against the violence of
that Pope, who was rather a successor of Judas then of St. Peter, and given
more to the Alcoran than to the Gospel.

There are no true and natural French men, who will contest with the King the
power of repressing the boldness of those pretended Devoto's, who teach that
Kings Excommunicated by the Pope are no more Kings, and that they are no more
any thing to their subjects being nothing to the Pope.

I dare not Speak the rest it being so full of horror; see the Censure of
Sorbonne against Vernant and Guimenaeus.

Can one believe that Lewis the 12th had no right to suppress the wicked
doctrine and hector like piety off Julius 2d, who committed so many
wickednesses against the quiet of this excellent Prince, that he caused to be
stamped upon his coin; I will destroy the whore of Babylon.

The King of Navar John 2d deposed by the same Pope; ought he in his condition,
to detest or adore the Religious thoughts of this very Pope told him by a
Spanird in these words: I must aid the King of Spain and employ my two Swords,
both Spiritual and temporal against France and Navar who are enemies to all
honest people.

Pope Sixtus the 5th. was resolved to Excommunicate Henry King of Navar, and
Henry Prince Conde, his Bull said, that he would draw the sword of Vengeance
against Henry, late King of Navar, and Henry Prince of Conde, a Bastard and
Detestable Generation; that he did declare them and their Successors to be
deprived of all their Lordships, Lands, and Dignities: Had not these Princes
some right to resist this violence, and cause to be Preached (one to his
Subjects, and the other to his Vassals) that Religion and Conscience obliged
them not to follow the Passions and Usurpations of this Roman Bishop?

Royal Dignity is of a larger extent than vulgar thoughts can apprehend, and
beyond the limits which the Ambitious and Covetuous men do prescribe it, for
their own advantage, by an affected or ignorant malice.

This Royal greatness is joined to the Pontifical, by a kind of necessity, from
which it cannot be parted, neither by Reason nor Conscience; and though the
King does not execute actually the functions of it, yet he ought to render them
so really effected, that true Judgment and Power should maintain them, and put
them in good order.

The animated heats against my Proposition, opposes the punishment of King
Hozias, when he offered Incense upon the Altar of perfumes; but those who
consider his crime, will find that he offended (by neglect, or by Pride)
against an express order Established by Divine Authority, which ordained that
the Levites only should serve in the Ministry, excluding every other Family and
Person, whether Royal, or not.

If this Prince had commanded the Sacrifices and Incense to be performed as God
had ordered him, I do not believe that he had been reproved either by God, or
Man.

My notion proves it self by the words of the high Priest, which attributes to
the King, only the sin of contradicting Gods order in these words, 2 Chronicles.
26.18. It appertains not unto thee to burn Incense unto the Lord, but to the
Priests, the Sons of Aaron that are Consecrated to burn Incense; in the 4.
Chap. of Numb. you may see the Law expressly.

So Uzza not being of the Family of Levi, was stricken by God, because he
stretched forth his hand, to touch, and bear up the Ark, 1 Chronicles. 13.9. These
examples cannot prove, but that a Christian King may have the care of Religion,
and of the Law of God.

The Head and Finisher of our Faith, Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God,
has not bound the exercises of Religion to some particular people and
conditions; all those who have Authority do not sin, if they employ it in the
Service of the all-powerful God; if a Father owes this justice to his
Children, a King, certainly, is engaged to it for his Subjects: Do you think
that the King does commit an Injustice against God, when he causes Justice to
be Executed among men?

12. Since all which, I have showed, proves, that the King may, and ought in
Conscience to have the care of Religion, since he may desire, most Lawfully,
that there be but one Religion in his Government; I believe that the first Idea
which can open the way to effect it, is to resolve, that no stranger shall
govern it; and according to my thoughts, all the French of either Religion,
wish, or ought passionately to wish for it, both in Reason and Conscience; for
when the King gives, or permits to a Stranger, the Government of Religion in
his Kingdom, he keeps to himself the least part of his Riches, and puts into
the hands of another power (which it may be will War against him) the
Government of those affections, which tie most effectually Subjects to Princes.

What should one say, if the King should suffer himself to be persuaded to take
a Polonian to Command all his Army in chief, or a Spaniard for his
Lord-Chancellour? by what Reason can one oblige him to have a Patriarch of
Greece, Alexandria, or Italy? Must the King commit that which is most
considerable for his quiet and safety, to such an Authority as does not care
for his welfare, or it may be are Enemies to it?

All France sighs at the remembrance of these Devotions, (rather promoted by
Devils themselves, than by Diabolical men) which made Clement Jacobin, John
Chastel, Ravillas, and generally all the League, act by a hellish zeal: All
this mystery of Iniquity took its birth, progress, and execution from a false
principle of Conscience, which the Outlandish Beast caused to be proposed to
the people, and which had at the bottom nothing but a fatal machin of Interest
and Ambition.

I have read in Avila an Italian Author, that Jacobin the Murderer of Hen. 3.
was a false devote, and a furious Zealot for the Orders of the Pope.

We read in lib. 95. of the History written by Mouns, the President of Thou,
that Pope Sixtus the Fifth, commended in a full Consistory, this horrible
action; with large praises, admiring the Virtue of this man, the strength of
his Courage, and his ardent Love toward God; Cum virtutem, hominis, animi
robur, and ferventem erga Deum amorem, supra Eliazarem and Juditham multis
verbis extollit.

John Chastel was another devote, and the decree of Parliament given against
his wicked act, is Excommunicated in Rome, of whom the wise Cardinal of Ossat
spoke in this sort to the Cardinal Aldobrandin, as he himself reported, [ If
the King had any cause to fear to be Murdered, he should rather fear the
Hugonots whom he had forsaken, and who had cause to complain of him;] but they
have attempted nothing like this, neither against him, nor against the five
Kings, his Predecessors, whatever Butchery they have made of them.

Ravillac, another devoto, began his day by the Confession, Mass or Communion,
and employed the rest of it, to follow the Kings Coach to find the occasion,
which he met with (to the great damage of the Kingdom) after 6 months spent
in his Devotions, and his Indefatigable cares.

The Zeal of a desperate man (which he witnessed in his torments, and at the
point of his death) shows us, what a dangerous thing it is for a Stranger to
govern the Consciences, when the Natural King has nothing but the Political to
govern.

13. Can a State be happily Governed when two Monarchs are equally considered
in it; their Interests do undoubtedly divide and part their minds, hearts, and
hands; this division produces Confusions without Remedy; the wisest men commit
the greatest errors in this Mist, which permits not the right discerning of
Justice, or Injustice between these two parties.

But if one be persuaded that one of these two Monarchs is infallible, and that
one is obliged by Conscience to take his part, all the people will take his
Interest, and look upon all that which opposes his design, as a Horror and a
Curse: If a Stranger, or the Pope, Establishes his power in France, by the
principles of Conscience, his Authority must infallibly triumph over that of
the King, who is the lawful Prince of it, and this cannot be avoided; for the
Superstitious will fear to be Condemned; and the Perfidious Interested ones,
make the weak capacities of others serve for their more bold designs; and the
besotted Worshippers will believe to gain as many Crowns in Heaven, as they
kill Protestants.

What Prince can be safe (reading and believing the discourse) of the Crowning
of the Pope, attributed to Innocent the 3d. and saying these great words? I
bear the Mitre, because of my Priesthood; the Crown, because I am King;
Establishing my self next under him, who writ upon his Thing, the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords. What wonder is there, that so many people did rise
against Hen. 3d. and afterward against the generous and good King Hen. 4th?
Few persons could resist those barking Hypocrites, who being engaged in the
Popes party, did publish through all the Kingdom, That whosoever should serve
the Prince, could never escape Damnation; that Kings lose their Power in losing
the Friendship of the Pope; and being in that condition, they merit neither
Respect nor Love.

Judge Sir, if the King has not a just Interest, and a lawful Right to cause
his Nation to love a Religion which has but one God, one Heaven, and one
Monarch upon Earth.

14. If the King designs this Unity, of which you tell me, the true fear of God
ought to possess his Soul; he ought to think that he is a Sovereign over his
People; but yet that he is neither Master of, nor Companion with God, and then
he will account it his greatest glory to appear a faithful Servant in the house
of the Almighty; this title was given to Moses when he governed the Hebrews;
David and Solomon were honored with that quality. Certainly to serve God, is,
truly to Reign; his Majesty ought to take this Resolution, not to consider the
Interests, Flatteries, the Threatenings, Opinions, or the Wills of Men, but only
the Truth of God, which conducts to true Justice.

Princes are obliged to know that God alone is the Monarch of Consciences, and
his Law only ought to instruct, and his Authority to engage.

When they say that the King permits Liberty of Consciences, they understand
the liberty of exercising it, or the liberty of appearing what one is, since
the freedom of thoughts answers but to God only.

It is certain then that the King, desiring to draw his Subjects into one
Religion, cannot succeed more nobly, nor more usefully, then in establishing
the way and orders of God, the common Father of all; no body can exclaim
against his Powers, censure his Word, nor condemn his Ordinances.

Excellent Kings are marked with the quality of Princes, according to Gods own
heart, because they have care to order to be done, not what men's hearts desire,
but what God loves.

Sovereigns, who render themselves subject to the Wills of men, whither to
their own Subjects, or Strangers, divide Opinions, and give birth to War; but
if they appear faithful Servants to God, and requite no more from the people,
but what God himself requires, then the people give to Caesar, and to God,
that justice and obedience which is due to them by one and the same act;
because Caesar desires all, and only that which GodS Wills.

15. When the vulgar speak of the uniting of the two Religions in France, they
speak of a thing impossible; because they consist of Propositions, which are
named Contradictories, of which the first are necessarily false, if the
Opposites are true, in this condition they can never be united, as may be seen
by these Examples; one maintaining that the body of Christ in his very Flesh,
Blood, and Bones, is really present in the Sacrament; the other saying, that
there is no reality of flesh, though there be a real presence and spiritual
grace: Can these two Notions unite, and be conjoined? one says, the souls
separated from the bodies, being in a state of grace, burn in a fire
underground, to satisfy for their sins; the other holds, that souls justified
by grace, have no obstacle which can hinder them from possessing or enjoying
glory.

One affirms, that the Pope is Monarch of all Kings and Bishops, with the
same power which Christ had when he was upon the Earth; the other is persuaded
that this Bishop has not this power, and that he can neither maintain it
without error, nor exercise it without Tyranny; these propositions can never
agree, and if one would speak rightly of the design of his Majesty, we must
interpret it a unity of good Society, which may be effected; but not a unity of
Conformity, which can never be.

16. I believe, that (according to the Kings will) those of both Religions, may
agree in the same thoughts, and make but one Religion both good and pious.

In the fourth Age, all Christendom was divided upon the Propositions of the
Divinity of Christ; these two Propositions, viz. Christ is God in substance,
and Christ is not God in substance, but by resemblance, are discourses and
notions never to be reconciled. In a word, after many unjust Fends of the one
and other Party, all did agree after the Truth was justly known, and sincerely
sought after.

We might experiment the same unity, if minds would cease to be prae-possess'd
by Interest or Custom; Let us search with sincerity the will of God, and the
reality of his thoughts, and then we shall easily be of one mind, piously
following that which God bids us.

17. This Union of Minds in the same apprehensions of things, cannot be done
with fatisfaction, if, (as some pragmatically say) the King should use his
absolute Authority without suffering any disputes about it.

One [I Will,] is not enough to persuade the profound Reason of the Soul: One
[I Will not] cannot root out the first Impressions; all the effects that these
commands can produce, is terror or dissembling; one may study to hide one self
for fear of anger, for the respect one ought to have for his Majesty; but every
one will keep those thoughts which he thinks necessary for his Salvation; What
pleasure can the King have to see his Realm full of Dissemblers, who fear his
Anger; or of miserable ones, if he should use Violence?

18. They rank that which you told me, of the Embassage to Rome to obtain a
permission for a Conference about Religion; Amongst the ill news we hear, His
Majesty has too much knowledge of the practices of the Romish Court, to expect
that the Pope should give him liberty to argue against him, and his Universal
Power: Dare the Signiorle of Venice, ask the King of Spain the power to debate,
whither the Duchy of Milan, and the Kingdom of Naples belong to him by a
Ligitimate Right?

Can one believe that Roman Polity has ever been so civil to praise Catholic
Majesty, to ordain a conference upon the posession of Sicily; and that it has
ever asked the liberty to publish the Bull (in cana Domini) in the Lords
Supper, by which that King is Excommunicated?

The King is not under Age, let him govern his Subjects in the fear of God,
even from the bottom of our Souls we all desire it; and those who would not
have it so, are neither, Rational nor Frenchmen; Can we be in a better hand
than that of a King, who speaks our own Language, whom Nature engages to
cherish his Country, whose Inclinations are agreeable to our Climate, which is
his, and whose Interests are necessarily tied to ours?

Let the King freely take his own; let no body dispute it in his Kingdom; let
no Stranger rule over us: It is one of the most horrible punishments which God
has brought upon his people; of which the Hebrews complain most bitterly, and
which may be compared to the crime, of which the Lord himself complains in
Jerem. 2.25. But thou say there is no hope, no, for I have loved Strangers,
and after them will I go; and in Jerem. 5. You shall serve Strangers; in
Lament. 2. Our Heritage has been overturned by Strangers.

Is not the King a Christian, and, The most Christian King? is he not a Sacred
person? is he not the Lords Anointed? ought he to ask the Pope leave to search
the true Law of God, and to offer it naked to his people?

Let the King speak as the generous Henry le Grand for his Marquisdome of
Salus, he answered to all the cunning devices of Pope Clement the 8th. and the
addresses of Cardinal Aldobrandin, and the Artifices of the Duke of Savoy, with
these words, [I will have my Own.]

It is the Kings right to propose the Law of God, as it is his duty to search and
meditate it; has not he, as well as the Prince of Rome, both Moses and the
Prophets, the Holy History, the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Confession of
Faith, of the Council of Nice? has he not as much Ingenuity, and as
Penetrating a Wit as the Pope, to discern Good from Evil, Truth from Falsehood,
and Sincerity from Interest? has he not more Zeal, or more Natural Inclination
for the good of his Subjects, than a Stranger, who appears to all reasonable
men, to make no Conscience of any thing, if he can but raise never so little,
his glory and advantage by it.

Will he take measure from the Pope, to oblige the French to give their Souls
to God, rendering their Respects to their King? can any one believe that France
has no body in it who is enlivened with a Zeal by a sincere and unspotted
Soul, and by an enlightened Piety? Can his Majesty expect Know ledge and
Conscience from Italy, to make us Famous and Conduct us.

13. Believe Sr. that if the King has designed that, of which we discourse, he
has too much Grandeur and Light in his Mind, to commit it to the Pope or
acquaint him with it.

19. If the Pope should admit of this Conference, he would never suffer that
any thing should be concluded on to his disadvantage; no one hates his own
Flesh. The Council of Trent was a mighty Assembly, whither the French sent
Eminent Men, but Rome never permitted that any one should propose any thing
whereby his Glory or his Interest should be Touched.

This Conference which you speak of, will give something or nothing to that
Religion which is not approved of by Rome; if it gives any thing it will
certainly be disowned by the Pope, and perhaps Excommunicated; If it denies
every thing to the Protestants of France, it will be very unuseful to the Kings
design, who will not without doubt ruin his Kingdom by violence, but make a
peaceable and voluntary agreement.

It Is then most certain, that if an Assembly depends upon the Pope, and if
those who compose that Assembly are pre-admonished or tied to manage the
interest of the Pontifical Court, suspicion or hatred will accompany its Birth,
stubbornness its Progress, and bitterness its End.

20. Rather than be hindered by the delays of Rome and choice of a Deputy for
this Conference, all France should unite and with an unanimous Consent, beseech
the King, that he would inform himself of the differences of the two Religions,
and pitch upon a certain Form, since Heaven has made him to be looked upon by
all the World, as a Prince who has a most just Genius, a most solid Judgment,
and Parts not Confused in any thing he undertakes; one cannot think that his
Majesty can charge his Memory or weary his Eyes with the Mysteries and
Wranglings of Controversies; but after some Love to, and some Practice of the
Sacred Books, where the Law of God is found so much recommended to Princes by
holy People, his Majesty may distinguish exactly enough what Religion is most
proper to be Allowed, and to tie the Soul to God without Violence, Confusion
and Hypocrisy.

Has not the King (who is very judicious) discerned that the form of
Administering justice, would defer the proceeding; and that introduced
Corruption followed by Custom had need to be Corrected; has not these
Thoughts made his Majesty be Approved and Blessed by all the reasonable
disinterested People, when he made his Commands to be published and kept, which
among the common sort are Named Le code Louis.

The King can very well distinguish, whether the Counsel and Advice which they
give him, does bear the Character of Freedom, the Principle of good Meaning,
and be useful for his Design: When he pleases to bow himself a little from his
Majestique Grandeur, to converse; the easily knows whether he be a man that
expresses himself by a heap of unprofitable and windy Words, or whether he
uses Neat, Clear and apt Expressions; he need not study much to understand the
Air of an affected Woman, who defires to appear fine by fading and ridiculous
ornaments; by the same Genius his Majesty without trouble understands the
comeliness of a well-made Woman who appears in her own Colors without Paint or
Disguise with the Characters of a generous Virtue.

This judicious Prince, (who considers all that he sees, who weighs every
thing that he apprehends, and apprehends every thing that comes before him) can
with ease exactly judge of the Interest, Fraud, Amusements, affected Pomps,
Artifices, Politic Interests, industrious Covetousness, and the h, pocritical
Characters of Religion.

21. If the King would lessen his Trouble, he may Command any one to give him
an Account what was demanded in the Council of Trent to reform the Abuses
introduced in Religion; and particularly, his Majesty may please to take notice
what the French Ambassadors Treated of in former Complaints of Protestations or
Demands; of which you may see a small Abridgment. drawn from the History of the
Council, which learns us the Negotiations of Amiot, Pibrac Ferrier, Lansac and
of the Cardinal of Lorain who appeared for France. At diverse Times and at
diverse Conclusions of this Synod, they Demanded,

That the Sacrament should be Celebrated with the Cup, according to the Order
of Jesus Christ and the Ancient Customs of the Church.

That their might be Abolished many Abuses Introduced by Images, Relics,
Pilgrimages and other suchlike Devotions.

That they would Reform the Abuses committed by the Mendicant Friars.

That they would Permit Ecclesiastiques to Marry.

That they would receive no Pastors without having a Flock, and without being
able to Preach the Gospel.

That Divine Service be read in a Tongue understood by all.

That they would reduce the Monks to their first institution, which obliges
them to work with their Hands, and not to meddle with Ecclesiastical Affairs,
unless they be specially employed by the Bishops.

That Pastors should be Resident at their Churches.

That Eclesiastical Donations be employed and distributed according to the just
intention of those who gave them, for the Poor, for Schools, and for the
preachers of the Gospel.

That they should not give to Tradition the same Authority as to the Gospel.

That before the Administration of Sacraments, they should expose with
Clearness, their Establishment, their Use and their Force, in a vulgar Language
understood by the most Ignorant.

Other Ambassadors demanded many other things for their Princes and Nations, as
the Abolishing of first Fruits, the reducing the Papal Authority to that which
St. Peter seemed to have taken over the other Apostles.

Queen Katharine of Medices, particularly demanded the Abolition of the Feast
of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, which appeared to be instituted rather for
Pomp than Piety. Read the seventh Book of the History of the Council, and there
you will see all these Requests, which testify that the King of France and
other Princes, desire to Establish one only Religion in their Nations,
suppressing the Abuses of that which was in use; of which Abuses they have
taken a pious and just Account, that they might separate the good from the Evil.

22 None can believe that it does not belong to Kings to judge of Religion,
since the Ambassadors (of whom I have already spoken) had their Instructions
from the Sovereigns to whom they were Servants; they proposed the Thoughts and
Designs of their Princes; who were so far from consenting to the Orders of
Rome, that they Deliberated, Determined and Propounded against them: Reason and
judicious Piety makes Kings see the multitudes of Abuses.

23. What rational Minds can ignore that our true judgment may very easily
discern the Thoughts of a thing, of which we have no practical Experience since
we know some general Principles of it.

I do not profess Physic, yet I know very well, that excess of Wine is
dangerous for one in a Fever: Although I am no Farmer, yet I know, that a bad
Husbandman, who never Sows, shall never Reap, and that he who breaks the
Stalk, when the Ear is formed, does very ill dispose of his Crop.

I never was a Servant, yet I know, that he who will do that which pleases
himself only, (being a Servant) does not his business; and runs the danger of
being Chastised or turned away.

And by the same Consequence, those which have not School Divinity, have that
of Reason to discern that which has the resemblance of being the Principles of
good Morality and Piety; they know that Divine Will ought to Govern and Rule
these Virtues, and then they may believe and conclude that all practices
established by Humor, or by the Interest of Men are Ambiguous, Uncertain,
Indifferent, or Criminal: And that Prince who bears a good Mind, as well as a
good Sword, may as well judge of Religion, as of War; St. Paul himself tells us,
that the Spiritual man discerns all things.

But without going to spiritual exactness, I have seen Peasants brought up in
the labor of the fields (who being born with good Wit) despise many Grotesque
Devotions, and could distinguish with a solid judgment.

There is much reason to believe, that if his Majesty would employ his
excellent Wit about the two Religions exercised in his Kingdom, he would
discern with an exact clearness, the Good from the Evil, the Necessary from the
Superfluous, Divine from Humane, the True from the Dubious, the Hypocritical
from the Sincere, the Dangerous from the Useful, the Material from the
Spiritual, and the Rational from the Brutal.

A regular mind easily sees that which raises him to Heaven, or that which
amuseth him upon the Earth.

24. It is certain that his Majesty may discern (without any great difficulty)
the form of that Religion, which falls under the knowledge of a good natural
judgment; but to satisfy himself more fully, he may command experienced men,
(who are capable of greater, labors) to represent to him chat which is Old and
New, Christian and Roman, Apostolical and Pontifical, to the end his Majesty
may be able to discern what is established by the Antiquity of the Apostles,
and all that which is added by a Modern Antiquity.

This Representation cannot be done, but by minds very laborious and knowing in
both Religions, and whose Souls are sincere and generous.

They ought also to consider the respect they owe to their Prince, and repay
his kindness with a solid sincerity; by this means one shall find that nothing
is more ancient than that which is most true; and that which does appear most
true, will be best maintained and defended.

25. I consider in the Economy of this Peace, both Royal and Heavenly, that
the difficulty must be but mean upon the Propositions disputed in the Schools
by Divines on either side, as the mysteries of Justification, the grace of
Praedestination; this Controversy may raise diverse Opinions, and yet leave men
Friends.

But the worst Obstacle is of Practices, Customs, and outward Devotions which
appear of great moment to the Vulgar, when as they are looked upon but as low
things, and indeed but tricks, by Wise men.

The Roman Catholic does not believe that there can be either Piety or
Christianity, where he finds not Images, Ornaments, Ceremonies, Processions,
and Pompous Appearances; He accounts nothing worthy enough for his Adoration,
nor real for his Salvation if one does not persuade him that Christ in the
flesh is kept in a box in the Church; He is much a slave to Custom, and
believes that the Sacraments and Service administered privately, and in an
unknown Language, where they hear the voice only, without understanding the
words, begets more Reverence; His mind is so ill-dispos'd by this Custom, that
he imagines that all will be in a disorder, if the King should declare himself,
next under God as well Protector of Religion, as of Justice; and because of the
loud and continual bawlings of the Emissaries of Rome, He imagins that God will
not remain in France, if the Pope should not be Mediator between Christ and the
King, to keep them Friends, without thinking that St. Peter (who writ plainly)
says, that he that honors the King, shows his fear to God, whereby he
declares the near Relation between God and the King, for he writes, Fear God,
and Honor the King.

Such is the disposition of the Roman Catholic; from whence follow such
Practices, Devotions, and Customs which cannot be taken from it without its
destruction; and one feels as much pain, when one plucks away an unprofitable
and idle excrescence from the flesh, as in cutting off a Member which is very
serviceable to the body.

The Protestant has a Soul inclined quite another way; He seeks God with a
Worship of Spirit and Truth; He believes not his Faith divinely Established,
but by the Word of God; nor the equity of his Conscience well regulated, but
only by the Law of God; He seeks not the flesh of Jesus Christ upon the Earth,
but his Spirit and his Grace; He Worships him as he is in Heaven, not by the
Image of his body, but in respect of his Divinity; he can easily pass by Images
and Statues, looking upon them as false Representations, and very unprofitable
to solid P^et^: If he esteems the Right of the Church, and the Decency of it in
the external practice of Religion he despises the multitude of Proud
Ceremonies, and the glittering of so many affected Ornaments; He believes not
that the Popes Authority is necessary for the French Church; He says
confidently that the Gallique Church may stand without the Roman, and that she
can never render her self more just and happy, than by banishing strange Power:
He looks upon the King as the Head of Justice, which is principally established
by the Divine Laws, that Sovereigns, who are according to Gods own heart, ought
to know and cause to be observed the Law of God, without turning either to the
right, or to the left hand; with this disposition of mind, so different between
the Roman-Catholiques and French Protestants (if diverse Opinions remained in
the mind only without breaking forth) they would not produce dreadful Enmities,
and those Obstacles which are so hard to be overcome; but when one endeavors
to draw a Roman Catholic from his painted Devotions, and oblige a Protestant
to conform to them, they suffer frightful Vexations if they be constrained, and
can hardly take any Resolutions, except they are brought to them by Reasonings
and Persuasions.

26. I have known the thoughts of many rational minds, even of the
Roman-Catholiques, who believe that the King would do an act of Wise Bounty, if
he would permit (without any reserve) the satisfaction of Consciences, without
showing any aversion, either to Protestants or Papists, provided that all would
dwell in a mutual Peace, without malediction or quarelling.

This State of Cessation would be a principle of Peace, and all the World would
be contented, if his Majesty would not permit, that any one of his Subjects
should be debarred from bearing Offices and Honors, that those of either
Religion may live without trouble and disquiet in the Service due to his
Majesty. By this Liberty we should all have a Peaceable Conversation and a
Charming Commerce; the heats of disputes animated by Hatreds, would cease, they
would become Conferences of Friendship, by which every one might be Instructed;
Aversion (which disorders the blood) should have no more force against the
calm lights of our minds, and all would be so agreeably disposed to Truth,
that, in a word, all who are Great, Rational, and Spiritual in the Kingdom,
would give their hearts and minds to the most just verity.

One may observe in the Debates of Religion, that which falls out in all other
quarrels;

One never yields to declared Enemies, till after they have tried the
misfortune of Arms, and then the Submission increases the rage of the
Overcome, and begets such grudges as are the Fathers or Children of desperate
Actions; but in a Cessation of Fight, they speak together, they hear one
another, they join their Interests, and every one has time to do Justice to
himself and others.

If we could have in France so sweet a way to perfect Peace, we should see a
miraculous effect, and sooner than one could believe, of this desired Unity;
because every one being dis-engaged from the Authority of Strangers, (without
fearing to be punished by the Kings Orders) would bind himself willingly to his
Natural Prince, who is most Christian; rather than to tie himself to the Roman
Monarch, who appears very jealous and hard to be served; and so not parting
their Hearts, they would Unite their Souls.

If a Frenchman were in necessity of having a Dispensation for Marriage, would
he not be content rather to obtain it of the King, than to buy it of Rome?
especially when in these days, they cost four times more than ordinary, to make
war against Candia.

I believe not but that Pastors Ordained by the Kings Authority, and
Canonically received by the Churches, would be as satisfactory, and as fully
Authorized as by the Power of Rome; and when we shall have well thought upon
the establishment of this sweet Agreement, the Fruits which it will produce,
will be found to be the very things which the King desires for his People.

28. This matter of Religion having been discoursed, where there were many of
both Religions, one approved the thoughts of a person, who maintained that the
Roman-Catholiques, whose minds are not cruelly inclined, are more easily bent
to the Reformed Piety, than the Reformed to the Romish Religion.

The 1st. Reason is, that it is more easy to cease believing that which is
uncertain, than to begin to believe that which appears to be false; for
example, I give you the Creed of the reality of the Body and Blood of Christ,
of the only and Supreme authority of the Pope, of Purgatory and of the glory of
the Saints departed whom they pray to; The reality of Christ's being carnally in
the bread, is so uncertain, that it depends upon the well-making of the bread,
the right Ordination of the Priest; upon the true Pronuciation of the Words and
upon the fixed attention of the Priest, all these necessary conditions are only
Supposed or believed by a Charitable Faith.

The Supreme Authority of the Pope depends upon his lawful Election, which is
often so obscure, and appears so clearly defective or so openly Criminal, that
many Decades of years have passed, in which one knew not which Pope to obey if
there were two chosen, and where there is but one, Simony is so ordinary that
all Popes are Suspected of it.

Purgatory is proposed as a place in the hollow of the earth; holy Authority
speaks not a word of it, the Ancients Creed speak nothing of it, the Greek
Church despises it, eyes cannot see it, reason cannot understand it, the
perfect grace of Christ does not favor it The vision of Souls who come again
clothed in White or Red, is much Suspected for a cheat and convicted of
extravagancy; this Mystery has nothing more certain than the fear it gives the
people and the good it brings to the Priests.

The glory of the souls departed to whom they pray, cannot be known but by a
popular opinion, which has but little discerning; or by particular persuasions
which may seduce by freindship; or by Canonization of the Pope which may be
deceived by a false report.

The mind of a Roman-Catholique finding in its self these proofs to be so
uncertain, as well in the Essentials as Circumstatials, will have much less a
do to deny his full consent, than a Protestant to give his; because, Reason and
Faith will fly uncertainties and cannot seek for them nor love them: the second
Reason is, that Roman-Catholiques do believe all that which the Protestant do
positively avow, in respect of God, of Jesus Christ, of the blessed Virgin, of
the life and death eternal, and generally of all mysteries, universally
received in all Churches where Christ is worshipped as God, and known as a
Redeemer; In this common belief, it is more easy for rational minds tolimit
themselves to this Faith so ancient and general, than to increase it by
Articles of humane faith, which has not the principles nor just Characters of
divine Authority, The third Reason is, that the Roman Catholic may have the
same comfort of Spirit by the Protestant Religion having laid aside the
mysteries which are added to the Primitive Faith, that which the Protestants
may not do when they go to the Roman Communion.

A Christian soul may comfort it self, without the reality of Flesh if it
unites it self Spiritually to Jesus Christ, by having respect to him, knowledge
of him, and a sincere Love for him.

One is more satisfied to believe the grace of God capable to carry our souls
to Heaven, than to leave them at the bottom of a lake of fire;

The heart is more content to Establish its faith, obedience and its good
works upon the Law and words of the Gospel, then upon the Politiques of the
Decretals and upon the Engine, du droit Canon.

Prayers have much more justice and confiance when they are addressed to God,
who sees, understands, and fathoms all things, than if they are carried at
random by the Imagination, to get the favor of a Saint whose state is unknown
to us.

These three Reasons, which I set down (amongst many of the same force) prove,
that the Roman-Catholiques not being corrupted by the advantage of the World,
nor upheld by the power of a Sovereign, or animated by violent passions, are
easily carried to the Approbation of that Faith and Piety with which the
Protestants content themselves; But the Protestant cannot without violence or
without interest submit to all the particulars of the Roman Faith because they
make the Spiritual adoration, carnal; the Spirit of God, the material Body of
Christ; Faith in God, Fear; Certainty, Dubious; Divinity, humanity, Pure and
Efficacious grace a defective and weak merit.

29. Let us not trouble our selves to dispute, to which way pious Reason would
turn, if it were at full liberty; whatsoever inspiration one might pretend to
have to presage, it is the event that must make the Prophecy known.

But to see some effects in favor of this desired Unity; The entire liberty of
the two Religions will make the only overture to this Royal design; and then
considering no body but the King, next to the Majesty of God, they will lose
the fears which the thunder of the Vatican gives them, and of which a wife man
has said, Chi non ha Paura, non sent il malo; he who has no fear can feel no
harm.

No Party should take an advantage of another, and I believe that if we served
God well and honored the King, we should all agree, with so much sweetness,
that one might see faith truly universal, justly Apostolical, and truly
Christian, shine out clearly.

30. If to produce unity we must have the same thoughts, let us all respect
and follow (without wrangling) the good will of our Sovereign; let us not be
obstinate in our private faith, but let us be fixed in that which has appeared
at all times Catholic, and which we have equally respect for and confiance in.

All of us have the Confession of Faith which is called the Apostolical Symbol,
we have almost in the same words as they recite them in the Mass, the
Confession of Faith of the Council of Nice: such a collection of Faith signed
by 318 Bishops was a conclusion of that worthy Assembly, to whom Rome sent two
Deputies; the Articles of faith were received by the Church which was not
Arian, and since none of bur Churches are so, let us be satisfied with that
Confession truly Catholic, and let us hold to it.

Let us Reason together with freindship: The Confession of the Symbol of Nice,
touched without doubt all the Articles of the Christian Faith which the truly
faithful believe or ought to believe to satisfy their consciences; so worthy
an Assembly was the first that Christianity saw in its quiet after the
dreadful Persecutions: It was under the Authority of Constantine the great,
who was converted from Idolatry to the Faith, it was as the Resurrection of the
Gospel, which until then was preached in hidden places, in Caves and dark
holes of the earth.

By the happy Miracle of a new Life, Jesus Christ increased by his Divine
Power, the light of Faith and the sweetness of tranquillity; it was necessary
in so considerable a meeting to inform Christians very well what they were
obliged to believe always in all parts of the World, and in all Nations where
Religion could be found. It was absolutely necessary also to inform by a
public Act the Soul of the newly Converted Emperor of all the Mysteries
which make Christian Religion Divine and True; and the Emperor ought to
Regulate his Faith by that general approved Confession, signed by all the good
Bishops. In short this Confession of Faith so Authentic and so wisely
Established, was received by all Christianity as an abridgment of the Gospel,
with this assurance, that those who believe these Propositions, would have that
true and entire Faith which Christ requires in his Faithfulones.

All these Circumstances witness, that the Articles proposed since that time
were not believed then, since they could not forget to Record them; and that
this Council principally Assembled against the impious subtleties of Arius,
treated of all the Mysteries of Religion, and by a common Agreement made a
general Declaration of them; that they put into it all that is necessary to
Salvation; not only to correct present Errors, but to hinder new ones; and if
the blind obedience which Worshipped the Decrees of the Church, and the
Patriarch of Rome, had been a difference necessary to Salvation, the Roman
Deputies would not have sailed to present it. The Emperor nor the Fathers of
the Council would not have neglected to put in that Article which goes at
present for the most Fundamental Ground of Faith, and instead of these Words
One Holy and Apostolical Church we should read these, the Roman Church only.

I wonder that if the Greeks complain of that which the Latins have added to
the Articles of the Procession of the holy Spirit Filioque, we should not
complain of them that they have added. And the Roman Church.

After having confirmed this Truth, that the Confession of Faith published by
the Council of Nice being received by all Christians establishes them in a
most Holy and Pious Unity, let us agree according to the will of the King in
the French Church, in that manner which the first and principal Council of
Christians, regulated our common Faith; since in the third Age it regulated the
Faith of Constantine the great and all Christianity: we may join to these,
those who condemned the Heresy of Nestorius and Eutichus; in short we are
united if true Antiquity Governs us.

20. Let us consider the difference of the first Council held at Nice, which
cements us all, with the last held at Trent which divides us; I am not willing
to utter the least unbeseeming Word, but I must say, (keeping the Truth which I
love) that there is a great difference between him whom the Spirit of the holy
Scriptures Governs, and him that takes his from the Valises or Clok-bag of
Rome: In the Council of Nice, we have nothing which is not proposed in Holy
Writ, by the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles; In that of Trent, we see all
is Proposed, Resolved, and Ordained according to the prescribed Order of the
Roman Legates, and according to the Popes interest. The first which binds us
with the Truth of God, unties us with Pleasure; the other which makes all
submit to the Vanities of the Pope, divides us even to Fury.

But to make the Purity of that Faith appear the better, which can give us that
Admirable Peace, I will employ this Page, to set down Word for Word, the
Confession of Faith Writ at the Council of Nice, so as it is sang in the Roman
Mass from whence I took it with exact Faithfulness.

The Creed.
I Believe in One God, the Father Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and of
all things Visible and Invisible; and in One Lord Jesus Christ the only
begotten Son of God, begotten of his Father before all Worlds; God of God,
Light of Light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one Substance
with the Father, by whom all things were made: Who for us Men and for our
Salvation, came down from Heaven, and was Incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the
Virgin Mary, and was made Man, and was Crucified also for us under Pontius
Pilate: He suffered, and was Buried, and the third Day he Rose again according
to the Scriptures, and Ascended into Heaven, and sits on the Right Hand of
the Father: And he shall come again with Glory to Judge both the Quick and the
Dead, whose Kingdom shall have no End. And I believe in the Holy Ghost, the
Lord and giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, who with the
Father and the Son together is Worshipped and Glorified, who spoke by the
Prophets. And I Believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church; I acknowledge one
Baptism for the Remission of Sins, and I look for the Resurrection of the Dead
and the Life of the World to come, Amen.


We are Piously and Christianly United by this Creed, and if any thing be
omitted in it, it is so clear in the Holy Scriptures, that one has no need of a
Council to persuade or declare it. But to follow the Decrees of the Council of
Trent I must add to the Confession of Faith which I have Written, these new
Articles.

1. I Believe the Patriarch of Rome to be Sovereign Monarch and independent of
all Christian People above all Laws, incapable to be judged either by a
Council or any other Power.

2. I Believe the true Body of Christ made so by the Priest is Eaten, Broken,
and sensibly bruised by the Teeth of the Faithful.

3. I Believe a Purgatory under the Earth, to Torment the Souls destined to
Glory.

4. I Believe the Indulgences of the Bishop of Rome to draw Souls out of that
Fire.

5. I Believe the Efficacious Absolution of the Priests when one has confessed
all the Sins to them which they have Committed.

6. I Believe the Canonizing of Saints ordered by the Pope.

7. I Believe Images, Relics Processions, the Agnus Dei, the Medals, the
Service in an unknown Tongue, the Rosaries, the Girdle of St. Francis; the
Medals of the Fourth Sts. or Borromie, the holy Water and Exorcisms with Salt.

8. I Believe Dispensation for a certain Price, the cruel Inquisition, the
giving of Kingdoms to the first Usurper, the Massacre of all those who
withstand the Court of Rome, the Eternal Damnation of those who stray from his
Commands, and an infernal Curse upon all those who (without any Reserve) do not
obey all his Orders.

9. I Believe, that if one shoud know that if the Pope did neglect his own
Salvation and that of his Brethren, if he should lead multitudes with him
without Number to Damnation to be slaves of Hell, no Mortal could, without
presumption, reprehend his Faults, because he who judges all others, cannot be
Judged by any one. See the Decretals in 4. Distinct. Canon. 5.

10. I Believe generally that the Roman Church only and those who obey her in
all things without Contradiction and reserve, are Catholics and Apostoliques.

11. I Believe also the new Morality of the Jesuits favored by the Pope, and
the Doctrine of Vernant and that of the Guimeneus, whose Condemnation made by
Sorbon, has been burnt as an Heretic by an express Bull from the Pope.

12. I believe that there is as well Piety as justice in the crimes approved,
tolerated, and allowed on by the Pope.

13. I Believe generally that Christ and the Pope have but one and the same
Power and Tribunal, and that all Power is given to him in Heaven and Earth.

14. In a Word, I Believe that one ought to follow, in spite of what ever can
be said the sine conceits of the Cardinal of Perroon, in respect of Pope
Clement the Eighth of whom he held his Cardinalship.

I Have always Reverenced your Blessedness as a God upon Earth.

This Creed is very long, and much more than that of which the first Christians
made Profession.

If this Creed divides all Christianity, if it hinders the Peace of our hearts
in France; Let us all beseech our Gracious King to Stand, and make us Stand
also to the Creed of that Generous Constantine, and of so many Excellent
Bishops, the most part of whom bore the marks of Martyrdom, which they received
during the Persecution.

O how happy should we be, if we had nothing else to do, but to obey God and
the King; how contented would our lives be and how quiet our Consciences, if
the King would give us Power and Liberty not to change the Incorruptible Glory
of God into the Image of Corruptible Man; how Contented and Glorious would his
Majesty be, if he would Unite all of us by the Truth of God, since that we are
not divided but by the Vanity of Man.

32. Although the Roman-Catholiques are tied by Custom to their Ceremonies,
which makes Religion to be a show; although they glory much in their
Profession, seeing themselves upheld, and the Protestants low in the present
state of affairs; although Custom makes them imagine, the Religion of the
Protestants in France at too far a distance from that which pleases the fancy
and sense of the People; Yet it is certain, if they had tasted the good Word,
and found without fear and prejudice the Essence of true Piety, they would
relish it with Pleasure and Comfort, they would approve of that holy Truth
which the Prophet spoke, Taste and see how sweet the Lord is; they would rebuke
with scorn an infinite company of Follies, which they dare neither leave nor
censure in their present condition.

I have seen more than a hundred persons of great Quality, whose Souls were
above the Vulgar, laugh at, or bemoan these Superstitious Actions and low
Opinions which the Vulgar made their dear Devotions, and which many
Hypocritical Cheats would make go for considerable matters.

Mouns. Abbot Marreau of Ville-Loing shows in all his writings that he had a
great Soul when he speaks most generously of so many Heads attributed to St.
John Baptist, and of the Blood of Christ kept in glasses, and of many other low
things, which stuff the Devotion, and daub it with Mud or Ink; so I call the
Impostures of the Bablers of Fables, and the Writers of Prodigies: I have heard
many of the best sort of Ecclesiastiques, say, that they suffered much violence
to comply with, and follow such gross abuses to their Sense and Knowledge; but
because Contradiction or neglect passed for a Crime in regard of the received
use, they believed that they acted like wise men, when they trifled and played
the Fools like the Ignorant: I can assure you, Eutimius, that the distance
which I perceive for the particular Creed of the Pope, which is explained here,
does not come from a prejudiced mind, but from a sincere heart, which does not
suffer me to commit my Salvation and my Faith to Ideas, where I remarque
weakness and incertitude; I speak in respect of those who believe them, for
those who do not, have spirit and understanding to manage their Interest,
laughing at these ridiculous Weaknesses.

Many generous Souls brought up in the Romish Communion, have the same thoughts
that I have, although they have not the same which animate me; they have too
many knots to break or untye; they are content only to slack them, they see to
cut them asunder, is an offense against the public Opinion.

Certain of my Friends speaking to me of this matter, tell me that a Wise man
seldom takes up that Resolution which his Master blames, and his Companions
hate.

In spite of the Custom of some, and the Policy of others, if his Majesty would
determine, to make the Star of Freedom shine, he would quickly see the day of
Unity; all hearts and minds would willingly render themselves to the Truth of
God, Countenanced by the King; and all eyes love light, although they are not
Prisoners; so all that are Generous and Rational in France, would join without
noise and without trouble to true Reason and noble Piety; no one can resist the
loving force of that which is Good, Fair, and True.

33. When his Majesty testifies his desire of the Agreement of his Subjects, he
wishes first the Glory of God, and then the happiness and honor of that
Church, which bears the title of the French Church; are we not all obliged by
the Zeal of our Salvation, and for the Interest of our most dear Country, to
carry our Affections highly toward his Majesty's design? let us procure the
Glory of God, and the happiness of the Church of France.

For the first, let us not be so weak and erroneous to believe that the Honor
of God is increased when that of Rome is; the Authority of the King, who is a
Sacred Majesty, is sufficient to make us Preach, Understand, and Observe the
Will of God; for the second are we so base to seek after with an unnatural Zeal
the glory of the Roman Court, to the prejudice of the French Church?

The Gentlemen of Sorbon making their Censures or judicious Observations on
Odoricus Renaldus, Continuer of Baronius, have branded as notable faults that
which is writ against the French Church and its Liberty. These Liberties are
not Licentiousness, but, as the Wise learnedly explain, an exact Observation of
the Ancient Rules of the Christian Faith.

Would to God that all the Kings Subjects, upon this occasion, had the love to
hold themselves to the Rules of that Faith which is called Canons; and ten or
twelve Persons of each Religion, had the Command to search them, not in Modern
Antiquity, but Apostolic, and in that of the first Councils; they would
easily find the French Liberty well established, and the Dependence on Rome
very ill-founded.

I ask if our French Church can be unjust, if she takes the Reformation
demanded by 5 Ambassadors of France, in several Reductions of the Council of
Trent?

Would she not be as holy when she Regulates her Faith upon Divine words, and
her Manners upon the Sacred Laws of God, as though she served the Statues of
the Grandeur of Rome.

The Cardinal of Lorain, did not he do a greater Service to the French Church
when he endeavored a Reformation in the Council of Trent, than by that base
Compliance which he had afterward to the Will of the Pope.

Are not the Gentlemen of Sorbon generous and Christian, when speaking of the
works of Renaldus, they say that the French-Church has done nothing more
profitable than the Pragmatick Sanction, which Sanction was made at Burges, in
the year 1438. The King Assembled Bishops, Princes, and the great Lords of his
Kingdom; but because it bound the Authority of the Pope, it was looked upon as
a black attempt, and that was it which rendered it praiseworthy.

His Majesty may if he please do something better, he may apply the great Remedy
to the Malady, which has broken our bones, and eaten our flesh; whereas others
have ordered nothing but Lenitives, and applied them with a trembling hand.

Let us desire (my dear Eutimius) let us desire this holy Unity of one and the
same Religion; his Majesty who wishes it, desires our common good; it is an
evil thing to hate, as it is an unhappiness to be hated.

The thoughts which I have newly explained to you, shall end with this, we
should be happy if we had but one God in Heaven, and one Monarch upon Earth.

I beseech the Almighty to inspire the King not to permit in his Kingdom a
Companion with God; and that he would propose ways to us, which are only drawn
from the Law and Truth of God, to be the Rule of our Devotions; his Majesty
will acquire Glory in giving us Peace; France will have all the Properties of
being the One, the True and the Good, and we shall have Goodness of Soul, Truth
in Spirit, and Unity of hearts.

FINIS.

