TO THE SUPREME AUTHORITY OF THE NATION THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of
ENGLAND. The humble Petition of Mary Countes of Sterling, and John Blount her
husband, Sr Robert Croke of Checquers in the County of Bucks Knight, and Dame
Susan his wife, Henry (...) Zin^^^, and Jacoba his wife, Sackvile Glemham, and
Peter Glemham, your Petitioners, the said Countess, Dame Susan, Jacoba,
Sackvile, and Peter, being Grandchildren of Sir Peter Vanloore the elder; and
your Petitioners the said Countess, Dame Susan, and Jacoba, being also right
Heirs of the said Sir Peter, and of Dame Mary Powel, late wife of Sir (...)
SHOWS,
THat the said Sir Peter Vanlore did in his lifetime settle the Castle and
Parkes of the Devises in Wilts worth 600 l. yearly; and the fifth part of
diverse other his Manors and Lands worth yearly 2500 l. upon the said Lady
Powel, and the Heirs of her body: And for default of such issue, the reversion
of the said Castle and Parks to his own right Heirs; which your Petitioners the
said Countess of Sterling, Dame Susan, and Jacoba are, and entayled the fifth
part of the said other Manors and Lands upon all your Petitioners his
Grandchildren, and some others his Grandchildren by name, and so dyed; and the
said Lady Powel upon the sixth day of October 1651 died without issue; and your
Petitioners are thereby become lawfully entitled to the said Castle, Manners,
and lands, according to the settlement of the said Sir Peter.

2 That by reason of some implacable differences between the said Sir Edw.
Powel, and the said Lady, they lived apart for about 15 years together before
her death; and one Thomas Levingston a Lawyer (who married Anne Caesar one of
the Grandchildren of the said Sir Peter Vanloore) being conceived by the said
lady to take part with the said Sir Edw. Powel against her, the said lady
Powel, became much disaffected to, and displeased with the said Tho.
Levingston, and his wife.

3 That the said lady about Septem. 1651. being dangerously sick (of the
sickness whereof she soon after died) at a house in Chelsey, where she had long
lived sole and separate; and the said Sir Edw. Powel, and Thomas Levingston and
his wife, knowing the said lady had a great estate at her dispose (some with,
and some without the consent of the said Sir Edward, which they contrived to
gain unto themselves by several strange unlawful practices) they, together with
one Will. Hinson another Lawyer, and a Justice of Peace of Middlesex, and near
kinsman of the said Sir Edward, (and to whom, as it is commonly reported, he
has given all his estate, and disinherited his own Brother and Heir) with
diverse other their kindred, servants, and confederates, did about the 7 day of
the same Septem. (according to a Complot betwixt them) forcibly enter into the
said house at Chelsey, wherein the said Lady Powel then lay dying; [and to
which the said Sir Edward had no Title;] and guarded and secured the same with
armed men, caused all the Ladies servants to be presently arrested and
violently taken away by one Thomas Crook then Under Sheriff of Middlesex [whom
they brought with them] and to be imprisoned without Bayl, upon falls and
feigned Actions of many thousand pounds, which they never prosecuted, but
became nonsuit therein; and with Guards of armed and dissolute men they
chained up the Doors of the said House, and in Warlike manner kept it and the
nearest friends and kindred of the said Lady from her until she died, engaging
their Confederates to secrecy and fidelity by Rings of Gold given to them with
this Motto inscribed, viz. (Never to be forgotten or requited) and discharged
the said Lady Powels Apothecary for but delivering a civil Message from some of
her friends, and placed a new Physician of their own engagement, and strange
servants (whom the Lady knew not, and against her will) to attend her in her
last sickness; and fearing least the said Lady should make any discovery of
their wicked doings from her chamber window (which opened into a neighbors
ground adjoining) they forbade that Neighbor, to permit any of the said Ladies
friends to come inground, or stand near the house.

4 That having thus by force and practice secluded all but themselves, they
(upon the 18 day of the same September.) brought Judge Warburton (who knew not
the Lady Powel) from London, unto the said house at Chelsey, then chained up
and kept guarded; and then, and there procured the said Lady (as the said Judge
certifies) to levy several Fines of the said Castle, Parks, Manors and lands,
unto one Anthony Basset; which Fines (as the said Complotters affirm) were
declared by some Writings, which she shortly after sealed to the use of the
said Sir Edward Powel, Levingston, and his wife: And the said Lady Powel did
about that time also (as they pretend) dispose a great personal Estate (which
was your Petitioners said Grandfathers) to the said Levingston and his wife;
although the said Lady utterly detested them as persons of a most evil and
dangerous conversation, and often times has been heard to wish the said Anne
Levingston were not of her kindred.

5 That the said Confederates suspecting [as they had cause] the sudden death
of the said Lady Powel [who died thus imprisoned upon the 6 day of October.
following] might render all their plots and fines ineffectual; They by practice
between one Gardener an Attorney, and James Pickis a Cursistor, procured
several Writs for passing the said Fines to be made out antedated in Easter
Term before, and made returnable in Trinity Term next after; and to deprive
your Petitioners of all possibility of redress, caused the same Fines to
enrolled of Record, as acknowledged and levied in Trinity Term [four months
before they were acknowledged, and contrary to the true intent of the Statute
made in the 23 year of the Reign of the late Qu-Eliz: and the practice so
dangerous [if admitted] as tends to the deceiving of all such as shall
purchase or deal for any lands, and to establish wickedness by a law.

6 That yet doubting all these plots would not hold (wickedness filling them
with fear of discovery) they procured a sequestered Parson to certify under his
hand, that the said Lady Powel was reconciled to the said Sir Edward, and had
received the Sacrament of the Supper, and procured a paper under the said
Ladies hand to signify her well pleasedness, although upon, or near that very
day that paper was subscribed, the said Lady Powel did publikeby rebuke the
said Mrs. Levingston, and affirm, That their plot was to disinherit the right
Heirs of the lands; but that she would be torn in pieces with wild horses
before she would do it. And the said Certificates are things so altogether
unusual, and full of suspicion, that the Judges of the Common Pleas in dislike
thereof did publicly in open Court tell the said Levingston, that he had
over-acted his part therein.

7 That the Petitioners so soon as they possibly could, complained of the said
wrong to the Court of Common Pleas, where the chief Justice thereof did openly
affirm, That he knew not what was force and fraud, if these Actions of the said
Confederates were not; and Judge Puliston, and Judge Atkins, two of the other
Judges, did also in open Court several times earnestly express themselves
against the foulness of the said Levingstons practice, in obtaining the said
Fines; but said it was past their power to relieve your Petitioners, but there
was a Parliament then sitting that could, and they believed would relieve them.

8 That your petitioners have for the space of a year and half addressed
themselves to the late Parliament for relief, which was so far sensible of the
foulness of the Crime, That they caused it particularly to be excepted out of
the Act of General pardon; but never found leisure-time for the hearing
thereof, or giving your petitioners relief, or to provide for prevention of
like wickedness for the future.

Your petitioners believing, That God has sitted you with Spirits to relieve
against Oppression, and to do and act righteousness, Humbly beseech you to
vouchsafe a Hearing to your petitioners Complaint, and to afford them such
relief, That the said Fines and Deeds (so unduly obtained) may be produced and
vacated, Offenders punished, and like wickedness for the future by some good
law prevented. And (as they now do) so they shall continue to pray that the
Spirit of Wisdom, Council, and the fear of the Lord may rest upon you, and
abide with you, for his glory, the good of his people, establishing
Righteousness in the Nation, that the Calamities thereof may cease, when men of
public Spirits shall stand up that date and will do justice.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS HUMBLY PROPOSED To the Worthy Members of Parliament, By
Thomas Levingston Esquire, and Anne his Wife, and William Powel, otherwise
Hinson Esquire; concerning a Petition and Complainst against them by John
Blount, and Mary Countess of Sterling his Wife, and Others, now under
consideration before the honorable Committee for receiving PETITIONS.
FIrst, The matter in difference between the Plaintiffs, and these Defendants,
is, only the Title unto the Estate lately belonging unto the Lady Powel
deceased, the Defendant Anne's Mothers Sister.

Secondly, the Complaint against the Defendants, is, That they did wickedly
force the said Lady Powel, by several evil practices used upon her, to settle
her Estate upon her Niece (the Defendant Anne) and did cause a Fine to be
antedated for the perfecting of the said Settlement: And therefore the
Plaintiffs desire the said Fine, and the Defendant Anne's Deeds to be produced
and vacated.

Whereas the Force complained of has been legally examined and tried. For the
Force complained of by the Plaintiffs is a pretended forcible Entry upon, and
also a forcible Detainer of the House of the said Lady Powel, and that was
legally tried by a Jury upon the place where the force is supposed to be
committed, and no force found.

And the pretended antedating of the Writs for the Fine complained of, is no
more then the ancient usual practice in levying Fines for many hundred years,
when any settlement is made of any Estate in the vacation time. For the Writs
must bear date in a Term, and cannot bear date in the succeeding Term, and
therefore must bear date in a preceding Term. And in most of the assurances and
settlements, made of any men's estates in England by Fines acknowledged between
the Terms, the Writs must bear date and be returnable the Terms foregoing; and
if those be not good in law, most men's Titles to their Estates are void; and if
this were not admitted, the people could not make any perfect Conveyances and
Assurances of their Estates by Fines in the vacation time.

And as well the said pretended force and antedating of the said Writs, as all
other the supposed evil practices that the Plaintiffs could then suggest were
examined before the Judges (one of which took the said Fine in a judicial way,
the said Lady acknowledging to him that she did the same freely and willingly,
and without constraint.) And upon the Plaintiffs first reproachful false
suggestions, they gave rules to stop further proceedings upon the said Fine.
But upon full hearing of both Parties, with their Council, gave their Judgment
that the said Fine should be proceeded in, to be perfected, which was done
accordingly.

Therefore the said Complaint against the Defendants is irregular; For their
Complaint ought now to be against that Court of Justice, who have examined and
determined the Matters complained of, and caused the Settlement complained
against to be perfected, if they have done Injustice therein: and the parties
ought not to be further vexed and molested, when their Cause is Legally heard
and judged.

But, if the supposed evil gaining a Title to the said Estate by the
Defendants be not fully examined, yet, it is both Examinable and Determinable
in the ordinary Courts of Law and Equity; And many Settlements of several
Estates by Fines and Deeds have been anulled and vacated upon sufficient proof
made, that they have been unduely gained or procured by evil practices.

Yet the Honorable Committee for receiving of Petitions, only upon hearing
the said Complaint against the Defendants, without their Answers or Defense,
have required the Defendants Deeds and Evidences concerning the Defndants Annes
Title to the said Estate, to be produced, which may be of very evil
consequence, that their Adversary claiming the same Estate should peruse or be
advertised of their Title before any Trial be brought upon the same.

The Defendants in all humility and submission offer it to consideration.

First, Whether the Legislative Power, as Legislative can try the Matters in
question suggested against the Defendants.

For if the Defendants have evilly and wickedly gained a pretended Title to the
said Estate, they have transgressed, either the common law, Romans 4. 25. Where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression.
or the Statute law of the land, or else they have done contrary to the Rules
of good conscience, Romans 3. 20. By the Law is the knowledge of Sin.
and equity.

If either of the first, the Defendants punishment for Romans 7. 7. I had not
known sin but by the Law.
their offenses, will be known by the laws they have broken; and it is only
the Jurisdictive power, as Jurisdictve, that can try the Defendants for those
offenses. The business being no more then the Application of the laws in being
to the offenses done.

If the Defendants have done the latter (that is) done contrary to a good
conscience, and eequity, in gaining the said Title, then that must be tried by
the known Rules of Equity, known and practiced in this Nation (For there cannot
be a particular Equity that concerns the Defendants only) And that cannot be
within the limits of the legislative power, as legislative, when the work is
only to measure a Fact by the Rule already in being.

Secondly, It is humbly offered to be considered, Whether any Reasons be
offered by the Plaintiffs against the Defendants, why the legislative power,
should in an extraordinary way, should take this particular Controversy out of
the hands of the Ordinary Courts of law, and Equity, when others of the same
nature concerning Titles, unduly gained have been, and are daily tried, judged
and determined by them

Thirdly, Whether any Reasons be offered by the Plaintiffs, why they are not
relievable by the ordinary proceedings of law, and equity, if there be just
cause for the same.

Fourthly, If the Legislative power shall please in this Case to exercise the
Jurisdictive power, (for otherwise they cannot take conusance of it) The wisdom
and care of the Parliament in their late constitution of the Committee for
Petitions, provided against the confounding the Legislative power with the
jurisdictive and limited them to receive such Petitions only for the
Parliament, as are proper to the legislative power, or not relievable elsewhere,
it is humbly offered to be considered, Whether it can concern them to examine
the Defendant Annes Title to the said Estate by the said Fines and Deeds (as is
now required by the said Committee) before they have tried the Defendants for
their supposed offenses in the undue gaining of the said Fine and Deeds? For if
the Defendants be not guilty of any such offenses, the Parliament cannot be
supposed to intermeddle with the Defendant Annes Deeds or Title.

Now the Defendants being clear in their own consciences from any wicked
practice, plot, or combination, whereof they are falsely and maliciously accused
by the means, occasion, and procurement of one Crump, otherwise Crompton, who
was a mean menial servant unto the said Lady Powels husband, and had
endeavored wickedly to separate the said Lady from her hushusband to her
dishonor, and who striveth and hops to gain a great personal Estate to
himself by suggesting many falsehoods against us the Defendants, and inciting
others upon such grounds to contend for the said Lady Powels real Estate.

We the Defendants upon the Considerations aforegoing humbly pray,

Either a dismission of the matters in question, to the ordinary course of
Justice and Equity.

Or otherwise if the Parliament please to take the Trial of them unto
themselves, That the Defendants may be first legally tried in such manner as
the Parliament shall direct, for the offenses whereof they are accused, before
their Deeds and Title to the Estate in question be called for out of their
hands,

And your Petitioners shall pray, etc.
AN ANSWER To a Printed Paper; Entitled, Some Considerations humbly proposed
to the worthy Members of Parliament, by Thomas Levingston Esquire and Anne his
Wife, and William Powel, otherwise, Hinson Esquire concerning a Petition and
Complaint against them, by Mary, Countess of Sterlin, and others; now under
consideration before the Honorable Committee for receiving Petitions.
THe Complainants first observe, that the Defendants have very wisely, for
their own advantage, mistated the Case of the Complainants; for they complain
of a most notorious practice, of force, and fraud, to dis-inherit them; And the
Defendants in their Paper state the Case as if the Complaint were only of
force; and to the fraud and practice answer not at all.

The true state of the Case stands thus, and will be made good by these
particulars:
The Complainants say they complain of a dis-inherison, done unto them, in
September. 1651. of lands near 1200 l. yearly value, and of a great personal
estate gotten from them, by wicked practices, upon the late Lady Powel, their
fathers sister, while she lay dying, put in execution by the said Thomas
Levingston, and Anne his wife, William Hinson, and Sr Edward Powel, since
deceased, and diverse others, their Confederates.

They say that Sr Edw. Powel, and his Lady, had lived asunder for 15 years
before, in implacable differences, wherein the said M. Levingston, and his
wife, and Will. Hinson, were conceived by the Lady, to take part with the said
sir Edward against her; That sir Edward and M. Hinson were indebted to some [in
trust to be at the Ladies dispose] the sum of 8000 l. and that by an outrageous
force in the said Septem. in the time of her last sickness (whereof she upon
the 6. of October. next after died, in which month 2000 l. of the 8000 l. was
payable) they by confederacy violently entered into the house where the said
Lady had long lived separate, and then lay sick, and to which the said sir
Edward had no title (for 'twas bought with the Lady Vanlores money, and
conveyed in trust) arresting and haling all her servants from her by one Crook
then Undersheriff of Middlesex (whom they brought with them for that purpose)
upon false and feigned Actions of many thousand pounds, which they never
prosecuted, but became nonsuit in.

That they chained and bard up the doors of the said house, and kept it with
guards of armed and hired men, with grenades, swords, guns, and pistols,
charged with bullet, and ordered to do execution; oblieging their confederates
to fidelity, by Rings of Gold given them with this Motto, viz. (Never to be
forgotten or requited) That they discharged the Ladies Apothecary, and
violently excluded all her kindred, friends, and servants, that knew her many
diseases and infirmities, and would not admit them to sight of her, saying,
They should never see her face more; nor did they, [being violently kept from
her by the said Force] That they placed upon her a new Physician, and new
servants of their own Engagement against her Will.

That during this force they brought Judge Warburton (who knew not the Lady
Powel) from London to Chelsey, to take several Fines of her. That they procured
a strange Minister (of Mr Levingstons acquaintance [but unknown to the Lady
Powel) to be assistant to them in these practices, and forbade the Doctor of
the Parish, (an honest godly Divine] to come to the house, and though the Lady
in her lifetime desired and appointed him to preach her Funeral Sermon, they
forbade him to come to the Funeral, and appointed a guard of their Confederates
in the force to keep him out of the Pulpit at the Funeral of the Lady (had he
thither come) and to keep in that stranger Minister who preached the Funeral
Sermon, and then read some unusual Writing in justification of the
Confederates, That M. Hinson then was, and still is a Justice of Peace of that
County, and he and Mrs. Levingston were always present and very active in this
force, managing and directing all things of, and in order to it; and she upon
the remove of the Ladies servants, cried out, The Plot has taken, the Plot
has taken; and gave order to those of the force, That if Mr. Vandenbemde the
Ladies kinsman did but go out of the house, to keep him out; for that then she
knew how to do her work; Mr. Vandenbemde was offered by Mr. Levingston a year
before to be of this Plot, and to have share of the benefit but he refused it.
and thereupon they got him out by a device suddenly contrived amongst them, and
ever after kept him out by the force; and neither he, nor any of the Ladies
friends, kindred, neighbors, or servants ever after saw the Lady.

The Complainants say this practice to gain the said estate, was in the end
completed by 7 several Fines, pretended to be acknowledged by the said Lady
(upon the 18 day of the said September, during the said force) and by
confederacy with Clerks perfected in 11 days (all out of Term) and enrolled of
Record near 4 months, before themselves confess them to be acknowledged; and by
color of several Writings pretended to be executed by the said Lady during the
said force, a little before she died, to the use of Sr Edw. Powel, and Mrs.
Levingston, whom she utterly detested.

And they say that Mrs. Levingston endeavored to gain the said Estate by
several other transcendent wicked practices; to the amazement of such as heard
the Evidence of them before the Honorable Committee for Petitions.

Answers to Mr Levingston 's Objections in the said printed Paper contained.
AS to the Defendants pretense that the force was not found by the Jury upon
the place, it is truth, that upon an Indictment of forcible entry, grounded
upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. the Jury did not upon the Evidence then given find
a forcible entry within that Statute; but the Defendants themselves well know,
and their Council did then confess, that a foul force was fully proved; but the
title of the house in Chelsey into which they riotously entered was not then
proved to be in any of the Prosecutors, by reason that the Deed of the Title to
the house could not then be had (but it is since found) and the want of that
Deed, at that time, was the only cause why the forcible entry within that
Statute was not found; although a foul force otherwise was fully proved, and by
themselves could not be denied, and is since also found by Verdict against the
said Confederates in the Upper Bench before the Lord chief Justice Roll.

Secondly, the Petitioners complain not only of antidating Writs, (which the
printed Yearbook of 1 H. 7. fol. 9 disallowes) but of making the Fines
(supposed to be acknowledged the 18. of September) Records of Trinity Term
(near four Months before the acknowledgment of them, to prevent the Petitioners
of all relief in any inferior Court. And the first of the Proclamations upon
the said Fines is entered upon Record as made of Trinity Term also, against all
truth and sense, and contrary to the Act of Parl made 4 H. 7. for bar by Fine,
and 5 years non-claim (the practice of which false recording of Proclamations
upon Fines is dangerous to all men's estates) and the Petitioners are advised,
That the false recording of Fines so late acknowledged in Sept. to be made
Fines of Trinity term before, is not warranted by ancient course, or usual
presidents (if it be) they expect the Records [to warrant such course] should
be produced by the Defendants; And the Petitioners say, That it is also
contrary to the Act of Parliament made in the 23 of Queen Eliz. against false
practice, and deceits in Fines, it being to little purpose for that Statute, so
carefully to provide that the day of the acknowledgment of the Fine be
certified; and yet to suffer a Clerk [contrary to the truth of that
Certificate] to record the Fine as acknowledged near 4 months before the same
is certified, and confessed to be acknowledged; And that if this course of
false recording fines and proclamations thereupon shall be admitted, it will
then be in the power of a Clerk of the Common Pleas, to deceive any Purchaser
of the Land he has bought and paid for, and to praeclude the rightful Owner of
the full time allowed him by law, to make his just claim to save his
Inheritance; and indeed it will prove the greatest Cheat in the Land: for when
a Purchaser has taken his Assurance by Feoffment or Deed enrolled, and paid
his money, he shall notwithstanding have his Assurance overreached by a false
antidated fine to another person; nay, one Fine shall overreach and outstrip
another.

The Complainants do also say, That the vacuating of these Fines shakes no man's
Title or Assurances, but such as are built upon so foul a practice, which the
Complainants say there never was; and therefore no man else in danger.

To that part of the Objection, That if this course of recording Fines of the
Term before be not admitted, no man can make a perfect purchase in vacation; We
answer, That the Purchaser may keep his money until his Assurance be perfected,
which is without mischief to either party; however, of evils the greatest is
most to be avoided; and that is the danger of deceit to all Purchasers, by the
allowance of this course of antidating Fines.

Secondly, We say the Purchaser may have a good assurance by Fine acknowledged
in vacation; and the States silver being entered, it will be a good fine of the
ensuing Term, though the party die; and where acknowledgments of fines have
been so late in a long vacation, the use has been to make them fines of the
ensuing Term; and if it had been so done in this Case the Court of Common Pleas
(finding a prastice) might then have stopped the fines which by this course
(the Cyrographs being made up as of the Term before) was prevented: And it is to
be observed, that the Complainants complain not alone, because the writs were
antidated; but as they were antidated by practice.

Also, whether the Lady Powel acknowledged these Fines, or not, appears not to
the Complainants; for the Confederates had excluded all but themselves: And the
Judge declared in Court, and elsewhere, that he never saw the Lady Powel
before; and if a Judge (as it is possible he may) take a Fine, either by force,
or of a supposititions person, these Fines are binding by the Commonlaws of
England, and cannot be avoided but in Parliament; for that by the common law no
averment lies against a Fine of Record, how untrue soever. And the truth is,
the Judges Judge Atkins said in open Court it sounded ill in his ears here,
that it would found worse in Parliament, and worse in the high Court of Heaven.
vehemently exclaimed against so much of this practice, as then was made appear
unto them (for much more has been discovered by their own Confederates since)
and the Judges did not deny to vacuate the said Fines, as unsatisfied with the
practice, but as conceiving it beyond their power to give relief; because the
States silver being entered, and the Cyrographs made up in haste to complete the
practice before the Term began, the Fines were thereby become perfect Fines
pleadable at Law; and not to be nullified but in Parliament; which the Judges
openly declared they believed would give remedy.

The 4th Objection that the Petitioners ought now to complain of the Court of
Commonpleas, is answered in the Answer to the last Objection before; only this
is observable, that Mr. Levingston would fain have the Petitioners complain of
the Court of Common Pleas, that he might find subterfuge under them, and his
offense impunity, by involving the Court in participation of the Crime, whereas
the Judges themselves declared the Petitioners relief to be in Parliament only.

As to the fifth Objection, that the Petitioners are relievable in the inferior
Courts, and therefore ought not to sue to Parliament for relief, We answer, It
is true, Chancery has in some Cases made Decrees against Estates gained by
practice; but these Decrees bind only the persons, and work not upon the title
or interest of the land; nor can that Court punish the Offenders: and the
Petitioners are not willing to follow Mr. Levingstons person for their
Inheritance, not knowing whether he may resolve to go, or abide imprisonment,
in case Chancery should order him to reconvey. They say also, that Chancery
cannot make a good Title of these lands to the Petitioners; nor will any man
deal with them for their interest in the land upon a Decree in Chancery, should
the Petitioners have need (as indeed they well may have) to mortgage, sell, or
settle them; for the truth is, no Court but Parliament can vacuate Fines
enrolled of Record, though gotten by practice; and that was agreed in
Star Chamber 12 Jac. by the then Lord Chancellor Egerton, and all the chief
Judges of England. And that Fines are only to be vacated in Parliament Mr.
Levingston well knew (whatever he pretends) when he made his Agreement with Mr
Vandenbemde (one other of the dis-inherited Grandchildren) to give him his
share of the lands in question, gotten from him by this practice Mr. Levingston
by (agreement with Mr. Vandenbemde) is to have 4 years profits of Mr.
Vandenbemde's share of the land's in question to bear his charges against the
Petitioners Complaint in Parliament.
; for by the Articles betwixt them, Mr Levingston provided to defend himself
against your Petitioners Complaint in Parliament at Mr. Vandenbemdes costs and
charges; which shows, Mr Levingston knew and expected that your Petitioners
must and would come to Parliament for relief.

As to Mr Levingston's Objection, Why Parliament should not intermeddle herein;
because his offense is either against Common law, Statute law, or Rules of
Equity; and therefore he only to be censured by Common law, Statute law, or
Court of Equity, We answer, That all fraud is against the common law; and that
his false Antidates, and recording of his Fines and Proclamations thereupon are
against two Statute laws; the one of 4. H. 7. and the other, 23 Eliz. before
mentioned; and all his whole action is against the Rules of good Conscience, in
that, Mr Levinstgon being a person of a gainful profession, and having at
present an estate in land of 600 l. yearly, by the gift of your Petitioners
Grandfather (besides the land in question,) of part of which he also was to
have a share) and having no child himself, should yet by so foul a practice go
about to dis-inherit the Petitioners (three whereof are the mothers of 19
children) of the best part of their livelihood, to maintain themselves, and
them: But we say, as before, no Court can vacuate a recorded Fine, but
Parliament; how transcendent soever the Crime in obtaining of it be; and
therefore we appeal to Parliament to do it, and to punish the offense: For when
a Lawyer shall so notoriously practice to violate the Laws, and all Rules of
Equity, and good Conscience, his Knowledge ought to aggravate his Crime. And by
the Argument of Mr Levingston, the Parliament should have no power to punish
any offense at all; for all Offenses are either against common law, Statute
law, or good Conscience; And therefore by this Rule all Crimes must be censured
and punished by the Courts below; and Parliament should have no jurisdiction
over any Crime at all; which, how abhorrent from Reason, and contrary to
Experience it is, let all men judge that understand any thing at all, what the
power or course of Parliament is.

And the Complainants observe, that M. Levingston does very wisely desire to be
judged in Chancery; for that, Chancery cannot vacate the Fines, nor punish his
offense, how transcendent soever it shall appear to be.

But we say, it is the proper work of Parliament to relieve where the inferior
Courts cannot, and the inferior Courts cannot nullify a fine; therefore,
Parliament must, otherwise there will be a failer of power to do justice; And
it is manifest, where great frauds or force have appeared to the Parliament, it
has been usual for them to give a remedy where there was none before; and a
more full, or more speedy remedy, where there was remedy by law before,
especially in matter of complaint of complicated nature (as this is) where both
the Civil Title, and matter Criminal, is in question before them.

And we say, That Fines, Recognizances inrol^ed, and Conveyances gotten by
practice, or duresse, have been complained of, and vacuated in Parliament; and
that shall be made manifest by examples, if it be denied.

As to the consideration offered, Why the Deeds should not be produced to the
honorable Committee before the Crime be examined, We answer, That the fight of
the Deeds would more clearly manifest the practice, by comparing the Ladies
Seal and handwriting, and the names of the Witnesses endorseder subscribed;
and more especially in this Case is it necessary, that all Deeds be produced,
and publicly perused, because the Petitioners have reason to believe, that M.
Levingston has in the Deeds (whereby he claims the personal estate) contrived
great guists and bequests to some persons whom he intends to produce as
Witnesses for him to prove the Deeds for the land; and so Witnesses that swear
for their own benefit shall not be detected for want of sight of all Deeds; Nor
is this Order of the honorable Committee to compel him to being in his Deeds
more then necessity to discover the practice requires; nor more then Chancery
and other Courts use to do in matters of complaint of fraud and practice, and
many other Cases.

As to so much of Mr. Levingstons Considerations as concerns the means,
occasion, or procurement of the Petitioners Complaint, they deny, That they
complain by any other means or procurement, then their own, and for their own
Inheritance, Estate, and Right; and they recriminate his charge of malice and
falsehood upon himself, he having lately had three of his Witnesses convict of
perjury in the Upper-Bench before the Lord chief Justice Roll, and two others
of them indicted, and to be tried for perjury the next Term, in other Causes
that have issued from these practices.

And that the Defendant Mr Levingston did heretofore offer to one Dowthwait a
reward of 50 l. value to swear your Petitioners out of other part of their
inheritance [to the value of 500 l. yearly] is sworn by Douthwait himself upon
his Examination in Chancery in another Case.

And the Petitioners do aver, That they ^omplein as well for the personal
estate, as real, (being both unduly gotten from them by M. Levingston, and his
wife) and when by Justice of Parliament the petitioners shall have set aside M.
Levingstons pretended Deeds, the petitioners (being Heirs, and next of kin to
the Lady Powel shall then be ready [as occasion serves] to say as much truth
against Mr. Cromptons title to the personal estate, (if he shall then make any)
as Mr. Levingston shall say.

And the Complainants say that they did heretofore in open Court refuse to be
concluded by the reference proposed betwixt Mr. Levingston, and Mr. Crompton
[concerning the personal estate in question] wherein one M. Sadler was named a
Referree for Mr. Levingston.

And the petitioners do affirm, th^^ Sir Edward Powel, and M. Hinson, alias
Powel his kinsman being bound by recognizance of 8000 l. for payment of 4000 l.
in trust to be at the Lady Powels kinsman as aforesaid, and that 2000 l. part
of the said 8000 l. being to have been paid in that very Month where in the
Lady Powel died, it is evident to every man for what cause Sir Edw. Powel, and
Mr. Hinson his kinsman have been so assistant to M. Levingston, to get that
estate which Sir Edward and M. Hinson were debtors to, and M. Levingston has
power to release if his Deeds thus gained shall be upheld.

And the Petitioners do observe, that M. Levingston, and his wife, would fain
insinuate a scandal, and stick some oblequie upon that dead Ladies reputation,
who living (as they would have the world believe) obliged them with the gift
of her whole estate.

But truth will out; and were M. Levingston and his wife conscious to
themselves, that the lady Powel had really intended her estate to them, the
Petitioners believe, they would in modesty and common gratitude have forborne to
have hinted that reproach and scandal to her, who [being in her grave] cannot
now make answer for her self.

And lastly, the Complainants say, That all the English Histories and Records
cannot parallel this transcendent practice, whereby the estate in question is
gotten from them; and that they have hitherto pursued it as with Hue-and Cry;
and shall give a more particular account of it hereafter, this being but
minutes of it, and in haste.

The Progress of the Fines.
These several Fines, were acknowledged the 18th day of September, 1651.

The Several Writs of Covenant, sued forth for the passing of these Fines, are
all antedated, and bear test the 30th day of May, 1651, and made Returnable
Tres Trinitatis following which is the 16th day of June.

The Dedimu^ Potestatem to enable the Judge to take these Fines, in sued forth
after the acknowledgement of them, and antedated and made to bear date the 31th
of May 1651, Returnable Ties Trinitatis as aforesaid; So that the return of
this antedated Commission, is expired above 3 months before the
acknowledgement, and yet this is not Error relieve-able at Law.

The States Silver is entered upon Record of Trinity Term 1651, near four
months before the acknowledgment; but in truth was not entered until the 24th
day of September, 1651.

It is Endorsed upon the foot of the Fines, that the first Proclamations were
made the 18th day of June in Trinity Term 1651, according to the Form of the
Statute; Which is a mere falsehood, impossibility, and contrary to the Statute.

The whole Transaction of these Fines, from the beginning to the end, was acted
and done within 11 days, all out of Term, to wit; between the 17th day of
September, and the 29th day of the same month, to fore-close the Court of
Common Pleas, that it might not be in their power, to relieve the Petitioners
upon Complaint which they made to the Court, upon the first day of the next
ensuing Term.

FINIS.

