Anti-Paedobaptism: OR THE THIRD PART. BEING, A full REVIEW of the Dispute
concerning Infant Baptism. IN WHICH, The Arguments for Infant Baptism from the
Covenant and Initial Seal, Infants Visible Church Membership, Antiquity of
Infant Baptism, are refelled. AND The Writings of Mr. Stephen Marshal, Mr.
Richard Baxter, Mr. John Geree, Mr. Thomas Blake, Mr. Thomas Cobbet, Dr.
Nathaniel Homes, Mr. John Drew, Mr. Josiah Church, Mr. William Lyford, Dr.
Daniel Featley, Mr. John Brinsley, Mr. Cuthbert Sidenham, Mr. William Carter,
Mr. Samuel Rutherford, Mr. John Crag, Dr. Henry Hammond, Mr. John Cotton, Mr.
Thomas Fuller, Mr. John Stalham, Mr. Thomas Hall, and others, are examined; And
many points about the Covenants, and Seals, and other Truths of weight, are
handled: By JOHN TOMBS. B D.

ISA. 5.20. Woe unto them that call evil good and good evil, that put darkness
for light and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet and sweet for
bitter. LONDON, Printed by E. AISOP, over against the Upper Pump in Grubstreet.
1657.

TO THE PARLIAMENT OF THE Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
HAving presented the two former Parts of this Review to His Highness, and His
Council; I take boldness to tender this to your Honors, as those who are
entrusted with the affairs of these Nations (in which are many Churches of
Christ, whose safety, and welfare does much depend under Christ on your
wisdom, and uprightness) that it may serve to justify your Honors in
allowing those who agree with me in the ^oint herein discussed liberty,
employment, and maintenance alike with dissenters. Wherein your equity and
wisdom is very conspicuous and laudable, notwithstanding the clamours and
practices of those our opposites, who would have the ship of this Commonwealth
so ordered, that the power of it should all incline to one side to the
endangering of the whole. It Is true the asserting of this truth has heretofore
been unhappily managed, partly by reason of the conjunction of some errors
very dangerous in the Assertors of this truth, and partly by reason of the
violence of spirit in them and their opposites, which have occasioned hard
Laws against them, and great hatred toward them. Nor do I know any likelihood
but that still not only about this, but also about any other point in
difference, when one party seeks to oppress the other there will be much
unquietness, unless Governors become moderatours between them. In the
Declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, Ordered to be
printed 4. Martii 1647. I read these words. The name of Anabaptism has indeed
contracted much odium, by reason of the extravagant opinions and practices of
some of that name in Germany, tending to the disturbance of the Government and
peace of all States: which opinions and practices we abhor and detest. But for
their opinion against the Baptism of Infants, it is only a difference about a
circumstance of time in the administration of an Ordinance, wherein in former
ages as well as this, learned men have differed both in opinion and practice:
And though we could wish that all men could satisfy themselves, and join with
us in our judgment and practice in this point: yet herein we held it fit that
men should be convinced by the Word of God with gentleness and reason, and not
beaten out of it by force and violence: And yet May 2. 1648. there was an
Ordinance which made it punishable with imprisonment, to affirm that the
Baptism of Infants is unlawful, or that Infants Baptism is void, and that such
persons are to be baptized again. Notwithstanding which, it is to be
acknowledged with all thankfulness to His Higness and your Honors, that we
enjoy our Peace and Liberty as Dissenters do; which they who value not, forget
the goodness of God, and make forfeiture of their own good. For those who so
do, I plead not, but for that Truth and Practice which is delivered and
appointed by Christ, which should be encouraged not suppressed by Governors.
For this I am moved to appear out of Conscience of my duty to Christ,
commiseration of them who have been condemned and injured for avouching my
position, and my engagement by solemn Covenant enjoined by Parliament, to
endeavor Reformation in Doctrine and Worship according to Gods Word; And do
humbly present it to your Honors, craving that if any Laws do remain in force
against it they may be repealed; And that while we walk according to the rule
of Christ, Liberty, Peace, Encouragement may be granted to us as to others who
have joined in the Common Cause, which will be a motive to us the more
affectionately to pray for your Honors prosperous and happy proceedings in
repairing the Breaches, and building up this Commonwealth whereto you are
advanced, and for which I am

Your Honors Humble and Devoted Servant: JOHN TOMBS.

TO The christian Reader.
THough all personal Pleas and Narrations are suspected to be partial, and are
usually judged to have something of ostentation, or dissembling, o^ some such
inordinate affection which may abate their credit and esteem, yet the practices
of opponents in Controversies, and the great prejudice to the Truth, and person
opposed they create thereby, and the difficulty for persons who are not actors
in such contentions to understand the truth without them make them necessary.
Doubtless if such pleas were not necessary, the Apostle Paul would not have
thought his course justifiable, who has written one Epistle, to wit, the
second to the Corinthians, almost wholly Apologetical for himself, that the
misunderstanding of himself and ways might not be advantage to Seducers for
hindering the success of his preaching. It is true my credit and esteem is
nothing comparable to the Apostles, the Church and Truth of God may stand,
though I be buried in perpetual silence: yet since I am a Preacher of the Gospel
as Paul was ( absit verbo invidia) and my labors therein as I hope not
altogether without fruit, and since the Lord seems to me to have set me, though
in a lower Sphere, for defense of that One Baptism which Paul mentions Ephesians.
4.5. as one of the chief points of Christianity, and Heb. 6.2. is counted as a
foundation point. I assure my self Paul's practice does justify mine, and that
I should be wanting not only to mine own credit, but also to that truth which
is dearer then my credit, if I should pass by with silence those
misrepresentations whereby both are abused, and the minds of men alienated
from them. Which is the more necessary, because of the great repute which my
Antagonists have in this generation, and their confident speeches, and their
incessant endeavors upon all occasions in Pulpits, Presses, Disputes,
Conferences, to represent the way I avouch as dangerous, my self as
instrumental to an evil design of perverting and dividing the Churches of God,
unto which the proneness of men to uphold an Error inveterate, and speciously
pretended to be approved and blessed by God, and the contrary opinion accursed,
besides the advantages it has for their carnal ease, and for the begetting of
a favorable opinion of themselves and their children (which are more to most
then demonstrations out of Gods word) do gain an easy assent. And though I am
not out of hope that those who have opposed the truth I assert with impetuous
zeal, will be (especially the most tender conscienced, who examine their ways,
and review their doctrines) awakened and see and confess their error, yet I
fear the obloquy, and perhaps detriment in repute and outward estate and peace,
which m^n either are likely or doubt they may incur by owning the truth I hold
forth, or the seeming inconsistency of the reformation I seek to promote, with
the peace of the Churches of God, will divert the thoughts of many from an
exact consideration, and an equal judgment of what I shall write, either of
my self or the matter under debate. What was wont to be opposed against the
reformation of Popish and Prelatical corruptions, shall we go against all
antiquity? Be wiser then our Fathers? condemn all the Churches? make rents in
the Church? and such like objections, though they be upon examination but vain,
yet like Gorgons head they are apt to turn men into stones, and to make men not
see what they do or might see, and to be insensible of the evil of that
practice, which otherwise their Consciences would be affrighted with. And
truly though it be the wise and just contrivance of Divine prov^dence, and
congruous to his end, that the vanity of all things under the Sun might appear,
yet is it an humane irregularity, that not only for evil labor, but also for
all travel and every right work a man is envied, malign^d, or disliked of his
neighbor, Eccl. 4.4. chiefly when it crosses self ends and conceits. Nor is
it incident only to the profane and unbelievers, to dislike and oppose such
acts as are rightly done, but also to the godly, until their mistakes are
discovered to them. The building of the Altar of Ed, Josh. 22.12. was likely to
have been an occasion of war beetween the rest of the Congregation of Israel
and some Tribes* till the intention of the builders was cleared to Phinehas;
and Peter's going in to Cornelius, Act. 11.2. occasioned contention with him,
though it were from God, till his warrant was showed. Paul knew that his
promoting the collection for the poor Saints at Jerusalem might be distasted of
the best, and therefore he prays that his service which he had for Jerusalem
might be accepted of the Saints, Romans 15.31. Even holy upright men have their
weaknesses, passions, mis-prisions, prejudices, which often times hinder a right
understanding of tenants and actions of Christian Brethren, and thereby no
small contentions arise. God would have us discern thereby humane imperfection,
and keep our spirits humble and heedfull how we manage the rightest actions.
Surely no action is more necessary then the discovery of truth in the things of
God, nor should any endeavors be more acceptable to holy persons, then such as
tend thereto, yea though there should be imperfection in actings and defect in
the success. Yet too much experience has showed that such attempts meet with
much opposition, and are ill entertained even by those who are or seem friends
to truth. It is unnecessary to give instances: in the Scripture Acts 15.2, etc.
in the Ecclesiastical Story there are so many as verify it beyond all
contradiction. If there were no other example but what has befaln me about the
point in this writing discussed, yet it were sufficient to verify what I said
of the difficulty to gain entertainment of that truth against which men are
prepossessed, and of the ill usage of them that in a due manner endeavor to
clear it. That Infant Baptism was not according to Gods will, I thought might
be made manifest by the silence of it in Scripture, and the Writings of the two
first Ages, and by showing how it was counted but an Ecclesiastical humane
tradition unwritten, induced upon such reasons by the Leaders of the Churches
in after ages as are now judged erroneous; and how false and dangerous the
grounds are on which it is made a Divine institution, to wit, an imagined
Covenant of grace to a Believer and his seed natural, the nature of Sacraments
to be seals of the Covenant of grace, the inference of duties about positive
rites of the new Testament from analogy with abrogated Ceremonies of the old,
the command of Circumcision to have been in the extent of it commensurate to
and derived from the Covenant with Abraham Genesis 17. as the adequate reason, the
succession of Baptism into the room and use of Circumcision; all which or most
of them, are so contrary to the Scripture and Protestant doctrine, as that I
presumed they would quickly have been discerned by those who are acquainted
with the controversies of Divines, and sought reformation in Discipline, and
removal of humane inventions in Gods worship, and had entered into a solemn
oath and Covenant to that end. And for my way of manifesting my doubts first to
the Ministers of London, and then to the Committee of the Assembly then sitting
at Westminster, and after to a prime man in it in the years 1643, 1644. and
what opposition I found is so manifest in my two Treatises and Apology
published 1645, 1646. as that it were but actum agere to say any more thereof.
Which I hoped would have taken off such prejudices, as my Antagonists writings
had raised against my writings and person, that I might securely apply my self
to review the Dispute, without hearing of any more personal objections. But
when I found the like usage continued by Mr. Robert Baily of Glasgow in
Scotland, I published an Addition to the Apology 1652. though it were framed
before, and sent in a letter Manuscript to him. Yet the hottest charge was
behind. After my necessitated removal from the Temple in London to Bewdley in
Worcestershire, anno 1646. it happened that a public Dispute was between Mr.
Richard Baxter of Kidderminster near to Bewdley and my self, at Bewdley Jan. 1.
1649. which how it was occasioned, managed, injuriously divulged, may be
perceived by the writings on both sides; his Epistle before the first Edition
of the Saints Everlasting rest, his Book of Baptism, Praefestinantis Morator,
and my Antidote printed 1650. and Pr^cursor, anno 1652. By Mr. Baxters book of
Baptism, my self, doctrine, answers, practice have been so unwo^thily dealt
with, as that they have been painted out in deformed shapes quite besides their
true feature, and thereby exposed to the unrighteous censures and contempt of
so many, that Mr. Blake in his Preface to his Vind. faederis thought he might
without control say, Mr. Tombs is generally looked upon low enough under
hatches. It is indeed too manifest that upon the publishing of Mr. Baxters Book
of Baptism, which was often printed and very much dispersed, floods of
reproaches were cast on me and those who are of my judgment in that point,
triumphant boastings of that book as the Mawl of Anabaptism, a most excellent
piece, a lasting monument, etc. which had laid me flat on my back, with many
the like vaunts in print and colloquies. Nor did men's loose tongues and pens
stay here, but many insolent speeches were vented, trampling upon me and the
Cause with me as Captives subdued by that mighty hand; my actions were
censured, my abilities disparaged, yea people possessed with conceits as if I
and those of my judgment were accursed of God, left over to a spirit of
delusion, a hardened heart; Magistrates were provoked to make Laws against us,
as intolerable authors and fomentors of the errors, heresies, and divisions
now in the Land; the rage and violence of common people showed it self against
the practice of Baptism enjoined by Christ, people were deterred from hearing
us, Scholars from reading our Writings, ancient acquaintance alienated,
liberty formerly allowed to preach in public places restrained, those that by
Baptism were added to Communion withdrawn from society, yea violent cours^s
taken to hinder Wives, children, servants from associating with them that were
baptized, and that which was in former ages the only Baptism, and highly
honored by the ancient Writers with titles of dignity exceedingly debased and
derided, insomuch that in many parts of this Land, I have been taken at best
for a self-conceited man, affecting novelty and singularity, of a dangerous
spirit, a ring leader of a sect of giddy men adversaries to unity, discipline,
opening a door to all fanatique conceits, whose end would prove wicked, with
many more imputations, which neither my books nor known conversation before and
since the wars, my labors and employment in places not obscure, the confessed
holiness, orth^doxy, unblameableness of those Churches over which I had any
inspection, or with whom I associated could so acquit us* but that either our
wound is uncured or a skar rem^ins. Mr. Blake in his Preface to his Vind. faed.
says thus of me. And indeed I think it a special providence that he should
thus appear with a show of learning, a volumn of words, a rhapsody of Authors*
getting a name to be the strongest sword and buckler that was ever left up in
this Cause, to draw the eyes of his party toward him, and then fall so flat,
able to make good nothing; so that men far from censorious vanity well able to
judge (upon serious perusal of his works and converse with him) do conclude,
that it is not possible but he goes against the dictates of his own conscience;
so that these it seems count me for an autocri^ or self-condemned heretic.
What other imputations Mr. Blake casts on me, may be seen here Sect. 26. And
what Mr. Firmin, Mr. Gattaker, and Mr. S^mon Ford, Sect. 53. Besides what Mr.
John Goodwin, Mr. Wood, and many more have judged of mine and Mr. Baxters
writings. After Mr. Baxter Mr. John Crag would needs take up the cudgels and
play his part in this matter, which how he has done may be seen by our
writings, compared chiefly here sect. 87, etc. Books after books have been
published from England and Scotland, by Dr. Hammond, Mr. Carter, Mr.
Rutherford, Mr. Fuller, Dr. Savage in Latin, and others for Infant Baptism;
besides Sermons in the Pulpit, and determinations in the Universities at most
solemn times. Yea upon occasion of a mere accident at Oxford in July 1652. I
have been baited in the Weekly News^books, and I have just cause to conceive
that by clancular Letters, conferences, consultations, not only my doctrine
has been decried, my writings vilified, my way represented as pernicious that
people might not know the truth, but also my station undermined, and my
silencing endeavored; and which is of all other the most grievous to me, the
fruit of my labors in the Gospel of Christ not a little hindered: so that
whereas Mr. Baxter would have in his Gildas Silvianus all Ministers tied to
confer with the people in private* by his misrepresenting of me, the people
(whom I would gladly teach) are deterred from hearing me in public, and
conferring with me in private. Yea notwithstanding the Quakers have been so
often opposed by me, and my doctrine as contrary to theirs as light to
darkness, by reason of Mr. Baxters imputing the rise of Quakerism to
Anabaptism, as he terms it (which how ^ar he charge on me may be seen by his
Questions to me set down here sect. 63.) one Blashfield a bookseller in
Lempster has openly reviled me at the close of my Sermon while I was in the
Pulpit December. 26. 1656. though I then refuted the Quakers, and told me, if
there were no Anabaptist there would be no Quaker; and somewhat before Mr.
Farmer a preacher in Bristol making a relation of James Naylors riding into
Bristol, prints a passage in a private letter, which he with much ado signifies
to me was written by Mr. Robert Breton of Pembridge in Herefordshire but four
miles from me, in which I am charged to say, that in a Sermon which I disavow
in my writings upon the report at table of a man of this Town, who (what ever
his qualities be) being pressed twice by me, once before some of the most
intelligent and indifferent men here, another time before all or the most part
of the Governors of this Town, to deal plainly whether I did speak those words
which Mr. Farmer has printed does refuse to do it, shuffles in his answers,
and will neither affirm nor deny it. Such dealings as these from men reputed
godly, preachers of the Gospel, some of them fellow sufferers for the common
cause of reformation, and by the same Covenant engaged to it, do make me amazed
to see what strange courses the intemperate zeal of Paedobaptists carries them,
discerning thereby what a malignity of spirit they have toward me, who have so
far as I can remember done no such thing to them, nor have been wanting in any
good office I could do for them with a good conscience, but willing to join
with godly dissenters in the common Cause of Christ. Nor do I find any
relenting in Mr. Baxter, but as he shows his spirit in his letters printed here
sect. 53, 63. so by his preaching at Bowdley May 4* 1656. in which he gave ten
frivolous reasons for his practice of Infant Baptism, for the confirming of his
party who opposed my preaching there at that time, and since, and by the late
passages in most of his writings, and in his last book of Conversion p. 109. I
find him still the same he was. No doubt (says he) but God does pardon
original sin to multitude of infants by the blood of Christ, through the
Covenant of grace which is made to the faithful and their seed, and this
pardon bestowed by the Covenant is sealed by baptism which more solemnly
conferreth it. It is most probable that God does also make some change on the
hearts of infants, secretly giving some seed of inward grace before or in their
baptism. And p. 299. he has this fool^sh passage. Others withdraw upon
pretense we are unbaptized, to which end they must coin a new baptism, or else
they are at a loss. And their arguing with (...) will be much like the Papists,
in the point of Transubstantiation, which requires that men renounce their
sense and say, that they see not that which they se^, and feel not or taste not
that which indeed they feel and taste, and then they may come to be in the
right; and so we must believe that we see none baptized in our Churches, nor
hear it, nor know of any such thing, and then we may come to be a Church: As if
the arguing were that there is nothing which Paedobaptists call baptism in
their Churches, not, there is nothing that may be truly called Christian
baptism according to Christ's institution, and then p. 300. after his fashion
when he wants arguments, he adds. Oh if it were the will of God that we could
have as clear light in some other weighty points as we have in Scripture for
the baptism of the children of believers, how much would it do to quiet the
understandings of many that are willing to know! I dare not say it is a wonder
to me to find such passages in Mr. Baxter, but having examined his book of
baptism, his ten reasons for his practice of Infant baptism delivered in
Bewdley Chapel May 4. 1656. His Letters to me 1655. set down here sect. 53,
etc. I cannot but bemoan the sad condition, first of Ministers and people who
are carried away with such shallow disputings, and confident speeches as Mr.
Baxter has used in these writings. 2. Of my self, and all who go about to
clear truth, that they be necessi^ated to stir up such a nest of Wasps and
Hornets* as these have showed themselves to be who have opposed me, if they do
never so brotherly and fairly and regularly declare their judgments contrary to
the common received tenants. Yet I must confess two things have somewhat
refreshed me against the hard censures of those whom Mr. Blake mentions and
the rest, the one that His Highness, and Council and the Parliament since (as I
am informed) confirming the Ordinance for approbation of public Preachers
seem to have better though^s of me in putting that trust on me, the other that
(to mention no other) two of the ablest acutest and well read Divines and
accurate Dispu^an^s, which I have known the University of Oxford in my time to
have bred, and who have been thought sit for the Divinity Chair, have had far
other conceits of my writings then these have had, the one not long after the
publishing of my Examen, expressing his rejoicing to see so accurate and
scholastical a discussing of the point, which he found not in the Assembly,
wishing he had known of it before the publishing of it that he might have
prefixed an Epistle, yet wishing it had been written in Latin, as foreseeing
that the publishing it in English was likely to beget me more trouble, then it
would have done if printed in Latin; the other who since that wrote thus to me.
I am a friend to your person (whom I have known (though not known to you) this
31. years) and to your opinion too (as to the main of it) for I believe and
know, that there is neither precept nor practice in Scripture for Paedobaptism*
nor any just evidence for it for about two hundred years after Christ. The
first who bears witness to Infant baptism prastised in the Church is
Tertullian* but so as he expres^^d slik^s and condemns it as an unwarrantable
and irrational custom^: and Naxianzen a good while after him (in his Oration
(...)) dislikes it too, and would not have infants brought to baptism till they
were of some age and able to answer for themselves. Sure I am that in the
Primitive times they were first to be Catechumini, ^f then (...) illuminati, or
baptizati, and that not only children (...) Pagans* or Pagans converted, but
children of Christian parents, Na^ianzen (though a Bishops son) being not
baptized till he was about 30. years of age, as appears in his life, and the
like is evident of some others^ The truth is, I believe P^dobaptism did (how or
by whom I know not) come in in the 2d. Century and in the 3d. and 4th. began to
be practiced (though not generally) and defended as lawful from that text
(grossly misunderstood) Jo. 3.5. Upon the like gross mistake of Jo. 6.53. they
did for many Centuries (both in the Greek and Latin Church) communicate infants
and give them the Lords Supper, and I confess they might do both as well as
either: But although they baptized some infants and thought it lawful so to
do, yet Augustine was the first that ever said it was necessary inde durus pater
infantum. I have read what my learned and worthy friend Dr. Hammond, Mr. Baxter
and others say in defense of it, and (I confess) I wonder not a little that men
of such great parts should say so much to so little purpose, for I have not yet
seen any thing like an argument for it. Nor is it a small case to me that I
find after all Mr. Baxters shameful and vain arguings against the truth, and
injurious dealings with me and the baptized Christians, with whom I hold
Communion, that yet at last, though quite besides his intentions, he has so
befriended our cause as to lend us twenty good arguments against Infant
baptism, in his 2d. disputation of right to Sacraments, in the close of the
16th. saying thus p. 156. I conclude that all examples of baptism in Scripture
do mention only the administration of it to the professors of saving faith:
and the precepts give us no other direction. And I provoke Mr. Blake (as far as
is seemly for me to do) to name one precept for baptizing any other, and make
it good if he can. I know what he will pretend, that he intended th^s only
against Mr. Blakes opinion of baptizing upon a dogmatical faith and he means
what he argues only in the case of adult persons. But that does not avoid his
own arguments against himself, though he otherwise intended; nor will his
evasion serve till he prove, that there is a different precept or example for
baptizing Infants from that of baptizing adult persons, or that any are to be
accounted believers or disciples by their parents o^, as his term is,
proparents profession, which will never be done by him. I will not say as Mr.
Blake says some have said of me, that it is not possible but he goes against
the dictates of his own conscience: But this I dare boldly say, that Mr. Baxter
has strongly disputed against Inf^nt Baptism in the place forenamed, page 53.
asserting and proving Arg. 1. We must not baptize any who profess not true
repentance, page 62. Arg. 2. We must baptize no man that first professes not
to bel^eve in God, ^. 68. Argum. 3. It Is the very nature or appointed use of
the external part of Baptism it self (yea essential to it) to signify and
profess the saving faith and repentance of the baptized, page 710. arg. 4. we
must baptize none that profess not their consent to enter themselves presently
into the Covenant of grace with God in Christ, p. 79. arg. 5. we must not
baptize any without the profession of that faith and repentance which are made
the condition of remission of sins; the rest have speeches to like purpose, in
which though he puts in sometimes [ and their seed] yet his proofs do all
overthrow that his own addition, and tear off his patch which he has printed
to his argumen^, and as fully militate against his book of baptism as Mr.
Blakes tenet; so that to me it seems that by Divine providence without his
intention, una eademque manus vulnus opemque tulit: Nor do I think but that if
conscientious Christians chiefly Scholars, would read over that second
disputation, they would be satisfied that infants ought not to be baptized but
themselves, and that Mr. Baxter has cheated the world by his book of baptism,
and showed himself therein an inconsiderate writer. But however this fall out,
it is a great rejoicing to my soul, that God has so long preserved my life and
strength though now declining, to finish this part of the Review also, and to
see that part of it printed which is in answer to Mr. Baxters second main
argument in his book of baptism, about his pretended ordinance of infants
visible Church Membership and its repeal, which some have given out as
unanswerable, because this answer has been so long in publishing; not
considering that besides the not knowing of his mind about it till 1655. I
have been necessitated to answer many others, and together with my constant
labors, some other employments extraordinary with domestic distractions,
necessity of respect to my bodily strength, want of help of books in some
points, of learned men to whom I might have recourse, of an amanuensis, and
chiefly the difficulty of getting it printed by reason of the great charge,
which this book amounts to, and yet is not so readily put off as other smaller
writings, and such as suit more with the mind of Readers, of whom few seem to
search after truth impartially, especially in controversies of this kind. In
this which is done my witness is in heaven how faithfully and sincerely I have
dealt, which makes me slight the unrighteous censures of those Mr. Blake
mentions, of Mr. Baxter, Mr. Firmin Mr. Gattaker, Mr. Ford, Mr. Crag and the
rest. And for Mr. John Goodwin who so much magnifies Mr. Baxters book, I wish
he and Mr. Horn his second would read this writing, which I take to be a
sufficient answer, with the two fore-parts of this Review, to what is said by
Mr. Baxter and themselves in the point of Infant Baptism. As for the point of
Schism or Separation which Mr. Baxter, and he charge Anabaptists with, I take
my self no further concerned then mine own fact, which if they can prove to
have been unbrotherly or unrighteous, I hope God will so frame my heart as to
testify my repentance: if not, I advise them to take heed of rash judging, and
all their followers of following them in that sin. If the objection be still
set on foot, That those that are, as they term us, Anabaptists, do fall into
many false opinions, prove Quake^s etc. I wish them better to examine reports
of us, then Mr. Farmer, Mr. Breton, and others have done of me before they
spread them, and to look into the state of the societies of their own
judgment, who if they be not guilty of such fallings, I shall rejoice with
them, and hope they will learn to pity and endeavor to restore those who are
fallen in the spirit of meekness; if they be, that they will remember that it
should be no more objected to us then to themselves. For my own part, I hope I
shall not abet any such error, nor do I know of any such errors or
miscarriages in the Churches to which I have associated which are not opposed
and censured by us: Nor do I think it equal we should be charged with that
error or miscarriage which we condemn. And I make bold to admonish
Paedobaptists in the Lord, that they take heed of those practices which tend to
the disquieting, defaming, hindering their brethren in the work of Christ
because of the supposed error, as they term it, of Anabaptism, lest they
happily fight against God, and wrong their brethren, remembering that he that
does wrong shall receive for, the wrong he has done, and there is no respect
of persons with God, Col. 3.25. And to the end they may search their own
consciences, and rightly judge of themselves, I presume they may do well to lay
to heart th^se following qu^stions. 1. Whether it be not a manifest perverting
of the Gospel of Christ, to maintain that the Covenant of Gospel grace is made
to each believer and his seed. 2. Whether it be not against the Gospel to
maintain, that the command of Circumcision Genesis 17. does any way bind Christian
believers now in their practice? 3. Whether it be nor against the Gospel to
entitle persons to the Church visible Christian by their natural generation of
believers? 4. Whether it be not a manifest will worship to practice the
positive Rite of Infant Baptism as Gods worship, which is confessed to have
neither precept nor example in the New Testament? 5. Whether it be not a
profanation of Baptism to use it otherwise then Christ appointed? 6. Whether by
justifying Infant Baptism, the relinquish^ng of many Popish and Prelatical
ceremonies which have as much of reason, tradition, authority of the Church as
it, be not condemned? 7. Whether it be not an oppression, and exercising of
dominion over men's consciences, to tie them to acknowledge Sacraments to be in
their nature seals of the Covenant of grace which the Scripture terms not so,
nor can be proved plainly from it, and to impose on them the practice of Infant
baptism under pain of guilt of sin which Christ never appo^nt^d? 8. Whether it
be not manifest hypocrisy to oppose the Cross, Surplice, etc. and to be
zealous for Infant baptism? 9. Whether they who justify Infant baptism and
oppose baptism of Believers at age confessed to be according to the institution
of Christ and primitive practice, are not partial in Gods Law and may expect to
be made contemptible before all the people? 10. Whether they who do so, do not
break the solemn Covenant of endeavoring reformation according to Gods word?
11. How they that say they baptize infants into the Name of Christ, who
sprinkle or power only some water on them, without any profession of the infant
can be acquitted from saying falsely? 12. By what rule those who are
acknowledged visible Church Members in infancy c^n be denied the Lords Supper?
13. Whether it be not a sign that Paedobaptism is not according to rule, when
there are so many differences about the title to it between Papists and
Protestants, and the ablest Protestants themselves? 14. How they can make good
the regularity of Church-consti^ution, and the ordination of Elders, who have
no other baptism but that in infancy? 15. How they can be free from the guilt
of hardening souls in deadly presumption, who avouch the Christianity of
infants by natural birth, and Infant baptism which is the great plea of
ignorant and profane persons on which they rest? 16. Whether it be not a sign
of injustice and want of love to truth, or adherence to a party, in them that
will read and hear what one party says for Infant baptism, and refuse to read
or he^r what the oppos^^s say, though they bring the plain institution of
Christ and his Apostles practice for them? 17. Whether it be not an unrighteous
course to charge the miscariages of persons either dead or strangers, on that
doctrine or practice which countenanceth not them, or to persons who are no way
abettors of them because of agreement in one opinion? 18. Whether division or
Schism is not chiefly to be imputed to those who violently oppose and inveigh
against their Brethren for holding and practicing that which they conceive
themselves bound to do by the plain command of Christ which their opposites do
acknowledge? 19. Whether such as impose Infan baptism on their Brethren who
hold the faith and baptism confess^d to be from Christ, and deal rigorously
with them for not owning i^, do not as the Papists, who impose with cruelty
their own addi^ions o^ those who otherwise are not denied to hold the true
faith and pract^s^? 20. Whether such pretenc^s as are made for Infant baptism,
and the imagined evil of Anabaptism, can be a sufficient plea for baptism, and
the imagined evil of Anabaptism can be a su^f^cient plea for any truly godly
person to neglect that baptism which Christ has so strictly commanded Mat.
28.19. Mar. 16.16. and the Apostles constantly practiced? And since Mr. Baxter
has with so much earnestness ministered so many interrogatories to me, I shall
take the boldness to advise him to consider his own ways. 1. In giving such a
title to his book of Pl^in Scripture proof of Infants baptism, when there is
not one text in all his Book which speaks plainly or obscurely for it, yea it is
confessed by himself, that it is not plainly determined in Scripture, p. 3. and
is so dark in Scripture that the controversy is become hard p. 301. 2. In his
abusing so many texts of Scripture as he ha^h done, chiefly the institution of
Bap^ism Matthew. 28 19. for infant Baptism, as if they were disciples appointed
there to be baptized, which is sufficiently refuted by himself in many places
of Baptism, p. 299, 300. of the right to Sacraments from p. 91, to 96. 3. In
coining a new title to Baptism by the profession of parents or pro parents, of
which the Scripture is altogether silent. 4. In his devising ^n ordinanc^ of
infants visible membership in the Christian Church, of which there is no foot
step in all the Bible. 5. In his many years clamorous abuses, and some kind of
violent persecutions of my self and others of my judgment for not
acknowledging these figments of his, but promoting reformation of Baptism
according to our duty. 6. In his unbrotherly printing my answers I made in the
dispute at Bewdley Jan. 1. 1649. without so much as acquainting me with it
though living near him. 7. In blazing it abroad that he had driven me to gross
absurdities, which yet he has not in his answer to the 17. sect. of of my
praecursor or elsewhere showed to be so. 8. In his light passing over my urging
his own words against infant baptism, about Christ's institution Mat. 28.19. in
my praecurs. p. 66. in his Praefest. morat. sect. 16. which is noted in the 2d.
Part of the Review, p. 66, 67. which sure being from Christ's institution,
deserved better consideration. 9. In condemning our rejection of infant
Baptism, though but an humane tradition, on no better grounds then Papists
build many of their ceremonies which he condemns, in asserting the Covenant of
grace to the faithful and their seed, which in disputes against Arminians is
commonly denied by Contraremonstrants. 10* In his many false accusations of me
as a sect master disturber of the Church, which he cannot prove, in his
scornful expressions in the dispute and his books, in his injurious
insinuations of me, as if I were blinded or hardened, occasioned the rise of
Quakerism and other errors, thereby indirectly creating odium to me and to the
truth, and which is worst of all, weakening my hands in the work of Christ, and
particularly in taking off my quondam hearers at Bewdley from hearing me, or
permitting me there to preach in public. None of which, nor any of the rest of
his evil suggestions of me or the people baptized there or elsewhere, I pray
God may be laid to his charge.

I have no more to add, but to commend the reading of this and the other parts
of the Review to thy care, hoping that as the differences between the
Cis-Jordan and Trans-Jordan Israelites, and Peter and the circumcised
Christians were composed by right in^elligence of their actions, so it may be
in this, and that God will awaken the eyes of those who have opposed the truth
I assert, with devices of an anti-Evangelical Covenant of grace to Believers
and their seed, a Law and Ord^nance of infants visible Church membership no
where extant, of baptizing infants according to the Jewish pattern of baptizing
Proselytes, of an additional promise of casting elect children on elect parents
ordinarily, of a command in force now, Genesis 17.9. of Baptisms succession to
Circumcision and fetching a rule from it, of baptisms confer^ing Grace, etc.
will discern their error, and embrace that light which they have hitherto shut
out, and laying aside their vain disputes about the baptizing of Infants of not
Churchmembers, profane, excommunicate parents, or proparents and such like,
endeavor to restore that one Baptism which with that one faith once delivered
to the Saints, may bring the Churches of God to a right constitution and holy
unity and order, and without which a right reformation covenanted will not be,
and that go^ly pa^ents of tender consciences will take heed of bringing infants
to baptism whereby it is profaned, and discern that it is their own duty to be
baptized in the name of Christ, and that the use of baptism is, as Mr. Baxter
confesses p. 68 Of right to Sacraments, yea essential to it to signify and
profess the saving faith and repentance of the baptized (which sh^ws infants
are not baptized, since they do not that which is essential to baptism and that
which is essential must be in all) and not to look upon it as their childrens
privilege, but as it was by Christ appointed, by it engage themselves to
follow the Lord JESUS; which is the prayer of

Thy loving Brother and real Servant in Christ; JOHN TOMBS.

The Contents.
Sect. 1. THe second argument against infant Baptism that it is will worship is
confirmed. Sect. 2. Dr. Homes his arguments to prove infant Baptism from Gen
17. are examined. Sect. 3. Mr. Drews argument for infant Baptism from Genesis 17.
is examined, and it is showed that there is not the same reason of infant
Baptism as of infant Circumcision. Sect. 4. The Covenant Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
was a mixed covenant. Sect. 5. Acts 2.38, 39. proves not either the identity of
covenant now with that to Abraham Genesis 17.7. as it comprehends his natural
seed, nor the connection between i^ and ^aptizability. Sect. 6. The argument of
Mr. Josia^ Church in his Divine warrant for infant baptism, ^om their being
judged in the promise of propriety in God is answered. Sect. 7. Bare judgment
of charity concerning a persons interest in the promise is not a warrant to
baptize. Sect. 8. Acts 2.38, 39. proves that interest in the promise intitles
not to baptism without repentance. Sect. 9. Infants are not proved by Mr.
Church to be of the visible Church Christian. Sect. 10. Infants capacity of
some respects different from discipleship intitles them not to baptism. Sect.
11. The agreements between circumcision and baptism do not justify infant
baptism, and the validity of sealing infants with an initial seal is showed to
be null. Sect. 12. Dr. Featley his argument for infant Baptism from the
Covenant is examined. Sect. 13. The arguments of Mr. William Lyford from the
Covenant for infant baptism are answered. Sect. 14. The arguments of Mr.
Stalham, Mr. Brinsley, Mr. Hall, and a nameless Author from the Covenant for
infant Baptism are examined. Sect. 15. The dispute of Mr. John Geree about the
extent of the Gospel Covenant to prove thence infant Baptism is examined, and
it is showed that interest in the covenant did not entitle to circumcision; nor
is it proved it does now to baptism. Sect. 16. That the Gospel covenant is not
extended to infants of believers as such. Sect. 17. Mr. Cottons, the
Assembly's, and London Ministers way of arguing for infant Baptism from the
Covenant and Circumcision is recited, and the method of the future progress in
the Review expressed. Sect. 18. Mr. Marshals reply to the first section of the
3d. Part of my Examen about the connection between the Covenant and seal is
reviewed. Sect. 19. Mr. Blakes exceptions against my speeches in the point
about the connection between the Covenant and initial seal are refelled. Sect.
20 The exceptions which in the first part of my Review or Antipaedobaptism
sect. 5. are made against the proof of connection between the Covenant and
initial seal, are confirmed against Mr. Blake vind. faed. chapter 42. sect. 3.
Sect. 21. The ten exceptions of the first part of my Review against
Paedobaptists exposition and allegation of Acts 2.38, 39. for the connection
between the Covenant and seal, are vindicated from Mr. Blakes answer vindic.
f^d. chapter 37, 43. Sect. 22. Animadversions on chapter 2. part. 1* of Mr. Thomas
Cobbet his Just vindication touching the explication of Acts 2.38, 39. in which
his exposition is showed to be vain, and mine justified. Sect. 23. The
arguments drawn from Acts 2.38, 39. against the connection between Covenant
interest, and Baptism right, and infant Baptism are vindicated from Mr. Cobbets
answers. Sect. 24. Mr. Sidenham's notes on Acts 2.39. in his Exercitation chapter
5. are considered. Sect. 25. Mr. Marshals reply to my Examen about his first
connclusion is reviewed, and the Covenant Genesis 17. still maintained to be mixed,
and that Gentile self-justitiaries, though reputed Christians, are not termed
Abraham's seed, nor Gal. 4.29. proves it, and that the distinction of outward
and inward Covenant is not right. Sect. 26. The mixture of the Covenant as by
me asserted, is vindicated from Mr. Blakes exceptions vind. faed. chapter 26. Sect.
27. The four first chapters of Mr. Sidenham's Exercitation are examined, and
his vanity in his conceits about consequences proving infant baptism, the
purity of the Covenant Genesis 17. infants of believers being Abraham's seed and in
Covenant is showed. Sect. 28. It is proved from Luke 1.54, 55. and 19.9. Joh
8.39. Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Gal. 3.7, 1^, 29. and 4.28. Rom 9.6,
7, 8. Matthew 3.9. that the seed of Abraham to whom the pro^ise as Evangelical is
made Genesis 17 7. are only true believers o^ elect persons. Sect. 29. The
allega^ion of Romans 9 6.7, 8. Matthew. 3.7, 8, 9. to prove that the seed to which
the promise Genesis 17.7. as Evangelical belong^ are true believers or the elect
only is vindicated from Mr. Blakes answer vindic faed. chapter 36. and Mr.
Sidenhams E^ercitation chapter 6. Sect. 30. Of the meaning of Mr. Marshals second
conclusion, the ambiguity of which is showed. Sect. 31. Of the novelty and
vanity of Mr. Marshals and others doctrine about sacraments being seals of the
Covenant of grace, and the several sealings of them. Sect. 32. The exceptions
in my Examen part. 4. sect. 5. against Mr. Marshals speeches about the Covenant
and conditional sealing, are made good against Mr. Marshal and M^ Blake. Sect.
33. That it is no error, as Mr. Baxter calls it; but a truth, that the Covenant
of grace is made only to the elect. Sect. 34. Mr. Baxter has not proved that
the absolute promise or Covenant is not it that is sealed in baptism. Sect. 35.
My speech about Gods sealing to none but believers, is cleared from Mr. Baxters
objections. Sect. 36. Christianity is not by birth, nor the Church as civil
corporations, Mr. Marshals equivocation in the use of the term [Covenant of
grace.] Sect. ^7. That the promise Genesis 17.7. proves not an external privilege
of visible Churchmembership and initial seal to infants of Gentile believers,
as Mr. Marshal asserts. Sect. 38. Animadversions on the 3d. chapter of the first
part of Mr. Thomas Cobbets Just vindic. sect. 1, 2, 3. about Genesis 17. whereby
his positions about Church Covenant and external privileges of the Covenant of
grace are refe^led. Sect. 39. Animadversions on sect. 4th. of the same chapter,
whereby the conceits of Mr. Cobbet about external being in the Covenant of
grace, are showed to be vain. Sect. 40. Animadversions on sect. 5. of the same
chapter showing that Mr. Cobbets supposed visible interest in Gods Covenant is not
the rule of baptizing. Sect. 41. Animadversions on the 6th. sect. of the same
chapter showing that Christ is not head of any unsound members, nor parents
profession unites children to Christ so as to entitle them to baptism. Sect.
42. Animadversions on sect. 7^h. of the same chapter showing that the body of the
Jewish Church, even the worst of them, was not under the Covenant of grace in
respect of external interest therein. Sect. 43. That the Covenant at Mount
Sinai was a Covenant of works and not of Evangelical grace, and that the Jewish
Church and state were but one body. Sect. 44. Animadversions on the 9th. sect.
of the same chapter in which the Covenant interest external and Ecclesiastical of
infan^s of inchurched believers, is pretended not proved to be Gospel, and his
allegations of Deuteronomy. 30.6, etc. Genesis 17.8. Luke 19.9. Deuteronomy. 29.10, etc. Ezekiel.
16.1, etc. Genesis 9.25, 26. and other places are examined. Sect. 45. Mr. Cobbets
answers to objections against his 7th. concl. part. 1. c. 3. sect. 9. of his
Just vindic. are considered, and Mr. Blakes tener concerning the general nature
of a Covenant that it i^ a mutual agreement. Sect. 46. The 27, 28, 29. chapters
of Mr. Blakes vind. faed. are examined, and it is showed that he has not
proved the Covenant of grace in Gospel times to admit or to be made to any but
the elect regenerate. Sect. 47. Mr. Blakes vindic. faed. chapter 34. concerning the
stating the question of the birth* privil^^ge of the issue of believers is
examined, and his objections against my stating it removed. Sect. 48. The 35th,
and 37th. chapters of Mr. Blakes vindic. faed. are examined, and his arguments
concluding the natural issue of believers to be taken into covenant are
answered. Sect. 49. The 4th. chapter of Mr. Baxters part. 1. of plain Script.
proof, etc. is examined, his conceits about infants visible Churchmembership
and their admission considered, and sundry animadversions made on that chapter.
Sect. 50. The 5. chapter of Mr. Brs. plain scrip etc. p. 1. is examined, and the
texts Gal. 4.1, etc. Mat. 28.19. cleared so as to prove infants now no visible
churchmembers. Sect. 51. The arguments from altering of the Jewish Church
constitution and call, the ceasing of the High Priest, etc. to prove infants
now no visible Churchmembers, are made good against Mr. Baxters 5. chapter plain,
etc. part. 1. Sect. 52. It is proved that infants were not reckoned to the
visible Church Christian in the primitive times, nor are now. Sect.53. Letters
between me and Mr. Baxter are set down, concerning the Law and Ordinance of
infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, which he as^^rt^, whereby the
point is stated. Sect. 54. Infants were visible Churchmembers only in the
Congregation of Israel. Sect. 55. Infants of the Jews were not visible
Churchmembers by promise or precept, as Mr. Baxter teaches. Sect. 56. That the
people and thereby the infants of the Hebrews were made visible Churchmembers
by a transeunt fact, is made good against Mr. Baxters exceptions. Sect. 57. Mr
Baxters Law of infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed is not proved from
Genesis 1.26, 27, 28. or Genesis 3.15. Sect. 58. Infants visible Churchmembership is
not proved by the Law of Nature. Sect. 59. The sayings of Adam, Eve, Noah,
concerning Cain, Seth, Shem, the term [ sons of God, Genesis 6.2.] prove not Mr.
Baxters Law of infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed. Sect. 60. Mr.
Baxters Law of infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, is not proved from
Genesis 12. or 17. or 22. Sect. 61. Covenants, promises and speeches in the Old
Testament of Israel, the righteous, prove not Mr Baxters Law of infants visible
Churchmembership unrepealed. Sect. 62. Mr. Baxters 9th. and 10th. questions
about the repealableness and repeal of his imagined Law of infants visible
Churchmembership, and his 8. additionals are answered Sect. 63. Mr. Baxters ten
calumniatory questions and the conclusion of his Letter are answered. ect. 64.
My answer in the Dispute and sermon to the argument of Mr. Baxter of Baptism
part. 1. chapter 6. about the nonrepeal of infants Churchmembership because neither
in justice nor in mercy is vindicated. ect. 65. Mr. Baxters arguments from
Matthew. 23.37. Revel. 11.15. for infants visible Churchmembership ch, 12, 13.
are answered. ect. 66. Mr Baxters 9th, 10th, 11th, concerning infants better
condition in the N. T. in his 14th, 15, 16th, chapters part. 1. of Baptism, to
prove their visible Churchmembership are answered. ect. 67. Mr. Baxters
argument chapter 17. part. 1. of baptism, from Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. is answered,
and my answers vindicated. ect. 68. Neither from Romans 4.11. nor by other
teason, has Mr. Baxter proved chapter 18.19. part. 1. of baptism, that infant
Churchmembership was partly na^ural, partly grounded on the Law of grace and
faith. ect. 69. Mr. Baxter chapter 20. by his 15th. argument from infants being
once members of the universal visible Church, has not proved their visible
Churchmembership unrepealed. ect. 70. Mr. Baxters 16th. and 17th. arguments
from the promise of mercy Exodus 20.6. and of blessing Psalm. 37.26. are
answered. Sect. 71. Mr. Baxters 18th. argument from the priori^y of infants
Churchmembership before Circumcision, his 19th. from Gods mercy, his ^0th. from
blessing and cursing Deuteronomy. 28. are answered. Sect. 72. Mr. Baxters 21. argument
from the absurdity of my doctrine making all infants members of the Devils
visible Kingdom is answered. Sect. 73. Mr. Baxters 22. argument chapter ^7. that
my doctrine leaves no ground of hope of salvation of infants dying is answered.
Sect. 74. Mr. Baxters allega^ions p. 76, 77, 78. show not a stronger ground of
hope of infants salvation so dying then mine, his 23d. argument chapter 28. his 25
th. chapter 30. are answered. ect. 75. My arguments to prove the ingraffing Romans
11.17. ^o be into the invisible Church by giving faith, are vindicated from Mr.
Blakes exceptions vindic. faed. chapter 38. and Mr. Sidenhams Exercit. chapter 8, 9.
Sect. 76. My sense of matrimonial holiness 1 Cor. 7.14. is vindicated from Mr.
Blakes exceptions vindic. faed. ch 39. and Mr. Sidenhams Exercit. chapter 7. Sect.
77. Mr. William Carters attempt of proving the Christian Sabbath from Heb. 4.7,
9, 10. is showed to be successeless, and so useless for proof of infant
baptism. Sect. 78. Mr. Carters exposition of Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. as if God
promised to make every believer a blessing, so as to cast ordinarily elect
children on elect parents is refuted. Sect. 79. Neither did Circumcision seal
Mr. Carters additional promise, nor was Abraham thence termed father of
believers. ect. 80. Mr. Carters conceit as if Genesis 17.9. were a command in
force to Abraham's spiritual seed in the N. T. is showed to be vain. ect. 81.
The succession of Baptism to Circumcision, and their identity for substance to
us is showed to be unproved by Mr. Carter, Mr. Marshal, Mr. Church, Dr. Homes,
Mr. Cotton, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Cobbet, from Col. 2.11, 12. or elsewhere. ect. 82.
Notwithstanding Mr. Carters allegations of Acts 2.38, 39. 1 Cor. 7.14. Romans
11.16, 24. Mark 10.14. Acts 15.10. Matthew. 28.19. the N. T. appears to be silent
about Mr. Carters additional promise and infants baptism. ect. 8^. Interest in
the Covenant gave not title to Circumcision as Mr. Marshal in his 4th. concl
would have it. ect. 84. The enlargement of our privileges proves not infant
baptism as Mr. Marshal in his 5th. concl. would have it. ect. 85. Mr. Cobbets
dictates Just. vindic. part. 2. chapter 1. touching childrens baptismal right are
examined and refelled. ect. 86 The 13th. and 14th. chapters of the first part
of Mr. Rutherfords book of the Covenant are examined, and found to make nothing
for infant baptism. ect. 87. The disasters in Germany and our present
distractions sprung not from Anabaptism as Mr. Crag says. ect. 88. Austins
saying about Apostolical traditions is not to be rested upon, nor his testimony
about the antiquity of infant baptism. ect. 89. The testimonies of the Ancient
writers of the Greek Church concerning infant baptism are examined and my
exception^ made good against Mr. Crag, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Homes, Mr. Marshal.
Sect. 90. The arguments to prove infant baptism an innovation in the Greek
Churches Exam. p. 9. are made good against Mr. Marshal, and Dr. Homes. Sect.
91. The testimonies of Tertullian for infant baptism, and Dr. Hammonds
interpretation of chapter 39. de Anima, are examined with 1 Cor. 7.14. Sect. 92.
Dr. Hammonds imagined evidence from [hath been sanctified] for his sense of the
forepart of 1 Cor. 7.14. nullified, and my opinion of enallage of tense
vindicated. Sect. 93. Dr. Hammonds rendering [ by 1 Cor. 7.14*] is refelled, and
my ^endring (...) [ to] justified. Sect. 94. It is showed that Dr. Hammond has
no proof from 1 Cor. 7.16. for his sense of the forepart of v. 14. nor will his
sense of holy for baptized agree with the Apostles argument, though his sense
of the forepart of the verse were granted. Sect. 95. Dr. Hammonds reasons from
the terms holy and unclean for his sense of baptized or not baptized are
refelled. Sect. 96. The Jewish custom of baptism for initiation was not the
pattern of Christian baptism, as Dr. Hammond would have it. Sect. 97. Matthew.
28.19. infants are excluded from being subjects of baptism notwithstanding Dr.
Hammonds pretensions. Sect. 98. The testimonies of Cy^rian, Augustine, and other
Latin Fathers for infant baptism, are showed to have come from their mist^kes,
and the evidences why the antiquity of infant baptism should not be deemed such
as is pretended, are vindicated. Sect. 99. Mr. Crags objections about my nine
untruths, his discourse about rebaptizing are refelled. Sect. 100. The
Arguments of Mr. Crag for infant baptism are re-examined.
ERRATA.
Page; 2. l, 17. r, he premiseth. p, 3. l, 18. r, 44. p, 7. l, 7. r, nor is; l,
39. r, 2. p, 4. l, 39. r, mere. p, 20. l, 3. r, motive; l, 10. r, they are
vain. p, 22. l, 12. r, not only. p, 23. l, 30. r, yea* p, 25. l, 6. r,
commenders; l, 10. r, opinion; l, 25. r, probability; l, 28. r, disputation; l,
35. r, external. p, 29. l, 8. r, 13. l, 9. r, 7. l, 46. r, speci. p, 39. l. 16.
r. 2.17. p, 40. l, 31. r, peculiar; l, 46. r, 7. p, 41. l, 45. r, seal. p, 55.
l, 11. r, conveys. p, 62. l, 43. r, ejection. p, 67. l, 12. r, not sealed. p,
70. l, 34, 35. the lines are misplaced p, 75. l, 22. r, and not still be
admitted to the like initiating Sacrament. p, 81. l, 29. r, erant. p, 86. l.
^6. r, own. p, 94. l, 36. r, persecuted; l, 43. r, some. p, 100. l, 4. r. 43 p,
108. l, 2. r find. p, 113. l, 18. r, fiction; l, 30. r, wont. p 114. l, 2. r,
invisible: p, 115. l, 3. r swerved. p, 108. l, 3. r, then; l, 13, 17. r,
apposite. p, 120. l, 10. r, par. p, 121. l, 4. r, he tells. p, 123. l, 8. r,
Baxter. p, 124. l, 31. r, app^site. p, 126. l, 21. r, remission of sins. p,
109. l, 25. r, incognitum, p, 141. l, ^3. r, number. p, 146. l, 1. r, eyed. p,
148. l, 3 r, mislike; l, 5. r apposite. p, 150. l, 2. r, meant by; l, 17. r,
comprehended. p, 15^. l, 22. r, dichotomie. p, 158. l, 26. r, branches, d* and.
p, 159. l, 23. d, or the inward. p, 160. l, 15. d, not. p, 166. l, 46. r, they,
l, 48. r, unbaptizable. p, 171. l, 37. r, belong. p, 172. l, 5. r, of this. p,
173. l, 16. r, seed, which; l, 22. r, because And as. p, 177. l, 1. r, that
knows. p, 178. l, 44, 45. r, does not agree: p, 183. l, 38. r, regenerate: p,
185. l, 5. r, Romans 3.1. p, 186. l, 9. r, now: p, 184. l, 22. r, visible: p,
197. l, 35. r, type: p, 204. l, 1^. r, is not: p, 209. l, 44* r, Abrohamites
antecedently: p, 213. l. 36. r, pentance neither have ours; l, 43, r, nor is:
p, 215. l, 21. r, L. C. l, 24. r, e.g. p, 221. l, 42. r, mediation: p, 222. l,
4. r, revelation; l, 30. r, of science or: l, 33, r* an act; l, 47, r,
contenting: p, 223. l, 7. r, types of Christ; l, 28. r, has not; l, 34. r, in
this; l, 40. r, alluded: p, 224. l. 19. r, me to: p, 226. l, 37. d* not: p,
228. l, 6. r, vent; l, 33, 34. r, syncretism: p, 229. l, 4. d, not; l, 5. r,
derive; l, 35. r, to be a seal be: p, 230. l, 20. r, term; l, 44. r, Jews: p,
23. r. l, 20. r, he had: r, 232. l, 5. r, our; l, 12. r, passing; l, 30. r, if
it* p, 234. l, 5. r, 15. p, 237. l, 48. r, P* p, 238. l, 7. r, in my; l, 14. r,
reviewed: p, ^39. l, 8. r. flings: p, 240. l, 15. d, not; l, 17. r, and seals;
l, 33. r, cerning: p, 241. l, 7. r, first grace; l, 13. r, what sense: p, 244.
l, 2^. r, contradistinguisheth: p, ^45. l, 33. d, not* l, 47. r, asserting: p,
246. l, 20. r, as. p, 249. l, 10. r, there, l, 39. r, and not: p, 250. l, 35.
r, charged: p, 252. l, 20. r, and Ward. p, 254, l, 1. r, (...): p, 256. l, 32.
r, 28. l, 41, 43. r, all at age p, 257. l, 8. r, my; l, 14. r, instance, l, 4^.
r, stony: p, 258. l, 37. r, futility: p, 261. l, 1. r, it were; l, 4. d, to; l,
39. r, sealing: p, 268. l, 29. r, ly; l, 42. r, that* l, 43. d, I: p, ^72. l,
1. r, reason i^; l, ^9. r, and the: p, 273. l, 23. r, art: p, ^75. l, 37. r,
external: p, 276 l, 45. d, not: p, 277. l, 37. r, during the; l, 44, 45. d, in
the right administration of it: p, 278. l, 12. r, no where; l, 47. r, elect
allusive: p, 279. l, 2. r, before. l, 15. r, contain; l, 17. r, it proper to
Israel: p, 280. l, 35. r, but that such are to be; l, 37. r, act is a; l, 39.
r, they are: p, 281. l, 20 r, were: p, 282. l 46. r, without that; l, 47. r,
John: p, 283. l, 44. r, professor: p, 28^. l, 36. r. or: p, 286 l. 19. d, and;
l, 26. r, yea under yet were: p, 287. l 7. r, was; l, 13 r, that which, l, 20.
r, visible interest: p, 293. l, ult. r, noting p, 294. l, 24. r, unto: p, 295.
l, 38. r, winding: p, 300. l, 9. r, expected: p, 301. l, 24. r, no
transgressors: p, 310. l, 12. r, know not: p, 311. l, 3. r, of grace: p, 317.
l, 46. r, come: p* 329. l, 8. r, mere professor: p, 330. l, 16* r, is a seal to
the Gentiles that believe of the righteousness of faith though they be never
circumcised; l, 26. r, were such; l, 27. d, were: p, 332. l, 40. r, are: p,
334. l, 3. r, inference; l, 37. r, exilia: p, 335. l, 7. r, assert; l, 47. r,
whence; l, 13. r, tenet: p, 341, l, 36. r, condition.

At Yy the figures are wrong by reason of the use of two Pres^es; for after
344. sect. 46. is p, 245. ag^in: p, 245. l. 14. r, of which* p, 256. l, 4. r,
vasorum: p, ^61. l, 48. r, desert: p, 269. l, 31. r, ever: p, 283. l, 6. r, to:
p, 284. l, 33. r, nor: p, 292. mis^printed 284. l, 38. r, unto what: p, 297. l,
6. r, indefinitely: p, 304. l, 28. r, special: p, 318. l, 25. r, desertion: p,
323. l, 8. r, mere: p, 382. l, 23. r, cause: p, 387. l, 22. r, of all: p, 398.
l, 6. r, he is: p, 401. l, 37. r, many: p, 403. l, 20. r, use no: p. 407. l,
19. r, churchmembers: p, 501. l, 43. r, on condition: p, 503. l, penult. r,
righteousness: p, 509. l, 9. r, can: p, 510. l, 47. r, not: p. 557. l, 18. r,
it was. p, 559. l, 18. r. who has. p, 561. l, 28. r, is not. p, 597. l, 34. r,
sarcastical. p, 608. l, 23. r, an. p, 613. l, 43. r, might well. p, 621. l, 9.
r, there. p, 647. l, 12. r, import. p, 653. l, 10. r, concrete. p, 678. l, 7.
r, deny. p, 684. l, 46. r, sanction. p, 702. l. 36. r, did not. p, 703. l, 11.
r, were not. p, 705. l, 42. r* benefit. p, 721. l, 8. d, not. p, 725. l, 14. r,
the time. p, 727. l, 24. r, is. p, 735. l, 11. r, there. p, 745. l, 11. r,
formally. p, 752. l, 43. r, there. p, 756* l, 7. r, Janua. p, 783. l, 27. r,
there were. p, 798. l, 7. r, ambigua. p, 799. l, 10. d, of. p, 803. l, 38. r,
not. p, 816. l, 44. r, one parent was. p, 822. l, 7. d, be. p, 825. l, 7. r,
which it was; l, 23. r, na^i. p, 830. l, 18. r, and also. p, 834. l, 47. r,
inference which. p, 844. l, 19. r, of the Chair. p, ^48. l, 1^. r, 23. p, 850.
l, 16. r, ca^achresis. p, 851. l, 2. d, in; l, 10. r, form* p, 852. l, 46. r,
pu^. p, 853. l, 31. r, comprehend. p, 854. l, 40. r, or not. p, 877. l, 29. r,
not ^s. p, 883. l, 2. r, denegandam. p, 885. l, 7. r, desert. p, 889. l, 4. r,
conten^.

Books published by the Author.
Christ's Commination against Scandalizers, on Luke 17.1, 2. Printed for Richard
Royston, at the sign of the Angel in Ivy Lane, London. Jehovah ^ireh, o^, Gods
Providence in delivering the Godly; in two Sermons on 2 Pet. 2.9. on occasion
of preserving Bristol from a plot to deliver it to Prince Rupert, March 7.
1642. Printed for Michael Sparks at the Blew Bible in Green Arbor, London.
Fermentum Pharis^orum, or, the Leaven of Pharisaical will worship; in a Sermon
on Matthew. 15.9. Printed for Andrew Crook at the Green Dragon in Paul's
Churchyard, London. Anthropolatria, or the sin of glorying in men; on 1 Cor.
3.21. Printed for John Bellamy, at the three Golden Lions in Cornhil, London.
Two Treatis^s concerning Infant Baptism, to wit* an Exercitation, and Examen of
Mr. Stephen Marshals Sermon; Printed for George Whittington, and to be sold at
the Blackmore at Fleet-b^idge London by W. Larnar. An Apology for the two
Treatises, printed for G. Calvert at the Black spread Eagle at the West end of
Paul's, London. An Antidote against the venom of a passage of Mr. Richard
Baxter, Printed for Thomas Brewster at the three Bibles at the West end of
Paul's, London. An addition to the Apology in a Letter to Mr. Robert Baillee of
Scotland: Printed by Henry Hills, next door to the sign of the Peacock in
Aldersgate Street, London. Pracursor, or a Forerunner to the Review: Printed
for the same. Antipaedobaptism, or the First Part of the full Review of the
Dispute concerning Infan^ Baptism: Printed for Henry Crips and Lodowick Lloyd
in Pope's Head Alley near Lumbard-street, London. A Plea for Antipaedobaptists,
against Mr. John Craggs Dispute and Sermon at Abergavenny: Printed for Henry
Hills above named. Antipaedobaptism, or the Second Part of the full Review of
the Dispute concerning Infant Baptism: Printed for the same. Joannis Tombs
Be^dleiensis refutatio positionis Dris. Henrici Savage Londini: typi^ Henrici
Hills. Antipaedobaptism, or the the Third Part of the full Review of the
Dispute concerning Infant Baptism: London, printed for Henry Hills above named.
FINIS.
Anti-paedobaptism: OR, The third part of the full Review of the Dispute
concerning Infant Baptism, refuting the proof of it from Circumcision and the
Covenant.
SECT. I. The second Argument against Infant Baptism, that it is will worship,
is confirmed.
HAving proceeded so far in the Review of the dispute concerning
Infant Baptism, as to vindicate the Texts, Romans 11.17. Act. 2 38, 39. 1 Cor.
7.14. from such glosses as tend to wrest them to the maintenance of it, and to
make good my first Argument against it, from the institution of Christ, Mat.
28.19. Mark. 16.16. The Apostles and primitive Evangelists practice and
sayings, in two parts of the Review already printed, I go on to the finishing
of the rest of the forementioned Review.

My second Argument against Infant Baptism is thus formed, That which is
will worship is not agreeable to the will of God, nor according to the rule of
baptizing: But the ordinary Baptizing of Infants, though by a lawful Minister,
is will worship. Ergo.

The Major is proved, 1. From Col. 2.13. where will worship is disallowed by
the Apostle, and so generally Commentators and other Authors account
will worship a sin. Doctor Lakes defense about the Sabbath, These. 2. Ye know
that (...) did never please God; yet Doctor Hammond in his Treatise of
will worship, will have (...), or will worship, to be understood in the better
sense. But against it are the fra^^ of the Apostles words, and the drift of
them, which is to blame them for being subject to ordinances after the
doctrines and commandments of men, as not agreeing with a Christians co-dying
with Christ; And he says, Such things have a show of wisdom: and verse 18. he
that promises that none do beguile them of their reward (...), willing in
humility, or as our Translators, in a voluntary humility. I may not now divert
from the present business to examine Doctor Hammonds Allegations, there being
enough in that Text to prove, service as done to God, invented by men, and
practiced after their commands, without Gods appointment, not to be after Gods
will: and I take Doctor Hammond to be well answered by Mr. Cawdrey. 2. However
the Major is plainly proved from Christ's words, Mat. 15.9. In vain do they
worship me, teaching for doctrine men's precepts; which proves that worship
which is taught after men's precepts (which is the same with will worship in my
proposition) is in vain, and therefore not agreeable to the will of God. But I
need not say any more about it, since my Antagonists do most of them except
against will worship as a sin.

The Minor is proved thus, That which is worship not appointed by God, is
will worship: But the ordinary baptizing of Infants of Believers, Churched or
unchurched, though by a lawful Minister, is worship not appointed by God. Ergo.
The Major is confirmed from the very definition of will worship, which is, A
worship of God nor appointed by him, but taken up according to the command of
man, out of Mat. 15.9. The Minor is proved, by demanding a Scripture wherein
God appointed Infant Baptism.

In answer hereto, in conference with me, it was once denied that
Infant Baptism was used as a worship of God: But if so, then it is no holy
thing, no Sacrament, no profaneness to contemn it, no matter if a Midwife do
it, with many more of the like absurdities.

Master Blake in his answer to my letter chapter 13. page 92. Vindic. foed. chapter 44.
denies Infant-Communion, Bell-baptism, to be will worship, he makes
will worship then when men devise an Ordinance, but not when it is only an
abuse, profanation, misapplication of an instituted worship to a wrong subject.

And Master Marshall page 195. of his Defense, would put me to prove, that all
things belonging to Christian worship, even in the circumstances of it, even
the ages and sexes of the persons to whom the Ordinances are to be applied,
must be expressly set down in the N. T. page 196. There is no absolute
necessity, that every circumstance of an Ordinance, or the several sexes or
ages to whom an Ordinance ought to be applied, must be set down in precept, or
Apostolical example equivalent to a precept, found in the N.T. page 205. The
point about Infant Baptism touches but a circumstance of age. In which
speeches Mr. M. seems to make Infant Baptism but an arbitrary circumstance; and
if so, then much injury was in the first use of his Sermon, in which he made
the denial of Infant Baptism, odious, as if it were as bad or worse than the
facts of Herod, and Hazael in slaying Infants; then much guilt of oppression
lies on them that have denied place in the Ministry, scourged, imprisoned,
fined, banished, put to death men for opposing, or not owning Infant Baptism;
and very unrighteous have been their declamations, who in Pulpits and elsewhere
have inveighed against them as Heretics, Sectaries, etc. censured their
opinion as intolerable, as Maresius qu. 6. their practice as Sacrilege, as
Master Blake vindic. foed. chapter 4. If Master M. do indeed think the point of
Infant Baptism to touch but a circumstance of age, and that it needs no divine
institution, then it is an indifferent ceremony with him, such as the power of
the Church may appoint, and if so, it is no otherwise blameable to omit it,
than it is to omit any other Church-constitution. But the truth is, it is false
which he says, That the matter touches only a circumstance of age: for
indeed it touches the qualification of the person to be Baptized; and the very
end and use of Baptism (which are the essentials of it, as it is a Sacrament)
which is, that the person Baptized, do thereby testify his profession of
Repentance and Faith in Christ, and covenant to be his, as appears by the very
phrase used, of being Baptized into the name of the Trinity, Mat. 28.19.
compared with 1 Cor. 1.13. as I have proved before, Part 2. Sect. 5. And were
it a circumstance only of age, yet it being determined by Christ, who are to
be baptized, to wit, Disciples and Belie^^^s, it is an arrogant presumption to
alter it. Rightly says Chamie^ Panstr. tom. 4^ lib. 8. c. 4. Sect. 32. quae
non sunt institutae circumstantiae habeto sane sibi Ecclesia, ut tempus
locumque celebrandi, and si quae sunt similia. At quae instituta sunt ea ne
moveto.

As for M. Blakes speech, that a misapplication of (...) instituted ordinance
to a wrong subject, is an abuse or profanation of it, but not will worship, 1.
It is not right. For though every misapplication to a wrong subject of an
instituted ordinance be not will worship, yet a misapplication to a wrong
subject of an instituted ordinance is a will worship, when not only the rite
it self is made worship of God, but also the application of it to that subject,
though it be but men's invention, yea and such a one as alters the end and use
of the ordinance* as is in infant baptism, bell-baptism, altar-baptism,
infant-Communion, Prayer, sacrifice, vows, keeping solemn feasts, offering
incense, building altars, were instituted ordinances, yet Jeroboams sacrificing
and keeping a feast at another time than God appointed, Ahaz his forming an
altar after the pattern of that at Damascus, Nadab and Abihu their offering
strange fire, prayer to Saints, for the dead, vows to Saints, monastic
profession after such a rule, keeping of holy days to Saints, and many other
things among Pagans, and Papists, are: condemned as will worship. Generally
Protestants, even the Assembly in their Conffession of faith, chap. 29. art. 4.
make the lifting up, reserving the elements in the Eucharist, Contrary to
Matthew. 15.9. and chap. 21. they say, the acceptable way of worshipping the true
God is instituted by himself, and so limited to his own revealed will, that he
may not be worshipped according to the imaginations and devices of men, or
suggestions of Satan, under any visible representations, or any other way not
prescribed in the Holy^scripture; yea the non-conformists have gone further in
so censuring the three ceremonies, cross at baptism, kneeling at the Lords
Supper, the wearing the Surplice in holy ministrations, to be will worship, as
the Abridgement of the Lincolnshire Ministers petition, and other writings
show, and D. Morton in his Defense, and D. Burges in his Rejoinder to the
reply, chap. 2. and elsewhere, acquit them only from will worship, in that
they placed not holiness in them, made them not necessary parts of worship,
which I presume M. Blake will not say of Infant Baptism, the denial of which he
counts, though vainly, to be sacrilege, Vindic. foed. chap. 40. And sure
baptisms were instituted ordinances among the Jews, Heb. 9.10. yet our Lord
Christ applies the Prophets censure of will worship, Isai. 29.13. against the
Pharisees placing holiness and fear of God in their washings of hands and other
things so often and in the manner they used. Mark. 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Secondly, were it granted, that it is not properly will worship to misapply an
instituted ordinance to a wrong subject, yet if it be an abuse or profanation,
the matter is no whit mended with M. Blake, if I put in my argument instead of
the term (will worship) the term (profanation or abuse) I presume Paedobaptists
will not justify a profanation or abuse, which Infant Baptism is acknowledged
to be if it be not after Gods appointment or Christ's institution. Wherefore M.
M. and the most of the paedobaptists, not trusting to these evasions seek for
an appointment of Infant Baptism in the institution of Infant-circumcision,
Genesis 17. Yet M. Baxter in his p^^in Scripture proof, part. 1. chap. 4. etc.
declines the command of Circumcision for proof of Infant Baptism, and imagins
an ordinance of their visible Church Membership, distinct from the ordinance of
Circumcision, unrepealed, out of which he endeavors to prove Infant Baptism,
though he no where that I know show us where that ordinance is, notwithstanding
in my Praecursor and elsewhere he has been often pressed to show it, which
book of M. B. taking so much, that a third edition is printed, I had hoped
paedobaptists would have stuck to his way, and declined the other way of
analogy of the Command of Circumcision. But I see latter books, as M. Sidenham,
M. Fuller, and others, still insisting on the hypothesis concerning the
covenants and the seal, and Baptisms succession to Circumcision, etc. M.
Gataker in his Latin treatise against D. Ward about the force and efficacy of
Infant Baptism, though by his Epistle* it appears he had seen M. Baxters books,
yet p. 16. he speaks thus to D. Ward. I would you had specially designed the
Command concerning the baptizing the infants of believers, which you mean. For
although from the analogy of Circumcision, and the nature of this very
sacrament, as it is destined to initiation, the comprehension of infants in the
Covenant of grace etc. I deservedly believe both the Ancient Church to have
used, and the Church at this day justly to use Infant Baptism, yet hitherto I
have found no special Command concerning this thing. I wish he had formed and
confirmed his proof for Infant Baptism from the Analogy of Circumcision, etc.
so ancient, learned a man, and so accurate in Controversies, me thinks should
have yielded some better proof for Infant Baptism than others have don, or have
forborne calling them novel sectaries who with so much endeavor oppugn
Infant Baptism (which is the expression in his Epistle to the Reader) and
withheld his hand from subscribing to that attestation wherein the Four
positions of my Examen were censured as erroneous and pernicious. But not
meeting with any other proof than this, I shall keep on in the Review of the
dispute, and examine the pretended institution of Infant Baptism out of the Old
Testament, taking in some texts of the New, and first Examine the way of proof
by analogy of Circumcision, which seems to have been the Assemblies way, and
then M. Bs. more refined way, as is imagined, desiring the Reader to take
notice of what was before disputed in the Second Section of the second part of
this Review, to prove that consequences drawn from analogy between mere
positive rites of the Old and New Testament to prove a duty in the use of them,
without particular institution, are not good.

SECT. II. Dr. Homes his arguments to prove Infant Baptism from Genesis 17. are
Examined.
Two ways I find Consequences framed, one in arguments formed
syllogistically, the other in certain Conclusions or hypotheses from whence it
is conceived they may deduce Infant Baptism. I begin with the former way. I had
formed the argument from Genesis 17.7. etc. three ways, in my Exercit. Sect. 1,
2, 3. and that without disadvantage to my Antagonists, notwithstanding D. Homes
his exceptions. But I am content to view the forms D. Homes sets down, as more
agreeable to their mind. In his Animadversion on my Exerc. chap. 2. page 6. he
says, Our first form of argument from Genesis 17.7. etc. is this. Where there is
a Command for a thing never remanded on contramanded, there the thing is still
in force. But there is a Command for signing the infants of a believer with the
sign of the Covenant of grace, Genesis 17.7, 9. never yet remanded or
contramanded: therefore the signing believers children with the sign of the
Covenant of grace (namely baptism now) is still in force.

To which I answer, 1. The conclusion is not of the thing in question, which is
not of the children of believers, but of the Infant-children of believers, as
it was in the Minor, now a person of 20. years of age is a believers child, as
well as one of two days old. 2. In the Minor (the sign of the Covenant of
grace Commanded) is understood, either of the sign of the Covenant of grace
expressed in the Conclusion, to wit, Baptism, and if so, it is denied that
there is any such Command, Genesis 17.7, 9. to sign with the sign of the Covenant
of grace believers infants, there is no Command but of circumcising the manchild
of eight days old, not a tittle of baptism: or else of a sign of the Covenant
of grace there expressed, and if so, the Minor is denied, that the Command for
signing the Infants of a believer with the sign of the Covenant of grace, Genesis
17.7, 9. was never yet remanded or contramanded. It was expressly contramanded
Acts 15.28. Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. If in the Conclusion by ( the sign of the Covenant
of grace) be meant as the words ( namely baptism now) import, the rite of
Christian Baptism, and in the Minor it be meant of the Command of Circumcision,
then there is a fault of the syllogism in the form, it consisting of four
terms. If in the Minor i^ be meant of the sign of the Covenant indefinite,
which is neither Baptism nor Circumcision, I deny there is such a Command, Genesis
17.7, 9. and the syllogism has also fourth terms.

Two other forms he has page 9. 2. Form of argument from Genesis 17. is this. To
whom the Covenant in force runs in the same tenor in the New Testament as in
the Old, to them the application of the first sign or seal of the New Testament
may be applied* as well as the first of the Old Testament: But this tenor of
the Covenant of grace still in force, is as true, and does as truly run to a
believing Gentile, I am thy God and the God of thy seed, as it did to Abraham
the Father of believing Gentiles, Romans 4. Gal. 3. Ergo, the first seal of the
Covenant may be applied to believers children, now in the New Testament as well
as in the Old to Abraham's. The Major is plain in Genesis 17. the tenor of the
Covenant, and the application of the first seal, are Knit into a dependence one
upon another. I am the God of thee, and thy seed, V. 7, 8. Therefore thou shall
circumcise every male, V. 9. etc. The Minor is unquestioned of any that I know.

Answer 1. The thing to be concluded was, that Baptism may be applied, but
baptism and the first seal of the Covenant I do not take to be all one. Baptism
or Circumcision I do no where find in Scripture called the seal of the
Covenant, much less the first seal, and why the blood of Christ, or the spirit
of Christ, or the oath of God may not be called the first seal of the Covenant
as well as these, I know not; again the Conclusion was to be ( may be applied
to infant-children of believers) where as the conclusion is ( may be applied to
believers children) And the thing to be concluded was simply ( baptism may be
applied to Infants of believers) whereas it is propounded comparatively ( now
in the New Testament as well as in the Old to Abraham) now baptism was not
applied to Abraham, and therefore the Conclusion may be granted ( baptism may
be applied to infants of believers now as well as to Abraham) that is, just
never a whit, since it was never applied to Abraham. 2. But besides, if the
phrases ( to whom the Covenant in force runs etc.) in the Major, and in the
Minor, (does as truly run to a believing Gentile) (as the words carry it) be
meant only of the believer, and in the Major (the application to them) be
meant only of the believing Gentile as in the Minor, then there are more than
three term^ in the syllogism, ( applied to believers children) being not at
all in either of the premises. But if it be put in the Major (may be applied to
them and their Infants) and in the Minor (to a believing Gentile and his Infant
children) I deny both Major and Minor. Nor the Major proved from Genesis 17.7, 8,
9. as in my Answer to M. Bailee, Sect. 3. in my Ample disquisition Sect 5. is
made manifest, by showing the nullity of the pretended connection between the
Covenant and the seal; The term ( therefore) Genesis 17.9.) may be read ( and) and
it has not reference to the promise only, V. 7. but to the rest of the
promises, V 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. or rather to the whole Covenant, and the making of
it, and it imports not a right by virtue of the Covenant, but a motive
enforcing a Command, and this command being of circumcising the male only of
8. days old, shows there is not a connection between the Covenant and Seal,
since then it would belong to the female and male of the seventh day, they being
in Covenant as well as the male of the eighth. The Minor he takes as
unquestioned, But I deny it, till I find it better proved than yet I have
done. I omit the uncoutheness of the Phrase ( to them the application of the
first sign may be applied) and leave the D. to make good sense of it, which I
cannot do.

His 3. form of Argument from Genesis 17. is, Where there is the same reason of a
precept, there may be the same practice: But the promise which is the reason of
the precept runs in the New Testament (as flowing from Genesis 17.) to believers
and their children, The promise is to you and your children, Acts. 2.39. Ergo.

Answer. What is the Conclusion he would prove he leaves to be gathered. It
should be, Infants of believers are to be baptized. But then the predicate in
the Conclusion would be found in neither of the Premises. For the precept Genesis
17.9. is only that male Infants of 8. days old of Abraham's house should be
Circumcised. But a little after he puts this as the Conclusion, that the same
reason on which the administration of circumcision was grounded, the
administration of baptism was grounded. Which I grant true in this sense, that
as the reason why Circumcision was administered to Infants was the Command of
God, so the reason why Baptism is to be administered to believers, is the
Command of Christ. But the D. would have it thus, that as infants were to be
Circumcised by virtue of the promise, Genesis 17.7. so Infants of believers are to
be Baptized by virtue of the same promise repeated Acts 1.39. concerning which,
to omit the monstrosity of his syllogism, in which there are more than 4 terms,
and neither the Predicate nor Subject in the Conclusion, Major or Minor, his
speeches are without proof or truth. For 1. it is not true, where there is the
same reason of a precept there may be the same practice. For Levit. 19.5, 9,
10, 19, 23, 25, 26, 27, 28, 30. are precepts concerning Mosaical ceremonies or
observances, as of offering a sacrifice, of peace offerings, not reaping the
corners of the field, not sowing the field with mingled seed, not wearing a
garment of linen and woollen, not eating fruit of trees planted till the
fourth year, not eating any thing with the blood, not rounding the corners of
the head, reverencing the Sanctuary, to wit, the tabernacle or Temple, and
these with other moral precepts mixed among them in the same Chapter, have in
sundry of those verses, and the beginning and end of the Chapter, this as the
common reason, I am the Lord, and yet we are not by the same reason tied to all
the practices. 2. He does not prove that the promise, Acts 2.39. is the same
with the promise, Genesis 17.7. It is more likely to be either the promise, Act.
2.17, 33, 38. or Act. 2.30. or Act. 3.25. which were eminent promises, and
related to the covenant of grace. 3. He does not prove that ( to you, Act.
2.39.) is (to you believers and to your children) that is, the Infants of
believers as such: It does not appear they were then believers when these words
were spoken. 4. Nor is there a word that shows the promise was to them or their
children, whether called or no. 5. Nor is it proved that the promise to Abraham
and his seed, Genesis 17.7. was the only reason of the precept, verse. 9, 10. 6.
If it were so proved, it is not proved, nor ever can be, that it was the formal
adequate reason, why an Infant was circumcised. 7. Nor is there the least hint
in the words, Act. 3.38, 39. that the reason why a person has right to be
Baptized, is barely the being of the promise to that person, or Genesis 17.7, 9,
10. any hint that the promise barely of it self, did either give right to
Circumcision, or oblige to the duty, but in both places it is brought as a
motive to excite to that duty, which the precept alone was the formal reason
of, and in the former as well of Repentance as of being Baptized. So that when
the Doctor has formed his arguments, they are but misshapen things, having many
ambiguities of speech, little or no proof for what he says. And
notwithstanding the Doctors cavils, I yet think the arguments from Genesis 17.
were better formed by me in my Exercitation for Paedobaptists advantage, than
by the Doctor in his Animadversions: But perhaps we may find the Arguments
better formed elsewhere.

SECT. III. Master Drew's Argument for Infant Baptism from Genesis 17. is
examined, and it is showed, there is not the same reason of Infant Baptism, as
of Infant-Circumcision.
MAster John Drew is one of those to whose writings Master Baxter refers me,
and is said by the Author of the lawfulness of obeying the present government,
to have written with sharp reasons and mild language. Let Us see how he has
disputed page 23. of his serious address; Where there is the same reason of a
precept or command enjoining any practice continued, there may and must be the
same practice continued: But the reason of the command for signing Infants of
Covenanters with the first sign or seal of the Covenant under the Old
Testament continues still in force for that practice under the New Testament.
Therefore now that command is in force to all persons in Covenant, as it was
then.

Answ. The command in force then to all persons in Covenant, is expressed by
himself in the words before, page 22.23. the command of Circumcision, Genesis
17.11, 12. when he says ( All the Infants of those in Covenant with God were
signed with the first sign or seal of the Covenant then instituted and
commanded by the Lord, which was Circumcision) so that if he mean, as his words
are, this is his meaning in his conclusion ( that command which is Genesis 17.11,
1^. to Circumcise the flesh of the foreskin of Abraham's males of eight days
old, is now in force to all persons in Covenant, as well as it was then) which
neither has nor can have any other sense (taking words as they are used by
other men) but that still all in Covenant with God, are bound by the command,
Genesis 17.11, 12. to Circumcise their male children of eight days old; which is
to maintain that which the Apostles have abro^^ted, Act. 15. to entangle us
with the yoke of bondage, which the Apost^e says, would make Christ
unprofitable to us, Gal. 5.1, 2, 3. But it will be said, he means not the
command of Circumcision, but the command of signing with the first sign or seal
of the Covenant. Ans. If he means so, he rather juggles than disputes. For the
words speak of the command, which is Genesis 17.11, 12. and that is no other than
of Circumcision; no such command of signing Infants of Covenanters with the
first sign or seal of the Covenant in the Old Testament, besides that of
Circumcision, is either there or any where else that I know of; if there be let
it be showed. But this is the manner of Paedobaptists, in their disputes to
imagine a command of sealing, as they call it, with the first seal, the Infants
of Covenanters abstractively or distinctly from Circumcision in the Old
Testament, Genesis 17. which is indeed a mere fiction, with which they mock their
auditors and readers, who unwarily take what they say without examination. Now
this were an answer sufficient to this argument; yet because this man's
reasoning is so commended, let us view his proofs.

For proof of the Major thus he writes. For when God gives the reason of any
command, that reason is the ground of the command; and till that reason
cease, he is very bold with God, that dare exempt himself from the practice.
And again, If the first proposition be denied, viz, where there is the same
reason of a precept continued, there must be the same practice, then every man
may set himself free from any command of God, and who can say unto him, what
do thou? For the Lord commands nothing without a reason, if there be no
reason expressed, the reason of his will is employed, which is as cogent and
binding as all reasons in the world, till he makes it appear that it cease.
This is very clear.

Answ. The reason of a Command may be understood, either of the reason why Cod
commands a thing, or the reason why we are bound to observe that command. The
reason why God commands is various, sometimes one thing, sometimes another,
sometimes expressed, sometimes concealed. And sometimes the same reason is
given of very various commands, as I said before ( I am the Lord your God) is
Levit. 19. the promiscuous reason of moral and ceremonial and judicial
commands; yea that the very reason which 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. is given for the
command to be obedient children, not fashioning themselves according to their
lusts in their ignorance, but to be holy in all manner of conversation, is
cit^d from Levit. 11.44, 45. and is the very reason why he forbids the
Israelits to eat certain meats, or to touch certain things unclean by the Law.
And therefore by Master Drew's reasoning (the reason of the precept not
ceasing) we are bound still to the precept, Levit. 11. of abstaining from meats
unclean by the Law, and from touching things legally defiling. But though there
may be many motives to do it the rather, yet the only formal adequate
reciprocal reason why we are bound to observe any thing, is the command of our
Lord revealed to us. besides which, we are to look no further, nor are we to
neglect it, till by some declaration of his will, it appears we are discharged.
Thus Abraham was bound to offer his son Isaac on the Altar, because of Gods
command, without knowing any other reason; yea though he had known the reason
from the end to be fulfilled, yet he had not been discharged till God signified
it by the Angel, that he should not slay him. Now then to Master Drews
argument. I^ he understand the reason of the precept in the first sense his
major is false; the reason why God gave a precept may continue, and yet the
practice is not to continue, as Levit. 11* 44, 45. On the otherside the reason
of a precept may not reach, and yet the precept reach; as though God brought
not us out of Egypt, which is the reason of the command, Deuteronomy. 5.6, 7. yet the
command pertains to us, and verse. 15. It is said, Remember that thou wast a
bondsman in Egypt, therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath
day. Where I presume Master Drew will say the command reaches us, though the
reason of it do not. And as for his inference, That if it be denied, where
there is the same reason of a precept there must be the same practice, then
every man may set himself free from any command of God, it is true, if by the
same reason of a precept, he understand the reason of a precept in the second
sense, for the reason why we are bound to observe his precept, to wit, the
declaration of Gods will it should continue: but if he understand it in the
first sense, for that reason which God gives, why he declared his will, and
bound us to observe it, though it continue. yet the precepr may not be in
force, nor on the other side does the precept always cease to bind, though
that reason cease, as is proved before.

Now that reason of the precept Genesis 17.11, 12. which is verse. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
is a reason of the first sort, and not of the latter. And indeed in more
positive rites which are by institution the precept continues not in force,
however the reason God used to enforce it, remain, except the institution be
continued. Rightly Pareus comm. in Genesis 8.20. to an Objection, That sacrifices
are to be continued, because the cause is perpetual, Answers, The perpetual
cause of a thing necessarily co-hering with the thing, as a Cause continued
with its effect, makes the same perpetual. But the said causes or ends do not
so co-here with the sacrifies of the Ancients, but only by appointment, that
is divine ordination, which was that those sacrifices should be the
confirmation of the faith of the fathers, and a signification of gratitude,
unto the coming of the Messiah, etc. The like may be said of the ends of
Circumcision, and the occasion of appointing it.

But let us view Master Drew's proof of the Minor, The reason (says he) of the
command for signing Infants of Believers under the Law, with the first sign or
seal of the Covenant, was this promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy
seed, as is evident, Genesis 17.7, 8. compared with the 9.10. and 11. verses,
where this promise of God, and the application of the first seal are knit into
a dependence one upon another: I will establish my Covenant between me and
thee, etc. to be a God unto thee and thy seed after thee; therefore thou shall
Circumcise every male, as a token of the Covenant, verse 11. But this same
reason of the command continues in force under the Gospel; God does as truly
say to every Believing Gentile now, I am thy God and the God of thy seed, as he
did to Abraham the Father of believing Gentiles, so he is called Romans 4.11.
Therefore I may conclude, that Believers under the Gospel, have the same
command for signing their Infants with the first seal of the Covenant of
promise (which now is baptism) as Abraham had to sign his under the Law with
the first sign, etc. which then was Circumcision; and now Sirs, if the
blessing of Abraham be come upon you, and if you be heirs according to the
promise, you may easily find a command for Baptizing your Infant seed.

Answ. If Master Drew would prove what is to be proved, he should prove that
the proper formal reason obliging to the duty of Circumcision, Genesis 17.9, 10,
11. was the promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed after thee. But
that is false. For the formal reason being put, the thing is put without any
other thing, and it being not put, the thing is not put, though other things be
put. But if the promise had been put, yet Abraham had not been obliged to
Circumcise, unless a command were put, and the command being put, Abraham was
bound to Circumcise, though God had made no promise.

Therefore, though the promise might be a motive to do it, yet as Master
Mars^all truly confesses, Defense of his Sermon page 182. the formal reason
of the Jews being Circumcised was the command; and therefore till Master Drew
show we have the same command to Baptize Infants, as Abraham had to Circumcise
Infants, he can never show we have the same or equal reason for Infant Baptism,
as was for Infant-circumcision. But Master Drew thinks to prove his Minor from
Genesis 17.7, 8. compared with the 9, 10, 11. verse. Where it is evident (says he)
this promise of God, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, and the
application of the first seal, are knit into a dependence one upon another.

But he does but dictate without any clear explication, or thorough
consideration of what he says. For 1. He does not plainly tell us, that the
dependence he imagines to be one upon another of the application of the first
seal and the promise, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, is upon that
promise alone, and not upon the other promises, verse. 4, 5, 6, 8. And if he do
so mean, yet he brings nothing to p^ove it, and it ^s unequal he should expect
we should take it on his word, since if we gather any thing from the placing of
the words, the reason of the command, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. may as well be from
the promise of giving him and his seed the land o^ Canaan, verse. 8. as the
promise, verse. 7. 2. Whereas the promise verse. 7. has diverse senses, one, so
as to be meant of Abraham as a natural father, and his seed according to the
flesh, another, of Abraham as a spiritual father, and his spiritual seed, he
neither brings a word, nor do I think can, why the reason of the Command, verse.
9, 10, 11, 12. should be from the promise made to Abraham as a spiritual
father, and to his spiritual seed (which alone is for his purpose to bring
Gentile-believers children to be in the promise) rather than to Abraham as a
natural Father and to his natural seed, especially those of them that were to
inherit the land of Canaan: yea it is manifest, that if the dependence were, as
he says, it is to be interpreted of Abraham's seed by nature, since the command
there was given to the natural seed of Abraham only, and them that joined to
them. 3. Nor does Mr. Drew show what dependence one upon another they are knit
into, whether contingent or necessary, or if necessary, in what degree of
necessity, Whether, de omni per se or quatenus ipsum. This last seems to be
most likely, and the dependence this, To whomsoever that promise is made, that
person is to have the first seal; and whosoever is to have the first seal, to
that person the promise is made. But this were evidently false. For it appears
from v. 19. that the promise was not made to Ishmael, and yet he was to have
the first seal, and others of Abraham's house had not the promise who were to be
signed with Circumcision, and the females had the promise made to them, and yet
were not to be signed. If it be said they were vertually signed, it serves not
Master Drew's turn, who asserts a dependence of the promise and actual signing
in the person federate. 4. Nor does he show from what term or words his
imagined dependence is evident. The only term I know, he or any other gathers
the supposed dependence from, is verse. 9. ( therefore) But in the Hebrew it is
(...) which in the most usual sense is, And thou, noting a further addition to
his speech, not an illation of one thing from another. And so the Tigurines
read and tu, And thou, Pareus Tu autum, But thou, Piscator, Tu vero, Thou
verily. So that the evidence is very small, which is from so uncertain a light.
5. Nor does he nor can he show from the comparing Genesis 17.7, 8. with 9, 10, 11.
any dependence of application of any other first sign, than Circumcision upon
the promise there. The Command of an indfinite first seal, there or elsewhere to
believers Infants, is a mere figment. 6. That dependence which is employed by
the term ( therefore) is not at all such as intimates a right competent to
Infants, but a duty enjoined to parents, which Infants are nor capable of. And
therefore if any see a command for Baptizing of Infants in that place, it is
but a parallax, or decep^io visus, a mistake of sight, as in him that thinks he
sees two Suns or two Moons at once. The Minor also in his Argument is to be
proved.

SECT. IV. The Covenant, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. was a mixed Covenant.
BUt before ^e comes to prove it, he brings in an objection, Gods Covenant with
Abraham, was not a pure Gospel Covenant, as appears, say they, by his promising
Abraham temporal things, Genesis 17.8. therefore we may not argue from thence to
the Covenant of Grace.

It is true, both in my Exercitation, and in my Examen, Part 3. Sect. 2. and
else where, I deny the Covenant made with Ahraham, Genesis 17. to be a pure
Gospel Covenant, and aver it to be mixed, and show how it is mixed, to wit, of
promises not belonging to every one with whom the New Covenant of the Gospel is
made, but respecting peculiarly Abraham's house, and the policy of Israel, and
that the promises Evangelical are delivered, Genesis 17. in words expressing
proper benefits to Abraham and his natural seed, though in the more inward
sense of the Holy Ghost, Evangelical promises were meant, and therefore it may
be well doubted, whether that Covenant may be termed simply Evangelical: Yea
the Scripture where it speaks of this Covenant, often mentions no other
promise, but of the Land of Canaan, as Exodus 6.4. Psalm. 105.8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Chronicles. 16.17, 18. Act. 7.5. Where Stephen mentions Gods promise to Abraham, he
mentions that of the land of Canaan; and verse. 8. calls the promise of Canaan,
the Covenant of Circumsion. Wherefore Cameron in his Thescs of the threefold
Covenant of God, Thesi. 78. says, Mr. Gatakers Annot. on Jer. 31.30. The
former Covenant comprehended, together with those spiritual promises, which yet
were the principal part of it, many temporal blessings, as the possession of
the land of Canaan, and multiplicity of issue, and outward prosperity, Genesis
15.5, 7, 18. and 17.2, 7, 8. Psalm. 105.8. Deuteronomy. 28.1, 19. Whereas this later
runs wholly upon the Spiritual and Celestial blessings, Romans 3.24, 25. and
5.1, 2. Ephesians. 1.3. Heb. 8.6.
That Circumcision did primarily separate Abraham's seed from other Nations,
sealed the earthly promise, it signified sanctification secondarily. Whence I
infer, that when Paedobaptists speak of Circumcision as if it were a Seal of
the Covenant of Grace only, and from it gather Rules and Conclusions
concerning the Ordinance of Baptism, in the New Testament, as if the Reason of
Circumcising Infants were from nothing proper to the policy or Nation of
Israel, but only out of the respect it had to the promise of Evangelical
grace, they do but mislead the people, and speak their own conceits, and not
the Language and mind of the Scripture.

To this Master Drew says, I answer, The Scripture no where calls that
Covenant a mixed Covenant, but on the contrary, notwithstanding any civil
promises of temporal things, it is held forth as pure a Covenant of Grace as
may be; the Apostle tells us plainly that this Covenant was confirmed of God in
Christ, Gal. 3.17. which I think is enough to make it a pure Gospel Covenant.
Christ was never the Testator of any Covenant, but that of Grace: outward
things as appurtenances altered not the Covenant, nor made it mixed at all,
unless that Covenant we live under be mixed too, for outward things are promised
to believers under the Gospel, Romans 8.32. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. 1 Timothy 4.8. Besides,
this Covenant with Abraham is called a Covenant of justification, Romans 4.2, 3.
of Grace, verse. 4. of Faith, verse. 13. and I am persuaded, that Abraham had not
been called the Father of the Faithful, if Believers had stood in a different
Covenant toward God, with that in which he stood; as for differences in the
manner of administering and dispensing that Covenant, they matter nothing, if
there be no difference in those Evangelical promises, which make it a Covenant
of Grace; but no man is able to make this appear; therefore this exception
weakens not our proposition, nor the Argument at all.

I reply, if it be true which I allege, that the Covenant, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7,
8, was a mixed Covenant, as I show in the places forecited, and that
Circumcision enjoined, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. had reference as a sign or token
not only to that promise ( I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed) but
also to the promises which peculiarly respect the house of Abraham, and policy
of Israel, which cannot be understood to belong to every believer, as verse. 7.
to be the father of many Nations, to be exceeding fruitful, that God would make
Nations of him, and Kings should come out of him; that he would give unto him
and his seed after him the Land wherein he was a stranger, all the Land of
Canaan for an everlasting possession; Then it follows, that the reason of the
command, verse. 9, 10, 11, 12. is not only from the promise verse. 7. but those
other promises, and the application of the first seal are knit into a
dependence one upon another, as well as that verse. 7. and then if the argument
be good, The Infants of those to whom the promise is, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed, are to have the first seal, because of the dependence
there, it will follow, he to whom God gives the Land of Canaan for a
possession, he out of whom God brings Nations and Kings, he is likewise to be
sealed with the first seal, since there is as much dependence in the text, of
Circumcision on the promises verse. 4, 5, 6, 8. as on the promise verse. 7. so
that if this reasoning of Master Drew's be good; for my part I see not but that
the Turk, possessour now of Canaan, may be entitled to Baptism by the same
reason he produces for Infant Baptism of Believers children.

Now whereas he says, That the Scripture no where calls that Covenant mixed, I
grant it, and it is true also, that it no where calls it a pure
Gospel Covenant, nor Circumcision a seal of the Covenant of Grace, or the first
seal; yet, the thing I mean by it being proved out of those texts forenamed,
there is no reason to except against the expression.

Nor can it be true, that the Covenant Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. is held forth as
pure a Covenant of Grace as may be, if the promises are of sundry things not
assured to Believers in the Covenant of the New Testament. Which is most
evident: for no Believer has now a promise of the possession of the Land of
Canaan, but rather an assurance of persecution, no promise of such greatness,
as to be the progenitor of Kings and Nations, but rather of obscurity and
debasement.

A pure Gospel Covenant containing many promises, is rare in the Old Testament,
except where he foretells us he would make a new Covenant. God made a Covenant
with David, Psalm. 89.3, etc. Nor do I deny it was a Gospel Covenant, yet
therein are promises peculiar to his house, as verse. 30, 31, 32, 33. yea the
promises which were Evangelical in the furthest intent and aim, were domestical
in the first place, and the most open expressions. Nor is it a whit against the
mixture of Abraham's Covenant which I avouch, That the Apostle tells us plainly
that this Covenant was confirmed of God in Christ, Gal. 3.17. And that Christ
was never the Testator of any Covenant but that of Grace. For the word is in
Greek (...) rendered in Christum by the Tigurines, into or unto Christ, or as
Master Dickson renders it, respectu Christi, in respect of Christ, That is, as
in his paraphrase, with relation to Christ, or as Diodati, whose foundation was
Christ, not as the Testator, but as the party concerning whom the Testament was
made, or as the executor by whom the things promised were performed. Now in
either of these senses it is easy to conceive how the pro^ise might be in
Christ, or unto Christ, and yet the Covenant not a pure Gospel Covenant. He
might be either a Legatee, or an Executor in that Testament which contained not
only Evangelical blessings of justification, etc. which were common to all
true Believers, but also outward blessings, which few or no Believers had in
the New Testament. I see not any inconvenience in it to say that the Testament
was confirmed in Christ, in respect of the promises, so far as they were
Evangelical, and yet to say there were promises in the same which were not
such, nor they (...) in Christ, though in the same Covenant.

And whereas he calls outward things appertenances, I conceive the promises of
outward things, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 8. are as truly parts of the Covenant as the
promise, verse. 7. Yea in the p^^ces foretold, the promise of Canaan has the
title of the covenant. And those promises, though they alter not the Covenant,
yet they must needs make a mixture in the covenant, for by reason of them the
covenant contains promises of diverse sorts.

And for that which is said, That now under the Gospel, outward things are
promised to Believers: I grant it, yet it is nothing against the mixture in the
covenant, Genesis 17. which I assert: For those promises are not the p^omise of
Canaan, to be progenitor of Kings, which are not made to every Believer, but of
a different sort. Whence I infer, that there was a mixture in the covenant,
Genesis 17. which is not in the New Testament, and the reference of circumcision
to that covenant, might be and was in respect of those domestic promises, as
well or more then of the Gospel promises as such. Nor do I find Romans 4.2, 3,
4. any mention of the covenant, Gen, 17. much less is it there, which Master
Drew says, That it is called the covenant of justification and of grace. It is
true Abraham is there said to be justified by Grace, yet no mention of the
covenant, and the text there cited, is Genesis 15.6. not Genesis 17. And though Romans
4.13. it be said, The promise to Abraham and his seed, that he should be heir
of the world, was not by the law, but by the righteousness of says; yet it
neither calls the covenant the covenant of faith; nor does it assert that the
covenant, Genesis 17. contained no other promise but what was Evangelical or
common to all Believers of Jews and Gentiles. Neither do I, nor need I say,
that Believers stood in a different covenant toward God with that in which
Abraham stood. I am persuaded as Mr. Drew, that Believers now are justified by
the same covenant that Abraham was justified by, to wit, that in Abraham all
Nations of the earth should be blessed, Gal. 3.8. and Romans 4.13. A father of
many Nations have I made thee. I only say, that the covenant Genesis 17.
contained promises which were proper to the Jews, together with the Evangelical
promises. And to make those promises no parts of the covenant, but only the
manner of administering and dispensing the covenant, because the Holy Ghost
alludes to them as figures and types of spiritual things, is not right. For
even the promise, verse. 7. was in the like manner typical, Abraham's natural
seed inheriting, shadowing the Israel of God, true believers, and then by this
reason the promise, I will be a God to thy seed, should be no part of the
covenant, but belong to the manner of administering and dispensing the Covenant.

The like may be said of the rest of the promises, they all shadowed out
spiritual benefits, and so there should be no parts of the covenant, and
consequently no covenant at all, but a manner of administering and dispensing of
I know not what covenant. But the speeches verse. 4, 5, 6, 8. do contain
promises, as well as verse. 7. and either I am incapable to understand the
meaning of terms, or else promises are parts, yea substantial or essential, or
integral parts of a covenant, the description of a covenant, being a collective
of promises, and the Scripture, what Gal. 3.15. is called a covenant or
testament, calls verse. 16. promises. And therefore to make the promises Genesis
17.4, 5, 6, 8. not to be parts, but appurtenances to the covenant, or the
manner of administering and dispensing it, has in my apprehension, neither
truth nor congruous sense. Now if they be part of the covenant, as has been
made appear, and circumcision had its appointment by reason of them, as well as
the promise, verse. 7. it matters much to weaken Master Drew's proposition and
argument, though there be no difference in those Evangelical promises which
make it a covenant of grace between Abraham's covenant and ours. Master Drew
proceeds.

SECT. V. Acts 2.38, 39. Proves not either the identity of Covenant now with
that to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. as it comprehends his natural seed, nor the
connection between it and Baptizability.
NOw to go on to the proof of our second proposition in the argument, which is,
that the reason of the command for signing, etc. even this promise I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed, continues in full force under the Gospel, I
refer you to that Scripture Acts 2.39. to make it good. The promise is unto you
and to your children. What promise? Why this must needs relate to a former
engagement, yea and too made unto them to whom the Apostle Peter spoke, viz.
Jews, and I know not to what engagement this can have reference, if not unto
Gods promise made to Abraham, of being his God and the God of his seed after
him. Certainly he is one of those that are blind, and yet have eyes, who sees
not from this text, that this very promise is in force and appliable to
Believers under the Gospel, and if this stand good, then the command for
signing our Infants with the first sign of the covenant of grace, viz.
Baptism, stands good too, for this promise is the reason which God gives of his
precept; God will own a Believers children, therefore he will have them marked
for his.

Answ. I grant the promise I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, does
still continue in force, God is still the God of Abraham's seed, that is his
spiritual seed, elect persons, and true Believers; and he will be again the God
of Abraham's natural seed when the natural branches or posterity of Abraham, the
root, shall be grafted in again.

But I deny that which Master Drew means, and in the page before expressed,
that God does as truly say to every believing Gentile now, I am thy God, and
the God of thy seed, as he did to Abraham the father of the faithful; yea or
that ever God meant by that promise to assure Spiritual or Evangelical
blessings to all and every of Abraham's natural posterity, the Apostle
determining and proving the contrary, Romans 9 6 7, 8, etc. and restraining that
promise in the Evangelical sense only to the children of Abraham, which were
elect by God. Nor is there a word, Act. 2.39. to make it good in Master Drew's
sense. For, 1. Master Drew proves not that the promise Act. 2.39. must needs be
the promise Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. His argument
is, It must needs relate to a former engagement to the Jews, and therefore to
that Genesis 17.7. But this is to argue a genere ad speciem affirmative, it relats
to a former engagement therefore to this, which Logicians deny to be good proof.

But says he, I know not what engagement this can have reference to, if not
unto the promise Genesis 17.7.

I answer, though he know not, and so may be one of those, that are blind and
yet have eyes, (which he charge on his opposits) yet others see other
promises, namely that to David of raising up Christ to sit on his throne
mentioned Acts 2.30. or the promise of the Holy Ghost mentioned V. 33. or the
promise of blessing mentioned Acts 3.25. Any of which may be the Promise meant
Acts 2.39. more probably then that Genesis 17.7. 2. Where it is said ( The promise
is to you) if we either consider the scope of the Apostle or other parrallel
texts Acts 3.26. Acts 13.32, 33. ( the promise is) is as much as to say, the
promise made to David Acts 2.30. or to Abarham Acts 3.25. is fulfilled in
raising up Christ, or the Promise of the spirit is fulfilled in the shedding
forth of its gifts, (of which Promise mentioned V. 17.18. Piscator and others
understand it) and that for you, that is for your good blessing, and your
children and all that are afarr off as many as the Lord our God shall call, not
as M. Drew means, there is a promise of being a God to you and every one of
your children continually to be fulfilled as soon as ever they are in being.

3. It is false which M. Drew presupposes as if the meaning were ( the Promise
is to you) that is (the Promise of being your God is to you believers and to
your children) that is to all your Infant children, as children of believers
whether Jews or Gentiles. For 1. that speech is made to the Jews (as M. Drews
own words seem to import (only and their children, and not to Gentiles and
their children 2. It is false that when it is said ( the Promise is to you) the
meaning is to you as believers. For neither were they then believers, as I
prove in my Ample disquisit: Sect 5. nor is it certain whether some of them
were ever believers, the occasion and scope seems to intimate rather that they
were considered there as persons who had crucified Christ 3. Neither is it true
that the Promise is to their children, that is to their infant children as
their children, M. Gataker discept: de bapt: Infant: vi. and (...). page 12.
says thus, To the obtaining the promise as well repentance as partaking of
baptism at least in this place is exacted; so that hence the promise of
remission of sins cannot be proved to be made to Infants when they are entered
by baptism, unless also they repent. 4 nor do I know how it can be true, which
M. Drew says, in any sense for his purpose, that God has promised to every
believing Gentile now to be the God of his seed as he did to Abraham, by which
he would expound the words Acts 23.9. the promise is to your children. For in
respect of spiritual blessings accompanying salvation it is not true, every
believers child is not elect, in the Covenant of saving grace, a child of the
resurrection, nor in respect of outward Ecclesiastical privileges. Neither did
God Promise Circumcision to every child of Abraham, not to the males under 8.
days old nor to the females, nor has it any color to interpret I will be the
God of thy seed, that is they shall be circumcised, much less that God promised
to every Gentile believers child he should be Baptized or have right to
Baptism, sure not to professed unbelievers, to abortives or still born Infants.
For my part with all M. Drews light I cannot understand how according to M.
Drews exposition the promise Genesis 17.7. is enforce and applyable to believers
under the Gospel as he says.

Nor do I conceive it true which he ads. If this stand good then the Command
for signing our Infants with the first sign of the Covenant of grace viz.
Baptism stands good to; For were it granted that it were true, that God does as
truly say to every believing Gentile now, I am thy God and the God of thy seed
as he did to Abraham the Father of believing Gentiles, yet there is not a word
in that text or any other to prove that therefore every believers Infant child
is to be baptized, it being false that the Covenant of grace does of it self
entitle to Baptism as I have proved in my Examen part. 3. S. 1. in my letter to
M. Bail or Additions to my Appology Sect. 3. in the Ample disquisition Sect.
5. where also it is proved that though the promise Acts 2.39. be alleged why
they should be baptized V. 38. yet not as the reason of their right to Baptism
as M. Drew makes it, but as a motive encouraging them to it as their duty, and
in performing of it first to move then to repent and then to be baptized. The
reason, is not as M. Drew makes it. The promise is to you and and your children
therefore it is their and your right to be baptized, and the minister ought to
do it to you and your Infants; but this, the promise is to you and your
children, therefore you and they ought and may be encouraged to repent and be
baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus for remission of sins: nor is there a
word in the text or elsewhere to prove that dictate of M. Drew, God will own
believers children, therefore he will have them marked for his, even in infancy
by baptism, more truly says M. Gataker discept: Infant. de bapt* infant. vi.
and E^f^c. page 9. Acts 2.38, 39. is nothing found concerning Infants to be
baptized, In that they are Commanded to repent and to be baptized unto the
remission of sins, it is altogether like to that saying of the Lord Christ, he
that believes and shall be baptized shall attain salvation Matthew. 16.16.

But M. Drew thinks to take off the exceptions that are laid against the
witness which this place brings to prove the birth privilege of believers
children under the Gospel. The first exception is that the promise is of
extraordinary gifts of the spirit, and he answers. This does not suit with the
promise made Genesis 17.7: which was to be performed to Abraham's children, and yet
they had not those gifts.

But 1. this Answer goes upon his mistake that the promise Acts 2.39. must be
that Genesis 17.7. 2. he supposes that the promise Acts 2.39. must be understood
so as to be made good to Abraham's seed before Christ: But if so, it were false
in his sense, for all Abraham's seed had not the birth privilege of the first
seal not the females any of them, nor any of the males till the eight day.

2. He says, it cannot be true of extrao^dinary gifts, since then all believing
Jews must have those gifts, which they had not, and all believers might pray
for them.

To which I say if the promise be so understood, you shall all have sueh gifts.
I acknowledge it were not true Exam. part. 3. Sect 6. But in this sense it may
be true even of those gifts, the promise of sending the spirit in extraordinary
gifts is fulfilled to you and your children and all that are afarr off even as
many as the Lord our God shall call, that is for their and your benefit, in
that by those gifts the Apostles were enabled to publish and propagate the
Gospel, which is a benefit to all that are called.

The Second exception is that the words ( as many as the Lord our God shall
call) expound the Apostle meaning, which is this, their children should receive
the promise if the Lord called them, To it he answers 1. that this particle
(even) with that which follows (whom the Lord our God shall call) has relation
to the next foregoing sentence viz. those that are afarr off for the
explanation of that not unto this sentence (to you and your children) so that
the Apostle speaks thus, The promise is made to you and your children for the
present, and when the Lord shall call those that are a far off and strangers to
the Covenant of promise, they and their children shall be heirs to the promise
as well as you and your children are now.

To which I reply, M. Drew gives no reason, why the limitation should be meant
only of those afar off, and not also of them and their children 2. nor does he
answer the reason given to the contrary, that the speech were not true, if it
be so expounded as that the sense be, that God would be a God to those Jews he
then spoke to, though they were not called to the knowledge and belief of
Christ, and so salvation by another then Christ contrary to the same Apostles
words Acts 4 12. To me says M. Gataker discept. debapt. Inf. viz. and e^fic.
page 253. the Covenant of grace Act^ 2.39. seems only to be with them that
have embraced the Gospel. Now if the words ( as many as the Lord our God shall
call) must limit the words ( to you and all that are afar off) it is
incongruous to the use of speaking not to apply it to ( your children) in the
middle. Yea without the limitation it would not be true that God has promised
to be a God to their or any others children. For God is not a God to any but
those he calls either outwardly or inwardly at least. 3. His Paraphrase ( when
the Lord our God shall call those that are afar off, they and their children
shall be heirs to the promise as well as your children are now) is an
intolerable abuse of adding that of which there is not a word in the text,
which does not mention at all the children of them that are afar off though
called.

2. says M. Drew if the Appostle had meant to apply the promise only to those
who should be called of God to believe, then it had been needless to have made
any mention at all of children.

To which I reply there was great reason why he should mention their children
with them, because they had wished Matthew. 27.25. Christ's blood on them and
their children. To take away the horror of soul, and fear of the curse on
them and their children caused by the conscience of their crucifying Christ and
imprecation to them and their children, and not to assure them of such a poor
empty Eclesiastical outward privilege as paedobaptists imagine to belong to
believers infants, was that speech of the Apostle intended in like fort as
Joseph did in the like Genesis 45.3, 4. etc. Genesis 50.20. For this end was suitable
to the occasion of their question Ver. 36.37. and to the Apostles answer, and
it seems probable tthe Apostle says ( to you and your children) but not, to
all that are afar off and their children, because those afar off had not wished
Christ's blood on them and theirs as the other had done.

3. Says M. Drew, it utterly overthrows the Apostles scope which is to show
the Jews shall be bettered rather then worsted by believing in Christ, which
they would hardly believe should he have left their children (who were always
till now reckoned in Covenant with them) in as poor a condition as the most
barbarous heathens in the world, which had been a bad argument to bring in the
Jews, cold comfort to hear that their children should be made as much aliens to
the Commonwealth of Israel by their Fathes embracing the Gospel, as the very
Pagans. Surely this would stave off the Jews from Christ rather then bring them
on.

To which I reply, The Apostles scope is plain to direct them what to do being
oppressed with the horror of their sin in crucifying Christ and wishing his
blood on them and their children, and Ver. 39. is a notice to them to repent
and be baptized in the name of Christ. To imagine the Jews then either thought
of a privilege for their children answerable to circumcision, or that Peter's
scope was to satisfy them about it, is such a toy as is fit for children rather
then men of understanding. It had been alike comfort unto the Jews at that time
to tell them of their Infants right to baptism as for a man to tell an
arraigned malefactor, expecting to be condemned and hanged, that his little
child had a new Coat given him, vain words and bug-bears fit to affright
children with, of a child's being out of the Covenant for defect of tittle to
baptism, of being in worse case then the Jews, in as poor a condition as the
most barbarous heathens in the world, aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel,
debarred a privilege the deprivation of which would have staved off the Jews
from Christ. Children may be in covenant as much as the Jews, no whit worsted
in their condition in a better condition, then barbarious heathen infidels,
though title to baptism be not aserted to their infants. If by ( the
commonwealth of Israel) the Jewish civil or Eclesiastical estate, be understood
those that Peter spoke to, must expect to be alienated from it if they would be
Christians. They knew Christ was cast out, and might know he had told them it
would be so with his disciples. If by ( the Commonwealth of Israel) be meant
(the true Christian Church) the defect of Infant Baptism neither expressly nor
by consequence made them aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. Such conceits
arise from paedobaptists mistaken suppositions. Nor can I imagine but that had
the Jews understood that their children were in that condition, worsted for
want of a privilege equal to their circumcision they would have been glad to
accept of Christ to take away that horror that then lay on their Spirits.

The third exception is, that it is not said the promise is to the Gentiles and
their children; now if this be not made good the argument falls, because we are
Gentiles by nature. To which he answers 1. If believing Gentiles live under the
same Covenant that Abraham and his seed did (which has been proved) then though
they were none of his seed, it is safer to apply the whole promise to them, I am
thy God and the God of thy seed, then to cut off and circumcise the tenor of
the Covenant, and to say unto believers now, God only is your God, not the God
of your children; is not this to make a main and substantial alteration in the
Covenant? and to rob believers of one of the most precious comforts they have
by promise, even Gods owning their seed. Which they cannot be assured of as the
Jews were, without the children be admitted to the first sign or seal of the
Covenant, which is baptism now under the Gospel, as I shall prove by its
succeeding circumcision by and by.

To which I reply, The Covenant Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. is mixed and in respect
of the temporal promises believing Gentiles live not under the Covenant made to
Abraham Genesis 17.7. but in respect of the spiritual part, that is, they are
justified and saved now, or God is a God to them as they are Abraham's seed Gal.
3.29. But neither did God promise to be a God in respect of Gospel grace, to
Abraham's natural seed as such, the contrary is delivered Romans 9.7, 8. nor now
to any believers seed as such, but the elect whether believers or unbelievers
children, as is proved at large by me Exam. part. 3. Sect. 4. not by denying
the Covenant of grace to be made with a believer and his natural seed do we cut
off or circumcise the tenor of the Covenant, or make any alteration, much less
a main and substantial alteration in the Covenant, the Apostle expressly
determining, and whole Juries of the ablest Protestant writers even
paedobaptists expounding Romans 9.8. as resolving, that the Covenant Genesis 17.7.
to be a God to Abraham and his seed, was not made to all Abraham's natural seed,
no not to the circumcised, not to Ishmael and Esau, but to the elect only, and
therefore there is no safety to apply the whole promise, I am thy God and the
God of thy seed, to every sincere believer and his child, it being expressly
contradictory to Romans 9.8. which determines some only to be children of the
promise. And yet we need not say as M. Drew injuriously makes us say, God only
is your God, not the God of your children, but only this: you may assure your
selves that he is your God, for ye are believers and so Abraham's seed; and ye
may hope by reason of general indefinite promises and frequent experiences that
God will be a God to your children. But God has not promised that he will be
certainly a God to every, or any one of your children definitely, but is at
liberty to show mercy to your children, or to an infidels, as it shall please
him. And this you must be contented with, since God afforded no more to Abraham
himself, when he had made Isaac the child of the promise and not Ishmael, nor
to Isaac when he loved Jacob and hated Esau. It is fit you should remember God
to be no debtor to you, that he is the potter, ye and yours are the clay, and
accordingly acquiess in his will blessing him for his love to you which is the
most precious comfort you have by promise, and not being anxious concerning
your children. Nor is there any truth in it that either the Jews were assured
that God would own their seed, that is, be their God, nor that by being
admitted to circumcision they had that assurance, nor that without admission to
baptism we cannot be assured of our children that GOD owns them, nor that
baptism succeeds circumcision, or if it did, such assurance as Mr. Drew speaks
of cannot be inferred thence. So that all this passage is but a fardel of
mistakes. Lets consider the next. 2. says M. Drew, Are not Gentiles the seed
of Abraham? Then I would fain be resolved in this whether Christ took upon him
only the nature of the Jews, or of the Jews and Gentiles both? If only of
Jews, how must the Gentiles be saved? If of both, then how you will construe
this text Heb. 2.16. He took upon him the seed of Abraham, if you will not
allow the Gentiles by any means to be Abraham's seed.

Answer. I grant believing Gentiles are Abraham's spiritual seed descending from
him as the Father of the faithful by imitating his faith. And as for M. Drews
frivolus or captious question, which goes upon a supposition as if Christ might
take on him the nature of the Jews only, and that the nature of the Jews were
one and the Gentiles another, I tell him (though I think such a Dr. might have
resolved himself) for his resolution that Christ took on him the nature of
both, that is the same specifical essence or kind of being, that both had, to
wit the being of a man common a like to Jews and Gentiles, meaning by nature
his individual, and numerical Existence, which is all one with that, our Lord
sprang out of Judah Heb. 7.14. not from Levi, or from Lot, and yet the Gentiles
are saved by his name, he dying and arising again both for Jews and Gentiles.
And for the Construction of Heb. 2.16. thought there are learned men that
expound (...) thus, he takes hold or helps the seed of Abraham, that is
believers of Gentiles as well as Jews, yet I think the meaning there to be no
more but this, that he took on him or received the nature of man by a natural
descent from Abraham 1. because the seed of Abraham is opposed to Angels, and
therefore Abraham's seed signifies the nature of man contradistinct to Angels.
2. because the author says ver. 17. thence he ought to be like to his
brethren, to be a merciful high Priest, which comes not from his helping
believers, but his assumption of the humane nature, whith fits him to be like
to men and to be a merciful high Priest. And therefore I like best the reading
of our transtators in the text, not that in margin. And thus hay I answered M.
Drews douty question in which he would so fain be resolved. But what is this to
prove that Acts 2.39. the promise is not yet to the Gentiles, that are called
but also to their children I see not, it being neither proved that Acts 2.39.
the promise is the promise Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee and thy seed, ot
that the children of Gentiles called, are in that respect Abraham's seed.

M. Drew adds, But yet further 3. It Is plain in the Gospel that faith makes a
believer the child of Abraham; yea and a surer heir to the promise, I will be
thy God and the God of thy seed, then carnal descent from Abraham's Loins does.
Abraham had 2. seeds one descending from Ishmael and onother from Isaac; all
that came from Abraham were not children Romans 9.7. But in Isaac shall thy seed
be called. Isaac was his special seed, and typed out his believing seed under
the Gospel, for ver. 8. they which are the children of the flesh, these are not
(that is not in so peculiar a manner) the children of God as the believing
seed, for the children of the promise are the seed, the seed by way of
eminency, that is the prime seed. and Mark I pray you how the same Apostle
explaines and applies this to our purpose Gal. 4.28, 29. The Galatians were
Gentiles, but being believers, we says the Apostle, as Isaac was, are the
children of promise, and so the special seed of Abraham: the Galatians were no
more of Abraham's natural seed then we are, but by faith they became his prime
seed, and heirs apparent to all the promises as Isaac was, who is said in the
next ver. to be born after the spirit as well as Gospel believers are. And,
sirs, shall we make the Covenant curtail and narrow to Abraham's prime seed and
halve the promises to them when they are full and large to his worser seed? The
Appostle will not suffer this Gal. 3.29. If ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise, which surely must needs be according
to the full extent of that promise made unto our Father Abraham; for if it be
not ours so fully as it was his, then we are not heirs according to the
promise; if our seed be exempted it falls much short of what was said to him, I
will be thy God and the God of thy seed. And mark, friends, I beseech you, that
was Gospel which was preached to Abraham Gal. 3.8. In thee shall all Nations be
blessed; not only his natural seed, that was but one Nation; but all that were
of the faith shall be blessed, as children of what nation soever ver. 7. For
faith was imputed to Abraham in uncircumcision Romans 4.10, 11. to this end that
he might be the Father of all them that believe though not circumcised. And
truly I wonder since the G^spel is so clear that believers are Abraham's
children that any man dare rob them of any comfort or privilege wherewithal
he was invested by that promise to which they are more sure heirs then any of
his natural seed, as I think is made plain to the easiest of your capacities.

Answer. the thing to be proved is that to the natural seed of Gentile
believers God has promised to be a God. To prove which diverse places are
brought which do manifestly refute it. That of To. 9.7, 8. determines that all
the natural children of Abraham were not the seed to whom God had promised to
be God, but that in Isaac his seed should be called. And the same is determined
Gal. 4.28. that Isaac was the child of the promise and not the son of the
bondwoman, and that no child of any man is a child of the promise but he that
is born after the Spirit. And Gal. 3.29. is meant of those only that are the
sons of God by faith in Christ ver. 26. and from the Gospel mentioned Gal. 3.8.
in thee shall all nations be blessed, he infers ver. 9. only of believers, so
then they that are of faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. And Romans
4.10.11. Abraham is said to be the Father of believers, or as it is ver. 12.
those that walk in the steps of the faith of our Father Abraham which he had
yet being uncircumcised. Wherefore I may much more justly wonder that learned
Protestants who so commonly say, that elect persons only are in the Covenant
of grace from Romans 9.7, 8. when they dispute against Arminians, should yet have
the face to avouch that every believers yea though but by profession a
believers natural child whether elect or a believer or not, is in the Covenant
of grace made to Abraham Genesis 17.7. when they dispute for paedobaptism, though
by such doctrine they make the word of God to fall, it being not true of
Ishmael, Esau, and thousands of others of both of Abraham's and other believers
seed, God has not nor will be a God to them.

It Is true believing Gentiles are heirs of the promise made to Abraham of
blessing or justification by faith as he had, but it is false, every believer
is heir of every privilege. Abraham had; none besides him is Father of the
faithful as Abraham, or has Gods promise to his natural seed as Abraham had
to his spiritual, yea or to his natural. None has the promise that in his seed
all nations of the earth should be blessed Acts 3.25. nor any that his
posterity should be graffed in again as it is assured to Abraham's seed Romans
11.28, 29.

The imagined privilege that God would be the God of his natural seed was
never promised to Abraham's natural posterity, as such. Yet it is false, that a
believers child is a more sure heir of the promise then any of Abraham's natural
seed.

For though God has not promised to be a God to all Abraham's posterity, yet he
has to some, which I know not that he has done to any believing Gentiles
natural child. M. D. does but Calumniate by insinuating as if we curtaild the
promise, robbed believing parents of any comfort or privilege wherewith Abraham
was invested by that promise Genesis 17.7. perverting the text as if when God said
he would be a God to Abraham, by Abraham were meant every believer, and when he
says he will be a God to Abraham's seed, it were meant of every belivers
natural seed whether believers or not.

About which he and other paedobaptists, particularly the Assembly at
Westminster in the Directory about baptism do but abuse people, and lead fond
parents, who swallow down Preachers sayings without Scripture proof into a
fools paradise, by telling them that the promise is made to a believer and his
seed, that God will be a God to a believer, and his child, and that Infants of
believers dying in their Infancy, are saved by the parents faith, and by this
there is assurance of their salvation.

But Master Drew once more urgheth Romans 11, 17. that the term graffing, shows
believing Gentiles come in with their seed, or twigs that grow from them, else
surely they cannot be said to be graffed in as the Jews were cut off,

But I have so fully proved the ingraffing to be by giving faith according to
election, and that none but elect persons are ingraffed according to the
Apostles meaning, and that ingraffing is into the invisible Church in my Ample
disquisition, being the first part of this Review in the ten first Sections,
that I think it unnecessary to say any more to what Master Drew here speaks.
And for what he says, If believers Infants were taken in under the legal
administration, and left out in the Gospel-administration, the covenant
dispensation under the Gospel is more uncomfortable th^n that under the Law, it
is but a vain speech, as if the circumcision of Infants were such a matter of
comfort, that the having of no priveledge under the Gospel did recompense the
loss of it without Infant Baptism, as if Infant Baptism were of so great
comfort to parents, that without it other comfort concerning their children
were nullified, whereas these things arise upon mistakes, as if Baptism were
administered according to a persons interest in the covenant, and circumcision
was so, and that the denying Infants Baptism, is putting them out of Covenant,
which is but ungrounded talk, as shall be further showed in that which follows.

Yea when the Paedobaptists answer the Papists, who would have the work of
outward Baptism to take away original sin from the Infant-baptized, they say
only that it seals the covenant, but does not seal the fruit of the covenant,
but upon condition of Faith and Repentance; so that the Infant has no benefit
by the covenant, or the seal without Faith or Election; and so much benefit
has any unbeliever or his Infant; yea the unbeliever has more advantage then
the Infant, for the unbeliever has the moral use of the sealing of any
baptized person, which the Infant has not. When they talk of the covenant to
Infants of believers they say it is but condicionally that they do believe that
God will be their God, and in the same manner the covenant belongs to all men
in the world, to unbelievers and their Infants, and when they speak of the
benefit of Baptism, they say it only seals the covenant, not the persons
partaking the fruit of it (excepting he be an elect person dying in Infancy)
which yet he may have without the seal) till he believe, yet he has not the
moral use and comfort of it till he understand and believe, at which time the
Baptism in Infancy is altogether unknown to him. So that indeed the comfort
which Paedobaptists give to parents, is either the same I give, without
Infant Baptism, or, if parents did examine it, it would be found delusory. What
Master Drew speaks about Baptisms succession to circumsion, and his imagined
full proof from thence for Infant Baptism, I shall put off till I review the
Dispute about Master Ms. third Concl. This is enough to satisfy that Master
Drew's reasons are blunt and not sharp as was supposed.

SECT. VI. The Arguments of Master Josias Church in his Divine warrant for
Infant Baptism, from their being judged in the promise, is answered.
THere is another writing of Master Josiah Church, entitled, The Divine
warrant of Infant Baptism, of which I passed a censure in the first part of
this Review Sect. 21. and I might let it pass, being as the commanders of it
say, Dogmatical rather then Polemical, and leave it to those that affect such
superficial writings. Yet because Master Roberts and Master Geree have
commended it, and Master Baxter page 6. of his Plain Scripture proof, puts it
among the chief books, of which he says, If any of the men of Bewdly have
taken up the union of Antipaedobaptism, and have not read and studied him with
others, and been able to confute them, he has discovered a seared conscience
(which is a most unreasonable and uncharitable censure) to show the folly and
vanity of Master Baxters and others conceit, I shall give the Reader some taste
of his overly handling the point.

His first Argument is thus, The Infants of Christians are righty judged in the
promise of propriety in God, therefore they may be Baptized.

To it I answer, 1. The antecedent is ambiguous, not expressing what propriety
in God he means, whether of justification, regeneration, and salvation, or of
outward protection and prosperity among men or Ecclesiastical privilege, nor
where that promise is which he calls promise of propriety in God, nor whether
he means it of all Infants of Christians, or some, and if of some of which he
means it, and of which not; nor of what sort of Christians, whether such as are
Christians only by profession, or really such in Gods account; nor with what
judgment he means, whether of charity or verity, probably or certainty; nor
upon what evidence they are with any of these sorts of judgment rightly judged
in the promise of propriety in God. So that I find nothing but Sophistry in
this dispensation, the antecedent being perhaps true in some sense, in some
false: and therefore it is but wast labor to refute it, or answer his proofs,
till that he distinctly set down what he asserts, and how his proofs suite with
his assertion. Yet I shall cast away some animadversions on this writing, least
my silence be disadvantage to the cause I maintain.

That which I conceive he means, is this, All the Infants of Christians by
visible profession, are rightly judged by a judgment of charity, though not of
certainty to be included in the promise of propriety in God, in regard of
eternal adoption and privilege expressed in those words* Genesis 17.7. I will be
thy God, and the God of thy seed, therefore they may be Baptized. Of which
Argument, I deny both the antecedent and the consequence. The antecedent he
takes upon him to prove by ten Arguments.

1. The Infants of the Jews (so long as they continued visible professors) were
rightly judged to be in the promise of propriety in God, for it was sealed to
them by the initial Sacrament no less then to actual professors, Genesis 17.7, 12.
Ergo

Answ. Did not Master Church affect new phrasifying, which serves only to
puzzle in plain words, he had said, To the Jews Infants^ the promise was made
of being God to them, therefore the Infants of Christians are rightly to be in
that promise: Of which, neither is the antecedent true universally taken, but
contradicted by Paul, Romans 9.7, 8. where he expressly denies the promise ( I
will be the God of thy seed) to be true of Abraham's natural seed universally
taken: Nor if it had been true, does it follow that what was promised to
Abraham's seed, is true of every true Believers, muchless of the seed of every
mere visible professor of Christian faith, who are neithet themselves, nor
their children in any Scripture sense Abraham's seed: nor is the proof of any
weight, That the promise of propriety in God was sealed to the Jews Infants by
the initial Sacrament, no less then to actual professors, therefore the Jews
Infant were rightly judged to be in the promise of propriety in God.

For this reason in plain terms is no more then this, the Jews Infants were to
be circumcised, Ergo they were rightly judged to be in the promise of propriety
in God, that is that God would be their God, which rests upon these false
suppositions, that God had promised to be God to those whom he commanded to be
circumcised, and that the promise of being their God was the formal reason of
their being circumcised, that when God promised to be a God of to Gentiles, he
meant it of external adoption and privileges.

The consequence he would prove by four Argument. 2. The promise of propriety
in God was not a specialty, therefore the Infaints of Christians being
certainly no less in the promise then were the Infants of Jews aforetime, they
are rightly judged to be in it as they were. Where the conclusion is altered,
which was to be proved ( therefore if the Infants of the Jews were rightly
judged to be in the promise of propriety in God, then the Infants of Christians
are rightly judged to be in that promise) and instead thereof, that which
should have been the antecedent ( the Infants of Christians are certainly no
less in the promise then were the Jews Infants aforetime) is made the chief
part of the conclusion, and in stead of the right antecedent, this ambiguous
antecedent is put ( that promise of proriety in God was not a specialty) which
he says he would prove by seven arguments, but sets not down which branch of
the promise was not a specialty, whether that ( I will be thy God) or that ( I
will be the God of thy seed) nor in what sense it was not a specialty, nor does
his speech ( that it was not a specialty) appear equipollent to that he should
have proved ( The Infants of Christians are certainly no less in the promise
then were the Jews dnfants aforetime) but he dictates so ambiguously and
indistinctly, that more labor will be necessary to understand him then to
refute him. He tells us, the promise of propriety in God, was not peculiar to
Abraham, and visible professors, and Abraham's natural seed; where he supposes,
that the promise ( I will he thy God, and the God of thy seed) was true of mere
visible professors, and Abraham's natural seed; which is most false and contrary
to Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Luke 20.36, 37, 38. He brings the words Exodus 12.48, 49 the
stranger was as our home-born, and there was one law for both (which are spoken
merely of allowance for them to eat the Passover with them) to prove a like
propriety of the Infants of visible professors of the Gentiles in the promise
of propriety in God, Genesis 17.7. He brings Gal. 4.28. which was spoken only of
true Believers born after the Spirit, to prove visible professors and their
Infants to be judged in the promise of propriety in God. He says, Isaac was in
the promise as an Infant of Believing parent, whereas Paul says no, for then
Ishmael and Esau had been in the promise, but by special calling or election,
Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9. He applies those texts Gal. 3.14. Romans 11.17. Romans 15.8, 9.
Genesis 17* 5, 7. to prove a promise to every Gentile visible professor of faith
and their Infants, which are only verified in the sense the Apostle uses
them, of true Believers as Abraham was, who are justified as he was. He
allegeth that which the Apostle Romans 11.28. says, The children are beloved for
the Fathers, as it were meant of Infants of every Gentile visible professor,
which is spoken only of the elect Israelites, and the ancient Patriarchs
Abraham, etc. That which is said, Psalm. 138. 1, 3. of children of him that
fears God, sitting round about his table like Olive plants* to prove visible
professors and their partaking in the promise of propriety in God.

He says, The former part of that promise (I will be a God to thee, Genesis 17.7.
is undeniably common to all Believers, which in truth is undeniably proper t
Abraham, not simply as a Believer, but either as a natural Father, or Father o
Believers according to the spiritual part of the promise.

He says, Christians are in this dispensation as Jews were in the former, they
are called as they were, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, a royal priesthood,
1 Pet. 2 9. Tit, 2.14. And every Nation receiving the faith as the Nation of
the Jews did, and in which there is a national agreement in doctrine, worship,
and discipline, as was in the Nation of the Jews, is to be accounted to the
Lord in every age, Psalm. 22.30. even Egypt and Assyria with Israel, Isa. 19.21.
and many call Abraham Father (who obtained the Fatherhood of many Nations, Genesis
17.5.) and may be accounted a national Church no less hen that Nation was,
whereby those speeches 1 Pet. 2.9. Tit 2.14. Genesis 17.5. as expounded, Romans
4.17. which are meant only of the elect and true Believers of every Nation are
applied to a national Church like the Jews consisting of a great part of either
ignorant persons that know little or nothing of Christianity, or persecutors of
godliness, profanely despising the word, and hating the godly.

He applies that Mat. 18.10. little ones, who are said verse. 6. to believe in
Christ, and the offending of whom has so great a penalty, to little one in
age. He applies Jer. 30.20. which is spoken of the Jews upon their return from
captivity, as appears verse. 18.21. concerning their prosperity in Canaan to the
restitution of their Infants to an initial seal at the calling of them to the
Christian faith whereas if it were so meant, the Prophet should foretell that
the Jews children at their calling to Christ should be as a foretime, that is,
should be circumcised as they were before the Prophets time, not ba^tized. More
things there are liable to exception in his arguments whereof what pertains to
the text, Act. 2.39. Romans 11.17. 1. Cor. 7.14. is sufficiently discussed in ^y
Ample dsquisition of those texts. That which concerns the reasons that God
promises mercy to thousands, and such like arguments, being urged more fully
by Master B. I shall answer when I meet with them in his book.

His arguments page 18. to prove his Consequence, The Infants of Chaistians are
rightly judged in the promise of propriety in God, therefore they are to be
baptized, are insufficient. The first is from circumcision of Infants, to which
has been often answered, That was done by virtue of the Command, not by virtue
of the promise and therefore without the like Command the like promise (if it
were granted) would not prove the like, practice. What is said of John
Baptists, and the Apostles, not denying baptism to any whom they judged to be
in the promise, seems to intimate, that they baptized men because they judged
them to be in the promise: But there is not a word thereof in any of the
Evangelists, but their coming to John confessing their sins, glorifying God in
embracing his Counsel, professing faith, as the reason of their admission to
baptism.

To his second reason, Being in the promise, is the reason rendered by the
Apostles for the receiving of baptism, Acts 2.38, 39. Therefore they that are
rightly judged in it may be baptized, I answer 1. He says not truly, that
being in the promise is the only reason mentioned by the Apostle for baptism;
for repentance is put as a prerequisite. 2. The Apostle does not speak of the
promise as Master Church means that he judged that they and their children were
rightly judged as visible professors in the promise of propriety in God, for
they were not then such: But that the promise of raising up Christ was
fulfilled for them upon their repentance and baptism, or their calling, and
this is made not the reason of right to receive, or warrant to the Minister to
baptize them, but as a motive to their duty of repenting and being baptized,
and encouragement to hope for remission notwithstanding their crucifying Christ
and imprecation on themselves, and theirs, Matthew. 27.25.

SECT. VII. Bare judgment of charity concerning a persons interest in the
promise is not a warrant to baptize.
Page 19. Mr. Church brings in an objection thus, The judgment of charity that
any are in promise is not a sufficient reason for administering baptism to them:
there must be shows of grace for more certainty, To which he thus answers:
shows of grace and actual profession are a reason for baptizing only as they
are ground for the judgment of charity, that the parties to be baptized are in
the promise; for else if the Devil should take a humane shape, and make a
verbal profession (though he were known to be a Devil) he must be baptized.

I reply, Mr. Church here starts a question, by what judgment a Minister is to
proceed in admitting a person to baptism. Concerning which I suppose it will
not be denied. 1. That a Minister being but as an officer under Christ in
baptizing, is to baptize according to his Lords will. For that is the property
of a servant. 2. That the will of the Lord is most manifest in the institution
or appointment of Christ; which is without question declared by the words of
Christ, Matthew. 28.19. Mark. 16.15, 16. explained by the Apostles and other
approved Ministers thereof, command and practice mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles. 3. That true believers and disciples of Christ are appointed to be
baptized, and that they have true right before God. 4. That such believers and
disciples as are appointed to be baptized, are Disciples of all nations, not of
Angelical but humane nature; and therefore we have no warrant to baptize either
good Angels or Devils taking humane shape and making shows of repentance or
faith if known to be Divils or Angels. All the difference is, with what
judgment and upon what evidence a Minister is to baptize, I conceive 1. upon
extraordinary revelation from God a Minister is to baptize an Infant declared
to be a Disciple, as I say in my Examen p. 4. S. 3. 2. According to ordinary
rule he ought to baptize none but Disciples by profession, which profession
ought to be free, sober, serious and intelligent. For discerning of which he is
to use ministerial prudence, though he be not able to search the heart, and
after the use of ministeral prudence therein, he is prudently to judge of the
truth of his faith and discipleship. Wherein he ought to judge according to the
rule of charity 1 Cor. 3.17. which believes all things, hops all things, and
yet heed what Solomon says Prove. 14.15. The simple believes every word: but
the prudent man looks well to his going. And our Lord Christ Luke 12.43.
having said as it was conceived of a Minister, Who then is that faithful and
wise steward, whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household, to give them
their portion of meat in due season? it is requisite that the judgment of a
Minister upon which he baptizeth should have both ingredients, prudents and
charity, charity alone is not sufficient. For 1. If Charity be used without
prudence, there may be a mockery of the Ordinance, and it profaned. 2. If the
rule be a judgment of charity alone, then supposing the Minister be defective
in his charity the person is to be debarred, who is otherwise fit to be
baptized. But about this I conceive there is little or no difference between me
and the paedobaptists. Mr. M. in one place, to wit, in his defense page 78.
intimates that I am conceived to incline to the looser way of baptizing any
that would make a profession of faith in Jesus Christ. And in another place
page 233. he maks it all my pleading that because we cannot know that all
Infants of believers have the inward grace, we may not therefore baptize them.
From the former I vindicated my self in my Apology Sect. 17. and from the
latter Sect. 10. But the difference is what qualification it is that may be
evidence to a Minister, whereby to judge prudently a person to be capable of
baptism. They that hold all Infants are to be baptized that are offered, they
make no scruple, nor do they make much scruple that hold all Infants that are
in a chosen nation, which I have refuted Exam. part. 3. Sect. 13. others
baptize only the children of inchurched members, of which I shall speak in
Examining Mr. Cobbets conclusions. There are, that from the Generality of
promises and election running through the Loins of believers, will have all the
children of believers to be in Covenant and elect in the parcels though not in
the lump, and M^. Church his opinion comes near it, that we have ground from a
judgment of charity that the parties to be baptized are in the promise to
baptize them. But against this I argue.

1. That is to be the rule of judging a persons baptizability which is made the
condition of a person to be baptized in the holy Scripture. But no where in it
is this made the condition of being baptized, that he be elect and in the
Covenant. 2. The Scripture does no where say that the election of God runs for
the most part through the Loins of believers. And though there are promise, of
blessing to the righteous and their seed, yet these are indefinite both for the
kind of blessing, and the person, and these promises are made only to the
truly righteous, and not to them, who are only such in appearance. Wherefore
there can be no certainty for a judgment of prudence to rest upon, to determine
of any whether they are elect or not, in the Covenant of grace or not,
spiritually considering that God has declared Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 18, 24. That he
ties not himself to believers children. Now all judgment is to be suspended of
that which is not revealed, The secret things belong to the Lord our God, Deuteronomy.
29.29.

3. For Infants of believers there is no ground for a judgment of charity,
because they do nothing to show whether they are in the Covenant or no. And if
it be revealed by God that they are all or some in Covenant then we know it by
a judgment of faith believing Gods revelation, and so it is not a probable
judgment of charity, but a certain judgment of verity, which directs in this.
4. If a probable judgment of charity that a person is elect and in covenant be
the rule to direct in baptizing, then suppose a salvage in new England or
elsewhere seeming to be affected in the the time of preaching should be judged
in charity to an elect person in covenant he ought to be baptized by the
Minister so judging before he owns Christ by profession. It is promised that the
Israelits shall be graffed in again, and all Israel saved, Romans 11.24, 25, 26,
27, 28. and we may charitably judge it will be shortly, shall we baptize any of
them or their Infants upon this charitable judgment of their election and being
in Covenant before profession? 5. If a charitable judgment of election and
being in covenant had been the rule to baptize, then sure John the Baptist, and
the baptizers appointed, had somewhere propounded that question, or made
inquiry into that thing, but it was not so, they required repentance Acts 2.38.
inquired into the faith of the baptized. 6. if this had been the direction
(baptize those that are elect or in Covenant) had been a blind derection unfit
for men to follow, and so our Lord should have imperfectly instructed his
Apostls and others, or rather have mocked them, putting them to do a business
not feasiable by them. But this is not to be said of Christ, especially the
rule being so plain to baptize believers and Disciples by profession.

As for Mr. Chuch his conceit, that shows of grace and actual profession are a
reason for baptizing only as they are a ground for the judgment of charity
that the paties to be baptized are in the promise* I deny it. For the rule is
not (baptize persons in the Covenant) but (Disciples or believers of all
nations.) To that of the Devils making a verbal profession, I have answered
before. That which he says that the judgment of charity (meaning that they
were in Covenant) was the rule by which John Baptist and the Apostles walked in
baptizing is not true, for they baptized upon their profession which they
certainly knew. And though they had no infallable knowledge of the individuals
election or being in Covenant, but baptized hypocrites not a few, yet they had
an infallible knowledge of individuals confessing sins, brofessing repentancc
and faith, for they heard them, and this was their rule, not the conjectural
knowledge of a persons interest in the Covenant or election of grace.

SECT. VIII. Acts 2.38, 39. proves that interest in the promise intitles not to
baptism without repentance.
MR. Church brings in a Second objection, which is in effect what I allege
Exam. page 62. a right to Evangelical promises is not the adequat reason of
baptism, for the Jews were in the promise Acts 2.38, 39. yet not baptized
without preceding repentance. To which he answers thus, A visible right to the
promise either by shows of grace (as in those of riper years) or by the meaning
a species in the promise without restriction, of which the parties to be
baptized are individuals (as the Infants of visible professors are) is a
sufficient reason for baptism.

To which I reply. If visible right to the promise by shows of grace be a
sufficient reason for baptism, then the rule I set down for admitting to
baptism is yielded to be aright. But for the new made rule of Mr. Church it is
but an humane ivention without Scripture warrans. He supposes the Infants of
visible professors to be in the promise without restruction, and the promise I
conceive he means is ( I will be thy God and the God of thy seed Genesis 17.7.)
But it is most false that that promise is made to any mere visible professors,
but to Abraham, not to any true believers natural seed, much less to any mere
visible professors natural seed, but only to A^rahams seed, who are only
elect and true believers of the Gentiles according to the spiritual part of it,
as is proved before. Yet were it granted that not only the Species, but also
the individuals were named expressly in the Covenant, I should deny they were
to be baptized according to ordinary rule till they were known Disciples and
believers. The Jewish people are in covenant Romans 11.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and
yet not to be baptized till they believe, and Peter Acts 2.38, 39. requires
repentance for baptism, of whom he says, the promise is to you. But he tells
me, The learned and rational of the Anabaptists confess that if it could appear
to them that an Infant is in the Covenant they would not doubt of the baptism
of it, I answer, whatever others do, yet I disclaim that confession. I have
granted sundry times as Examen part. Sect 15. part. 3. Sect. 3. that
regenerate, justified, adopted persons born into the world who have the inward
grace are not to be debarred baptism, if it be known by special revelation, for
they are then known Disciples and believers. But I never said this of an Infant
in Covenant. For an Infant may be in Covenant even then when he is unregenerate
(being in covenant) nothing no more then having the promise made to him, which
may be before he is born, and therefore I should not yield that of being in
covenant, which I would do of actual regeneration.

But Mr. Church makes some show of answering the argument from Acts 2.38, 39.
He tells us those Jews rejecting and crucifying Christ and Atheistically mocking
^at Gospel truths, ceased to have a visible right to the promise, until they
regained it by repentance.

Answer Mr. Church page 18. says being in the promise is the reason rendered by
the appostle for the receiving of baptism Acts 2.38, 39. therefore they that
are rightly judged in it may be baptized. page 20. Being in the promise is the
only reason mentioned by the Apostle for baptism. Does not thus plainly assert
that the Jews then were righly judged by Peter to be in the promise, and their
right thereby to batism? How then is it true which here he says they ceased to
have a visible right to the promise till they reigned repentance? But it is not
once only that this Author is off and on, saying and unsaying at a little
distance. Here he requires a visible right in the promise regained by
repentance, a little before he says the species being named without
restriction in the promise as a sufficient reason of baptism. However I take
his confession that notwithstanding what he said page 5.6, 7. from Acts
2.38.39. of the promise to them and their children, and thence inferring their
Infants tittle to baptism, as being the children of visible professors, to whom
God had promised to be a God and to their seed, yet here he says they ceased
to have a visible right to the promise until they regained it by repentance,
which the Apostle supposes they then had not, even then when he said, The
promise is to you and your children: For he exhorts to it as a thing to be
done.

But Mr. Church flutters like a bird in a net, seeking some evation from this
objection, though all in vain. He tells us they were a mixed company to whom the
Apostles spoke Acts 2.8, 11. and not all Jews, for they were of diverse
languages; and that they were adulti.

But what is this to the avoiding the objection, that notwithstanding it is
said the promise is to you, yet they were not entitled to baptism without
repentance.

He then discourses, that repentance was in them only in fieri before their
baptism* and that the Apostle accepted of probabilities of it and baptized
them; For in that distance from his preaching, and their baptizing, so many
could not have repentance visible by its fruits and discernable, and thence
would gather, if such heinous sinners were baptized upon probability of
repentance, therefore Infants of Christians guilty of no actual sin may be
baptized unto repentance.

To which I reply, 1. It is expressly said ver. 41. they that gladly received
the word were baptized, therefore there were visible fruits of repentance and
faith discerned by the Apostles and other Disciples, who were many and could
confer with them in that space of time, and baptize them in that day, though
their conversion was easily discernable without distinct conference with each.

2. His argument is not worth a rush, notwithstanding Cyprians words to back
it, to prove Infant Baptism. For it goes upon this frivolous supposition, that
Infants because they have no actual sin may be baptized, though they show no
repentance, much rather then heinous and great transgressors upon probability
of repentance. As if lesser sinners might be baptized upon no testimony of
repentance, because greater sinners are baptized upon probability of
repentance, which if true, the more civil and orderly persons, though
pharisaically minded, as if they needed no repentance, have much more right to
baptism, then publicans confessing their sins because but probably penitent. 3.
All this is nothing to answer the objection, but to strengthen it, that
notwithstanding the promise was to them, yet they were not to be baptized till
their repentance, either in facto esse, or in fieri, either visible in fruits
or at least probably conceived, of which neither is to be said of Infants. Yet
Mr. Church is not ashamed to conclude thus.

Being in the promise is the only reason mentioned by the Appostle for
baptism, (whereas repentance is undeniably prerequired) and that if any disable
the reason he imputes not a little weakness to the Apostles and their converts;
whereas he that disables the inference from being rightly judged in the promise
to right of baptism, does vindicate the Apostle from weakness, which
paedobaptists do by their exposition and inference thence blemish him with, and
cast the blame of weakness only on Mr. Church and such inconsiderate
expounders and disputers as he is. I had not thought to have said so much of so
poor a piece as that book is; yet lest any say it is not answered I add.

SECT. IX. Infants are not proved by Mr. Church, to be of the visible Church
Christian.
HIs second Argument is, Infants of Christians are rightly judged to be of the
Church with Christians of riper years, therefore they may be baptized.

To which I say, His words are ambiguous, it being uncertain whether he means
the Antecedent of the visible or invisible Church, of all infants of
Christians, or some; but conceiving it meant of all, and of the visible Church
of Christians, I deny the Antecedent. And for his ten Arguments, not one
proves it.

The Medium of the first is the Antecedent of the former Argument, to which I
have answered before, denying that all the infants of Christians are rightly
judged to be in the promise of propriety in God, expressed Genesis 17.7. in those
words, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.

But I deny the consequence also, that if it were true, that all the infants of
Christians are rightly judged in the Promise of Propriety in God, therefore
they are rightly judged to be of the visible Church: nor is it proved by that
which he allegeth, ( For they only are aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel, which are strangers from the covenant, Ephesians. 2.12.) For if it did
prove, that all that are strangers from the covenant of Promise are aliens from
the visible Church of Christians, yet it proves not, that all who are in the
covenant are in the visible Church; but the very truth is, neither the one nor
the other is proved from that place; for this only is asserted there, that the
Ephesians who were Gentiles in the flesh, who are called uncircumcision, by
that which is called the circumcision in the flesh made with hands, no
Proselytes were in the time of their infidelity and Idol-service, then without
the policy of Israel and the covenants of Promise: but it does not follow that
every one that was then uncircumcised in the flesh, and out of the policy of
Israel, meaning the outward policy, was stranger from the Promise of Propriety
in God, meaning of it of saving Propriety; for Cornelius, Acts 10. was a
stranger from the policy of Israel, being no citizen, but unclean, as being a
Gentile, uncircumcised, yet then he feared God, God heard his prayers, accepted
his alms, etc. much less now that every one that is rightly judged to be in the
Promise of Propriety in God is of the visible Church, or every one that is
rightly judged of the visible Church, is rightly judged to have the Promise of
Propriety in God.

His next Argument is, Infants of Christians are rightly called the Lords
children, for his manner has been to call the children of his people his
children. In the old world some were called the sons of God, as children of his
people, Genesis 6.2, 3. And the infants of the Israelites were called by him, his
children born to him, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. and their lawful seed, a seed of God.
And the Jews were accounted to him great and small in every age until the
breaking off; and the same was prophesied of the Gentiles, when they shall be
converted, and of the Jews when they shall be grafted in again: and the
Psalmist calls himself the Lords servant, as he was the son of his handmaid:
therefore such infants are rightly judged to be of the Church, which is the
House of God.

Answ. Not one of these Texts proves the Church Membership of Christians
infants. The term Sons of God, Genesis 6.2, 3. is attributed to persons before the
Flood, and those not infants, but such as took them wives of all that they
chose, which could not be said of infants; nor are they said to be Sons of God,
because children of believers, but because they professed the true worship of
God, Dei filios professione Christ. Cartwright Eborac. Annot. in locum, Such as
descending from Seth and Enoch professed the true worship of the true God, New
Annot. I omit the opinions of Josephus, Aquila, and many of the Ancients,
recited by Mr. Gataker against Pfochenius, cap. 13. and the other of the
Chaldee Paraphrase, R. Solomon, Symmachus, that they are called Sons of God,
because Sons of Potentates or Judges, of which Mr. Cartwright ubi supra, and
that of others Sons of God, that is, eminent men, because I think the other is
more right: however they are not called Sons of God, that is, visible
Church Members by their descent, but by their profession, which is not to be
said of infants.

It is true Ezekiel. 16.28, 21. the children of Israel are said to be born to God,
that is, of right as their Land was the Lords Land, Hos. 9.3. and this did
aggravate their sin, that those that were of right his were sacrificed to
Idols: now this was by reason of that peculiar interest which God had in that
people, verse. 8. But that what is said of the sons of the Jews is true of all
the infants of believers, or that this is enough to entitle the infants of
Christians to visible Church Membership, and the initial seal, as they call it,
is yet to be proved.

Of Mal. 2.14, 15. I have spoken sufficiently in the first part of this Review,
Sect. 13.26. of the Ample Disquisition: to which I add that in the second
Edition of the New Annot. these words are added suitable to my Exposition of a
legitimate seed; All other seed is spurious, not a lawful seed; nor such
fathers are lawful fathers, who so pervert the order and Ordinance of
Matrimony, God puts his mark of infamy upon the seed it self, Deuteronomy. 23.2. which
shows that with Calvin that Author understood, by a Seed of God, a legitimate
seed.

That which is said Psalm 22.30. A seed shall serve him, it shall be accounted
to the Lord for a generation, has no show of any thing for infants visible
Church Membership: it cannot be expounded of infants while such: for how can it
be said, They shall serve the Lord? But it notes only a continuance of the
Church promised in a people, who should when some decease, stand up after them
to serve the Lord. The impertinency of that Jer. 30.20. is showed before. As
little to the purpose is that Psalm 116.16. He does not say, he was the Lords
Servant as he was the son of his handmaid; and it was to express his mean
condition or humility, as Mary, Luke 1.48. not his privilege, and his
subjection to God, not his right he could clame from God; yet if there were any
privilege imported in this title ( son of thine handmaid) Mr. Church must
prove it to be Church Membership, and that not proper to him as a Jew, but
common to all Christians ere it will serve his turn, which he cannot do.

Enough is said before in the Ample Disquition, to prove that 1 Cor. 7.14.
children are not denominated holy, because they appertain to the Church.

The remnant to be called holy, Isai 4.3. are either such Jews as in the
captivity escaped alive, who should be holy in respect of their worship, not
serving Idols, but the living God, or such converted believers in the Christian
Church as should be written in the Book of Life, which makes nothing to infants
Church Membership.

The Church is not called the circumcision, Romans 3.30. and 15.8. but the Jewish
people.

The Christians infants are not rightly judged to be of the Church Christian,
because the Hebrews children were of the Church Jewish, God now not taking one
whole Nation for his Church, but Disciples of Christ in all Nations.

Abraham is said, Romans 4.11. to have received the sign of circumsion a seal of
the righteousness of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised; but that any
other man's circumcision was so to him, much less that every infants
circumcision was such to them, I read not: sure the tenor of the words
imports no more than this, that Abraham's circumcision in his own person was an
assurance to all believers though themselves uncircumcised of righteousness by
faith to be imputed to them also. What Divines though of never so great esteem
thence infer of the nature of circumcision, that it is a seal of the
righteousness of faith, of all Sacraments, that it is their nature to be seals
of the covenant of grace, that to whom the covenant belongs to them the seal
belongs, and consequently to infants, are but their mistakes, not the Doctrine
of the Text.

Of Mark 10.14 enough is said before. Of infants may be the Kingdom of God, yet
they not in the visible Church.

The speech ( out of the Church is no salvation) is true of the invisible
Church of the elect, and is so expounded by Dr. Morton Apol. Cath. and others;
of the visible it is not true; Rahab had been saved though she had never been
joined to the visible Church of the Jews.

What I said, that it is uncertain whether the infants brought to Christ, Mark
10.14. were the infants of Christian disciples or believers, is true; for it is
not said, their Parents brought them, and though it be probable they that
brought them believed on Christ, yet it is uncertain whether they believed him
to be the Christ, or some eminent Prophet, as Matthew. 16.14. Luke 7.16.

The Daughter of the Syrophoenician was called a Dog, Matthew. 15.26. not because
she was not a believers child, but because a Gentiles child, not an
Israelitess.

Though Di^t. 30.6. Isai 44.3. Circumcision of the heart and the spirit be
promised to the seed of the godly, yet it is not promised to any but the elect,
as the fuller promise, Isai. 54.13. is expounded by Christ himself, John 6.45.
and therefore not as Mr. Church says, to children, as they are the children of
Gods People, if ( as) be taken reduplicatively; for then all the children of
Gods People should have the spirit promised. Nor is the spirit promised to them
in their infancy, and yet if it were, till they show it, we have no warrant to
take them for visible Church Members, or to baptize them without special
revelation.

It is largely proved above that Acts 15.10. no infant is called a Disciple.

There may be hope of infants salvation, they may be of the body of Christ,
though they be not of the visible Church.

Our infants and our selves though believers are yet Heathens, that is, of the
Nations by birth, and had been reputed Dogs as well as the Woman of Canaans
child, Matthew. 15.26. if we had then lived: but in the sense as it is now used,
and as it was a Title of infamy and rejection, Matthew. 18.17 we are not to be
called Heathens, that is, infidels, and whose society is to be shunned; nor our
infants, who are neither infidels nor believers, they being not capable of
faith in that state ordinarily: as in Logic they say, a Whelp till the ninth
day is neither blind nor seeing, there being a middle of abnegation of either
extreme, by reason of the incapacity of the subjects, so we may say our infants
are neither infidels nor believers.

What Mr. Church allegeth out of Rev. 22.15. serves only to beget hatred
toward Antipaedobaptists: for ( without) there is meant of being without the
city or heavenly Jerusalem, verse. 14. and Dogs, there are ranked with
Sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and such like;
neither of which needs be said of infants; though we say, they are not visible
members in the Christian Church, and that they are not yet believers.

Christ an infant was head of the Church, yet visibly he appeared not the head
of the Church, till he was manifested to be so. Infants may be members of
Christ the head invisibly, but not visibly till they show faith.

SECT. X. Infants capacity of some respects different from discipleship,
entitles them not to Baptism.
IN the third Argument is not much more than was said before, and is answered.
Jews infants were meet for circumcision, because of the command to them; ours
not meet for Baptism, because we have no command or example: it is true Matthew.
18.22. A little child is made a Pattern to those that are saved, in respect of
humility or freedom from ambition: but it does not thence follow that this mere
negation of ambition does qualify them for Baptism, unto which, actual
Discipleship or Profession is ordinarily necessary. Christ admittted to him,
and blessed little children, Mark 10.13. but did not appoint to baptize them,
which it is likely he would, if he had judged them meet for it. If Parents may
enter into covenant for their children, and dedicate them by solemn vow, as
Hannah did, (of which there is cause of doubt whether now it is to be done as
then) yet it follows not they are to be baptized, since Baptism is to be the
persons own engagement, not another for him: yea if this reason be good each
Parent may baptize its own child, though a woman, since Hannah could dedicate
her child by vow to God: If Israel be holiness to the Lord, Jer. 2.3. yet it
follows not believing Gentiles infants are meet for Baptism, Joel 2.16. the
children that suck the breast are required to fast: if this prove them meet for
Baptism, by like reason should the Ninivites children and cattle be meet too,
Jonah 3.5, 7, 8. The Psalmist was cast on God from his mothers belly, Psalm.
22.10. not by dedication to God, but by special providence, as verse. 9. shows.
Infants of Christians, it is rightly judged may have in them the principal
things signified by Baptism, but not that they have them till they show it. If
Mr. Church could make it good that God undertakes for what is wanting in the
infants of his people through infancy, as he does for what is wanting in his
people through infirmity, he should say somewhat to purpose: but I am out of
hope to find any good proofs from him, but trifling dictates and impertinent
allegations, Psalm 119.122. is a Prayer, wherein the Psalmist prays God, to be
surety for him for good, that is, says the New Annot. to put himself between
him and his enemies, as if he were his Pledge: it is no undertaking he will, and
if it be, it is nothing for his infants, surely not to supply what is wanting
in them by reason of infancy for Baptism; He will circumcise the hearts of his
peoples children, Deuteronomy. 30.6. but this is meant of their elect children only,
and not necessarily to be performed in infancy. Christ's promise Matthew. 18.19.
is upon condition of agreement by two or three to ask in his Name, nor is it
said for them and theirs, however not without subordination to his secret
purpose, and other limitations.

That of Isai 22.24, is rightly expounded in the New Annot. by learned Mr.
Gataker, All his kindred and allies with their issue as well small as great
shall partake of Eliakims honor, in one employment or other: so that this with
the other Texts, might as well prove a man in the Moon, as that which Mr.
Church infers, Therefore such infants are judged meet for Baptism.

His next, that Christians infants have righteousness by imputation, Romans 5.19.
as they have guilt by imputation, is true only of the elect, but makes them
not meet for Baptism till they are called. What he says, Shows of grace are not
necessary to the judging infants of Christians meet for Baptism, is said
without proof; the contrary is proved before. All his Reasons he brings to
prove it, serve as well to prove them not necessary that a person be judged
meet for the Lords Supper.

Infants may be rightly judged to have original sin in them without shows,
because the Scripture says so, but tells us of none meet for Baptism, but
disciples and believers. The Israelites infants did as much eat the Lords
Supper, as were baptized, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3, 4. If the Text proves the one, it
proves the other.

Baptism is called Baptism unto repentance, Matthew. 3.11. as well as Baptism of
repentance, It is well it is confessed that John's Baptism was called the
Baptism of repentance; but it is true also that it is often so called Mark 1.4.
Luke 3.3. Acts 13.24. and 19.4. and but once unto repentance: and it might have
been observed which Beza notes on Matthew. 3.11. that it might be there read ( at
repentance, or when they repent) as (...), Matthew. 12.41. is rendered, ( at the
preaching of Jonah) however if it be read ( unto repentance) the meaning is to
the same effect, that when he baptized them they professed repentance for the
present, and for the future.

In answer to the Objection, infants by like reason should have the Lords
Supper, he tells us, that the ceremonies are different, in the one the person
is to be active, in the other passive: but the Scripture says not so, but
requires Baptism as a duty, and thereto profession of faith as a prerequisite.
He says, Baptism is the Sacrament of entrance into the church, the other of
progress; but this proves the rather that infants should have the Lords Supper,
since they are to grow and make progress after their entrance. What he says, it
cannot be given to infants, is false: for they can take Bread and Wine, and it
was given them six hundred years together, as many both Protestants and Papists
confess.

What he says Argument 4. page 30. Sealing the covenant by an initial
Sacrament to infants of Gods people aforetime was not peculiar to that
church state, is manifestly false: for that sealing was no other than
circumcision, which if it were not proper to the Jewish Church State, nothing
was.

It is frivolous which Mr. Church says, The commission to baptize must be
expounded by the command to circumcise.

What is said about the antiquity of infant baptism is elsewhere answered,
Exam. part. 1. Apol. Sect. 15, 16. Praecursor Sect. 3. Dionysius Areopagita is
a spurious Author, as whole Juries of Protestants and Papists confess.
Salmasius says in his Letter to Colvius, page 179. that he is no elder than
the fith age, page 441. it is certain that he wrote about the fith age. There Is
plainer proof for Episcopacy being in use nearer the Apostles days than for
Paedobaptism: it is no intolerable presumption but a certain truth in them that
assert, that infant baptism is not so ancient as is pretended, as now taught is
a late innovation.

In his fifth Arg. he undertakes to show, Infants have great profit by Baptism,
but either asserts a mere Title, or a Profit which they have not by their
Baptism, or that which they may have without it. It is not true, that there is
the like profit to infants by baptism as by circumcision; for the one is
appointed and not the other, and there is no penalty for omitting
infant baptism as for neglecting infant-circumcision, nor any promise or
privilege assigned to infant baptism as to infant-circumcision.

SECT. XI. The Agreements between Circumcision and Baptism, do not justify
Infant Baptism, and the validity of sealing Infants with an initial seal now,
is showed to be null.
HIs sixth and last Argument runs thus, The promise was sealed by the initial
Sacrament aforetime to infants of visible Professors, seeking it for them both
Jews and Gentile, therefore it may be sealed to the infants of Christians by
the initial Sacrament.

The Antecedent he proves not, it is in effect no more than the infants of Jews
and Proselytes were circumcised, only Mr. Church uses the affected
Phraseology of Paedobaptists to call that sealing the Promise by the initial
Sacrament, which is no more than circumcision, which it is false did seal, or
assure to every circumcised person the Promise of propriety in God, or any
other Promise made in the covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. And he says, It was
sealed to infants of visible Professors; intimating it was done to them by
reason of their Profession, and not to others; whereas the infants of any in
his house, whether born in Abraham's house, or bought with his money, who were
not of his seed, but a strangers children, were by command to be circumcised.
He puts in his conclusion ( our Baptism) for ( sealing by the initial
Sacrament) But to let pass these stale Paralogisms; he takes on him to prove
the consequence by six Arguments.

The first is, The principal Promise is not made void. He means that Genesis 17.7.
but gives no reason why that should be the principal Promise, and not that v.
4. But I grant that Promise Genesis 17.7. meant of Abraham's seed by faith is not
made void. He thence concludes, Therefore it may be sealed to the infants of
Christians by the initial Sacrament in this dispensation; which is not a proof
of the consequence, but of the conclusion of the former Argument; nor is there
any force in this inference: for though the Promise were still in force as
then, yet it is not a sufficient reason to baptize an infant, the command being
not to baptize persons in covenant, but disciples of Christ.

In his second he tells us, Sealing that Promise by an initial Sacrament to
infants of Gods people (which was the substance of circumcision, and a distinct
thing from it) did not of right cease with the Jewish church state; for it was
not peculiar to that church as a national church; for that Promise was sealed
to infants by the initial Sacrament long before the existence of a national
church, and to Infants of strangers which were not of that nation Genesis 27.2.
Sealing the promise by an initial Sacrament is principally in reference to the
Catholic church. For shows of grace are sufficient to it, though^ the parties
have not joined themselves to any particulor church Acts 18.36, 37. and 10 47.
and one that cannot be rightly judged to be of the catholic church cannot have
the promise sealed to him by an initial Sacrament, though he be a member of a
particular church.

Answer. That which Mr. church says ( sealing that promise by an initial
Sacrament to Infants of Gods people was the substance of circumcision and a
distinct thing from it*) is many ways faulty in respect of falsehood, and
obscurity. For 1. the substance of circumcision as a type or shadow is Christ
exhibited, as the Apostle Col. 3.7. not the promise of God to every Infant of a
believer by profession 2. as circumcision was asign or taken of the covenant
made with Abraham; and it is true the promise Genesis 17.7. was the thing
signified by it, but not only that part, I will be the God of thy seed, but
also the other, I will be thy God, yea and all the rest of the promises as ver.
4. thou shall be a father of many nations, fruitfulness, descent of Kings ver.
6. inheritance of Canaan ver. 8. yet how the promises or the sealing of them
should be the substance of circumcision I do not understand. Circumcision was a
ceremony consisting of an action and a relation. Circumcision as an action has
no other substance or essence but the cutting off the little skin, as a
relation, the signifying, or sealing is the very relation, but it is a trifling
speech to say, paternity is the substance of paternity, if the promises sealed
be meant to be the substance yet no Logicians I know so speak, to call the
object of sight the substance of sight, the thing signified the substance of
the sign. Faith is Heb. 11.1. said to be the substance of things hoped for, but
there the act is said to be the substance of the object, not the object the
substance of the act, and so the covenant should not be the substance of
circumcision, but circumcision, the substance of the covenant. 3. It is more
unintelligible to me, how sealing the promise by an initial Sacrament to
Infants of Gods people was the substance of circumcision and yet a distinct
thing.

For, first, if he mean that it was the substance of circumcision as a
relation, that is the essence of it (in which sense only I know how to
understand his speech) then sure it was the very same and no distinct thing,
the essence being not a distinct thing from the essentiate, the thing defined
and definition are not two distinct things, though the notion be formally
distinct; if he mean that sealing that promise by an initial Sacrament should
be the Genus to circumcision, yet so it should not be a distinct thing, the
Genus and species are not distinct really but formally, Quae formaliter
distinguunter non habent se ut res et. res Kick. ^ist. log. lib. 1. part. 2.
cap, 5. nor was there any other sealing that promise by an initial Sacrament
then by circumcision, and therefore no real distinction, all the distinction
was merely notional or verbal, circumcision being one word, and sealing with
the initial seal at that time another, yet both expressing the same thing. If
any imagine a sealing with an initial seal then that was not circumcision let
him show what it is and were commanded: Mr. Church himself page 41. calls
circumcision the initial Sacrament aforetime. 2. Sealing the promise by an
initial Sacramment is said to be the substance of circumcision, yet page 41. he
says it was a distinct thing from sealing the promise, and only a ceremony for
that time. Wherein sundry inconsistences seem to be 1. that sealing the promise
by an initial seal should be the substance of circumcision, and yet
circumcision a distinct thing from it. Is the substance of a being a distinct
thing from it? the substance of a man a distinct thing from a man? 2. that
Sealing the promise should be the substance of circumcision, and yet
circumcision only a ceremony for that time. Is that a ceremony to a thing
which is the substance of it? 3. that circumcision does cease yet not that
sealing the promise by that initial Sacrament which was no other then
circumcision. Let him that can read these riddles, I am no such Ocdipus as to
unfold them. But let Mr. Church use what gibberish he please I know no other
initial Sacrament then that of circumcision mentioned in the old Testament, nor
any sealing then commanded but it, and if it cease, then all the ruls about it
cease to bind, and so are no rule to us now. But says he page 41. The sealing
of promise is not ceased, far seals are added in dispensation to the covenant.
To which I reply. A thing is said to cease either of right or of fact which was
of right to be or had being before but not now. There was no sealing by an
initial seal aforetime that had being of right or of fact aforetime but
circumcision, which Mr. Church says was the initial seal aforetime, therefore
circumcision ceasing, sealing with the initial seal aforetime ceased, there
being no other foretime. But says Mr. Church it is not ceased, for seals are
added in this dispensation to the covenant, he means doubtless baptism and the
Lords Supper, and by seals other seals, and so his reason is sealing of the
promise by an initial Sacrament which was aforetime is not ceased, because
other seals are added, which is as if one should say, the night is not past
because the sun is risen, the reason is good to the contrary, there are other
seals added, therefore the sealing with the initial seal, aforetime is ceased.
But, says he, it did not of right cease with the Jewish church state: For it
was not peculiar too that church as a national church.

Answer. If circumcision were not particular to the Jewish Church State I know
nothing peculiar to it. And if it were not peculiar to that church as a
national church why was the nation peculiarly called the circumcision, and
other people the uncircumcision Romans 3.30. And for that which is alleged, that
promise was scaled to Infants by the initial Sacrament long before the
existence of a national church and to Infants of strangers which were not of
that nation, I conceive neither is true. For circumcision was not till Abraham's
nation were a Church. For he had before that time taught them the way of the
Lord Genesis 18.^9. and they worshipped the true God, as appears by the many
altars he built to Jehovah* And though Abraham's house was but a small nation,
yet it was a nation. And though Infants of strangers were circumcised, yet it
was not without in corporation into that nation, so that they were of that
nation if not by birth, yet as proselytes added thereto; nevertheless if it had
been before the existence of the national church of the Jews, it might cease
with that church state, as the distinction of clean and unclean beasts was
before Abraham's days, as appears by Genesis 17.2. and yet that distinction ceased
with the Jewish Church state.

As for his second reason it is of no force. For when he says, Sealing the
promise by an initial Sacrament is principally in reference to the Catholic
Church* he means it, I conceive, of baptism, else Acts 8.36, 37. and 10.47. are
cited to no purpose. But there is no color of consequence in Mr. Churches
reason, thus framed, Baptism joined men to the Universal Church, therefore
Circumcision was not peculiar to the Jewish Church State, or that it ceased not
with the Jewish Church State. As for his other assertion, That [one that cannot
be rightly judged to be of the Catholic Church, cannot have the promise
rightly sealed to him by an initial Sacrament, though he be a Member of a
particular Church,] it being of no weight to the present Argument, I shall not
so fitly meddle with it till I come to answer the 20. chapter of Mr. Bs. first part
of Plain Scripture proof, etc.

As for his third Argument, it proves not the Consequence. [For though faith
and repentance be required of some before circumcision] yet it was not required
of infants before circumcision. But before baptism it is required of all Mat.
28.19. Mark 16.16. Acts 2.38. and 8.36, 37, 38.

To the fourth, I say though [infants now are capable of the promise as the
Jews infants were,] and that [they could bear baptism as well as the Jews
infants could circumcision, yet without a like command (which cannot be found)
they are not to be baptized as the other were to be circumcised.

As for the fifth Argument, it is false, That [baptism is as appliable to
infants as circumcision was; for there is not the like command, without which
though it were, that no more action were required in the subject to be baptized
then in the subject to be circumcised (which is false, as appears from Matt.
28.19. Mark 16 16. Acts 2.38. Acts 8.36, 37, 38.) and though it were that the
parities were more between them then they are, yet they make no rule for
baptism without a command or institution. But it is false which he says, that
baptism is the same Sacrament with Circumcision And as for the twelve parities,
brought by Mr. Church, some are doubtful, as the first [that they are both
initial Sacraments of the Covenant of grace] in some sense with some
limitations it may be true, but in other, even in that sense it is commonly
taken, it is not true; to wit, that the essence of them consists therein, and
that they are so to all rightly circumcised or baptized.

The second is likewise ambiguous, in some sense true, in some false. Those
that might not be rightly judged to be in the promise might be circumcised,
however it be concerning baptism. And those that may be rightly accounted to be
of the Church, meaning the invisible, yet are not therefore to be baptized.

The third likewise is doubtful by reason of the different ways of being
accounted to the Church, and the doubt whether a person be to be accounted of
the Church before baptism or after. The Words Acts 2.41.47. seem to prove that
they are added to the Church after baptism.

Neither is the fourth or fifth certain. For women ordinarily entered into the
Church aforetime without circumcision, and did eat the Passover.

The eighth is not true of every circumcised persons circumcision, nor of every
baptized persons baptism, that it is an external seat of the righteousness of
faith.

In the tenth something is untrue. For in the new Dispensation (as the phrase
is) are not both temporal and spiritual promises sealed as well as in the
former, if he mean it of the same temporal promises, we have better promises
Heb. 8.6 but not the ^ame, not the promise of the land of Canaan, of greatness,
prosperity, etc. but rather a prediction of persecution, if we will live Godly
in Christ Jesus. Christians have Christ, and all other things by that part of
the Covenant made with Abraham, which is spiritual, but not by that part which
is proper to the Israelites.

In the eleventh Mr. Church seems to be out in his computation about the
beginning of baptism, and end of Circumcision. He says [Circumcision of right
ended when baptism began to be an initial Sacrament, and that was not surely
till John began to baptize, which was not till the fifteenth year of Tiberius,
as is plain from Luke 3.1, 2. now mark his reason, For Christ's Circumcision was
the period of it. Now if Christ's circumcision was the period of it, then it did
cease almost thirty years before baptism began to be an initial Sacrament,
Christ being circumcised in the Reign of Augustus. But whence does he gather
that Circumcision of right ended, when Baptism began to be an initial Sacrament?

For my part I find no such thing in Scripture. If our Lords words John 7.22,
23. do not prove it was then in force, yet those speeches of the Apostle Ephesians.
2.14, 15, 16. of abolishing the Law of Commandments in Ordinances, and slaying
the enmity by his Cross, and Col. 2.14. of blotting out the handwriting of
Ordinances, which was against us, and took it away nailing it to his Cross, do
determine that Circumcision did of right continue until Christ's death, and so
some years after, baptism began to be a Sacrament initial. The usual Doctrine
is, that the Ceremonies of the Law became dead with Christ, deadly after the
open promulgation of the Gospel, and calling of the Gentiles, Diodati annot. on
Matthew. 27.51. And this breach was a sign that by the death of Christ all
Mosaical Ceremonies were annihilated. But Mr. Church tells us, Circumcision
ceased to be needful when John began to baptize, for the Law is said to
continue but until John, Luke 16.16. To which I answer, I know not why
Circumcision should not be as needful as the Pass over, which our Savior
himself observed Luke 22.15. and offering the gift to the Priest that Moses
commanded, Matthew. 8.4. I presume the command of Circumcision was in force till
after Christ's death as well as the command of the Passover, seventh day
Sabbath and other things. As for Mr. Church his reason if it were good, That
circumcision was needless when John began to baptize, because it is said the
law was until John, by the same reason he might say* all the rest of the Law,
yea and the Prophets were needless, when John began to baptize. But the meaning
is, the Ministry of the Law and Prophets continued, till John, or as it is
Matthew. 11.13. all the Prophets and the Law prophesied until John, that is,
declared Christ's coming as future, and when John began then the Kingdom of God
began to be preached, and therefore Mark 1.1, 2. The beginning of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ the Son of God is said to be upon John's preaching; for then the
Messiah was named as present, Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the sin
of the World, John. 1.29.

Lastly says Mr. Church [the Apostle plainly teaches that Baptism is the same
Sacrament to Christians that Circumcision was to Gods people aforetime Col.
2.11.12. arguing against the continuance of Circumcision: in this Dispensation
he uses two Arguments, which argue no less. For 1. Christ being come (who was
the body of the old shadows) they of right ceased. 2. That baptism was now the
sign of our Mortification, for which circumcision served aforetime.]

To which I answer, neither does the Apostle plainly, that is, in express
terms, teach Col. 2.11, 12. what ever Mr. Church, or Mr. Calvin say, That
baptism is the same Sacrament to Christians that circumcision was to Gods
people aforetime, nor do his reasons prove it. For by the same reason we might
say it of putting away of leaven out of their houses, and keeping the Passover
with unleavened bread: baptism is the same Sacrament to Christians that the
feast of unleavened bread was to Gods people aforetime. For 1. Christ being
come (who was the body of the old shadows) they of right ceased. 2. That
baptism is now the sign of Mortification, for which keeping the feast with
unleavened bread served aforetime, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.

But were all these parities between circumcision and baptism, which Master
Church mentions, right, yet they prove not his Conclusion, That the initial
sacrament in this dispensation is as appliable to infants of Christians as the
initial sacrament aforetime was to infants of Gods people. For if not all
these, yet as many other parities may be reckoned, at least according to
Paedobaptists Hypotheses, between baptism and the Passover, as, that they are
both Sacraments of the Covenant of grace, both ceremonies to be used about
those that might rightly be judged in the promise, and accounted of the Church,
the ordinary way of communion in the Church, not allowed to those without,
engaging to observancy of the Covenant according to the several
administrations, signs of mortification, external seals of the righteousness of
faith distinguishing Gods people from infidels, to cease at Christ's coming,
etc. and yet I suppose Mr. Church will not have them the same Sacrament. Yea as
many disparities between circumcision and baptism may be reckoned as Mr. Church
reckons parities, as that the one was a shadow of Christ to come, not the
other; the one a token of the mixed covenant made to Abraham, which was of
promises peculiar to the Jews, not the other; the one a domestic action to be
done in the house, the other an Ecclesiastic belonging to the Church; the one
to be done by the parents in that respect, not so the other; the one with
cutting off a part, not the other; the one with drawing blood, not the other;
the one to males only, the other to females also; the one to be on the eighth
day whatever it were, the other not limited to any precise day; the one made a
visible impression on the body, and that permanent, not so the other; the one
to be done with an artificial and sharp, the other with a natural and not
wounding instrument; the one to all males belonging to the house of Abraham
even infants, but not to others though Godly, except they joined themselves to
that family: the other to believers or disciples of all nations; the one
engaging to keep Moses his Law, not so the other. But be the disparities or
parities what they will, the only rule in these mere positive rites is the
institution or command: so that were the Sacraments (as they are called) the
same in kind, use, analogy, or what other way they may be deemed the same, yet
without a rule of command or example intimating such a command, we are not
bound to do the like in the one, as we do in the other.

As for the sixth Argument, That nothing can be soundly collected from the
scriptures against infant baptism; the contrary has appeared above in the
second part of this Review Sect 5. etc. what he grants that it may be soundly
gathered that all of riper years should be discipled before baptism from the
commission Matthew. 28.19. does also prove, that they had no Commission to
baptize any but discipled persons, and so none but those of riper years, not
infants unless there be showed some other Commission: which is not to be found
in the Scripture, but only in corrupt tradition of antiquity, and the Jewish
arguings of latter Divines, and is not yet found any other then will worship.

To all which Mr. Church further brings answer is made before, the vindicating
of my objections will most fitly come in the reply to Masters Marshalls
Defense, to which I shall hasten after the dispatch of some few other Authors.

SECT. XII. Doctor Featley his argument for Infant Baptism from the Covenant,
is examined.
MR. Rutherford is another of the Authors, whose writing Mr. Baxter tells, yet
remains to be answered. But I know not any writing of his in which he does
directly dispute against Anti-paedobaptists.

I confess I have met with a dispute against those of the Congregational way of
Discipline in his Peaceable and temperate Plea, c. 12. q. 12. for denying
baptism to those infants whose next parent is not a known believer in some
gathered Church, who yet do hold and practice baptism of such infants, whose
next parent is a Churchmember. But that dispute going only against them, and
upon his grounds denied and refuted by me elsewhere, it were out of my way to
answer what he says there. If there be any other writing of his, I presume
some one or other of the Antagonists I refute, have the strength of it: yet I
intend if such a one do occur to me, to give account of it as I shall find
meet.

Mr. Robert Baillee is another to whose writing Mr. B. points me. But his first
Argument I have already enervated in the Addition to my Apology in my letter to
him, and answering his three first criminations, especially the third, and have
showed, sect. 1. that he does but calumniate, when he charges us to affirm,
That no infants have any place in the Covenant of grace, or any Gospel promises
till they be called by the word, and by an actual faith have embraced the
Gospel. What other arguments he brings are answered either in answering Others
that bring the same, or its intended shall be answered in fit place.

There are many others who have written of this argument in the English tongue,
each of which forms his Argument from the Covenant to the initial seal, from
infant circumcision to infant baptism, with some difference in terms, or
phrasifying, though in effect all of them are reduced into the three forms in
the 1, 2, 3. sect. of my Exercitation, and rest on these false principles, that
interest in the Covenant of grace was the adequate reason of a persons title to
circumcision, and is the adequate reason of a persons title to baptism, and
that there is the like reason of baptizing infants of believers, as of
circumcising infants of Abraham by virtue of the like interest in the Covenant,
though there be not the like command for the one as for the other, nevertheless
that it may not be said I have neglected any thing conceived worth answering,
or to have slighted any of their labors, I shall briefly answer the Arguments
of such as have come to my hands, and then more largely answer Mr. Geree, Mr.
Marshall, Mr. Cobbet, Mr. Blake, Mr. Baxter, who have opposed my writings,
taking in others by the way, as I see fit.

Dr. Featley is one that has been a Leader of the Prelatical party, and is
judged by them to have proved Paedobaptism learnedly. His dispute is in his
Dipper d^pt, p. 46. arg. 5. thus.

[All they who are comprised within the Covenant, and are no where prohibited
to receive the seal thereof, may and ought to receive it: But children are
comprised within the Covenant of faith, whereof circumcision was a seal, Romans
4.11. and now baptism is, Ergo children may and ought to receive Baptism.

Of the Major or first Proposition there can be no doubt; for it is unjust to
deprive a Man of the confirmation of that to which he has a true right or
title. And for the Minor or Assumption, it is as clear, for so are the words of
the Covenant Genesis 17.17. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee.]

Against which I except, first, That the Syllogism is many ways faulty; 1.
That he puts in the Conclusion [children] as all one with infants. 2. That in
the Conclusion there is this term not expressed in the Major [may and ought to
receive baptism] for that which is in the Major [may and ought to receive the
seal of the Covenant] is not all one with [may and ought to receive baptism]
baptism and seal of the Covenant being not equipollent, besides Circumcision,
passover, Lords Supper, the Ephesians are said to be sealed with the holy
spirit of promise Ephesians. 1.13. nor is the term [seal of the Covenant] applied
to Sacraments any other than a novel expression, neither used in Scripture, nor
the Ancients. Romans 4.11. does not term circumcision (much less other Sacraments
as they are called) a seal of the Covenant of faith, as the Doctor misallegeth
it, but a seal of the Righteousness of faith, which he had being yet
uncircumcised. Whence it appears that it was a Seal of what he had, not of a
covenant concerning what he was to have: and this is said only of Abraham's
circumcision, with such an observing of particularizing circumstances, as show
it to be appropriated to Abraham's circumcision, what ever is said of
circumcisions being a seal of the righteousness of faith, however Divines
dictate to the contrary, and therefore what the Doctor adds in the Minor
(which multiplies the terms in the Syllogism) [and now baptism is] asserting
thereby baptism to be a Seal of the Covenant of faith, is said without proof,
though I should not stick to grant it in this sense, that to the true believer
his baptism assures righteousness according to Gods Covenant, and the true
believer by baptism gives testimony or assurance of his faith according to his
Covenant, as being unwilling to wrangle about terms if we agree in the meaning.
But in the sense Paedobaptists use it, as containing the nature of a Sacrament,
I shall reject it in that which follows. 3. Against the Doctors omission of
some words in the Minor, [and are no where prohibited to receive the seal
therof] which were in the Major. 4. That the term [and are no where prohibited
to receive the seal thereof] is ambiguous. For it may be understood either of
an express prohibition in forbidding terms, or a prohibition by consequence. It
is granted in so many express words, infants are not prohibited to receive
baptism, no nor the Lords Supper, yet they are by good consequence to be denied
both, in as much as both are disagreeing from the institution and practice of
those rites in the new Testament. Wherefore to the Doctors argument, I except
against the form of it, as containing more then three terms, the predicate in
the conclusion not being in the Major, part of the medium in the major being
left out in the Minor. And if it be thus formed [all they who are comprised
within the covenant of faith, and are no where prohibited to receive the seal
thereof, may and ought to be baptized: But infants of believers are comprised,
etc. Ergo.] I deny the Major if meant of Gods covenant to us, or promise either
of faith or righteousness to infants by it, as the alleging Genesis 17.7. imports
the Doctor meant. But grant it of those who are comprised within the Covenant
of faith by their covenanting to be believers, in which sense I deny the Minor,
that children, that is infant-children are comprised in the Covenant of faith
by their covenanting to be believers; yea and if the proposition be universal,
all children, or all infant-children of believers are comprised in Gods
covenant of faith or promise that he will give them faith or righteousness by
faith, I deny it. Nor is the Major proved by the Doctor. For it is no unjust
thing to deny baptism to a person to whom it is not appointed; now baptism is
appointed to disciples or believers, not to whom God promises to give faith or
righteousness by faith. Besides were it true that God had so promised it and
confirmation of it were due; yet without institution confirmation by baptism
were not due; God has other ways to confirm it, as by his Oath Heb. 6.17. the
blood of his Son, 1 Cor. 11.25. his Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.22. A man that is bound to
pass an estate, and to seal it, may not be bound to a further Confirmation by
fine and recovery. Besides its no injustice not to confirm ones right who does
not claim and prove it. But this infants do not. And for the Minor, the words
Genesis 17 7. have nothing about the second part of the proposition, nor do indeed
prove any to be comprised in that promise, but Abraham and his seed, of which
sort none of Gentile-believers children are, but those that are true believers
as he was, or elect by God to adoption of children. The objection the Doctor
brings in is not rightly framed, nor do I deny the answer the Doctor gives is
sufficient to overthrow it as so formed. But what the Doctor dictates, That all
true believers and their children are to be reckoned among children of the
promise, is contradictory to the Apostles determination Romans 9.7, 8. as the
Apostle is expounded by Dr. Featly himself in the New Annot. on Romans 9.8. in
which he thus speaks, not all they who are carnally born of Abraham by the
course of nature are the children of God to whom the promise of grace was made;
but the children of promise, that is, those who were born by virtue of the
promise, those who by Gods special grace were adopted (as Isaac by a special,
and singular promise was begot by Abraham) they only are accounted for that
seed mentioned in the Covenant, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed.

SECT. XIII. The Arguments of Mr. William Lyford, from the Covenant for
infant baptism are examined.
MR. William Lyford in his Apology for Infant Baptism page 33. thus disputes.
All that are taken into the Covenant of grace ought to receive the initial sign
[what ever the sign be that God shall chuse] and that according to the
commandment of God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. But infants are taken into
Covenant with their parents, as is proved; therefore by the Commandment of the
Lord they ought to receive the sign which God has enjoined to be used, and
that sign is baptism.

To which I answer, by denying the Major, and for his proof out of Genesis 17.7,
12. I deny,

1. That there is any command for any other initial sign but Circumcision.

2. That circumcision is there appointed to all who are taken into the Covenant
of grace, not to Lot, Melchisedeck, Job or their children, not to the females
of Abraham's house, not to the males under eight days old, not to the
Proselytes of the gate as Cornelius was.

3. That the adequate reason why any was to be circumcised was interest in the
Covenant, Genesis 17.7. but the command only. For both Ishmael who was not in the
covenant was to be circumcised because of the command, and as has been showed,
others in the covenant were not to be circumcised through defect of the
command. Nor is the Minor true, if understood of all the infants of believers,
or any of them as their infants, nor is there a word to prove it Genesis 17.7.
which is only a promise to Abraham's seed, and they of the Gentiles are only
true believers or elect persons. But perhaps Mr. Lyford mends the matter in the
next form, which is this page 34.

If infants have a right to the covenant and the initial sign thereof, then it
is a wrong to deny it to them. But infants have a right to the Covenant and the
initial sign thereof, both by Gods original grant, Genesis 17.11.14. and by
Christ's confirmation of that Covenant made to their Fathers, Romans 15 8.
therefore it is a wrong to deny it them. The Covenant under which we are, is
the Gospel Covenant, made long since with us Englishmen and our infant seed,
with a command of giving them the sign, which at first was circumcision, and
now baptism by the same Divine authority enjoined and commanded to be given
without any exception of any within the Covenant.

I answer by denying the Minor, and to the proof by denying that Genesis 17.11,
14. there is command of any other initial sign than Circumcision, or that
circumcision is commanded to all that had a right to the Covenant, or that the
Gospel Covenant was made long since with us Englishmen, and our seed as our
seed, or that there was in that of circumcision any command to us to baptize
infants, or that Divine authority has commanded baptism to be given without
any exception of any within the Covenant. But I affirm he has commanded only
to baptize those in the Covenant who are disciples or believers. But Mr. Lyford
adds further p. 37.

All those to whom the blessings and promises in the Covenant do belong, t them
also belongs baptism, the sign thereof (by the doctrine of St. Peter, and of
Jesus Christ himself) But to infants of believing parents, the blessings and
promises of the Covenant do belong before actual faith, therefore by the
Doctrine of the Holy Ghost in Scripture, such infants ought to be baptized
before actual faith.

The Major or first part of this Argument is the very reason of the Text. The
Minor proposition, viz. that the blessings and promises of the Covenant do
belong to infants before actual faith is proved by these reasons. 1. By the
express words of Peter, which say, the promise is to your children. 2. By the
express words of our Savior, of such is the Kingdom of Heaven. 3. By example
of Isaac and Jacob, they were children of the promise before actual faith, and
had applied unto them the seal of the righteousness of faith. 4. Some infants
dying are saved, they are members of Christ's Kingdom, therefore the blessing of
the covenant, viz. regeneration and remission of sins through the blood of
Christ do also belong to them.

To which I answer, blessings of the covenant are of sundry sorts, such as
certainly accompany salvation, regeneration, justification, adoption, or such
as are common to reprobates, as to have teachers, example, and acquaintance
with the godly, etc. Both these may belong to them in present possession or
assurance for the future: when they belong to them in present possession, it is
either discernibly or indiscernibly. Actual faith may be in the exercise or
habit. Infants of believers are elect or non-elect. It is true all those to
whom the blessings of the Covenant which accompany salvation belong in present
possession discernibly, to them also belongs baptism: but so the Minor is
false, understood of all infants of believers: they belong not to all, but only
to the elect, nor them certainly in present possession, much less discernibly
during infancy: or if it be discernible, then they have actual faith, and so
the Minor is not true, that to infants of believing parents the saving
blessings of the covenant do belong in possession discernibly before actual
faith. If it be meant of the blessings of the Covenant in future assurance only
the Major is false. Nor is it true that the Major is the very reason of the
text Act. 2.38, 39. It is false that this is Peter's reasoning, therefore does
the sign belong to Peter's hearers because the promise did first belong to them.
For the term [(...) for] does not infer a right which they might claim, but
imports a motive to duties, and of these duties first to repentance, and then
baptism: so that if from thence a right be concluded, they must conclude as
well a right to repentance in the first place, and then to baptism. Nor is it
true that Acts 10.47, 48. the Apostles discourse is reduced to M. Lyfords form
of argument, or says as he says, They that receive the same grace are
capable, yea have right to the same sign, but infants are capable of the same
grace, therefore of right they are to have the same sign, i. e. the Sacrament
of baptism. For although the Major be granted of actual possession of the
spirit and magnifying God, yet it is not true only of the promise thereof. But
the Minor [infants are capable of the same grace] alters the term, which is in
the Major thus [they have received the same grace] and so Mr. Lyford syllogism
has four terms. Nor does the Apostle say, they that are capable of the same
grace are to be baptized as well as we, but, none can forbid water to baptize
them that had received the Holy Ghost, and so were manifestly actual believers
as well as themselves, though they were of the Gentiles: which when it appears
in infants I should yield they are to be baptized, but not merely because of
the promise or capacity of grace, for the promise agrees to Jews children
elect, and capacity of grace to Turks children, and therefore if either or both
these did entitle to baptism, the infant-children of such might be baptized.
And for his proofs of the Minor, it is false, that to infants of believing
parents the blessings and promises of the covenant do belong before actual
faith, is proved by the express words of Peter. For though he say, the promise
is to your children, yet he does not say, to you as believers, or to your
children in infancy as the children of believers, nor before actual faith, Yea
the words [as many as the Lord our God shall call] do require actual faith
before the possession of the blessings of the promise: Nor is this any miserable
shift: nor is it true, that those words are quite a new thing clearly relating
to another sort of people, than his present hearers, and not to them, for that
expression limits all the Subjects, and is put after all joined by copulative
particles, and therefore is to be conceived to limit all of them. Nor is the
speech true of any of them without that limitation. Nor is it true which Mr.
Lyford says, That the words do not exegetically expound to which of his
hearers children the promise did belong. For they are a manifest limitation
excluding some and including others.

And what he says, that Peter says [this promise does belong to them that are
afar off, and their children, as well as to you and your children] is
manifestly false. But of this text I have spoken in the first part of this
Review, sect. 5. more fully.

To his second proof, I say it is false, that the express words of our Savior
(of such is the Kingdom of Heaven) prove his Minor. For [of such] is not all
one with [infants of believing parents] nor when it is said [of such is the
Kingdom of heaven] is it all one with this [the blessings and promises of the
Covenant do belong to them before actual faith] the Kingdom of heaven is not
said to be of them, because their parents were believers, its uncertain whether
they were so or no; and if they were, another reason may and ought to be
conceived of their interest in the Kingdom of heaven, to wit Christ's special
and effectual blessing: nor is it said the Kingdom of heaven belongs to them in
actual possession; and if it were so meant, and yet they were not appointed to
be baptized (as it appears by the Evangelists they were not) it is a good
presumption, Christ would not have infants, notwithstanding their interest in
the Kingdom of heaven, to be baptized till they became believers by profession,
and knew what their engagement is th^^eby.

To his third, it is true, Isaac and Jacob were children of the promise before
actual faith, yea before they were born, and therefore if the interest in the
Covenant had been a sufficient reason of Circumcision, they should have been
circumcised before the eighth day, which because they were not, it is an
argument, that not the Covenant, but the Command entitled them to Circumcision.

To the fourth, I never denied, that to some infants the covenant belongs; nor
that they are saved, regenerated in infancy, but I deny, that this is true of
all infants of believers. For the very instances brought prove the contrary,
that though Isaac and Jacob were children of the promise, yet Ishmael and Esau
begotten by believing parents were not, who yet were to be circumcised: nor is
any a child of the promise because he is the child of a believer, but because
he is elect of God.

As for Mr. Lyfords answer to the Objection in conference with him, it is
indeed no answer. For he that objects that the blessings of the Covenant,
belong to elect infants, not to all, and therefore under that pretense all in
general are not to be baptized, does not by that speech grant, that baptism
belongs to one infant, or to any because elect, but only shows the
insufficiency of the adversaries proof for that practice: As for those who deny
baptism to all because they are infants, I know not who they be, the reason why
it is denied them is not because they are infants, but because in infancy they
appear not to be disciples, or believers in Christ, who only by the command are
appointed to be baptized; and I agree with Mr. Lyford, That the Sacraments do
belong to the elect not as elect, but as visible members and Professors (and
that upon this account Simon Magus was baptized, though Mr. Lyford is mistaken
in saying Peter baptized Simon Magus, which was done by Philip) whereby Mr.
Lyford does indeed overthrow his dispute. For if the Sacraments belong to the
Elect as visible Members and Professors, then to all and only visible members
and Professors. For what belongs to any quatenus ipsum as such, belongs to all
and only such universally and reciprocally, and so if he will stand to his own
words, though children be in the Covenant or elect, yet till they be visible
members and Professors they are not to be baptized, which does plainly refute
his own Argument, viz. the Major of his own syllogism: nor need we by our
reason know whether a person be elected that we may baptize him, but whether he
be a visible member and Professor.

SECT. XIV. The Arguments of Mr. Stalham, Mr. Brinsley, Mr. Hall, and a
nameless Author, from the Covenant for infant baptism, are examined.
MR. Stalham in the Conference at Terling page 4. argued thus, They who are
included in the substance of the Gospel covenant are not to be excluded from
the seal of the Covenant. But infants are included in the substance of the
Gospel covenant, and therefore not to be excluded from the seal of the Gospel
Covenant.

But in this Argument the Conclusion is not of baptism in particular, and so
concludes not what was to be concluded, and since circumcision according to him
was a seal of the Gospel covenant, it might be true of it and so granted. Yet
the Major if universal is not true, no not of circumcision. For women and
infant-males before the eigth day were excluded from the seal of the Covenant,
though they were included in the substance of the Gospel covenant, s his
phrasiology is, nor has he a word in all the conference to prove his Maor; and
for his Minor, setting aside his phrasifying, if this be his meaning; All the
infants of believers, or the infants of believers, in as much as they are their
children, have the substance of the Gospel Covenant, that is the promise, Genesis
17.7. as it is a Gospel promise made to them, it is false and contrary to
Romans 9.7, 8. nor is there any thing in the conference there brought that
proves it.

Mr. John Brinsley of Paedobapt. page 11.32. makes this his first and grand
argument for the baptism of infants.

If children of believing parents be within the Covenant, then they may be
baptized, But they are within the covenant, Ergo.

The Major he takes as granted, though I deny it as being most false.

The Minor he would prove, 1. From Acts 2.39. where he makes the promise to be
of remission of sins, but that belongs only to the penitent believer, and
therefore proves not that it belongs to the infant of a believer, without
repentance and faith.

2. In that they were in the old Testament in the Covenant. But he himself page
33. says, All infants of believing parents are in the outward visible
covenant. As for the covenant it self, to speak properly and strictly, it
depends upon Gods election. Neither does it belong to any but those who are
elected. What juggling then does he use to tell us that they are in covenant,
and that the promise belongs to them without any difference of elect and
non-elect; and p. 11. he says, To whomsoever the covenant it self belongs,
to them belongs this seal of the Covenant. And so his Minor must be, but the
Covenant it self belongs to infants of believers: and yet to say, the covenant
it self, does not belong to any but those who are elected, but the outward
visible covenant to all. But what this outward visible covenant is, he tells us
not. I cannot understand any other than Circumcision, for that was the outward
visible covenant in the old Testament, and then his Minor asserts infants are
in Covenant as they were in covenant in the old Testament, that is, they are to
be circumcised. Besides what interfering is there in Paedobaptists? Mr. Stalham
says, they are included in the substance of the Gospel covenant, Mr* Brinsley
says, the Covenant it self (and then surely not the substance of the Gospel
covenant) belongs not to any but elect, but the outward visible covenant, that
is a new nothing, belongs to them all. And thus people are cheated by these
Doctors.

3. In that they are federally holy, 1. Cor. 7.14. but of it enough already in
the first part of the Review. So much for Mr. Brinsley, one of Mr. Halls
Champions.

Let us see what Master Thomas Hall himself in his Font Guarded page 9. argues;

To whomsoever the covenant it self belongs, to them also belongs the seal of
the Covenant; But the covenant belongs to Believers and their children: Ergo
the seal of the Covenant belongs to them also.

Answ. If Mr. Hall mean in the Minor, that the Covenant it self belongs to all
the children of believers, then he contradicts Mr. Brinsley (out of whom he
says in his Epistle to him and Mr. Blake he gathered his weeds) who says, it
belongs only to the Elect, and if he mean it only of the elect, then he can
conclude only concerning the elect; if he mean the outward visible covenant,
than it is either circumcision, and then he asserts circumcision to belong
still to infants; or he means baptism, and then his Minor and Conclusion is all
one, and his Argument a mere inept tautology, unless he mean some other new
nothing. And indeed this Argument of Mr. Hall is like the rest concluding of
the seal of the covenant indefinitely when he should conclude of baptism, using
in the Major and Minor the term [the covenant belongs] but not explaining what
covenant, to whom or how it belongs, using children for infants, so that there
is nothing but equivocation in his Speeches.

And for his propositions in the sense they are commonly taken, neither Major
nor Minor is true, nor is the Major proved though he say it is clear. For
though he that has right to a temporal inheritance has right likewise to the
seal^ and deeds that do convey that inheritance to him, yet in Law it is not
necessary that there be a sealing to each inheritour by himself. A man may have
a deed sealed for him to another as a Feoffee in trust, as is usual in the Case
of young Orphans, to one man is conveyed the estate of many. So that besides
the frivolousness of this conceit to make the term [seal of the Covenant] of
the Essence of baptism, though it be but a metaphor not found in Scripture, and
thence, and the use in civil Negotiations, to make a rule for the service of
God; yet were this kind of proof allowed, the Major is not true, that to
whomsoever the covenant it self belongs to them als^ belongs the seal of the
Covenant, meaning it in their own persons. For a Feoffee in trust may have the
Estates of many conveyed to him, and so the parent by this reason may be
baptized for the child. And for the other reason it is also insufficient,
Abraham's posterity being in covenant receive the sign of Circumcision the seal
of the Covenant, for the seal of the Covenant is as large as the Covenant it
self. But neither is it true that the Seal of the Covenant in Abraham's
posterity was as large as the Covenant it self, the women being in Covenant and
yet not to be sealed in their own persons: nor if it were true does it prove
the Proposition. For if it were so by virtue of a particular command, then it
follows not that if it were so then it must be so now without the like command.
Nor is the Minor proved from Genesis 17.7, 10, 11. Acts 2.38, 39. For in the one
is affirmed only that God will be a God to Abraham and his seed, which is not
all one with every believer and his seed; in the other, whatever the promise be
and howsoever Peter meant it was to them and their children, yet it is not said
to you believers, and to your children as the children of believers, for then
he had spoken false they being not then believers, and therefore it proves not
that the covenant belongs to Believers and their children. This is enough to
show the vanity of Mr. Halls disputing. For the rest of his Book, he being a
gatherer out of others, as he says, and in most things he should argue,
referring us as an Index to their writings, I think it best to rid my hands of
him, and to deal with his Authors he points to.

There were sent to me by some friends these two following Arguments in
manuscript, as judged by some unanswerable.

The first thus. What privilege the proselyted Gentiles had who joined
themselves to Abraham's Family in reference to their infant seed in the
Ordinance of Circumcision, the like privilege the Christian Gentiles in the New
Testament have in reference to their infant seed in the Ordinance of baptism.
But the Proselyted Gentiles had this privilege, that when they were circumcised
their children were circumcised in their infancy. Ergo the Christian Gentiles
have the same privilege that their children should be baptized in their infancy.

To which I answer, letting pass the exception to the quaternity of terms, and
conceiving [what privilege] is put for [whatsoever privilege universally]
without which the argument would be all of particulars, and so the Syllogism
naught; I deny the Major, and my reason is, because were it a privilege or not,
what was done in the use of circumcision by virtue of an express command, is
not to be done in the use of baptism, without the like command. If it were, the
Apostles did ill in not baptizing a whole Nation old and young together, and we
do ill in keeping away the young ones of believers baptized from the Lords
supper, when being circumcised they were not debarred from the Passover. The
other argument is in these words.

To whom the outward visible covenant of God manifestly belongs, to them in the
days of the Gospel, the initiating ordinance, viz. baptism belongs. But unto
the infant seed of believers the external visible Covenant of God does
manifestly belong. Ergo to the infant seed of believers in the days of the
Gospel the initiating Ordinance, viz. baptism belongs.

To which I answer, what outward visible covenant he means, except baptism, I
know not. If he speak as Mr. M. speaks, and some others, I have showed in my
Apology sect. 10. that by it is meant the outward administration of the
Covenant, which is no other now but baptism. Now if this be the meaning of the
Author, the Major contains a trifling tautology, in effect this, They that are
to be baptized, are to be baptized, and the Minor and Conclusion being all one,
the Minor is to be denied, and the argument hissed out of Schools as a
ridiculous foppery.

SECT. XV. The dispute of Mr. John Geree about the extent of the Gospel
covenant to prove thence infant baptism, is examined, and it is showed, that
interest in the Covenant did not entitle to circumcision, nor is it proved it
does now to Baptism.
BUt Mr. John Geree Vindic. Paedobap. p. 6. would seem to dispute more
accurately and after a syllogism which does but repeat the conclusion in a new
phrase, he disputes thus.

To whom the Gospel covenant is extended in the Churches of Christians to them
the Sacrament of initiation appointed for that administration of the Covenant
does belong. To children of believing Christians, the Gospel covenant is
extended in the Christian Churches, Ergo, to them the Sacrament of initiation
does belong.

To which I answer, Mr. Geree in this syllogism has altered the term in his
prosyllogism, it was in that [the sacrament of initiation instituted for
Christian Churches] here it is [the Sacrament of initiation appointed for that
administration of the Covenant] and wherein he supposes; 1. The sacrament
appointed for that administration of the Covenant. 2. The Sacrament of
initiation appointed for the administration of the Covenant all one with the
Sacrament of initiation instituted for the Christian Churches, and from thence
would derive a rule for baptism. But that being a phrase not used in Scripture,
nor perhaps deducible from it, and at best ambiguous, it serves for no proof,
and therefore serves only to mislead those understandings which are apt to be
caught with such chaff.

That the phrase is not used in Scripture, will not I suppose be denied, no
where is baptism called either a Sacrament or a Sacrament of initiation, or
said to be appointed for that administration of the Covenant, nor is it
deducible from thence. For there is no place that I find, that makes this the
proper and immediate use of baptism to be the administration of the Covenant,
so that thereby either the making of the Covenant, or the conferring or
assuring to the baptized the benefits of the covenant should be the next end of
it self intended therein. The immediate and proper use of it is to be a sign
that the person baptized repents of his sins, and renounceth specially his
Gentile defilements, communion with Satan, and engages himself to be Christ's
disciple; Yet I deny not but that by consequent in the manner of doing it by
dipping or plunging under water, it minds us of Christ's death* burial and
rising again, and testifyeth our salvation by him, and so in a remote manner
assures to us the benefits of the Covenant of grace. But in this manner it is
the administration of election as well as the Covenant, and is an
administration of the Covenant only to elect persons, and true believers, for
it assures salvation only to them, not to all that are baptized, and therefore
in this respect none but they can have title to it. So that if from hence, that
baptism is the administration of the Covenant, a title be derived for infants
to be baptized, it can entitle none but those to whom it administers the
Covenant, which are only the elect or true believers. But the ambiguity of the
expression is much more fallacious. For 1. when it is said, it is appointed for
the administration of the Covenant, the expressions sometimes are, as if it
were the administration it self, calling it the new administration, as I show
in my Apology, sect. 10. Mr. Geree here p. 10. baptism is a seal of a new
administration, and then it is all one as to say the administration of the
Covenant is appointed for the administration of the Covenant, which is either
nonsense, or at least in^ptly spoken. 2. When they say [it is the
administration of the Covenant] do they mean the outward or inward Covenant?
The latter I presume they will not say, for then baptism should be an
administration of the things promised therein, regenerarion, remission of sins,
and if so, then it administers them in a natural way, and so it should in
manner of a natural agent regenerate, etc. which is to confer grace ex opere
operato, or in a moral way; but baptism can administer regeneration, remission
of sins, etc. no other moral way but by assuring, or persuading, or the like,
what ever way it be conceived it administers not the covenant to an infant in
infancy, nor to any but the elect: now if it do not administer the covenant to
any but such, then it is not baptism but to such, if baptism be in its nature
the administration of the Covenant of Grace. If they mean baptism is the
administration of the outward covenant, I am yet to learn what the outward
covenant is, except they mean the outward administration, which is no other
then baptism, as I show Apology s. 10. and what is this then but to say, that
baptism is the administration, or appointed for the administration of baptism?

3. When they say, it is the administration of the Covenant, do they mean the
Covenant or promise of the baptized to God, or Gods promise to the baptized? If
the former, then it is no more but this, that baptism is the administration,
that is the signification of the baptized his engagement to be Christ's
disciple, which is indeed the best sense of it, but then it will not fit them,
for so it is not in infants, for they signify no profession or engagement of
theirs by it. If the later, then by baptism God does promise man; but that's not
true, his promise is in the Word before baptism, or he signifies his promise
formerly made, and this can derive no title to the persons to whom the promise
is made, for the signifying that promise as past is as useful for others,
either baptized or unbaptized, as the then baptized, and not at all of use or
avail to infants, who cannot apprehend the signification; or he assures the
benefits of the Covenant, and that can be only to elect or true believers; or
that he contains them by it, and so it gives grace, ex opere operato.

4. The Covenant of grace is, I take it the Covenant of saving grace, opposite
to the Covenant of works, the promise of justification by faith in
contradistinction to the Law, Gal 3.18. This covenant was made mixtly, Genesis
17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. purely Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. They should tell us whether they
mean the one, or the other, or both. The former they seem to mean when they
make baptism to succeed Circumcision, and to seal the same Covenant that it
did. But then baptism should not be the new administration but belong to the
old. And if it seal that Covenant then it assures the Land of Canaan, and
greatness in it. But it seems they mean that it seals only the promise, I will
be thy God and the God of thy seed, so Mr. Geree here, we find in the
administration of the Gospel covenant to Abraham and his seed.

But if so, 1. Then it seals only a part of the Covenant that circumcision did,
and so succeeds not in it is use, nor is there a reason given, but their own
conceit, why it should seal one part, and not another.

2. If it seal or administer the Gospel Covenant, then it administers not this
promise [that God will be a God to a believer, and his natural seed as such]
For that is neither Gospel nor at all to be found, Genesis 17.7.

3. In that promise was foretold Christ to come of Abraham, and this was Gospel
Gal. 3.16. But this is not administered by baptism, which signifies Christ
already come.

4. In the spiritual sense it was made to Abraham's seed by faith, Gal. 3.29.
Romans 4.11, 12. But they are only the elect; Romans 9.7, 8. and then it is an
administration of that Gospel covenant only to elect persons, and true
Believers.

5. There Is ambiguity also in the term [the Gospel covenant is extended] The
Gospel covenant is, The just shall live by faith, that God will be a God to
Abraham's seed by faith. But Mr. Geree imagines a Gospel covenant, which is but
a fiction, that God has promised to be a God to the natural posterity of every
believing Gentile.

6. For the extent of it how it is extended is ambiguous. For he cannot say it
is extended in respect of the Gospel promise of righteousness and life to all
the children of believers, it was not extended Ishmael to and Esau. Therefore
he acknowledges it to be extended in the reality of it only to the Elect,
only it is to be charitably presumed that they are elect, and therefore they
are to be taken for persons in covenant till they discover the contrary. But he
shows no rule of Scripture for such a Construction of the promise: sure such a
construction was unknown to Paul, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. when he expounded that very
promise, Genesis 17.7. nor does such a construction agree with the words, since
when God says, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, the meaning according to
M. Geree should then be [I will be a God to thee, that is, every believer, and
to thy seed, that is every believers natural seed which are elect in reality,
and to those that are not elect in charitable presumption of the Minister of
baptism, till coming to years they discover the contrary] now what a nonsense
exposition is this, to expound [thee] meant of Abraham by [every believing
Gentile] and by [thy seed] which is meant of Abraham's seed only either natural
or spiritual by faith to understand [every believers natural seed] and when it
is said, God will be a God to them, that he will be a God only to some in
reality, which is to make God to promise what he does not perform, and to
others, that men shall think he will be a God to them, which would be too poor
a matter to be meant in that expression, and therein God should not promise
what he will be or do, but what men shall think, which would be false, for it
is not made good, or that they may charitably so presume of them, but in this
sense it is not a promise at all, but a mere permission to men to think
charitably of them, which I suppose they are as well bound to do of unbelievers
children till they discover the contrary, and so no privilege to the believers
children. And yet this too must be limited to a certain time till they come to
years and discover the contrary, and therefore by seed must be understood only
the infant seed, when they came to years, there is neither promise nor
permission for men to think so charitably of them. And yet herein there is
nothing but abuse of terms. For charitable presumption must have some ground,
which is to be from some thing we perceive done to judge well of what we see
not according to the rule 1 Cor. 13.7. Charity believes all things, but in
infants acts there is nothing that may be such a ground, but to the contrary
they opposing their baptism by their crying, etc. If it be said, the promise is
a ground, I answer, Mr. Geree confesses the promise is not in reality but to
the elect, nor to the elect till they believe, and therefore there is no ground
from the promise till it be known the persons be elect or believers. But it
will be said, we know nothing to the contrary. To which I reply, nor do we know
any thing to the contrary, but that unbelieving Jews children are elect, and in
the Covenant, and yet its not charitably presumed of them, so as to count them
in the Covenant, and to judge them admissible to baptism. I think since we
perceive nothing of believers infants acts that may distinguish them from
unbelievers, that we should rather suspend our thoughts of Gods election and
covenant to them till they show of what spirit they are, which is meet for an
administrator of baptism, who as a wise Steward should give to every one his
portion in due season, Luke 12.42. rather then have such a fond imagination of
what God has concealed.

And if it be true which Mr. Geree says in his Vindic. Vindic. p. 42. That
many of the Assembly intended the words in the Directory for baptism [The
promise is made to believers and their seed] in Master Gerees sense, they have
reason to be ashamed that they have so much abused the World with such a toy.

Yea but have they not a promise on which to ground this charitable
presumption? I answer, surely the Jews have a more express promise, To. 11.26,
27. for their posterity then any believer now living has for his children, and
therefore if that be all the ground of baptizing believers infants, there is a
like ground for baptizing Jews infants though parents be unbelieving, and they
have wrong that it is not done, where it may.

But shall we make no difference between the children of believers and
unbelievers? I answer, we are to conceive with a judgment of probability for
the present that they are elect, and with a quieting hope for the future that
they will be believers.

1. Because of Gods general indefinite promises.

2. Because by reason of the means of the knowledge of the Gospel which they
have in their education, and living where the Gospel is taught, they are in a
nearer possibility then others to be believers.

3. Because experience shows that God often does continue godliness in
religious families, though it often fall out otherwise. But that such an
extension of the Gospel Covenant as Mr. Geree makes to the children of
believing Christians, should entitle to baptism, is without all rule. And to
his Syllogism, though it might be denied in respect of the form, by reason of
the ambiguity of terms; yet I answer, by denying the Major in his sense, which
I conceive is this, They to whom the Gospel Covenant is extended according to
the charitable presumption of the Minister without the persons showing by any
act that he is in Covenant, to them the Sacrament of initiation to wit baptism
does belong, and shall examine his proof both of Major and Minor.

The Major, says he, I prove by that of Peter Acts 10.47. when they had
received the Holy Ghost, which was but an evidence of Gods receiving them into
the Gospel covenant, Peter says, can any forbid water that these should not be
baptized, who are in covenant with God as well as we? They have the word or
promise, which is the greater; who can inhibite the sign which is the less?

To this I answer, the proof rests on this, That the allegation of Peter that
they had received the Holy Ghost, was brought for an evidence that God had
received them into the Gospel Covenant, and so it may be said to the same
purpose, who can forbid water that these should not be baptized who are in
covenant with God as well as we?

But this is false. For their receiving the Holy Ghost is brought not to prove
only that God had made his covenant of grace to them, but to prove that they
were actual believers, as their works did show upon hearing the word of faith,
for says he v. 46. they heard them speak with tongues and magnify God, and chapter
11.17. if God has given them the like gift as unto us that believe on the Lord
Jesus Christ, who was I that I could forbid God? And v. 18. it is said, when
they heard these things they held their peace and glorified God, saying, then
has God also granted to the Gentiles repentance unto life.

Whence it appears that they were penitent believers, and this is proved by
their acts; and therefore to be admitted to baptism, and not barely because the
Gospel covenant was extended to them, much less because the Gospel covenant was
extended to some of that sort, and to those particular persons only upon a
charitable presumption, that Gods promise did belong to them for the future
without any show of repentance or faith at the present. It is false that we may
say, that when by any other principle in Scripture any are demonstrated to be
in the Gospel covenant, who can forbid water that these should not be baptized,
who are in covenant with God as well as we? For though God should reveal that
this or that person were elect, and that his Covenant did belong to him for the
future, yet he were not to be baptized, till God revealed that he were a
believer or disciple. For if so, than if God did reveal concerning any, as he
did of Isaac and Jacob, that he were a child of the promise, though yet unborn
in the Mothers womb, he were to be baptized, which is absurd. None are to be
baptized before born, therefore any principle whatsoever in Scripture
demonstrating a person to be in the Gospel covenant is not sufficient to
entitle to baptism, much less such an uncertain doubtful guess, called
charitable presumption, that he is in the Covenant, as is without any
particular declaration of Scripture, or other revelation from God concerning
the person, or any show of his that he is Gods child, which yet Mr Geree makes
a sufficient warrant to baptize, nor is his reason of any force, for we might
in like manner say, They have the election of God, which is the greater, who
can inhibit the sign which is the less? It is not whether that which they have
is greater, much less that which is conjectured, or hoped they have, which is
the rule to baptize, but the manifest having of that qualification of faith or
discipleship, which is prerequired to baptism according to the institution and
primitive practice of it. But Mr. Geree has more to prove his Major.

Besides, says he, we find in the administration of the Gospel covenant to
Abraham and his seed, whom God had thereby separated then to be his church, and
evidenced it by an outward seal: there was so near a relation between the
Covenant and Circumcision the Sacrament of initiation, whereby men were
externally separated from the world, that circumcision was called the covenant,
and the token of the Covenant, Genesis 17.10, 11. to show us how the seal did
follow the Covenant; and therefore when any were aggregated into the Jewish
Church and taken into the Communion of the Covenant made with Abraham, they
were initiated into that administration of the Covenant by the Sacrament of
Circumcision.

To which I answer, letting pass his Phraseology, this reason goes upon these
suppositions.

1. That by Circumcision God had administered his Covenant to Abraham and his
seed, and separated them to be his Church, and evidenced it by Circumcision,
and that the seal did follow the Covenant, when any were taken into Covenant
they were circumcised, and therefore it must be so in baptism But if he mean
that to as many as God appointed to be circumcised he administered the covenant
of grace (which sense alone serves his turn) it is not true. Ishmael was
circumcised, yet the Covenant not administered to him, nor he separated to be of
his Church, not this evidenced by an outward seal, but the contrary declared
concerning him before his Circumcision, Genesis 17.18, 19, 20, 21. and he in the
event cast out, and so the seal did not follow so the Covenant, but that it was
imparted to them to whom the Covenant was not made, and not imparted to them to
whom it did belong, as v.g to the females, nor were the Pros^lytes all taken
into Communion of the Covenant made with Abraham, though they were taken into
the Communion of the policy of Israel: nor (...) the calling circumcision the
covenant or a token of the Covenant (which are all one) Genesis 17.10, 11. prove
that all that were circumcised had the Covenant made to them: but this that
Circumcision was a memorial that such a covenant was made with Abraham, and God
would perform it. 2. That it must be in baptism as it was in circumcision. But
for proof of that there is not a word brought by Mr. G. and what others bring is
examined in its place. M. G. goes on thus.

Now for your exceptions against the connection which we put between the
Gospel Covenant, and the Sacrament of initiation annexed to it, in any
administration they will clearly be wiped away; for what though (as you say)
the Covenant made with Abraham were not a pure Gospel covenant, but had some
external additaments? yet a Gospel covenant it was, and for substance the same
with ours Gal. 3.8. The Gospel was preached before to Abraham; and as
circumcision was the seal of initiation under that administration; so is
baptism under the Christian administration; neither is the Gospel covenant now
so pure as to exclude all temporal promises. For godliness even under the
Gosspel, has the promises of this life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8.

Answ. The distinction of a pure and a mixed covenant was brought in by me to
show that Paedobaptists do but mislead people when in their writings and
sermons they express themselves as if they would have men conceive that the
Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. is all one with the Covenant of grace, and so
that there is the same reason of baptizing infants because of the Gospel
covenant, as there was of circumcising infants, because of the Covenant made
with Abraham, Genesis 17. Now how does Mr. Geree wipe this away? He tells his
Reader, That I say, the covenant made with Abraham was not a pure Gospel
Covenant, but had some external additaments. But neither do I so speak in my
Exercit. page 2. nor Exam. part. 3. s. 2. nor any where else I know. I say the
promises were mixed Exercit. page 2. Exam. part. 3. s. 2. now promises are not
external additaments to the covenant, but integral parts, the covenant being
nothing but a promise, or an aggregate of promises: yea I prove that the
peculiar promise to Abraham's natural posterity inheriting of the Land of
Canaan, etc. is frequently called by the name of the Covenant, Psalm. 105.8, 9,
10, 11. Nehem. 9.8, etc. And for what he says, That the covenant made with
Abraham was a Gospel covenant; this is true according to the more infolded and
hidden sense of the spirit, but not according to the outward face and obvious
construction of the words, which in the first meaning spoke of things proper to
Abraham's natural posterity, though the Holy Ghost had a further aim in those
expressions.

And whereas, he says, The covenant made with Abraham was for substance the
same with ours, Gal. 3.8. Though that promise mentioned Gal. 3.8. be no in the
Covenant Genesis 17. to which Circumcision was annexed, but that Gent 12.3. and
the term [substance] be ambiguous, yet I grant the Covenant made with Abraham
according to those Gospel promises, which in the hidden meaning declared
justification by faith, as the new covenant sealed with Christ's blood does, is
the same in substance, meaning by it, the intent, purport and meaning of the
Holy Ghost, though not in words or expressions; yet I deny that it was every
way or in every respect in substance the same. For the promise, according to
that sense in which they contain domestique or civil promises proper to
Abraham's natural posterity were of the substance of the covenant, and for the
confirming of them, circumcision was instituted of God, as well as for them in
priority of order before the assuring of those Evangelical benefits. And for
what Mr. Geree says, That the Gospel is not so pure now as to exclude all
temporal promises, it is true; yet the Gospel does not promise as the Covenan^
Genesis 17. the inheritance of the land of Canaan with rest, plenty, prosperity
and greatness therein, but on the contrary such temporal blessings as are with
persecution Mark 10.30. and do rather consist in inward comfort and content
than in outward enjoyment of any earthly commodity: which proves that the
Gospel promise for temporal things is clean different from that made to Abraham
Genesis 17. concerning temporal benefits to his posterity.

Mr. Geree adds. Neither are the differences mentioned by you (page 4. of your
Exercit. or elsewhere) to be between Circumcision and baptism any whit material
to put a difference between the parties to be sealed by them in reference to
our present controversy; since notwithstanding these differences they agree in
this main general; That the one was the Sacrament of initiation to all that
were to be sealed under one administration of the covenant, the other in the
other, which is enough to my purpose.

To which I say, the disparities between circumcision and baptism, are brought
by me to invalidate the argument made by Paedobaptists to prove the succession
of the one, into the place, room and use of the other, from the parities
between them, which allegation to that end is made good before against Mr.
Church, sect. 11. Those differences which I allege Exercit. p. 4. tend to
demonstrate that there is not the same reason of circumcision and baptism in
signing the Evangelical covenant, nor may there be an argument drawn from the
administration of the one to the like administering of the other: which
differences are very material to that end the different end and use of a thing,
being the most apt reason for altering the application of it, As Mr.
Rutherford, Divine right of Church Government, ch 6. q. 2. page 276, 277, 278.
answering Era^tus, says of the Sea, Cloud, Mannah, Water, because they had a
mixed use, they were appointed to all, yet it follows not now the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper must be given to wicked men. So by the very same reason, since
circumcision had a mixed use to signify political as well as Evangelical
promises, to confirm the promise of Christ to come, and did belong to the
Church, not ecumenical, but oeconomical or national, which baptism did not,
therefore circumcision might belong to infants, and yet not baptism. And
letting pass his phrase of administration of the Covenant, of which is enough
said before, though the agreement, which he calls, The main general, be yielded
him; that they are both sacraments of initiation, yet unless the same special
rule of command, or example primitive be brought for the one as the other,
infant baptism cannot be proved from infant-circumcision.

Mr. Geree further tells me. But you add further p. 4. of your Exercit. that
some were circumcised to whom no promise in the Covenant made with Abraham did
belong; as Ishmael, of whom God had said his Covenant was not to be established
with him. I answer, it is said indeed Genesis 17.21. my Covenant will I establish
with Isaac. But by covenant there is not meant that covenant, which we stand in
to God, in regard of our persons, for our own personal benefit: but the
covenant of special prerogative, that Christ should come of, and the Church
should remain in his posterity. Therefore notwithstanding that exception,
Ishmael when circumcised, might be, and was a member of the visible Church in
Abraham's family, and in regard of his person within the external administration
of the Covenant with Abraham, and so in the judgment of charity no alien from
the covenant of grace, but under it. This I might confirm by the opinion of
some Hebrew Doctors, wherein they are followed by many, that the petition of
Abraham for Ishmael Genesis 17.18. was not only for natural, but for spiritual
blessings, and what he begged God granted, v. 20. But I clear it thus; God
established his Covenant with Abraham and Isaac, not with Melchisedeck nor Lot;
shall we therefore expunge them out of the Covenant of grace? how absurd were
that? we only see their posterity enjoied not that privilege which God
vouchsafed Abraham in Isaac and his seed. And therefore no more can be truly or
rationally gathered from that place of Genesi touching Ishmael.

Answ. That which in my Exercit. page 4. I gathered from the instances of
Ishmael, Esau, the strangers and others of Abraham's house their circumcision,
and the non-circumcision of females, males under eight days old, Melchisedeck,
Lot, Job, the non-admission to baptism of circumcised Jews in covenant till
they professed repentance and faith in Christ were.

That the right to Evangelical promises, was not the adequate reason of
circumcising these or those, but Gods precept, as is expressed Genesis 17.23. Genesis
21.4.

2. That those terms are not convertible [federate and to be signed] which
overthrows the chief Hypotheses, upon which the Paedobaptists argument from
infant-circumcision for infant baptism rests. For they all conclude thus, The
reason why infants were circumcised, was that they were in covenant, therefore
by like reason infants being in covenant should be baptized. Now if the reason
of infants being circumcised, were not their being in covenant, but only the
command, then there is not a like reason for infant baptism, though they were
in the Covenant, unless there were the like command. Now let us see what Mr.
Geree says to my first i^stance of Ishmael. I alleged that Ishmael was
circumcised, though no promise in the Covenant made with Abraham, did belong to
him, and that Abraham knew, therefore the reason of his circumcision (and the
same is the reason of others) was not his being in covenant, but only Gods
command to Abraham.

The antecedent is proved from the words Genesis 17.21. which are exclusive. And
besides I alleged Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9. Gal. 4.29, 30. where expressly Ishmael is
denied to be a child of the promise, or to be born after the promise. And I
might have added Heb. 11.9. where Isaac and Jacob are distinguishingly reckoned
as heirs of the same promise with Abraham, not Ishmael and Esau. Now what says
Mr. Geree to this? He ^aith, The Covenant there is not meant that Covenant
which we stand in to God in regard of our persons for our own personal benefit:
but the Covenant of special prerogative to Isaac, that Christ should come of,
and the Church should remain in his posterity.

But this is false, 1. For it was that covenant that made Isaac heir of the
promise, which the Apostle Romans 9.7, 8, 9. reckons as much as to be an elect
person, it was the same covenant which was mentioned v. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. which
Mr. Geree, and other Paedobaptists call the covenant of grace, and usually make
the interest in it the reason of circumcision, and was sealed by it, and That
it was the same Covenant is apparent from v. 19. now then it was a covenant of
personal benefit, if it derive grace to the person, or any other personal
benefit. If it were only the Covenant containing the special prerogative
mentioned, then it was not the covenant sealed to any but Isaac, not to any of
the rest of Abraham's house that were circumcised.

2. It is insufficient. For it shows not that to Ishmael any promise, either
Evangelical or Political in the Covenant made with Abraham, did belong, though
he were circumcised, which he should have done, if he would have answered to
the objection, and have vindicated his argument from it: As for his inference,
Therefore notwithstanding that exception, Ishmael when circumcised might be,
and was a member of the visible Church in Abraham's family and in regard of his
person, within the external administration of the Covenant with Abraham, and so
in the judgment of charity no alien from the covenant of grace, but under it.

I answer. I know not what it is to be under the external administration of the
Covenant with Abraham, except it be to be circumcised; and therefore I count
this speech, that Ishmael when circumcised might be within the external
administration of the Covenant with Abraham, to be an inept tautology, as if he
had said, Ishmael when circumcised might be circumcised. But were his speaking
right, yet it is impertinent. For the thing he should have showed was not, that
Ishmael notwithstanding that exception was a visible Churchmember, within the
external administration of the Covenant with Abraham, or in the judgment of
charity no alien from the covenant of grace, but that any of the promises in
the Covenant made with Abraham Genesis 17. did belong to him, and so that he was
circumcised because of his interest in the covenant. Yet how Abraham could in
judgment of charity judge him no alien from the Covenant of grace, but under
it, whom God so plainly excepted out of that Covenant, which Paedobaptists
themselves take to be the Covenant of grace, I see not. It is true that God
heard the petition of Abraham for Ishmael Genesis 17.18. but that God granted him
spiritual blessings does not appear, but the contrary v. 20. where the
blessings granted upon Abraham's Petition for him are recited. However it is
clear that he did exempt him from the covenant v. 21. and therefore he was not
circumcised by virtue of his interest in the Covenant, nor did his circumcision
seal that interest. As for what Mr. Geree says, no more can be truly gathered
from thence then what may be said of Melchisedec, or Lot, it is not true. For
though its not said expressly that God established his covenant with them, yet
they are reckoned among the righteous; and so in the Covenant of grace. But for
Ishmael when Abraham begged for him, God answers how far he would grant for
him, and then adds adversatively. But my covenant will I establish with Isaac,
that is not with Ishmael, which can be no other then the covenant before
mentioned, v. 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. which thing was further manifested by Gods
ratifying Sarahs desire of Ishmaels election Genesis 21.10, 12. where he is
excluded from Abraham's seed, from which the Apostle argues Ishmael not to have
been a child of the promise, nor elect, See Ainsworth Annotations on Genesis 21.12.
nor born after the Spirit; but reprobate, a persecutor, born after the flesh.
And therefore in my Exercit. I cited those texts, which Mr. Geree did ill to
omit, since they served for my purpose to prove that Ishmael had no part in the
Covenant made with Abraham.

To the instance of Esau, Mr. Geree tells me, The case of Esau was but as that
of Ishmael, and others that were of Israel, but were not Israel: they were
under the external administration of the Covenant, though not really within the
covenant of grace. This distinction you your self acknowledge in the fourscore
and sixteenth page of your answer, when you say, it is one thing to be under
the outward administration, another thing to be under the covenant of grace.
Its true these are distinct, but those that are under the outward
administration are to be reputed under the covenant of Grace, and thence were
to be sealed; thus was it with Esau; for that sentence, the elder shall serve
the younger, Genesis 25.23. could sound no higher in Isaac's apprehension then
that difference which was put between Ishmael and Isaac.

To which I reply, If Ishmael were not really within the covenant of grace then
Mr. Geree yields what I proved before, that the promise of the Covenant of
grace did not belong to him; and if it were so, then Ishmael and Esau were
circumcised, though no promise in the covenant Genesis 17.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. did
belong to them, and because this was revealed to Abraham and Isaac they were
not reputed under the covenant of grace and thence to be sealed as Mr. Geree
says. Nor is it likely but Isaac did apprehend concerning Esau by the Oracle
Genesis 25.23. that none of the promises in the covenant made with Abraham, Genesis
17.2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. did belong to him. However God appointing circumcision to
these to whom he intended no interest in the covenant it follows, he made not
interest in the covenant the adequate reason of each persons circumcision, but
his own institution.

To the instance of strangers in Abraham's family, he answers; By Gods own
testimony Abraham would keep none in his family, but such as were outwardly
conformable to the ways of God, Genesis 18.19. and so were in the state of
Proselytes and interessed in the Gospel covenant.

Answ. Whether Abraham did or might keep any infidel in his family was
considered by me in the first part of this Review, s. 37. But for the text,
Genesis 18.19. it does not testify, that Abraham would keep none in his family,
but such as were outwardly conformable to Gods ways, but that he would command
them to keep Gods ways, and shall keep the way of Jehovah; but this being
spoken indefinitely is equipollent only to a particular, as appears in Ishmael
and Esau and others. But were this granted they were so conformable and were so
proselytes and were in some sort interessed in the benefit of the Gospel
covenant, yet it follows not that any promise in that covenant did belong to
them, much less that such interest was the reason of their being circumcised.
As for Mr. Gs. useful observation, that circumcision was not annexed to the
Covenant only because it was a mixed covenant, since it was appliable to the
Proselyte Gentiles, and their seed, that were not only without, but incapable
of interest in the land of Canaan; I know not what use there is of it for his
purpose; it goes upon a mistake that circumcision was to be to none, but who
had interest in the covenant Genesis 17. which I have refuted. The Gentile
proselytes were to be circumcised because of the command, though it were not
known that each, or any proselyte, or his seed, had interest in the Covenant.
As for Mr. Gs. reason of his obsevation, it should seem by it he meant
otherwise than he expressed, to wit, Circumcision was not annexed to the
Covenant only because of the temporal promises, which I grant, and yet hold the
Covenant, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. a mixed Covenant, and that persons were to be
circumcised to whom no promise in the covenant made with Abraham did belong.

Mr. G. go^s on. To the other part of my exception against the connection
between the seal and covenant, as they speak, that many were not to be
circumcised, to whom all or most of the promises of the Covenant did belong, as
the females coming from Abraham, he says.

For females we answer, That God under that administration was pleased (in
reference to some things pointed at by the seal) to appoint a sign of which
women were not capable; so were they particularly excluded from being sealed
with the Sacrament of initiation under that administration.

To which I reply, 1. That women are not capable of circumcision is
contradicted by those that say, that at this day in some parts of the world
women are circumcised. Aethiopes Christiani mares octavo ab ortu die
circumcidunt, and feminis etiam aliquid amputatur, ut Abrahami et aliorum
sanctorum patrum exemplo ardentius in similis sanctitatis studium incitentur.
Quarto deinde a circumcisione die mares, octavo autem foeminae salutaribus
aquis expiantur, and Eucharistiam ^o die infantes initiati in mica panis
assumunt. Osorius lib. 9. rerum ab Emmanuele gest. Zuinger. theat. vit. Hum.
vol. 27. l 3. tit. bapt. page 4172. Osiander Epit. Hist. Eccl. Cent. 12. l. 4.
c. 4. Anno Christi 1187. Jacobitae baptismo and ciriumcisione utuntur
circumcidentes masculos and femellas. Hornbeck. Append. ad disp. de bap. ve.
these. 8. Solebant Aethiopes cum baptismo etiam circumcidere baptizatum, mas an
femina esset circumcidebatur. Doctor Field of the Church 3. book chap. 1.
Speaking of the Jacobites in Syria, Sixthly, they use circumcision even of both
Sexes, and of the Habassines, They are also circumcised both male and female.

The same has Heylin in his Geography, describing Syria and Ethiopia, and
before him (if my memory deceive me not) Brerewood in his Enquiry of Religions.

So that it is but a just of Mr. Blake, that women could no more be circumcised
than barb'd, if these authors be of any credit. But were it true that women
were not circumcised because incapable, yet would God doubtless have appointed
such a sign as they were capable of, if it were true that all that were in
covenant must be signed. But if it be true which Mr. G. confesses, That the
females, though in covenant were particularly excluded from being sealed with
the sacrament of initiation under that administration, then the connection
between the seal initial and the covenant, is not proved from circumcision. And
as for that he says, That in reference to some things pointed at by the seal*
God under that administration was pleased to appoint a sign of which women were
not capable; it is a plain confession, that God appointed circumcision for an
end not common to believers at all times, or to such as were in the covenant of
grace, but proper to the posterity of Abraham; and therefore though the
covenant were granted to be the reason of circumcision, yet it follows not all
must be baptized barely from the covenant of grace, because they were
circumcised by reason of interest in it, since this was not true, and as Mr.
Geree confesses, Circumcision was appointed in reference to some things proper
to that time.

But he hopes to salve the matter thus: So, actually they were not circumcised,
yet were they reputed as circumcised, as appears both by the place alleged by
Mr. M. Exodus 12.48. and where the house of Israel is said to be circumcised,
and also by that of Samsons parents, being displeased that he should take a
wife of the uncircumcised Philistines Judges 14.3. For unless the Israelitish
women were reputedly circumcised in the males, circumcision could make no
difference between wife and wife; yea our Savior should be born of the
uncircumcised.

To which I answer: To be reputed as circumcised, may be understood thus, they
were mentioned as circumcised, and this sense is false; for then it should be
an error, since they were not circumcised: nor is in the text Exodus 12.48. any
thing to that purpose; for the speech, no uncircumcised person shall eat the
passover, is to be limited by the matter, of them that ought to be
circumcised, and that Judge 14.3. of taking a wife of or from the Philistines
uncircumcised, as if thereby were intimated that an Israelitess woman was
reputed as circumcised, or that our Savior should be born of the
uncircumcised, if women were not reputed as uncircumcised, proves it not. For
the terms [ciecumcised and uncircumcised] are spoken of the people, who are
said to be circumcised from the chief part, not from all parts. I remember not
where the whole house of Israel is said to be circumcised, but to be
uncircumcised in heart, Jeremy 9.26. yet were there such a place, it must be
understood of all that were to be circumcised. Or else the meaning is, they
were reputed as circumcised, that is, they were admitted to the passover if
their males were circumcised, notwithstanding they were not in their proper
persons circumcised, which sense is true. But then it serves not the turn to
avoid the force of the instance brought to show there is not a necessary
connection between interest in the covenant, and the persons right to the
initial Seal, in his own person, which Mr. G: must prove to make good his
Major. For he would have infant-females actually baptized, because in covenant;
and his proof is, They that were in covenant were circumcised, which must be
meant of all in covenant, and of actual circumcision in their own persons, or
else it can prove but a particular of some, and their virtual baptism, to wit,
female infants. But Mr. G. thinks to prevent this objection.

And whereas you object, that you may as well say, that children are virtually
baptized in their parents, I deny it, because you have not the like proof for
the one, as we have for the other. Besides women that are said to be virtually
and reputatively circumcised in the males, were not actually to be circumcised
at all: they were excluded, which you do not, nor cannot say of infants; when
they are grown up you confess they may and ought to be baptized.

Answ. That which I said, was only by way of inference upon Paedobaptists
suppositions; if virtual circumcision were all that might be claimed by virtue
of the covenant it would not help Paedobaptists who would from the covenant
prove a right of actual circumcision to infants, whereas by their own
confession it only proves necessarily a virtual; and if so, how can it prove
necessarily by their own principles any more than a virtual baptizing of
infants? The same medium that does not prove as necessary actual circumcision
in the one, cannot prove as necessary actual baptism in the other. Now the
force of this objection is not at all weakened by his reply. For my words were
not concerning the fitness of the expression, that the one was as fit as the
other, but that I might grant a virtual baptism to infants without detriment to
my cause, if they assert no more from the covenant, but a virtual circumcision.

But had I said [you may as well say] (which yet I find not in my writings,
but, we might grant, we may say Examen page 37. by like, perhaps greater reason
it may be said Exercit. p. 4.) the speech might have been right notwithstanding
Mr. Gerees exceptions, for there is no more proof for the use of this speech,
that females may be said to be virtually circumcised in the males, then for
this, infants may be said to be virtually baptized in their parents, neither
being used in Scripture, and reason being as much for the one as the other. And
though those that were infants when grown, being believers, are to be baptized,
yet infants during their infancy are by more full evidence excluded from actual
baptism, then females were from actual circumcision.

Mr. G. proceeds thus. For your second instance of infants dying before they
were eight days old; I answer that they were particularly tied to that day,
whether for the Theological reason Levit. 12.2, 3. or for the Physical reason,
that God would not suffer an incision to be made on the flesh of a tender
infant; or till the seventh, that is* the Critical day was over; or whether to
typifie the resurrection, we cannot determine; but till that day they were
expressly excluded; yet therefore it remains clear that all that were within
that administration of the Covenant, that were not expressly excluded, were
circumcised, which is enough for my purpose. And so unless you can bring a rule
that no infant of Christians shall have the Sacrament of initiation till 18
years or so, that instance of infants not being circumcised dying before the 8.
day, is too short to reach up.

Answ. It is not enough for Mr. Gs. purpose, which was to prove, the seal did
follow the covenant, and when any were aggregated into the Jewish church and
taken into the communion of the covenant made with Abraham they were initiated
into that administration of the Covenant by the Sacrament of Circumcision,
unless he can prove that all that were in covenant, and in the Jewish Church
were circumcised. But his own grant, That some in the Covenant, and Jewish
Church, as females and males under eight days old, were expressly excluded,
overthrows his own position, and is enough for my purpose to prove, that all in
the covenant were not circumcised. The reason why males before the eighth day
were not circumcised, whatever it were, is nothing for Mr. Gs. advantage, but
against him, since it does more fully show that God would not have them
circumcised. Nor need I bring a rule that no infant of Christians shall have
the Sacrament of initiation till eighteen years, or so, which goes upon his
mistake, as if the instance I gave were as a proof of the time of baptism, it
being brought only to show a reason of my denial of his assertion, that the
seal did follow the covenant. It is enough for me, that I prove (as I have done
in the second part of the Review s. 5. etc.) that the rule is, that persons are
not to be baptized till they be disciples or believers, and that infants are
not such.

Mr. G. adds. Your third instances are of Adam, Abel, Noah page 36. of your
answer, and Melchisedec, Lot, Job, page 4. Exercit. I answer either those were
before the administration begun with Abraham, and so before the institution of
seals, or such of them that were with or after him, either they join not
themselves to that administration, and so were not to be sealed no more then
the Proselytes of the Gate, or if they did unite to the Church in Abraham's
family, then it is apparent they might lay claim to circumcision, as other
proselytes did. And so indeed it is averred of Job, that he was circumcised, by
the Author of the book of true circumcision* which is ascrrbed to Hierom, cited
by Iunius in his animadversion on Bellarmine, Controv. 4. l. 3. cap. 16. Not.
13.

Answ. Master Geree does make show of answering my allegation, but does indeed
confirm my proof, that since Abel, Noah, Melchisedec, Lot, and many Proselytes
of the gate were in the Covenant of grace, yet had not any initial sign or
seal, as M. Geree calls it, to seal the Covenant, and some sealed after an
initial seal was instituted though in the Covenant of grace, therefore there is
not such a connection between the Covenant, and the initial seal, that therefore
a man must have the seal initial because he is in the covenant of grace, and
that it was not from interest in the Covenant of grace, that persons were
circumcised, but Gods special command upon such reasons as seemed best to him,
but is not a reason for us to imitate in another ordinance without the like
command. If one Author conceive Job was circumcised, many do conceive
otherwise, and there are more probable reasons he was not; since there is no
mention of his circumcision, or his observing any of the rites of the Law, or
of any acquaintance he had with Israel, or any thing else that might induce us
to believe he had communion with the policy of Israel.

Master Geree says further; And whereas you say, Lastly, that the Jews
comprehended in covenant and circumcised could not be baptized without faith
and repentance. I answer, the reason is evident; because baptism was a seal of
a new administration; and therefore they must join to that administration of
the covenant as well as be in covenant, before they could be baptized.

Answ. I am beholding to Mr. Geree, who as before had given the reason why
Melchisedeck, Lot, Job, were not circumcised, though in Covenant because of
their not joining themselves to that administration, or their not uniting to
the Church in Abraham's family: so here again he does not only grant what I
allege, but gives a reason of it also, and such as quite overthrows his
dispute. For if it were true that the Jews that were in covenant were not to be
^aptiz^d without faith and repentance, then being in covenant is not a
sufficient reason of an infants being baptized without faith and repentance,
and if baptism were a seal of a new administration, then it must have a new
rule, and so the old rule of circumcision is no direction to us about baptism,
if Lot, the Proselytes of the gate, though in covenant, were not to be
circumcised without joining to that administration, or the Church in Abraham's
family, then right to circumcision was not from interest in the covenant common
to all believers, but something proper to that Church State, or administration,
which is now voided: if therefore the Jews in covenant and circumcised must
profess repentance and faith before they were baptized, because they must join
to the new administration of the covenant, then according to Mr. Gerees own
confession, according to the new administration of the Covenant, faith and
repentance are required of them that join to that administration of the
Covenant. And therefore whereas Mr. Geree adds, we may therefore conclude,
that those that are under the Gospel Covenant in any administration of it, have
right to the seal of initiation under that administration; unless they be
particularly excluded by God himself, and so the major is firmly proved; I may
truly say, it is firmly proved that they that are under the Gospel Covenant in
any administration of it, yet have not right to the seal of initiation under
that administration, barely from the Covenant without a command, and that God
himself has excluded infants from baptism by Mr. Gerees own concession,
without faith and repentance, and that in all this arguing Mr. G. has dictated
much and proved nothing. Let Us see whether he speed better about proving the
Minor.

SECT. XVI. That the Gospel Covenant is not extended to infants of believers,
as such.
NOw the Minor, says he, that children are under the Gospel Covenant in the
Christian administration of it, that we prove by the Scriptures mentioned, as
first, Genesis 17.7. I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy
seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant to be a God
unto thee and thy seed after thee. To comprehend the meaning of this place we
are to consider. What the privilege is that is here promised: 2. what the
extent of it is. First for the privilege it self, as Calvin has well observed
by virtue of this promise, the Church was settled in Abraham's family, and it
was separated from the rest of the World, as light from darkness. And the
people of Israel (Abraham's posterity) was the house and sheepfold of God; And
other nations like wild beasts ranging about without in the wilderness of the
World. And by this privilege the dignity of adoption-belonged to all the
Israelites in common, Romans 9.4. To whom pertains the adoption. And so, though
by nature they were no better than others; yet by reason of this promise they
had a birth-privilege, whereby they were separated from others, which is
apparently held forth, Gal. 2.15. We who are Jews by nature, not sinners of the
Gentiles; as Mr. Blake has truly observed; And since you grant the Jews a
birth-privilege, as p. 106. and p. 78. of your Answer, you needed not have
quarrelled with this plain proof. But now among those that had this outward
privilege of common adoption (to be reputed children when the Gentiles were
reputed as Dogs, Matthew. 15.26.) there were some that were separated by the
secret election of God, and really made partakers of sanctifying and saving
grace, and so not only adopted outwardly, and reputatively, but also really; in
comparison of whom the other Israelites are sometimes spoken of, as no sons of
Abraham, Romans 9.6, 7. Though externally they were the children of the Kingdom,
and in reference to the Gentiles they are so styled, Matthew 8.11, 12. So then
the privilege is, that he would be a God to all in regard of external
denomination, and external privileges of a Church, and to the elect in regard
of spiritual adoption, grace and glory.

Answ. It is true, I granted page 78. of my Examen, that the Jews had a
birth-privilege; yet denied it to be from the Covenant of grace according to
the substance of it, as Mr. M. speaks, but that special love God bare to
Abraham's posterity. Nor do I deny that the people of Israel, till broken off,
were in common estimation Gods children, children of the Kingdom, nor Dogs, nor
unclean as the Gentiles, and that these titles did belong to all by external
denomination, really to the elect. Nor do I much gainsay that by virtue of the
promise, I will be a God to the seed of Abraham, the Church was settled in
Abraham's family, though it does not appear to me that the Apostle did so
expound this promise, but expressly contradistinguisheth the children of the
promise, to the children of the flesh, Romans 9.8. And his doctrine there is
plain, that the elect are they only to whom the promise, I will be the God of
thy seed, Genesis 17.7. was made: yea Exercit. page 2, 3. I expound the promise,
as in respect of some peculiar blessings, belonging to Abraham's natural seed.
Nor did I quarrel with Mr. Blake for proving from Gal. 2, 15. a birth-privilege
belonging to the Jews, but excepted against him for that he contended to have
the seed of believing Gentile-parents under the Gospel to be under the first
member of the division in the text, to wit, Jews by nature: which exception I
have made good in my Postscript to my Apology S. 9. which I intend to vindicate
from Master Blakes Reply, Vindic. foed. cha. 35. in that which follows. But
then what does this advantage to prove Mr. Gs. Minor. To children (meaning all
or else his conclusion can be but particular) of believing Christians the
Gospel Covenant is extended in the Christian Churches? Is this the
Gospel Covenant to make a people only reputatively and outwardly, but not
really adopted: Is this that which circumcision did seal? Is this the covenant
of grace which the seal is to follow? What kind of juggling is there with these
men?

They contend the Covenant Genesis 17.7. to be the same with the Covenant of grace
for substance, and that they make to consist in saving graces, the temporal
benefits they refer to the administration that then was, they will not have it
called a mixed covenant, and this covenant of grace they will have to be sealed
by circumcision out of Romans 4.11. and they say this was made to believers and
their seed, and thence they have salvation if they die in infancy, and without
this there is no ground of hope of the salvation of any infant deceased; and
they argue they are to have the seal, because they are in covenant, which if
they understand not of that covenant, of which that ordinance is the seal, what
color is there to derive thence a title unto that seal on them who have
interest in another covenant, which it does not seal? Their argument is, He
has right to the Conveyance, who has right to the Land: but these men who
dare not assert that the covenant of saving grace belongs to all believers
natural children, yet will have them all to have right to baptism which seals
saving graces, though perhaps a very few, and those all unknown persons have
right to that Covenant, only because a promise of outward and reputative
adoption, though not saving graces belongs to all. Besides what ground has Mr.
G. to call this promise the Gospel Covenant? Romans 1.16, 17. Gal. 3.8, 9, etc.
the Gospel Covenant is, The just shall live by faith: it is that which contains
promise of sanctification, remission of sins, etc. Hebrews, 8* 10, 11, 12. and
10.16, 17. Matthew 26.28. The everlasting covenant that has the sure mercies
of David, Isaiah 55.3. Acts 13.34, 38, 39. Hebrews 13.20. and of which Jesus is
the Surety or Mediator, Hebrews 7.22. and 12.24. what a mockage then is this of
people to tell them the Covenant of grace is made to their children, and the
Cospel-covenant is extended to them: and that God has promised to be their
God* and that they are confederate with their parents, and yet in fine all that
they dare assert is, God has promised to the seed of believers an external,
reputative adoption, though not real: such chaff they catch their auditors
with. But is this promise that God will settle his Church in Abraham's family,
and separate them from the rest of the World, as light from darkness, as Mr. G.
expressly makes it, indeed the Gospel Covenant? I dare freely say, it is Jewish,
Anti-evangelical, directly opposite to the Gospel Covenant. For the
Gospel Covenant is, That God would bless all Nations in Abraham through faith,
Gal. 3.8, 9. Gentiles as well as Jews, yea the Gentile-believers instead of the
Jews broken off by unbelief. If then this be the Gospel covenant, I will be the
God of thy seed; that is, in Mr. Gs. sense, I will separate Abraham's family
from the rest of the world to be my Church, then the Church under the Gospel
covenant is not Catholic contrary to the article of the Creed, and so the
Gospel Covenant continues the middle wall of partition. But perhaps Master
Geree, helps the matter in that which follows.

For the second thing, says he, the extent of this privilege (though there
were something in it peculiar to Abraham) yet was it not limited to him alone,
but those that were of Abraham inherited his promise to have God their God, and
the God of their seed. As what was said to Joshua, Josh. 1.5 I will not leave
thee nor forsake thee, was not bounded to his person, but applicable to all
conscientious Israelites; yea to all Christians in Gods way and work, as the
Apostle applies it Heb. 13.5. So this privilege or the Covenant to have God
the God of their seed, is to be applied to all Israelites, yea to all of any
nation that have his faith and tread in his steps: they that do the work of
Abraham may claim the promises of Abraham, that be ordinary and essential parts
of the Covenant.

Answ. Mr. G. Will have the promise [I will be a God to thy seed] to promise
the settling of the Church in Abraham's family separated from the rest of the
World as light from darkness; if this be so, how can it be a promise to another
nation, that their children should be adopted outwardly and reputatively? For*
if by this promise Abraham's natural posterity have a privilege whereby they are
sethis promise is common to other nations with them. But says he, The promise
parated from all other nations, surely its no better than a contradiction to
say to Joshua, Josh. 1.5. was not bounded to his person, Heb. 13.5. which I
grant; nor do I doubt, but promises made to Abraham, David, Joshua, etc do
belong to all true believers, where the holy Ghost does so expound them, and
where the promise is of a thing which other Scriptures do clear to belong to
them. But there is no such thing in the promise of Genesis 17.7. Master Geree
brings nothing but his own assertion to prove it, nor do I know any thing
brought by any else, but what the Author of the little book, entitled, Infants
baptism proved lawful by Scripture, printed Anno 1644. has,

Who thus argued, That which was promised to Abraham, as a believer, is
promised to every believer.

But God promised to be a God to Abraham, and his seed as a believer: Ergo:

To which I answered, if [as] be taken reduplicatively so as that the meaning
be under that formal consideration, to him being a believer, and to every one
being a believer, as to him, I deny the Major; it was not made to him as a
believer, simply under that consideration, but though it were made upon his
faith, as a motive of making that covenant with him, yet not under that formal
consideration simply as a believer, so as that the covenant should be said to
be made to every believer, as to him. As in like manner, though Peter Matthew
16 18 19 had the promise of building the Church, and the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, and of binding and loosing, conferred on him by reason of his
confession of Christ, verse 16, yet every one that confesses Christ as he did,
has not that that promise: If any ask how it was made to Abraham? I answer, so
far as concerns the spiritual part, it is clear from Romans 4 11 12 16 18, that
it was made to him as Father of believers, and in that construction, though it
belong to Gentiles, yet it belongs only to believing elect Gentiles, Romans 9
7 8 Galatians 3 29, or to Christ, whether personal or mystical, verse 16. But
that it belongs not in that sense, no not to all or any, either of Jews or
Gentiles, who are not elect, is apparent from Romans 9 7 8, no mere formal
professor can lay claim to it. As for the promise of outward privileges, as to
be of the visible Church, to have the Ordinances of Gods worship, so the
promise is made to Abraham as a natural Father of his inheriting posterity by
Isaac, and to that seed by Isaac which was to inherit in Abraham's family: and
to that natural seed which God would bring out of Egypt, and settle in Canaan,
and this was but unto the time of reformation, as it is termed, Heb. chap. 9.
verse. 10. Now that those words, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed,
should be expounded thus, I will be the God of every Gentile believer, either
in profession or reality, that his natural posterity should be Gods visible
Church, or visible Church Members, has not the least intimation in Scripture,
but much against it, nor can be brought by any show of right construction to be
the meaning. For I would know under which term of these [thee, or thy seed]
every such natural child, even an infant shauld be meant; under [thy seed]
they must say, but the Scripture places believers themselves, and those only
real believers under that term, as is proved before, and other places speak to
like purpose, John 8.39. Matthew. 3.9. Luke 19.9. therefore without addition to
the text, believers natural seed are not there placed. Nor were the promise
true in Mr. Gerees sense. For God does not make good the promise in that sense
to every believer and his natural seed, many Gentile believers have had their
children persecutors, not visible Church Members, and may have still; yea in
that sense which Mr. Geree himself expounds it, it was only verified of the
natural posterity of Abraham, yet not of every particular child of his, but of
the nation till Christ's coming.

As for the dictate of Mr. G. they that do the works of Abraham, may claim the
promises of Abraham, that be ordinary and essential parts of the covenant, it
intimates some promises of the covenant to be essential, some not, some
ordinary, some extraordinary parts of the covenant.

But these are new distinctions, with which I meet not elsewhere, nor know I
how to understand what promises he makes ordinary, nor what extraordinary, what
essential parts of the covenant, what not. That Covenant being but once made in
my conceit, therefore had all the promises of the same sort, whether ordinary
or extraordinary, and a covenant being an aggregate of promises, contains the
promises as the matter, and the making together as the form, which are the
essential parts of the Covenant, there is no promise but being the matter of the
covenant is an essential part, or rather all the promises together are the
matter, and each promise is an integral part of the whole number of promises.
And therefore his speech is not easy to be understood.

I grant that they who are of the faith of Abraham, may claim the promise of
Justification, and other saving blessings. But for visible Church Membership of
natural posterity, or other domestique promises made to Abraham, neither the
natural posterity of Abraham, nor the truest believing Gentile, can lay a just
claim to them, but that notwithstanding that promise, God is free to make their
children or the children of Gentile, or Jew Infidels his people, his visible
church, and to settle his worship with them.

Mr. Geree writes thus, and that this privilege of having God to be the God of
our seed, was not personal, and peculiar to Abraham, but propagated to his
seed, may hence appear, because the same in effect is promised to other godly
Jews, which is here promised to Abraham, Deuteronomy. 30.6. And the Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed.

Answ. The promise to Abraham, according to Mr. Gs. exposition, was, That he
would be a God to all in regard of external denomination, and external
privilege of a Church, and to the elect in regard of spiritual adoption grace
and glory. Sure this is not the same in effect with that, Deuteronomy. 30.6. which is
nothing of external privileges of a Church, but of circumcising their hearts,
and the heart of their seed, to love the Lord their God with all their heart,
and with all their soul, that they might live: which can be true only of the
elect. Besides, it is promised to them at their return from captivity, and upon
their returning to the Lord, and obeying his voice according to all that he
commanded them that day, they and their children, with all their heart, and all
their soul, v. 2. which sure cannot be ordinarily applied to them in their
infancy, and therefore this text is very impertinently alleged to prove an
external privilege to infants of mere reputed believers, even in their infancy.
Mr. Baxter himself in his Friendly accommodation with Mr. Bedford p. 361. has
these words. The text seems plainly to speak of [their seed] not in their
infant-state, but in their adult, Deuteronomy. 30. For first, verse 2. the condition
of the promise is expressly required, not only of the parent, but of the
children themselves by name.

2. And that condition is the personal performance of the same acts, which are
required of the parents, viz. to return to the Lord, and obey his voice with
all their heart and soul.

3. The circumcision of the heart promised, is so annexed to the act, that it
appears to be meant only of those that were capable of the act, ver. 6. The
Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord thy God; so that it is not meant of those that are incapable of so
loving.

Mr. G. yet adds. And thus much that place, Act. 2.39. does hold forth and
contribute to infant baptism, to show that children are comprehended in the
Covenant with their fathers, and both these last promises being of Evangelical
privileges they must needs be communicable to all under the Gospel Covenant; so
then it remains that God still is in covenant with every believer, and his seed.

Answ. That Acts 2.39. neither shows that children (of believers) are
comprehended (universally and necessarily) with their parents, nor contributes
ought to infant baptism, is showed in the forepart of this Review s. 5. and
notwithstanding any thing said by Mr. Geree it yet remains to be proved, that
God is in Covenant with every believer and his seed.

The rest of that section of Mr. Geree, is about my expounding Mr. Ms. second
conclusion, which I shall review as far as is meet when I come to it. I have
dispatched at last the answering those that argue syllogistically from the
covenant, and seal for infant baptism. But most go another way by laying down
conclusions, and framing hypotheses, and I proceed to take a view of their
writings.

SECT. XVII. Mr. Cottons, The Assemblies, and London Ministers way of arguing
for Infant Baptism from the Covenant and Circumcision, is recited, and the
method of the future progress in the Review, expressed.
MR. John Cotton in his Dialogue, chapter 3. goes this way, and expresses himself
in four things,

That 1. God made a covenant of grace with Abraham, and his seed, Genesis 17.7.

2. Gave him a commandment to receive the sign of circumcision the seal of the
covenant of grace, to him and his seed, Genesis ^7.9, 10.

3. The Lord has given that Covenant of grace which was then to Abraham and
his seed, now to believers and our seed.

4. And has given us baptism in the room of circumcision.

The Assembly at Westminster in their confession of faith, chap 25. art. 2.
assert, That the visible Church consists of all the children of those that
profess the true Religion, and cite to prove it, 1 Cor. 7.14. Acts 2.39.
Ezekiel 16.20, 21. Romans 11.16. Genesis 3.15. and 17.7. of these, one of the Texts,
to wit, Genesis 3.15. I meet not with in the writings of the defenders of
infant baptism, to my remembrance, except once in Mr. Baxter to prove a
conditional covenant made with all Adams posterity. I do not imagine what use
that Text is of to prove infants of those that profess the true Religion to be
visible Church Members.

Whether the seed of the woman be meant of all men, or by excellency of Christ,
or of true believers (which are all the senses I conceive) yet how from any of
these should be gathered that infants of professors of the true Religion, as
such, and not as of humane kind, should be meant by the seed of the woman, or
that the bruising of the Serpents head should prove, infants of them that
profess the true Religion to be visible Church Members is a riddle, which I
cannot yet resolve. Chapter 28. art. 4. they say, Infants of one or both believing
parents are to be baptized, and in the margin cite, Genesis 17.7.9. with Gal.
3.9.14. Col. 2.11, 12. and A^ts 2.38.39. and Romans 4.11, 12. 1 Cor. 7.14. Mat.
28.19. Mark 10.13, 14, 15, 16. Luke 18.15. what they would gather from these
texts may be ghessed from the Directory about baptism, where they direct the
Minister to teach the people, That baptism is a seal of the covenant of grace,
of our ingrafting into Christ, etc. That the promise is made to believers and
their seed, and that the seed and posterity of the faithful, born within the
Church, have by their birth-interest in the Covenant, and right to the seal of
it, and to the outward privileges of the Church under the Gospel, no less then
the children of Abraham in the time of the old Testament, the covenant of grace
for substance being the same, and the grace of God, and consolation of
believers more plentiful then before, that the Son of God admitted little
children into his presence, embracing them, and blessing them, saying, For of
such is the Kingdom of God; that children by baptism, are solemnly received
into the bosom of the visible Church, that they are Christians, and federally
holy before baptism, and therefore are they baptized.

Most of which propositions are ambiguous, few of them true, or have any proof
from the texts alleged in the Confession; and if they were all true (setting
aside one or two which express the conclusion in a different phrase) they would
not infer the Conclusion.

The first proposition is ambiguous, it being doubtful in what sense baptism is
said to be a seal of the Covenant of grace, whether in a borrowed or proper
sense, so as it be the definition or genus of it, or only an adjunct of it, or
whether it seal the making of the Covenant, or the performing of it, or the
thing covenanted, what they mean by the covenant of grace, which is that
covenant; whether it seal all or a part of it, whether it seal Gods covenanting
to us, or our covenanting to God. Nor is there any proof for it from Romans 4.11.
which neither speaks of baptism, nor of any ones Circumcision but Abraham's, nor
says of his Circumcision, that it was the seal of the Covenant of grace, as
they, it is likely, mean.

The next proposition is so ambiguous, that Mr. M. and Mr. G. are driven to
devise senses which the words will not bear to make it true, as I show in my
Apology, s. 9. The words seem to bear this sense, That the promise of
Justification, adoption, etc. is made to believers and their seed. But so it is
apparently false, contradicted by the Apostle Romans 9.7, 8. and by other texts,
nor is it proved from Genesis 17.7. compared with Gal. 3.9.14. Acts 2.39. or any
other of their texts, yea in that sense it is disclaimed by Master Marshall,
and Master Geree.

The next is ambiguous also. For how the seed of the faithful may be said to be
born within the Church, or what interest in the covenant, and right to the seal
of it, and what outward privileges they have by their birth, or what outward
privileges they have in like measure as the children of Abraham, is as
uncertain as the rest, and how any of the texts prove it, is uncertain. Surely
Gal. 3.9.14. speaks only of the privileges of Justification and Sanctification,
which Abraham's children by faith, and no other, not every believers posterity
or natural seed have, nor is there a word Genesis 17.7. of any privilege to our
natural seed as such.

The next too is doubtful, it being uncertain what they mean by the substance
of the Covenant, what they make accidental in it, and what substantial; nor is
it easy to conceive what they mean when they say, the grace of God and
consolation of believers is more plentiful then before, or how any of the texts
prove it, or what this is to their purpose, that the enlargement of a believers
comfort intitles his child to baptism, nor what is meant when it is said, That
children by baptism are received into the bosom of the visible Church, and yet
after withheld from the Lords Supper without any Ecclesiastical censure, nor do
I know how they mean or prove them to be Christians, or federally holy before
baptism.

For my part, in those propositions I deprehend little truth or plain sense;
but that the Directory in that part is a mere riddle, fitter for Scholars to
study than for teaching of the people.

The London Ministers (of whom it is likely a considerable part were of the
Assembly) in their Jus Divinum regim. Eccl. page 32. speak thus.

So infants of Christian parents under the New Testament are commanded to be
baptized by consequence, for that the infants of Gods people in the old
Testament were commanded to be circumcised, Genesis 17. For the privileges of
believers under the New Testament, are as large as the privileges of believers
under the old Testament, and the children of believers under the New Testament
are federally holy, and within the covenant of God as well as the children of
believers under the old Testament, Genesis 17. compared with Romans 11.16. 1 Cor.
7.14. And what objections can be made from infants incapacity now against their
baptism, might as well then have been made against their being circumcised. And
why children should once be admitted to the like initiating Sacrament (the Lord
of the Covenant, and Sacrament no where forbidding them) there can be no just
ground. And baptism succeeds in the room of Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12.
concerning which I say, there is no proof from Genesis 17. compared with Romans
11.16. 1 Cor. 7.14. to prove the children of believers federaly holy as they
would, nor is there any proof from Col. 2.11, 12. to prove the succession of
baptism in the room of circumcision. And though infants have not a natural
incapacity to be dipped in water, yet they have a natural incapacity to profess
faith in Christ, which is now required to baptism though not required to
circumcision. And there is an objection that may be made against
infant baptism, to wit, the want of a command, which could not be objected
against infant male circumcision: and this is a just ground to exclude infants
from baptism, yea the very same ground they give for excluding them the
communion, and the very same ground which Paedobaptists do continually, in
books and Sermons urge against Popish and Prelatical ceremonies. But forasmuch
as Mr. M. did direct his Defense of infant baptism to the Assembly, and Mr.
Pryn in his suspension suspended, p. 21. seems to have taken his book to be
approved by the Assembly, and he is of any I meet with in print likeliest to
have produced their strength, and for other reasons, therefore I conceive my
self bound to examine his defense in the third part of it, referring the Reader
to what of that or any other is already dispatched, taking in somewhat of
Master Blakes, and some others by the way, and then to examine such parts of
Mr. Cobbets Just Vindication, as are not yet examined so far as I find
necessary, and at last examine so much of Mr. Bs. dispute about his second
argument as is not yet dispatched.

SECT. XVIII. Mr. Marshalls reply to the first section of the third part of my
Examen about the connection between the Covenant, and seal, is reviewed.
MR. M. in his Sermon page 8. thus disputed, My first Argument is this; The
infants of believing parents are foederati, therefore they must be signati.

They are within the Covenant of grace;

Therefore are to partake of the seal of the Covenant.

To this I answered by denying both the antecedent and the consequence: and
first I disputed against the consequence, Exam. part. 3. s. 1.

Mr. M. in his Reply would have the Reader to consider my advantage from the
much silence in the Scripture to make my work have a specious probability, that
the like specious plea might be made against the justification of infants,
especially if his dispute should be carried as mine is, altogether in the way
of making exceptions against arguments, but not positively affirming any thing.

Thus what others have counted my virtue, and have commended, beyond what it is
fit for me to express, Mr. M. unjustly seeks to draw into suspicion, as if
there were sophistry and guile in it, as he did in other things, as I show in
my Apology.

But me thinks a considerate Reader should take this to be the course of a
diffident man. If there be much silence in Scripture about infants, why do Mr.
M. and others avouch their baptism; with so much peremptoriness. If their
justification could be no better proved then their baptism, it would be no
article of my faith. My disputation is carried in that way which is used by
Disputants that examine writings Scholastically, wherein it is defective Mr. M.
should show.

That I made exceptions against arguments was agreeable to my work, being to
answer as Mr. M. was to prove: no man is to expect regularly any more of a
Respondent. Yet that I positively affirm nothing is an untruth with a witness:
yea in many points where it was not necessary I positively set down my tenet
and my proofs, and answer objections to the contrary. The resolving questions
about baptism how it should be, could not reasonably be expected in my Examen.

2. Mr. M. takes on him to prove his consequence by mine own principles, to
wit, that I yield that such as are regenerate, sanctified, etc. may be
baptized, which he says is in plain English, that such as are covenanters
ought not to be denied the initial seal of the covenant.

But I do not think the speeches the same, either in plain English, or Mr. Ms.
own English, or mine. Not in plain English. In plain English a Covenanter is
one that makes a promise.

Is a Scottish Covenanter any other then one that makes a promise or subscribes
to the Covenant? But a person regenerate or sanctified may make no promise, nor
do I think when Mr. M. calls infants federate, or in the Covenant of grace, he
means they make a promise, but that a promise is made to them. Nor in Mr. Ms.
own English. For when he says, they are in covenant, he means, infants are in
some sense under the covenant of grace in respect of the outward administration
and Church privileges, which is not all one as to be regenerate, sanctified,
etc. nor in my English. For the being in covenant which I grant, gives a title
to baptism, is meant of their present state, so as that not only the promise is
made to them, what God will do for them afterward, but for the present they
are actually sanctified, regenerate, believers, disciples, as mine own words,
cited by Mr. M. show; So that Mr. M. does but abuse me, and the Reader,
endeavoring to possess him with this conceit, as if his consequence were
proved by mine own principles.

But Master Marshall not trusting to this, answers, more particularly:

1. I grant with you that there is no necessary dependence between a promise
and a seal, the addition of a seal to a promise is of free grace as well as the
promise it self. Which if true, then there is no necessary connection between the
Covenant and Seal, and so this proposition is not true. All that have the
promise are to be sealed. For if it be true it is in some degree of necessity,
to wit, de omni. As for his reason, it is frivolous; there is no necessary
dependence, because both are of free grace. For those things that are of free
grace have a necessary dependence as, to be predestinate, called, justified,
glorified. But he means, the nature of the terms makes not a necessary
connection between them.

If that be his meaning, Mr. Baillee his Colleague is deserted, who would infer
a necessary connection from the nature of the terms, which I have refuted in my
Addition to my Apology, S.3.

But Mr. M. adds. Nor 2. did I ever think, that by Gods revealed will this
proposition was true in all ages of the Church. All Covenanters must be sealed,
I carried it no higher than Abraham's time, when God first added this new mercy
to his Church, vouchsafing a seal to the Covenant.

Answ. If this be true, then there is nothing moral and perpetual in seals, as
they call them, of the Covenant. For such thing are from the beginning, and
belong to Gentiles as well as Jews, and therefore it is in vain to derive
infants sealing barely from the Covenant of grace. For since that, as Mr. Ms.
first Conclusion speaks, for substance has always been one, and the same both
to the Jews and Gentiles, if there were a connection between it, and the seal it
should have been as well before Abraham's time as since.

But he thinks in his third answer to make good the connection, when he says,

And 3. from Abraham's time, and so forward I say it was Gods will, that such as
are in Covenant should be sealed with the initial seal of the Covenant,
supposing them only capable of the seal, and no special bar put in against them
by God himself.

To which I answer. He says after, if you please to state the general
Proposition as you needs must, That all who since Abraham's time are foederati,
or Covenanters with God, must by Gods own appointment receive the seal of
admission into covenant, unless they be either incapable of it, or are exempted
by a particular dispensation. So that one of these two propositions is that
which makes up his Enthymeme an entire syllogism, and his syllogism must stand
in one or other of these forms.

From Abraham's time all such as are in covenant should be sealed with the
initial seal of the covenant, supposing them only capable of the seal, and no
special bar put in against them by God himself.

But all the infants of believing parents are in covenant, and they are capable
of the seal, and there is no special bar put in against them by God himself.

Ergo, They should be sealed.

Or thus; All who since Abraham's time are foederati, or Covenanters with God,
must, by Gods own appointment receive the seal of admission into covenant,
unless they be either incapable of it, or are exempted by a particular
dispensation. All infants of believers since Abraham's time, are foederati or
covenanters with God, neither incapable of the seal, nor exempted by a
particular dispensation: Ergo, all infants of believers since Abraham's time,
must, by Gods own appointment, receive the seal of admission into covenant.

To which I answer, Mr. M. tells me, I must needs state thus the general
Proposition. But it is a pretty art he has, as elsewhere to call that my Minor
which was his own not mine; so here to say, I must needs state the general
Proposition thus, which is of his own framing. However, he is not wronged, that
it is thus framed. Let us then view it, and try whether (except in that of
circumcision) there be any truth, sense or consideratenesse in it.

As for circumcision, if it be meant only of it, then the Conclusion can be of
it only, and as the truth is, his argument concludes only that infants of
believers are to be circumcised.

1. I had in my Examen noted a fault in his Argument in his Sermon, in that his
Conclusion was of a sign of the Covenant indefinite, and not of baptism only,
whereas the Lords Supper is also a sign of the Covenant, which he would not
have delivered to infants.

And to it he answers, That he clearly in his Sermon showed this Proposition to
be only meant of the initial sign, and not of the other. But this does not
excuse his fault, who taking upon him to prove infant baptism, concludes
another thing in the argument, though he might perhaps, some pages of, where
the Reader looks not for an explication of his argument, limit his speech to
the initial seal.

And for what he tells me, he is sure that I who durst baptize an infant known
to me to be regenerate, durst not give the other Sacrament to it, there being
self examination and ability to discern the Lords body prerequired to the one,
not to the other; I told him in my Apology s. 10. I durst do the one as I durst
do the other, and that self examination and ability to discern the Lords body
is as well required to baptism, as the Lords Supper, Acts 2.38. and 8.37. Romans
6.3, 4. But were it, that I durst not do the one as the other, yet this would
not help Mr. M. who would prove the title to the initial seal, by that proof of
interest in the Covenant, which will conclude as well title to the after, as
the initial seal.

For the proof is usually the seal must follow the covenant; which if true,
then not only the initial, but also the after-seal must follow it. But waving
this, is the fault mended in his Defense? does he conclude definitely of
baptism here? nay notwithstanding he was warned, yet chorda semper oberrat
eadem, he still runs into the same fault, concluding in both forms of an
initial seal indefinitely, not definitely of baptism, and therefore may be
interpreted to conclude of circumcision as well as of baptism, yea rather his
assertion (if there be any good sense of it) is of the circumcising then
baptizing of infants, since all his proof is about the initial sign of
circumcision, and the limitations he puts into the Major are, that it may be
true of circumcision.

But this is not all the fault in his new forms: notwithstanding I complained
in my Examen sect. 3. of his ambiguities, which I showed in my Apology s. 9,
10. and Postscript s. 6. yet as if either he could not, or would not, speak
distinctly, he retains the same fault in his Defense. Whereas I conceive the
covenant of grace now contains only the promise of saving grace, he says p 90.
The Covenant of grace contains not only saving grace, but the administration
of it also in outward ordinances and Church privileges; but shows not where,
nor in which covenant of grace there are promises of the administration of
saving grace in outward ordinances and Church privileges. It is true,
circumcision is called the Covenant, Genesis 17.13. by a Metonymia as Mr. M.
confesses page 32 but not because it was contained in the Covenant: it is not
Metonymia continentis pro contento, but signati pro signo: now that the sign
should be said to be contained in the covenant, is scarce good sense; sure it
is not meet to be used in disputes. And therefore whoever uses the covenant of
grace for any other than the covenant of saving grace, or says it contains any
other than promises of saving grace, seems to affect ambiguities unmeet for
dispute, as not willing to be understood. Again page 92. he expresses the
covenant of grace he means to be that Genesis 17.7. and he cannot but know it to
have diverse meanings; one that God will be a God to Abraham, and his spiritual
seed, which he confesses page 102. to be the elect, when he says, Secondly by
the word [seed] was meant the children of the promise the elect, Romans 9.8. and
in this sense it is denied by him, that God has made a promise of saving grace
to the natural seed of believers, and so they are not in this covenant in this
sense. Yet the Directory when it speaks of baptism, as the seal of the
covenant, means it in this sense, as the words before recited show, for what
else can be meant when they distinguish between interest in the covenant, and
right to the seal of it, and the ou^ward privileges of the Church under the
Gospel. And Romans 4.11. is alleged in the Confession of Faith, for the proof of
this, that it is the seal of the Covenant of grace; now that text speaks of
being a seal of the righteousness of faith, which is a saving grace, and in the
Confession of faith, chapter 7. art. 3. and in the greater Catechism, they make the
Covenant of grace to offer life and salvation by Christ, to promise faith, and
to be made with Christ, and in him with all the elect, as his seed; and so the
Argument from the Covenant of grace to the Seal, must mean it thus, or else it
is frivolous. For if the Seal must follow the Covenant; it must follow the
Covenant which is sealed by it, which is only the promise of saving grace,
there being no show of consequence in it, infants of believers have not the
covenant of saving grace, but of outward Ordinances and Church privileges,
therefore they are to be sealed with that seal, which seals only saving graces.
And yet methinks they should not have avouched as the Directory does, that the
posterity of the faithful have by their birth interest in that Covenant,
considering how the Ap^stle determines Romans 9.8. the children of the flesh may
not be the children of God, nor the seed, nor children of the promise. Another
ense of the promise, Genesis 17.7. is, I will be a God to Abraham, and his natural
seed by Isaac and Jacob: But in this sense it is proper only to the Jews, and
the argument is as frivolous: God promised to be a God to the Jews, therefore
infant-Gentiles who have nothing to do with that promise, must have baptism,
which is no seal or token of that promise at all. If Mr. M. would have done
something to his purpose, he should have showed, not as he does p. 106, 107,
etc. in many words quite besides the business, how the Covenant is taken
strictly and largely, and how they may be said to be in covenant in some sense,
who have a visible right, without saving grace, but have showed in which words
there is any promise that may infer right to Gentile-believers infants to be
baptized, Genesis 17.7. or how he can prove what he says, page 103. That baptism
seals that promise in which God engages himself to be the God of believing
Christians, and their seed? I would fain know in what words, in respect of what
blessings and gifts, and in what manner or upon what terms God thus engages
himself. The Apostle says Gal. 3.16. To Abraham and his seed were the promises
made. I no where find they were made to a Gentile believer and his seed.

The like playing with ambiguities is in the use of the phrases, foederate, in
Covenant, being under the Covenant, being in Covenant* Covenanters. When he
says, Infants of believers are foederati or Covenanters with God, or enter
into Covenant, according to the plain meaning of the word, they should be
asserted to be such as make a promise to God. For what is a Covenanter but one
that makes a promise? how do men enter into covenant, but by some act
testifying assent to a promise? now in this sense I should grant his Major, and
deny his Minor, which in this sense is against sense. For when did any hear or
see, or otherwise perceive an infant of a believer make a promise to God, or by
any act of his, show his assent to own God for his God.

In the other form he says, All such as are in the Covenant should be sealed,
and that expression seems to have this sense, That God by his act of promise as
his words are page 103. engages himself to be the God of believing Christians,
and their seed, which his words import, page 92. where having said, All such as
are in the Covenant should be sealed, to prove it he allegeth, Genesis 17.7, 9,
10, 14. Where the very ground why God would have them sealed is because of the
Covenant, I will establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy seed after
thee, etc.

So that the sense of his argument should be thus, All they who are in
covenant, that is, to whom God has promised to be their God, they should be
sealed, etc. But all infants of believing, even Gentile parents, are in
Covenant, that is, God has promised to be their God: Ergo.

Of which I would deny both Major and Minor the minor being expressly contrary
to To. 9.8. though it were understood of true believers, and most certainly
false of believers only in profession, to whom, especially th^se of the
G^ntiles, God never promised to be God, much less to their natural seed; yet
the minor must be true of them, or else this argument proves not they are to be
baptized, which is their practice.

But seeing the Argument for infant baptism will not hold in these senses of
the promise, Genesis 17.7. (though the first sense be that which they give of that
promise, when they dispute against Arminians, and apply it to the elect only,
as the words of many show, cited in my Examen part. 3. S. 4. in my Praecursor
S. 10. Mr. M. himself so expounds it with Mr. Bayn page 102. of his Defense)
therefore Mr. M. has another sense to which he flies. He talks of an outward
and an inward Covenant, page 120. and page 112. he tells us, That he means all
the infants of believers are in the outward Covenant, that is, they are to be
reputed as in the Covenant, in respect of the outward administration, outward
Ordinances and Church-privileges, which when it comes to application is meant
of no other than baptism now, and circumcision heretofore, and therefore as I
show in my Apology S. 10. the Major proposition is merely nugatory in this
sense; All that are in the Covenant, that is, that are to have the initial seal
should be sealed with the initial seal, which were true, but ridiculous. And in
truth I may (how ever it be censured) apply to the discourse in this argument,
be it Mr. Ms. or the Assemblies, the Poets words, Parturiunt montes, nasc^tur
ridiculus mus.

And yet there is more shuffling in this thing. Mr. M. to make some show of
answering my instances of women and males under eight days old, not being
circumcised, though in covenant, limits his Major in the first form thus
[supposing them only capable of the seal, and no special bar put in against
them] in the other form thus [unless they be either incapable of it, or are
exempted by particular dispensation] By the Bar, he means Gods prohibition, as
these words, page 93. show, God forbad them to have the seal till they were
eight days old. But a prohibition and a dispensation are not all one: a
Prohibition is of a thing, that may not be done; a dispensation supposes the
thing is to be done, yet frees the person from doing it in some cases for some
time. But letting pass this exception against the expressions, I would know how
God put a bar, or forbad infants under eight days old to be circumcised. I
know no other but this, that God appointed the eighth day for them to be
circumcised. Now if this be a forbidding to circumcise before (as I acknowledge
it is, and so do many Protestant Divines, as Parcus Comment. in Genesis 17.11.
Errant masculi in foedere abjutero, etc. anticipare vero signum nec licebat,
nec opus erat) then that is forbidden, which is otherwise than God appointed:
and since our Lord Christ has not appointed any to be baptized till they be
disciples, he has prohibited any to be baptized till they be disciples, and
so, what ever the London Ministers say in their words above recited, there is
just ground even a prohibition, against baptizing infants. And so the Minor of
Mr. Ms. argument is not true. Upon all this debate I profess I find so much
inconsiderateness, or confusedness, or nonsense, or untruth, or trifling, if
not juggling in Mr. Ms. arguing, that I must vary my answer, as I find his
meaning sometimes denying the Syllogism as being tautological, and not having
three terms, or which is all one, any medium to prove his Conclusion by, but
only repeating the Conclusion in different phrases, and those some of them new
minted gibberish or nonsense, sometimes the Major, sometimes the Minor,
sometimes both. However, since it is my task, I shall view what he says.

Page 92. he says thus, Which is apparent in the very first institution of an
initial seal Genesis 17.7, 9, 10, 14. Where the very ground why God would have
them sealed is because of the Covenant, I will establish my Covenant between me
and thee, and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting
Covenant to be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee: thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore: and this is my Covenant which ye shall keep; every
man-child among you shall be circumcised, and afterward in the fourteenth, the
seal is by a metonymia called the Covenant, for that it is apparent, not only
that God commanded them who were in covenant to be circumcised, but that they
should therefore be circumcised because of the Covenant, or in token of the
Covenant between God and them; and he that rejected or neglected the seal, is
said not only to break Gods commandment, but his Covenant. So that because the
initial seal was added to the Covenant, and such as received it received it as
an evidence of the Covenant, or because they were in Covenant* I therefore
concluded, that by Gods own will, such as enter into Covenant ought to receive
the seal, supposing still they were capable of it. So that to lay circumcision
upon Gods command, and the Covenant of grace too, are well consistent together;
for the command is the cause of the existence of the duty, but the Covenant of
grace is the motive to it.

Answ. Here is all Mr. Ms. strength to prove his Major, that it was Gods will
that such as are in Covenant from Abraham's time, and so forward, should be
sealed with the initial seal of the Covenant, which he after alters thus. Such
as enter into Covenant ought to receive the seal. But there is nothing but
confusedness and impertinency in all this passage.

1. He tells us, There is the institution of an initial seal Genesis 17.7, 9, 10,
14. which he must understand of an initial seal in general or indefinite, or
else it reaches not to baptism, and so it is impertinently alleged. But it is
palpably false that there is in those words any other initial seal instituted
then circumcision, and I dare boldly say, it is a mere dotage to maintain that
in those words there is any rule about baptism or any other ordinance of God
then circumcision. The very words are, thou shall keep my Covenant, and this
covenant is demonstrated to be male-circumcision and no other, of which the
time and part are precisely set down.

2. He should prove that all that were in covenant had title to the initial
seal or right; but his Conclusion is of their duty, not of their title. Now it
cannot be said to be infants duty; the command was not given to them, nor does
Mr. M. I think, assert it as their duty, but as their privilege; and yet all
that the text infers, or Mr. M. concludes from it, concerns the connection
between the duty of circumcising, which belongs not to infants, and the
covenant, not between the Privilege of circumcision passively taken, which
belongs to infants and the Covenant, which is another impertinency.

3. Be it granted that the proposition to be proved is of duty in parents or
Ministers, yet he is necessitated to grant the command was the cause of the
existence of the duty, and more plainly page 182. The formal reason of their
being circumcised, was the command of God: which if true, there is no duty
without the command, whatever interest there might be in the Covenant: and
therefore the proposition is true, all that enter into Covenant ought to
receive the seal if it be commanded, not otherwise: and so neither
infant-circumcision nor infant baptism can be proved from the bare interest in
the covenant, without a particular command for each of them.

4. He says, the Covenant of grace was the motive, page 182. the Covenant of
grace, or their Church State was the motive to it, and the thing it related to.
But he tells us not to whom it was a motive. A motive is an impulsive cause,
whereby a person is persuaded or induced to do a thing. But it was not the
motive to infants, for they conceived not of it. His words [the very ground why
God would have them sealed, is because of the Covenant] do intimate, that he
means the covenant was the motive to God to give the command. But what it makes
to his purpose I do not conceive. For though that were the motive to God, yet
Gods motive is not the rule of the duty, but his command to us; nor the
evidence of our privilege, but his declaration of his Will. But be it a motive
to Abraham, yet it was but a motive for the more full engagement of him to that
which without that motive he had been to do by reason of the Command, nor any
further evidence of privilege then was imported by other Declaration of Gods
will.

5. Though Circumcision did relate to the Covenant, and it was received as an
evidence of the Covenant, yet this proves not that it was received by each
person, because he was in covenant, nor that the being in Covenant was the rule
of the using that rite, that they which were in Covenant should have it, and
they that were not in Covenant, should not have it, which is the thing to be
proved, but is certainly false, as I have by many instances showed.

6. If all this were granted, yet that this rule did reach further then the use
of circumcision is not proved here: and what is brought elsewhere shall be
showed in it is place to be much short of proving any such general rule about an
initial seal, as is here by Mr. M. averred. But let us see what his proof
amounts to about circumcision.

1. He urges, That circumcision is called a token of the Covenant; But this
proves no more then this, that the use of Circumcision was to be a sign God
made such a Covenant, and would fulfill it: not that every one that was in
Covenant was to be circumcised, or that every one that was to be circumcised
was in covenant.

2. That it is termed the Covenant. But this proves no more than the former,
since it is acknowledged to be so called only by a metonymia, of putting the
thing signified for the sign.

3. The particle [therfore] is thus urged: God not only commanded them who were
in covenant, (...) b^ circumcised, but that they should [therfore] be
circumcised because of the covenant, or in token of the Covenant between God
and them;

But 1. The particle [therfore] though it be in our last translation, yet in
the Hebrew it is only (...) and may be rendered, And thou, or, But thou, as by
the Tig^^: it is and (...), by Parcus, tu autem, Piscator, tu vero.

2. Let it be read [therefore] and the inference be from the Covenant; yet that
the inference is from the promise in the seventh verse only, and not from the
eighth verse, which is next, or the rest of the promises, v. 4, 5, 6, cannot be
showed.

3. Let these things be granted: yet that it imports this rule to be taken from
the Covenant, those who are in Covenant are to be circumcised, not others, has
no color of proof, nor any show of truth in it, since it is clear in the case
of Ishmael to whom that promise di^ not belong nor any in that covenant, yet he
was to be circumcised, and others were not to be circumcised, to whom the
promises were made.

4. He urges thus: And he that rejected or neglected the seal is said not only
to break Gods commandment, but his Covenant: so that because the initial seal
was added to the Covenant, and such as received it, received it as an evidence
of the Covenant, or because they were in covenant. To which I reply.

Two ways a man may be said to break Gods covenant: one by breaking the
command, which was in reference to the Covenant, or enjoined in testimony of
it; and if this be his sense, then Mr. Ms. speech is trifling, when he says,
he that rejected or neglected the seal, is said not only to break Gods
commandment, but his Covenant, sit being all one to break the command and the
covenant. The other sense is; he has broken my covenant, that is, as Piscat.
sch. on Genesis 17.14 as much as is in him, by depriving himself of the grace of
God, promised in the Covenant. For otherwise the incredulity of man does not
make void the faith of God, Romans 3.3. But take it either way, it proves not
that which was to be proved, that the rule about circumcising persons was their
interest in the Covenant. All that follows on this is, that the observance of
circumcision was strictly enjoined under this penalty, that otherwise they
should be cut off from Gods people, and so deprived of the benefit of the
Covenant signified; but this does not prove that every one circumcised was in
the Covenant, and should have the benefit of the Covenant. So that though it be
granted which Mr. M. says, That to lay Circumcision upon Gods command, and the
Covenant of grace too, are well consistent together; Yet his Major is not
proved, That it was Gods Will that such as are in Covenant from Abraham's time,
and so forward, should be sealed with the initial seal of the Covenant,
supposing them only capable of the seal, and no special bar put in against them
by God himself. Nor is Mr. M. more happy in answering my exceptions.

Whereas you allege, says he, concerning Melchisedec, Lot, Job; we find no
such thing, that they either received this seal of Circumcision or were tied to
it. I reply, its very hard for you to prove that Melchisedeck was then alive:
and had he been alive, he was of an higher Order, and above that Paedagogy.

Answ. I grant it cannot be demonstratively proved, that he was alive: yet it
being probable he was, who not many years before met Abraham, though he were in
Covenant, yet being not appointed to be circumcised, it overthrows the
proposition by which Mr. Ms. Enthymeme was to be proved, That all that are
foederati, must be signati. Yea Mr. Ms. answer here, That he was above that
Paedagogy, does plainly intimate that circumcision was peculiar to that
Paedagogy, and so the rule about circumcision not obligatory to Christian
Gentiles, to whom that Paedagogy is abolished, and who have a Priest of an
higher Order, to wit, that of Melchisedec. As for Lot, he denies not that he
then lived, but says, That no Scripture says he was not circumcised, which he
says of Job also, whose time is uncertain, by reason of the Scripture-silence,
though probably he was of Esaus posterity. But in matters of fact, a non
Scripto ad non factum non valet consequentia.

Nevertheless for Lot, it seems to me very unlikely he should be circumcised
living then in Sodom, not in Abraham's house, and no mention made of him, when
Abraham circumcised his own house, and Lots posterity being after uncircumcised
Jerem. 9.26. And for Job, what time soever he lived, it is likely he was an
Edomite; who are reckoned for uncircumcised Ier. 9.26. and there are no
passages that give any intimation of his acquaintance with Israel. But if these
serve not the turn, the example of Cornelius undeniably uncircumcised, and not
blamed for want of it, though undoubtedly in the Covenant of grace, being one
that feared God with all his house, and his prayers and alms heard, therefore
he was not to be circumcised though in the Covenant of grace, nor all that
enter into Covenant ought to be sealed with the initial seal, though capable,
and no bar put in against them by God.

I instanced in male infants of Jews under eight days old, who were not to be
circumcised, though in Covenant. Mr. M. answers, To that of infants there was a
peculiar exemption of them by God himself; whether for any typical reason, or
in regard they were not fit in nature to undergo so sharp a pain, as was to be
endured in Circumcision before the seventh and Critical day was past, or
whether for any other cause, I dispute not; it is sufficient, God forbad them
to have the seal till they were eight days old.

Answ. This is a grant of the objection, and overthrows the proposition of Mr.
M. in his Sermon; All that are in Covenant are to be sealed. And the
forbidding, being only by not appointing it, the proposition can be true only
in this sense; All those in Covenant are to be circumcised, to whom it is
appointed, and no other; But infants are in Covenant, and to them it is
appointed to be sealed with the initial seal in the New Testament: Ergo.

Wherein I should grant the Major, and deny the Minor, and infer that without
appointment interest in the Covenant did not make capable, no not of
Circumcision, though it is likely infants might have born it in the end of the
seventh day as well as on the eighth.

I alleged that no females in Abraham's family, though in Covenant, were to be
circumcised. To this Mr. M. answers. For the women, they were not Subjectum
capax circumcisionis, there was in them a natural impediment against it,
therefore could it not be enjoined them: and suppose some men amongst them, or
some who turned proselytes to them, had not had a praep^tium (as some sort of
Eunuchs) this Ordinance had not reached them; whether the wisdom of God
purposely chose a sign that women might not be capable of receiving it, for
some typical use, as some conjecture, it is sufficient they were not capable of
it, and were exempted from it by God himself.

Answ. If it be true, which many Authors relate, that the Habassines, and
Iacobites do at this day, circumcise females; then it is not true, they were
incapable of it by reason of natural impediment. But if it be true which Mr. M.
says, yet Gods chosing a sign of which they were not capable, and that for a
typical use, when he might have chosen one as baptism, of which both s^xes were
capable, it is an evidence, That it was not the Will of God since Abraham's
time, and so forward, that all in Covenant should be sealed with the initial
seal, which was Mr. Ms. proposition. Nor do his two limitations added in his
Defense help him. For if incapacity and non-appointment be a sufficient
exemption from the initial seal, yea a prohibition of it, then his proposition
is but what I contend for, that those in covenant to whom God appoints it and
no other, are to have the initial seal; which is as much as I would evince,
that it is not bare interest in the Covenant without institution or appointment
that gives right to a person to claim either circumcision or baptism, nor
warrants a baptizer to admit a person to baptism. And therefore though it were
yielded that all infants of believers were in covenant, yet they have not right
to either initial seal without a command, or institution concerning each rite.

As for Mr. Ms. general proposition as he states it, as it advantageth it him
not for the reason last given, so it may be granted, if he mean by exemption or
particular dispensation the non-appointment of it. For then I am sure infants
of believers are exempted from baptism till they be proved disciples of Christ,
or believers by profession; which if it could be proved, we need not fetch it
from circumcision and the Covenant. From which they that deduce infant baptism,
do but in vain weary themselves and others, as they that seek to draw water out
of a pumice stone.

But there is some more in Mr. M. about women's circumcision, which I must not
omit. Mr. M. in his Sermon had answered, that women were circumcised virtually
in the M^les. To which I answered, that a virtual circumcision was not enough
to make good his argument: For then his Syllogism must have four terms, thus.
They that are in Covenant must be sealed actually in their now persons, or
virtually in others. But infants of believers are in the Covenant, therefore
they are to be sealed. If the Conclusion be meant of actual sealing in their
own persons then there are four terms, and more in the Conclusion then in the
premises. But if it be meant disjunctively, they are to be sealed actually or
virtually: then it is less than is to be proved, his business being to prove
that they were to be sealed actually. For a virtual sealing is less than Mr. M.
would have, and might be granted without any detriment to the cause of
Anti-paedobaptism. To this Mr M. makes no answer at all, but charge me with a
scoff where there was none, tells me it is like refuting Bellarmine with, Thou
lie: whereas I did show wherein his answer was insufficient, and that by
putting his Syllogism into form, according to his own meaning, and then showing
how it would not conclude what he should prove. And to this in his Defense he
makes no answer, but tells us, what his plain meaning was, which is nothing to
the present point: he should have showed how, with that exposition or
limitation his argument would prove actual sealing of infants in their own
persons. But to slight a reason and speak nothing to it, is not to answer, but
to shift.

But I also said, to speak exactly, women were not circumcised virtually in the
Males: For that supposes they might receive it in their own persons, whereas it
had been a sin in them to be circumcised, God not appointing it: which is
confirmed by the like, it would be sin for the male to be circumcised before the
eighth day, since it was not appointed: which may now be confirmed by Mr. Ms.
words, that God forbad them to have the seal till they were eight days old.

To this says Mr. M. But first give me leave to observe by the way how you
pinch me with a point of Law, that no man can be said virtually to have that by
his Proxy or Attorney, which he might not actually receive himself in his own
person. I question whether this be good Law; but I am confident it is bad
Divinity; sure we sinned virtually in Adam, yet we could not actually, though
the sin of Adam be ours by imputation. The Sun is virtually hot, yet
Philosophers say, it is not actually. And the Jews of old offered to God such
things by the hands of the Priests, who were their Proxies in that work, which
they might not offer in their own persons, yea and received such things by the
hand of the High Priest (who bare their names in the most holy place) which
they might not receive in their own persons immediately: and the Saints now in
this world do virtually and quoad effectum juris, receive some such privileges
in Christ their Advocate, who in their right is at Gods right hand, which here
they are not capable of receiving immediatrly in their own persons.

Answ. My words were not as Mr. M. recited them, but thus. He is said virtually
to have a thing by another, as by a Proxy or Attorney, that might receive it by
himself; yet quoad effectum juris, according to the effect of Law another's
receiving it is, as if he had received it. In which I understand by [having a
thing] that having a thing which is by possession of it, as a benefit,
privilege, commodity, and by [might receive it] without any prohibition in Law,
and that he receives it not in his own person, is only from some temporary
impediment, as minority, absence or the like. And this according to that skill
I have in such terms, I conceive still to be the meaning of them. Nor do Mr.
Ms. instances take me any whit off from it, being without fear of being
chargeable with bad Law or Divinity. For our sinning in Adam is not receiving
something as a benefit: the Suns heat is natural, not by virtue of any
Political Law, it is not having as a proxy or attorney for another; the High
Priests offering for the people was an action in their stead, not receiving a
benefit for them, and what they received for the people which they might not
receive in their own persons immediately was not by reason of any prohibition,
but from some other cause, nor were they in imparting it, the peoples Proxies
or Atturneys, but Gods: were it an answer from God or any other thing they
received for them, if God had immediately communicated it to them, it had not
been their sin. And the like may be said of what Christ receives for us as our
Advocate. But the circumcising of women had been a sin forbidden, according to
Mr. Marshalls and others doctrine before recited, they were prohibited to be
circumcised, it being limited to the males on the 8. day. Mr. M. adds.

I also obiter desire you to remember this expression of yours, that it had
been a sin for a child to have been circumcised after the eight day was past,
and try how you will reconcile this with another opinion of yours delivered
elsewhere; viz. That Circumcision might be administered oftener then once; surely
those other times must be after the 8. day.

Answ. Where I deliver this, that Circumcision might be administered oftener than
once, I remember not, except in my Examen, page 118. However I conceive no
necessity of Circumcision or baptism above once, yet I profess my self
unsatisfyed in this, that there is either a command that a person be but once
circumcised, or a person once only baptized. And my reason of the speech is
from hence. 1 Cor. 7.18. the Apostle says, Is one called circumcised, (...),
Let him not be drawn up, that is, let him not draw up his foreskin: we
translate it, Let him not become uncircumcised. Whence it may be perceived,
that some Jews had an art to draw up their foreskin. Now in such a case, while
the Law stood in force, I conceive he was bound to be circumcised again,
because it was to abide in his flesh, Genesis 17.13. Nor do my words at all
contradict this, when I say more fully then Mr. M. recites them; It had been a
sin for a child to be circumcised before, or after the eigth day in them that
altered or swerved from the appointment of God: where I make the sin not to be
the doing of it, on the eighth day, and then doing it again (though I deny not
but unnecessarily to do it after the eight day had been sin, that day being
determined for it) but not doing it that day which God appointed by those that
altered or swerved from that appointment unnecessarily: which in the case
mentioned, and any other of the like, might be done after the eighth day. But
M. M. will confirm his proofs, that the women were circumcised in the men.

My first, says he to me, was, that the whole house of Israel are in the
Scripture said to be circumcised. You answer, that by the whole house of Israel
must not be meant all, but the Major part. But Sir do you imagine that any of
your judicious Readers can be satisfied with this answer, when (you know well
enough) that the Circumcision is put for the Church and people of God in
opposition to the uncircumcised, that is, all the rest of the World who were
not the people of God.

When Peter was to go to the circumcision, and Paul to the Gentiles to preach
the Gospel; does not circumcision include the women Jews as much as the men, in
opposition to Gentiles, as well as the word Gentiles includes women Gentiles as
well as the men, to whom Paul was sent? Gal. 2.8, 9. Surely it must needs be
granted, that not only the Major or nobler part, but the whole nation of the
Jews both men and women, are there meant by circumcision, which could not have
been, if in some sense they were not to be accounted circumcised.

Answ. My Answer might satisfy any judicious Reader, specially if the texts
had been fairly set down by Mr. M. wherein I show all Israel, and all the house
of Israel must be understood Synecdochically, 1 Samuel 7.3. Acts 2.36. Acts
13.24. And if in the term [circumcision] be not a Synecdoche of the whole for
the part; not only every individual in Israel must be in some sense accounted
circumcised, but be actually circumcised also in their own persons. Nor against
such a Synecdoche does it make, that circumcision stands in opposition to the
uncircumcised, which is meant of every individual. For neither is it true, when
the uncircumcised are mentioned, it is meant of every individual, there being
many of those nations that were circumcised; and if it were true, yet the
opposition does not prove every individual Jew circumcised, any more then when
they are called the holy Nation in opposition to the Gentiles: as when it was
said, Israel was holiness to the Lord, Jerem. 2.3. every Israelite or Jew must
be counted holy in some sense: but the terms are attributed Synecdochically.
And for the other instance, I grant circumcision must include Gal. 2.8. women
as well as men, because Peter was to go to them: but this proves not that women
were in some sense accounted circumcised in the males, but that they are part
of the nation which were called the Circumcision Synecdochically, because of
the males. And for the term Gentiles, there must be in like manner a Synecdoche
conceived of the whole for a part, else he should be sent to preach to infant
males as well as women of years.

Secondly, says Mr. M. I argued thus, no uncircumcised might eat the
Passoever; Ergo their women might not have eaten it, if in some sense they had
not been circumcised. Your answer is, This is to be limited pro subjecta
ma^eria, none that ought to be circumcised might eat the Passover, unless they
were circumcised. But this answer is altogether insufficient. For where is this
distinction of yours found or founded in the word of God? other Distinctions
about eating the Passover are clearly found: the clean might eat it, the
unclean might not eat it, the circumcised might, the uncircumcised might not:
But of your limitation there is altum silentium.

Answ. Mr. Ms. conclusion is, That in some sense women were circumcised, and
before in some sense they were counted circumcised, neither of which is the
same with this [they were circumcised virtually in the males, or the males were
circumcised in their stead as their Proxy or Attorney.]

2. My answer was right, and to his Demand, where it is found in the word of
God? I answer by another demand, where is his limitation found in Gods word,
that women might eat the Passover, because they were in some sense accounted
circumcised? Sure the words are, Exodus 12.48. No uncircumcised person shall eat
thereof, not as Mr. M. none but those that are counted in some sense
circumcised may eat thereof: If there be in Scripture that which does
necessitate to a limitation of that speech, my limitation is as well in
Scripture as his is: yea my limitation is plain and easy, whereas his
limitation is liable to this objection, that when Gods Law requires persons to
be circumcised that they might eat the Passover, if Mr, Ms. limitation or
explication be good, it should require no more but this, that persons in some
sense should be accounted circumcised. For so Mr. M. understands the Law, and
then, though the males were not actually circumcised, but virtually, in some
sense, so accounted they might eat it, without breach of the Law, which
absurdity does not follow on my limitation, but follows inevitably on Mr. Ms.

2. Says Mr. M. I demand further, where is there any command or institution
for women to eat the Passover (more than for women now to eat the Lords
Supper) unless it be founded upon circumcision? yet in practice we know they
did eat it? and if they eat it not as circumcised persons, tell me by what
right they did it.

Answ. I have proved Examen part. 3. S. 12. page 112. Postscript to my Apology
S. 11. that 1 Cor. 11.28. and 10.17. and 12.13. Acts 20.7. are express precept
and example for women's receiving the Lords Supper. And for eating the Paseover,
there is an express precept, That all the Congregation of Israel shall keep
it, Exodus 12.47. in which women were meant, and they were to eat according to
the number of the Souls v. 4. and no leaven was to be in their habitation, v.
20. therefore either women must eat the Passover, or else they must not eat
bread: so that we need not go to circumcision for women's eating the Passover.
Yea, if we use no other way than that of Mr. M. it will not be proved that
women ought to eat it. For Exodus 12.48. no mention is made of any circumcised
who are to eat it, but males; and though it be said, no uncircumcised might
eat, yet it is not said, all circumcised must eat, much less they that are only
in some sense counted circumcised. But Mr. M. seeks to make his advantage of
this point thus.

If you say they were included in the Household Exodus 12.3, 4. every household
was to eat the Paschal Lamb, and there was no exception of women; I reply,
first grant but the same consequence, that when we read so frequently in the
New T. that whole households were baptized, and no exception of children, that
therefore all the children in those households were baptized, and this
Controversy is quickly ended.

Answ. If it were granted that we had no other way to prove women were to eat
the Paschal Lamb (which yet we need not, as I have showed) but from Exodus 12.3,
4. in that every household was to eat the Lamb, and there was no exception of
Women, yet the consequence were not good; whole households were baptized,
therefore infants, because not expressly excepted. For as Exodus 12.3, 4 infants
are excepted from being required to eat the Lamb, though not in express words,
yet because the thing to be done was not such as could agree to infants of a
few days old, suppose eight or nine. So where Act. 16.15, 33. and 18.8. 1 Cor.
1.16. the household is said to be baptized, besides this, that no infants are
expressed, in the same chapter or elsewhere, the speech is plainly interpreted
to be meant of those that heard the word, and believed, as Acts the eleventh
chapter, and fourteenth verse, and chapter 16. v. 32, 34. and 18.8. 1 Cor. 16.15.
as if the holy Ghost had of purpose prevented this misconstruction and
frivolous consequence of Paedobaptists.

But says Mr. M. I add further, it is not said the whole household shall eat
it, for all uncircumcised persons were forbidden to eat it, and none but
circumcised persons had warrant to eat it.

Answ. It is said, Exodus 12.4. they shall eat the Lamb according to the number
of Souls, i. e. hominum Pisc. Schol. in locum, every man according to his
eating, which is a plain precept for women to eat who could eat.

Yea further, says Mr. M. suppose some words in the institution should reach
the Jewish women, yet how does it reach the women Gentiles who should prove
Proselytes to them? For Exodus chapter 12. verse 48, 49. there is order taken
for the male stranger, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come
near and keep it, but there is not any word that takes order for the strangers
females.

Answer. It is said verse forty seven, That all the Congregation of Israel
shall keep it, and the Proselytes of Righteousness, women as well as men were
of that Congregation, and verse forty nine, it is said, One Law shall be to
him that is homeborn, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you: if then
the Law appointed the Israelitish women to eat, the same law appointed the
Proselyte Women to eat. So that notwithstanding Mr. Ms. vain hope, my exception
against the consequence of his Argument, They are foederati; Therefore they are
to be signati, stand good and it is not yet proved, that bare interest in the
Covenant Genesis 17. or the Covenant of grace did entitle to Circumcision, much
less to baptism, which were enough to overthrow his first argument.

But since it is my task, I will now go on to the rest of his Dispute, taking in
by the way Master Blakes third section of the 42. chapter of his Vindic.
foederis.

SECT. XIX. Mr. Blakes exceptions against my Speeches in the point about the
connection between the Covenant, and initial seal, are refelled.
MR. Blake asserts a reality of connection between the Covenant and initial
seal, and first he meddles with my Examen, and then with my Anti-paedobaptism.
To my objection that the Proposition is not true, that all that were federate
in Abraham's family, were to be signed, for neither Males before the eighth day,
nor females were to be circumcised, besides his avouching Master Marshall^
answer as sufficient, which is reviewed before, he says, Is there no connection
between them, because he that receives into Covenant and appoints the seal,
has prescribed a time when it shall be applied?

To which I say, it proves that there is not a connection between being
federate, and to be signed, to make this Proposition true, All that are
federate are to be signed, barely in that they are federate. For they are
federate the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh day, as well
as the eighth, yet not to be signed, whereas if there was such a connection
between them according to Gods will, that the one being put, the other is to be
put, they would be to be signed as soon as ever they are federate. And if it be
Gods will that they should be signed, but not till the appointed time after, I
might say that though infants were federate, yet they were not to be signed
with baptism till Gods appointed time, which is not till they be disciples, and
so infant baptism is not proved from their being in Covenant, the Major
Proposition, All that are in Covenant are to be signed, being true only with
this limitation, in the appointed time, which is not for baptism till they be
Disciples. And whereas in answer to my objection, that if infants have right to
the seal by being in covenant, then they have right to the Lords Supper, he
answers.

1. That in baptism there is no more of necessity than to be passive. This is
false, for baptism is enjoined as a duty, and such as is to have repentance and
faith antecedent Mark chap. 16.16. Acts the 2. chap. 38. Acts chap. 8. verse 37.

2. He grants that infants have true title to the Lords Supper, jus ad rem, not
jus in re, a right to it, yet by reason of infancy have their actual interest
suspended.

But 1. still Mr. Blake speaks of the Lords Supper, and of baptism, as of
privileges merely, whereas the Scripture speaks of each as a duty as well as a
privilege.

2. By the same distinction an answer is given to him concerning infants
baptism, that though they have the right to it, yet by reason of infancy, the
actual interest of it is to be suspended, they being no more able to profess
the faith, till they be grown to some riper age then a Cradle King to rule a
Kingdom.

So that Mr. Blakes answers yield more exceptions against Mr. Ms. argument,
confirm it not at al, but show how we may grant his Major, and yet so limit it
that it will be too short of proving baptism of federate persons in infancy:
and these passages of Master Blake appear to be Cavils and not An^wers.

He next sets upon the fifth section of the first part of my Review, and
excepts,

1. That I show not where to find Mr. Baillees words. But if he had looked into
my Letter mentioned, he had found them quickly in the third section.

2. That I denied the Metaphor of a seal to be rightly made, the genus of a
rite, as of baptism, to which he replies in his flirting fashion. We shall
expect another letter to show Saint Paul's definition, Romans 4.11. to be alike
light (who runs upon the same error, if an error) when he says that
Circumcision is a sign and seal, there is the genus and the differentia lies in
these words to distinguish it from other signs, and seals of the righteousness
of faith. The nature of a Sacrament stands in a figure, and the whole efficacy
of it in the use. And how else then should the nature and use of it be held out?

To which I answer, Paul does not give a definition, Romans 4.11. of
circumcision, much less does he define a Sacrament in general. Every Definition
is reciprocal with the thing defined, but Mr. Bl. I presume will not say; every
circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of faith, and every seal of the
righteousness of faith is circumcision. Besides individuals are not wont to be
defined, but what is there said is said of the singular circumcision of
Abraham, and no other. The title given to Abraham's circumcision does but show
what the use of it was to him, not what was the constant nature, and use of it
on and to others. Which appears from the particularizing circumstances so
exactly noted by the Apostle, to wit, the times of his justification and
circumcision, which do show that it was appropriated to Abraham's circumcision,
on his own body, what he there said of Circumcision. There is no more reason to
make this the definition of Circumcision [the seal of the righteousness of
faith] then to make that [1 Timothy 6.10. the root of all evil] the definition of
the love of money, or that [ Heb. 6.16. the end of all strife] the definition
of an oath, or that [v. 19. the anchor of the soul firm and stable] the
definition of hope, or that [ Heb. 11.1. the evidence of things not seen] the
definition of faith A seal cannot be the genus of it, being a Metaphor, for a
Metaphor shows not what it is, but what it is like. Circumcision is an action
as it is from the agent, as in the subject a passion. The relation that comes
to it is not from its nature, but by institution, and is the end of it, rather
than the genus, rather for what it is, than what it is. A seal is an artificial
body compound of a substance and figure, which cannot be said of Circumcision.
What Mr. Bl. says, that the nature of a Sacrament stands in a figure, cannot
be true of such a figure as is in a Seal, for so baptism, the Passover, the
Lords Supper should be no Sacrament since they do not make any figure on the
body, nor of figure of speech, for so a Sacrament should not be a visible sign,
but an audible. I grant the use of it is to resemble by a visible sign some
other thing, as the breaking bread, Christ's body broken, and in that sense it
may be called a figure as Augustine called the bread the figure of Christ's
body. But the use belongs to the difference to distinguish it from the same
action or passion used to another purpose, not to the genus. And yet sign and
seal of the righteousness of faith, cannot be the difference to distinguish a
Sacrament from the preaching of the Gospel, for the preaching of the Gospel by
word or writing is a sign or seal of the righteousness of faith. What is said
Romans 4.11. that Abraham received the sign of circumcision, the seal of the
righteousness of faith, is not all one with this [a seal of the Covenant of
grace] For it is added [which he had yet, being uncircumcised] and therefore
was a sign not of a promise or covenant, concerning a thing to be done, but of
a thing accomplished or already done. I see not how Romans 4.11. either the
general nature of a Sacrament, or the special nature of circumcision may be
said to be defined. Nor do I conceive it true which Mr. Bl. says, the whole
efficacy of a Sacrament is in the use: I suppose baptism, and the Lords Supper
have their efficacy in comforting, moving to holiness, love, etc. after the
use. The nature and use of a Sacrament may be otherwise held out then Mr. Bl.
does, which I now omit. It is sufficient at present to show the emptiness of
Mr. Bls. dictates. And for my rejecting of the common use of the terms of seals
of the Covenant, and initial seals as Synonymous to sacraments and baptism,
especially in disputes wherein proper terms should be used, I have given
sufficient reason from the abuses of Paedobaptists inferring errors from a
late devised term, and imposing on men's consciences: yet I profess, if baptism
were granted to be a seal or initial seal, that I think that it would not
follow, that it has that relation to the Covenant; that infants in Covenant
must not be denied it, but that it is a frivolous argument, infants are in
covenant, therefore they must have the initial seal of the Covenant: for which
if I had no other reason, yet that one of Mr. Bl. that though a person be in
Covenant, and have right to the seal, yet he is not to have it till the
appointed time, it were sufficient to justify my censure.

Mr. Bl. excepts against my speech, that to have the promise, and to be a
disciple or believer, are not all one, for he conceives to have a promise in
Scripture phrase is to possess it, as those Jews after the flesh did possess,
Romans 9.4* And how to possess a promise without faith, he does not yet
understand.

Whereto I reply, that I find the term [promise] used in Scripture sometimes
metonymically for the thing promised,, as Luke ^4.49. when Christ says, I send
the promise of the Father upon you, he means the Holy Ghost promised, and it is
true in this sense, to have a promise is to possess it. But in proper
acception the term [promise] notes the act of the person promising, as Gal.
3.16. to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, or spoken. So likewise v.
17, 18. And in this sense he has a promise, who has not possession of the
thing promised, and thus we usually say, I have not yet such an office,
revenue, estate, etc. but I have a promise of it. In which sense I took it, and
so it is true, that in this sense, a man may have the promise, and not be a
believer or disciple as yet. And thus I conceive it taken in all the three
places in the new Testament 2 Cor. 7.1. 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 7.6. and in this sense
a person may have a promise before he is a believer.

Mr. Blake further excepts against me:

That 1. I make these terms all one, to have a promise, and to be a child of
the promise.

2. That I make a child of the promise, Romans 9.8. to be all one with to be an
elect person, as Isaac and Jacob, v. 10, 11, 12. were children of the promise,
to whom the promise was made before they were born.

But Mr. Blake says, That to have a promise, and to be a child of promise, are
two different things in Scripture; yet shows not the difference between them.
In that expression Romans 9.8. the child of the promise (according to the usual
Hebraisms, Child of light, Child of wrath, Son of perdition, which note the
person who is the subject or object of those several terms attributed) is a
person of whom, or for whom, the promise is made, and so it is all one with [to
have the promise.]

But says M. Bl. if the child of the promise were all one with to be elect,
then (according to me) all the Jews according to the flesh were elect persons;
they had the promises, yea those that were actors in Christ's death Acts 2.39.
which he must needs yield to be an absurdity.

To which I reply, I do not conceive how this is true according to me, that if
children of the promise be all elect, all the Jews according to the flesh were
elect persons. Sure I no where make all the Jews according to the flesh
children of the promise.

Yea the text Romans 9.8. is so express against it, that the children of the
flesh, are denied to be children of Gods, that is, children of the promise,
which the words show to be equipollent. Yea it is the express determination, v.
6. that all that are of Israel, to wit, by natural generation, are not Israel,
to whom the promise was made; nor all children (that is, of God, and of the
promise) who are the seed of Abraham, v. 7. But that no other were children of
the promise, though the seed natural of Abraham and Isaac: but elect persons,
the Apostle does not only assert, but prove it in Esau and Jacob, v. 10, 11,
12, 13. It is true, Romans 9.4. it is said the promises were the Israelites: but
whatever the promises there meant were, whether of spiritual or corporal good
things, yet it follows not that of every Israelite were the promises any more
than that of every Israelite, v. 5. was Christ according to the flesh. Nor Acts
2.39. is it said that all the Jews according to the flesh had the promises. But
that the promise was to them, their children and all afar off, whom God should
call: the promise is attributed to none but the called of God. The generality
of Anti-Arminian Protestants make children of the promise to be all one with
the elect, Romans 9.8. some I allege in my Exam. part. 3. sect. 4. some more in
my Praecursor, and more I meet with in my reading. It is not true which Mr. Bl.
says, that Isaac being born by promise, all his posterity originally were of
the same birth, for the Apostle concludes the contrary of Esau, Romans 9.10, 11,
12. The text Gal. 4.28. is rightly brought to show that all Jews according to
the flesh, are not the children of the promise, but as Mr. Dioson, we, that is
believing Christians, who were born after the spirit, and presented by them
that were born after the flesh, v. 29. that is, by the unbelieving Jew, who
stuck to the legal covenant. Nor need we say, that all the visible Churches of
Galatia were born after the spirit, but only that the true believers in them
were so. Nor is there a word of any privileges inferior to justification, as
the series of the text shows, and many learned Protestants clearly express.
That which Master Blake says, he will maintain, that every one in Covenant is
a believer, a disciple, that believers are same formally, such as in act assent
to Gospel revelations; some virtually, such as have the privileges of
professing believers, that infants in Covenant are virtually believers, in that
they are honored with the privileges of believers, and that this distinction
the Scripture warrants, are all vain dictates, there being not one Scripture
that ever calls any a believer from a privilege, but from the act of assent or
profession of faith, nor is there the least color for it out of Scripture to
call infants in covenant believers without their own act of assent or
profession of faith, and therefore I let pass these speeches of M. Bl. as idle
unproved talk, of which his book is full.

Mr. Bl. excepts against my speech, some not yet born, some not yet called are
in the covenant, have the promise of grace made to them. I have read (says he)
of a covenant entered with those that at the instant time of the making of the
Covenant were present, and with those that were not present, Deuteronomy. 29.15. with
men of years, and them with their little ones, Deuteronomy. 29.11. But I read not of a
covenant actually made with any unborn.

Answ. My expression [are in Covenant] I confess that I remember not used in
the Scripture, yet it is usual in the writings of Paedobaptists, who usually
say, infants are in the Covenant of grace with their parents. The Assemblies
larger Catechism avoucheth infants of parents, professing faith in Christ
within the Covenant. Mr. M. in his Sermon p. 8.15, etc. And this expression of
theirs I knew not how to conceive they meant otherwise then thus, Infants have
Gods promise of grace made to them, or for them, as in the Directory, the
promise is made to believers and their seed. For infants said to be in the
covenant must be so by some act either their own, or the administrators, or
Gods. Not by any act of their own, for they do nothing to that effect; not by
the administrator of baptisms act, for he does nothing but baptize, and if his
act be bringing into Covenant then bringing into covenant is all one with
baptizing, and if an infidels child be baptized it is in Covenant. Besides
Paedobaptists assert they are within the Covenant before they are baptized, as
the Directory says, they are foederally holy before baptism It remains then
that it is by Gods promise. Now surely Gods promise to Abraham, and his seed
Genesis 17.7. which is usually made the promise whereby infants of believers are
in covenant, was many thousand years since, 430. years before the law, Gal.
3.16.17. Therefore even according to the usual language of Paedobaptists
infants of believers are in Covenant before they are born: which Mr. Bl. had no
cause to carp at (as he does) but that it is almost all his art, especially
when I had to prevent it, so distinctly added to show my meaning [have the
promise of grace made to them] If Mr. Bl. have any other way whereby infants
are in the covenant, as the parents vow, or profession, or surety for them,
according to it; I suppose, infants may be said to be in covenant before they
are born, since such vows, profession and promises may be made for them before
they are born Let Us consider what M. B says. He tells us, he reads not of a
covenant actually made with any unborn. And as I conceive by his Appendix to
his Vindic. foederis, as an addition to his first chapter, his reason is,
because he conceives that it is of the general nature of a covenant properly so
called, that there be a mutual contract and agreement, which I shall examine
when I consider Mr. Cobbers part. 1. c. 3. sect. 9. of his Just Vindic. For
present, if this be true, neither can a Covenant be actually made with an
infant born, since an infant born can no more contract, or agree, or consent,
then one unborn. Nevertheless I conceive, there is a covenant actually made
with persons unborn Genesis 9.12. where God says, This is the token of the
Covenant which I make between me and you, and every living creature, that is,
with you, for perpetual generations: which does express a covenant actually
made with every living creature of all flesh for perpetual generations,
therefore for thousands of persons unborn. Yea where he says, he reads of a
Covenant entered into with those that were not present, Deuteronomy. 29.15. he reads
of a covenant made with persons unborn, as Piscator, Ainsworth, Iackson,
Grotius, the New Annot. The notes out of the Archbishop of Yorks Library, etc.
do conceive, and reason proves it: since that covenant was made only with
Israel, not with any other people then existent, but there was none of all
Israel then born, which was not there that day, as appears from v. 10. therefore
those that were not there with them that day, can be no other then persons
unborn, and so Mr. Blake says not true, that he has not read of a covenant
actually made with any unborn. But were it granted that by them that were not
present were meant persons existent then, there is no reason why a covenant may
not as well be said to be actually made with the unborn as with the absent, who
do not express any actual consent or agreement. Surely if it be true that the
Covenant of grace was made with Christ before the world for all the elect, or in
the beginning of time, Genesis 3.15. or at his death or resurrection, as many
Divines speak, and sundry texts seem to intimate, Gal. 3.16. 1 Cor. 11.25. Tit.
1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. Joh. 6.38, 39, 40. John 10.15, 17, 18, 29, 30. Job. 17.9, 10,
20, 24. Isa. 53.11, 12. Psalm. 2.7, 8. Heb. 1.5, 6. Heb. 10.7, 15, 16. Heb. 8.6.
Heb. 13.20. it must of necessity be made with many persons unborn. But Mr.
Blake adds.

Mr. Tombs seems here to make the Covenant and election to be one and the same,
as by this passage, so by that which follows; but these Scripture still
distinguishes.

To which I say, it is true that I make the elect and those that are in the
Covenant of grace one and the same, but neither in that passage or any other,
do I make the covenant and election to be one and the same, as Mr. Blake
mistakes me.

He says further; We find promises and prophecies, as to the taking into
Covenant in time to come, Ezekiel. 20.37. but not any such respective to election.

To which I say, the prophecy of taking into Covenant, Ierem. 31.33, 34. is
respective to election, or else God promises to write his Laws in their hearts,
and not to remember their sins who are not elect.

He goes on. All the promises of call of the Gentiles is to bring them into the
privileges of glory, formerly proper to the Jews. To be in covenant was their
great privilege: And this is not conferred on the Gentiles before all time, but
done in time, Isaiah 42.6. when he brings them light, then he brings them into
Covenant.

To which I say, The Jews privileges were some of them (as those Romans 9.4, 5.)
such as God never promised to the Gentiles to bring them to, he never promised
to make any entire nation little ones, servants, etc. to be his visible Church.

But God promised to the Gentiles the saving privileges of justification,
adoption, regeneration, eternal life, Ephesians. 3.5, 6. and this was only to true
believers or elect persons, verse. 11, 12. And these were in Covenant in
respect of Gods act of promise before they were in being, in which sense alone
infants may be said to be in the covenant of grace; but in respect of the
conferring of the things promised and the possession of them by faith, so
neither they then were in Covenant Ephesians. 2.12. nor are infants now.

He adds, That text Romans 11.26, 27, is too notoriously abused; a prophecy of
their future call into covenant, is made a proof that they are already in
covenant, upon that account we may make the resurrection (if not past, as the
ancient Heretics Hymen^us and Phile^us affirmed, 2 Timothy 2.18. yet) at least
present. There is like promise of the resurrection of the dead, as there is of
the call of the Jews into Covenant, and resembled to the resurrection, as Ezekiel.
37. so also Romans 11.15. If by virtue of the text alleged they be already in
covenant, by virtue of like Texts the dead are already raised.

Answ. Had Mr. Bl. either heeded my words, or been willing to give them any
fair interpretation, he had forborne this censure, in which he does too
notoriously abuse me. I said, the Jews, Romans 11.26, 27. not yet born, or not
yet called are in the Covenant, have the promise of grace made to them, which
later words I put in on purpose to show in what sense I said they were in
covenant, to wit, in that they had the promise of grace made to them (in which
sense I took the Paedobaptists to mean, that infants are in the covenant of
grace, nor do I yet know how they can mean otherwise) and this is proved
plainly from Romans 11.26, 27. That God has promised to save all Israel, to turn
away ungodliness from Jacob, and says, this is his covenant unto them, when he
shall take away their sins. I say not they are in covenant in respect of the
things promised as already possessed, but that they are in covenant in respect
of Gods act of promise, they have promise of that which they shall have when
they are called, as I often express my self: which being rightly understood,
the cavil of Mr. Bl. vanishes of it self, for though the resurrection be not
past, because of a promise of it, yet the term Covenant being the same with a
promise they may be said to be in Covenant in respect of a promise made to
them, who yet enjoy not the thing promised. Which is confirmed even from the
common allegation of Paedobaptists, who say, that by virtue of the promise,
Genesis 17.7. to be a God to Abraham and his seed, infants of believers are in the
covenant, which can be true only in respect of the promise made, which is as
much before they are born as after.

To this Mr. Bl. answers, 1. That this can be an argument barely ad hominem;
seeing though we affirm, yet he denies any such Covenant. I reply:

1. That it is true that I deny that Genesis 17.7. there is a covenant made to
believers and their seed, but I deny not the Covenant to be to Abraham and his
seed, nor do I deny elect infants to be therein comprehended, and that before
they are born.

2. If it be only an argument barely ad hominem, yet it is sufficient, till the
tenet on which it proceeds be disclaimed by them, which Mr. Bl. has not yet
the heart to do.

But he answers, 2. I say, as they were in being, so they were also in
covenant, not actually, but potentially, which is nothing to Master Tombs his
purpose.

I reply. To be potentially in Covenant may be meant either in respect of
possession of the things promised, and so I grant they were in covenant only
potentially, or in respect of the making of the Covenant, and so they were in
covenant actually, that is, the promise was made to them, and this is enough
for my purpose to prove a person may be in covenant unborn, in which sense
only infants are in covenant, and therefore if infants thus being in covenant
make them visible Church Members, and give right to their baptism, by the same
reason unborn or uncalled infidels have right to baptism.

Mr. Bl. page 386. says, he willingly closes with me, where I say, that the
judgment of charity is no rule to a Minister whom to baptize; nor do I dissent
from what he says, if his meaning be as the words seem, I as well know when
any man is in covenant, as he knows when he is a believer: when any man does
avouch himself to be one of the people of God, as he knows when they profess
to believe. I do confess that by the same knowledge whereby any man is known,
and so far as he is known to be a believer, he is known so far to be in
covenant; he that avoucheth himself to be one of Gods people, and that
professes to believe is in appearance, and to be taken as in covenant, and a
believer. But how does Mr. Bl. know that this or that infant is in covenant and
to be baptized? not by Gods promise, for there is no such promise of any
Gentile believer, that all his infants, or any one in particular shall be his
people, either by regenerating grace, or outward ordinance: not by profession
of believing or avouching himself to be one of the people of God, for no infant
does, or can without miracle do it; therefore it must be by a judgment of
charity (which Mr. Bl. agrees with me to be no rule to a Minister whom to
baptize) or no way. And consequently were it granted (which is not) that being
in covenant in respect of Gods promise of being a God to some infants of
believers did give a title to baptism, yet no Minister could upon this ground
baptize this or that particular infant, nor any infant now existent, since he
neither does nor can know without special revelation, that God has made this
promise or covenant to it.

What he adds, And it appears when it is brought home, this is all his ground
of challenge of baptism of persons in covenant, because their interest in
covenant is not manifest, is not right. For I assert first, that bare interest
in the Covenant, that is, as I have often said, this thing, that God has
promised to be his God, does not of it self entitle a person to baptism, since
God has made this promise to thousands yet unborn, and of those that are born
to thousands yet uncalled, perhaps Jews, yet professed unbelievers, whom no man
can say rightly to have title to baptism. 2. That if it were granted this
interest in the covenant did entitle to baptism, yet no Minister can by this
rule justify his baptizing of an infant, since he neither has, nor can have,
ordinarily, knowledge, that the infant he baptizeth has this interest in the
Covenant.

What he says of me, that I seem to make election and interest in covenant
commensurate; All elect are interessed in covenant, and all interessed in
Covenant are elect; I do grant it, being understood of the covenant of
Evangelical grace, of regeneration, justification, etc. in respect of Gods
promise of it, and I have often showed that both Paul, Romans 9.8. and many of
the soundest Protestant Divines say the same. But what he adds of me; And
elect infants (as he has more then once acknowledged) might be baptized in
case their election were known, is Mr. Bls. mistake of me, who do no where say,
that they may be baptized in case their election were made known, but that
infants born might be baptized in case their regeneration, faith,
sanctification were made known. Whereas a person not yet begotten, may be known
to be elect, but not to be regenerated, or made a believer. And by my tenet
there is a bar against baptizing of infants, in that they want title to
baptism; and if they have title, we want knowledge of it. As for Paedobaptists
tenent I profess, I do not know what they count a bar against baptizing of
infants according to their tenent, there being such uncertainty in their
tenants, some holding all are to be baptized in case of danger of death, some
all born in a Christian nation, some, all who are in families of persons
professing the Christian faith, though the parents were infidels; some, only
the children of Church Members after the way they call Congregational; some
judging of the interest in the covenant by a judgment of charity; some by a
judgment of certainty. What my tenet is, I have showed already. Though I
conceive that Christ's words, Mat. 19.14. did import that the infants were
elect, yet I do not say, that Christ was displeased with the disciples for
being ignorant of their election and justification, and for that reason not
admitting them to be blessed by him, but for that knowing Christ was the great
prophet, who was sent to bless, they did hinder those that were brought to be
blessed from access to him.

As for Mr. Bls. question, who say that the covenant of grace without any other
command is a command to baptize infants, I think Mr. Stephens said it when he
made a convertibility between the word of promise, and the word of command; and
whereas Mr. Bl. says, if Christ had never given a command for it, neither old
nor young ought to have been baptized, it is true; nor in my speech of his, and
Mr. Stephens tenet did I mean when I said [without any other command] to
exclude the institution of baptism, but it being supposed to be instituted by
Christ, Paedobaptists do frequently prove a command to baptize infants by
virtue of being in covenant, without any particular command of baptizing them,
or any other description that comprehends them, as Mr. Marshalls first argument
in his Sermon, Mr. Bls. second argument, Vindic. foed. chap. 43. sect. 1. s^^w.

Mr. Geree calls denying infant baptism, A defalking the Covenant, and Mr. Bl.
himself maintains the third speech, that the command to baptize disciples is
all one as to command to baptize persons in covenant, when he says, p. 335.
every disciple is in covenant, and everyone in covenant is a disciple And for
his Arguments asserting that infants are of Christ's disciples what I have met
with either are answered already in the second part of this Review, or will be
answered in this part (i^ God permit) my conceit being still more confirmed by
fuller examination of them, that they are very frivolous.

SECT. XX. The exceptions which in the first part of my Review, sect. 5. are
made against the proof of connection between the covenant and initial seal, are
confirmed against Mr. Blake, vindic. foed. 42. chapter sect. 3.
Mr. Bl. proceeds to vindicate the proofs for the reality of connection between
the Covenant and initial seal from Genesis 17. and Acts 2.38, 39. from my Answers.

And to my answer that the particle rendered [therefore Genesis 17.9.] may be
rendered [and, or, but thou] he says, 1. we have no reason but that it may be
an illative as well as a copulative; and being an illative particle, he has no
exception against the strength of it.

Whereto I reply: There need be no reason given, why it should be read [and or
but] and not [therefore] but this, that either of those are the usual
acceptions of the particle, that [and] is the most frequent use of it, that it
may well be so in that place, and that learned interpreters do so render it.
Which being not denied, there is no strength in that proof which is made barely
from the term [therefore Genesis 17.9.] to infer that to them belongs the
initial seal, whether of the Jewish or the Christian Church, who have interest
or title to the Covenant of grace. For he that will prove from it, must assert
that it must be rendered [therefore] for a certain conclusion cannot be
inferred from an uncertain medium.

Whereas Mr: Bl. only asserts, it may be an illative as well as a copulative
particle, and not that it must be, he intimates a grant of what I answer, that
it may be a copulative as well as an illative particle,

What he adds, that it being an illative particle, I have no exception against
the strength of it, is manifestly untrue, since I added three more exceptions
against the proof of that proposition from thence.

But Master Blake proves the same from verse 10. taking in Acts 7.8. and would
have me at more leisure find answer to this argument. That which God himself
calls by the name of a covenant ought not to be separated from it: but God
calls circumcision by the name of a covenant; Ergo they ought not to be
separated.

To which I answer, First, if the Conclusion be good, then circumcision and the
Covenant ought not to be separated; but the covenant according to Master
Marshall, Master Blake, etc. remains the same; therefore according to Master
Blake circumcision ought to remain still to our children, they being in
covenant.

Secondly, If the Conclusion were good, then the females and males before the
eight day being in covenant must be circumcised:

Thirdly, The conclusion is neither of those propositions, which were to be
proved, to wit, 1. That the reason why Abraham's infants were to be circumcised,
was their interest in the Covenant* For though it were granted that
circumcision and the covenant ought not to be separated, yet it proves not the
reason of this conjunction to be from interest in the covenant, since it may be,
yea, is indeed to be deduced from the command.

2. To them belongs the initial seal, whether of the Jewish or Christian
Church, who have interest or title to the Covenant of grace. For the Conclusion
of Mr. Bl. does not say any thing at all concerning the initial seal of the
Christian Church, but only of circumcision.

Fourthly, To his Syllogism I answer, 1. That God calls circumcision the
Covenant only by a metonymia of the thing signified for the sign.

2. That [ought not to be separated from it] may be understood of every person
that has interest in the covenant, or of every person to whom it is commanded,
and when it is not dispensed with: in the former sense I deny the major, it is
not true, that what God himself calls by the name of a covenant ought not to be
separated from it, or that Gods calling any sign the Covenant, proves that all
in covenant are to have that sign on them. For neither was it true of
circumcision, since neither were males before the eight day or females in
covenant, nor any in the wilderness to be circumcised, God either not
commanding it, or dispensing with the observation of it; nor is it true of any
other sign called the Covenant (if there be any) without Gods command
undispensed with.

Mr. Blake says further, 2. Let him consider the relation in which the Apostle
puts this Sacrament of circumcision to the covenant Romans 4.11. an instituted
appointed sign and seal is not to be divided from that which it signifies, and
seal is not to be divided from that which it signifies and seals; circumcision
was an instituted appointed sign and seal of the covenant; therefore it is not
to be divided from it.

Answ. 1. Neither does the Apostle, Romans 4.11. make circumcision the sign and
seal of the Covenant mentioned Genesis 17. nor of any covenant to be kept for the
time to come, but of a benefit Abraham had before obtained Genesis 15.6. to wit,
righteousness by faith, being yet uncircumcised, nor is any ones circumcision
besides Abraham's, on his own person, called, the seal of the righteousness of
faith.

2. The Conclusion is, neither of the Propositions to be proved, that the
reason why Abraham's infants were to be circumcised, was their interest in the
covenant, that to them belongs the initial seal, whether of the Jewish, or
the Christian Church, who have interest or title to the Covenant of grace.

3. The Major proposition is true in this sense, an instituted appointed sign
and seal, is not to be divided in our conceit of it, from that object or thing
which it signifies or seals. But in this sense the Conclusion would be true
only of an intellectual division from the object, which is nothing to the
purpose. That sense in which it would be to his purpose is this, An instituted
appointed sign and seal, is not to be divided, that is, not to be withheld or
denied to any person or subject, who has by promise or possession interest in
the thing signified and sealed by that sign. But in this sense it is false, for
circumcision was not to be to any female, to whom yet the promise of Canaan
signified by it, belonged; Nor indeed does any such sign belong to any person
merely from interest in the thing signified, but from the command and will of
the Appointer.

I said if [therefore Genesis 17.9.] were allowed to be the best reading, yet that
the inference, v. 9. should be made from the promise only, v. 7. and not as
well, if not rather from the promise, verse 8. I find no sufficient reason
given.

To this Master Blake replies, This reference engages me, 1. in a
contradiction to my self, Exercit. page 3. the promise of the Gospel was
confirmed to Abraham by the sign of Circumcision, and that the covenant made
with Abraham Genesis 17. was a mixed covenant. 2. In a contradiction to the
Apostle, who makes circumcision a sign and seal, not alone of the land of
Canaan, but of the righteousness of faith.

Answ. Either I have lost all my skill in Logic, or else there is not the
least color of this charge, but Mr. Blake writes as one that scribles any
thing that comes first into his fancy. A contradiction is of two propositions
opposite in quantity and quality, the one universal, the other particular; the
one affirmative, the other negative, my propositions are. If it were granted
that [therfore Genesis 17.9.] is the best reading; yet that the inference verse 9.
should be made from the promise only, verse 7. and not as well, if not rather
from the promise verse 8. I find no sufficient reason given; the promise of the
Gospel was confirmed to Abraham by the sign of Circumcision, the Covenant Genesis
17. was a mixed covenant made up of spiritual and temporal mercies: The Apostle
Romans 4.11. says Abraham received the sign of Circumcision a seal of the
righteousness of the faith which he had yet being uncircumcised. If Master
Blake show in these propositions I will not say contradiction only the
greatest of oppositions, but any contrariety at all, let me be taken for a
heedless Scribler; if not, let Master Blake bear the blame.

His other words [all that know the nature of Covenants, and use of seals know
that the seal ratifies all that the Covenant contains. But the Covenant (Master
Tombs being judge) contained not barely the promise of the land of Canaan, and
therefore the reference must carry it further than the Land of Canaan] what are
they but a grant of my exception, that the reference Genesis 17.9. must be not
only to the promise verse 7. as if infants were circumcised merely because of
the promise, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed, but also to the promise
verse 8. and that they were circumcised also because of that promise of the
Land of Canaan, which belongs not to us, and therefore the reason of
circumcision of infants from the Covenant Genesis 17. can be no rule to us to whom
some of those promises belong not. If the seal ratifies all that the covenant
contains, then it ratifies the promise of the Land of Canaan, and in respect of
that it was to Abraham's infants, which not belonging to our infants the reason
of circumcising infants, if it be taken from the covenant, it will not pertain
to our infants to whom that promise belongs not.

I said, if it were yielded that the inference were made peculiarly from the
promise, verse 7. to be a God to Abraham and his seed; it must be proved, that
every believers infant-child is Abraham's seed, before it be proved the promise
belongs to them.

To this Master Blake says, It must either be proved that they are Abraham's
children, or ^ave the privilege of the children of Abraham, which from Genesis
9.27. Romans 11.17. is sufficiently proved, especially being confirmed by those
texts that carry the covenant in Gospel times to the issue.

Answ. What privilege of the children of Abraham he should mean, except the
promise, I will be a God to them, which should belong to every believers infant
child, I understand not. The privilege of circumcision, or visible
Church Membership in the Christian Church is neither inferred from the promise
Genesis 17.7. nor from Genesis 9.27. Romans 11.17. nor is there one text that
carries the Covenant in Gospel times, I mean that covenant of which Christ is
Mediator, mentioned Heb. 8.10. Heb. 10.16. (besides which I know no covenant in
Gospel times) to the issue, that is, all the natural infant-issue of every
believer, and that neither those texts mentioned, nor any other produced by Mr.
Bl. Mr. M. Mr. Cobbet, or any other prove it, will be showed in that which
follows. For present my speech is right, the promise is not, I will be a God to
thee, and to thy seed, and to him that has the privilege of thy children. This
is Master Blakes addition to the Text. And therefore no man can prove the
promise belongs to the infant-child of a believer, till he be proved to be
Abraham's seed: Whatsoever privilege of Abraham's children, any child may have,
yet from that promise none can claim privilege, but Abraham and his seed, since
the promise is made to no other, and therefore no child of ours can claim an
interest in that promise till he be Abraham's seed, which Master Blakes shift
does no whit avoid.

To my exception, that the Covenant was not made to every child of Abraham, he
says, Though it were true, yet it would nor serve my purpose, provided, that
we in Gospel times are under the same covenant as was Isaac; if some of
Abraham's children were left out, that concerns not us, so that we are taken in.

But I reply, sure if it were true, it were much to my purpose to show the
insufficiency of the Paedobaptists inference, from Genesis 17.7. that every child
of a Gentile believer is not in covenant by virtue of that promise, if it be
true that the Covenant was not made to every child of Abraham. No Paedobaptist
hitherto that I know has had the face to avouch that our children by virtue of
that promise are more in covenant than Abraham children; Master Bl. himself
says, To make the inference good from Genesis 17.7. that believers children by
virtue of that promise have title to the initial seal, it must either be proved
that they are Abraham's children, or have the privilege of Abraham's children; If
then the covenant was not made to every child of Abraham, then every child of
Abraham had not the privilege by the covenant, and then if it were granted that
our children by that covenant had the privilege of Abraham's child, yet it could
not be proved thence, that every child of ours has the privilege of the
Covenant, since every child of Abraham had it not. Nor does Mr. Bls. proviso at
all help him.

For 1. it being granted, that we in Gospel Times are under the same covenant
as was Isaac, and that we are taken in, (though without the limitations, first
of the covenant only, as it contains promises of saving grace; secondly, only
of true believers before God, I deny it) yet it follows not that our children
are taken in.

2. Nor if it were true, that our children are taken in, does it follow that
all our children are taken in, by virtue of that promise Genesis 17.7. since
neither all Abraham's children, nor all Isaacs children were taken in by it,
Esau being expressly excluded, Romans 9 10, 11, 12, 13. and elsewhere, nor does
God style himself the God of Esau as he did of Jacob.

But Mr. Blake says, my instance from Genesis 17.19. Heb. 11.9. is very weak to
prove, that the Covenant was not made to every child of Abraham, Ishmael
himself was in Covenant, though not established in covenant (as God there, and
verse 21. promised concerning Isaac) nor his seed never received, appears not
alone by the sign and seal which he received verse. 23. which yet is sufficient
(for God to seal to a blank is very strange; to sign a covenant to a man never
in Covenant) but also from Gal. 4.30. what says the Scripture? cast out the
bondwoman, and her son, for the son of the bond woman shall not be heir with
the son of the freewoman A man cast out of Covenant, was before casting out in
Covenant; ejection supposes admission, unless we will give way to Mr Tombs his
dream of ejection by non-admission. He was cast out after the time of the
solemnity of his admission by circumcision, as may be seen, Genesis 22.

Answ. The Apostle Romans 9. answering the objection, that if the Jews were
rejected from being the children of God then the promise falls, or takes not
effect, which God made to Abraham and his seed to be a God to them, answers
verse 7, 8, 9, in these express words, neither because they are the seed of
Abraham are they all children, but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, That is,
they which are children of the flesh, these are not the children of God: but
the children of the promise, are counted for the seed: For this ^is the word of
promise, at this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son. Which words if
they do not affirm, that the promise or covenant, Genesis 17.7. was not made to
all Abraham's seed, and particularly that it was not made to Ishmael, I cannot
perceive any pertinency in the Apostles speech to the answering the objection
made, nor know how to understand his words, nor do I remember that I ever met
with an interpreter, which did not thence conceive, that the Apostle in those
words did assert, that the promise or covenant was not made to Ishmael. Some I
have produced Exam. part 3. S. 4. so conceiving, and many more might be alleged
if it were necessary. But the words of God to Abraham, Genesis 17.19, 20, 21. do
sufficiently prove, that the Covenant Genesis 17.7. was not made to Ishmael, and
therefore he was not in Covenant by Gods act of promise. For when Abraham upon
Gods promise concerning Sarah and her son, ver. 15, 16. had laughed verse 17.
and petitioned for Ishmael, verse 18. God answers verse 19. by repeating his
promise concerning Isaac, and says, he would establish his Covenant with him
for an everlasting Covenant, and with his seed after him, verse 20. Then tells
him he heard him concerning Ishmael, and recites what he would do for him;
which expresses how far he had heard his petition. And then follows verse 21.
But my Covenant will I establish with Isaac, which b^ing adversative has this
plain sense, that he would do that for Ishmael which he had expressed, verse
20. But he would establish his Covenant, that is, confirm and perform what he
had promised before verse 7, 8. in Isaac not in Ishmael; he promised not to be
a God to Abraham and his seed, by Ishmael in their generations, nor to give
them the Land of Canaan.

As for what Master Blake says, that Ishmael himself was in Covenant, though
not established in Covenant; it seems to intimate that he conceives, that God
made the Covenant to him, but did not establish it. But sure God makes no
Covenant with any which he does not establish; if he did, he should not be
true. Nor is there any such emphasis in the word (...), I will establish, which
does intimate, that the Covenant was made to Ishmael, but established, that is,
confirmed, and to be certainly performed only to Isaac, for the phrase used
elsewhere, Genesis 9.9, 11. does express no more than is meant v. 12. this is the
token of the Covenant I make between, me and you.

As for Master Blakes proof that Ishmael was in Covenant, because he was
circumcised, Genesis 17.23. it rests upon these unproved false suppositions.

1. That circumcision was appointed to men because they were in covenant with
God.

2. That God did by circumcision sign the covenant to him that was circumcised^

3. That every one that was appointed by God to be circumcised was in covenant.
As for the speech that God does not seal to a blank, it is a speech the
Scripture uses not, and it having various senses may be true in some sense, in
other false. A blank is such a paper as has no writing in it, or wherein there
is some empty space left to write more in, whether persons names, or promises,
or other matter. By Gods sealing Mr. Bl. means the using of Circumcision,
baptism, the Passover, the Lords Supper, according to Gods appointment. That
which he conceives to be sealed thereby is the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. which he
makes all one with the Covenant of grace, and by proving every Sacrament to be
a Seal of the Covenant of grace, from Romans 4.11. his meaning should be, that
God seals in the administrators right use of every Sacrament to every person,
that he is in Covenant, that he has the righteousness of faith, else God
should seal to a blank. But in that sense I do aver it to be most true, that
God does seal to a blank, that is, that many thousands had circumcision, the
Passover, baptism, and the Lords supper, according to Gods institution and
appointment, who were never in Covenant with God, nor did God seal, that is,
assure to them their interest in the Covenant, Genesis 17. or the Covenant of
Grace in Gospel times, or the righteousness of faith. But in this sense I grant
it to be true that God does not seal to a blank, that is, when he appoints any
sign or seal of a Covenant, he does not appoint it a sign and seal of a
Covenant that has no promises, or wherein the persons to whom, and the
promises are not sufficiently expressed, yet he does command that sign to be used
upon persons to whom is no promise in that covenant, as well as those to whom
it is made, yea the using it on one person may seal to thousands, who are not
to have it on their own persons, as the circumcising of Abraham himself was a
seal of the righteousness of faith to all believers of the Gentiles, who were
not to be circumcised. And if every ones Circumcision should seal to him, the
righteousness of faith, then circumcision should by Gods appointment seal that
which is not true, which is not to be said of God.

Nor does Mr. Blake prove from Galatians 4.30. that Ishmael was first in
Covenant, because he was after cast out; for the casting out is not appointed
to be out of the Covenant, for that Abraham could not do, to whom this speech
is directed, it is God that puts in and out of his Covenant, but the casting
out is out of Abraham's family, which was to be done by Abraham. If it be
replied, that this was a sign of casting out of Covenant, and therefore
supposed he was in Covenant, I answer so it was a sign of casting out of the
inheritance, out of the righteousness of faith, out of the Kingdom of heaven,
which yet neither he, nor those whom he typified, and so were cast out with
him, ever had.

What he calls my dream of ejection by non-admission, does but show Mr. Blakes
own oscitancy.

For Matthew 8.12. it is said, the children of the Kingdom, that is, the Jews
shall be cast out, to wit, of the Kingdom of heaven, where Abraham, and Isaac,
and Jacob sit down, into outer darkness; and yet those children of the
Kingdom, were never in the Kingdom of heaven, nor ever should be.

Ishmaels casting out after the time of the Solemnity of his admission by
circumcision, does not prove he was in covenant before. Neither circumcision,
nor baptism, does admit men into covenant with God. If they did, then
administrators could put men in and out of Covenant with God; but that is Gods
prerogative, not in man's power. Even according to Paedobaptists suppositions,
persons are first to be in Covenant before they are to be baptized, therefore
baptism does not admit them into Covenant.

Master Blake adds; For that of Hebrews 11.9. it is a mystery, what he will
make of it, unless he will conclude, that because Abraham sojourned in the
Land of promise, that therefore none were in Covenant, that were not taken into
that Land, so Moses and Aaron will be found out of Covenant.

To which I reply. The mystery might have been unveiled, if Mr. Blake had
heeded that the Author of that Epistle calls only Isaac and Jacob of those
that dwelt with Abraham in tents, heirs with him of the same promise, therefore
Ishmael and Esau were not heirs with him of the same promise, though he dwelt
in tents with them, and consequently were not in the Covenant, or had not the
Covenant or promise of Abraham made to them.

Upon those words of mine; As for a visible Church-seed of Abraham, that is
neither his seed by nature, nor by saving faith, nor by excellency, in whom the
nations of the Earth should be blessed, to wit, Christ, I know none such in
Scripture, though some men have fancied such a kind of Church-seed, as it is
called.

Master Blake thus animadverts. I know not how saving faith comes in, when a
faith of profession will serve the turn. Abraham's seed had circumcision as a
seal of the righteousness of faith, when their parents had no more than a faith
of profession.

To which I reply, a mere faith of profession will not serve turn to make any
Gentile to be rightly according to the Scripture termed Abraham's seed. None of
them in Scripture are counted Abraham's seed, but either true believers before
God, or elect persons. No where does the Scripture say, that the Circumcision
which any of Abraham's seed had was as a seal of the righteousness of faith to
them, when their parents were true believers, much less when their parents had
no more than a faith of profession. Mr. Blakes talk, that all that which my
three former exceptions gainsaid is made good, is but vain, as the rest of his
arguing. Let us here see what he adds further.

I had said, Lastly, were all these things yielded, yet the proposition could
not be made good from hence, since the inference is not concerning title or
right of infants to the initial seal, as if the Covenant or promise of it self,
did give that, but the inference is concerning Abraham's duty, that therefore he
should be the more engaged to circumcise his posterity.

Hereupon Mr. Blake tells me, I should rather have left this to my adversaries
for the strengthening of their proposition, than have made use of it my self
for refutation of it. It was Abraham's duty to give them according to Gods
command the initial seal* in this Master Tombs and we are agreed; whether it
will thence follow that they had right and title to it, or without right, let
the Reader determine.

Answ. The Adversaries propositions to be refuted were, first, That the reason
why Abraham's infants were to be circumcised, was their interest in the
Covenant, which they would gather from Genesis 17.7, and 9. put together;
secondly, That to them belongs the initial seal, whether of the Jewish or
Christian Church, who have interest or title to the Covenant of grace. But if
the inference be not of title or right in the persons to be circumcised, but of
duty in the administrator, and the propositions be of title or right from the
Covenant, and not of duty, the adversaries propositions are not rightly
gathered from that inference, which is not concerning right or title but duty.
As for Master Blakes jeer rather than answer, it is unworthy a serious sober
man. For my speech did not intimate that the infants were circumcised without
right or title, but that the inference, Genesis 17.9. was of duty, not of title or
right, and that what title the infants had to circumcision it was not, as
Paedobaptists suppose, from the interest in the Covenant which the circumcised
had, but the command of God to the circumciser, and therefore there is not any
connection between interest in the Covenant and title or right to the initial
seal without the command, nor this proposition true. All they who are in
Covenant are to be sealed with the initial seal, unless this limitation be
added, when it is commanded. Now if this limitation be put, then, though the
infants of believers were granted to be in Covenant, yet they are not to be
baptized, till over and besides their being in Covenant a command for their
baptism be showed, which has not been yet, nor I think ever will be.

There are some more of Mr. Blakes jeers or flirts rather than sober and
serlous answers yet remaining. To what I said, that Abraham was engaged to
circumcise only those that are males, and not before eight days, and not only
those that were from himself, but also all in his house, whose children soever
they were, which apparently shows that the giving circumcision was not
commensurate to the persons interest in the Covenant, but it was to be given to
persons as well out of Covenant as in, if of Abraham's house, and not to all
that were in the Covenant, to wit, females: which does clearly prove that right
to the initial seal, as it is called, of circumcision did not belong to persons
by virtue of the Covenant, but by force of the command, Mr. Blake in his
flirting fashion thus speaks. If he can prove that Abraham kept Idolaters in
his house, professedly worshipping a false God, and gave Circumcision to them
in that faith and way of worship; it would prove that a man might have the
seal, and not be in Covenant. And it will prove a man might have the seal, and
not be in covenant, though I cannot prove any Idolater in Abraham's house, if I
can prove there were or might be infants or young persons who were children of
Idolaters, for such were not in covenant as the seed of believers, or by their
own profession.

But, says he, it would not prove that he might be in covenant, and be denied
the seal. True, but this that infant-males under eight days old, and females
in covenant might be denied the seal, would prove it.

And then, says Mr. Bl. infant baptism might be of easier proof. Though they
were not in Covenant, though they were not holy, yet they might be baptized. I
reply, I grant that persons in Covenant might be denied Circumcision, but think
infant baptism never a whit the easier proved. I ft-circumcision is commanded
of all in Abraham's house, whether in covenant or no, but baptism to none
because he is in covenant, or holy, but because a disciple, which is not true
of any infant ordinarily.

But, says Master Blake, I will not yield so much; I do not believe that
Abraham carried circumcision beyond the line of the Covenant, and that he had
those in his house which were aliens from God; seeing I find that testimony of
the Lord concerning him, Genesis chap. 18. verse 19. and find that resolution
of Joshua, Joshua chap. 24. verse 14, 15. I believe Abraham catechized all he
took in as Heathens, and did not circumcise them as Heathens.

Answ. I believe he did not circumcise them as Heathens, but as his own bought
with his money, and of his house, and if he bought any infants, or young
children (which was then, and has been since usual, where men and women are
sold as slaves) he did circumcise infant or young males of heathen Idolaters.
For the command of God was he should, and yet those infant or young males of
heathen Idolaters could not be catechized, nor were in Covenant, either by
their own profession, or their parents right, or any promise of God to them;
and therefore circumcision in that case must be carried beyond the line of the
Covenant.

To what I added of Master Marshalls Confession, That he granted the formal
reason of the Jews, being circumcised, was the command, and the covenant he
makes only a motive, Defense page 182. Master Blake speaks thus. I wonder what
need there is of an argument to force such a Confession. The reason I say, why
Jews were circumcised, and Christians baptized, is the command; were there a
thousand Covenants and no institution of a sign or seal, such a sign or seal,
there could have been no circumcision, no baptism. The command is the ground,
and the Covenant is the Directory to whom application is to be made: we say,
all in Covenant are entitled to the seal for admission; but we presuppose an
institution.

I reply, If the formal reason why the Jews were circumcised were the Command,
and the Covenant only the motive, then the command was the differencing
reason; for the form distinguishes, and the formal reason is the reason which
differenceth. Motives are not directions what to do, but commands, the same
motive may be to contrary commands. The Command is the Directory to whom
application is to be made both of circumcision and baptism. The command does
express not only the act to be done, but also the persons to whom. The Covenant
is no Directory to whom circumcision, or baptism is to be applied. The whole
Covenant of Circumcision is expressed, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. But there is
not a word who are to be circumcised, but after. There is not the least hint in
the institution of baptism, Matthew chap. 28. verse 19. Mark chap. 16. verse
15. of any Covenant God makes to man. To imagine God commanded circumcision and
baptism, and yet not to tell who are to be baptized or circumcised but from the
Covenant, which no man knows to whom it belongs, is to imagine God gives a
blind command, which no wise Master would do. It is not true, all in covenant
are entitled to the seal for admission, for then females, males under eight
days old, believers out of Abraham's house, Proselytes of the gate had been
entitled to Circumcision, for they were in Covenant as well as those who were
to be circumcised.

And it is as certain on the other side that Ishmael, Esau, the infants of
strangers bought by Abraham, with his money, were to be circumcised, though
they were not in Covenant, and therefore I infer it as certain, that being in
covenant or interest in the covenant, or having the promises of the Covenant,
Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. or the new Covenant in Christ's blood Heb. 8.10, 11,
12. and 10.16, 17. or any other Evangelical Covenant, all, or some of them made
to a person did not entitle a person to circumcision, nor does now to baptism,
nor can be without the command or institution of Christ, or primitive example,
a rule, Directory or sufficient warrant for any to baptize a person, nor acquit
him from profaning and abusing baptism, and therefore there is no such reality
of connection between the Covenant and seal, that this proposition is thereby
proved true, All in Covenant are entitled to the seal for admission: or this
false, some of those who are not in covenant are entitled to the seal (as they
call it) for admission: and Master Blakes censure of my exceptions as frivolous
trifles shows his weakness in disputes, there being very little in his
arguings or answers but flirts, quips, dictates and impertinencies.

What he adds of my grants discovers the like vanity; For though I say that
believers, and disciples are to be baptized, not barely on their faith and
knowledge, but upon the Command to baptize such, yet how it follows which Mr.
Blake says, so that the command is with reference to the Covenant, with
reference to the interest in the Covenant, is to me a mere inconsequence,
unless he imagine the command and Covenant all one, which to assert were
ridiculous. And who will believe that I attribute as much to the Covenant
respective to this seal, when I say Examen page the seventieth eight, That the
common privilege of Circumcision belonging to the Jews, did not arise from the
Covenant of grace, according to the substance of it, but according to the
administration that then was, as Master Marshall to the Command, when he said,
The Command was the formal reason of the Jews being circumcised.

When I do not at all make circumcision to arise from the Covenant as any
reason of the duty, much less the formal reason of it, but as from the occasion
of it, whereas Master M. makes the command, the very formal reason of the
existence of the duty.

SECT. XXI. The ten Exceptions of the first part of my Review against
Paedobaptists exposition and allegation of Acts 2.38, 39. for the connection
between Covenant and seal are vindicated from Master Blakes answer, Vindic.
Foederis, chapter 37, 43.
MR. Blake adds some snatches against my ten exceptions to Paedobaptists
exposition of Acts 2.38, 39. To the first which was, that the promise is not
proved to be that Genesis 17.7. and Acts 3.25. Acts 2.30. lead us to some
other, he says, when a promise is mentioned and a seal, any man but he will
presently understand that promise, which is ratified by such a Seal.

To which I reply. Where is there mention of a seal? or of a promise sealed or
to be sealed as he speaks? If there were, is there no other promise to be
ratified by such a Seal but that? Did circumcision seal no other promise but
that? Does the Scripture give the least hint of sealing that promise, Genesis
17.7. understood as Paedobaptists expound it, that God would be a God to every
believer, and to his seed, in respect at least of visible Church Membership,
yea though he be a believer only by profession? They use to tell us that
Circumcision seals the righteousness of faith, from Romans 4.11. But to seal this
and to seal the promise, Genesis 17.7. (as Paedobaptists do rack rather than
expound the words) are as much different as are the payment of Gold, and lead.
Have not learned men expounded the promise, some of that mentioned, ver. 38. of
the gift of the holy Ghost, some of other promises? why then does Master Blake
so ineptly intimate me to be singular in my conceit? why does he so falsely
insinuate that no more than bare words can be found for my exposition; when I
bring two texts to confirm it, and Mr. Bl. says not a word to infirm my
alleging them? what he refers me to in his 37. chapter and Mr. Cobbet shall be
examined in its place.

To the second, which was that [the promise is Acts 2.39] is expounded,

1. of a promise of a thing to come, whereas it may seem rather from Acts
13.32, 33. to be meant of a promise already fulfilled.

2. That the thing to come promised was some outward privilege to be conferred
on them and their children.

Mr. Blake says, yet he quotes no man for this exposition of a thing to come,
but on the contrary quotes Mr. Cobbet in the margin against it. It is meant of
a present right; for as yet they were not broken off from the olive, nor
Gentiles graffed in.

Answ. 1. That Paedobaptists do understand the words Acts 2.39. of a promise of
some thing to come appears, 1. in that many of them make it the same with this,
I will be a God to a believer, and his seed.

So Master Marshall Defense page 126. Mr. Drew ubi supra, Mr. Blake out of
Calvin, Vindic. foederis page 270. and others. Now a promise that he will be a
God to them is a promise of a thing to come. 2. In that they disclaim the
supplement [is fulfilled] as Mr. Cobbet Just. Vindic. part 1. chapter 2. sect. 3.
and usually, as Beza, the English Directory, Mr. Blake and others expound it,
the promise is made, which proves it is, according to them, meant of something
to come, not of a thing past, for if it were it should be a promise fulfilled.
Mr. Cobbet, it is true, says, the promise in praesenti is to you in respect of
external right; but then he must needs mean it, that the promise was in
praesenti made of external right to come, or else he must mean it of a promise
fulfilled, which he denies.

And for the other, that Paedobaptists do expound it of outward privilege to be
conferred on them, and their children, besides Mr. Cobbets words cited, and
other in the same section; Mr. Hudson Vindic. page 223. says, This promise
Acts 2.39. is that external covenant to which baptism does belong, and the
Ashford Disputants for Infants Baptism, grant, That the promise of the eternal
inheritance, life and salvation is not made, much less made good to any upon
terms of the parents faith, but upon our own personal belief, and obedience,
but the promise of outward privileges, and of right to participation of
Ordinances as to be baptized, and inchurcht, this belongs to children upon
their parents faith, and in this last sense it is, that Peter says the promise
is to you and your children, etc. i. e. you and yours have the privilege of
right to baptism.

To my third exception, that [to you] is taken, as if it were meant of those
persons to whom he spoke, as then believers, and under that formal
consideration, Mr. Blake says, I do not interpret it of any present explicit
faith in Christ as the Messiah; but now this conviction, that so evidently
appeared, did evidence them to be in an hopeful way, and with that Scribe not
to be far from the Kingdom of God, and therefore he takes his opportunity, and
presses it on to come into the way of believers in Christ Jesus.

Answ. This grant is sufficient, first, to justify my exception, secondly, to
overthrow Mr. Blakes, and other Paedobaptists inference from this text,

1. That in this text the Covenant in New Testament times is held out in this
latitude to believers and their seed, Vindic. foed. chap. 37. For if they had
not any present, explicit faith in Christ as the Messiah, then they were not
believers.

2. That this speech [the promise is to you, and to your children] is
equipollent to this promise [I will be a God to believers and their seed] for
if they were not then believers, it had been false if the Apostle had said as
they would have him, the promise that God will be a God to believers and their
seed, is in praesenti to you and your children, when they were not believers.

To my fourth Exception, that [your children] is expounded of their
infant-children; yea it is carried as if of them only, he says, to this is
sufficient spoken, chapter 37. I shall therefore look back to that chapter, page
270. he says, Acts 2.39. an effectual call cannot be mean^ (which the Apostle
calls a call according to purpose) proper only to the elect, so the visible
seal would be limited to invisible members. But this is not true, for then the
being of the promise would be limited to them, not baptism.

It is false which Master Blake supposes, that baptism is limited to them to
whom the promise is, and that the being of the promise to a person intitles to
his baptism. He says; it is a call unto such a Church State as the whole
^^tion of the Jews did then enjoy as the firstborn in the family. To which I
reply, The whole Nation of the Jews enjoyed a Church State, by which they were
joined in one national society under an high Priest, and other Priest offering
sacrifice; at the Temple, whither the Church Members were to bring their gifts,
and to observe the Levitical rites. It is a dotage with a witness to conceive
that Peter meant Acts 2.39. that the promise was to them or those afar off,
whom God should call to this Church State. It is certain that the calling of
the Jews and Gentiles, by the Gospel was to remove them out of that society,
and Church State, as appears by v. 40. nor did the Apostles ever associate the
Christians to the Jews as Proselytes to them, nor did they ever draw them into
any such Church State, as the Jews had to take in a whole Nation, City, or
Family, comprehending Infants into the Christian church, but only so many as
believed as v. 41.42, etc. show: yea to call them to such a Church State as the
Jews had, had been to call them not to baptism, but to circumcision and the
observation of Moses Law. The call of God, Acts 2.39. is no other then what is
mentioned in the new Testament to be Saints, to his Kingdom and Glory, to the
fellowship of his son by his word and spirit, or one of them at least, yea
the promise being meant of Christ, which Master Blake does not deny, as will
appear in that which follows, it can be expounded only of those that are
effectually called, since to them only Christ belongs: on the other side to
understand it of a call unto such a Church State as the whole nation of the
Jews did then enjoy, is to limit the promise to Jewish proselytes, or to
national Christian Churches, which is a wild conceit, unfit for a serious and
sober Divine. But Master Blake goes on from whence this Argument may be drawn,
those to whom the Covenant of Promise appertains have a right to baptism, But
the Covenant of Promise appertains to men in a Church State and Condition and
to their Children. The Major cannot be denied by any that will not make
themselves the Apostles opposites. The Minor proposition is now only to be
considered, that the Covenant of promise to men in a Church State and Condition
is in that latitude as to comprize their Children, For which the words of the
Apostle are full and clear. To you is the promise made, and to your Children,
on which Calvin rightly comments. Peter observes (says he) a due order when he
assigns the first place of honor to the Jews, that it takes in Children, it
depends on the word of promise Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God and the God of thy
seed, where God joins children with their parents in the privilege of
Adoption, where Adoption is taken in the Apostles sense, Romans 9.5. to the
inheritance of privileges belonging to all Church Members, as he after explains
himself.

Ans. The Major is ambiguous, and in some sense it is true, and in some sense
false. It is true in this sense, Those to whom the Covenant of Promise by their
beleiving, and Covenanting to be Christ's Disciples, appertains, have a right to
baptism. But in this sense (in which Master Blake seems to understand it, for
he comprehends Infants in the Covenant) Those to whom the Covenant of Promise
by Gods Acts of Promise, whether of saving Grace or Church-privileges,
appertains without their personal believing or covenanting, have a right to
baptism, it is false. Nor is the Contradictory thereto opposite to any thing the
Apostle says, who does indeed exhort to repentance and baptism, but does not
from the promise without each persons repentance ascribe a right to baptism to
any parent or child, the promise is not urged by him to declare a right to
baptism of it self without repentance, but to encourage to repentance and
baptism into the Name of Christ as their duty. The Minor also is ambiguous, it
being uncertain what he means by the Covenant of Promise, whether the Covenant
whereby the persons promise to God, or God to them; and if of this latter,
whether the Covenant wherein God promises to them, be of saving-graces, or of
Church Priviledges; if he mean it of the former, and understand it universally,
it is manifestly false, contrary to Scripture and experience; whether the
Church State be in respect of the visible or invisible Church, there is no such
promise of God, that if the Parent be in a Church State or condition, so as to
be elect, or true beleiver, much less if he be only in the visible Church,
that his child, as his child, shall be in the Covenant of saving grace, have
Christ, his Spirit, remission of sins, and life everlasting by him. Nor is it
true of the promise of Church Priviledges, that God will take the child of him
who is in a Church State and condition for a visible Churchmember, capable of
the initial seat, (because he is his child) without the child's personal faith
and repentance. Nor do I know of any Covenant of Promise now under the Gospel
of such outward Church Priviledges, but take it to be a faction of
Paedobaptists; nor is there in the Apostles words any thing to prove the Minor.
For neither does the text say, the promise is that, Genesis 17.7. nor that it is
made, but only [is] nor does say, it is to you as in a Church State and
condition, and to your children as the children of men in a Church State and
condition. And for Calvin's words neither are they plain for Mr. Bls. purpose,
nor if they were, should I take them for an oracle, but should expect better
proof then his or Master Bls. sayings. As for the Adoption, Romans 9.5. it is
clear from the text, and confessed by Master Rutherford, Due right of
Presbytery chapter 4. Sect. 4. page 192. to have been a prerogative of the Jews,
as was the giving of the Law, the descent of Christ, etc. and therefore it is
untruly suggested by Master Blake to be an inheritance of privileges belonging
to all Church Members, or that the Apostle does after so explain himself; and
Master Blake continues his want of dictating without proof. He next takes on
him to answer objections. One is, that the children are the same with sons and
daughters mentioned, v. 17. from Joel 2.28. and consequently the promise is of
the spirit of prophecy, and appertaining to none but those of age and capacity
for prophecy. To which he answers, 1. That the promise cannot be that
extraordinary gift of the Holy Ghost in that visibie way, because it is
enlarged to all the Lord shall call: but all these have not the Holy Ghost in
that extraordinary way, nor any promise of it. I confess, this answer is good
against those that expound the words thus, the promise of the gift of prophecy,
Joel 2.28. is to you and your children, and to all afar off, as the subjects to
whom this gift is promised; for then it would not be true, since all had not
that gift, 1 Cor. 12.28. yet it may be true in this sense. The promise of the
gift of the Spirit in that visible way, is fulfilled to you and your children,
and all afar off called by God, as the persons who had benefit by it, and so
were the Finis cui of those gifts promised as having the benefit of them,
though not the subjects in whom they were. 2. Says Master Blake, however the
promise be extended, yet that promise is on condition of their baptism, and is
an encouragement to baptism, and in that latitude as they had formerly known
the command of circumcision. To which I say, 1. If the promise be interpreted
so as to belong to all that are believers, and call on the Name of the Lord, as
here follows, then the promise is to the elect only, and the call into the
visible Church, which Master Blake before denied. 2. Though extraordinary gifts
were given after baptism often, yet they were given also before, Acts 10.44,
etc. and therefore I doubt it is not true which Master Blake says, that
promise of extraordinary gifts is on condition of their baptism, nor does the
text assert it. 3, As the promise is an encouragement to baptism, so it is to
repentance, which is first required before baptism by the Apostle. 4. There is
not a word in the text, Acts 2.38, 39. which yields a proof of any of those
positions which Master Bl. so importunely obtrudes, 1. That baptism is there
urged as a sign and seal of the promise. 2. That they were encouraged to
baptism in that latitude as they had formerly known the command of
Circumcision. 3, That the Scripture delivers, and the Apostle urges the
promise as to men and their posterity, to them and theirs, so as that God
promises to be a God in Covenant to his and their seed. 4. That the Apostle
holds this out to draw them on to this seal of the Covenant, to accept baptism
on the same terms that Abraham did circumcision.

But Master Blake his chiefest opposition about this text is against me, and
therefore he bends himself against the fourth Section of my Exercit. And first.
he excepts against my words, that the promise made (which reading I then
followed, but since like rather the supplement [fulfilled] is the sending of
Jesus Christ and blessing by him, as is expounded, Acts 3.25, 26. Acts 13.32.
Romans 15.8, 9. Thus I answer, it is true that Jesus Christ is the most eminent
mercy promised, and may be called the promise virtualiter, being the ground of
all promises, and therefore some Interpreters have mentioned the gift of Christ
on this occasion. But it is plain that Gods Covenant and this gift are to be
distinguished; Christ is promised in priority to the Jew, before the Gentile;
The Jew then is taken into Covenant before this gift of Christ can be of them
expected: It is therefore the covenant it self (entered with parent and child,
root and branch) that is here meant, as Calvin in the words before observes,
from which the giving of Christ in the flesh follows. And therefore Diodati
fully pitches upon the true sense of it, seeing as you are Abraham's children,
you are within the Covenant, you ought to acknowledge Christ to be the head and
foundation of the covenant. The covenant I will be thy God and the God of thy
seed is here meant, which from Abraham had been the Jews privilege, Romans 9.

To which I reply, If Christ may be called the promise virtually, then it is no
obscuring the text, to interpret the being of the promise to them of the
sending of Jesus Christ and blessing by him, nor does this hinder the
distinguishing of Gods covenant and this gift, or the promising of Christ to
the Jew before the Gentile, or the Jews taking into covenant before this gift
of Christ can be expected of them, or that the giving of Christ in the flesh
followed the covenant it self entered with parent and child, root and branch,
meaning Abraham and his seed, as the Apostle, Gal. 3.16. understands it; and
therefore in all this there is nothing brought by Master Blake, which makes
void my interpretation, but confirms it rather. But for such a covenant as
Master Blake imagines of Gods being God to every believer and his infant child,
in respect of Church Membership in the Church visible of Christians, and other
outward Church Priviledges, I find no word in all the Scripture. And for
Diodati his words, if he so meant what he speaks of their being in covenant,
because they were Abraham's children by natural descent, he answered from the
sense of the place; but Master Blake has more to say to me.

I had said, the limitation, as many as the Lord our God shall call, shows
that the promise belongs to them, not simply as Jews, but as called of God,
which is more expressly affirmed, Acts 3.26. To this Master Blake answers, I
wonder how it came into Master T. his head to call this application a
limitation; it plainly enough speaks his boldness in dealing with the
Scriptures; had the Apostle said, to you is the promise made, and to your seed,
in case God shall give you a call, he had spoke to Master T. his purpose: but
saying, to you and to as many as the Lord your God shall call, it plainly
shows that he does not limit, but amplify the mercy, extending it not barely
to the Jews (who in present by reason of fruition of ordinances were a people
near to the Lord, Psalm. 148.14. but also to the Gentiles, who, Ephesians. 2.17.
were afar off.

To which I reply, A limitation of a proposition is the determining of it
according to what the predicate agrees to the subject, or does not agree, as
Keckerm. syst. Log. l. 2. sect. 1. c. 4. And thus do the words [as many as the
Lord (not as Master Blake, your, but) our God shall call] limit the copulative
proposition [the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that are
afar off] determining to which of each of these, and in what respect the
promise is to them. And to take away Master Blakes wonderment (the fruit of
ignorance, and often of folly) which he and his brother Baxter do often express
about me, that they may describe me as some strange example of Gods judgment in
blasting my intellectuals, I will tell him how it came into my head to call
those words a limitation of the proposition. First, the placing of the words at
the end of the proposition, did give me occasion to take them for a limitation.
Secondly, the term (...) as many as] is a limitting term, appropriating the
thing said to those subjects forenamed, who were so qualified as to be called
by the Lord. Thirdly, (which was the prime inducement) I conceived the speech
of Peter had not been true without that limitation, And this I long since told
Master M. in my Exam. part. 3. Sect. 6. page 60. If the promise be of saving
graces, if of Christ sent, if of the outward ordinances of baptism, etc. if of
the Holy Ghost in extraordinary gifts, it is none of these ways true without
that limitation. For neither God promised saving graces, nor outward
ordinances, nor extraordinary gifts, nor sent Christ to them, their children,
or all that are afar off without calling them, and every of them. And but that
Master Bls. Master Bs. and such like wonderers heedlesness and peevishness are
no strange thing to me, I should wonder that Master Blake should no better heed
my words in my Examen, nor Diodati his words (who, he says, fully pitches upon
the true sense of it) which in his Annot. on Acts. 2.39. are these, shall call,
namely by his Gospel. So he does restrain the Israelites to whom the promises
are directed only to those, who by Gods gift believe in Christ; see Romans 9.8.
Gal. 4.28. which had Master Blake faithfully set down in stead of some other
words I find in him, his Reader might have discerned how false it is, that the
promise is to an infant child of a believer, as his child, without calling; and
have discerned that it is not my device only, but that which others before me
apprehended, and so no more boldness in my dealing with the Scriptures then was
meet, and the Apostles words to have this plain sense, the promise is to you,
being called of God; and to your children, being called of God; and to all afar
off, being called of God; and to no other, And to requite Master Blake, I may
more truly say, It Is a wonder how it came into Master Blakes head to call this
limitation an amplification. For though the words [to all that are afar off]
contain an amplification of the mercy either to the posterity of the Jews, or
to those in the dispersion, or to the Gentiles (of which I will not now
dispute) yet the words [as many as the Lord our God shall call] are a plain
limitation of his speech, as I have proved. But Master Blake adds of me, 2. In
that he says, this promise belongs to them not simply as Jews, but as called,
is a full contradiction; A Jew uncalled (at this time before the Kingdom was
taken from them) is as much as a convert unconverted, or a Gentile disciple
undiscipled: In case he think to come off by limiting it to an effectual call,
the Scripture by himself quoted does evidently contradict it; Christ came to
give them that effectual calling, and not only to those that were thus called.

Ans. Master Blakes charge of contradictions is as frivolous as his wonderment.
Master Blakes conceit of a calling into such a Church State, as the whole
nation of the Jews did then enjoy, is but a dream of his own, for which he
has not one Scripture nor other proof. The calling is to communion with
Christ, and an effectual calling, else the proposition were not true; nor is
there any contradiction in any of the places by me quoted, to this exposition,
the promise of Christ is fulfilled for the remission of your sins, and your
childrens, and all that are afar off, as many as the Lord our God shall
effectually call, and no other; nor has Master Blake showed any. For though
Christ came to give effectual calling, yet it is true also, he came to give
remission only to those that were thus called; nor is there any opposition,
much less contradiction in those speeches.

Master Blake goes on. He yet said, Peter does exhort to repentance and baptism
together, and in the first place persuades to repentance, then to baptism,
which shows repentance to be in order before baptism. To which he answers, not
by denying it, but by giving a reason of it, because they had crucified Christ,
etc. To which I reply, this grant shows that they had not right to baptism
without repentance, though the promise were to them, they were in the
Church State of the Jews, etc. and consequently Master Blakes proposition
false. Those to whom the Covenant of promise appertains (in his sense) have a
right to baptism. What he adds, And yet he shows that they and their seed are
under the promise of God, and puts them into a way in acceptance of Christ in
the Gospel-tender, in his present way of administration, to be continued his
people still in Covenant, and that (as is plainly enough signified) that they
might enjoy it in their former latitude to them and to their children; that the
Jews (even those that had not yet embraced Christ) were not yet dispossessed of
the promise, but stood as a people of God in visible covenant, and their
children, in the sense in which Master Blake means is false; and yet were it
true, it is against Master Blakes proposition, since notwithstanding this being
in covenant, yet were they not admitted or to be admitted to baptism without
repentance. He adds, Master T. has yet this evasion, and says, the text
speak^ not expressly of infants, but of children indefinitely; and if infants be
not children, we will be content that they be cast out of covenant, and will
hold no plea for their Church Membership and baptism.

Ans. As infants are children, so are men and women of twenty, or more years
old, and therefore the term (children) unless it be proved to be taken
universally or particularly of infants, the Covenant-state (as they call it)
though we should grant such an estate there meant, would not be thence
concluded. And yet infants were to be circumcised not simply because they were
Abraham's seed, nor because in Covenant, but by reason of Gods command. And
though a woman and disciple be not Synonyma, yet women being numbered among
disciples, it is an express example of women's coming together to break bread,
which mentions the disciples breaking bread; nor was I at all put to it, much
less hard put to it, when this came in for an answer. For without this an
answer was given before to the Argument, and this was added as an overplus,
and so was that which Master Blake nibbles at in that which follows.

I had said the text speaks not of the children of the Gentiles at all, (of
whom we are) but of the children of the Jews; and therefore if that promise be
extended to infants, which does not appear, the promise is to be expounded so
as to note something peculiar to the Jews infants. To this Master Blake thus
says, If the Gospel held out any such transcending privileges appertaining to
the seed of the Jews above the Gentiles, Master T. may do well to produce a
text for it, otherwise we shall take it for granted from Saint Paul, that there
is none at all, that there is neither Greek, nor Jew, circumcision nor
uncircumcision, Barbarian nor Scythian, bond nor free.

To which I reply, there is no need I should show any such privilege held out
in the Gospel to the Jews seed above the Gentiles, but that Master Blake
should show such privilege as he speaks of, to the Jews seed held out in the
Gospel. But this I say, if he will have the text, Acts. 2.39. to be for his
purpose, he must show that the children of the Gentiles (of whom there is not a
word) are mentioned as those to whom the promise is as well as the children of
the Jews, which he thus attempts.

And when the Apostle adds, to those that are afar off, even as many as the
Lord shall call, he plainly means the Gentiles, as appears, comparing Ephesians. 2.
And though I take not the boldness to add to the words, and to their children,
as Master T. challenges Doctor H. yet it is clear, that the same is understood
there in reference to the children of the Gentiles, that is expressed before to
the children of the Jews. If any shall grant an inheritance to Titius and his
heirs for ever, and to Caius, every one will understand that the heirs of Caius
are meant as well as the heirs of Titius, especially if it can be proved out of
the grant it self, that the privilege conveyed to Caius, is as ample as that
to Titius. We can prove the privileges granted to the Gentiles in the Gospel
to be equal to those granted to the Jews; when the Jews children are under
the promise with their Parents, the children of believing Gentiles cannot be
excluded.

To which I reply, that it appeared not plainly to Beza, Annot. in locum, that
by those afar off, Acts 2.39. are meant the Gentiles, but rather the posterity
of the Jews, which should be in after Generations, or those in the dispersion,
among the Gentiles. For it seems unlikely that Peter did then consider or
declare the calling of the Gentiles, who was so averse from preaching to
Cornelius, Asts 10. or that it would have been born with them, when even the
brethren expostulated with him for that fact, Acts. 11.3. nor do I think (...)
Acts. 2.39. the same with (...) Ephesians. 2.13. this latter noting manifestly
remoteness from God in respect of knowledge and communion, the former
remoteness from them to whom he spoke, either in descent or distance of place.
However were it resolved that the Gentiles are meant, Acts. 2.39. as many
Interpreters conceive, yet it is too much boldness to add to the text [and to
their children] and not much less in Master Bl. that it is understood, when
there is neither word in the text, nor defect of sense without it, nor any
ancient copy, which necessitate that addition or supplement. And for Master
Blakes case in law, it is not opposite. For, Acts 2.39. there is no mention of
a grant to them and their heirs for ever, but only a promise to them and their
children, which there is no necessity, nor I think intention in Peter in those
words to extend to any other then were then existent. But if it were opposite,
yet so far as I know their minds, either by such experience in law-cases, o^
converse with Lawyers, (with whom I sometimes lived) I presume they would say
otherwise then Master Blake, that a grant of an inheritance to Titius and his
heirs for ever, and to Caius, without mentioning his heirs, is not a grant to
the heirs of Caius, no not though it could be proved the privilege conveyed to
Caius is as ample as that to Titius. As for what Master Blake tells us, he and
others can prove of the privileges of the Gentiles granted in the Gospel equal
to the Jews, I yield it, if meant of believing Jews and Gentiles, and saving
spititual blessings in Christ, according to that, Ephesians. 3.6. But meant (as
Master Blake would have it) of visible Church Membership, and the initial seal,
I take it to be a vain brag, neither he nor any other having yet proved it, or
that the Jews or Gentiles children are or were universally under the pronise
of the Covenant of Grace, which is Evangelical, with their believing Parents,
and by reason of their faith, I know no more about Acts 2.38, 39. in that chapter
to be answered. I return to his answer to my exceptions chapter 43. page 393. he
thus dictates after his fashion, Children as theirs whether they be called or
no, is (he knows with us) a contradiction; children are called in their
Parents call, and we say they are in covenant, the promise is made to them,
they are visible Church Members till they reject the covenant, and deny their
membership.

To which I say, I know many things to be taken for truths and contradictions
with Paedobaptists, which were neither truths, nor contradictions: but this
conceit that [Jewes children uncalled, as calling is meant, Acts 2.39.] is a
contradiction. I had not so mean an opinion of Master Blakes and other
Paedobaptists intellectuals, as to imagine they would own it, till Master Blake
vented this foppery, which how vain it is was showed above. In like manner I
was secure of ever meeting with such a foolery as this of Master Blake,
children are called in their Parents call, till I read the like in his brother
Baxters vain-mocktitled-book plain Script. proof, etc. chapter 3. that he that
converteth the Parent, makes both him and his infants disciples: to which I
have said somewhat in my Review, part. 2. sect. 12. And for the other speech
that they are in covenant, the promise is made to them, they are visible
Church Members till they reject the Covenant, and deny their membership, it
contains sundry inconsistencies with Paedobaptists hypotheses. For first, they
say, the children of believers are in covenant, and visible Church Members as
theirs* children as theirs, whether they be called or no is (he knows with us)
a contradiction, says Master Blake here. If so, then they are in ^ovenant, and
visible Church Members while theirs, Quatenus ipsum includes de omni and
semper. But they are so when they reject the covenant, the relation to their
parents cease not then; therefore neither their Church Membership, if the
hypothesis be true. Secondly, they suppose the visible Church Membership of
believers children, is by virtue of Gods promise to be their God, Genesis 17.7.
and this promise requires no other condition but the parents faith, no
condition from the (...) for then it could not agree to infants; therefore if
the parent be a believer (...) the Child be not a visible Churchmember, God
keeps not his promise which he has made, according to their hypotheses, and so
they do make God a liar, which is blasphemy. Thirdly, they magnify the
privilege of infants visible Churchmembership, they enveigh against
anti-Paedobaptists, as robbing them thereof, and parents of their comforts,
though they grant the Parents as much ground of hope for them, as the
Paedobaptists grounds can truly give them; and for reality of privilege,
setting aside an empty title and rite as to them in infancy, they grant them
visible Church Membership, when they profess the faith, which in respect of
Church Communion Paedobaptists themselves grant them, not before; but mock both
Parents and children, telling them they are in covenant, and visible
Church Members by their parents faith without their own, yet denying them
Church Communion, which is due to every visible Churchmember, without their
own personal avouching the faith; besides, their injurious dealing with them in
their mock-baptism of them, when it is not due, nor does them any good, and
denying baptism to them, yea, persecuting them for seeking it after when it is
due, and might do them much good by engaging them to Christ, and thereupon
assure Christ to be theirs.

My fifth exception Master Blake passes over as fore-spoken to, chapter 37. which
has answer before, and my sixth as falling in with my tenth, where I shall
overtake him. To my seventh, wherein I excepted against Master Stephens for
holding the command [Be baptized every one of you] in a covenant-sense as he
calls it to be, as if he had said, Be baptized you and your children, which I
said to be a new devised nonsense, such as we have no Dictionary yet to
interpret words by. To this says Master Blake, I am sure here is a nonsense
device, to talk of Dictionaries; does Calepin or Scapula, Rider or Thomasius
help us to compare covenant and seal, promises and Sacraments?

I reply, that speech is nonsense, in which the words used to signify that
which the speaker would signify by them, do not in the use of them so
signify. But this speech [Be baptized every one of you] does not in the use of
the words signify [be baptized you and your children] therefore that speech so
used in that which Master Stephens calls Covenant-sense is nonsense. This
appears by Dictionaries, in none of which [every one of you] is as much as [you
and your children] Therefore that speech in that sense is a new devised
nonsense. As for Master Blakes words, either they are nonsense, or as bad.
For first, to talk of Dictionaries is not a device, an action of the mind; but
a speech, an action of the tongue or hand; and therefore it is nonsense to
call it so. Secondly, to talk of Dictionaries is not nonsense; for then all
speech of Dictionaries should be nonsense, and so all the verses before.
R^ders and others Dictionaries should be nonsense. But to speak of Dictonaries
otherwise then the words signify, so as the meaning cannot be perceived by
them, which he cannot say of my speech of Dictionaries. As for Master Blakes
question, it is frivolous, as much of the rest of his writing here is. For
though Dictionaries do not help us to compare covenant and seal, promises and
Sacraments, yet they do help us to know the sense of words, and discover to us
the nonsense of words used otherwise then their signification is. Master Blake
himself in the 43. chapter sect. 2. refers me to the Dictionary about the word Pax.
To my eighth exception that there is not a word of any scruple in the text, as
some have imagined, if we be baptized our selves, and not our children, they
will be in worse case then in the former dispensation, in which they had the
seal of the covenant; nor is it likely that they were sollicitous about such an
imaginary poor privilege of their children. He says, I am of his mind, that
there was no such scruple in their heads. Master T. his unhappy conceit of
casting the seed out of the Covenant was not then in being, though I think the
reason he gives is little to purpose, yet I say, this scruple raised by
Anti-paedobaptists, and heightened by Master T. as in many other, so in this
text is removed.

Ans. My exception then stands good against those who make that scruple the
occasion of Peter's mentioning their children. And for my reason, Master Blake
had done better to give a reason of his censure, then barely to say he thinks
it to little purpose. It is his calumny that I have any conceit of casting the
seed out of the covenant, and his conceit that the scruple mentioned is in this
text removed, has been showed to be but his dream.

My ninth exception was that Paedobaptists make [for v. 39.] to infer a right
to baptism, whereas it infers only a duty, which is proved in that [v. 38.
baptized] is in the Imperative Mood. To this says Master Blake, Master T. does
grossly abuse his judgment in this way of refutation, as though the right in
which they stood, could be no Topic, from which in a moral way the Apostle
might persuade them to baptism; when Shecaniah persuaded Ezra to the
reformation of the marriage of strange wives in these words: Arise, for the
matter belongs to thee, Ezra 10.4. here was a motive in the moral way to call
upon him to do it, and an argument inferred, that it lay upon Ezra as a duty by
command from God to set upon it. And to my reason he says, he has quite
forgotten, that the words holding out their right are in the Indicative Mood.
For the promise is to you and your children. And here is a notable correction
of the Apostle, he should have said, if this had been his meaning, you must be
baptized; and he sai^s, Arise, and be baptized.

Ans. Sure I am Master Blake does most grossly abuse me, in insinuating as if
by my refutation, the right in which they stood could be no Topic, from which
in a moral way the Apostle might persuade them to baptism, when I proved that
the Apostle did not from v. 39. infer a right to baptism, which in a legal way
they might claim, but a duty, to which in a moral way he persuades. And
therefore he shootes wide from the mark, when he goes about to prove that a
right may be a motive in a moral way to a duty. And yet as if he could write
nothing to the point, his own allegation, Ezra 10.4. is not to his own purpose,
the motive as himself alleges, it being not a right to a privilege; but a
command from God. The like roving talk is in his answer to my reason. For
whereas I alleged that verse 38. a right is not inferred from verse 39. but a
duty, because [be baptized, v. 38.] is not in the Indicative, but the
Imperative Mood, tells me the term [is v. 39.] is in the Indicative Mood, which
is nothing to my objection, but like as in the contention between two deaf men
in Sir Thomas Mores epigram, he that was charged with theft answered, his
mother was at home. The like random talk is in his insinuation of my notable
correction of the Apostle, who corrected not the Apostle, but showed the
Paedobaptists conceit incongruous to the Apostles words; He himself seems (I
think out of heedlesness) to correct the Apostle, when he speaks thus, And he
^aies, Arise and be baptized, which are not Peter's words, Acts. 2.38. but the
words of Ananias to Saul, Acts. 22.16.

My tenth exception was, usually Paedobaptists in their paraphrases put not in
any thing to answer [repent, v. 38.] which is true, though Master Stephens be
alleged in my sixth exception, as paraphrasing it by covenant, for your selves
and your children, Master Blake grants the Apostle presses to a duty, and such
as was to have repentance precedent in his then hearers: If so, then he does
not infer a right to bap^ism barely from their interest in the promise. What he
says, right and duty very well stand together, and that the Apostle fitly
makes use of their interest as a motive, I deny not. It is true, the Apostle
mentioned more to whom the promise was then, he then persuaded to repent, for
he mentions the promise as pertaining to the absent, or unborn; but he
persuades none to be baptized but the penitent, nor mentions any to whom the
promise was, but the called of God.

To my Argument from the precedence of repentance to baptism, Acts. 2.38.
against infant baptism, he answers as before, chapter 37. to which I have replied
before. As for Master Stephens his paraphrase avowed by Master Blake as the
Apostles meaning, that if the Jews who had crucified Christ, would receive him
as the particular Messiah, the same promise should still continue to them and
their children in the new dispensation, it is far from the Apostles mind. For
the Apostle does not make the eontinuance of the promise as the benefit
consequent on their receiving Christ, and the receiving of Christ the condition
of continuance of the promise: but the being of the promise is alleged as a
thing already existent, nor is there any likelihood that the Apostle Peter
would urge them to so hard duties as repentance, receiving Christ by so slender
a reason as the continuance of the promise of visible Church Membership and
baptism to them and their infant children, yea, the text it self shows that
the things by which he would persuade them to receive Christ, were the
assurance of remission of sins, and receiving the Gift of the Holy Ghost, and
the alleging the promise, v 39 is to take away the great objection against
these great benefits from their crucifying of Christ* and their imprecation on
them and their children, Matthew. 27.25. If then Master Stephens build his word
of command to baptize father and child, on that paraphrase, he builds on a
foundation which will not hold. Master Blake adds; To this the word repent
refers, as may be made plain. But what he means by this assertion I do not well
understand, it being ambiguous, what he means by [this] whether the paraphrase
of Master Stephens, that the same promise should still continue to them and
their children in the new dispensation, if they would receive Jesus as the
particular Messiah, or the word of command to baptize father and child, and in
like manner what kind of reference he means, whether as a medium to prove it,
or as a motive to it. If he mean the same with that which his allegations seem
to tend to, his meaning is, that the promise of visible Church State, was to
the Jews as they had been formerly, if they did receive Christ, and the term
[repent] refers to it as the motive. Now though I grant that the promise, Acts.
2.39. is alleged as a motive in a moral way to repentance v* 38. yet I deny
such a promise to be meant, v. 39. as Mr. Bl. and Mr. Stephens fancy. Nor do
any of Mr. Blakes allegatione prove it. For Acts 3.25. does not speak of such a
covenant as Master Blake means, but of that Evangelical covenant wherein God
promised Christ and saving blessings by him. Nor are the Jews there termed
children of the Covenant only, but also of the Prophets. Now the Prophets
there are the same with all the Prophets, v. 24. and those Jews to whom, Peter
spoke, were no otherwise their children, then in that they had been raised up
of, and sent to that nation in their predecessors times, and they are in like
manner called children of the Covenant, because they were the posterity of
those ancestors, specially Abraham, to whom that Covenant was made. But this
does not prove that they were then Gods visible people, that the Covenant of
visible Church State did belong to them and their children, or that such a
covenant is meant, Acts 2.39. What Master Blake allegeth from Matthew. 8.12.
Matthew. 21.43. that they were in danger to be cast off, does prove rather the
contrary, thet the nation or body of the Jewish people who had rejected Christ,
were not in covenant with God; and although those particular persons, Acts
2.37. to whom Peter spoke, v. 38, 39. were more awakened then others, yet they
could not be then said to be in the covenant of visible Church State, being not
then believers in Christ. What Master Blake allegeth and infers from Matthew.
21.31, 32. Luke 7.29, 30. I assent to, but know not what it make^ for his
purpose. Yea, me thinks his calling baptism to which Peter exhorted, entrance
into a new covenant-way, crosses Master Stephens paraphrase of continuing the
same promise to them and their children. In his third allegation he misreports
me, as if I excluded all consideration of right in the Jews and their children
from those words which are, Acts 2.39. Whereas that which I said was this, that
from the promise, Acts 2.39. (what ever right be imported by it) Peter does not
infer their being baptized as a right or privilege, accruing to them in manner
of a legal title and claim, but as a duty to which he persuades in a moral way.
What good interpretation I give of those words, v. 39. suitable to Peter's
exhortation; I have set down, Exam. page 61. Review part. 1. page 41. and
elsewhere Master Blake, if he could, should have overthrown it. Master Cobbets
exception is answered in the next section. Mr. Bl. has been often told that the
children are mentioned Acts 2.39. because of the imprecation, Matthew. 27.25.
That the words, Acts 2.38, 39. are carried in that way, that interest in
Covenant and Covenant-Seals in Mr. Bls sense formerly ran, is supposed, but not
proved by him. That the Jews yet persisting in their adherence to Moses, not
embracing Christ, should be in covenant and have thereby a right to baptism, is
such a dotage as me thinks Master Blake should disclaim. That the words of the
text, Acts 2.39. hold out such a covenant-right, as Master Blake imagins, in
Scripture Language, according to the grand charter of heaven, I will be thy God
and the God of thy seed, is said, but not proved by Master Blake. Whether my
exceptions against the Paedobaptists exposition of Acts 2.38, 39. or Master
Blakes answers are frivolous shifts the intelligent Reader will perceive. My
Antipaedobaptism is enough to refute Master John Goodwins charge, and my
censure of his interpretations others have made good. As for the text Master
Blake minds me of, Job 38.2. it may appear from my writings to be more
pertinently applyable to himself, then me. Had ever any man showed me so much
confused scribbling, so many irrational unproved dictates, so many impertinent
allegations in my w^itings as I and Master Blake have showed in his, I would
have silenced my self from writing any more, except a retractation of my former
books.

SECT. XXII. Animadversions on chapter 2. part. 1. of Master Thomas Cobbet his just
vindication touching the explication of Acts 2.38, 39. in which his exposition
is showed to be vain and mine justified.
TWo points the Paedobaptists do endeavor to confirm from Acts 2.38, 39. 1.
That the children of believers are in the Covenant. 2. That this being in
covenant gives them right to baptism. This latter point is that which I am yet
upon, for which how insufficient that text is has been showed in answer to
Master Blake. My intent was in this place to have said no more of this text
till I came to examine Master Ms. 2. Concl. But since Master Blake tells me
Master Cobbet has, p. 23. said that which utterly overthrowes my exposition, I
shall examine what he says, Just vindic. chapter 2., part. 1.

Sect. 3. He argues thus against my exposition. First, the promise is to you,
that is, fulfilled to you accordingly as made to Abraham, for sending of
Christ, etc. there wants Scripture Proof, to make this sense of the promise, is
to you, ( i. e.) is fulfilled to you, nor yet does that in Acts 3.25, 26. ye
are the children of the promise, etc. prove this sense.

Ans* My sense of the words is this. The promise of raising up of Christ is now
fulfilled to you, that is, for your benefit in the remission of your sins and
blessing you, being called of God, and in like manner to your childeen, and to
all that are afar off This to be the sense I gather, 1. From Scriptures which
seem to me to speak suitably thereto. The first is Peter's speech in the same
chapter v. 30. of David. Therefore being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn
with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins he would raise up Christ
to sit on his throne, etc. Hence I argue. It is most likely that Peter; v. 39.
meant a promise mentioned before, and known to them to whom he spoke. Not the
promise of the miraculous gift of the Holy Ghost, for reasons to be presently
expressed; therefore the promise mentioned, v. 30, 31, 32. The second is Acts
3.18, 19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. whence I argue. It is most likely that sense is
best which has most consonancy with the speech of the same Author to the same
persons, to the same purpose, on the like occasion. But the words, Acts 3.18,
19, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. are such, and my sense of Acts 2.38, 39. has most
consonancy with those words. For in that speech he exhorts to repentance, v.
19. because that was fulfilled which was foretold by the Prophets, to wit,
Christ's resurrection; and v. 25. the covenant mentioned is that of blessing all
the kinreds of the earth in Abraham's seed, that is, Christ. And that this was
fulfilled, v. 26. in raising up Christ, and this was first to them, to wit, for
their benefit, by blessing and converting them: which has much consonancy with
my sense of Acts 2.38, 39. therefore my sense is most likely. A third is Acts
13.32, 33, etc. which though it were spoken by another, to wit, Paul, and to
other company, yet by one endued by the same Spirit, to persons in respect of
their nation, and estate like, alleging v. 35.36, 37. the same text and almost
in the same words which Peter used, Acts 2.27, 31, 32. Now in that place Paul
makes the promise to the Fathers to be the raising up of Christ, and speaks of
it as to them, in that it was fulfilled, and that for their benefit, the
forgiveness of sins, v. 38. and thereupon exhorts to repentance and embracing
of Christ v. 40. Somewhat to like purpose might be alleged from Romans 15.8, etc.
But this is enough to show that my exposition does not want Scripture Proof. 2.
I gather my sense thus. The term [ is] is in the present tense. This Master
Cobbet takes notice of when he says, that the Apostle does not say, the
promise was to you. The proposition must be understood either as a proposition
secundi adjecti, as Logicians speak, the promise is to you, that is, the
promise exists to you, so as that the Verb substantive should note mere
existence: But this construction [the promise existes or has existence to you]
seems to me to be defective in sense or truth. For the promise being a
trans^unt act, was not then existent. Nor were it true, do I conceive to what
purpose he should mention the bare existence of the promise, which could be
neither comfort to them, nor motive to the duty he pressed. Or else the
proposition must be tertii adjecti; and if so, there must be a supplement
either of the term [made] or the term [fulfilled] For I know no third. But not
the term [made] For then the sense should be [the promise is now made to you,
etc.] but this is not true, the promise was not then made to them, but to their
fathers, Acts 13.32. therefore the supplement [fulf^illed] is most probable, it
being the term used, Acts 3.18. and 13.33. 3. This exposition of mine seems to
me to be right, because it is opposite to the Apostles scope, which was to
direct ane erect those affrighted Jews to whom he spoke. Now the sense that I
give is very proper to comfort them against the horror of their fact in
crucifying Christ, and wishing his blood to be on them and their children,
Matthew. 27.25. by telling them as Peter did, Acts 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. that
though they did unwittingly kill Christ, yet God had thereby fulfilled his
promise, even for their good and their children, even as Joseph when he told
his brethren, Genesis 45.5. Genesis 50.19, 20, that though they thought evil against
him* yet God meant it unto good, to bring to pass; as it is this day to save
much people alive. And this sense is a very fit motive to move them to repent
and be baptized in the Name of Christ for remission of sins, by testifying that
the promise of sending Christ was fulfilled in the raising of Christ from the
dead* 4. My exposition is confirmed, because all other expositions have less
evidence, and are more liable to exceptions. The most likely exposition after
that which I give, seems to be that which expounds the promise to be that of
giving the holy Ghost in the miraculous gifts, which is called, v. 33. the
promise, Luke 24.49. and was mentioned in the next words before, Acts 2.38. And
of this I confess the sense may be good thus understood. The promise of giving
the holy Ghost, Joel 2.28. is fulfilled in that which ye see and hear, Acts
2.33. to you, and your children, and all that are afar off, that is, for their
benefit, by moving them to own Christ. But me thinks if the promise were meant
of that gift, it should be meant thus, The promise is to you, that is, God has
promised to give to each of you, etc. this gift of the holy Ghost, because the
words immediately before, v. 38. are, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy
Ghost. But thus the proposition should not be true; For all afar off who were
called of God, had not that gift, and therefore it was not promised them. Nor
had this sense been so fit as to comfort them since that gift might be given*
and was to persons whom God rejected. As for the other exposition, that the
promise is, that God will be a God to them and their children, as to Abraham
and his seed, Genesis 17.7. it cannot be the promise meant, Acts 2.39. For, 1.
there is not the least intimation in the text of that promise. 2. There was no
such promise in all the Scripture, that God would be a God to those to whom
Peter then spoke, and to their children as their children, no nor such a
promise as this, I will be a God to a believer and his seed. For if this
promise were made to the seed of every believer, then either God keeps it, or
not. If not, then he breaks his word; if he do, then he is a God to them. But
that is not true: For neither in saving graces, nor in Ecclesiastical
privileges, v.g. Church Membership and baptism, is God a God to every one that
is the seed or natural child of a believer. Yet if it were true, it had been
false, being spoken to those Jews, who were not then believers, nor perhaps
many of them evet believers in Christ. And it is most false, that the Christian
Church Membership and baptism did belong to the Jews as Jews, by virtue of any
covenant made with that nation. For then John Baptist did ill to expostulate
with them for coming to his baptism, Matthew. 3.7. and to dissuade them from
alleging they had Abraham to their father, v. 9. and to tell them of another
sort of children of Abraham that had more right to it then they. Yea, John the
Baptist and the Apostles did ill to require personal repentance and believing,
if they had right to such privileges by a promise without them. Nor is the
promise said to be to any children, but those that are called of God, and
therefore not to infants uncalled, and consequently this Scripture is very ill
applied to prove federall holiness of believers infants. Master Cobbet adds,
Secondly, it is sending of Christ or of Christ sent. But let it be considered,
1. That the Apostle does not say, the promise was to you, as in reference to
the time of making it to the Fathers, with respect unto them, or in reference
to Christ, who was not now to come, but already come, as the Apostle proves
from v. 3, to 37. Nor is it the use of the Scripture, when mentioning promises
as fulfilled, to express it thus in the present tense: the promise is to you,
or to such and such, but rather to annex some expression that way, which
evinceth the same, for which let Romans 15.8. 1 John 2.25. Ephesians. 3.6. Nehe. 9.8,
23. 2 Chronicles. 6.15. 1 Kings 8.56. Acts 2.16, 17, 33. and 13.32, 33. Josh. 21.45.
and 23.14. Matthew. 1.22, 23. and 21.4. Luke 1.54, 55, 68, 69. and Psalm. 111.9.
Romans 11.26, 27. be considered.

Ans. 1. How the verb substantive [is] in the present tense, and the promise
referred to Christ, who was now come, agrees with the words and scope of the
Apostle, is already showed. And my sense is like or the same with Master Ms.
when he said in his Sermon, pa. 17. The plain strength of the argument, is God
has now remembered his covenant to Abraham in sending that blessed seed, and
the new Annot. in Locum; The promise is to you, Christ is promised both to
Jews and Gentiles: But the Jews had the first place. Which is agreeable to
the speeches of, Mary, Luke 1.54, 55. and of Zacharias, v. 68, 69, 71* 72, 73,
74, 75. 2. It is true, that the expression in that manner is not usual, and it
is confessed that in the places cited and many more the fulfilling of a promise
is otherwise expressed. But what then? does it follow that is not the meaning
which I give? If it did, by the same reason, neither Master Cobbets is right.
For it is usual to express a promise belonging to some of a thing yet to be
done in some other expressions, as 1 John 2.25. 2 Pet. 1.4. yea, in the place
Romans 9.4. of which Master Cobbet pa. 31. says, for the promise i^ to you or
belongs to you, as Romans 9.4. has it, the expression is not in the Dative case,
as Acts 2.39. but in the Genitive. But it is needful to consider how Master
Cobbet himself expounds the words, Sect. 1. He says thus, The promise is to
your children: not, was to you, etc. as intending any legal blessing, but, a
promise then in force after Christ's ascension, to effect some promised blessing
[(...)] used to signify the free promise, or covenant of grace, to which they
had visible right. Sect. 3. remission of sins may not be excluded, but must be
one principal thing intended. It is that promise to which baptism the seal is
annexed. Sect. 4. Nor was Abraham's charter less then what here avowed by the
Apostle, Scil. that the promise even of sins, did belong to the Jews, and to
their children in respect of external right and administration, and no more is
pleaded for. But repent and be baptized de futuro; for the promise in praesenti
is to you, Scil. in respect of external right. Sect. 7. And this promise here
mentioned, Acts 2.38, 39. containing in it remission of sins, and so the
righteousness of faith. The promise of remission of sins is or belongs to
you; Scil. in the external right and administration of it. So then according to
Master Cobbets exposition the promise meant is remission of sins, and of this
it is said that it is, not, it was to them, and the manner how is, that it is
to them, or it belongs to them in ^he external right and administration of it.
The promise or covenant he means here belonging to them to be Abraham's charter,
Genesis 17.7. Jerem. 31.33* 34. holding out at least an external interest therein
to them being Jews, not yet believing Fathers, or repenting: for that is
rather mentioned as exerted after many words besides, v. 40, 41. yea, rather
they were offensive members of the Jewish Church (which was then a true visible
Gospel Church) they were as persons under censure, though they had jus ad
baptismum, yet not jus in baptismo without repentance, yet they were
covenant-Fathers, and dispensers of the external right of it to their children,
though their children were not called. And herein is the difference between
them and those afar off; the Gentiles; it is to the Jews actually, to the
Gentiles de praesenti, only intentionally, till they be called of God, which
he understands not of an effectual saving call, but calling into visible
covenant and church estate, and then it belongs to their children as to the
Jews. This I gather to be his meaning out of scattered passages, Sect. 4, 5,
7. I shall, 1. observe some things concerning the exposition in general. 2.
Clear my own exposition from objections. 3. Make some animadversions on several
passages in the latter Sections of this chapter of Master Cobbet.

I observe that he brings no proof but his own saying, that the promise is
that, Genesis 17.7. or that it belongs to any in external right or administration,
or that the Apostle meant the belonging of the promise to them in respect of
external right and administration. For to say, it is the promise to which
baptism seals, is to prove an unknown thing by a more unknown, since baptism
neither there nor elsewhere is termed the seal of the promise or covenant, nor
does the Apostle mention baptism as sealing or administering the promise, nor do
I understand that there is any such thing as an external right and
administration of the promise, or by virtue of the promise, but by virtue of
the command. And therefore I judge all this talk to be a parcel of gibberish,
which the Scripture yields no hint of, but Paedobaptists have formed it from
those leading errors, that the nature of Sacraments is to be Seals of the
covenant, that the reason of a person being circumcised, was interest in the
covenant, Genesis 17.7. that there is the same reason of baptism as of
circumcision Besides, I would know to what the right is, and of what the
administration is which he calls external, and in what sense it is called
external. External he seems to make all one with quoad homines, and in foro
Ecclesiae, and the promise is of remission of sins; the sense then is, you have
a right and administration of remission of sins in respect of men, and in the
Court of the Church. A right is a title to a thing which a man may claim, an
administration is a serving or bringing in, as when a Deacon gives money to the
poor, G^hazi reaches water to Elishah. If there be sense in Master Cobbets
exposition, this should be the meaning. You Jews who crucified Christ, and
your children, though neither yet believers, nor repenting persons, have a
right and administration of the promise of remission of sins, Genesis 17.7. though
not in respect of God or the Court of heaven or your own consciences, yet
before or by men or in the Court of the Church, so that you may claim
absolu^ion from them, and they do or ought to administer it to you by a
sentence or baptism or some other way. Which were to make the Apostles speak
nonsense, and impious falsehood: Nonsense, the words bearing no such meaning
according to the Scripture-use or other approved authors: Falsehood, in that he
should tell them they had such a right and administration as they had not, and
this impious, since it tends to harden them in impenitency and unbelief, and to
justify Preachers or Churches in an unrighteous sentence, wherein remission of
sins is pronounced to belong to persons impenitent and unbelieving in sensu
composito while such. The like may be said if the right be meant to visible
Church Membership, and baptism and administration of them, the speech would be
nonsense; neither Scripture, nor any Author at that time expressing these
things by that which Peter spoke, Acts 2.39. and the speech were false, they
then having no right or administration of either, and it had been impious to
say so to them; for it had tended to move them to assume that to them, and to
justify the yielding it to them, which had been injuriously and profanely both
arrogated and yielded to them. Yet further, what a ridiculous salve had this
been to consciences so tortured with the sense of that most horrid act of
killing Christ, to tell them, the promise of remission of sins was to them in
respect of external right and administration before men or in the face of the
Church, though not before God or in their own consciences, or that they had
outward right and administration of visible Church Membership and baptism, I
may use his own words, mutatis mutandis? Sect. 6. They were not troubled for
want of external right and administration, and to tell them of such right and
administration was both impertinent and unsatisfactory, and it could minister
but little comfort to sin-sick souls to promise them such things, which they
might have, and yet die in their sins, Matthew. 7.23. Besides, it seems to be a
contradiction to say, the promise is to you de praesenti, in respect of
external right and administration, and yet you have not jus in re, and in like
manner to say that the promise is to all afar off de praesenti, in respect of
external right and administration, and yet it belongs not to them actually, but
intentionaly. And whence has Master Cobbet warrant to say that the promise
belongs one way to the Jews, and another way to the Gentiles? or that the
promise belonged to the Jew and his child in respect of external right and
administ^ation, though uncalled? Lastly, that I not grate any further on this
soar, where does Master Cobbet find in Scripture any mention of Gods calling
into visible covenant, and Church Estate? or how can it be true that the Church
to which those Jews who crucified Christ joined, containing the unbelieving
Scribes and Pharisees and High Priests, and the people of the Jews consenting
with them, was a Gospel Church, visibly interested in the covenant o^ grace,
the Subject of the Gospel, and the same essentially with that Gospel or
Christian Church, and that there was no other visible Church, then that of the
Jews* Credat Judaeus apella, non ego. But of these somewhat in the
animadversions following.

Master Cobbet against my exposition writes further thus. 2. They knew already
to their cost, that Christ indeed was sent amongst them, and to be that Jesus
or Savior of his people from their sins, Acts 2.36, 37. compared with Matthew
1.21. And this was cold comfort to them, to tell them of that which wounded
them, unless there be withal some promise annexed and supposed in his being
come. The promise merely of Christ's coming could not comfort them, unless also
in and by Christ come in the flesh, there be some promise made to them touching
the removal of those burdens of guilt which lay upon them 3. The blessing
principally propounded to them, for their reviving, healing, succor, and
support, it was not Christ's sending, nor his being sent, but emission of sins,
v. 38. wherefore unless the Apostle argue impertinently, this may not be
excluded, but must be one principal thing intended. 4. It is that promise to
which baptism the seal is annexed, now the seal is ever to the covenant, which
is not barely to Christ's being sent in the flesh, but to benefits contained in
promises by his coming.

Ans. Had Master Cobbet heeded my words in my Exam. page 60. And was it not a
comfortable Argument for men in that case to be told, that notwithstanding all
this the promise of Christ and remission of sins by him, was yet to them and
their children, etc. And page 61. The promise which is made to Abraham is now
fulfilled in sending Christ to you and your children, and to all that are afar
off as many as the Lord our God shall call, that they might be turned from
their iniquity, and baptized in his Name for the remission of their sins, these
objections had been spared, they proceeding all against me upon this mistake
(which my words heeded might have rectifyed) as if I had expounded the promise,
Acts 2.39. of Christ's being sent and coming without some promise annexed, and
particularly that of remission of sins by Christ* Whereas I did expressly
include it in my paraphrase (as my words recited show) gathering it from the
mention of it, v. 38. and conceiving it to be employed in the expression [to
you, v. 39.] that is, for your benefit by remission of your sins. And therefore
these three objections are answered by showing how according to my exposition
the promise of Christ sent includes also the benefit of remission of sins. But
on the contrary all these objections are against Master Cobbets own exposition.
For, 1. It had been but cold comfort to tell them of a promise of remission of
sins only in external right and administration. 2. It had not been available
for their reviving, healing, succor, and support. 3. According to
Paedobaptists suppositions, baptism is not a seal of that covenant in which
remission of sins in external right and administration only is promised, but,
as it is in the Directory, it is a Seal of the covenant of grace, of our
ingrafting into Christ, and of our union with him, of remission of sins,
regeneration; adoption, and life eternal. Therefore the promise, Acts 2.39.
according to Master Cobbets own arguments, and Paedobaptists hypotheses is not
of remission of sins only in ex^^rnal right and administration. Master Cobbets
third exception, Sect. 3. about those afar off, whether Israelites in the
disp^rsion, or in after ages, or the Gentiles be meant, has been considered
before. But whereas he says, The Apostles before Peter* Sermon, Acts 10. knew
by Christ's declaration of his mind to all his Apostles touching the discipling
and inchu^ching of the Gentiles the conversion of them, only they knew not
whether it might be by joining them first by way of addition, as proselytes to
the Jews, rather then by gathering them into other distinct Churches; his
speech is not right. For, 1. Though it is true, Christ had declared his mind,
Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.15. about conversion of the Gentiles, yet either Peter
understood not Christ's mind, or did not remember it before the vision, Acts
10.2. It is apparent from Acts 11.3. that the exception against Peter was not
for that he had gathered Cornelius and his company into a distinct Church, and
not joined them as Proselytes to the Jews, but that he went in to men
uncircumcised, and did eat with them, which sh^wes they held it unlawful so
much as to preach and converse with any uncircumcised, though he were a
proselyte of the gate, as Cornelius appears to have been. As for not joining
the Gentiles as proselytes to the Jews, they knew that well enough, that they
were not to be so joined, since neither John the Baptist, nor Christ or his
Disciples did ever by baptism join any as proselytes to the Jews, but did take
even the Jews themselves (who embraced their Doctrine) into distinct Churches
or Schools, though they did not erect any new political States or
Commonwealths, as the nation of the Jews was.

Master Cobbet further excepts against me in these words. 4. It Is affirmed,
that this promised of sending Christ was to them, their children, and those
afar off, as many as our God should call, that they may be turned from their
iniquity, and be baptized for remission of sins, and yet also that the promise,
what ever it be supposed to be, was to them all, with that limitation, that
they repent, or that they be called. What? is it to as many as the Lord shall
call, or convert, or cause to repent? and yet is it, that they may be turned
from their iniquity? is it to persons called, and yet also to uncalled persons?
is it to them that they may be called, yet the persons to whom the promise is,
are as many as are supposed to be called? how can these two be right? yea, it
is to them all, upon condition that they be called, and yet also, that it is to
them, that they may be called. Why, if it be to them, that by Christ they may
be called, then is that promise to persons as yet uncalled, and their calling
is an effect following their interest in that promise as a cause, and not
preceding their interest in the promise as a condition.

Ans. the promise is of sending of Christ for remission of sins, their calling
is a consequent of Christ's being sent, who was sent to turn them from iniquity,
that is, to call them; and this calling was for a further benefit, remission of
sins through Christ sent, and so their calling is a condition of the remission
of sins by Christ sent, nor is the promise of remission of sins by Christ sent
to any but those who are called. The calling is a consequent to Christ's sending
as a prior benefit, and an antecedent to remission of sins as a subsequent. And
thus the knot Master Cobbet conceives is easily loosed.

SECT. XXIII. The arguments drawn from Acts 2.38, 39. against the connection
between covenant interest and baptism-right, and infant baptism are vindicated
from Master Cobbets answers.
THere are other passages in the following Sections, on which I animadvert,
Sect. 4. he says, Acts 2. he does not intend it thus, your children (i. e.)
Abraham's children; for Abraham is considered rather by him as a pattern, having
the precedential Copy of the Covenant mentioned. And it had been incongruous to
have said; It is to your children, that is, to Abraham's children. Concerning
which passage I say, that though I conceive it a mistake to understand by [your
children] Abraham's children, yet Master Cobbets words intimate sundry things
which are liable to animadversions. 1. The promise, Acts 2.39. is supposed by
others, and by Master Cobbet, Sect. 7. to be that, Gen 17.7. I will be a God to
thee and thy seed after thee, but this was the covenant it self, and not a
precedential Copy of the covenant mentioned. I think Master Cobbet cannot show
any other after Copy, in which God promised to be the God of a believer and his
seed, which it is confessed he did to Abraham. 2. That Abraham should be
considered rather as a pattern to fathers, then as a particular person is said
without any proof; nor is it true, 1. Because it is understood in Scripture as
meant of Abraham as a particular person, Gal. 3.16, etc. 2. Because if he were
considered as a pattern, the promise should be to others as to him, Genesis 17, 7.
but that is not true, the promise is made to none besides as to Abraham, Genesis
17.7. And whereas Master Cobbet observes that the promise to them and their
children cannot be meant of the children as their children after the Spirit,
because they could not be such spiritual fathers to any children of theirs,
themselves being not yet such relates, as believing fathers, nor having such
correlates as children after the Spirit; this does plainly show that the
promise to them and their children is not all one with a promise to believers
and their children, and the mention of the children, Acts 2.39. is not to
intimate any privilege arising to the child from the faith of the parent. For,
as Master Cobbet says truly, as yet they acted not faith and repentance, nor
does Peter say, The promise is or belongs to you, for you have repented, and
consequently believed. As for Master Cobbets inference that if the imprecation
of the Jews, Matthew. 27.25. were the occasion of Peter's words Acts 2.39. then
the promise must be also to their babes, on whom they wished Christ's blood,
else the plaster were too narrow for their wounds rising from the guilt of
blood wished upon their children, including, and not excluding their babes; it
follows not. For, 1. Though babes be children, yet children indefinitely put
without any universal sign may be meant of others then babes or infants. 2. The
wish may be meant of infants, and the promise also, yet not to take place or to
be accomplished on them or to them in their infancy. That curse and that
promise which is made to a man's children being for present infant^ is verifyed
if it happen to them at twenty years old, they being then the ^^me persons,
which they were when they were but a day old. 3. Will Master Cobbet assert, the
promise must be as large as the curse? If so, then the promise must belong to
their children, elder or younger, whether believing or unbelieving* p^nitent or
impenitent, for the wish was on all absolutely. But Master Cobbet (I presume)
will not assert the promise of remission of sins was in praesenti to all the
children of the Jews to whom Peter spoke, elder and younger, believing and
unbelieving, penitent and impenitent in respect of external right and
administration. Therefore he must limit the term [your children] if he will
have his own exposition to hold good, and consequently the children, Acts 2.39.
must be fewer then those the imprecation lighted on, Mat. 27.25.

Sect. 5. That which Master Cobbet says, that those who say the promise made
to Abraham of sending Christ and now fulfilled, is to them, in effect say as
those that expound [the promise is to you] that is, is offered to you, is not
right. For the fulfilling notes something past, the offer is of something to be
yet done or attained, yet it is true that the speech of Peter did contain not
only an offer, but also an assurance of remission of sins to the called by
virtue of the promise fulfilled in Christ's coming.

Of the sense of the words, Acts 3.25. I have spoken somewhat before. The terms
[children of the prophets and of the covenant] are appropriated to the Jews,
as Romans 9, 4. they being the only people to whom the prophets were sent, as
Beza annot* in locum, id est, ^i ^stis quibus peculiariter destinati fuerunt
prophetae, and quibuscum foedus est sancitum, ex Hebraeorum idiotismo, qu^m
supra aliquoties annotavimus. Huc pertinet quod ait Paulus, Romans 9.4. And when
he says, they were children of the covenant made with the fathers, and not of
the fathers with whom the covenant is made, the intent is not to show that it is
meant of Church and federal interest in them, as covenant-fathers and
dispensers, or to show that the covenant was as seed, by virtue whereof they
considered as foederally and ecclesiastically privileged, did spring in Master
Cobbets sense of outward Church Membership and initiating ordinance: but the
plain meaning is, that they were the people to whom the first exhibition and
tender of the Gospel did belong, in that they were the posterity of the Fathers
with whom the covenant was made: and so the Jews had a priority of not only
external interest in the covenant, but also internal, though when the Gentiles
were called, the privileges of the covenant were equal to the Gentiles with
the Jews, and the condition of the promise, that is, the obtaining remission
of sins by the fulfilling of the promise, is equally to Jew and Gentile
savingly believing,

Sect. 7. Master Cobbets conceit of the term [afar off, Acts 2.39.] that it is,
meant of their being strangers from actual interests in the covenants of
promise, and Commonwealth of Israel, or the visible political Church, Ephesians.
2.11, 12, 13. supposes, 1. The terms (...) those afar off, Acts 2.39. to be
the same with (...) who were sometimes afar off, Ephesians. 2.13. But the phrases
are not the same, and it is for reasons formerly given more likely that the
remoteness, Acts 2.39. is meant of place or descent. 2. that the remoteness,
Ephesians. 2.13. was in respect of external Church interest, and so in like manner,
Acts 2.39. But Ephesians. 2.13. the remoteness was such as was taken away by the
blood of Christ, which is more then external Church-interest, and the nearness
such as [you and your children, Acts 2.39.] had not then attained to, but were
then afar off from God, or as it is, v. 18. had not access by one Spirit unto
the Father. And therefore Master Cobbets sayings that the Jews and their
children, Acts 2.39. were not then when Peter spoke afar off, as the t^rm is
meant, Ephesians. 2, 13. but rather nigh in that sense, and that the promise is to
them actually, and quoad hominem, and to the other, that is, the Genteles, afar
off intentionally, and quoad Deum, even whilst afar off, and uncalled, are but
conceits arising from the mistakes of Peter's speech, Acts 2.39. and Paul's,
Ephesians. 2.13. It is true, to the Jews indefinitely, that is, to that nation or
people did the Adoption and promises belong, yet not to every particular person
of that nation; For as it is said, Romans 9.4. To whom pertains the adoption,
and the promises; so it is said. v. 4, 5. To whom pertain the service of God,
of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came: and yet these things not true of
every Israelite.

It is true, Moses made a covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.15. with the unborn which were not
actually existent in Church Estate and humane being, but that this was a
covenant wherein Covenant-grace is expressed, and that it is verified
intentionally, and quoad Deum, is besides the text, which speaks not of Gods
making a covenant, but of Moses, v. 14. and this covenant was obliging to duty,
not expressing covenant-grace. That which Master Cobbet says, that the
righteousness of faith according to the covenant, Genesis 17.7. which contains
the promise of justification, was by circumcision visibly sealed unto the Jews
and their children by Gods own appointment, circumcision being in the
Sacramental nature of it, a visible seal of the righteousness of faith it self,
and not merely in a personal respect to Abraham, as applied by his faith to
justification, has either none or very little truth. For though it be true
that the promise, Genesis 17.7. was of the righteousness of faith according to the
more hidden sense of the words, yet it was so only to the spiritual seed of
Abraham by faith, Romans 4.12, 16. Gal. 3.7, 9, 29. Nor was circumcision
appointed by God to seal it to Jews and their children, nor circumcision in
the Sacramental nature of it, a visible seal of the righteousness of faith, nor
is any man's circumcision termed in the Scripture a seal of the righteousness of
faith, but Abraham's, which was not a seal as applied by his faith to his
justification, but as a seal to him that he had the righteousness of faith
before he was circumcised, and that all that believe as he did shall be
justified, as he was, Romans 4.11, 12. Master Cobbet adds, Nor will it suffice
to say, that covenant was a mixed covenant. It held forth temporal things
indeed, but by virtue of a covenant of grace, Psalm. 111.5. as does the promise
now, 1 Timothy 4.8. But it holds forth also spiritual things in the external right
and administration thereof to all, albeit in the internal operation, as to
some. The promises are to them all, Romans 9.4. Scil. in the former sense; and
yet, ver. 8. some only are the children of the promise, and the choice seed in
that general covenant, Scil. in respect of the saving efficacy of the covenant
upon them, v. 6. And the same distinction is now held out in such sort, amongst
persons in Church Estate.

Ans. It suffices against those that make the covenant, Genesis 17. to be a
covenant of Evangelical grace only, and make other promises of temporal things
to be only administrations of it, and make circumcision a seal of the covenant
of grace, because it was the taken of that covenant, to say, that (...)
covenant, Genesis 17.7. was a mixed covenant containing promises proper to Abraham's
natural posterity as well as Evangelical to his Spiritual, and (...) the
covenant is rather to be denominated from the former, which are more manifestly
held forth in it then the latter, and that the reason why circumcision was
appointed, was the signifying and assuring the former rather then the latter,
and so the circumcising of infants was not from interest Evangelical, but
national or proper to the people of Abraham. Nor is Master Cobbets exception of
any validity, that because there is a promise of the life that now is, 1 Timothy
4.8. therefore the covenant now is mixed. For the promise of the life that now
is, is not of any outward inheritance peculiar to the godly and their children,
as Abraham had of the Land of Canaan for him and his, but of fatherly care, and
sanctified use of outward things. Nor does Psalm. 111.5. prove that the
inheriting Canaan, being great and prosperous, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. were by
virtue of a covenant of grace, but it rather appears from many places, Deuteronomy.
28. etc. Heb. 8.6. that they were by the covenant of works in keeping the law
of Moses, unto which circumcision did oblige, Gal. 5.3. The promises Genesis 17.
so far as they were Evangelical did belong to Abraham's seed by faith only, nor
does the Apostle any where interpret that promise, Genesis 17.7. as holding forth
spiritual things in the external* right and administration of it, and the
spiritual things assured therein are by the Apostle determined, Romans 9.8. to
belong only to the elect, not to all. Nor does Romans 9.4. say, the promises
pertained to all the Jews, nor to any in respect of external right and
administration. And though I deny* not but that persons may be said to be
outwardly in the covenant of grace in appearance to m^n, when they make a
profession of faith, though not in reality, yet I deny that God has made the
covenant or promise of grace to any other then the elect and true believers,
nor appointed any way of sealing it to any other. Nor is it true that baptism
as a covenant-seal presupposes a covenant-right, or that the Jews, Acts 2.38,
39. had any covenant or Church-right to baptism, jus ad r^m, though not jus in
re, before they were believers on Christ, nor had they any right to baptism in
that they were members of the Church of the Jews, nor was the commission of
baptism first given by God to John Baptist in reference to that Church of the
Jews, as a seal of their membership therein, but of their owning John's
doctrine, becoming his disciples, and joined into a School or Church distinct
from the Pharasees, and other Jewish Church-rulers, though they adhered till
after Christ's death to the law of Moses and temple-service. Nor is there any
truth in it that Peter required of the Jews repentance before baptism, Acts
2.38. because though they had covenant or Church-right thereto, yet being adult
members under offense, and admonished thereof by Peter: they might for their
obstinacy against such an admonition notwithstanding Church or Covenant-right
have been debarred that seal. For, 1. The Christian Church and the Jewish
Church of which those Jews were members were in their profession not only
distinct, but also opposite; therefore there was no Church-right from being
members in the one to be members of the other. 2. For their fact of which they
were admonishde by Peter, they were so far from being in danger of being cast
out of the Jewish Church in which they were members, that they were more sure
of being cast out for repenting of their sin, and being baptized into the Name
of Christ, John 9.22. 3. Peter does not act in his speech, Acts 2. 38, ^9. as
an Elder in the Jewish Church, for he was none, but as an Apostle of Christ:
nor was their fact objected to them as an offense to the Church of which ^^ey
were, but confessed by themselves as an heavy burden that lay on their
conscience: nor was Peter's advice given to remove a Church-censure for
readmission to a seal, but to ease their consciences, and to bring them to the
faith of Christ and communion of that Church into which they had never been
admitted.

But Master Cobbet against my first exception says, those Jews were offensive
members of that Jewish Church, which was a true visible Church, and not yet
dischurched and divorced by the Lord; they were then in the Church of the
Gospel, and so externally in covenant and Church Estate also, as being yet in
the Olive and Kingdom of God, and not cast out, until their unbelief, or total
and final rejection of the covenant as ratified in Jesus as that promised
Messiah, Romans 11.20. to which the Jews had not as yet come.

Ans. A Church of the Gospel is such a company as avoucheth the Gospel, the
Gospel was that Jesus was the Christ; to the being in the Church of the Gospel,
it is not sufficient that there has not been a total or final rejection of the
covenant, but it is necessary there be an explicit believing and owning of
Christ, John 8.24. To be a people so cast off as to have the offer of grace
taken from them, presupposes such a rejection, Acts 13.46. Mat. 21.43. But to
be a Gospel Church or member of a Gospel Church, requires more then a
non-rejection, to wit, an express avouching of the Gospel. Non-rejection does
not make a Gospel Church or Churchmember; if it did, the salvage Americans
that never heard of the Gospel, and so have not rejected it, should be a
Gospel Church and Church Members. Yet that Jewish Church of which the Jews,
Acts 2.37. were of, and those Jews themselves had rejected Christ with much
violence, John 9.22. Acts 3.13, 14, 15. and therefore they could have no
covenant or Church-right, no not externally quoad homines from their standing
in that Church, by which they might have claimed admission into the Christian
Church by baptism without repentance, and faith in Christ, no not though they
were supposed to have been without any scandalous sin deserving excommunication
or suspense from the seal.

But Master Cobbet is bold to avouch, that this Church was a Gospel Church
visibly interessed in the covenant of grace, the subject of the Gospel, and the
same essentially with that Gospel, or Christian Church: which to me is such a
paradox, as is by no means to be received. For then that Church should be a
Gospel Church, which did obstinately adhere to the law, and they interessed in
the Covenant of grace, who sought righteousness by the works of the law, and
they a Christian Church who denied, persecuted, killed Christ, and avouched
themselves Moses his disciples, John 9.27. not Christ's. And if that Church and
the Christian be the same essentially* he that was admitted to the Jewish
Church was admitted to the Christian, then baptism was needless, yea, irrigular
for the entering and admission of a believing Jew into the Christian Church,
contrary to that, 1 Cor. 12.13. for they were in the Christian Church before,
in that they were in the Jewish Church essentially the same, then did Peter ill
to exhort them to save themselves from them, Acts 2.40. then was Luke mistaken
in saying v. 47. The Lord added them daily to the Church after they were
converted and baptized, for they were in the same Church before; all which are
in my apprehension palpable absurdities.

But Master Cobbet thus backs his assertion; Unless, whilst the Jewish church
stood, any will say, there was no Evangelical visible Church in the world, but
a legal Church; for there was no other visible Church, then that of the Jews.

Ans. the perpetual visibility of the true Church is a point in which Papists
and Protestants differ. The Papists assert a perpetual visibility of the Church
in Pastors and people, as sensible as any other society of men; so that at any
time one may point with his finger and say, this is the Church, the
Protestants, that though it abide always upon the earth, holding the whole
faith without change, and containing a certain number that constantly profess
it, yet this number may be very small, and their profession so secret among
themselves, that the world and such as love not the truth, shall not see them,
they remaining so hidden as if they were not at all. Thus Doctor John White in
his Way to the true Church, sect. 17. digress. 17. sets down the difference. If
Master Cobbet mean (as he seems to do) a visible political Church in the former
sense, then it is no absurdity to say, at some time while the Jewish Church
stood there was no Evangelical visible Church in the world. For at the time of
Christ's passion when the Disciples were scattered, the shepherd being smitten,
Matthew. 26.31. there was no such visible Evangelical Church; yea, some of the
Papists themselves quoted by Doctor White in the same place, hold that about
the time of Christ's passion, the true faith remained in none but only the
Virgin Mary. Alsted. suppl. panstr. cath. Chami. de eccl. l. 2. c. 16. s. 10.
D^in^e tempore passionis Christi ecclesia non erat visibilis, talis scilicet,
in qua erant praela^i and subditi, pastores and oves. Nam ecclesia visibilis
non erat apud pharisaeos and scribas* Illi enim impudenter, and scelerate
errarunt. But in the latter sense which the Protestants follow, we can assign
an Evangelical visible Church in the world, distinct from the Jewish, while the
Jewish Church stood. Alsted. ubi supra. Ergo ecclesia externa etiam tota
deficere potest, remanentibus occultis fidelibus; quales tum temporis erant
Simeon, Anna, Nicodemus, etc. At the time of Christ's incarnation and before
there was in the Protestant sense a true visible Evangelical Church in Simeon,
Anna, and those to whom she spoke, who looked for redemption in Jerusalem, Luke
2.38. In the time of John Baptists and Christ's Ministry, many baptized by John
and Christ's Disciples, John 4.1, 2. In the time of Christ's passion, besides the
Apostles, and those women who professed, Joseph of Ari^^th^a and Nicodemus are
expressed, John 19.38, 39. to have owned Christ. And these were a distinct
Church from the J^wish, I mean the Priests, Scribes, Pharisees and people who
denied Christ, though not in their political government, yet in their
profession of faith, which is necessary according to Protestants to make a
company to be a visible Evangelical Church, and essentially the same with the
Church Christian, Ames. medul. Th. l. 1. c. 32. Ecalesia est societus fidelium;
quia idem illud in professione constituit ecclesiam visibilem, quod interna and
reali sua natura constituit ecclesiam mystica^^, id est, fides.

But Master Cobbet from his erroneous dictates would frame an answer to the
argument brought from Peter's words, Acts 2.38, 39. to prove that the imagined
covenant-right is not sufficient to entitle to baptism, without repentance and
faith, since even of those Jews to whom he said the promise is, he prerequired
repentance to baptism, and thus he writes. That then something further was
required by Peter, of the adult Jews, to actual participation of baptism, and
it was not because their Church of which they were members was no true visible
Evangelical Church, since it was Gods only visible Church, in the time of
Christ's incarnation, of which he lived and died a member; and none will say, he
was no member of any Evangelical Church, but of a legal; nor was it because the
seal of baptism was not administrable, in, or by, or to that Church of the
Jews.

Ans. The true reason, why we conceive Peter required repentance of the adult
Jews to baptism, is because Christ appointed none to be baptized, but his
disciples* such as did repent and believe in him as the Messiah, Matthew. 28.19.
Mark 16.16. and so Peter here, and Philip, Acts 8.36, 37. understood Christ's
mind. The other reasons that the Jewish Church was no true visible Evangelical
Church, and that the seal of baptism was not administrable, in, or by, o^ to
that Church of the Jews, I know not who assigns them as the cause why Peter
required of adult Jews repentance to baptism, so that if Master Cobbet did
make void these reasons, and not the genuine reason assigned by us, his answer
is insufficient to the argument. However I shall examine what he says, since
his writing has been cracked of as unanswerable. 1. By removing the first
reason, he intimates that the objectour conceived it necessary that a person to
be baptized be a member of a true visible Evangelical Church and this he denies
not, yea he seems to conceive that it is needful he be a member of such a
particular Church visible in respect of outward order, and government by Elders
and People united in covenant. But this I conceive not true. 1. Because no more
is needful then is required in the institution. But in the institution to be a
disciple of Christ, a penitent believer on him is required and no more, Matthew.
28.19. Mark 16.16. Acts 2.38. not to be a member of a particular visible
Evangelical Church. Ergo. 2. No more is needful to baptism then what Philip
required of the Eunuch, Acts 8.36, 37. Peter of Cornelius, Acts 10.46, 47. Acts
11.17, 18. Paul of the Jaylour and others, Acts 16.32. But they required no
more but to be a Disciple of Christ, or a penitent believer. Ergo. 3. If it
were requisite to be a member of a particular Church, Cornelius was not rightly
baptized: but this is not true: Ergo. The consequence of the major is proved,
because Cornelius before his baptism was not a member of any particular Church*
not of the Jewish, for he was uncircumcised; and counted unclean by them, Acts
11.3. not of the Christian; For they excepted against Peter for going in to
him, Acts 11.2, 4. Regularly a man is not a member of a particular Church till
he is baptized, baptism going before joining to the Church, Acts 2.41, 47.
therefore it is not necessary a person be a member of a particular visible
Church before baptism. 2. Master Cobbet takes on him to prove that the Church of
which the adult Jews, Acts 2.37. were members was a true Evangelical Church.
1. Because so in the time of Christ's incornation. But this follows not, it
might be so at Christ's incarnation, and yet not be so at the time of Peter's
speech, Acts 2.38, 39. they having expressly denied Christ. 2. Because he lived
and dyed a member of that Church, and none will say, he was no member of any
Evangelical Church, but of a legal. To which I say, 1. Christ lived and dyed
the head of the Evangelical church of Jews and Gentiles, but not as a
subordinate member in it, though he were subject to the law of Moses, and did
yield obedience to it while it was his Fathers will it should stand in force.
2. But that he died as a member of the Jewish church, to wit, that party of
which the Jews, Acts 2.37. were a part, is not true, he being an outcast from
them, and made a curse for us. 3. If it should be granted he were a member of
that church, he had been a member not of an Evangelical church, but legal, or
rather manifestly Antichristian. 2. by removing the second reason of Peter's
requiring repentance before baptism of the adult Jews, he intimates that this
objectour conceived it necessary that baptism be administered in or by or to a
church, such as the Jews was not, and he grants the former, and denies the
latter. But how or whence it is deduced that baptism must be administrable in
or by or to a church I understand not. Baptism has been and may be lawfully
administered without the presence of any church, as in the baptism of the Eunuch
by Philip, Acts 8.38. to a person who is member of no particular church, as in
Cornelius his baptism, and by a Minister without consent of any Church, as in
the same cases, and to a single person, though no church were baptized, as in
the Eunuchs case. Then he asserts the seal of baptism administrable in, or by,
or to the church of the Jews, that he may maintain a title to baptism, though
suspended by reason of their sin in the Jews from an imagined covenant-right,
and Church Membership antecedent to their repentance, which are wild fancies.
But let us view what he writes.

For it is evident (says Master Cobbet) that the commission of baptism was
first given by God, to John Baptist, in reference to that church of the Jews
as a seal of their membership therein; the same God that told him, who should,
baptize with the Holy Ghost, he sent him to baptize, John 1.33. the Pharisees
themselves could not deny John's baptism to be from heavens authority, Mat.
21.25, 26. and baptism being a Church-ordinance, to be in ordinary dispensation
or administered only in and by a church of Christ, that baptism was at that
time the Jewish Church-ordinance, so far forth, there was no other floor,
wherein all sorts which John baptized, whether they proved chaffy hypocrites,
or solid grain upright ones, were in his and Christ's time interessed, Matthew.
3.11, 12. this was then the only floor, or visible church of Christ (for in
the invisible church is no chafe) [his] floor; he shall purge [his] floor.

Ans. It is granted, John was sent by God to baptize, and that the people or
church of the Jews were Christ's floor, and that in that floor or people were
chafe and wheat, bad and good, reprobate and elect ones. But this proves not
the commission of baptism first given by God to John Baptist in reference to
that church of the Jews, as a seal of their membership therein. For what
consequence is there in this, God sent John to the Jews, he had his authority
to baptize those of the Jews, who repented, therefore he sealed their
membership in the church of the Jews, and baptism was administrable in, or by,
or to that church of the Jews? It seems to me that the contrary follows, John
was sent ^o baptize, he preaches repentance, tells them that it availed not
them to say Abraham was their father gathers them into a distinct School or
society from the Pharisees and Lawyers, Luke 7.29, 30. directs them to Christ,
who should sever chafe and wheat; therefore he was not given by God in
reference to that church of the Jews as a seal of their membership therein,
but severed a people from them by repentance and baptism, and that baptism was
not administrable in, or by, or to that church of the Jews, but in a distinct
company, by a select officer, to a severed people from that church. Nor do I
know it to be true that baptism is a church-ordinance, to be in ordinary
dispensation administered only in and by a church of Christ, but conceive it a
ministerial ordinance to be administered by one single Minister without the
presence or consent of a church of Christ: nor do I think baptism was at that
time the Jewish ordinance being neither appointed in their law, nor by
Ministers chosen by them, nor by their authority, nor according to their
direction* nor for the settling of their church discipline, or authority, but in
these and all other respects opposite or distinct from the Jewish church. And
although I grant the Jewish people or church (though Pareus com in locum says,
Dominus areae suae, h. e. ecclesiae. imo totius mundi) Christ's floor, yet from
hence it follows not they were Christ's visible Church, there being other
reason why they are called Christ's floor, because Christ employed his fan, to
wit, his preaching among them, being Minister of the circumcision, Romans 15.8.
though they were not Christ's visible church, that is, a company or people
professing themselves to be his Disciples. Nor is it true that in John Baptists
and Christ's time, all sorts which John baptized, hypocrites, or upright ones,
were interessed in the Jewish church as Christ's floor, nor any such thing
proved from Matthew. 3.11, 12. the being in the floor importing only their
position, no benefit or interest accruing to them thereby. But Master Cobbet
goes on.

Into this Church Fellowship also did Christ's own Disciples by that new way of
initiation, visibly seal persons, which were the reformed part of that Jewish
church, continuing still their relation to those officers of the Jewish church,
and their fellowship in the Church-ordinances, then dispensed, and not
separating from the same, either gathering into distinct churches, or calling
to them other ordinary church officers, which yet were not actually given by
Christ, until upon his ascension, Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12.

Ans. The Disciples of Christ did not visibly seal persons by that new way of
initiation into the Jewish Church Fellowship; the fellowship they had in the
Jewish church, was by their birth and circumcision and the law they were under,
which they submitted to, while it was in force, and observed such legal
ordinances as were appointed them, acknowledging the Priests and other Officers
of the Jews according to their place: yet in respect of profession of Doctrine
they were by baptism separated from the Jews, and were gathered into a
distinct church, had Christ and his Apostles and the 70. as their Officers in
ordinary before the ascension of Christ: nor is there one jot of Scripture that
does in the least countenance this fond conceit of Master Cobbet, that Jewish
Churchmembership gave title to baptism, or baptism visibly sealed persons into
Jewish Church Fellowship.

Master Cobbet having cashiered the spurious reasons (as he imagins) why Peter
required of the Jews, to whom he said, The promise is repentance before baptism,
he takes on him to assign the genuine reasons thus.

But the reason rather was, partly because (as was said) they were under such
offense. Ans. He required repentance, because they had sinned in crucifying
Christ, but repentance was not required to take away the offense of the church
the Jews were of, nor for the removing of a suspension from the seal. For
Peter was no Jewish Church Officer, neither did any of the Jewish church in way
of Discipline deal with those Jews by any church-act, tending to their
correction for that sin, yea, the rulers of the Jews with the people did
generally avow that act as well done: nor was any thing more offensive to them
then the profession of Christ, and repentance for the killing of him. But Peter
requires repentance as a necessary prerequisite universally to baptism, and as
the way to remission of sins, which their perplexed souls needed. Master
Cobbet adds: And partly because, albeit their church were a true Evangelical
church, yet it was not so pure and perfect, but had many gross mixtures both of
ceremonial administrations, which were now to be laid aside, and of most
palpably and openly corrupt, and rotten members.

Ans. Neither does Master Cobbet offer any proof for this his speech, neither
is there any likelihood that Peter ever intended to urge repentance by reason
of these things, since in none of his speeches he does take exceptions at their
church by reason of them, nor had this been a sufficient reason to urge them to
repentance before baptism, because though they had covenant and Church-right to
baptism, yet their right was to be suspended to the seal without repentance,
because they had gross ceremonial mixtures, and openly corrupt members, the
Jewish church of which they were members being a gospel church and essentially
the same with the christian, if Master Cobbet say true; for if this were a
reason, the New-Engl^^^ Elders do ill to admit godly persons to the seal with
them, which came from ^ Pa^ish-church in England, in which were the like
mixtures, and corrupt members without like repentance* nor does it appear that
those Jews had any hand in those ceremonial administrations; and though they
sinned a great sin in crucifying Christ, yet it wa^ through ignorance, Acts
3.17. In a word, were it granted Master Cobbet that Peter did require
repentance for any of these reasons, yet the argument is no whit infringed
thereby, that bare interest in the covenant does not give title to baptism
without repentance, since it did not give title to these Jews, even then when
notwithstanding their offense, and the corruptions in their church, yet the
promise was asserted to belong to them de praesenti in respect of external
right and administration, if Master Cobbets exposition hold good, which is
directly opposite to the requiring of repentance to baptism by reason of a
suspension of their right to the seal by reason of offense and corrupt
mixtures. But let us hear Master Cobbet a little further.

And partly, says he, because it was now requisite, not only to acknowledge
the promised M^ssiah of Abraham's loins, to be he alone, which by his blood
should come actually, as well as virtually, to ratify the covenant of grace,
visibly made with them, as they did in receiving the seal of circumcision, but
that they own the Lord Jesus, who was crucified by, and among them, as he which
alone did thus: which amongst other testimonies baptism witnesses, therefore
more was now required of the adult Jews than formerly, which yet was not
required of their unripe children.

Ans. I deny not circumcision to have had this use, that it might signify, that
the promised Messiah should come out of Abraham's loins, and I take it as
certain that baptism was appointed, that thereby the baptized should own the
Lord Jesus, and witness that he was the Messiah, and that this was the reason
why even the Jews circumcised, what ever their interest in the promise should
be, were bound to witness by baptism Christ to be come: But this though true,
and such as shows a manif^st difference between ci^cumcision and baptism in
their use; and confirms the necessity of faith or owning of Christ by the
baptized at his baptism, yet is not pertinent to the intent of Master Cobbet*
since thereby neither is the argument from Peter's requiring repentance to
baptism infringed, which argues that therefore covenant interest is not
sufficient title to baptism without repentance, nor is thereby any reason given
of r^pentance being required by Peter before baptism: Nor is there any proof in
Master Cobbet why more should be required to baptism of the adult Jews, then
of their unripe children, only he tells of their practice in New England, that
when any are received to fellowship with them, though they being as transient
members by virtue of communion of churches, are admitted upon their former
church-ingagement, yet desirous to be fixed Members, they require testimony of
their repentance of their former church-sins and personal scandals therein
committed, not so of their children not sui juris, nor capable of personal
satisfaction, so it was with them, Acts 2. being to be incorporated into a
purer company, exhibiting the ordinances of Christ in a more perfect
Evangelical way. But setting aside the question, whether this course in New
England be justifiable and by what rule they require more of the fixed member
then of the transient, the defilement being alike in both. 1. It is not true
that it was so with the Jews and their children as with fixed and transient
members in N. E. For neither was the church of the Jews then an Evangelical
church less perfect then that of the Apostles, but openly opposite to Christ
and the christian church: Nor was that which those Jews perplexed did
propound, that they might be of their church as a purer church, but what Peter
and the Apostles would advise them to do to free them from the guilt of
crucifying Christ. Nor does Peter at all as an Elder assign repentance to them
for admission to outward Church Priviledges, but as an Apostle preaches to
them repentance for remission of sins and easing their consciences, which was
an act of doctrine, not of jurisdiction. 2. If it had been so, yet neither does
this prove that the Apostle required more of the aged Jews to baptism then
formerly, nor that he did it because they were to be inco^porated into a purer
company exhibiting the ordinances of Christ in a more perfect Evangelical way,
nor that he did require more of the Fathers then the children to baptism; nor
is the argument infringed, that if covenant interest entitle to baptism of it
self without repentance the Father to whom the promise is as well as the child,
yea, in priority to the child, who derives his title from the Fathers
covenant interest, then it should much more entitle the Father to baptism
without repentance: Idem qua idem semper facit idem, so that after so many
shifts, absurdities, unproved dictates, vain dreams of making the case of the
Jews like persons received into fellowship in N. E. and the overweening
conceit of the purity of their church, and exhibition of the ordinances of
Christ in a more perfect Evangelical way, there is nothing yet produced to
invalidate the argument from Peter's requiring repentance of the Jews before
baptism, against the connection between covenant interest and right to baptism.

Master Cobbet goes on thus: nor must that needs follow, that because it is
said, they were added to the church, that therefore they were not of the church
before, but after Peter spoke those words, v. 39. the promise is to you, etc.
for this is as well spoken after that expression that they were baptized, as
after that mentioned, of their receiving the Word gladly, and yet will our
opposites conclude, that therefore they were not of the church, nor in the
covenant before they were baptized, but came into that estate by baptism. If
baptism were the form of the church, or that which they so much urge wholly
failed, that a person must be first discipled, and so in covenant and
Church Estate before he be baptized.

Ans. Either I understand not the force of words. or else it is a clear
argument, Acts 2.41. And there were added in that day souls about three
thousand, v. 47. And the Lord added the saved daily to the church, and these
were of the Jews, therefore Jews were not of the church before that day, and
that addition. For what is addition to a company but a joining or bringing one
more to them then was before? even as in arithmetic addition is putting to
another member then was before reckoned. And this argument seems so plain to
me, that I count the denial of it as the denial of a common notion. That which
Master Cobbet answers is to the argument framed thus, they are not said to be
added till after Peter's speech, v. 39. therefore they were not of the church
before; and I confess the argument so framed is not so cogent, since historians
do not always relate things in order as they were done. Yet supposing Lukes
relation orderly (of which there is no cause to doubt, since the particles (...)
then v. 41. show it) the argument is good, after Peter's words it is said, then,
and that day were added, therefore they were not before of the church. Nor do I
know any absurdity in it to say they were added by baptism to the church, it
being one means of addition to the church, and though I say not that baptism is
the form of the church, but that there may be a church without baptism, nor the
only way of adding to the church, for the preaching of the Word is also a
means of adding to it, yet this I say, that neither is a church regular, nor
the addition as it should be without baptism. And though I say a person is to
be discipled before he be baptized, yet he may be baptized before he is in some
sense in covenant and church estate, meaning in covenant by Gods promise to
him, and in church estate, that is, so as to be reckoned a member of a visible
church in complete fellowship of other ordinances with it.

Master Cobbet proceeds thus. Nor is that cogent, which is urged against the
childrens right in the promise, and unto baptism, that they should be so
privileged, when they came to be effectually called, and to be turned from
their sins, as if this were quoad homines, their only rule of judging of
persons visible interest in the covenant of grace, or visible right to the
initiatory seal thereof: or at least the only way of having such a visible
interest in the visible churches cour^. For besides that it was not so of old,
in applying of circumcision, as Gods appointed seal of the parties visible
covenant-estate and right: even with us also it is not the rule in foro
Ecclesia; for then none are by the church to be by rule admitted to baptism,
but such as are effectually called, and then John which knew, that the most of
them, which he baptized, would be as chafe in the floor, he kept not rule in
baptizing of them. Or if calling be taken for external inviting in the Word
preached; and offer of Christ, that I suppose will not be pleaded; for then
every hearer should be forthwith baptized, albeit an Indian or Black^more; but
calling as taken in reference to baptizing unto remission of sins, seems to
be rather calling into visible covenant, and church estate; unto which some,
whose was the promise intentionally, yet were afar off from that estate
actually at present, but when called to it, they were then to be baptized.

Ans. The objection answered here by Master Cobbet (if this passage here relate
to my Examen, as it is likely it does) was thus formed, Exam. page 60, 61, 62.
Exercit. sect. 4. the promise, Acts 2.39. is neither to fathers, nor their
children, nor those afar off without calling, therefore nor to infants, who are
not called by the Lord, and this calling I conceive an effectual calling to the
fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 1.9. Master
Cobbet doting on his own frivolous exposition of the being of the promise in
respect of external right and administration, propounds the objection as if the
objectour agreed with him therein, and then the absurdities I confess would
follow, which Master Cobbet draws from the objection as thus interpreted [The
promise is in respect of external right and administration, to none but the
effectually called] that the only rule to judge a persons visible right to
baptism, and the only way of having such a right is effectual calling. But
Master Cobbet might have understood that I still disclaimed this, that right to
baptism is from interest in Gods promise or covenant, and have asserted; that
is only from the persons own profession of Christ and covenanting to be his
Disciple, and for the promise, Acts 2.39. I understand it of Christ sent for
remission of sins, and thus it is most true, that the promise is neither to
father nor child uncalled; what therefore Master Cobbet refutes is not owned by
me, yet his refutation I count not valid. For that which he allegeth, it was
not so in circumcision, therefore it must not be so in baptism, proceeds on
this mistake that the rule of circumcision is a rule about baptism. And for
that which he says, that John knew that the most of them which he baptized,
would be as chafe in the floor, I conceive not true, nor does it appear that
John did admit to baptism those he knew were hypocrites and reprobates. Pareus,
Comm. in Matthew. 3.7. non ad baptismum indignos admisi^, and of all others me
thinks a New England teacher should not allege that, which, if it were true,
would condemn their strictness in admission of members into their churches,
excluding them whom they are not satisfied to be truly regenerate, so far as
they can discern. For doubtless whom John baptized they may and ought admit to
Church Membership. And this plea is made by Master Norton, Resp. ad Apollon. c.
1. propos. 1. for the New England strictness that John Baptist repelled
hypocrites from baptism. Now to the objection as I conceive it in the answer is
insufficient, Master Cobbet denies that the words [as many as the Lord our God
shall call] do circumscribe [to you and your children] as well as [all that are
afar off, Acts 2.39.] But then he would have it to be meant of calling into
visible covenant, and Church Estate, in which he would have infants included:
But the Scripture speaks of no such calling, and both that conceit, and Master
Cobbets exposition conformable to it, have been so fully refuted before, that I
shall add no more. Only whereas he says, that if calling were taken for
external inviting in the Word preached, and offer of Christ, then every hearer
should be baptized forthwith, albeit an Indian or Blackamore. I conceive it
will not follow, since they that would have all outwardly called by the offer of
Christ baptized, it is likely do mean it of such a calling as is with effect, so
as that the person called be brought to outward profession at least of the
faith of Christ.

Master Cobbet adds three considerations to prove, that infants not capable of
actual repentance. were not in defect of that repentance, excluded from the
promise mentioned, Acts 2.38, 39. which I might grant understanding it of the
promise of remission of sins before God and of elect infants, and yet no proof
thence for infant baptism. But because Master Cobbet takes the promise to be in
respect of external right and administration, and that from it there is a title
derived for infant baptism. I shall consider what he says.

1. Such a supposed exclusion of their babes had been, to lay an occasion, and
addition of more cumbers and trouble to the darkened disquieted spirits of his
hearers, then to clear and ease them, supposing, as is undeniably evident that
their wish against their poor children, pressed them sore, as well as other
guilt. It was all along thitherto, a received truth, that God was a God to
their seed externally, by virtue of Abraham's covenant they were his adopted
children, Ezekiel. 16.21. and the churches children, which she ba^e to the Lord,
v. 20. see Deuteronomy. 29.29. and it was evident, by Gods own appointment of
circumcision, to be the initiatory seal, not to a blanck, but to his covenant
of being a God to them whilst babes, and before circumcised in heart, so as
actually to repent, Deuteronomy. 30.6. this their babes had external right unto
whilst these their parents were convinced or unwrought upon, remaining uncut
off by censures from the church, as of old, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. is mentioned of
those Idolaters. Now if not so when their Parents are wrought upon by Peter's
Sermon, as the parents were thus far losers, by Christ and his Gospel, and the
efficacy thereof, losing that precious parental privilege which they had
before this of their childrens federal in^erest, and privilege of Abraham's
covenant, so also their children are losers too, by their Parents coming so far
on to Christ, coming now thus to be excluded their former Covenant-right and
neither Parents nor children to have any Covenant-right and privilege in lieu
hereof. How such doctrine might well stumble, and trouble such Parents, let any
sober and judicious mind judge; to be sure they have a load of guilt, and given
a deadly wound unto their poor Babes, by that curse of theirs: now if they are
as Pagans, strangers from the covenant, then there is no hope, in reference to
ordinary and revealed grounds and ways of hope and life, Ephesians. 2.11, 12, 13.

Ans, This long tale has more of childish affection then manly reason, setting
aside the new language of initiory seal set to a blanck, childrens federal
interest, precious parental privilege, cavenant right, and such like gibberish
according to the Paedobaptists supositions about the imagined covenant to
father and child, right of infants to the first seal thereby, and this a great
privilege without which no revealed grounds ordinary of hope and life, this is
the substance of the tale, that if Peter had told them their infants were not
to be baptized, who before were circumcised he had added more grief to the
spirits of the Jews pressed with the sense of their wish against their
children, Matthew. 27.25. and therefore he is to be conceived, Acts 2.39. to have
told them of their infants right to baptism. Now surely in my apprehension if
Peter had told them such a tale, as Master Cobbet imagins he did; even then
when so great perplexity of spirit was upon them by reason of the horrid sin of
crucifying Christ, and their imprecation on them and their children, they being
then indisposed to laughter, must in all likelihood have been much moved either
with grief, or anger against such a Doctor, as would mock them with such a
receipt, as was no more to their disease then the promise of a feather to wear
is to revive a man almost dead with the pain of the colic. For what comfort
could this be to them concerning themselves, who expected the heaviest wrath
due to them for their sin, or concerning their children on whom they wished a
most heavy curse, to be told of a privilege for them and their children, which
as it was to them before, was painful in the use, so was it a heavy yoke in
the obligation, to be continued in an other rite which of it self was but
washing with cold water, and in the fruit of it before God yielded no benefit
without faith and repentance, and in the church yielded at best but a title of
church membership, by which they had no benefit, but what they might have
without it, no^ would stand them in any stead for church communion without
their actual believing? It is clear, Acts 2.39. is an encouragement to the
duties, and expectation of the good mentioned, v. 38. Now what encouragement is
it to repent, to be told that the promise was already to them in external right
and administration, and to their infants, though not as yet penitent or
believers? such a motive might rather have tended to keep them in impenitency
being in so good case already in the estate they were in. And for baptism into
the Name of Christ, such a motive tended rather to dissuade them from it, as
might fill their minds with high conceits of their and their childrens
covenant-right, even by virtue of their being in the Jewish church without
faith in Christ, or joining to the christian church. And for the good of
remission of sins before God which they needed, what assurance could they have
of it by telling them of their and their childrens having the promise already
as Jews, without personal faith and repentance in external right and
administration before men? As for the falsity of the speech as expounded by
Master Cobbet, it is showed before, what he would burden his opposites with, as
if denyeng infant baptism, they counted them as Pagans, strangers from the
Covenant, without hope, in reference to ordinary and revealed grounds and ways
of hope and life, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.13. is a mere Calumny. For setting aside
their talk of initiatory seal, and external covenant (which they cannot say
assure life to the infants of believers without election) we assure as much by
the covenant of grace, justification by Christ's blood, and sanctification by
his Spirit, which is effectual calling, and they can in truth assure no more,
nor any other way, though to uphold their credit, and to win the affections of
credulous parents, they befool them with idle talk of a covenant which the
Scripture never mentions, and of sealing that covenant by baptism, which the
Scripture is silent of. The texts Ezekiel. 16.21, 20. Deuteronomy: 30.6. will be examined
afterward. Why he bids see Deuteronomy. 29.29. I know not. unless it be that we may
discern his weakness in alleging the Scriptures impertinently, since it cannot
be meant of infants to whom the revealed things do not belong, that they may
hear them and do them in infancy.

The second consideration is in brief this, that the Apostles who as yet
preached not for the abolishing of Mosaical rites, but were indulgent to the
Jews, Acts 21.20, 22, 23, 24. would not give such manifest and just offense to
them as to hold forth an exclusion of their babes from right in that covenant
of Abraham it self, whereof circumcision was a visible seal, as the places
quoted in Genesis 17.11, 13. and Acts 7.8. declare.

To which I answer, By my exposition there is no exclusion of babes from the
promise, Acts 2.39. though it be restrained to those who are effectually
called, since babes may be said to be effectually called by the Spirit of God
according to election: nor does my exposition exclude the Jews infants from
the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. or circumcision, or in the least manner meddle with
that point. Nor do I think the promise, Genesis 17.7. to be the same with that,
Acts 2.39. If it were, yet how it may be understood otherwise then Master
Cobbet conceives is showed above.

The third consideration, setting aside his phraseology is this, that if Peter
should intend to exclude infants from baptism, it were to be cross to Paul's
doctrine, Romans 15.8. who makes it Christ's end not to evacuate, undermine, or
abolish by his coming, [the promises] indefinitely made to the fathers whether
in, Genesis 17.7. or Deuteronomy. 30.6. or the like, or respecting parents or children,
but to confirm the same, Ibid. But how this consequence is made good I cannot
conceive, but do deny it, and expect a proof of it ad Graecas Calendas.

Master Cobbet concludes the chapter with an answer to the objection, that if
this were granted of those Jewish children, what is this to our childrens
federal interest in the days of the Gospel? and he answers, 1. That it proves
that by the Apostles since Christ's ascension, this tenent of the children of
visible members of the church are visibly interessed in the covenant of grace
is of divine authority, and i^ no humane invention.

Ans. 1. In the objection, the concession was that those Jewish children were
never before denied to be visibly in Abraham's covenant, which Master Cobbet
alters, thus [are visibly interessed in the covenant of grace] now it may be
granted those Jewish children were visibly in Abraham's covenant, and yet
denied, that they are visibly interessed in the covenant of grace, the
covenants being not the same every way, and it being certain, as in the case of
Saul and others, a person may be visibly interessed in the covenant of Abraham,
and yet not in the covenant of grace. 2. Infants visible interest in the
covenant of Abraham I know no otherwise, then by circumcision, and this sure
the Apostles taught of no other then the Jewish children. 3. The text, Acts
2.39. speaks not of visible interest in the covenant of grace by external
administration. 4. If it did, yet it speaks of none other children, but Jewish,
and so not of ours, and therefore the tenent may be an humane invention
notwithstanding this text and the concession of the objectour.

2. Says Master Cobbet, these Jews are eyed by the Apostles, as persons to
partake of privileges of a Church of Christians, as was baptism; and therefore
what extent of federal right and privilege is granted by the Apostles to them
and theirs in that way is equally belonging to Gentiles in a like way. Ans. the
Jews were not tied by the Apostles to partake of baptism without the
repentance of each person to be baptized, nor is it by the Apostle made a
federal right and privilege, but a duty to which the promise did encourage,
nor is the promise said to be to them or any of their children, but the
effectually called, so that were the conclusion granted Master Cobbet, yet his
purpose is not gained that the Gentiles infants are to be baptized.

3. Says he, to suppose God by Apostolical ratification, to allow to children
of Jewish parents coming on to Christ, etc. a larger privilege then to Gentile
parents, as came on to Christ, etc. is to make God a respector of persons.

Ans. 1. It is not yet proved that the Apostle allows to children of Jewish
parents the privilege Master Cobbet means. 2. the Jews, Acts 2.39. were not
considered as coming on to Christ, but as guilty of crucifying him, and under
horror of conscience for it. 3. The privilege of baptism or the promise in
respect of external right and administration (as Master Cobbets phrase is)
could not belong to the Jews at that present, and therefore the Apostles
speech had been false in Master Cobbets sense. For he cannot assert they were
then come to Christ, but coming on to Christ, nor is it certain that many of
them ever came to Christ. But [the promise is de praesenti in respect of
external right and administration, which is Master Cobbets sense] is false of
persons which were not come to Christ, except he will have the Apostle assert a
right of baptism to them without faith. 4. The Jewish parents children had then
a larger privilege then the Gentiles in the first offer of the Gospel, as they
had larger privileges before, Romans 9.3, 4, 5. and they shall have larger
privileges at their calling hereafter if I understand the Apostle, Romans 11.24,
25, 26, 27, 28. And herein God is not such a respector of persons as Peter,
Acts 10.34. denies him to be so, as not to accept a Gentile who fears him and
works righteousness as well as a Jew. Acts of special grace undue to some
persons, not to others, argue not unjust respect of persons in God, but acts of
judgment awarding good to one that fears him and works righteousness, because
of such a Nation, and not to another, who does the same, because he is not of
that nation, contrary to his declarations, promises, laws, by which he has
bound himself; would argue unjust prosopolepsy, his declarations, promises, and
laws being general, and so the being of that Nation extirnsecal to the cause.

Says he, the force of the words seem to carry it, that the same promise which
was to those Jews actually in Church and Covenant-estate, was intentionally to
these afar off, which were strangers actually from a like estate, whether those
of the ten tribes, or rather those of the Gentiles, and should be actually to
them, when they came to be called actually into the fellowship of that covenant
and Church Estate. Now what promise was that? verily a promise which carried
with it a partial reference unto their children: The promise is to you, and to
your children: And the same is unto them afar off, whom God shall call, Scil.
in reference to their children also.

Ans. There is no color from the words that, Acts 2.39. the promise is meant
to be actually to those Jews, and intentionally to those afar off, nor does
this conceit agree with Master Cobbets exposition, who will have it to be de
praesenti to belong to the persons recited, and consequently actually to all
there named; Nor do I know how to make true sense of this his speech. For the
promise is either said to be in respect of the act of the promiser, or of the
thing promised. In the former sense the meaning of Master Cobbet should be
this, that God had made the promise to the Jews already actually, but he had
not made the promise to those afar off, but intended to do it afterward. But
this sense agrees not with Master Cobbets and other Paedobaptists conceit, who
would have the promise to be that to Abraham, Genesis 17.7. But that promise was
made almost 2000 years before, not made to those Jews then, nor to any afar
off afterward that can be showed. In respect of the thing promised, whether it
be (as I say) Christ manifested in the flesh for the remission of sins before
God, it is not true that it was actually then to the Jews mentioned, Acts
2.39. For they were not yet repenting believing persons, or it be meant of
remission of sins in respect of external right and administration, it is not
true that the promise was actually then to them, in external right, they had no
right then to claim baptism, being not then believers, neither had they the
promise in external administration de praesenti, for they were not actually
baptized (which I think is the external administration meant, I cannot imagine
Master Cobbet would be so vain as to conceive Peter told them, they were
circumcised) but Peter exhorts them to be baptized, and therefore the promise
was no more actually to the Jews then present, then to those afar off. Nor is
it true that the Jews present were then actually in Church and
Covenant-estate, if it be meant of the Christian Church, and Covenant of grace
in Christ, for they were not repenting believers; and if it be meant of the
Jewish Church, and Covenant-estate which they had as descended from Abraham by
natural descent, and by reason of circumcision, so the Gentiles were never
ealled or to be called actually into that fellowship of that Covenant, and
Church Estate, but rather out of it: Nor if they had been called into it, had
that Church and Covenant-estate at all conduced to their interest into the
Christian Church and Covenant of grace, but rather to the contrary. And for the
promise it is true, there is a reference to their children, but not because
they were believers children or their children, but by virtue of Gods call, and
it is true the promise is to Gentiles child^en and Jews when called of God,
and no otherwise, and consequently no Birth-priviledge to either intitling to
baptism. And thus is that magnified chapter of Master Cobbet abundantly
answered.

SECT. XXIII. Master Sidenhams notes on Acts 2.39. in his exercitation chapter 5.
are considered.
I Shall add a consideration of what Master Sidenham notes on Acts 2.39. that
I may at once show the impertinency of its allegation for connection between the
covenant and baptism, and infants of believe^s covenant interest upon that
consideration* I agree with him that the promise is of remission of sins and so
of salvation. Nor do I deny it to be suitable to what is promised, Genesis 17.7.
understanding it not, as Paedobaptists and among them Master Sidenham
conceives, as a promise to each believer and his natural seed, but as a promise
to Abraham as the ^ather of believers, and his spiritual seed by the following
of his faith of righteousness before God repeated at large, Jerem. 31.34. Nor
do I mistake his making it the same with the promise of Christ, and the Spirit,
as, Gal. 3.14. is meant including justification, sanctification, and all
graces. And his words I conceive very opposite to overthrow Master Cobbets and
others conceit of external right and administration, when he says, it would be
but a poor comfort to a wounded soul for to tell him of a promise of gifts, not
of spiritual grace, and the Holy Ghost is a better Physician then to imply such
a raw improper plaster to a wounded heart, which would hardly heal the skin,
this promise is brought in as a Cordial to keep them from fainting, and to give
them spirits to believe, and lay hold on Jesus Christ. And truly no other
promise but that of Free Grace, in order to Salvation, can be imagined to give
them comfort in that condition. And after, and it must needs have been a mighty
low, and disproportionable way of persuasion, to put them upon such high things
in the former verse, and to encourage them only by the narration of some
temporary gifts in the following, when their eye and heart was set on remission
of sins, and salvation by Jesus Christ; and nothing but a promise holding forth
these mercies could have been considerable to them. Nor do I deny that the
children as well as the Parents are included in this promise, nor do I deny but
that the children are invited to baptism by the promise as well as the parents.
But I deny, 1. That the mention of the promise to them and their children was
allusive to the expressions in the Old Testament, when God said to Abraham I
will be the God of thee and thy seed, Genesis 17.7. or that, Isai 44.3. and such
like, nor has Mr. Sidenham proved it, and there is this reason against it. For
in those expressions the Fathers are mentioned as righteous persons, and
believers* but here the parents could not be considered as righteous and
believing persons, for they were not such, but then charged by Peter, and at
that time under the sense of the great sin of killing Christ, and admonished to
repent of it, and therefore the words have clearly this sense, The promise is
to you, and your children as bad as you have been, and the mention of their
children is not allusive to Gods expressions in the Old Testament, but to their
own curse on them and their children, Matthew. 27.25. and so cannot note a
privilege to them and their children as persons better then others, but an
assurance to them of that good which they feared their sin debarred them of, by
telling them of Gods inrent for good according to his promise, though they
meant it for evil, as the same Apostle does, Acts 3.17, 18, 19. and Joseph did,
Genesis 45.5. and 50.20. 2. I deny that the children are invited to baptism by the
promise as giving title to baptism of it self, for the promise is urged as a
motive to a duty, not as a plea whereby they might claim, nor was their
interest in the promise the antecedent to baptism, but the consequent on it.
For the promise whether it be of remission of sins, or of the saving gift of
the holy Ghost allowing Master. Sidenhams observation that it is (...) not
(...) it is certain that Peter did assure them of it not as yet already
attained, but as attainable, not before, but upon their repentance and baptism,
neither to them, nor to their children as their children; but to them and their
children, and all afar off as many as the Lord should call. 3. He does not
invite them to baptism, but so as that he first puts them in mind of
repentance. Now if the promise had been alleged as giving title of it self to
baptism, he had left out repentance: But putting it in first, he plainly
shows, that the alleging of the promise was as well to move them to
repentance as to baptism, and first to repentance, then to baptism; nor is any
other course taken with the children then the parents, the promise and duty are
declared in like manner to both. And therefore Master Sidenhams talk of Peter's
speaking in the known dialect of the Old Testament, that if he had not meant
upon their believing and baptism without any other consideration of Gods
calling or their repentance the children to be in the promise, he had deceived
them, and that there was no other intent in mentioning the promise but to
intimate that as the Jews and their infant males were circumcised by virtue of
the promise, so it should be to them in baptism, is but vai^ without proof, and
without truth.

But Master Sidenham asserts that the words [as many as the Lord shall call]
can in no sense be referred to the former part of the verse, either to parents
or children; which if true, then according to his own interpretation of the
promise the Apostle asserts, that the promise of remission of sins and of the
Spirit including justification, sanctification, and all graces, was to them and
their children, whether called or no. But let us view his reasons for this
audacious assertion. For, says he, 1. He changes the sense in both parts of
the verse; in the first part unto the Jews, he speaks de praesenti, of the
present application of the promise; repent you and be baptized --; for the
promise is to you and your children: even now the promise is offered to you;
and they were then under the call of God; But when he speaks of the Gentiles,
because they were yet afar off, and not at all called, he speak de futuro, as
many as God shall call, even of them also; which is the first hint of the
calling of the Gentiles in all the Acts of the Apostles.

Ans. The Apostle changes not the tense of the same ve^b in either part of, v.
39. For there are but two verbs in the verse (...) and (...), and neither used
above once, so that he might have said, he uses two verbs in two tenses, but
neither change^h in one or both parts of the verse the same verb or the same
tense of the same verb. But what if he had changed the tense, and had said, the
promise is to you and your children whom he now calls, and the promise shall be
to all that are afar off as many as God shall call even of them also, did it
follow that in no sense the words (as many as the Lord shall call) can be
referred to the Former part of the verse, either to parents or children? Surely
if I have any understanding, the contrary follows, that if the meaning were*
the promise even now is offered to you, and they were then under the call of
God, but not yet called, the words may be referred to the former part of the
verse to parents and children, thus the promise of remission of sins is now
offered to you and your children under the call of God to be attained by as
many as the Lord our God shall effectually call at this time, and hereafter.
But how stands it with other Paedobaptists applications of this Seripture, as
if the promise did de praesenti belong to the children in external right and
administration, and a covenant-right in them, and title to the initial seal,
and yet the promise only offered to them, and they not called, but under the
call of God. If the offer of the promise, and a call in fieri which is not in
facto esse be sufficient to entitle men to the promise in external right, and
to the initial ieal, then had those Jews which believed not, Acts 28.24. and
the Athenians, Acts 17.32. such right and title. Master Sidenham will have
infants by the words [your children] will he say the promise was then offered
to them, and they then under the call of God? If he did, he should tell how
that we might understand it. And there is need he should show some reason and
proof of that his paraphrase, which is not yet done, ere his Reader (if he be
wise) will receive it. And for what he says that in that verse there is an
exact distribution of the world into Jew and Gentile, the Gentiles being
usually those afar off, it requires better proof then this, since neither is the
term Jew expressed, nor the term [afar off] used of the Gentiles that I know
but, Ephesians. 2.13. where it is (...), which may be questioned whether it be the
same with (...), in the text. But Master Sidenham adds.

2. How unequal would the distribution ^e of this verse, not suitable to the
laws of expression among rational men? If as many as the Lord shall call,
should be a limitation to the former part of the verse, the word children, must
needs be redundant and superfluous; for Jews and Gentiles comprehend all the
world. Now children must either be one part of the world, or comprehend under
one or both names, or be a distinct world by themselves, neither Jews nor
Gentiles: And this must needs follow on such a reading of the words; for the
design of the Apostle is to hold forth the freeness of the promise to Jew and
Gentile, and their children, to these Jews at present, to the Gentiles and
their children when God shall call the parents, as he did these Jews.

Ans. Master Sidenham has printed here such a toy as might please himself, but
is fit for nothing but to be slighted. For, 1. He supposes that [you and those
afar off] is as much as Jews and Gentiles, which is not proved. 2. He
supposes consequently [you and those afar off] to comprehend all the world,
because Jews and Gantiles comprehend all the world. But this follows not,
though the term [you] note Jews, if it note only some Jews, to wit, those to
whom Peter then spoke. 3. That if [as the Lord shall call] should be a
limitation to the former part of the verse, the word children, must needs be
redundant and superfluous, for Jews and Gentiles comprehend all the world.
Which indeed follows on his conceit that here is an exact distribution of the
world into Jew and Genrile. But this is manifestly false, for though [they afar
off] should be the Gentiles, yet all the Gentiles are not therein comprehended,
but those that are called; and if the term [you] note the Jews, yet in notes
not all the Jews, but such as were parents, and therefore the term [children]
is necessary being not comprehended under the term [you] and it is alike
necessary to express them distinctly, whether the limitation [as many as the
Lord shall call] be applied to the former part of the verse or to the latter
only, so that I can yet see no reason of Master Sidenhams conceit, that such a
referring of the limitation [as many as the Lord our God shall call] to the
first part of the v. as I make, would cause the distribution of this v. to be
so unequal as not to be suitable to the laws of expression among rational men.
And to what he adds further I say [children] were one part of the world, and
comprehended under Jews, but how this must needs follow on such a reading of
the words as puts [as many as the Lord shall call] to the first part of the
verse any more then to the latter only I see not? nor if it did, do I know any
absurdity in it, no nor any opposition to what he makes the Apostles designs.
But let us see what he makes of all this to his purpose. He tells us, now put
children by themselves a third party, and add, whom the Lord shall call, and
you exclude them from being etiher Jews or Gentiles, and so excommunicate them
from any hopes of calling, or being saved. To which I say, if I doated like
Master Sidenham, making [you and those afar off] synonymous to Jews, and
Gentiles in general, when the terms note only some in particular, and put
[children] by themselves as a third party, I should exclude them from being
Jews or Gentiles, whether I added to the first part of the v. the words [as
many as the Lord shall call] or did otherwise. And if I made all that are
called and saved to be comprehended under [you and those afar off] as
Synonymous to Jews and Gentilas in General, and excluded [children] as neither
I should excommunicate them a^ he says. But that either any such thing
follows on the limiting of the former part of the v. by those words [as many
as the Lord our God shall call] or any other of my sayings, is neither proved
by Master Sidenham nor any other, nor ever will.

But Master Sidenham goes on: Now this is, 1. Contrary to that known rule in
Logic, That Omnis bona distributio debet esse bimembris; only of two members,
and those opposite one to another; to bring in a third marres all. This then he
imagines that if [your children] be a third party, and not either [you or those
afar off] a Logic rule would be broken. But whose Logic rule is that he
mentions? I confess there have been Logicians who have affected dichotonie, but
when they have tied themselves to it, they have been censured as guilty of
accurate vanity by Burgersdicius Inst. log. l. 2. c. 5. Keck. Syst. Log. l. 1.
part. 2. c. 3. and others. Scheibler Top. c. 29. n. 36. bounds it with sundry
cautions. And indeed we must cashier many received divisions if that rule hold
as e. g. in morality of good into honest, pleasant and profitable, in divinity
of the law into moral, ceremonial and judicial, of the divine persons into the
Father, Son and holy Ghost, of the Books of the Old Testament into Moses, the
Prophets and the Psalms and so blame Christ himself. What Master Sidenham
infers, so that it is most clear the words must be understood, as they are
translated, is not denied by me, and yet the words, [ Acts 2.39. as many as the
Lord our God shall call] limit the first part of the v. Nor do I deny the
promise is to you Jews, and your children at present, to express the Apostles
meaning in the sense I have given, nor do I gainsay what he adds, and to those
afar off also and their children, when God shall call them, if he mean it of
the calling the chileren as well as the parents; though withal it is to be
noted, that in the text there is no mention of the children of those afar off.
But what he says further, else (that is, if the promise be not to the children
of those afar off when God shall call the parents) calling can with no sense be
applied to any tittle of the former part of the verse, without you make it
monstrous, and unlike it self, is either false or unintelligible by me. For
though the promise should not be to the children of those afar off, when God
called the parents, yet this is in my apprehension good sense, The promise is
to you being called, and to your children being called, nor is any monstrosity
or unlikeness to it self more in this sense then if the term [called] were
applied only to the latter part: But there would be nonsense, if the
distribution were reduced to dichotomie as Master Sidenham would have it, and
the proposition would be false, that the promise (which Master Sidenham makes
to be of remission of sins, Christ and his Spirit, justification,
sanctification, and all graces) is to them or their children without calling,
or though God should not call them.

There is some more of the like stuff in that which follows. 2. It Is against
another rule about distribution which is, that parts divisionis ambulent
equali passu, that the parts of a distribution should be equally set together.
Now here will be a mighty inequality, as to the communication of the promise;
if the words should be taken in their sense, the Jews will have a greater
privilege then the Gentiles, if children be not equally added to both, the
Jews had the promise made to them, and their children at present, these afar
off shall only have the promise to themselves, but not their children.

Ans. It is one of the vexations that befalls men that write books that they
are necessitated to answer such silly scriblings: But so we must do or else the
world will be befooled with that which is most vain. The objection to which
this Author answers is, that the latter clause, as many as the Lord shall call,
is a limitation of the verse, and no more are under the promise, and so
children, if God shall call them, shall also enjoy the promise; now that which
he contends for is, that [children] is to be added equally to both parts of the
v. (which was not in question) but shows not the promise to be to the children
if God call them not, which is the thing in question. And as he shootes besides
the mark, proving what was not to be proved, so his argument is nothing to that
he takes on him to prove. He sets down a rule in Logic, which I find in
Scheibler, ^op. c. 29. n. 39. with this explication, hoc est, sumantur ex eodem
genere. But in this sense it seems this Author meant it, that the thing
divided be communicated equally to the parts of the division, it is not true.
For then the division of being into substance and accident, God and the
Creature, with many more, were not right divisions. But were his rule right, as
he means it, (as it is not) yet it is nothing to his purpose. He would prove,
if children be not equally added to both parts of the v. Acts 2.39. then the
Jews will have a greater privilege then the Gentiles (which might be granted
without absurdity) for there would be a mighty inequality, as to the
communication of the promise, which is against the rule of Logic he mentions,
as if the promise or the communication of the promise were a whole divided into
parts, and one part were the Jews and their children, and the other were the
Gentiles and their children, which were ridiculous; nor do I know any other way
he can understand his arguing from this Logic rule, but that it will appear
alike frivolous. But the Reader (I doubt) will think I insist too much in
answering such trifles. I go on therefore.

3. Says he, consider, how comes this word (your children) to be kept in, for
what end and use, if it were not to show some spiritual privilege they have
with their parents, when God calls or converts the parents? what stands it for
but a stone of offense to conscientious hearts?

Ans. 1. he asserts in this passage that (your children) is kept in to show
some spiritual privilege they have with their parents, when God calls or
converts the parent? but a little before he observed a change in the tense in
both parts of the verse; in the first part unto the Jews, he speaks de
praeseuti, of the present application of the promise, and supposes under the
call of God already; here (your children) is to show a special privilege,
when God calls or converts the parent, which intimates that he had not then
called or converted the parent. and therefore the one passage crosses the
other.

2. He had said before, that (as many as the Lord shall call) can in no sense
be referred to the former part of the verse either to parents or children, and
yet here he refers it in a necessary sense, as he conceives, to the parent.

3. If the special privilege to the children does suppose the parents call,
why not also the childrens call?

4. Yea the special privilege in the Text to the father and child is the
promise, and that Master Sidenham makes to be of justification, sanctification,
and all graces, and can he imagine this promise to be to a child barely on the
parents call without his own personal calling by God? I think he durst not
assert it: If he did, I am sure it is false as being contrary to Romans 8.30. and
therefore of necessity to make his own exposition good, we must limit the
former part of the verse, in what is said both of parent and child by the words
[ as many as the Lord our God shall call]. As for his questions, why [ your
children] is in the verse, it has been answered, because of their imprecation,
Matthew. 27.25. to which he replies thus:

To see the sad shift of error is wonderful: Can any man imagine, that the
parents could doubt more, or so much of their childrens being accepted, and
saved, when God should call them who were innocent, and only under the sudden
rash curse of their parents, when they saw that the promise was to themselves,
who were the actual murderers of the Lord Jesus.

Answ. To me who am so well acquainted with the shifts of Paedobaptists, it is
not wonderful to see the shifts of error. This very reply what is it but a
vain shift? For he supposes the children were innocent, which he cannot prove,
and that the curse was sudden and rash, which seems rather to have been
deliberate, and that they saw the promise was to themselves, and Christ offered
pardon to themselves, when there was nothing but horror on their consciences
for crucifying Christ till after Peter's speech to them, and that if the parents
were not imagined to doubt more or so much of their childrens being accepted
and saved as themselves, then there was no reason to insert [your children] by
occasion of the imprecation, Matthew. 27.25. whereas if they doubted any whit,
yea if for the present they did not think on that curse, yet might afterward
as there was cause they should, there was reason enough for Peter to insert
those words whether they tended to take away a present, or possible fear in
them concerning their children. But there is more of his trifling yet behind.

2. Says he, Such a consideration would rather sadden them then refresh them,
to mention the calling of their children: For they might more doubt of that,
then of any thing, whether God would call them or no, and be as far to seek as
ever they were, that they would have but cold comfort upon this account; this
was enough to break their hearts if that were in their eye.

Answ. The phrase [ and be as far to seek as ever they were] intimates the Jews
had attained some comfort before this speech of Peter (which is manifestly
false from the Text) and that telling them that the promise was to their
children if called by God would rather sadden them then refresh them, it was
cold comfort, enough to break their hearts if that were in their eye: which is
in effect all one as if a man should say, when a man is in a swoon hot water
will rather sadden him then refresh him, or when a man is sad, it is cold
comfort enough to break his heart to give him a cup of Sack. But Mr. Sidenham
will not be thought sine ratione delirare. For, says he, they might doubt more
of that, then of any thing, whether God would call them or no. What? was it
likely they should doubt more of their childrens calling and pardon, if they
were called, then of their own pardon, who were then under horror of soul for
their own grand crime of killing Christ? or if they did thus doubt, would it
break their heart to be told that there was a possibility and hope that the
promise was to their children, who might be called? I have heard that if it
were not for hope the heart would break: but I never heard that the telling of
a person of a thing of which there was hope, though he might doubt of it, would
break his heart. But Master Sidenham adds.

The old way of conveying the promise is cut off, no promise but to called
ones: our poor children are uncalled, and God knows whether ever they may be
called of God: thus might they reason.

Ans. Its true, they might thus reason: But that they did, or by Peter's words,
as expounded by me, were likely to reason thus, is against reason to imagine.
The old way of conveying the promise I imagine he means the giving the initial
seal to their infants, that is, Circumcision. Now will any sober man think that
in that perplexity they were in through conscience of their guilt, and danger
of wrath impending on their children by reason of their impious curse, when
Peter tells them to stay them from despair, that yet in Christ sent the promise
was fulfilled for remission of sins to them and their children, if each of them
were called of God, that is, did repent and believe, that they would repel this
comfort by questioning the loss of Circumcision, and bemoaning the want of it
to their infants? I know the Jews were zealous after for Circumcision and the
Law, even those who became Christians, yet sure in that perplexity there was
not the least thought of such a poor privilege as an initial seal, but of the
freedom of themselves and children from their guilt and curse. But I would
know where this doctrine is, that Circumcision conveys the promises, or is the
old way of conveying them, and what Scripture says the promise (of remission
of sins here meant, as Master Sidenham himself expounds it) is to any but
called ones. Paul says, Romans 8.30. whom he has called, them he has
justified. Hos and non alios, says Augustine, and Orthodox Protestants, as
from the Text may be evinced, since all these agree to the same persons to be
predestinate, called, justified, glorified. Is this such doctrine as were
enough to break their hearts? But let us hear him out.

But when he includes them in the same promise with parents, and exhorts the
parents to repent upon this ground, that the promise is to them and their
children; this savours like a Gospel comforting-exhortation, and could not be
but of great efficacy upon their spirits.

Answ. Me thinks it should be comfortable to them, that the promise was to them
and their children upon condition of calling, that is, sanctification,
repentance, believing: It is Antinomian doctrine, not Gospel, to say,
justification is to a person uncalled, that before he believes he is justified
actually before God, even while he lives in the height of sin. It is true the
promises of the land of Canaan and other benefits were to Abraham's natural
seed: but the Gospel-promises of remission of sins and everlasting life in
Christ, were never to Abraham's or any believing parents natural seed as such,
but only to Abraham's spiritual seed elect and true believers. Master Sidenham
adds.

4. What strange mysterious tautologies would be in this one verse? if that
last sentence should refer to all the former expressions, we must read it thus
to make out their sense. The promise is to you parents of the Jews, when God
shall call you, (and they were then under call) and to your grown children,
when God shall call them; and to all which are afar off, when God shall call
them: Can any man with his understanding about him think the holy Ghost should
faulter so much in common expression of his mind, when there was no need of
adding of calling to any part, but to those that are afar off, who never were
yet under Gods Gospel call?

Answ. There Is neither tautology, nor mystery in limiting the promise to the
called of the Jew parents and children, nor does any thing make it seem
strange, but ignorance. Tautology is not, since the Propositions are three
distinct ones in words and sense, it is not the same to say, the promise is to
you called, the promise is to your children called, the promise is to all that
are afar off called* you, your children, all that are afar off being different
terms. Mystery is no more, if it be added to the former part of the verse then
to the latter. The calling in the latter part of the verse can be understood of
no other than effectual calling, whether inward only, or both inward, and
outward, for to none other of the Gentiles is the promise of remission of sins.
And for the same reason the limitation is necessary to be added to the former
part of the verse; nor can any good reason be given why the promise should be
to the Jews and their children without calling by God, and not to those afar
off without it; The Jews were then under call, but were not then called, nor
does Mr. Sidenham say they were, and therefore Peter might aptly enough say to
them, The promise is to ^s many of you as the Lord our God shall call. The
manner of expression is usual to put after a distribution of persons the
limitation in common. There is the like, Acts 3.24, where as many as have
spoken limits the Prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after. Had Mr.
Sidenham understanding in him of these things, he had not charged my exposition
with making the Holy Ghost faulter in common expression of his mind. Such
censures ill become such a smattering scribler. But who so bold as blind
bayard? It follows

Lastly, says he, the word, children, may and must he understood of little
ones, infants, not of adult and grown persons, for these reasons.

Answ. Boldly said like a young hotspur. Belike then when persons are ten,
twelve, or more years old, they cease to be their parents children and seed.
But I am willing to hear reason: 1. says he, the word here ((...)) properly
signifies an offspring, any thing brought forth, though it be but of a day, of
a moment old: Thus when a woman is said to be in pain, and to bring forth, this
word is used, John 16.21. Luke 1.31. Matthew. 1.16. Luke 1.57.

Answ. How heedlesly did this Author scribble when he said, this word (which
can be no other then (...)) is used, John 16.21. Luke 1.31. Matthew. 1, 26. Luke
1.57. when it is used in none of those places, though the verb whence it comes
is used in them. But were it used there, yet the reason is frivolous: (...)
signifies a thing brought forth, ergo (...) children, Acts 2.39. may not, must
not be understood of adult and grown persons. He might as well have said, it
must be understood but of those that are in this moment brought forth, not of
an infant of a day old, and that the person brought forth is only the mothers
(...), or child, because she only brought him forth, not the father. I did
think till I met with this new Master, that the Holy Ghost spoke properly when
he called persons grown to ripe age their fathers (...) or children, Ephesians.
6.1. Col. 3.21. etc.

2. Says he, Its an indefinite word, and therefore may not be restrained to
grown children, except God had expressed it in a peculiar phrase.

Answ. Mr. Sidenham alters the conclusion he undertook to prove, and concludes
that which he finds not denied: His reason is as well against his own
conclusion: Its an indefinite word, and therefore may not be restrained to
infant-children except God had expressed it in a peculiar phrase. And indeed the
reason is good only thus. Its an indefinite word, therefore its to be
restrained as the subject matter directs. But Mr. Sidenham shifts as it may
serve his turn. His conclusion set down at first excluded adult children,
because he knew the promise had not then been to them without calling, and so
his project of drawing thence a privilege for infants intituling them to
baptism had failed, but here his proof coming short he alters the conclusion
into that which might be granted him without detriment to the cause.

3. Says he, It must needs be especially meant of little ones, because they
are distinguished from themselves, who were men of years. Now when we
distinguish between men and children, we suppose the one adult, the other under
age, and not grown up; and it is contrary to all ways of expression to think
otherwise.

Answ. Belike then we must think that where it is said, Matthew. 10.21. the
fathers shall deliver the children to death, and the children shall rise up
against the parents, and Luke 1.17. to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
children, it must be especially meant of little ones, because they are
distinguished from themselves who were men of years, and to think otherwise if
the Dr. of New Castle say true, is contrary to all ways of expression, which
you may imagine he knew.

4. Says he, It cannot be rationally conjectured otherwise, because the
Apostle does join them with their parents in the same promise, and not leave
them to stand by themselves, as grown persons must.

Answ. Belike then if any understand the promises to Abraham, and his seed, to
David and his seed of any other then infants it is not rationally conjectured.
I have done with this Writer about this Text, of which he vainly talks, as he
does in the rest; so that all things weighed, this text of Scripture if there
were no more, holds forth (not to be seen) the sameness of the promise to
believers of the Gospel, both Jew and Gentile and their children, as ever it
was to Abraham and his natural seed.

SECT. XXV. Mr. Marshal's Reply to my Examen about his first Conclusion is
reviewed, and the Covenant Genesis 17. still maintained to be mixed, and that
Gentile self justiciaries though reputed Christians are not termed Abraham's
seed, nor Gal. 4.29. proves it, and that the distinction of outward and inward
Covenant is not right.
I Now reassume the Review of Mr. Ms. Reply to my Examen of his Sermon; Next,
says he, come we to examine the truth of the Antecedent, which I manifested in
those five Conclusions opened in my Sermon. But I supposed he had intended to
prove by his five Conclusions not only his Antecedent, but also his
Consequence. If I apprehend him rightly, there are none of his five Conclusions
but the two first that are for proving of the Antecedent. But let us view what
he writes.

The first whereof is this, That the covenant of grace for substance has
always been one and the same both to Jews and Gentiles. The first Conclusion
you grant, and therefore there were no need to have stayed the Reader any
further about it, were it not that some of your Exceptions do almost recall
your grant. If it be in substance the same, though you should reckon up a
thousand accidental and local differences, it were nothing to the purpose.

Answer. It is true, I granted this Conclusion understanding it according to
the Explication in his Sermon, page 9, 10. in these words, That the new and
living way to life was first revealed to Adam immediately after his fall, and
that blessed promise concerning the seed of the woman often renewed, and the
Patriarchs faith therein, and salvation thereby plentifully recorded in
Scripture: But the first time that ever it was revealed under the express name
of a League or Covenant was with Abraham; who because he was the first
explicit Covenanter is called the Father of the Faithful; and ever since
clearly has all the world been divided into two distinct bodies and families,
the one called the Kingdom, City, Household of God, to which all who own the way
of life were to join themselves; and th^se were called the children of God, the
sons of Abraham, the children of the Kingdom; all the rest of the world, the
Kingdom of the Devil, the seed of the Serpent, strangers from the covenant of
grace, without God in the world, etc. The substance of this covenant of grace
on Gods part was to be Abraham's God, and the God of his seed, to be an
all-sufficient portion, an all-sufficient reward for him, to give Jesus Christ
to him, and righteousness with him both of justification, and sanctification
and everlasting life, Genesis 17.1, etc. Gal. 3.15. Romans 4.3. John 8.56. On
Abraham's part the substance of the covenant was to believe the promised
Messiah, to walk before God with a perfect heart, to serve God according to his
revealed will, to instruct his family, etc. Gal. 3.16. Genesis 17.1. and 18.19.
Gal. 3.17, 19. In which passage I did conceive that Mr. M. meant by the
substance of the covenant of grace the promise as it is purely evangelical,
which I conceived to be the same with the new covenant mentioned Heb. 8.9, 10*
11, 12. and 10.16, 17. And this I was sure was not made with all Abraham's
natural posterity, much less with any believing Gentiles natural posterity as
such, but only so many of either as are elect and believe, as Romans 9.6, 7, 8.
Gal. 3.29. is determined, and so none of a believing Gentiles children are in
this covenant, but they that are believers, or elected to faith in Christ. But
then this would not serve Mr. Ms. turn. And therefore notwithstanding those
words in his Sermon, yet in his Defense page 90. he says, The covenant of
grace contains not only saving grace, but the administration of it also in
outward ordinances and Church-privileges: but in what sense he means it
contains them he declares not. That which is contained in a covenant is either
the promise or the condition. The seal, writing, writer, pen, and such like
adjuncts are never called the covenant, nor contained in it, though they be
instrumental to hold forth the covenant. Now where any promise is of outward
ordinances and Church-privileges, or how they should be a condition of the
promises I understand not. He distinguishes page 106. of the covenant of grace
thus,

The covenant of grace is sometimes taken strictly, sometimes largely: as it is
considered strictly, it is a covenant in which the spiritual benefits of
justifification, regeneration, perseverance, and glorification are freely
promised in Christ. Secondly, as the covenant of grace is taken largely, it
comprehends all evangelical administrations, which do wholly depend upon the
free and gracious appointment of God, and this administration is fulfilled
according to the counsel of Gods will; sometimes it was administered by his
appointment in types, shadows, and other legal ordinances; this covenant of
administration God said Zachary 11.10. he did break with the people of the
Jews, and at the death of Christ he did wholly evacuate and abolish, and in
stead thereof brought in the administration we live under, where also he
rejected the Jews, or broke them off from being his people in covenant, and
called the Gentiles and graffed them in ramorum defractorum locum, into the
place of the branch, and broken off as your self, page 65. do with Beza rightly
express it.

But herein Mr. M. confounds what in his Sermon he distinguished the covenant
of grace and the administration of it. He says, The covenant of grace largely
taken comprehends all evangelical administrations; and says, This
administration is fulfilled. By the evangelical administrations he means the
old legal ordinances before Christ's death, and the administration we live under
which is baptism and the Lords Supper, page 120. he says, Our Divines own the
outward administration of the covenant under the notion of foedus externum, the
outward covenant.

Now if there be sense in these passages, I must needs charge my self with
dullness, who cannot discern it. Is it sense to call that a covenant without a
Trope, which is neither a promise nor a condition of a covenant? to say that
the covenant contains or comprehends evangelical administrations, and yet to
call it the administration it self? to say, this administration was
administered, and not something by the administration administered?

But let us considee what others make of this distinction of covenant strictly
and largely taken, or which is all one, the inward and outward covenant. I have
met with none that speaks more distinctly than Mr. Anthony Burges in his Book
entitled Spiritual Refining, Sect. 8. Sermon. 64. page 393. who was one of the
Assembly.

The external covenant is that whereby in an outward visible manner God does
own a people, add they externally profess their owning of him; but yet in their
hearts and souls they do not steadfastly cleave unto God, and faithfully keep
this covenant in the conditions thereof. The internal or inward covenant is
that whereby God does in a spiritual powerful manner take a people to him
working in their hearts all those gifts and graces promised in the covenant as
regeneration, remission of sins, adoption, and the like. And in this sense
only the truly godly are in the covenant, and they are only Gods people, and
he their God. This distinction of a covenant into outward and inward is not a
distinction of a genus into its species, so much as a distinction of a thing
into the several administrations and dispensations of it.

In this passage there is want of clearness as well as in M. Marshals. He tells
us negatively, that it is not a distinction of a genus into its species, yet
with some mincing of the matter (so much) as if it might be the distinction of
a genus into its species, though not so much, which is an expression of a man
who would say somewhat but cannot well tell what to say. But if it be not a
distinction of a genus into its species, what distinction is it? Is any man the
wiser for a mere Negative? It is, says he, a distinction of a thing into the
several administrations and dispensations of it.

But this tells us not what sort of distinction this is, whether nominis of the
word or rei of the thing. If he had meant to be a distinction of the word he
should have showed where the word is so taken, if of the thing, what kind of
division or distribution it is. To me it seems against all Rules of Logic to
divide thus. A covenant is either the outward or the inward administration and
dispensation of it or the inward, which without Trope of speech (which should
be absent from men that should rationally explain things) is nonsense,
affirming one covenant to be one administration and another another, whereas
the covenant is one thing and the administration another thing. But his meaning
is this, one covenant is outward being outwardly administered, or administering
outward things, another inward administering inwardly or inward things. But
neither is this right since the covenant does not administer but the covenanter,
nor does he do it by the covenant but by some other act according to the
covenant, the covenant is only an ag^eement and promise to do it, the
administering is the keeping of the covenant, not the covenant it self.

But let that be yielded that the covenant does administer, yet the description
of the external covenant as made by Mr. Burges does not include administration.
For God may in an outward visible manner own a people, and they externally
profess their owning of him, and yet neither administer one to another any
thing promised, or if the owning be administration, the people administer to
God as well as God administers to them. Besides his description makes an
external profession of owning God requisite to the external covenant. If that
be right, no infant is in the external covenant till it profess owning God, and
in what outward visible manner God does own infants except by baptizing them
(which God does not but the Minister, nor ever commanded or declared his
approbation of i^) I know not, and then the outward covenant is nothing else
but baptizing, and an infants being in covenant is his being baptized or to be
baptized, and the argument from the covenant comes to this ridiculous
tautology, all infants of believers are in the outward covenant (for they dare
not say they are all in the inward) that is, they are in the outward
administration, which is no other than baptism, and so the antecedent is
equipollent to this, they are or are to be baptized; and the conclusion is,
ergo, they are to be baptized.

But Mr. Marshal it seems conceives the outward Covenant, as he describes it,
meant Zach. 11.10. where the Prophet says, And I took my staff even Beauty,
and cut it asunder, that I might break my Covenant which I had made with all
the people. And he interprets it thus, that at the death of Christ God brake
his covenant with the Jews, wholly evacuating and abolishing the legal
Ordinances, and bringing in the administration we live under.

But if this be the sense, then this Prophecy does not foretell any thing
penal to the Jews; for the abolishing of legal ordinances was a mercy to them,
they being a yoke intolerable, Acts 15.10. whereas the Text speaks of it as an
evil that should befall them.

Piscator in his Analysis, Eventus fuit desertio Judaeorum, v. 9, 10, 11, and
14.

Diodati and after him the New Annotations in Zech. 11.10. My Covenant] the
peace which I had granted to my Church, that she should not be assaulted no
more, nor be molested by any strange Nation, which was verified from the
Maccabees time, until a little before the coming of Christ.

Grot. Annot. in locum. Abstuli protectionem illam specialem. Irritum facere
foedus suum Deus dicitur, cum ruptis a populo foederis conditionibus, ipse
quoque a sua par^e promissa non implet.

Mr. Ms. conceit is, as if by the Covenant were meant legal Ordinances, and so
the breaking off is meant either de jure only, and then it is not a Prophecy
of what should happen; or else de facto, in the event, but then it is not true;
for the Jews retained the legal Ordinances of the Covenant he made with them,
and do still at this day even circumcision, and as many other of the legal
Rites as they can in their present dispersion. It is true, God brake o^ the
Jews from being his people in Covenant, and called the Gentiles and graffed
them in ramorum defractorum locum, and how this is to be understood I have
showed before at large in the first part of this Review. But without a Trope to
call outward Ordinances Gods Covenant is without example of Scripture (the
Covenants Romans 9.4. say Beza, Piscator, New Annot. etc. are the Tables of the
Covenant) and can hardly be acquitted from nonsense. Only perhaps it seems
Mr. M. for a shift, as v. g. page 103. he says, God makes good his promise
sealed in baptism in which he engages himself to be the God of believing
Christians and their seed; which in his Sermon page 10. he makes the promise of
saving grace, yet when it is proved that cannot be true of Gentile believers
and their children he runs to this vain shift, that the outward Covenant
belongs to them (which is nothing to the promise Genesis 17.7. in which outward
administrations are not promised) though not the inward. Nor is it Mr. Ms.
manner alone but the common course of Paedobaptists in their writings to play
fast and loose with the ambiguity of the term Covenant and Covenant of grace,
as has been formerly showed, and may appear more in that which follows. But to
keep to Mr. M.

He tells me, If the Covenant of grace be in substance the same, though you
should reckon up a thousand accidental and local differences it were nothing to
the purpose.

To which I reply; Though I grant the Covenant of grace be always the same in
substance, meaning thereby that the elect are saved in all Ages by the same
promises of evangelical grace, that is righteousness, regeneration, adoption in
Christ, and the promise Genesis 17.7. has an evangelical sense, which is this,
that God will be a God to Abraham and his spiritual seed by election and faith,
and am unjustly charged of spoiling all infants of all interest in the Covenant
of grace, and confining the Jews promises to earthly and temporal blessings, of
which I have acqui^ted my self in my Letter to Mr. Baily, Sect. 1.2. yet I
never granted that the Covenant with Abraham did contain no other than
evangelical promises of grace in Christ, nor that these very promises Genesis 17
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. were all evangelical promises, nor any of them in that sense,
which is obvious to the understanding, according to common Rules of Grammar,
but only according to the Apostles Exposition, who never so expounded the
promise, Genesis 17.7. as if it were made to any man's seed but Abraham's, not to
every believing Gentile and his natural seed. And certainly this difference
between the covenant Genesis 17. and the covenant of grace will be much to the
purpose to show the Covenant, Genesis 17 not to be to a believing Christian and
his seed; and that though circumcision of male infants should have its reason
barely from the interest of the circumcised in that Covenant; yet such a
Covenant Interest not belonging to our children who are of the Gentiles cannot
be a reason to entitle them to baptism though it should be granted (which is
not) that our baptism succeeds their circumcision, and seals the covenant of
grace as theirs did that made with Abraham.

This mixture of the Covenant, and the inference thence, that Circumcision did
not belong to all believers and their children, but as in Abraham's family is
observed by Mr. Allen and Mr. Sheppard in their Defense of the Answer to the
nine Positions, chap. 8. and because their words are apposite to my purpose,
though otherwise applied by them, I shall recite them.

Now that we hold the right proportion in the persons may appear, first, in
that (as was granted) Circumcision sealed the entrance into the Covenant, but
this Covenant was not simply, and only the Covenant of grace; but that whole
Covenant that was made with Abraham, whereby on Gods part they were assured of
many special blessings (whereof Lot and others not in this Covenant with
Abraham were not capable) and whereby Abraham and his seed, and family were
bound for their part to be a people to God, and to observe this sign of the
Covenant, which others in the Covenant of grace were not bound to. Secondly,
(as is granted) it was Abraham and his household and the seed of believing Jews
that were to be circumcised, and therefore not visible believers, (as such) for
then Lot had been included; so by right proportion not all visible believers as
such, but such as with Abraham and his family are in visible Covenant to be the
people of God, according to the institution of Churches when and to which the
seal of Baptism is given; and therefore as all family-churches but Abraham's
being in a new form of a Church were excluded, so much more such a^ are in no
visible constituted Church at all.

In which it is expressly yielded, that the Covenant with Abraham was mixed in my
sense, that Circumcision did not belong to all visibly in the Covenant of
grace, that it belonged peculiarly to the Church in Abraham's family, that
Baptism follows the Christian Church constitution (which sure is much different
from the Jewish) and therefore not the Covenant made with Abraham. But Mr. M.
seems to be sensible of this, and endeavors to p^event it in that which
follows.

But, says he, the first does almost recall it, wherein you charge me to carry
the narration of the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. as if it did only
contain the Covenant of grace in Christ; whereas it is apparent (say you) out
of the Text, that the Covenant was a mixed Covenant consisting of temporal
benefits, the multiplying of Abraham's seed, possession of Canaan, the birth of
Isaac, besides the spiritual blessings.

To which I reply, I meant so indeed, and so I plainly expressed my self, that
all the difference betwixt the Covenant then made with Abraham, and the
Covenant made with us, lies only in the manner of administration of the
Covenant; and not in the Covenant it self. The Covenant it self in the
substance of it holds out the same mercies both spiritual and temporal to them
and to us.

Answer. By mixed Covenant I mean a Covenant consisting of some temporal
blessings proper only to Abraham's natural posterity and some spiritual
blessings common with him to all believers whether Jews or Gentiles. And I say,
those promises of temporal blessings were of the substance of the Covenant made
with Abraham, that they cannot in any fit sense be called the manner of the
administration of the Covenant, that the Covenant it self in the substance does
not hold out the same mercies both spiritual and temporal to them, and to us.
And all these things I thus prove.

1. Those promises were of the substance of the Covenant, which are in
Scripture called the Covenant it self, without mention of the spiritual
promises; but this is true of the promise of the Land of Canaan, etc. Psalm
105.8, 9, 10, 11. Nehem. 9.8. Genesis 26.3. and 28.3, 4, 13, 14. 1 Chronicles. 16.15,
16, 17, 18, etc. In which places the Text expressly says, God made a Covenant
with Abraham; and then recites the Covenant, that it was to give the Land of
the Canaanites, etc. which were temporal mercies not now promised or performed
to us. Ergo, To deny those promises to be of the substance of the Covenant, and
to call them administrations, which the Scripture calls the Covenant it self so
often, if it be not to thwart the Scripture, sure it is unwarrantably to alter
its expressions: God himself so expressly calling the giving of Canaan his
Covenant, Exodus 5.45.8. refutes this conceit.

2. Those promises are of the substance of the Covenant made with Abraham,
which are integral parts of the Covenant. But those promises of temporal
blessings are integral parts of the Covenant made with Abraham. Ergo, the major
is in it self manifest, for the Covenant is nothing but a promise or an
aggregate of promises; and so if a Covenant have any substance in it, it must
be the integral parts. The minor is apparent from the very words, Genesis 17.4,
etc. where God having in general terms told Abraham, My Covenant is with thee,
he expresses to the 9. verse, wherein his Covenant was with him, and that is
set down in those peculiar blessings to Abraham's natural posterity, Verse 6.8.

3. The promise of Canaan can be called no other way the administration of the
Covenant of grace than in that in the hidden sense under that promise spiritual
good was intended to be shadowed. But this very thing shows that the promise of
an earthly inheritance was in the first place thereby intended to Abraham's
natural posterity, and the other only as an additament or appendix to the
promise in its first meaning. Now then if the promise of Canaan in the first
sense be not of the substance of the Covenant, neither is the promise only
implied mysteriously in the more hidden sense, which is but an appendix to it,
of the substance of the Covenant.

4. The Covenant made with Abraham, holds not out the same mercies both
spiritual and temporal to Abraham's natural posterity and to us. Ergo, there is
more difference than in the administration. The Antecedent is apparent; for the
promise of the Land of Canaan, the birth of Isaac, Christ to come of him
according to the flesh, etc. are not made to us. Ergo,

But Mr. M. thinks to prevent this by telling us, Godliness having all the
promises both of this life and that which is to come; and that they and we have
our right to all these promises upon the self same condition.

Answer. These things are manifestly false; for though godliness have the
promise of this life and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. yet the promises,
Levit. 26.6, etc. are not made to every godly man, that he shall ly down and
none shall make him afraid, that he shall chase his enemies, etc. but rather
assurance is given that he shall be persecuted, 2 Timothy 3.12. Mark 10.29, 30.
Nor have they promises upon the same condition; for Exodus 34.24. it is
promised, that none should desire the Israelites Land while they did appear
thrice in the year before the Lord, but to us there is not that promise nor
upon that condition.

But, says he* earthly things indeed were to them promised more distinctly and
fully, heavenly things more generally and sparingly than they are now to us;
and on the contrary, spiritual things are more fully and clearly promised to us
than to them; and earthly promises more generally and sparingly.

Answ. This is not all the difference; for I have showed that to us an earthly
rest is not promised at all, but the contrary assured to us, to wit, suffering
persecution.

Mr. M. adds, And that these temporal benefits which you mention, viz.
multiplying of Abraham's seed, the bitth of Isaac, and possession of Canaan,
were all of them administrations of the Covenant of grace, they were figures,
signs, and types of spiritual things to be enjoyed both by them and us. These
things I not only asserted, ^ut proved in my Sermon. If you mean no more than
this, that all these temporal blessings were promised and given as flowing from
the promise of Christ, and were subservient to it, or were types and shadows of
it, you mean no more than what we all grant, who yet deny any more mixture in
the Covenant made with Abraham for the substance of it, than there is in that
made with us; and that the difference lies only in the manner of
administration.

Answer. I deny not but that the possession of Canaan, birth of Isaac.
multiplying Abraham's seed were figures, signs, and types of spiritual things to
be enjoyed by elect* Jews and Gentiles according to the mystical hidden^sense
of the words; nor do I deny that they were subservient to the promise of
Christ, whether it be to be said they flowed from the promise of Christ, or
tended to the fore-signifying of Christ to come, the grace of the Gospel, and
the heavenly inheritance and rest is a doubt. Surely they flowed from Gods
special love to Israel above any other people, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7, 8. And I grant
that Circumcision ratified spiritual blessings chiefly, that is as the chief
thing promised; yet in the sense in which I think Gameron meant it, Thesi 78.
de triplici foedere primarily, that is according to the first and manifest
sense of the words it sealed earthly promises peculiar to Abraham's natural
posterity, and that Ciacumcision of infants was specially for that reason, to
wit, the peculiar promises to Abraham's natural posterity; nor do I see cause to
mislike Grotius his speech Annot. in Luc. 1.59. Infantium autem circumcisio
ostendebat foedus esse gentilium.

And this mixture of the Covenant with Abraham, to wit, that it contained not
only promises common to all believers, but also promises so peculiar to
Abraham's natural posterity, that all of them were not according to the Law to
be made good to any Gentile though a Proselyte circumcised, namely, the
inheritance of the Land of Canaan, of which none but the natural progeny of
Israel were to be inheritours, is so manifest, that the denial of it I can
hardly impute to any thing but dullness or mere pertinacy. Yet why these
promises so peculiar to them should be denied to be of the substance of the
Covenant made with Abraham, I see no reason they being integral parts. Christ
it is true is the substance of the things promised as they were Types; yet the
things promised in respect of their natural being had a substance besides, and
in relation to the Covenant were as much the substance or substantial parts of
it as the spiritual promises; yea, since those spiritual promises (if I may so
speak) did subsist in the expressions of temporal blessings, it follows in my
apprehension, that if the promises of the spiritual blessings were of the
substance of the Covenant, then surely the promises of temporal blessings,
which those very promises did express, and under the shadow of which they were
made should be much more of the substance of the Covenant. Nor do I conceive
any grosness in it to imagine of God, that he should in a Covenant of grace
founded in Christ intend in the seal of it to ratify temporal blessings, when
he intended to assure spiritual blessings under the covert of words in the
first sense importing only temporal. As for the terming of the administration
of the Covenant of grace it is neither according to Scripture, nor is it very
handsome sense, specially according to Mr. Ms. doctrine, who calls Circumcision
the old administration of the Covenant, and if it were an administration of the
promises, which were administrations of the Covenant of grace, then
Circumcision was an administration of an administration.

But Mr M. speaks to me thus. I desire to know of you what Scripture ever made
circumcision a seal of Canaan; we have express Scripture that it sealed the
righteousness of faith whereby he was justified, but I no where read that it
^ealed the Land of Canaan.

Answer. To gratify him I tell him, that I read Circumcision called a token of
the Covenant, Genesis 17.11. which Covenant was the Covenant mentioned before in
that chapter, and in that v. 8. the promise of the Land of Canaan is made, and
Acts 7.8. Stephen calls it The Covenant of Circumcision, which he shows not how
it was otherwise fulfilled in that speech but by bringing them out of Egypt,
and placing them in Canaan, in which he fulfilled his promise to Abraham, verse.
6, 7, 16. It is true, the Apostle calls Abraham's Circumcision A seal of the
righteousness of faith which he had yet being uncircumcised, Rom 4.11. But I
find not this said of any ones Circumcision but Abraham's: surely it cannot be
said truly of any ones Circumcision but a believers. As for what he says, That
we have now carnal promises, and therefore our covenant may be as well mixed as
that with Abraham.

I answer it is true, We have promise of the life that now is and that which is
to come; and so our Covenant is in a sort mixed of spiritual and temporal
promises: but these promises are common to all godly persons both Jews and
Gentiles, not proper only to Abraham's natural posterity inheriting, in which
sense I called it a mixed Covenant, Exercit. page 2. Sect. 1. I grant, we have
outward privileges and ordinances, as Baptism and the Lords Supper, and that
many now are members of the visible Church, and partake of them who are not
elect nor true believers. But none but elect persons have the promises of the
new Covenant made to them; none but an elect person has the promise, that God
will write his Laws in his heart, be his God, etc. And therefore none but such
in truth are in the covenant of grace, though others may be in show in it and
accounted so by us.

Mr. Josiah Church in his Book forenamed page 41. interposeth thus, 1.
Spiritual and temporal promises may be said to make a mixed Covenant, but not a
mixed Evangelical Covenant; for a mixed Gospel Covenant is a Covenant partly of
works, and partly of grace, and the Covenant of which Circumcision was the
initial Sacrament was not mixed after that manner; for the Law was not given
until four hun^red and thirty years after i^, and then it was not mixed with
it, but only annexed to it, Gal. 3.17.

Answer. Mr. Church his Confession, that spiritual and temporal promises may be
said to make a mixed Covenant, is as much as I need to justify my speech
Exercit. page 2. who did not call the Covenant made with Abraham mixed in any
other sense.

But, says he, ^* the difference was only in the dispensation, and not in the
substance of the Covenant: the Covenant of which Circumcision was the initial
Sacrament was as p^rely Evangelical as this, whereof Baptism is the initial
Sacrament: for the Gospel is said to be preached unto them as well as to us,
and the temporal promises were Evangelical and belonged to believers, as such;
for because of unbelief many obtained them not, Heb. 3.19. Also there are
temporal promises in this dispensation, and the people of God have Christ and
all other things by the same charter, Matthew. 5.5. and 6.33. Romans 9.32. Ezekiel.
36.25, 30.

Answer. If there were difference in the promises, there was difference in the
substance of the Covenant made with Abraham and ours. It is proved from Gal.
3.8. that the covenant made with Abraham was Evangelical, but not purely
Evangelical. It is not true, that the temporal promises Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
belonged to believers as such. For though many through unbelief entered not
into C^naan, Heb. 3.19. yet neither all nor only believers entered in. The
Gospel was preached to them as well as to us, Heb. 4.2. but not either by so
purely Evangelical a covenant, nor in so perspicuous a way. We have temporal
promises now, but not the same, nor by the same charter.

As for what he adds, that the promises sealed in the former dispensation were
principally spiritual. I grant it, but deny it any absurdity, to say, that no
promise was sealed to many circumcised infants, that their souls were not
profited, nor any benefit to them by circumcision, though there was profit by
it attainable and attained by many; more than which to the present purpose is
not gathered from Rom 2.1, 2.

I return to Mr. M. I take his grants page 99. That Circumcision was
comprehended in his, etc. as belonging to the manner of administration af the
Covenant together with sacrifice^, and that the Covenant of grace was
administered by sacrifices and other types before Circumcision was instituted;
and so blot out my second exception against his first conclusion* only it is
to be observed that page 187. he does cross himself. For whereas here he grants
it to belong to the manner of administration, not to the substance of the
covenant, there he will have it to belong to the substance of the Covenant not
as a part of it, but as a means of applying it. And this is in effect all one
as in his language to say, it belongs not to the substance of the covenant, for
of it only are the parts, but to the administration. For how does it
administer it but as a means of applying it?

But my third Exception requires more reviewing. Mr. M. in his Sermon page 14.
had mentioned besides Christ and true believers a third sort of Abraham's seed
not born Jews, but made Proselytes, who were Abraham's seed by profession who
sought justification by the works of the Law did not submit themselves to the
righteousness of God; and alleged ^al. 4 29. for it.

Against this I excepted 1. that I thought he could not show where in Scripture
such are called Abraham's seed.

To this he replies, 1. That he named not Proselytes to add any strength to the
argument, it had been enough for his purpose to have said, Some in the Church
of the Jews were visible members, yet not inwardly godly, and these were called
Abraham's seed as well as others.

Answ. I should have yielded to call such, if they were Jews by birth or
nature, Abraham's seed; but not so of any Proselyte, and so Mr. M. had not his
purpose, of applying the term [ Abraham's seed] to Gentiles who were believers
only in profession, much less to Gentiles who did not so much as profess faith
in Christ, but sought righteousness by the works of the Law.

2. He says, He never expected to have met with a quarrel for calling them,
who joined to the Church by that cowmon name whereby the Church Members were
called, viz. the seed of Abraham or the children of Israel.

Answer. There was no quarrel in my words: but if Mr. M. did not expect that,
his sayings in that Sermon would be sifted to the bran; it was his oversight.
They that doubted of the divine warrant of Paedobaptism had very great cause to
discuss that Sermon being preached and printed at that time by such a man, and
taken to be the sense of the Assembly of Divines then ^itting at Westminster.

He says, The seed of Abraham or the children of Israel were the common name by
which Church Members joined to the Church of Israel were called: but he proves
it not, and till he do prove it, I reject it.

3. Says he, And could no place of Scripture be produced where Proselytes are
expressly called by this name, the matter were no^ Tanti.

Answer. It would follow then that the promise Genesis 17.7. of being God to
Abraham 's seed is not meant of Gentile Proselytes, who were only by
profession Gods people, not in reality; much less of their natural seed, and
this would make most of the infants baptized unbaptizable by Paedobaptists own
p^inciples; for sure the do not take the natural infant children of them that
are not Abraham's seed to be in the covenant, Genesis 17.7. and therefore must
confess them unbaptized.

4. Says he, But if it were a thing of any m^men^, it would be no hard matter
to produce evidence sufficient to prove that Proselytes were called Israelites
and the seed of Abraham, as Acts 2.10. and 22. compared Acts 13.26. compared
with v. 43. but I forbear.

Ans. Of what moment it is, has been said. I think it would be a very hard
matter out of those Texts to prove any Proselytes, much less such as were only
visible Church Members of the Jews, seeking justification by works, not
submitting to Gods righteousness, Abraham's seed. In the former of the Texts is
not the term Abraham's seed, which was the term in question, nor do the Verses
compared prove that the Proselytes mentioned v. 10. are called v. 22. Men of
Israel, any more than Men of Judea and dwellers at Jerusalem, v. 14. nor does
it appear they were called Men of Israel, v. 22. in any other sense than as
Israelite by generation.

The later Text mentions the children of the stock of Abraham, v. 26. but so
called by natural generation opposite to the Gentiles, as v. 46. shows, not
Proselytes called Abraham's seed, though self-justiciaries and Gods people
only, so far as outward profession, yea, children of the stock of Abraham are
there distinguished from those among them that feared God, that is, Proselytes.

I told Mr. M. that he joined with Arminius, in calling self-justiciary
Proselytes Abraham 's seed: which Mr. Bayn denied.

He says, He joined not with Arminius, that I mis-allege Arminius, join with
Servetus.

To which I reply no more than I have done in my Apology, page 22. Sect. 5.

To acquit himself from what I charge him with, that Mr. Bayn opposes him, he
brings words six lines before of Mr. Bayns, that say [children of the flesh] in
some other Scripture does note out justiciaries, and that these words clear
him, and that I was guilty of negligence or falsehood.

But sure I must continue still this charge against Mr. M. and add further an
imputation of negligence at least, if not of falsehood, who heeded not that the
words of Mr. Bayn which I alleged say as much, that the term [children of the
flesh] elsewhere signified self-justiciaries though not there; yet the seed of
Abraham without any adjoined is never so taken. Now I did not charge with this
that he had no Scripture to prove self-justiciaries to be called children of
the flesh; but that he had no Scripture to prove self-justiciary Proselytes
called Abraham's seed, which M^ Bayn says, is never so taken, and therefore Mr.
Bayns words clear him not but condemn him.

Mr. M. says, I speak of Abraham 's seed by calling, and that the promise [I
will be the God of thy seed] was made good in the calling the Gentiles, all
which were not partakers of an inward calling, and therefore yield a seed of
Abraham only by profession. But that which I say I mean not of a mere outward
calling, nor of all the Gentiles who are outwardly called.

I excepted also against Mr. Blake for making some Abraham 's seed in the bosom
of the Church now, who are born after the flesh, and thereby have a
Church-interest or a birthright to Church-privileges: and that he grossly
alleged for this Gal. 4.29.

And Mr. M. in his Sermon page 14. says, We have also some (meaning in the
Church) who are only a holy seed by external profession, Gal. 4 29.

What Mr. Blake replied hereto in his Answer to my Letter is answered in the
Postscript to my Apology, Sect. 5. what he has said in his Vindic. Foed. cap.
41. is answered in the second part of this Review Sect. 18.

Mr. M. wonders at my calling those passages very gross, and tells me,

1. That it is apparent Ishmael and the civil justiciaries, of which he was
Type, had a visible standing in the Jewish Church, and were the same of whom
Paul speaks, Romans 10.3. and that in the same place Paul himself says, Even so
it is now (even in the Church of Galatia it was so) and Paul by his doctrine
labored to make them better) I see not why Mr. Blake might not use this as an
argument, that some have a visible Church Membership, and ought to partake of
outward Church-privileges, notwithstanding they will not have the inheritance
of children unless they repent.

Answer. If this had been all Mr. Blake inferred from Gal. 4.29. I should have
granted the conclusion, though I deny his Exposition, and the proposition he
raises from the Text.

But it is another thing that Mr. Blake and Mr. M. in his Sermon page 14. would
have. Mr. M. that Gal 4.29. There is mention of some who are only a holy seed
by external profession, and here expounds [even so it is now] in the Church of
Galatia, there is a different seed of Abraham, one which is holy only by
external profession, seeking righteousness by the works of the Law, and have
thereby a visible Church Membership, and ought to partake of outward
Church-privileges, which is clean besides the meaning of the Apostle, who does
not say, Even so it is now in the Church of Galatia, but simply [ Even so it is
now] that is, it so happens in the world, they that seek the righteousness by
the works of the Law persecute them that are born after the spirit, that is,
who through the spirit do wait for the hope of the righteousness which is by
faith! which was true in the Jews, who persecuted the Apostles and other
Christians out of zeal for the Law. Now these had no visible standing in the
Christian Church, nor is the term [ born after the flesh] taken in the better
part so as to import a privilege a holy seed by external profession, but in the
worser part, for an unholy seed by external profession and practice persecuting
the Christian faith and hope.

Mr. Blake exponds [ being born aft^r the flesh] as if it imported a privilege,
whereas it imports a cursed estate opposite to [ being born after the spirit]
and would have derived a title to Church-interest of some in the bosom of the
Christian Church, particularly believers infants: whereas to be horn after the
flesh is applied there to persecuting unbelievers, who were not in the Church,
but cast out, nor had any Church-interest by virtue of being born after the
flesh, but had an opposing enmity to it thereby. Nor is it said of infants that
they were born after the flesh, but of such as persecuted them that were born
after the spirit; nor is there a word intitling them that were born after the
flesh in that respect Abraham's seed, though Ishmael their Type, and the Jews
his Antitype were Abraham's natural seed. So that M M. is mistaken in conceiving
that which offends me in Mr. Blakes expression is, that he thinks there is a
fleshly seed of Abraham; for I grant the Jewish self-justiciaries were such.
But I conceive a gross absurdity in Mr. Blake, that he takes [ being born after
the flesh] in the better part, as importing the privilege of Church-interest to
infants of believers, and calling such as are born after the flesh Abraham's
seed by way of privilege derived from that birth, importing the seed of such to
be visible members in the Christian Church, of which I still conceive I passed
a right censure in my Examen for the Reasons given, however Mr. Blake and his
Seconds take it.

SECT. XXVI. The mixture of the Covenant Genesis 17. as by me asserted is
vindicated from Mr. Blake's Exceptions, Vind. Foed. c. 26.
BUt I am necessitated to have mo^e work with Mr. Blake, of whom I may say,
(whatever his worth be, and how excellent soever his Treatise be accounted of
by those who have commended it in their Epistle, and others in other respects)
that not only in his Preface to the Reader he does unchristianly accuse me of
scorn, and disrespect, of falsifica^ions such as a man might th^nk I had at
once cast off all regard either of conscience or reputation without either
cause or show of proof, but also of a high spirit, of bloody revenge, of
uttering reviling words against the Church of Christ, having the same spirit
with the Jesuits, from those things which were innocent of any such spirit, and
one grain of charitable candor with a little heed of my carriages and speeches
might have freed me from, who do not any where charge him or my Antagonists
with such kind of accusations, though I censure their arguings somewhat more
freely than they think meet, who are not to be judges in their own cause.

And for the Book throughout there are so many misconstructions of my words,
and so many satirical quips and taunts instead of any clear disputing, that I
can discern little or nothing of any brotherly affection to me, or study of
truth in that part of his Vind. Foed. wherein he opposes me. In his Preface to
the Reader after those hard speeches of me forementioned, after his venting his
conceit, as if that wherein he opposes me were of least use in regard that
point to great satisfaction has been spoken to at large: of which I wish he
had told in what part, and by whom such satisfaction is given, that I might
have found it in his, Mr. Bs. or others writings, who yet find no cause to
recede from this opinion, that they have perverted the truth, and
insufficiently handled the argument of infant baptism) and having
contemptuously mentioned me; As one generally looked upon low enough under
hatches, says thus, I must assert the spirituality of the old Covenant, and
maintain that the Gospel was preached as well to them as to us, that they a^e
the same spiritual meat and drank the same spiritual drink, and here by him I
am opposed.

To which I answer, In this charge I may say truly in words of meekness, having
answered this very crimination in my Addition to my Apology in answer to Mr.
Baily, Sect. 2. that I am impudently belied, supposing that by the old Covenant
he means the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. which is termed the promises,
the Covenant that was confirmed of God in Christ before the Law four hundred
and thirty years after, and distinguished from it Gal. 3, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20,
21. And this Mr. Blake might have discerned, yea, I conceive did discern, when
he from my words Exercit. page 2. conceived my meaning to be that Abraham had
promises of bliss and in reference to eternal salvation, Vind. Foed. cap. 26.
page 181. But that I may vindicate my self and the truth more fully from Mr.
Blakes injurious dealings I shall take a view of that Chapter.

First, Mr. Blake says falsely of me, that I am loath to yield to so much truth
as to confess the old Covenant (meaning that Genesis 17.) to be a Covenant
Evangelical, when as I grant Exercit. page 2. some of the promises were
Evangelical, and that the Covenant has denomination from the promises. Then he
calumniates me in his spiteful fashion to make me odious and my writing
suspected, as if I went in company with Jesuits, whom he calls my old Friends,
and says untruly I glean so much from them in this controversy; and adds tha^
I cast infants out of the Covenant and Church Membership, and so exclude them
from Baptism: whereas I have often acknowledged they are many of them in the
Covenant of grace truly so called, and the invisible Church of the elect, which
Protestants assert against Papists to be most properly termed the Church of
Christ; nor do I exclude infants from baptism because they are cast out of the
Covenant and Church Membership, but because they are not Disciple^ whom Christ
appointed to be baptized, Matthew. 28.19.

Next he excepts against me for saying, The Covenant made with Abraham is not a
pure Gospel Covenant, but mixed; concerning which, 1. Mr. Blake says, This
expression of Mr. T. is very untoward, and such that will bear no fai^ sense
without the utter overthrow, even of that difference between the Covenants,
which he would build on this distinction. The untowardness is in denying purity
of Gospel the first Covenant and affirming a mixture. That which is not pure
but mixed, is a compound of pure and impure; such that has some ingredients
such as they ought, and others such that make all adulterate; as silver mingled
with dross, or wine with water, Isai 1.22.

Answer. Mr. Blake me thinks should know that there are mixtures which do not
adulterate. There Is a natural mixture defined by Aristotle, The union of bodies
miscible altered, as in mixed bodies compound of the four Elements reduced to a
just temperament, without adultetating all. There Is an artificial mixture in
Medicines, of Wine and Sugar, of diverse Metalls in Bells cast, in which and
many more there is no such impurity as that there are some ingredients, such as
they ought, and others such as make all adulterate; and therefore there is no
untowardness in the expression; yea, the expression is so usual in morality, as
when voluntary is divided into purely voluntary and mixed, in Divinity the state
of grace is either pure or mixed, etc. that I presumed none would have
quarrelled with it, if my meaning be right. Let Us see what Mr. Blake says of
my meaning.

He tells us, that the false Teachers (St. Paul 's Adversaries) preach such a
mixed Gospel, a compound of that which was pure and impure; when they urged with
such vehemence a mixture of works. But do I call any where the Gospel mixed? or
do I preach any such mixture? Mr. Blake himself acquits me, when he says, This
sure is not his meaning. What then does Mr. Blake take my meaning to be? I will
set down his own words, that the Reader may judge of his dealing with me. What
then can be his meaning but that Abraham had promises, not only of bliss, and
in reference to eternal salvation; but he had premises also of earthly
concernment, as that of the Land of Canaan, and his plantation there? This
seems to be his meaning by the words that presently follow: The Covenant takes
it^s denomination from the promises, but the promises are mixed; some
Evangelical, belonging to those to whom the Gospel belongs; some are
domestic or civil promise^, specially respecting the house of Abraham, and the
policy of Israel, to this I readily agree.

Answer. If Mr. Blake readily agree to that which in his own conceit seemed to
be my meaning, with what conscience or with what face could he so falsely charge
me, as opposing him in these things, that spirituality of the old Covenant, the
preaching of the Gospel as well to them as to us, their eating the same
spiritual meat, and drinking the same spiritual drink, as he does in his
Preface, and here of untowardness in my expression, and such as will bear no
fair sense without the overthrow, even of that difference between the Covenants
which I would build on this distinction. But let us consider his Reason of this
last Speech.

To this, says he, I readily agree, and then his distinction falls to nothing.

Answer. I should rather have imagined that the contrary follows, that if Mr.
Blake do readily agree to my explication of the mixture of the Covenant, that
my distinction comes to something, being confirmed by Mr. Blakes suffrage,
unless he take it for nothing.

But let us follow Mr. Blake, Seeing in Gospel Times, in New Testament days,
this will denominate not a pure but mixed Gospel, we are under such a Gosp^l.

Answer. 1. Mr. Blake alters the term distinguished. I did not distinguish of a
pure Gospel and a mixed Gospel, as he intimates I did, but of a pure Covenant
and a mixed Covenant, and asserted not the Gospel preached to Abraham to be
mixed, but the Covenant made with Abraham. 2. It is false, that we are under
such a mixed Gospel, as he imagined I asserted; but Mr. Blake confirms his
Assertion thus.

I know not how we could pray in faith, Give us this day our daily bread; in
case we were without a promise of these things, or how man could live by every
word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, in case we had no word from God.

Answer. A believer may pray for daily bread in faith trusting on Gods
goodness, as he is a Creator, as our Savior argues Matthew. 6.26. as he is a
Father in Christ, Matthew 7.11. as he has made general promises, Mark 10 30.
Matthew. 7.7, 8. as he has made special promises, Prove. 10.3. Psalm 34.10.
confirmed by constant experience, Psalm 37.25. by the great assurance of the
gift of Christ, Romans 8.32. though the special promises domestic or civil
specially respecting the house of Abraham and the policy of Israel, belonging
not to him The word, De^t. 8.3. I take to be his word of power or command, such
as that Psalm 33.5. not his word of promise; yet if it be meant of his word of
promise, there are other promises by which the Patriarchs before Abraham, and
the believers since have lived without the domestic or civil promises
specially respecting the house of Abraham, and the policy of Israel.

But Mr. Blake adds, The Apostle tells us, Godliness has the promise of this
life, and that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. It would trouble many a perplexed
man in case he could not make good, that those words, Verily thou shall be fed,
Psalm 37.3. did not at all belong to him. There is no believing man in any
relation but he has Gospel-promises in concernment to that relation, as
appears in that speech of Paul 's encouragement of Servants, Ephesians. 6.8. It
were ill with all sorts, had not they their domestic relation-promises.

Answer. All this is true, and yet it is true also that the special promises
domestic or civil specially respecting the house of Abraham and policy of
Israel belong not to every believer.

Mr. Bl. says, I place great confidence in my proof this mixture of the
Covenant. And sets down my words Apolog. 127. averring my proof so full as that
I wonder Mr. M. Mr. Blake, and others, are not ashamed to except against it,
that what I deliver is plain according to Scripture, that there were some
peculiar promises made to Abraham, Genesis 17. which are not made to every
believer, that the words 1 Timothy 4.8. is not to the present purpose, for it does
not follow therefore that godliness has the promise of the Land of Canaan, or
that Christ should be every godly man's seed. And then adds, I think I shall
more gratify the Reader in leaving this to his smile, than in giving any
refutation of it; if he could assume that there is no earth but that of Canaan,
or at least that no other promise of earth but that will serve to make a
mixture, then he spoke somewhat to the purpose; otherwise it will be believed,
that our promises under the Gospel of things of earth as well serve to make up
a mixture as Abraham 's promise of the Land of Canaan.

Answer. Whether Mr. Blakes talk or mine be ridiculous the Reader may judge. My
speech is to purposes aimed at by me, to wit, the enervating the arguings from
Abraham's Covenant and Circumcision for infant baptism, by showing that the
Covenant Genesis 17. was not a pure Gospel Covenant, that is, having no promises
but what belongs to every believer, and consequently Baptism not sealing the
same covenant every way which circumcision did, and therefore there is not the
same reason from the covenant why infants should be baptized though they were
circumcised. And this purpose I doubt not to attain though I grant there is
other earth than that of Canaan, and that there may be other promises of earth
besides* that which will serve to make a mixture, and yet the promises of
things of earth as now extant under the Gospel do not as well serve to make up
the mixture I assert in Abraham's covenant, promising the Land of Canaan to be
in the covenant of pure Evangelical grace as now it stands, since those promises
of earth and this life are made to every believer or godly man now, whereas the
promises of Canaan and other things specially respecting the house of Abraham
and policy of Israel Genesis 17. and elsewhere were not made to Let and other
godly believers it is likely then living, nor to Gentile-believers now under
the Gospel. Mr. Bl. goes on thus.

2. As his expression is untoward, so taking him at the best his proof is weak,
that the Covenant takes its denomination from the promises; but the promises
are mixed. The most eminent promises (which contain the m^rrow of all) give the
denomination, and not such that are annexed as appendants to them.

Answ. Though the most eminent promises may give the denomination of the
covenant to be an Evangelical covenant, yet to denominate it a pure Evangelical
covenant it is necessary that not only the most eminent, but also that all the
promises be Evangelical: as though a man may be termed a Saint from the
habitual purpose and bent of his heart, and the constant course of his actions,
yet he is not denominated purely a Saint but from the entire and universal
purpose, bent, inclination of his heart, and entireness of holiness in his
actions without the least inconformity to it.

Mr. Bl. proceeds thus, Such as is the promise of the Land of Canaan, an
appendant to the great Covenant made of God with Abraham, as Chamier with good
warrant from the Text Gen 17.7, 8. calls it lib. de baptis. cap. Sect. The
Covenant being made of God to be a God of Abraham and his seed (which might
have been made good wheresoever they had inhabited or sojourned) the promise of
Canaan is over and above added to it. The reason given by M. T. for his dislike
of Chamier 's expression, calling it an Appendix to the Covenant, is little to
purpose, Psalm 105.10, 15. The gift of the Land of Canaan is called a Covenant,
and therefore not an appendant to it. By the same reason Circumcision must be
the Covenant, and not a seal appendant to it; seeing Circumcision is called a
Covenant, Genesis 17*10. Mr. T. is not ignorant of th^se Scripture Metonymies*

Answ. I find Chamier lib. de baptis. cap. 10. Sect. 23. saying, That the
promise of Canaan is not the Covenant, but an Appendix to the Covenant.

But I find not that he produces any warrant from the Text Genesis 17.7, 8. to
call it so, nor that he does any other way go about to prove it, but that the
words Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God and of thy seed. Which he calls the
covenant, is ill explained of earthly happiness, either as the chief or only
happiness, there meant which he proves from Matthew* 22.32. Nor is there any
force in this Reason, The promise of Canaan is added, v. 8. over and above the
promise v. 7. therefore it was an appendix and not the covenant. For if this
reason be good, it might be said, The promise v. 7. is not the covenant, but an
appendix to it, cause it is added over and above the promise, v. 4. Add as for
me, behold my covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a father of many
Nations, which is termed Gods covenant with him, Genesis 18.8. yea, me thinks the
argument is good to the contrary, the promise Genesis 17.8. was added over and
above the promise v. 7. and closed with this Epiphoneme, And I will be their
God; therefore it was a part of the covenant, yea a main part of it. Nor
because the promise v. 7. might have been made good wheresoever they had
inhabited or sojourned. Does it follow that the promise v. 8. was not a part of
the covenant, for by the same reason neither the promise v. 4. that Abraham
should be a father of many Nations, had been a part of the covenant, since the
promise v. 7. might have been made good though he had been father of one Nation
only.

Mr. Blake does not rightly form my Reason from Psalm 105.8, 9, 10, 11. thus,
The gift of the Land of Canaan is called a covenant, and therefore not an
appendant to it, but thus it is in my Examen part 3. Sect. 2. the Psalmist
calls the promise of Canaan the covenant made with Abraham, Psalm 105.8, 9, 10,
11. therefore it is a part of the covenant, and not only an appendix. Nor does
it follow that then circumcision must be the covenant, for it is confessedly
called the covenant Genesis 17.10. by a Metonimy, and v. 11. shows it where it is
said, And it shall be the token of the covenant between me and you. But it
cannor be expounded by a Metonimy Psalm 105.8, 9, 10, 11.

For, 1. The gift of the Land of Canaan was not a sign of the covenant, nor can
with any good sense be called the covenant according to any other sort of
Metonimy besides that of the thing signified for the sign.

2. If it could, yet the phrases used show it cannot be understood
Metonimically; For it is called as well, the word which he commanded to a
thousand generations, the covenant which he made with Abraham, the oath unto
Isaac, which he confirmed to Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an everlasting
covenant; and when it is recited the Psalmist prefixeth v. 11. (...) which our
Translation read, saying, Junius, Piscator, dicendo, which does directly tell
us wherein it was that the covenant he made did formally consist, which he is
said to remember v. 8. which thing is so clearly expressed Nehem. 9.8. Genesis
26.3. and 28.3, 4, 13, 14, etc. that I should wonder Mr. Bl. should persist in
this wrangling course to question a thing so plain, but that I see him
tenacious of absurdities he vents though never so gross, as from his exposition
and inference from Gal. 4.29, and other passages has been made appear.

Mr. Bl. adds, 3. As his proof is weak, to make the covenant not a pure
Gospel Covenant, but mixed; so in the third place, he is not constant to
himself, pointing that out which he makes pure Gospel, (Genesis 17.5. Genesis 12.3.
Genesis 18 18. illustrated by some New Testament Scriptures Romans 4.17, 18. Gal. 3*
8, 9, 16. Acts 3.25.) he observes yea it is to be noted, that those promises
which were Evangelical according to the more inward sense of the Holy Ghost, do
point at the privileges of Abraham's house in the outward face of the words, and
thereupon raises a doubt, whether any covenant made with Abraham be simply
Evangelical? And so he can find out Evangelical promises in the inwards of
that covenant, which is non-evangelical in the outward face; so Bellarmine,
with whom he so much (to speak in his own language) symbolizeth, can find out
spiritual Evangelical promises in that which he concluded to be of another
nature; denying that the promise made to Abraham in the letter, was any promise
of forgiveness of sins, but of special protection and government, and earthly
happiness; yet confesses that in a mystical sense they were spiritual
promises, both of pardon of sin and life eternal, and that they belong to us,
Bellar. de Sacram. Bapt. lib. 1. cap. 4. whereof Chamier observes, that which
is promised mystically God in covenant does promise; but Heaven is here
promised mystically; therefore in this covenant here is a promise of Heaven; so
the inward and outward face will be all Evangelical.

Answ. Mr. Bl. mis-recites my words; 1. in saying, That I point out in the
Texts Genesis 17.5. and 15.5. and 12.3. and 18.18. that which I make pure Gospel;
for my words are, that was Evangelical which we read Genesis 17.5, etc. not that
it was pure Gospel.

2. That I raise a doubt whether [any] covenant made with Abraham be simply
Evangelical? whereas my words are, whence it may be well doubted, whether
[this] covenant made with Abraham may be called simply Evangelical, not whether
[any] which is the same with that speech forecited Sect 25. of Mr. All^n, This
covenant was not simply and one^y the covenant of grace. But what inconstancy
to my self giving and taking, not knowing what to determine, is in those
speeches, or in that other which he most excepts against: yea, it is to be
noted, etc. I am yet to learn. Do I either by saying that the promises were
Evangelical say that they were purely Ev^ngelical not mixed) or by doubting
whether they may be called simply Evanglical revoke what I said, that they were
Evangelical? I think Mr. Blak^ will as soon extract water out of a Flint as
such inferences from my words. Young Legicians do know that to argue a dicto
secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter is ^allacious. As for my speech which he
says symbolizeth with Bellarmine, if it be true, it is not the worse for that:
nor did I blame Mr. M. for symbolizing with Arminius in a truth, but for
agreeing with him in that explication which does undermine the true explication
of Romans 9.8. which the Contraremonstrants prove from the Text. If Bellarmine
did by mystical sense mean the same which I did by the more inward sense of the
Holy Ghost, and by the Letter what I express by the outward face of the words,
I see not that either Chamier or Mr. Bl. have or can prove it false. The sense
in the outward face of the words I call that which a Linguist who knows what
words signify would conceive upon reading without any other revelation from
the Holy Ghost. But I cannot believe that any Linguist without other revelation
than what the bare words hold forth would ever have understood these promises,
A father of many Nations have I made thee, I will be a God to thee and thy
seed. Thus Gentiles as well as Jews shall believe in Christ, I will justify,
raise thee up, and all that are my Elect, or who believe as thou do to
eternal life. I grant Chamiers conclusion, In this Covenant here is a promise
of Heaven, and yet deny that the outward face of the covenant Genesis 17. is all
Evangelical, nor is there a word in Mr. Blakes that proves it.

Mr. Blake proceeds thus, Lastly, Mr. T. yet knows not how to bring any thing
home (were all granted) to serve his interest. And then sets down what he
conceives to be my meaning, which he thus opposes.

First, that orthodox Divines both ancient and modern have made Circumcision to
be of the same signification and use as Baptism, and till Anabaptists closed
they had no Adversaries, but Papists, who to advance their opus operatum in the
Sacraments of the New Testament will have them as far to exceed the Old, as
Heaven does Earth, and the substance does the shadow; and then cites a speech
of Chamier Panst. Ca^h. tom. 4. lib. 2. cap. 9. sect. 58. and prosecutes his
calumnies of my borrowing my weapons I use against infant baptism from the
Jesuits, to all which I answer.

1. That I grant that Circumcision and Baptism are in part of the same
signification and use, nor did I ever deny it; but in as many and more things
they differ, which I have showed Exercit. Sect. 2. Examen part. 3. Sect. 9. in
this part of the Review, Sect. 11. and those disparities I prove out of
Scripture and the best learned and approved Protestant Writers. Nor do I agree
with the Jesuits in holding Baptism to confer grace ex op^re operato, nor do I
undervalue the Covenant with Abraham and his seed as no Gospel Covenant, nor do
I deny Circumcision to have been the seal of a Gospel-promise. As Mr. Blake
does calumniate me, and to make odious does fa^sly and injuriously suggest I
took from the Jesuits. But this I confess I hold Exercit. Sect. 1. that there
is not the same reason of Circumcision and Baptism, in signing the Evangelical
Covenant; nor may there be an argument drawn from the administration of the one
to the like manner of administering the other, of both which speeches I have
given an account in that place which I find not yet invalidated; and if they
hold, the analogy between infant-circumcision and infant baptism is evacuated,
there being difference between the covenant made with Abraham and the new
covenant though both be in some sort Evangelical; and therefore the mixture of
the covenant will serve my interest in this point.

2. It is false which Mr. Blake says, That my conformity with the Jesuits
about the difference between Circumcision and Baptism to maintain the opus
operatum of the one to the disparagement of the other, as if Baptism exceeded
Circumcision as far as the substance the shadow, did put me upon it to affirm,
that what all Protestant Divines defend against the Papists must be truth
undeniable is no undeniable axiom: for neither do I conform to Jesuits in^
that point, nor was such conformity any reason of that speech, but the words of
Mr. M. in his Sermon, as the reading of the words of my Examen page 113. show.
And I say still that speech is a truth, and necessary to be avouched by all
those who ascribe only authentic authority to the holy Scripture. Nor is it
reasonable to require that I should show any such error as is maintained by
all Protestant Divines against Papists.

For, 1. it is not possible for me to show what all Protestant Divines hold
against Papists.

2. Nor is it necessary to verify my speech which avoucheth not any such
error in act, but only the possibility of it, which is sufficiently made good
by p^oving them not infallible.

And to the demand how Popery should be known if that be no: Popery which all
Protestant Divines defend against the Papists.

I answer. 1. it may be counted Popery and yet perhaps a truth which all
Protestant Divines oppose.

2. What is Popery which we have engaged our selves to extirpate is better
known in the ways I set down Ap. p. 133, 134. Sect. 13. than in Mr. Blakes way.

For, 1. it is not possible for any man no not the greatest Reader in
Controversies to know what all Protestant Divines defend against Papists.

2. If that be the Rule to know Popery by, many things will not be taken for
Popery which are, there being many Tenants which are counted Popery which
Protestants Divines and those of good note have not opposed, but have granted
many things favorably to them, as not only the Collections of Brerely and
such like Papists, but also the Treatises of the Cassandrian writers, and late
Episcopal Protestant do show, which yet I do not approve of.

I agree with Mr. Blake that there is less likelihood that the truth should be
with the Papists than with the Protestants, and yet there may be some truth
which some Papists may discern which many Protestants do not. It is the saying
of Doctor Twisse Vind. Great. lib. 1. part. 2. sect. 25. digress. 8. number. 3. But
I would not that those things should be rejected of us, because the Schoolmen
hold them; for neither do the Cretians fain all things. Augustines judgment was
esteemed better than the Pelagians as being the oracle of his time, yet he is
censured as the hard father of infants for maintaining their damnation if they
died unbaptized. Calvin was in high esteem as the great Light of the Protestant
Churches, who have many of them followed him in the point about usury, yet the
Popish and Prelatical Divines are generally counted by our most zealous
Preachers more right in that point than the transmarine Calvinists.

It is a wicked calumny which Mr. Blake vents when he says of me, that I (...)
in upon the party of these sons of Anak, meaning the Jesuits. Had he any other
than a malignant spirit toward me, he would have judged that not to side with
Jesuits, but to keep my Oath which I took in the solemn Covenant I did oppose
infant baptism, in maintaining of which he and the rest of the Paedobaptists
have broken the covenant, whereby they bound themselves to reform the worship
of God after the Word of God. And for what he charge me with, that I borrow
my weapons from the Jesuits, though my denial is enough to acquit me from it,
there being none but knows my actions better than my self, and with men not
malevolent to me I think my words at least deserve as much credit concerning my
own actions as Mr. Blakes, yet as I said so I repeat it, it appears to be a
loud calum^y in that all along in my Examen, and now in my other writings
almost in every point I produce Protestants of good note concurring with me,
not only in the point about the extent of the covenant Examen sect. 4. part.
3. and the holiness of children, 1 Cor. 7.14. Exam. part. 3. sect. 8. Exerc.
sect. 5. Review part. 1. sect. 22. but also about the institution, Mat. 28.19.
Review part. 2. sect. 5. even in this point of the mixture of the covenant in
the Section next before this. Yea, the Principle upon which I found all my
dispute is that which Mr. Cotton in his Preface to his Dialogue for
infant baptism confesses to be a main principle of purity and reformation. And
though Protestant writers do many of them oppose my conclusion, yet they do
agree with me in the premises on which I build it, to wit, that Baptism is to
be after the institution, and that neither the institution nor practice in the
New Testament was of Paedobaptism, and all Paedobaptists whether Presbyterians
or Independents who do hold that inf^nts belong to the visible Church as the
posterity of Abraham to the Jewish Church ^o injuriously keep them whose
Baptism they avouch to be good, and to be vi^^ble Church Members, from the
Lords Supper for want of knowl^dg; as for what he tells me, He can trace me out
of some Jesuit in what I de^^^er about the Covenant and Seal, though I do not
yet believe it, yet there is no reason therefore to reject it, as Doctor (...)
says truly.

Bishop Morton in his Apology has produced Popish writers and many of them
Jesuits who deliver the same things which the Protestants do; yet this is so
f^r from discrediting their cause that it is justly counted a good plea for
them, and why should not the like plea be good on my behalf, since Jesuits are
Adversaries to me, as well as others? But enough if not too much in answer to
these calumnies sufficiently answered before, Postscript Sect. 13.

Mr. Blake proceeds thus, Secondly, if Circumcision have respect to those
promises that were no Gospel-mercies, but civil, domestical, restrained to
Jews, and not appertaining to Christians; How could it be a distinction between
Jew and Gentile respective to Religion, it might have made a civil distinction,
and the want of it have been an evidence against other Nations, that they had
been none of the multiplied seed of Abraham according to the flesh, and that
their interest had not been in Canaan. But how could it have concluded them to
have been without Christ, strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no
hope and without God in the world, as the Apostle determines upon their
uncircumcision* Ephesians. 2.11, 12. cannot be imagined.

Ans. 1. Circumcision did not make such a distinction between Jew and Gentile
respective to Religion, as that every circumcised person was of the Jewish
Religion: for if the posterity of Ishmael and Esau were not circumcised as
Mahometans at this day (which some Historians say of them at least for a time
that they were) yet Ahab and other worshiperps of Baal were of the posterity of
Jacob, and the Samaritans, as Mr. Mede in his Discourse on John 4.23. were
circumcised, yet were not of the Jewsh Religion, or at least there was a
distinction in Religion between them John 4.22. No^ every one that worshipped
the same God with the Jews was circumcised. Cornelius and many other Proselytes
of the gate owned the God and spiritual worship, and moral Law of the Jews,
though they were not circumcised, as Mr. Mede proves in his Discourse on Acts
17.4. nor does the Apostle Ephesians. 2.11, 12. determine upon their
uncircumcision, that is, conclude them without hope, without God, barely from
their uncircumcision, as if he held all uncircumcised were without hope,
without God: but he only sets those things down as concurrent, not one the
certain cause or sign of the other.

2. Circumcision did distinguish between Jew and Gentile respective to
Religion, not because it sealed Gospel-mercies, nor because it sealed promises
of civil or domestic benefits* but because it bound to the observance of the
Law of Moses, in respect of the observation of which the distinction in
Religion was known by Circumcision not by its sealing the covenant-promises,
either Evangelical, or civil and domestic.

3. If the distinction between Jew and Gentile respective to Religion were made
by Circumcision as sealing the covenant, Genesis 17. it might have made a
religious distinction by my Tenet, who hold it signed the spiritual promises,
though not them only, as well: as by Mr. Blakes.

The next thing which Mr. Blake urges against me from Jerem. 4.4. Romans 2.28.
Deuteronomy. 10.16. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Ezekiel. 44.9. is that Circumcision had relation to
promises spiritual, which is not denied, nor any thing against the mixture I
hold in the covenant, nor to evacuate any inference I make from it.

In like manner the fourth tends to prove that Circumcision did not respect
alone the civil interest of the Jews, which I grant. But the fifth thing urged
by Mr. Blake needs some examination.

Fifthly, says he, How is it that the Apostle giving a definition of
Circumcision refers it to nothing rational, civil or domestic, but only to
that which is purely spiritual, speaking of Abraham, he says, he received the
sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had,
yet being uncircumcised? The righteousness of faith is a promise purely
Evangelical, Romans 3.22. and 3.30. and 10.3. Phil. 3.8. and this Circumcision
sealed, the self-same thing that our Sacraments seal.

Answer. The Apostle does not give a definition of Circumcision, Romans 4.11, 12.
For, 1. that which is to be defined is, say Logicians, a common term, but
Circumcision Romans 4.11. is not a common term, but a singular, or individual, to
wit, that which Abraham had in his own person, it is that which he received,
and the time is noted to be after he had righteousness by faith, which he had
yet being uncircumcised, for a singular privilege to be the father of believers.

Ergo 2. There is no genus, nor difference of Circumcision from other things,
therefore no definition. No genus, for the term [seal] cannot be the genus, it
being a mere Metaphor, and so not declaring what it is, but what it is like, in
respect of the use. Besides, Circumcision is an action, but Seal is in the
Predicament of relation, as being a sign, or a figure in the Predicament of
quality, or an aggregate compound of a material substance, having a figure for
signification. But the genus is in the same Predicament with the species, and
so is not [Seal] with [Circumcision] Ergo. For does Seal of the righteousness
of faith agree to all Circumcision, nor difference it from the Spirit of God;
nor according to the Paedobaptists Hypothesis, from the Passover, Baptism, or
the Lords Supper.

Mr. Blake adds, So that their extraordinary Sacraments are expressly affirmed
to be the same with ours by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.3. They eat all the same
spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink, so are their
appointed established Sacraments, Circumcision and the Passover.

Answer. 1. The extraordinary Sacraments are said to note the same thing with
ours, not expressly affirmed to be the same with ours.

2* It is no where said in Scripture that Circumcision and the Passover did
note the same thing with our Sacraments, much less that they are the same
Sacraments with ours.

Mr. Blake adds, Will Mr. T. with his old friend Bellarmine lib. 1. cap. 17. de
Saramentis in genere, and Mr. Blackwood in his Reply to the tenth Objection,
deny that Circumcision was an universal seal of faith, but was only an
individual seal of the undividual faith of Abraham, and so all falls to the
ground which is spoken from that Text of the use of Circumcision to the Jews.
All that is there spoken, having reference only to Abraham in person.

Answer. Mr. Blake tells me of an old friend of mine whom I never knew, and
have hitherto made him mine adversary, although perhaps we may agree in some
things, and I think Mr. Blake and he agree in more than I do with him. It seems
not to me to be Bellar. opinion, or Mr. Blackwoods that circumcision was only
an individual Seal of the faith of Abraham, but Bellarmines opinion is, that
his circumcision did testify not his individual faith, but his individual
privilege to be father of the faithful, which Mr. Blake agrees with him in,
when he says, This priority of receiving the faith and the sign and seal, is
proper to Abraham^ And then he is as much his old friend as mine.

Mr. Blackwood in his Reply to the second part of the Vind. of the
Birth-privilege, page 47. says thus, So that Circumcision was a seal of the
righteousness which Abraham had, not in persona propria, but in persona
relativa, it sealed unto him not his own personal righteousness, which he had
long before, but the righteousness of all believers. In which I dissent from
him, conceiving it sealed both: however his opinion seems to be otherwise than
Mr. Blake represents it. For my self I do not make it any seal of faith either
universal or individual, nor know I well what sense to make of either, but this
is my opinion, that Abraham's individual Circumcision, and no others is made
Romans 4.11, 12. the seal of the righteousness of faith to Abraham as the father
of believers, and to all believers of all Nations as his seed. Now to this
opinion of mine I find nothing opposite, but against another point that
Abraham's Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith and of the
Covenant to him only, which I disclaim, and therefore let his arguments pass
without gainsaying, only I request the Reader to take notice that Mr. Blake
has many ways misrepresented my opinion in this Chapter but has not at all
overthrown the mixture in the Covenant Genesis 17. which I assert; but where he
sets down my opinion rightly says page 181. To this I readily agree, nor has
at all so much as brought one reason to show that my distinction shows not my
turn for which I bring it, which he undertook to do, but leaves that thing and
runs out in calumnies of me, and proving that which I deny not.

SECT. XXVII. The four first Chapters of Mr. Sidenham's Exercitation are
examined, and his vanity in his conceits about consequences proving
Infant Baptism, the purity of the Covenant Genesis 17. Infants of Believers being
Abraham's seed and in Covenant, is showed.
I Think it necessary for many Reasons before I review the dispute about Mr. Ms.
second conclusion to consider what Mr. Cuthbert Sidenham has said in the four
first Chapters of his Exercitation.

1. He forestalls his Reader with things palpably false, that there is nothing
in all the New Testament against the baptizing of Infants, not one hint from
any express word dropped from Christ or his Apostles; not one phrase, which
though never so much strained does forbid such an act. The contrary whereof is
abundantly proved in the second Part of this Review, Sect. 5. etc. nor can any
Paedobaptist find so much against infant-communion, Bell-baptism, baptizing of
dead persons, Baptism of Midwives, the Cross in Baptism, and many other
Prelatical and Popish usages as there is in the New Testament against
infant baptism.

2. That all his Opposites have only this to say, that they can find no
syllabical precept or word of command in terms, saying, Go baptize Infants, or
any positive example where it is said in so many words Infants were baptized,
all that they say besides is to quarrel with and evade their arguments, and
that this argument is built on this false principle, that no direct
consequences from Scripture are mandatory: the contrary whereof is so manifest
out of my Examen part. 3. sect. 12. Apol. sect. 11. (which Mr. Sidenham often
quotes, and therefore cannot be ignorant of unless wilfully) and throughout all
my writings, that a man can hardly conceive but that he shamelesly vented these
things against his own knowledge. And therefore I need not answer his Reasons to
prove the use of consequence. Let any Paedobaptist give me one good consequence
whereby infant baptism is proved, and I shall yield* the consequences of Mr.
Baxter and others I find to be mere fallacies, and have, and doubt not with
divine assistance to show them to be so.

That which he says, page 6. That where we have a promise laid as the
foundation of a duty that is equivalent to any express command; for as commands
in the Gospel do suppose promises, to encourage us to act ^^em, and help us in
them; so promises made to persons do include commands, especially when the
duties commanded are annexed to the promises, as all New Testament Ordinances
are as well as old; is ambiguous, and in what sense, it is true it serves not
Mr. Sidenhams turn to prove infant baptism. By foundation of a duty may be
understood either a motive to encourage to a duty named, as when it is said,
Him that honors me I will honor, this promise does suppose it a duty to
honor God, and is a motive to encourage to it, and so is a foundation in that
sense of the duty: o^ by foundation of a duty may be understood the Rule
according to which that duty is to be performed, and this may be understood
either thus, to whomsoever there is a promise of that thing by which a duty is
urged on others they are bound to do that duty, and then it is false: for
Christ promised Matthew. 28.19, 20. to the Apostles whom he bid preach the Gospel
and baptize, that he would be with them, and Matthew. 18.20. to two or three
gathered together to be in the midst of them, does it therefore follow that
every two or three gathered together in his Name are commanded to preach and
baptize? or it may be understood thus, that he to whom the promise is upon the
doing of that duty is bound to do it; and this I grant to be true: but this
will not serve Mr. Sidenhams turn: for there is no promise to infants that upon
their baptizing themselves they should have remission of sins, nor is Mr.
Sidenham so absurd as to make baptism infants duty, but their right: now as Mr.
Sidenham would have it, that because there is a promise to infants, therefore
others are in duty bound to baptize them, as having right to it, it is false,
since the institution of Baptism is not to whom God has promised to be a God,
for that is according to his election which is unknown, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. but to
them who are Disciples or believers in Christ, Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16.
There are ambiguities in the speeches that commands in the Gospel do suppose
promises, that promises made to persons do include commands, that all the New
Testament Ordinances are annexed to promises, which would be too tedious and
unnecessary to unfold, it is sufficient to show they will not serve Mr.
Sidenhams turn in the sense they are true, and will as well serve to prove
infants right to the Lords Supper, as to Baptism.

That which he says, We have as much in the New Testament to prove
infant baptism, from the true principles of right to Ordinances, as they have
for those whom they baptize; for they baptize grown persons on such and such
considerations; and we shall hereafter show we baptize on as strong and
equivalent grounds, is notoriously false: for we baptize according to the
qualification required in the institution of Christ, and the Apostles and other
Preachers baptizing and directing the use of Baptism in the New Testament which
are acknowledged the true principles of right to Ordinances, and it is
acknowledged even by Paedobaptists that they have neither precept nor example
in the New Testament of infant baptism, and therefore cannot have as strong and
warrantable grounds as we who are Pistobaptists, that is, baptizers of
believers. Nor is it true that it is requisite we should show them
express^command against Infant Baptism, it is enough that they cannot prove in
its institution. Infants never by divine warrant enjoyed Baptism, and for
Circumcision it was more unlike than like to Baptism, and of it an authentic
repeal is easily showed Acts 15. and elsewhere.

In the rest Mr. Sidenham shows not why infants should not have been baptized
at first, as well as grown men if it had been Christ's mind; Ishmael and all
Abraham's males were circumcised the self same day in which Abraham was, Genesis
17.26, 27. and therefore if Paedobaptists Hypothesis were right, infants as
well as persons of years should have been baptized by the Apostles* which they
did not, for in that it is not expressed, it is enough to show it was not done,
unless we make the Spirit of God defective in what was needful to have been
set down, and to say as Mr. Sidenham does, There is enough to show it was done
though not written, is with the Papists to maintain unwritten traditions* Rule
^f manners. There is no hint left by Christ or the Apostles to deduce as a
infant baptism from. And it is false which he says, God has always ordained
some Ordinances in the administration^ of which, for the most part, the subject
has been purely passive. He names nor can name any till the institution of
Circumcision, which was not till after the world had been above two thousand
years. The rest of his speech savours of this corrupt principle, that what we
conceive fit in Gods worship is to be accounted his mind. This is enough in
answer to the first Chapter.

In the second he says untruly, that the Covenant Genesis 17. was first made with
Abraham and his seed in the name of all believers and their seed, both Jews and
Gentiles; nor is it true that if he should find the same Covenant reaching
Gentile believers and their children as Abraham and his they cannot be denied
the new external sign and seal of the same Covenant, that is, Baptism.

And for what he says, the Covenant Genesis 17. was a Covenant of pure grace, I
grant it so far as it was Evangelical, but deny it to be a pure
Gospel Covenant, nor do any of his Reasons prove any more than I grant, that
there were Gospel-promises meant by God under promises of temporal mercies
proper to Abraham and his natural posterity, and those that joined with them in
their policy; which I have proved before, out of Scripture to be termed the
Covenant it self without a Metonymy, and God is said to keep that Covenant by
establishing the Israelites in Canaan, and therefore it is but vain talk that
the promise of Canaan was but an additional, appendix, added ex super
abundanti, if he mean it of the Covenant Genesis 17. if he mean it of the
Gospel Covenant it is more true that was added to the other as a more hidden
sense under the promises of civil and domestic privileges. I do not make a
mixture in the Gospel Covenant, but in the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17.
nor by mixture do I understand any other than a composition of various parts,
not a mixture in the nature of it, or substance or circumstances: but that the
Covenant made with Abraham had promises of two sorts, some promises in the
first obvious sense of the words proper to Abraham's natural posterity, some
spiritual common to all believers in the more hidden sense of the words, which
with what has been said before is enough to answer that Chapter also,
proceeding upon mistakes of my meaning in the term [mixt] in many passages, and
the rest if not answered before, I let pass, because dictates without proof.

In the third, after he has allowed the distinctions of Abraham's seed into
carnal and spiritual, natural and believing, he sets down six considerations.

1. That Abraham 's spiritual seed were as much his fleshly seed also, Isaac as
Ishmael except Proselytes and Servants: which may be granted with these
limitations.

1. That it be not understood universally, for Christian believing Gentiles^
neither Proselytes to Israel, nor servants to them, are Abraham's spiritual
seed, yet not at all Abraham's fleshly seed.

2. That Isaac was as much Abraham's fleshly seed as Ishmael according to the
meaning Romans 9.8. as fleshly seed is called from natural generation simply
considered: but not as Gal. 4.23. it is meant of fleshly seed called so from
natural generation in some respect, to wit, as begotten in a baser way.

The second consideration of Mr. Sidenham is this, [The Covenant was
administered to all Abraham's natural and fleshly children, as if they had been
spiritual, and before they knew what faith was, or could actually profess
Abraham's faith.]

If he mean by the Covenant only Circumcision I grant it of all Abraham's
natural male children: if he mean the covenant of grace which is Evangelical,
though I deny not that it was administered by the mediation of Christ, and the
work of the Spirit, to many elect infants before believing, yet I deny that it
ever was or shall be administered to any but the elect of God, who have the
denomination of Abraham's spiritual seed. For I know not how the Covenant which
promises remission of sins, justification, regeneration, adoption* eternal
life is said to be administered but by giving these, which are given only to
the elect, not to Abraham's mere natural or fleshly seed. Mere outward
Ordidances and outward gifts and privileges as they are not promised in the
Gospel Covenant, which we call the covenant of grace, either as made to
Abraham, or confirmed by Christ's blood, so neither are they administrations of
it, but arise from Gods command or providence without the Covenant as
Evangelical.

His third consideration is, It Is no contradiction in different respects to be
a seed of the flesh by natural generation, and a child under the same promise
made with the parent; for they both agreed in Abraham 's case: which I grant,
if meant of Isaac and Jacob, and such other Heirs of the promise, as the
Scriptures term them. But I reject that which follows, that none was a child
of promise, but as he came of Abraham 's flesh: for believing Gentiles are
children of the promise though they come not of Abraham's flesh, yea it is not
only true to the contrary, but expressly avowed Romans 9.8. That none are
children of the promise as they come of Abraham 's flesh. Nor is it true, that
as he came from Abraham 's flesh, so every one had the seal of Gods Covenant on
his flesh* for this is not true of males under eight days old, or females, and
therefore this inference is vain: Thus a spiritual promise was made with
Abraham and his carnal seed.

His fourth consideration is, There was no distinction of Abraham 's fleshly
seed and his spiritual seed in the Old Testament, but all comprehended under
the same Covenant, until they degenerated from Abraham 's faith, and proved
themselves to be mere carnal, and rejected the promise.

But this is manifestly false, Esau was Abraham's fleshly seed, but never his
spiritual seed. The Apostle determines Rom 9.11. before he had done good or evil
he was rejected, and with the Apostle a child of the promise, and an elect
person are the same. No man is Abraham's spiritual seed but an elect person, or
true believer: Scripture makes none else his seed spiritual Romans 4.12, 16. and
9.7, 8. Gal. 3.29. John 8.39. This very Author makes the distinctions of
fleshly and spiritual, believing and natural taken out of Romans 9.7, 8 Gal.
4.23. and 3.16. most true. And if a person may be Abraham's spiritual seed a
while, then the degenerate the elect, and true believers may fall away finally
and totally, and if they that be Abraham's fleshly seed be under the same
covenant with the spiritual till they degenerate, then a person may be in the
covenant of grace, and be merely carnal, having not the Spirit of God, then a
man may be in the covenant of grace and not abide in it, then the covenant of
grace may be defective, mutable, and if there be no distinction of Abraham's
fleshly seed and his spiritual in the Old Testament, until they rejected the
promise, then there is no distinction of elect and reprobate till in time they
embrace or reject the promise contrary to Romans 9.11. He that holds this
position must become an Arminian.

His fifth is, There is a carnal and spiritual seed of Abraham, even under the
New Testament, as our Opposites must acknowledge, as well as Infants; so are the
most visible Professors which they baptize; which may have no grace; and many
prove carnal indeed, through the predominancy of their lusts and corruptions.

Answer. It is ackdowledged that there is a carnal seed of Abraham under the
New Testament in the Jewish Nation: but visible Professors of the Gentiles
which are baptized although they be many of them carnal men (and so are many of
the congregational Churches not baptized) yet they cannot be termed the carnal
seed of Abraham, being not his seed either by nature or by believing as he did.

His sixth is, when there is mention of Abraham 's carnal seed in opp^sition to
spiritual seed, it cannot be meant primarily or solely of those that descended
from Abraham 's flesh; for then Isaac and Jacob were the carnal seed, yea
Christ himself, who as concerning the flesh came of Abraham; it must be
therefore of those of Abraham 's seed which degenerated and slighted the
Covenant of the Gospel, and these were properly the carnal seed.

Answer. The distinction of Abraham's carnal and spiritual seed is as the
distinction of the Church into visible and invisible, in which the members may
agree to the same persons, though on the other side also they may not agree.
The same persons may be of the Church visible and invisible, and yet some
persons may be of the Church visible who are not of the invisible, and some of
the invisible who are not of the invisible: so some are Abraham's carnal seed
who are also his spiritual, as Isaac, Jacob, Christ; some ^re his spiritual
seed but not his carnal, as Gentile believers; some his carnal seed but not his
spiritual, as unbelieving Jews; some neither his carnal nor spiritual seed, as
unsound Professors of faith of the Gentiles, who are no way Abraham's seed, nor
ever called his carnal seed in Scripture.

There are but two places I know in which the term of Abraham's fleshly seed or
child is used Romans 9.8. Gal. 4.23. in both which is meant of his seed by
natural generation, though in the later in a worse way. In the former way,
those that embraced the Covenant without degenerating from Abraham's faith,
being descended from Abraham by natural generation, are as properly termed
Abraham's carnal seed as those Israelites that did backslide.

I grant, Abraham was a natural father to many of th^se to whom he was a
spiritual father, as to Isaac and Jacob and the godly of their posterity, but
not to all. He was a spiritual father to believing Galatians, though not a
natural, Gal. 3.29.

But what Mr. Sidenham says, That all to whom Abraham was a natural father
were under the Covenant, and had the seal until they rejected themselves, is
in no part true: not the former, for Ishmael was never under the Covenant,
whether it be meant of the spiritual promises or temporal, unless Mr. Sidenham
means by b^i^ng under the Covenant being circumcised, which is all one with
having the seal, and then he uses an inept tautology in his speech without
good sense. Nor is the later true of females and males under eight days old.

I grant that both Abr^hams natural and spiritual children were circumcised,
which Mr. Sidenham means when in the Paedobaptists gibberish he says, The
promise took in both relations, as to outward administration: but Romans 3.1, 2,
3, 4. speak^ ^^^^ing of the spiritual child of Abraham but the natural.

And for what Mr. Sidenham says, And if men truly state things, you may argue
as much against Abraham 's natural seed from enjoying these privileges, as
believers natural seed now, and with as much evidence of truth.

I know not what he means by truly stating things, the privileges mentioned
Romans 4.1, 2, 3, 4. are Circumcision, and the commission of the oracles of God
to them, and this later is reckoned as the Jews advantage; and though it be
true, that we have the benefit of the oracles of God, yet it is not true of our
children in infancy, nor of any of us or our children, that to them were the
oracles of God committed as to the Jews. And for Circumcision it is true, we
may argue as much against Abraham's natural seed from enjoying it as believers
natural seed now, and with as much evidence of truth, since Christ is come,
Circumcision the shadow is to cease, both to Jews and Gentiles: and me thinks
Mr. Sidenhams arguing should be the same with ours if he were a Christian (as I
doubt not he was) and not a Jew. But that which Mr. Sidenham would have is,
that a believers natural child should be Abraham's seed, and this is the true
stating of things, which perhaps he means. But before I state things after Mr.
Sidenhams mind, I must see some proof, as yet I see no one proof to make good
any of his (inconsiderate) considerations.

He takes upon him to weigh the Scriptures brought by his opposites to prove,
that they only are Abraham's seed meant in the Covenant as it was Evangelical
Gen, 17.7. to be true believers or elect persons.

The first is Romans 9.6, 7, 8. in the setting down of the occasion of which
words he says, Here (Romans 9.4, 5.) is a catalogue of high privileges which
belonged to the Jews, which they acre to be cut off from, which l^y on Paul' s
heart, and was like to sink him. But this is a frivolous conceit, for the
privileges there reckoned are all or most of them of things already past, such
as they could not be deprived of, for that which is already done cannot no not
by God himself be not done, for it would imply a contradiction: so those that
were Israelites, whose were the fathers, who had the giving of the Law, of whom
as concerning the flesh Christ came, could not be cut off from these privileges
which were things past, yea to imagine that the Jews should be deprived of
those privileges is to overthrow the faith of the Christians, who believe that
Christ came of the fathers of the Israelites according to the flesh, of which
the Jews could not be deprived but by making it false. And for the rest of the
privileges though our Translators read [ to whom pertains the adop^ion and the
glory, not as Mr. Sidenham, the adoption of glory] yet the Greek being (...),
which leaves out the Verb to be supplied, it is clear that it should be read
whose were the adoption and glory, and the Covenants and the giving the Law,
and the service and the promises, and v. 5. whose were the fathers, as well as
it is read from whom Christ came, though the Verb be not expressed, since
otherwise the speech were not true. For to the present Israelites did not
pertain the adoption, as if they then living were adopted or to be adopted
children of God: for the Apostle bemoans their rejection and cutting off. And
the glory being meant of the Ark, 1 Samuel 4.21. or the cloud that covered it
Ezekiel. 10.4. long before lost, and the Covenants meant of the two Tables of the
Law, being lost, and the giving the Law, to wit, the judicial Laws being an act
cannot be expounded but of the time past, and so the service, to wit, the
ceremonial worship now Christ was come was no privilege to the present Jews,
but a heavy yoke, yet it was a great privilege to their ancestors, and the
Verb is to be read in the Praeter-tense, and in like manner the promises were
the Israelites, that is, they had them first given to them, and had the benefit
of them, and accordingly it is to be expounded thus, whose, that is, to which
Israelites were the promises first made, and they enjoyed the benefit of them
The thing then that afflicted Paul was, not that the present Jews were to be
cut off from those privileges, but that the people who had formerly so great
tokens of Gods peculiar respect to them should not be broken off from the
Olive Tree, rejected from being Gods people, and hardened in unbelief.

Mr. Sidenham thinks this Text a weapon whose edg^ is turned against these that
count it their own.

1. Says he, The Apostle is sadly troubled for his kinsmen after the flesh,
for their rejection; his reason is, because of the Covenant and the promises
made to them, because they were the natural seed of Abraham; which holds forth
that the promises and privileges of the Covenant were indefinitely to all the
Israelites.

Answer. It is true, the Apostle was sadly troubled for the Jews rejection, but
the reason given is such as is scarce competent to a sober mind. For the
reason, as he makes it, must either refer to his trouble or their rejection. If
it refer to Paul's trouble, the sense is, that Paul was troubled because of the
Covenant, etc. But this should be a matter of rejoicing to him, not of trouble,
unless he were troubled that God brake his Covenant with them, because they
were the natural seed of Abraham; but sure God never brake his Covenant with
them for that reason, nor is it to be imputed to God without imputing
unfaithfulness to him, which were blasphemy to affirm. If it be referred to the
Jews rejection, then the sense is, they were rejected because of the Covenant,
etc. But sure they were not rejected because of the Covenant made to them, but
because of their unbelief in not being steadfast in the Covenant, Romans 11.20.
There Is the like wit in the illation.

For, 1. how were the promises made indefinitely, and yet to all the
Israelites? [all] is not an indefinite note but an universal.

2. What is the meaning of that expression, the privileges of the Covenant were
made to all? The making of privileges is somewhat an uncouth phrase.

3. What were the promises and privileges made to all the Israelites, he tells
us not, and so the Reader is left to guess.

4. How Paul's trouble or the reason given should hold that forth is another
Riddle which needs an Oedipus, if such nonsense scribbling be counted worth
ones study to unfold it.

2. Says he, That it is a most sad thing to be excluded from the outward and
general administration of the Covenant. Why should Paul thus break out in his
affections, for the loss of outward privileges, if it were not such a mercy to
be under them?

Answer. It is I confess a sad thing to be excluded from any mercy of God, much
more to be excluded from though but an outward administration of the Covenant
of grace. But it is a sad thing to me that I find a Teacher of a Church
pretending so much zeal for truth to vent in print such a ridiculous conceit,
as if Paul's great sorrow and continual pain in his heart, by reason of that,
for the remedy whereof he could wish himself accursed from Christ, were for the
exclusion from outward privileges, which they might have and yet be damned, and
might want and yet be saved. If the outward privilege were Circumcision they
had it, if Baptism they might have it, and yet be damned. And shall we think
the Apostle so foolish as to be thus troubled for such a loss?

3. Says he, The Apostle holds forth, that persons may be under the outward
administration of the Covenant, and yet not get the efficacy of it, verse. 6.
They are not all Israel that are of Israel; the Covenant was with Abraham and
his seed, all that were of him; and yet all were not Israel, that is, partakers
of the inward life and efficacy of the Covenant.

An. That which the Apostle holds forth is not, as this man dotingly scribles,
that persons may be under the outward administration of the Covenant, that is,
circumcised, etc. and yet no^ get the efficacy of it, that is, have the
Circumcision of the heart, justification and eternal life: for though this be a
truth, yet there is not a word in the Apostles answer v. 6, 7, 8. which gives
any color for such a Paraphrase, there being no mention of Circumcision or any
such rite as they call the outward administration of the Covenant, nor any
words equipollent thereto. For to be of Israel is to be descended of Jacob by
natural generation, as in like manner v. 7. to be the seed of Abraham, and v.
8. the children of the flesh: nor could such an Answer have met with the
Objection, which was not, if the Jews were deprived of the outward
administration, how could Gods word stand to be a God to Abraham and his seed?
But thus, if they were not his people to be justified and saved by Christ, how
could the word of God stand, Genesis 17.7. Jer. 31.36, 37. which seemed to promise
they should be his people to be justified and saved by Christ? And therefore to
answer, they had the outward administration, though not the inward efficacy is
to confirm the Objection, which is, that they had not that inward efficacy
which the Covenant promised: nor does the Apostle deny that those saving
mercies were in the promises, nor think the promises salved by alleging that
all had outward privileges though not saving mercies; but by showing that the
saving mercies in those promises were not assured to every natural child of
Abraham, or of Israel, but to the choice seed distinguished from the rest by
promise, and peculiar calling according to election, whether of Jews or
Gentiles, and thereby made the Israel of God, v. 7, 8, 11, 24. and so Gods
words of promise stands firm to that seed of Abraham and Israel to whom it was
made, though the natural seed of Abraham, and Israel be rejected from being
Gods people. It is therefore expressly cross to what the Apostle says v. 7.
which Mr. Sidenham says, that the Covenant was with Abraham and his seed, all
that were of him.

And that which he says, And so though they were under the outward
dispensation of the Covenant, yet God was not mutable, nor his promise, though
he rejected them because of their own degeneration; is directly contrary to the
Apostles determination that they were rejected merely out of the absolute
liberty of Gods will, v. 18. which the Apostle proves in the rejection of Esau
verse. 11, 12, 13. before he had done good or evil, yea, before he was born, and
the speech to Moses, v. 15. and the hardening of Pharaoh, v. 17. And indeed if
this Paraphrase of Mr. Sidenham were good then the Arminian doctrine of
conditional reprobation were here expressly taught, that their rejection was
because of their own degeneration, and consequently the election of the other,
to wit, the Gentiles must be, because of their own believing, and Gods promise
to be a God to them must presuppose their believing as the reason of his
promise to them, which is the very dregs of Pelagianism founding the difference
between the called and rejected in man's will and not Gods.

What Mr. Sidenha^ says, that the Covenant was made in general with Abraham 's
seed, to all that came from him, meaning by natural generation, is contrary to
the Apostles resolution v. 6, 7* 8. and would make God a breaker of his
promise, (which was not of outward privileges, but of saving grace) and
supposes the Covenant and the election not commensurate, contrary to the
Apostle, yea, to Mr. Sidenhams own words where he sums up the Apostles
resolution, when he says, that none are the children of the promise (to whom
the Covenant was made) real saints but those that have the true effects of the
Covenant in their hearts.

And what he says, to all children of believers the promise visibly belongs to
them ^s to Abraham and his seed, it is a piece of nonsense gibberish, such as
Paedobaptists use, according to their false Hypotheses, no whit agreeing either
with the promise Genesis 17.7, or the Apostles determination Romans 9.6, 7, 8. so
often refelled by me, that it is superfluous to say of it any more now.

As for what he adds, But here is nothing at all to demonstrate that infants,
because children of the flesh, are not under the promise.

I g^ant it, but say, there is enough to demonstrate that the promise of being
a God Genesis 17.1. is not made to every believers child, since it was not made to
all Abraham's natural seed, but to the elect of them, which is enough for our
purpose.

Mr. Sidenhams proceeds to the Text Gal. 3.16. which he grants not to be meant
barely of Christ personal, if, says he, the promises were to Christ mystical,
then to all the elect as in him, and so to infants as well as grown persons,
[which I grant] but thus the promise is conveyed under ground as it were, none
knows the veins of it, which I also grant, until the calling shows who were
elect, nor do I count it any absurdity to yield it.

But, says he, take the promise to be made to Christ, the seed, as the Head of
a visible Church, then still it speaks for us.

Answer. This is doughty disputing, likely to turn the edg of our weapons
against our selves, when the Antagonist must yield him what he would have; and
me thinks he should have brought some Expositour or some argument for him, and
not so pitifully beg what he should prove. To the contrary I urge that by [
Christ Gal. 3.16.] is meant either Christ personal or Christ mystical, or both,
and not as the Head of a visible Church.

1. That the promises said to be made to Abraham 's seed, that is, Christ are
of the blessing of Abraham, which is righteousness and the spirit, Gal. 3.8, 9,
14. the inheritance v. 18. life v. 21. not bare outward privileges. But these
things belong only to Christ and his mystical body, not his mere visible
Church. Ergo, they are not the seed there meant.

2. From the condition or means by which the promise is made good, and that is
faith, v. 14, 22. But the mere visible Church may be without faith, therefore
the promise is not made to it.

3. By the express determination of the Apostle v. 7. Know ye therefore, that
they which are of faith are the children of Abraham, verse. 29. And if ye be
Christ's (that is by faith, v. 26, 27.) then are ye Abraham 's seed and heirs
according to the promise: which a man would think were enough to silence th^se
that make the promises to belong to unbelievers as Abraham's seed.

4. The current Protestant interpreters of note, such as Beza, Piscator,
Perkins, etc. go this way.

But Mr. Sidenham thinks to evince his purpose from v. 14. where the blessing
of Abraham is said to come on the Gentiles through Christ, and this blessing of
Abraham was not personal, but to him and his seed, this very blessing is come
on Gentile believers, as on Abraham; therefore it must come on believers of the
Gentiles and their seed. For it cannot be called Abraham, s blessing, except it
come on the Gentiles according to the substantial terms of Abraham 's Covenant:
now this was the absolute form of Abraham 's blessing, I will be a God of th^e
and thy seed; and this very blessing is come on the Gentiles through Christ, as
it came on Abraham; and therefore it must be to believing G^ntiles and their
seed; else it will neither ^e Abraham 's bl^ssing in the form nor fa^ness of
it; Abraham 's blessing will descend on the Gentiles clip^ half off, not like
it self: and it must needs be a very uncouth saying to all judicious ears, to
say, that Abraham 's blessing is come on the Gentiles by Christ, as it was on
the Jews by Abraham, and to exclude half the subjects at once from any right to
it; for so you must, if you cast out the seed of Gentile believers.

To which I answered, that had not the Assembly at Westminster, Confession of
Faith, chap. 28. art. 4. cited Gal. 3.9, 14. with Genesis 17.7, 9. to prove
infant baptism of a believing parent, I should not have transcribed so much of
this arguing. The blessing of Abraham must come on the Gentiles, says he,
according to the substantial terms of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. Ergo, on Gentile
believers and their seed. Now what is the blessing of Abraham? and what the
substantial terms of the Covenant? and what seed of Abraham did it come on? and
how?

1. The blessing is plainly expressed v. 8.9. to be justification v. 14. to be
the receiving the promise of the spirit. The same Apostle Romans 4*6, 9. places
the blessedness of Abraham in the imputation of righteousness through faith,
Beza Annot. in Gal. 3.14. Et spiritus nomine benedictionem aeternae spiritualis
vitae intelligo. Perkins Comment. on Gal. 3.14. That the blessing of Abraham,
that is, righteousness and life everlasting, Piscat. Schol. in Gal. 3.14. Ut
benedictio ill^ Abrahae promissa (de qua supra v. 8.) ad Gentes perveniret in
Christo; quatenus nimirum illae Christo inseruntur per fidem, Di^son in Gal.
3.14. benedictio Abrahae, id est, justitia and vita aeterna.

2. The substantial terms of the Covenant Genesis 17.7. are thus set down by Mr.
M. in his Sermon, page 10. The substance of the Covenant on Gods part was to be
Abraham 's God, and the God of his seed, to be an all-sufficient portion, an
all-sufficient reward for him, to give Jesus Christ to him, and righteousness
with him, both of justification, and of sanctification, and of everlasting
life. On Abraham 's part the substance of the Covenant was, to believe in the
promised Messiah, to walk before God with a perfect heart, to serve God
according to his revealed will, to instruct his family, etc. Not one that I
know that makes the blessing or the substance of the Covenant to be an initial
seal, visible Churchmembership and such like mere Ecclesiastical privileges.

3. The seed of Abraham to whom the blessing is promised is his spiritual seed,
and it only. Diodati Annot. on Gal. 3.14. of Abraham] namely, promised to
Abraham, and to his spiritual posterity only. Trapp. Comment on Gal. 3.14. v.
14. The promise of the spirit] that is, the spiritual promise made to Abraham,
and his spiritual posterity. The Text it self ^al. 3.7. Know ye therefore that
they which are of faith, the same are the children of Abraham.

4. The means is through faith, Gal. 3.14. So then they which be of faith are
blessed with faithful Abraham, verse. 9. From which I infer, that he that would
conclude from hence that the blessing of Abraham comes upon the G^ntiles,
fathers and infant-children, and that this is according to the substantial
terms of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. must hold that all children of Gentile
believers are elect and believers, and that they are justified as Abraham was,
which Mr. M. and Mr. G. disclaim, and indeed is manifestly false being contrary
to Scripture and experience. But Mr. Sidenham thinks to infer hence a mere
Ecclesiastical privilege of right to an initial seal, which is not at all meant
Gal. 3.14. by the blessing of Abraham, nor ever meant by the Covenant Genesis
17.7. nor would the promise be true, if meant of it; for many of Abraham's seed
had no right to Circumcision or visible Church Membership. Surely according to
Paedobaptists Hypotheses all the posterity of Abraham by Ishmael, the sons of*
Keturah, Esaus were excluded; and therefore the word of Gods promise so
expounded had been false.

As for Mr. Sidenhams Reasons, there is no force in them. The first may be
retorted, The first is come on Gentile believers, as on Abraham; therefore it
must not come on believers of the Gentiles and their seed also universally, for
it came not on Abraham and his natural seed universally, nor is it true this
very blessing is come on Gentile believers as on Abraham, for it is come on
Abraham not simply as a believer, but as a father of believers, not as father
of men, but it comes on no Gentile as father of believers, but as Abraham's
child by faith.

The next also may be retorted, if the blessing come on the Gentiles according
to the substantial terms of Abraham 's Covenant, then not in a mere outward
Ecclesiastical privilege, for that is no part of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. much
less the substantial term of it, it is neither Abraham 's blessing in the form
nor fatness of it; yea, if it be meant by Abraham's blessing it, is clipped half
off not like it self, it is made an empty thing, a mere outward privilege
without salvation, and so is in a manner reduced to nothing, and half the seed
of Abraham, all the females and many more are excluded from any right to it.
For they had no right to the initial seal, to wit, Circumcision.

And to his question, And to what end should the Apostle say, The blessing of
Abraham, and not the Promise or Covenant is come to the Gentiles, but that he
intended it to the Gentile believers and their seed, as formerly it came to
Abraham and his seed?

I answer, he says, The blessing of Abraham (not the Promise or Covenant of
Abraham) because he in the Chapter before mentioned it, and it was the proper
effect of Christ's being made a curse for us, though he after mention the
Covenant and Promise according to which it is bestowed. But that the use of
that term of [ the blessing of Abraham] should intimate an outward privilege of
an initial seal to Gentile believers and their natural seed is such a reason a^
I am out of hope ever to understand. Me thinks the use of that term verse. 14.
compared with v. 7, 8, 9. does overthrow the fond conceit of the Assembly and
Mr. Sidenham, and is so plain a determination, that the Promise of being God to
Abraham 's seed, is meant only of true believers of the Gentiles, and not
their natural seed, that if there were no more Texts, it seems enough to me to
overthrow their interpretation of Genesis 17.7. and the inference they make thence.

And in this I commend Mr. Sidenha^s wit and the Assemblies, that they let pass
Gal. 3.7. without mentioning, finding perhaps that it is expressly contrary to
their conceit of Gentile believers children being reckoned for Abraham's seed.

I think it not amiss to add the word of Mr. Stalham Vindic. Redempt. against
Otes, Gal. 3.13* 14. Behold here a Gospel-blessing comes upon all those who are
freed from the legal curse, and if then* the non-elected by this man's doctrine
have the one, he must yield the other also; if freed from the curse they are
blessed, justified, and saved ones; this is worse than nonsense, even impure
blasphemy against the truth* which shows all these to be connex to be freed
from the curse, to be blessed with Abraham's blessing, to be justified and
saved, and therefore cannot be interpreted of a mere outward privilege
belonging even to believers children who may be, as Esau was, non-elect.

There Is another Text which Mr. Sidenham takes upon him to turn the edg of it
against Antipaedobaptists who produce it against Paedobaptists, and he speaks
thus, But in Ga^. 3.29. the Apostle (say they) describes who are the seed; if
you be Christ 's, then you are Abraham 's seed, and heirs according to promise;
so that now no children born of believing parents can be the seed; for they
must be Christ 's, according to that in v. 26. we are all the children of God
through faith in Christ Jesus.

Answer. This Text is clear not to prove (as Mr. Sidenham represents ou^
conclusion) that now no children born of believing parents can be the seed, but
that none of the Gentiles are Abraham's seed but those who are Christ's by their
^aith or election, and adoption to be the children of God, for such are all
that are Christ's, and heirs according to the promise. But the children of
believing Gentiles are many of them not such, nor any of them in that he is the
child of a believing Gentile* therefore all the children born of believing
parents are not Abraham's seed, as Paedobaptists suppose.

To this Mr. Sidenham opposes, 1. That the Claromont Bible has it, if ye be
one in Christ, then are ye Abraham 's seed, and that the Apostles endeavor is
to take away all difference between Jew and Gentile, and to hold forth their
unity in Christ, where there is no distinction as formerly: but now the
Gentiles being one in Christ are Abraham 's seed as well as the natural and
believing Jews.

Answer. It is granted, that the Apostle takes away the difference between
Gentiles and Jews who are in Christ, and asserts that now the believing
Gentiles being one in Christ arc Abraham 's seed as well as the natural and
beli^ving Jews. But this makes for our purpose; for as none of the natural Jews
but the elect and believing were Abraham's spiritual seed, so it is concerning
the Gentiles, none of them either of their children are Abraham's seed in the
sense in which the Gentiles may be termed Abraham's seed but the elect and
believing.

2. Says Mr. Sidenham, The Apostle here has no intent to show the distinction
of Abraham 's seed as the subject of the outward privileges, and
administrations of ordinances, but to show that none are spiritually and really
Abraham 's seed and heirs of promise, but such as are Christ 's, one in him
with Abraham: for if this should be the distinction of seed as the subject of
outward ordinances, it would be as much against professing believers as
infants; for there is a carnal profession as well as a fleshly generation, the
former more abominable.

Answer. I confess it is not the Apostles intent to show the distinction of
Abraham 's seed as the subject of the outward Privileges and administration of
Ordinances: for neither does he make there any distinction of Abraham's seed,
there being in that passage no seed of Abraham mentioned but such as are
spiritual, nor does he mention Abraham's seed as the subject, meaning the
adequate subject of outward Ordinances and Privileges, there being many that
were not Abraham's spiritual seed, who might be circumcised, baptized, admitted
to the Passover and Lords Supper, and at least in some of these many who were
might not, though v. 26, 27. compared together show who were wont then to be
baptized, to wit, believers, and such as at least in profession put on Christ.
And I conceive Paul's intent was to show, that none are spiritually and really
Abraham 's seed and heirs of promise, but such as are Christ 's, one in him
with Abraham*

Now this manifestly proves the thing we would have, that none of our children
are Abraham's seed in the Gospel-sense according to which the promise Genesis 17.7.
is to be understood, but elect and true believers, and so not in that Covenant,
and consequently not by virtue of interest in that Covenant baptizable, as
Paedobaptists would have it. But I know not any who reason thus, None but these
who are Christ 's are Abraham 's seed; and none are Chiist 's but real
believers, and therefore none but they must be baptized. For though it is true,
that before God none have right to Baptism but such, yet since the Minister of
Baptism cannot distinguish between a believer in reality and one in profession
he is without fault in baptizing a believer only in profession, whom he takes
to be a believer in reality.

If any say, Baptism knows no flesh, the meaning likely is that Baptism is not
allotted to any for its natural birth though of a believer. So that I need not
answer Mr. Sidenhams arguments to the contrary, since I do not assert that none
but Abraham's seed may be baptized.

Nor is it true, that we have the same ground of charity to act on infants of
believers as on grown men. For though infants may be Christ's, yet we have not
the same evidence that they are Christ's which we have of grown persons, whose
words and actions show that the Spirit of God dwells in them. Nor would God have
us 1 Cor. 7.14. to account the children to be holy as visible professors are
for the parents faith, but to be legitimate from the lawfulness of their
generation. Nor can it be proved that any one infant of the most godly person
is taken into the same Covenant with the parent: nor does Christ 's respect to
infants when brought to him give warrant to any to judge better of a believers
infant than of a visible professor, or to account of such an infant as
baptizable.

Nor is it true, that a general Scripture-assertion, and the ground of an
indefinite promise, is more than all our Reasons to judge a visible Professor
Christ 's or Abraham 's seed, or a subject of Baptism* since the words and
actions of such a one do show more of Christ's spirit and faith than any
speeches of God or promises do of infants now existent, and he that baptizeth a
visible professor of faith, proceeds upon certain knowledge according to a
certain rule of baptizing Disciples, which is more to assure the conscience in
the doing the will of God, then any Charitable judgment or any probable
likelihood of an infants being Christ's, or in covenant for the present, or
certain revelation of the infants election and being in covenant, and so will
be a believer hereafter can be to warrant a man to baptize it at this instant.
Nor is it true that he that baptizeth a visible professor, goes by the purblind
eye of his probable judgment. For he baptizeth upon an unerring rule of
baptizing manifest disciples, according to an unerring knowledge, that those he
baptizeth are such under the Gospel; the Jews are Abraham's fleshly seed,
though they be not visible professors of faith in Christ, no mere Gentile
visible professor is Abraham's seed, nor any true believers natural seed as
such, nor does the covenant make every believer in reallity, or any, except
Abraham, much less every visible believer a spiritual Father. I confess, the
spiritual seed of Abraham takes its denomination from the covenant; I mean the
future seed, and from their believing the actual, but the natural seed takes
not its denomination from the covenant, but Abraham's begetting, nor is it true
the Covenant made with Abraham and his natural seed, is renewed in the new
Testament with believers and their seed, neither formerly nor now are infants
of believers non-elect Abraham's seed, nor is there in the word of God one
passage either in the old or new Testament either of those alleged by Master
Sidenham or any other, I know, wherein infants of believers are visibly owned
as we own visible professors. There will be found visible subjects of baptism.
though neither infants of believers, nor mere visible professors be Abraham's
seed. I conclude my animadversions on this chapter of Mr. Sidenhams with these
considerations, that none but elect or true believers of the Gentiles are the
seed of Abraham with whom the Covenant Genesis 17.7. is made, nor are persons to
be baptized for their interest in that Covenant, except it be made manifest by
their profession of faith, and therefore neither can we say of any infant of a
believing Gentile that he is in that covenant, nor if we could, were it to be
baptized till by profession or other ways, its faith did manifest it to be a
Disciple of Christ.

In the 4. chapter Mr. Sidenham tells us of a being in Covenant according to
the purpose of election in Gods heart, which I allow, and of being in Covenant
in the face of the visible Church by the persons own visible profession, which
I deny not, but for the other sort of being in covenant with God as in a
political moral consideration, as in the right of another through a free
promise to him and his heirs, it is a mere figment, there being no such kind of
being in Covenant in the time of the new Testament, nor does Mr. Sidenham bring
one text of Scripture to prove it: and for his reasons they prove it not, 1.
Says he, If men deny an external as well as internal being in covenant, none
can administer an external ordinance an outward sign to any, for we must go by
external rules in these actings. But this reason is nothing to prove a
political moral being in covenant without any act of Covenanting by either of
the parties in Covenant. I deny not, but that all the elect are in Covenant
with God in his purpose and so infants are in Covenant with God by Gods
promise, eiher to his son when he gave them to him, or at some other time. And
I grant that visible professors of faith in Christ are in Covenant externally
by their own act of covenanting, and such may be baptized they being Disciples
of Christ. 2. Nor did I ever say that no Ordinance must be administered to
these* which are not internally in Covenant. 3. Nor do I count it any absurdity
to say we may set a seal to a blank (though I like not the expression) in this
sense a man may lawfully be baptized to whom God has not promised to be his
God. 4. And I have showed we have certain evidence of visible professors being
in covenant, for we hear their profession and see their actions, and their rule
by which baptism is to be administered, but of infants we have no evidence of
their being in covenant by profession of faith, according to which we are to be
baptized, yea we have evidence to the contrary, and their being in covenant
according to election is uncertain, and if it were certain, yet till they be
actual believers or Disciples of Christ we have no rule to baptize them by, nor
is there a jot brought by Mr. Sidenham to prove they are in Covenant by their
parents faith only in Gospel times. Nor does any thing Mr. Sidenham has said
answer that which he says is the great question I and we all urge, that if God
made the Covenant with believers and their seed, they must be all saved, etc.
But in stead of answering me poseth me thus, does God make the covenant of
salvation with every visible professor whom they baptize^ or with every visible
Saint. Answ. No; Or do they baptize them out of Covenant? Answ. Yea; If by
being out of Covenant be meant, that the Covenant of salvation is not made by
God to them; then how come any to fall off and be damned? Answ. None of those
God made the Covenant of salvation with fall off and be damned, others though
baptized rightly and were visible professors, yet fall off and are damned,
because the Covenant of salvation was never made ^y God to them, Or what rule
have they to baptize by? Answ. That which is, Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16. Acts
2.38, 41. and 8.12, 37, 38. Why should it be thought more hanious to set a seal
on (i. e. baptize) infants, as in the covenant, then on these professors which
afterward prove not to be in Covenant. Ans. because infants are not Disciples
of Christ, when visible professors are, though they be not in covenant with God
by his promise of saving-grace. The being or not being in Covenant is not the
reason of the baptizing or not baptizing of them, but their being or not being
Disciples of Christ, or do they baptize because that persons are in the
covenant? Answ. not because they are in the covenant that is Gods covenant to
them, but because they covenant to be Christ's by their own Declaration and
promise, which is certainly known upon hearing their words and seeing their
actions, nor is it any trick to evade, but a clear truth, that it is not being
in covenant (by Gods promise of saving grace to us) but being an actual
believer, gives right to baptism; Nor does it follow if the covenant be the
ground (i. e. the object) of faith, it may well be the ground (i. e. adequate
reason on the baptizer and the baptizeds part) of an outward privilege i. e.
baptism, for the institution is not to baptize men in covenant by Gods act of
promise, but Disciples or persons in covenant by their professing of faith. Nor
is there danger of separating the Covenant from the conveyance of actual
privilege; for the Covenant of it self, till it is fulfilled by the making a
person a known Disciple of Christ, does not give right to baptism any more then
to the Lords supper. Nor is there reason why infants without faith should now
be baptized because they were circumcised, the institution of the one being
different from the other, neither do we account Simon Magus, etc. Abraham's
spiritual seed, nor deny elect infants to be so, if God does administer all his
graces by covenant, yet not all outward ordinances by the persons interest in
it, and if he did, then infants by this reason should have the Lords supper as
well as baptism. The invisible design of God may be known to us, and is carried
on secretly in an outward visible dispensation* and some may be condemned by an
outward rule, and yet persons not admitted into or ejected out of the Church by
their being or not being in Covenant through Gods act of promise to them, but
by their profession and practice we say not, none are to be baptized but real
believers, the spiritual seed, nor that none are the spiritual seed but visible
believers, nor do we conceive infants no spiritual seed of Abraham because no
visible believers; But we deny that an infant of a believer is as visible by
promise as a believer by profession. For on the one side no infant is of the
visible Church barely by Gods promise of regeneration, justification, salvation.

1. Because that promise is according to Gods election, which is secret, so as
that no man can know who are they to whom the promise pertaines, till it appear
by some others declaration then the promise or act, an infant can ordinarily
perform.

2. That which makes a thing or person visibly must be something existent in
act, for then a thing or person is visibly when it is the object of sense, but
sense is only of singular things actually existent. But persons may have a
ptomise before they are in being, as Isaac was in Covenant before he was begotten
or born, yet not a visible Churchmember, therefore an infant is not visible by
promise.

3. On the other side profession makes a person manifestly visible, and
therefore Mr. Sidenhams speech is palpably false, that an infant is as visible
by promise, as a believer by profession.

SECT. XXVIII. It is proved from Luke 1.54, 55. and 19.9. John 8.39. Romans 4.11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Gal. 3.7, 16, 29. and 4.28. Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Mat. 3.9.
That the seed of Abraham to whom the promise as Evangelical is made, Genesis 17.7.
are only true believers or elect persons.
TO those texts in the foregoing Section alleged to prove that the seed of
Abraham to whom the promise, Genesis 17.7. as it is Evangelical belongs, are only
true believers or elect persons, which have been vindicated from Mr. Sidenhams
answers, I shall add some more in the new Testament.

1. In Mary's song, Luke 1 54.55. It is said, He has helped his Servant
Israel, in remembrance of his mercy as he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham, and
to his seed for ever.

That seed of Abraham is only meant in the promise, Genesis 17.7. As it was
evangelical which he has helped by Christ in remembrance of his mercy; this is
manifest from the text. But they are only true believers or elect persons.
Pisc. Schol. in Luke 1.55. Semini. (...) id est posteritati nempe spirituali,
id est electis; sive sint ex judeis, sive ex gentibus, ut docet Apostolas Romans
4. v. 16. and chapter 9. v. 8. New annot on Luke 1.55. to his seed for ever, that
is to the faithful and holy. See Gal. 3.16.26, 27, 29. They only are helped by
Christ in remembrance of his mercy, which is confirmed from the words of
Zacharias, Luke 1.71, 72, 73, 74, 75.76, 77, 78. wherein the holy Covenant and
Oath God swear to Abraham was, that he would grant them that is (Abrahoms seed)
salvation, deliverance, to serve god in holiness and righteousness before him
all the days of their life, the salvation is expressed to be by remission of
sins, through the tender mercy of God, whereby the day Spring from on high
visited them, which shows, the Covenant as it was Evangelical, promised not
outward privileges but saving graces, which are not promised to any but elect
persons, therefore by Abraham's seed in the promise, Genesis 17.7. As it was
Evangelical are, meant only elect or true believers.

2. It is said of Zaccheus, Luke 19.9. This day is salvation come to this
house, for so much as he also is the son of Abraham, for the son of man is come
to seek and to save that which was lost; In which words the term [ son of
Abraham] is made to infer salvation, and Zaccheus in that he was the son of
Abraham, proved to be one that the son of man came to seek and save which can
agree only to elect persons, therefore the term [ seed of Abraham] equipollent
to [ son of Abraham] as Evangelically such notes only elect persons or true
believers. Piscat. Analys. Luc. 19.9. Electio Dei patris significatur v. 9. his
verbis, eo quod ipse quoque filius Abrahae est, ubi intelligitur non
simpliciter filius secundum carnem, sed filius secumdum promissionem Dei, qua
promiserat ipsum futurum patrem credentium, schol. filius Abrahae, nempe filius
secundum promissionem, id est electus, vide, Romans 9. v. 7. and 8. New Annot on
Luke 19.9. Is the son of Abraham, to be a son of Abraham is to be chosen
freely, Romans 9.8. To walk in the steps and faith of Abraham. Romans 4.11, 12. And
generally to do the good works of Abraham, John 8.39. Whereby we moy be assured
of Election to eternal life, Romans 8.29, 30. 2 Pet. 1.10. Trap com, in Luke
19.9. He also is a son of Abraham that is freely elected, Romans 9. A follower of
Abraham's faith, Romans 4.12. And a doer of his works, John 8.39.

3. It is said by our Lord Christ, John 8.39. If ye were Abraham's children ye
would do the works of Abraham, he granted them ver. 37. To be Abraham's seed by
nature, but not the seed of Abraham according to the Covenant Evangelical,
because their practice was unlike Abraham's. Whence I infer, they Only
Evangellically are Abraham's children or seed even of those who descended from
Abraham by generation who are like unto Abraham in their Actions. But such
only are true believers or elect persons, therefore true believers or elect
persons only are Abraham's children or seed Evangelical. Diodati. Annot. on
John 8.39. children, namely true and lawful imitators ^f Abraham's faith:
Father of all believers; wherein consists the true meaning of this name of
children of Abraham, Romans 4.16. and 9.6, 7. Gal. 3.7.

4. With our Lord Christ's words accord the words of Paul, who does plainly
determine that the seed of Abraham to whom the promise, Genesis 17.7. That God
would be the God of Abraham's seed, as it was Eavngelical belongs, are believers
or elect persons and no other, Romans 4.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Is so plain
to prove it that the very reading the words is enough to clear it to a heedfull
reader. For therein the Apostle does show how the promises, Genesis 17.7. Are true
of the Gentiles as well as the Jews. in that Abraham is considered therein as
the father of believers, v. 11. And the father of circumcision, that is as Beza
of the circumcised, yet not a father to all of them, nor to them only, but to
those circumcised ones only, and with them to all other that believe, or walk
in the steps of that faith, which our father (of us believing Gentiles) Abraham
had being yet uncircumcised, v. 11.12* Now if Abraham be considered in the
promises as Evangelical only as the Father of believers of either sort
circumcised, or uncircumcised, then the seed of Abraham are only believers or
elect persons. And to this purpose does Master Dickson paraphrase the words
thus. Abraham received from God the sign of circumcision to seal the Covenant
of grace, or the righteousness of faith, which ^e had uncircumcised to that
end, that he might be father of uncircumcised believers* and in like manner of
circumcised, to wit, who are both sons of the flesh, and sons of the faith of
Abraham. Therefore the righteousness of faith is common to the circumcised, and
uncircumcised believers, or them that follow the steps of the faith of Abraham
not yet circumcised. But Abraham is said to be the father of believers, in that
he is the first eminent example of faith, and of righteousness imputed by
faith, and by his example an Author to all that they may believe. Beza in his
note on Romans 4.12. For as speaking of the uncircumcised, he said not simply
that Abraham was the father of them all, but of them only who should believe,
he also has deservedly kept the same distinction in the Jews, because (as I
said before) it is not simply the Apostles purpose to teach Abraham to be the
father of both the uncircumcised and the circumcised, but also especially by
what reason he is the father of both, which is his scope. For to be a child of
Abraham before God, and to be justified by faith cohere, Again v. 13. shows
the same. For the promise that he should be the heir of the world was not to
Abraham, or to his seed through the law, but through the righteousness of
faith. I shall use the words of the same Authors. Dickson thus paraphraseth, v.
13. He proves Abraham to be Father not but of believers only, uncircumcised
alike and circumcised, and together adds a third argument. The promise made to
Abraham and his seed, that he should be heir of the land of Canaan in time, and
of the world and heaven in truth, came not to him by the law, or by the
condition of works, but happened to him by an absolute promise to him already
justified by faith, and having the righteousness of faith. Therefore his sons
are not they which are of the law seeking to wit righteousness by works, but
they only who are by faith, seeking righteousness by faith, that is all and
only believers, circumcised alike and uncircumcised, to whom equally the
common righteousness of faith and the inheritance is promised. The argument is
of force, for if father Abraham be not the heir of the world, nor have
righteousness but by faith, certainly none are his sons but believers, who have
righteousness by faith, and by righteousness the inheritance. Beza Annot. ad
Romans 4.13. But in these words there is a continuation of the former conclusion,
the application of the example of Abraham neither to the circumcised, neither
to the uncircumcised, otherwise not availing unless two things be showed: to
wit that God made that Covenant not with Abraham alone, but with his heirs
also, and that under the name of his posterity, any who shall believe that
covenant like Abraham are understood. Therefore Paul conjoynes the promises of
God made to Abraham, as it were into one body, and when he had taught all
believers whether cicrumcised, or uncircumcised to be Abraham's sons, he verily
deservedly calls Abraham the heir of the world, by the term world understanding
all Nations, and therein following the Lords st^ps. For when the Lord had said
to Abraham that he would be the God of him and his seed, after he expounded
what he understood by the term seed; to wit all the nations of the earth, when
he said that it should be, that in him he would vouchsafe them all his grace.
The next v. also confirms it, v. 14. For if they which are of the Law be heirs,
faith is made void, and the promise made of none effect, which Mr. Dickson thus
paraphraseth, if they which are of the Law, or which seek righteousness by
works, were the sons of Abraham, and heirs of life, and partakers of
righteousness, then faith should be made void, and the promise vain: But this
is absurd. Therefore they which are of the law are not heirs, but alone
believers are sons of Abraham, and heirs of life and righteousness. The 16. v.
does yet more plainly express that the seed of Abraham to whom the promise,
Genesis 17.7. As Evangelical is made are believers only. Therefore it is of faith
that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the
faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all. Upon which says Mr. Dickson
with that uery counsel God appointed that the inheritance should be of faith;
that it might agpear to be of grace or by grace. Therefore only and all
believers uncircumcised, and circumcised alike, are heirs. The inheritance is
of faith and by grace by the Counsel of God, that the promise might be sure to
all the ^eed, not only to that which is the seed of Abraham by the law of
nature and has faith also, that is the circumcised Jews believing* but also
to that seed which is not by the law of nature or the flesh, but only by the
faith of Abraham, that is the uncircumcised believing Gentiles.

Therefore, unless suspending the promise of righteousness, and the inheritance
upon the condition of the law to be performed, we would make it unsure and
uncertain, the whole seed of Abraham, or all and only believers circumcised
and uncircumcised, are heirs by faith with father Abraham, who according to
faith is father of all us believers of Jews and Gentiles. Beza Annot. ad Romans
4.16. Paul manifestly devides into two members that which in general he had
said of the whole seed of Abraham, that is believers both circumcised and
uncircumcised, Pisc. Sch. to all the seed] that is of Abraham, to wit all
believers, Diodati* to all, namely to the spiritual seed according to the
faith, of which God intended to speak in that excellent promise, I will be thy
God and of thy seed after the, Genesis 17.7,

Lastly the Apostle interprets the promise, Genesis 17.5. That Abraham should be
the father of many Nations, thus that the Gentiles should be his seed by faith,
v. 17. as it is written, I have made thee a father of many Nations, on which
Master Dickson. By force of the divine promise, promising that he should be the
father of many Nations. Abraham embraced for sons all believers to be ingrafted
into his seed, and so in virtue of the promise, as it were begat or conceived
believers to himself as sons promised. The new Annot on Romans 4.17. I have made
thee a Father, See Genesis 17.5. Not of those only that should issue from him
according to the flesh, but also of those among all nations that by faith
should be adopted and received into his spiritual family.

5. The texts also which are; Gal. 3.7, 16, ^9, and 4, 28. Are very pregnant to
the same purpose, that the seed of Abraham to which the promise, Genesis 17.7. as
Evangelical is made, are only true believers, or elect persons. The first of
these places is that which is asserted in terms. Know ye therefore that they
which are of faith the same are the children of Abraham, where the speech is
equipollent to an exclusive. For having, v. 2.5. told them they must have the
spirit, and be Abraham's children either by the works of the law or by faith,
and determined that they had not the spirit by the works of the law, but by
faith, supposing that they who are children have received the spirit as it is,
v. 14. it plainly follows that they only are the children of Abraham which are
of faith, even as Protestant divines conclude from Gal. 2.16. that
justification is by faith only, because the disjunction being sufficient,
justifycation is either by faith, or by works, and works excluded, it follows,
we are justified by faith only. And so Mr. Dickson conceives that the Apostles
argument is, Gal. 3.7. They only who are of the faith, or who seek to be
justified by faith, and not by works, are the children of Abraham, therefore
the only reason of justification is by faith. Diodati Annot. on Gal. 3.7. yet
you know (that is to say) this doctrine is clear and resolved upon amongst
Christians, that the true children of Abraham comprehended in the covenant
which God made with him and his posterity are not the carnal Jews, which are
borne of him, or joined to him by circumcision, and by professing of their
ceremonies; but all such as according to Abraham's example do renounce all
confidence in their own proper works, and put it wholly in Gods promises and
grace in Christ* as Abraham was made a father, example and paragon of faith, to
all those to whom the covenant made with him was to appertain. The like is the
determination of Mr. Perkins (that I may omit others) who in his com. on Gal.
3.7. Says the promise and election of God makes properly children of Abraham,
and that the true mark of the child of Abraham is to be of the faith of
Abraham, and that profession of Abraham's faith, and descent from Isaac are not
sufficient to prove men children of Abraham without following of his faith.

The texts, Gal 3.16, 29. have been considered before, and our inferences
vindicated from Mr. Sidenhams evasions. The other to wit, Gal. 4.28. Speaks to
the same purpose to which the fore alleged texts do. Now we Brethren as Isa^c
was, are children of the promise, that is we of whom the Jerusalem which is
above is mother, that is as Beza Annot. add v. 26. we who embraced Christ,
add v. 27. he shows the true sons of Abraham are born spiritually by the
Gospel, add v. 28. are children of the promise, that is that seed to which
pertains that promise, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, out of all which
it appears that as the promise, Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee, and to thy
seed after thee was Evangelical, it was made only to the elect of God and true
believers, and they only are Abraham's seed there meant.

6. I shall next add the consideration of that text, Romans 9.6; 7, 8. Wh^re the
Apostle speaks thus; not as though the word of God has taken none effect. For
they are not all Israel which are of Israel; neither because they are the seed
of Abraham are they all children; but in Isaac shall thy seed be called, that
is, they which are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of
God, but the children of the promise are counted for the seed. I suppose it
will not be denied, that this passage is an answer to an objection occasioned
by the intimating of the rejection of the Jews from being Gods people, v. 1.2,
3, 4, 5. If any should deny it yet the matter and form of expression, v. 6.
shows it to be opposed to something which might be objected against what was
before employed. For the speech, the word of God has not fallen, or not taken
effect; intimates that there was some word of God which seemed to be without
effect, or to fall if the Jews were cast off from being Gods people. And it
appears by the answer that the word of God was some promise concerning Israel
as, v. 6. shows, and Abraham's seed as v. 7.8, 9. shows. The word of God
concerning Abraham's seed which might be conceived to fall, appears upon
inquisition to have been that, Genesis 17.7. either only or chiefly Piscat. Sch.
in Romans 9.6. that word of God, to wit that promise made to Abraham, I will be
thy God and of thy seed after thee. Dickson expos. annaly^. Romans 9.6. the word
of God has fallen, when he said to Abraham, I will be thy God and of thy seed,
I conceive it needless to add any more, it being so manifest and so conceived
by interpreters of note. Hence it appears also that the objection answered by
the Apostle is this, God promised to be a God to Abraham and his seed after him
in their generations in an everlasting covenant, therefore if the Jews who are
Abraham's seed are rejected, the word of God falls.

To this the Apostle answers. 1. By denying that every Jew who was descended
from Abraham by natural generation, and so a child of the flesh is meant by the
seed there named, who should be the child of God, and so the promise of being
God to them is not meant of all Abraham's natural posterity.

2. By asserting that they who are counted for the seed and were children of
the p^omise, that is those to whom that Evangelical promise, Genesis 17.7.
belonged, were a peculiar number whether of Jews, or Gentiles, according to
Gods own choice and calling distinguished by no other discriminating reason but
Gods will, as he proves in Isaac and Ishmael, v. 9. Esau and Jacob, v. 10* 11,
12, 13. and otherwise in that which follows.

Whence it appears 1. That the promise, Genesis 17.7. was not made to Abraham's
natural posterity as such, and if so, then it is not made to every child of a
believer.

2. That only the elect whether of Jews or Gentiles are the seed of Abraham to
whom the promise, Genesis 17.7. is made, and consequently to no other of a
beleivers children, but the elect: nor any other in covenant with God by virtue
of that promise but they.

This to be the Apostles determination I confirmed, Exam. part. 3. sect. 4. by
the speeches of Beza, Twisse, Ames, Bayn, Walaeus, Dounam, new Annot,
Ainsworth, Pareus, Estius (who though a Papist, yet is reputed more solid and
right about the the point of grace, then the Jesuits are) and added in my
Praecursor page 36. the words of Mr. Rutherford of Scotland, and Mr. No^ton of
New England. To which I have added more testimonies of Beza, Chamier, and the
Belgic Professors at the Synod of Dort ^n my Refutation of Dr. Savage his
Position in Latin, Sect 5. And because Mr. Blake seeks so much to possess
people as if I drew this from the Jesuits, I will add Mr Dicsons words on Romans
9.7, 8. Neither does it follow because the Jews are the seed of Abraham
according to the flesh, that therefore they are all sons in the Scripture sense
or the seed promised. For so even the Issmaelites should be accounted for
Ab^ahams seed contrary to Scripture, which has restrained the right of sons to
Isaac and his family, by saying, In Isaac shall thy seed be called. The sons of
the flesh are to be distinguished from the elect sons of God, for this God
would, when Ismael being secluded, he called Isaac the seed of Abraham, that
not all are the elect sons of God, but only the children of promise (or whom
God determined of grace to make with Isaac sons of the faith of Abraham) are
the children of God, and that seed to whom the promise is made. Dr. Owen of
Perseverance, Chap. 5. Sect. 10. The Apostle, Rom 9 8. calls the elect the
children of the promises, or those to whom the promises to Abraham and his seed
were made. Chap. 7. Sect. 23 The persons to whom this promise (Isai. ^9*21.) is
made, are called thee and thy seed, that is all those and only those, with
whom God is a God in Covenant. God here minds them of his first making of this
Covenant with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.7. Now who are this seed of
Abrhaam? Not all his carnal posterity, not the whole nation of the Jews. Our
Savior not only denies, but also proves by many Arguments, that the Pharisees
and their followers, who doubtless were of the nation of the Jews, and the
carnal seed of Abraham, were not the children of Abraham in this sense, nor
his seed, but rather the Devils, John. 8.39.40, 41. And the Apostle disputes
and argues the same case, Romans 4.9, 10, 11. and proves undeniably that it is
believers only (whether circumcised or uncircumcised, whether Jews or
Gentiles) that are this seed of Abraham and heirs of the promise. So plainly,
Gal. 3.7. Know ye therefore that they which are of the faith, are the children
of Abraham, and then concludes again as the issue of his debate, verse 9 So
then they which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. Mr. Marshal
himself in his Defense, page 102. says, secondly by the word [Seed] was meant
the children of the promise, the Elect, Romans 9 8. ^s Mr. Bayne, nay Arminius
himself confesses: only Arminius says, that they were elected upon foresight
of their faith. And indeed so far as I discern in the reading of Arminius his
Analysis of the ninth of the Romans the cited Remonstrants Defense of their
opinion at the Synod of Dort on the first Article, Mr. John Goodwin his late
Exposition of the ninth to the Romans it is agreed, that in the mystical sense
the promise Gen, 17.7. is determined by the Apostle, Romans 9 6, 7, 8, to belong
only to the elect, though the Remonstrants would have them elected upon
consideration of believing, and the Contra-remonstrants, according to the
Apostles determination, verse 11 etc. assign no other reason of the election of
some and rejection of others, but Gods will. All do agree that the Apostle
determines, that every child of Abraham, much less of every believer, is not a
child of the promse, or the seed of Ahraham to whom the Promise is made, Genesis
17.7. but the elect or true believers, whether Jews or Gentiles.

7. It is proved that the promise Genesis 17.7. as it was Evangelicall, or as the
Apostle speaks, Gal. 3.17. the Covenant (...) (...), fore-confirmed of God unto
Christ, was not to every believers natural seed, but to the true believers or
elect persons, who are meant by Abraham's seed, because it can be true only of
them. For in the Evangelical sense to whom God promises to be God he promises
to justify them, to regenerate them, to raise them up to eternal life, as
appears by our Saviors own reasoning, Luke 20.37, 38. where he infers from
Gods avouching himself to be the God of Abraham, his living to God, and rising
from the dead to eternal life, by the Apostles inference Romans 4.16. from thence
that righteousness is by faith, Romans 9.7, 8. determining them to be elect
people of God, to whom he has promised to be God, Heb. 8, 10* etc. But God
does not promise to every believers child, to justify, regenerate, and raise
him to eternal life for if he did promise it he would perform it, to say he
makes a promise to any, and to say they have not the efficacy of it, is to
make God a liar, whereas many children of believers are never justified,
regenerated, nor shall be raised to eternal life. He performs it to all true
believers and elect persons, and to none other, therefore none others are meant
there by Abraham's seed in the Evangelical sense.

8 Lastly, the words of John Baptist Matthew 3.9. When he saw many of the
Pharisees and Sadduces come to his baptism saying to them, And think not so say
within your selves, We have Abraham to our Father: for I say unto you that God
is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham, do evince ^ that
repenting and believing persons though raised by God of stones without natural
generation, are the children of Abraham to whom the promise is made, Genesis 17.7.
2. That it was not their natural descent from Abraham without repentance and
Gospel faith, which did entitle them to Gods favor, or to his baptism, and
therefore it follows thence, that the children of Abraham to whom the promise
is, Gen 17.7. are only the elect or true believers. 3. That to be the child of
a believer is not a sufficient title to Gods favor, or baptism. To this
purpose Paraeus Com. in Matthew. 3.9 He teaches also that the promises of God
are not tied to fleshly birth, but pertain only to believing and spiritual
posterity. For they are not sons of Abraham who according to the flesh are of
Abraham, but who are according to the spirit. Piscat. Sch. in Mat^h. 3.9. His
sentence is, although ye come from Abraham according to the flesh, yet ye are
not therefore those sons of Abraham to whom pertains the promise of eternal
life made to Abraham and his seed: For this belongs to them who imitate
Abraham's faith and piety. Diodati Annot. on Matthew. 3 9. And think not, do not
dally with your selves to think that because you are issued from Abraham
according to the flesh, you are in Gods favor and free from his judgment: for
with him the imitation of Abraham's faith and piety is the only thing which
demonstrates and causes to be the children of Abraham, and not the corporal
generation, Rom 4.12. Now such children may be brought forth of all Nations,
yea and out of these stones. Neither do you persuade your selves, that by your
perdition Gods people shall perish: for Gods people shall always subsist in
these spiritual children of Abraham toward whom Gods covenant and promises
shall be verified.

This then is the constant Doctrine of the New Testament, that the promise Genesis
17.7. as Evangelicall, is made only to the elect and true believers, that they
only are Abraham's seed spiritual, and so only in the covenant of grace by
Gods promise, and therefore if it be true that they only who are in covenant,
which Paedobaptists say when they say the Seal follows the Covenant, are to be
baptized, not any one because he is the child of a believer, but the elect and
true believers are to be baptized, and so their own argument for Infant Baptism
overthrows it.

SECT. XXIX. The Allegation of Romans 9.6, 7, 8, Matthew. 3.7, 8, 9. to prove that
the seed to which the promise Genesis 17.7. as Evangelicall belongs, are true
believers, or the elect only, is vindicated from Mr. Blakes Answer Vindic.
Foed* chapter 36. and Mr. Sidenhams Exercit. chapter 6.
TO my Allegation of Rom, 9.6, 7, 8. in my Examen, part 3. sect. 4. Mr. Blake
undertakes to give an answer, Vindic. Foed, chapter 36. And first having belied me
as borrowing from Stapleton the Jesuit, and learning to a ^air to follow him,
though to my remembrance I never read that passage in him, which he allegeth,
nor made any use of his exposition of the Epistle to the Romans, or any other
of his works in that Book of mine, he proceeds thus in his scoffing
calumniating fashion, like a Satyrist rather than a Disputant. We have drunk up
the Protestants poison, and Mr. T. his great care is, to preserve his party by
the Jesuits Antido^^; be is wholly beholding to them for the Receipt. Which is
Mr. Blakes manifest calumny, as the quotations in my Examen part 3 sect. 4. in
which he might see that I received it from the most eminent Protestants, and
alleged but one Papist, and he no Jesuit, but one of the better note, and
since, the quotations in the foregoing Section do fully prove, and it were
easy to produce treble the number if need were. But I find it in vain to
endeavor the satis^ying of such eager and through prejudice selfe-blinding
Antagonists, as Mr. Blake is, I could (if I liked such Arts as Mr. Blake uses)
tell Mr Blake he borrows from the Jesuit Bellarmin, who against Peter Martyr
saying the promise Genesis 17.7, is not universal concerning the children of
beleivers, but has place only in the predestinate, replies, This is said
without proof, for the words of the Scripture are absolute, nor is there any
mention of predestination in that whole chapter. But Mr Blake promises me
square dealing in the examining my Argument, and sets down my words at length,
and then in stead of answering it, puts diverse Quaere's to me, yielding first
to me, that the Text Genesis 17.7. was in that place Romans 9.6, 7, 8, brought into
question by the Apostle. 1 says he, How Bain and Ame^ come to the name of
Remonstrants? I had thought they had been on the party that are called
Contra-remonstrants? Answer. And so also did I, and therefore called them the
answerers of Arminius, and the cited Remonstrants, not Remonstrants, as Mr.
Blake not heeding my words suggests, as one not willing to omit any thing
whether right or wrong which may render me odious or contemptible.

2. says he, Where it appears that Arminius conceived that the Covenant there
spoken to was the word of the Law and not of Promise, I am sure in his Analysis
on this chapter to the Romans (of which Mr. T. should not be ignorant, little
less than vapouring of his examination of it in Oxford Apolog. page 131.) he
spoke in another manner, even in Mr. T. his own Dialect, as though the ones
Comment had been spit out of the mouth of the other. The sons of the flesh with
the Apostle (says he) are those who by the works of the Law follow after
righteousness and salvation. The so^s of the Promise are those that seek after
righteousness and salvation by faith in Christ, and he thus frames the
principal Syllogism of the Apostle for confutation of the Jews arguing from
the rejection of the Jew^s, Gods failing in his promise. If the word of God
comprehend only the sons of the promise, shutting out the sons of the flesh,
then it follows that the word of God does not fail, though the sons of the
flesh be rejected: But the word of God comprehends only the sons of the
promise, shutting out the sons of the flesh: Therefore the word of God does not
fail though the sons of the flesh be rejected. Armin. Anal. cap 9. ad Romans page
781, Let any now judge whether he can interpret this of the Law and not of the
Promise.

Answer 1. The mention of my examining of Arminius his Analysis of Romans 9. is
little less than vapouring, as Mr Blake in his spiteful fashion terms it, but
a necessary allegation with modesty to clear my self from his false charge,
That I had lately preached this as a Gospel truth, that this is one of the
promises of the Covenant of grace, that God will be the God of beleivers and
their seed, and that now I was suddenly otherwise persuaded. If the Reader view
my words, he will discern a spirit of malice or waywardness in Mr Blakes
misrepresenting of my actions, 2. To his Quaere I answer, That I have not now
Arminius his book, to discern whether it was Arminius his conceit or not, nor
need I prove it was, not alleging it as of my own search, but upon the credit
of Bain and Ames. And I find in that Edition I have of Bain on Ephesians 1. Anno
1618. page 134. on verse. 5. that he says, that Arminius was deceived in this
among other things, that the objectors whose objection Paul preventeth verse. 6.
do by the word of God conceive the word of the Covenant legal, which he
refutes 136 as one of those mistakes which did mislead Arminius: Nor does Mr.
Blake at all acquit Arminius from this mistake which Mr. Bain charged him with.
For Mr. Bain did not charge him with that mistake in the framing of the
Apostles principal Syllogism for confutation of the Jews arguing from the
rejection of the Jews Gods failing in his promise, but in the framing the
objection v. 6. as if the Jews objection, That if they were rejected who by
the works of the Law sought righteousness, then Gods word in the Legal
Covenant to take them to be his people who kept the Law, did fail: which Mr.
Bain refutes, and shows, That the objection did arise concerning Gods word
about their natural descent, as being Israel and Abraham's seed, which is the
same which I alleged. And the same is the observation of Ames concerning the
cited Remonstrants, Animadv. in Remonstr. script Synod. de praedest. chapter 8.
sect. 4. where he has these words, Remonstr. autem pro confesso and concesso
habent, agi hic de sermon legis, sicut apparet ex illis verbis: Si legem Moses
non violarint; qui legem sequuntur. Sed in textu agitur de sermon
promissionis, qui efficax est in populo praecognito* de quo praecip^e
glori^bantur Judaei, semetipsos Abrahae filios, and haer^des promissionis ipsi
factae jactitantes, sicut ex Pauli responso patet. So that if the Reader do
conceive that Arminius in the words cited by Mr. Blake, meant by the word of
God the word of Promise not of the Law, yet Arminius might conceive the word of
God in the objection of the Jews to be the legal Covenant or word of the Law,
in which Mr. Bain, and I after him, took him to be deceived.

3. Whereas he says, That Arminius speaks in mine own Dialect, as though the
ones Comment had been spit out of the mouth of the other, alleging Arminius his
words, and after his third Quaere is, when he affirms, that to be born after
the flesh is all one with the Apostle with legal Justiciaries, Apolog. page
114. (which is Arminius his interpretation) how then can he by that distinction
of children of the flesh, and children of the promise, shut out the natural
seed of Abraham? Are the n^^urall seed of Abraham and legal justiciaries one
and the same? He continues his spiteful language and calumniating course. For
1. though it is true that Apol. page 114. I s^y one born after the flesh^s all
one with the Apostle as legal justiciaries, yet I limit this speech to the
Apostles speech, Gal. 4.22, etc. And therefore it is a mere calumny that in the
explication of Romans 9 6, 7, 8, I sp^ke in Arminius his Dialect, as if my
Comment had been spit out of his mouth. Yea it might easily have been
deprehended by Mr. Blake, that I rejected Arminius his explication of children
of the flesh, and children of the promise, Romans 9 8. in that I excepted Exam.
part 3. sect. 2. against this very thing in Arminius his exposition, and did
recite Mr. Bains words, who grants, that elsewhere sons of the flesh are put
for legal justiciaries, yet denies it of the phrase Romans 9.8. where he proves
it notes barely natural descent from Abraham, page 138, 139.

2. To this question I answer, 1. I shut not out the natural seed of Abraham
universally from the promise, but only do not include them universally and this
I do from the Apostles distinction not understood in Arminius his sense. 2 To
his second question, Are the natural seed of Abraham and legal justiciaries
one and the same? I answer, No. for says Mr. Blake, if the Apostle exclude all
the natural seed of Abram from this covenant of God with Abraham, (as Mr. T.
from Stapleton argues) and take in only his spiritual seed, how can he be
reconciled to himself?

Answ. There are diverse untruths in this passage: First, it is untrue that I do
argue that the Apostle excludes all the natural seed of Abraham from this
covenant of God with Abraham. 2. That I argue this from Stapleton, which I am
sure is most false, nor would have been said by Mr, Blake if he had any care to
refrain from calumniating me. 3. Nor do I think by Mr. Blakes own allegation of
Stapletons wor^s in this chapter, from whence he imagines I borrowed my arguing
that Stapleton himself did so argue, but Mr. Blake misreports him also. My
assertion is, and if Stapleton do agree with me, I like it not the worse, that
in the promise Genesis 17.7. as it is Evangelical assuring regeneration,
justification, and life eternal, all the natural seed of Abraham are not
included, but grant that many have been and shall be included, yet say, that as
they are his natural seed so they are his spiritual seed by believing or
election, and that to the elect only that promise as Evangelicall is made by
God, and that this the Apostle determines and proves, and no where gainsays.

But says Mr. Blake, In the words immediately before this objection, he speaks
of the Jews (as his kinsmen according to the flesh* which were the natural
seed of Abraham) and says, to them pertain the adoption, the glory, and the
Covenants, etc. How then can his distinction be interpreted to throw them out
of Covenant, when in express terms he had affirmed that they were in covenant?
How can he deny that these are children, v. 7, when he had affirmed that to
them pertains the adoption v. 4.

Answer. If the Apostle had affirmed those Jews his kinsmen after the flesh,
that they were in covenant, Genesis 17.7. and adopted, for whom he sorrowed so
much, v. 2. he had played the hypocrite, expressing his sorrow for them as not
included in the covenant, who he knew were in it, he had trifled in raising an
objection from thence and answering it, yea he had contradicted himself, who v.
6. says, All are not Israel that are of Israel, and v 7. that because they
were the seed of Abraham, they were not all children, v. 8. that the children
of the flesh are not the children of God, opposing the children of the promise
to the children of the flesh. And it will concern Mr. Blake to reconcile the
Apostle to himself, if he should mean as Mr Blake expounds him, Nor do I know
how he could with any show of truth affirm these men to be in covenant with
God, to be his children who did obstinately oppose Christ, being ignorant of
the righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own righteousness,
were not subject to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. but were broken off
for unbelief, Romans 11.20. It is true it is said, Whose or of whom are the
adoption and the covenants. But does he say this of the Israelites then living
whose case he bewailed? I conceive not, but of their ancestors. For the
speeches were not true of them, that of them was Christ according to the
flesh,, or theirs the giving of the Law, yet I deny not it was their honor and
privilege in some sort, that God vouchsafed these things to their ancestors
and nation, and it did affect Paul much, that the people which were so much
dignified by God, should now be rejected. But were it that of those persons it
were said, that to them pertained the covenants, and the adoption, yet were it
not true which Mr. Bl. says, that Paul in express terms affirmed that they
were in covenant, or were children of God. For if it be true that by the
Covenants were meant the Tables of the Covenant, as Beza conceives, or the
Covenants of Adoption, in respect of outward legal privileges, which are
only there mentioned as proper to the Jews, the adoption and covenants might
be said to pertain to them, and they neither in covenant, nor children of God
Evangelically. But of this Text I have before spoken, Sect. 27, etc. Mt Bl
adds, which may be confirmed by abundant other texts of Scripture; Ye are the
children of the Lord your God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Out of Egypt have I called my Son,
Hos. 11.1. It is not meet to take the childrens bread and cast it unto Dogs,
Mat. 15.26: where all that were no^ Gentiles, all to whom Christ was sent are
called Children: Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the covenant which
God made with your Fathers, Acts 3.20. Does the covenant appertain to them, and
they styled the children of the covenant, and yet are they out of covenant? Are
they children to whom the adoption pertains, and yet no children? When Mr. T.
has given any fair answer to these Quaere's, especially the two last, we shall
conceive some probability of truth in his gloss on the Apostles words; in the
mean time we cannot but look upon it in full opposition and contradiction to
that which the Apostle expressly delivers.

Answ^ 1. Non^ of all the passages call those brethren of Paul whose case he
bewaileth verse 3. Children of God, his Son, Children, Children of the Prophets
and of the Covenant. 2. The speeches being of a people mixed of good and bad,
and the speeches being indefinite, may be true if meant of some only of those
people: yea in the Apostles sense they cannot be true of all that were not
Gen^iles, all to whom Christ was sent, that they were the children of God. For
many are termed by the Prophet Isai. 57 3. the sons of the Sorceresse, the seed
of the adultresse and the whore, by John Baptist, Matthew. 3.7. Generation of
vipers, by our Lord Christ Matthew. ^3 15. Children of hell. 3. Sometimes the
term of Children is meant as the term righteous is, Luke 15.7. of one that is
so in reputation though not in truth, as the children of the Kingdom, Mat.
8.12. must be meant of them that were so in reputation, though not in truth:
For had h^y been so in truth they should not be cast out into utter darkness.
4. By the children of the covenant Acts 3.25. is not meant that they were then
in the Evangelicall Covenant as made to them: For at that time they had not
repented, but were exhorted thereto, v. 19 But they are called the children of
the Covenant, because they were the posteri^y of those Fathers with whom first
the covenant was made, as they are called children of the Prophets, because
they were the posteri^y of that people to whom the Prophets were first raised
and sent, as is showed before Sect. ^7. out of which there is a fair answer to
Mr. Blakes Riddles without an Oedipus, that first the Covenants and Adoption,
Romans 9.4. are not said to pertain to those Israelites for whom Paul mourned. v.
3. but to their ancestors. 2. If they did, yet not in Mr. Blakes sense,, but in
the sense fore-given. 3. That those Israelites for whom Paul mourned, Romans 9.3.
are not styled children of the covenant. Acts 3.25. 4 Nor though i^ be true of
those for whom Paul mourned, is it any thing to Mr. Blakes purpose, but has
another meaning foregiven. And thus there is a sweet harmony be^ween my gloss
and the Apostles expressions.

Mr. Bl. next gives his Analysis of the Apostles words, in which he grants v.
7. a numerous company by Ishmael to be excluded (who were Abraham's seed after
the flesh) which evinceth what I contend for, that Gods promise Genesis ^7.7. was
not made in any sort to Ishmael though he were the child of a beleiver and
circumcised, therefore that covenant is not made to every believers natural
child, nor was the reason of circumcising this or that person, taken from the
persons interest in the covenant, for Ishmael was circumcised though not in
covenant. Then Mr. Bl. adds, As then there was a distinction of seed, so also
now, one member he had laid down before, viz. Israelites according to the flesh
rested in all those privileges there reckoned up, v. 4, 5, these they pleaded,
the Apostle yelds them: and Mr. T, (according to the discovery of these times)
denies them, The second member he after falls upon; the eternally beloved and
chosen of God, and largely amplifies. In these Abraham's seed may continue;
though the other be cast off,, to whom yet God has continued (in successive
generations) a God in covenant, and continued to them the privileges of being
his people, though now he was upon the rejection of them.

Answer. I should hardly have thought a sober minded man, much less a man
reputed an ancient grave Divine, would so slightly have handled such a
Scripture in which he says is my triumphing argument, but that I meet with
this passage defective in what was to be done, and made up of flirts,
falsehoods, impertinencies, (...) opposite to the Apostle* It is defective (...)
main things, first, in applying the distinction of the Apostle to the (...) of
the objection* by showing how the word fa^ls no^, if ^he one sort of seed of
Abraham be rejected. 2. In not showing any invalidity in my deduction of my
Conclusion thence, that the seed of Abraham to whom the promise Genesis ^7.7. as
Evangelical is made, are only the elect. His ^^irts are at me, (...) denying
the Israelites according to the discovery of these times, what the Apostle
yeeld^. Falsehoods, that the Israelites according to the flesh pleaded all those
privileges reckoned up, v 4, 5. For they were so far from pleading it as a
privilege, that Christ came of them according to the flesh, that they abhorred
and accursed him. 2. That I deny the privileges which the Apostle yields
them. Which also are mere impertinenc^es to the solution of the objection, and
to the distinction of the Apostle, who does not at all in the expression af
Children of the flesh mention those privileges, nor mentions Children of the
flesh, as importing an investiture into those privileges, as Mr. Bl. seems to
have conceived, but barely by that term notes their natural descent from
Abraham, insomuch that Ishmael is meant as a Child of the flesh, who was no way
vested in those privileges v. 4, 5 In stead of telling whether the eternally
chosen and beloved of God were the seed meant Genesis 17.7. and ^o the word of God
f^iled not, he only tells us, In these the seed of Abraham may continue though
the other he cast off, which is impertinently and doubtfully expressed, as if
there were not a certainty but only a possibility of the seed of Abraham
continuing in the eternally beloved and chosen of God. It is in like manner
impertinent to the business, to tell what God has done in successive
generations, when the objection is of the inconsiste^cy with his doings and his
promises concerning the present generation. Lastly, it is directly against the
Apostle, who opposes the children of the promise to the cast off, to say, that
he has continued a God in covenant to them whom he has cast off, and
continues ^o them the privileges of his pepole though he was upon the
rejecting of them. And it is a strange expr^ssion, when there is speech of
rejection opposite to eternal love and choice of God, to say, God is now upon
the rejection of them, which intimates a beginning of a rejection. But Mr. Bl.
thinks to satisfy all by the words of Gomarus, which having set down at large,
he then says, In which we have these three things, 1. Mr. T. his objection
wholly solved. 2. The Apostle reconciled to himself. And 3. the doctrine of
Covenant holiness from the Apostle fully established, which when Mr. T. has
well considered with that which was spoke before (having the whole current of
the Scripture against him) he will have little list to make this one Scripture
his asylum.

To which I answer, first there are many things in the words of Gomar^s liable
to exception, as ^, that ^e says, The Jews great privileges mentioned (...)
objected. But the thing that was objected was not those privileges, but the
word of God concerning Israel and Abraham's ^^ed. 2. That (...). That th^se
privileges are attributed by the Apostle to the unbelieving Jews. Which is
not true in the sense he (...) present unbelie^ing (...) (...) attributed by
the Apostle to the unbelieving Jews by virtue of their outward ^all, because
salvation is revealed and offered to them under condition of obedience, and
that offer sealed with circumcision* wherein 1. he says, the offer of
salvation under condition of obedience, was sealed with circumcision But I had
thought the thing Pedobaptists would have sealed with circumcision; had not
been the offer of savation upon condition of obedience, but the covenant of
God, Genesis 17* which is another thing than the offer of salvation which is by
men indeed according to the covenant: but it is not the covenant, for that is
Gods act, and is presupposed to the other. Besides, there are some promises at
least in the covenant absolute, not upon condition, as the promise of
regeneration, in respect of which the covenant cannot be conditional, and
therefore the offer and the covenant are not to be confounded, nor do I think
Pedobaptists will like this, that that offer was sealed with circumcision.
Besides, there was no offer made to the Jews of salvation under condition of
obedience. An offer is made by pre^ching, circumcision was on the eighth day:
was there any that pre^ched at circumcision salvation under the condition of
obedience to the circumcised, and then circumcised the child to seal that
off^r? Nor did the Jews use circumcision to seal the off^r of s^lvation under
condition of obedience to Christ, but to bind them to keep the Law of Moses in
expectation of righteousness, as appears from Acts 15.1.5.9, 10. Gal. 5.3. Romans
2, 25, etc. 2. Nor do I see any truth in that which he says, That those
privileges are attributed by the Apostle to the unbelieving Jews by virtue of
their outward call, because salvation is ^^^ealed and offered to them under
condition of obedience, and that offer sealed with circumcision. For neither do
Church Priviledges belong to persons barely by reason of an outward call, which
is but an offer of salvation, no man is accounted a Churchmember, having right
to the seal, as they term it, because salvation is offered without some
consent, nor did those privileges in any sort accrue to the Jews upon an
outward call by which salvation was offered to them upon condition of
obedience, the proceeding of Christ from them, their having Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, for their fathers, their having the Law given them, etc. were not upon
such an outward call, but Gods respect to them, Deuteronomy 7.6.4. It is not true that
from thence all Israelites are promiscuously called children of the Covenant,
as Acts 3.25. For it is true only of them that were after the Prophets as well
as the covenant, since they are called children of the Prophets as well as of
the covenant, and neither Title is given to them because of the outward call
alleged, but because they were the posterity of those to whom the Prophets
were sent, and the covenant exhibited. 5. It is not true that the Apostle
affirms that the unbelieving Jews are Abrahamites and Israelites; not only
by reason of their birth after the flesh, but also by reason of acceptance of
the covenants and promises: For neither is it true they did accept of the
covenants and promises, since they rejected Christ to whom the promises were
made, Gal. 3.16. Nor does the Apostle say, They accepted of them, nor at all
give that as a reason of their being Abrahamites or Israelites. Yea, they were
Israelites or Adamites antecedentally to some of those recited privileges. 6.
Nor does the Apostle s^y, The Fathers and Adoption, and Covenants, and
Promises, belong to all the Israelites: yea he denies the promises to Israel
and Abraham's seed to belong to every one that is of Israel and Abraham's seed,
v. 6, 7, 8. 7. Nor does he make any such distinction of promise in respect of
the efficacy of it, and collation belonging to some, and tender or offering of
the covenant of grace: For neither does the Apostle at all mention the offer of
the covenant of grace with condition of duty to be performed, nor does he make
the promise to belong to any who have not the efficacy of it: yea, to say the
promise belongs to any, and yet he not have the efficacy, is to make the word
of God fall, which the Apostle disclaims as a thing by no means to be imputed
to God, for thereby he should be charged of unfaithfulness in not keeping his
promise. 8. Neither does the Apostle make that answer which Gomarus sets down,
that though the privileges v. 4, 5, belong to all the Israelites, yet all are
not therefore true children beca^se the privileges are attributed to them by
reason of their outward call, not by reason of their inward. For the objection
was not thu^, To the Jews belong those privileges, therefore they must be
true children and heirs of salvation: But thus, Gods promise or covenant was
with Abraham and his seed to be a God, therefore either God must be a God of
the Jews who are Abraham's seed, and they his people contrary to what your
sorrow intimates, v. 2 or else the word of God has fallen, Now Gomarus sets
down another objection than that which the Apostle answers, and another than
that which the Apostle makes, as may appear by what I have said before. And for
the three things Mr Blake gathers from Gomarus, the first is not true, that my
objection is wholly solved: For there is not a word in Gomarus that answers this
objection, Every child of Abraham was not a child of the promise Gen 17, 7, 8,
as the Apostle determines, Romans 9, 7, 8. None were his seed to whom the promise
as Evangelical belongs, but the elect, therefore neither was the covenant Genesis
17, 7. as Evangelical, made to all the natural children of Abraham, not they
circumcised because the covenant was made to them, nor is the covenant made
with every beleiver by profession, nor has he right to Baptism by virtue of
that title, nor is the covenant made to every true beleivers infant or natural
child, there are none of them Abraham's seed but the elect, and therefore all
the plea of the Paedobaptists from Genesis 17.7. to prove the right of every
beleivers natural child to baptism, is manifestly false, going on that
supposition which the Apostle plainly contradicts. The second thing is
frivolous: For there was no contradiction in appearance in the Apostles words,
which need reconciliation, and therefore Gomarus and Mr Blake have taken upon
them an unnecessary task: But the seeming opposition to be reconciled, is
between Gods performing his word to Abraham's seed to be a God to them, and his
rejection of them from being his people, which the Apostlee does indeed
reconcile righ^ly, but Mr Blake and Gomarus are both mistaken in the thing as
has been d^monstrated. Yet this I find, that Gomarus with the other four
Professors of the united Belgic Provinces (of whom Gomarus is first) set down
the same that I conclude in their Judgment at the Synod of Dor^ about the
second Article of the Remonstrants, in which they say, That to the elect only
the promises are made, is professedly proved by Paul Romans 9, 7, 8* For only
the sons of promise are counted for the seed to whom that word of the
everlasting possession of the inheritance appertains. So that I have five more
Suffrages together for me. And for the Doctrine of Covenant Holiness, I confess
the Apostle establishes this Doctrine, That all the spiritual seed of
Abraham* to wit, true beleivers, or elect persons, are holy federally as being
those to whom God has covenanted to be God: But Mr Blakes doctrine of Covenant
holiness, that Gods covenant is to be a God to every beleiver and his seed,
which is no other than his natural seed (for infants are no otherwise his
seed) is so far from being established by the Apostle, that he determines the
contrary, denying that all Abraham's children were children of the promise, and
proving the elect only to be his seed to whom the promise Genesis 17.7, as it was
Evangelicall was made by the state of Ishmael and Isaac, Esau and Jacob. And
for this I am assured that I have the whole current of the Scripture for me,
and fear not to make this Text my Asylum, still having considered what Mr
Blake produces both here and before: the frivolousness of which I hope by
Divine assistance to show in that which follows.

There is somewhat which Mr. Blake adds in that Chapter in answer to the
Allegation of Matthew. 3.9. in which as I showed before, John Baptist rejects
their claim to baptism, though Abraham's natural children without repentance
and faith, and asserts the only seed of Abraham in covenant to be his
spiritual. Here to says Mr. Blake, I answer, First* When those that were no
better then th^se make the same plea, John 8.3^. We be Abraham's seed, and were
never in bondage to any, Christ yields it, v. 37. I know that ye are Abraham's
seed; he allows all that upon this account they can claim. And for Pharisees
he does not barely yield them to be Church members, but also Church teachers,
Matthew. 23.2.

I reply, Christ's yields they were Abraham's natural seed, but denies them to
be Abraham's Children, verse 39. that is, to whom the promise Evangelicall
belongs. The Pharisees were not yielded to be Church Members in the Christian
Church, nor were admitted by John Baptist or Christ's Disciples to baptism
without repentance and faith, nor were they teachers in the Christian Church,
though among the Jews they are said to fit in Moses Chair.

2. Says Mr. Blake, John Baptist does not deny what Christ yields, but lets
them know that this place will not serve to avoid wrath whilst they live in
impenitencie; notwithstanding that this plea holds, they may perish, and yet
Gods Covenant with Abraham hold; being able of stones to raise up children unto
Abraham, to make good what in covenant he had said. He no where says that they
are not entitled to privileges of ordinances, and thereby interessed in the
prerogatives of Gods visible people. What Paul Romans 9.4, 5. so largely yelds
them, John Baptist does not deny them, which also now they had in visible
possession.

Answer. Neither John Baptist, nor Christ, nor Paul, y^ilded them either to be
in the covenant with Abraham (Mr. Blakes own words: notwithstanding this plea
holds, etc. do plainly imply, that Gods covenant did not hold with them, and
that by them God should not make good what in covenant ^e had said) or to be
Gods visible people, or to have right to the privilege of baptism: but the
contrary is declared by them. What Mr. Blake concludes the Chapter with, ^s
either but a dictate, that privilege of ordinance (meaning of Baptism) is a
Birth-inheritance, without either proof or show of proof from Prove. 19.14. Romans
3.1. so that I shall trouble the reader with no more of the fopperies of this
chapter* only I desire the reader to observe, that whereas usually
Paedobaptists grant that by birth a grown man is not entitled to the initial
Seal without his own profession, Mr. Blake denies that John says, the viperous
Pharisees and Sadduces, and unbelieving Jews are not in^ituled to privileges
of ordinances and thereby interessed in the prerogatives of Gods visible people.

But Mr. Sidenham in his Exercit. chapter 6. takes upon him to refell the plea from
Matthew. 3.8, 9. gathering that the pretense of being Abraham's children, could
not give them a right to baptism; and if John denied Abraham's natural seed on
that account, much more would he the adopted children. But herein I conceive he
does not rightly set down his adversaries collection: For the adopted children
of Abraham I conceive are no other than beleivers, and surely Mr Sidenhams
adversaries do not imagine that John denied them baptism. I for my part
remember not my allegation of this Text before the writing of this Book. But I
find Mr. William Kay in his Baptism without Basin thus averring, 1. That Matthew.
3.8, 9. is directly against Infant Baptism, in that none but such as have faith
and repentance, must think to be baptized. 2. That the pretense or consequence
from circumcision, and being Abraham's natural children, to prove their title
to Baptism. I add to the Covenant Evangelicall Genesis 17.7. is also condemned, in
that he allows them not to think within themselves, We have Abraham to our
Father, which is not meant simply as if they might not in any sort think
Abraham to be their Father; for Christ acknowledges it, John 8 37. and they
might lawfully think that to be so which was so but in some respect, and the
respects are intimated in the Text, 1, In respect of baptism to which they
come, but as Par^us Comment. in Matthew. 3.7. John did not admit them as being
unworthy. 2. In reference to the covenant* Genesis 17 7. which appears in that he
adds, For I say unto you that God is able even of these stones to raise up
children to Abraham, which can be understood no otherwise than of spiritual
children, who are children of the promise, Romans 9.8. which the Pharisees are
not, 3. In respect of that which they imagined, that they should be s^cured
from wrath to come, v. 7, in that they had Abraham to their father. Now what
says Mr. Sidenham to this?

1. That they were of age, and men degenerated from Abraham's says, that he did
not refuse them because Abraham was their father, or upon that account that
Abraham's seed had not right to the promise, b^t as only pretending Abraham to
be their father, when they walked contrary to the principles of Abraham's faith.

Answer. It Is true, he did not refuse them because Abraham was their Father,
nor as only pretending Abraham to be their Father: Nor does he deny that it
was true that they had Abraham to their father in respect of natural
generation, but because though they had Abraham to their father in respect of
natural generation, yet they did not believe as Abraham, nor had right to the
promise, which is enough to show that the children of believers are to be
refused and not admitted to Baptism till they become believers themselves.

2. Says Mr. Sidenham, This is the same as to grown men professing faith,
baptized, and then not admitted to the Lords Supper because carnal and
Apostate, it ^e said, You have cut off your own right by your contrary actings,
which impeach not the truth of this position, That believers and their infants
are in covenant, and ought to be judged so until they manifest the contrary;
or that if they believed themselves afterward the promise should not be to
them and their children: And that the Text holds out no more than this, that
when persons are grown up to years, and come to understanding, they must then
stand on their right, and look to make out personal qualifications for new
ordinances.

Answer. 1, It is not the same: For such a speech should imply a former right
now cut off, but John Baptists speech disclaims any right they ever had to
baptism. 2. John Baptists speech proves, believers children as such are not in
the covenant, for Abraham's children were not, and that they ought not to be
judged so until they manifest faith and repentance, for John Baptist denied
them to be Abraham's children in covenant without them, and that the promise is
not to their children because they believe; for the promise was not to Abraham's
children by natural generation though he were father of believers, and it
proves that none of Abraham's children have right to baptism without faith and
repentance, and consequently infants no more than grown men. But Mr. Sidenham
yet thinks to avoid the inference from this text, thus.

3. This was at the first institution of the ordinance, when baptism was was
newly administered: now new institutions require grown persons, and actual
visible bilievers to be the first subjects of them: they could not baptize
their children first, for then the parents would be neglected: And the bringing
in of a new ordinance requires renewing of special acts in those which partake
of it. Now in the new Testament God renewes the covenant of Abraham, adds a new
initiating seal to it: It was before entailed in such a line which is cut off,
i^'s now of the same nature, only every one must come in his own person first,
as Abraham, and enter his own name, and then the promise to him and his seed.
Thus it was in the former place, where when the Jews came to be baptized, they
were exhorted first to repent and be baptized themselves, then the promise is
to you and your children.

Answer. All this scr^bling is at random, and without any proof, or answer to
the objection: It is quite beside the objection, which was not barely from John
Baptists not baptizing their children, but from the reason of John Baptists
refusing to admit themselves to baptism. So that Mr. Sidenhams answer is only
to the Consectary, inferred from the Conclusion deduced, not to the premises, no
nor the first conclusion it self. For the argument is this, If Abraham's natural
children had not right to baptism without their own faith and repentance. But
the Antecedent is true, Ergo the Consequent, and consequently no^ infants to be
baptized. Again, if Abraham's children were not in the covenant without faith
and repentance, neither are ours, for we have no more privilege for our
children then Abraham's had: But the Antecedent is true, Ergo the Consequent,
and consequently a believers child is not in covenant because a believers
child. Yet once more, If persons circumcised and descendended from Abraham,
were not therefore admitted to baptism, then the same thing does not entitle to
baptism which did entitle to circum^ision, nor the command of circumcision a
command concerning baptism. But the Antecedent is true, Ergo the Consequent,
and consequently infants are not to be baptized because they were to be
circumcised. Now Mr Sidenhams answer is to the allegation of John Baptists not
baptizing infants, not at all to any of these arguments drawn from his refusing
the Pharisees, though coming to his baptism, and conceiving they might, having
Abraham to their Father. Yet what Mr. Sidenham faith takes away the force of
the argument if it had been thus made: Those we are not to baptize whom John
did not baptize: but John did not baptize infants, Ergo. Yea his answer
strengthens the argument: For if John's baptism were at the first institution of
baptism, and infants were not baptized, then neither are they to be now. For
the first institution is the rule of observing it, as the Lord Christ himself
urges concerning marriage, Matthew. 19.4. and Paul concerning the Lords Supper,
1 Cor. ^1, 23. If baptism were a new institution, and did require actual
visible believers as the first subject of it, then it is not all one with
circumcision, which admitted infants at the first institution, then such only
are to be baptiz^d except some further Institution can be showed, the
institution for infan-circumcision is not sufficient for infant-baptism^, for
that was in force as much at the first institution of baptism as after. It is
false that they could not baptize their children first, that is, at the first
institution, John Baptist and the D^sciples of Christ might have baptized
infants at first as well as Abraham circumcis^d them, yea ought to have done
it, If Paedobaptists say true, that the command of circumcision was the Rule in
force concerning baptism: nor need the parents be neglected, no not though they
had baptized the children first in order of time; yea the right of the child
being contemporary with the paren^s faith, if they say true, they should have
been baptized as soon as ever ^he parent was a believer, or the child in
covenant. Gods Covenant with Abraham was to him and his seed; but his covenant
was never made to every believer and his seed. In the new Testament God renews
the Covenant wi^h Abraham in respect of spiritual blessings, but for the
promises domestic or civil* he does not renew it. He adds to the new Covenant
the s^al of Christ's death, whose blood confirmed it, and the initiating seal of
his Spirit, I know no other initiating seal added to it. It is not true that
the ^n^w covenant, or covenent of grace was entailed before to a certain line,
though the covenant with Abraham in respect of the civil domistick promises
were entailed to Abraham's natural posterity, and is now cut off: Nor is the
covenant every way of the same nature with Abraham's covenant, nor upon a
believers entering his name is the promise to him and his seed, nor is it Acts
2.38, 39. said, that upon their repenting and being baptized themselves, that
the promise is to them and their children, but the being of the promise to them
and their children, is urged as a consideration fit to move them to repent and
be baptizd.

He next sets down 4 affirmations, 2. That no man must be baptized, or receive
an ordinance by any fleshly prerogative. Answer. Then no infant is to be
baptized by virtue of birth from a believer, for that is a fleshly prerogative,
as the birth of Christ was but a fleshly prerogative to David, the virgin Mary,
though there were an entail of a promise to them of this thing, so is the
imagined birth-priviledge of believers infants, and yet there is no promise to
retain it to a believers child.

2. That no person grown up to years of udderstanding, has right to a sealing
ordinance, but upon his own personal qualification.

Answer. Then Mr. Blake did err in intituling unbelieving Jews to privileges
of ordinances* and thereby interessing them in the prerogatives of Gods visible
people. 2. There is no other right to an infant to baptism, than what a grown
person has.

The third affirmation I grant, and the fourth too, if there were any such old
privileges of the promise to be conveyed to those which do really embrace the
Gospel and their seed. And this grant that those Pharisees and Sadduces had
demonstrated themselves to be only the children of the flesh, and not of the
promise, and that they were excluded, shows the covenant as Evangelical not to
be made to a believers natural seed, nor they thereby have right to baptism.

SECT. XXX. Of the meaning of Mr. M. his second Conclusion, the ambiguitie of
which is showed.
I now return to Mr. M. whose second Conclusion was thus expressed, Ever since
God gathered a distinct select number out of the world to be his Kingdom,
City, household in opposition to the rest of the world, which is the kingdom,
city, household of Satan, he would have the i^fants of all who are taken into
covenant with him, to be accounted his, to belong to him, to his Church and
Family, and not to the Devils. This conclusion b^ing the main pillar upon which
he settles Infant Baptism, the Antecedent of his Euthymem I examined with great
di^igence after the exact manner of Scholastic Writers in their Disputes.
Which dealing of mine being indeed the one^y way to clear truth, and approved
by a learned member of the Assembly [Mr R.C. of P.C.O.] and known to be one of
the most accurate disputants in his time in Oxford, yet Mr M. page 105. of his
Defense, in a most inj^rious though frivolous way, traduce^h as an indirect
Artifice. To which some answer is given in my Apology sect. 5. page* 23 I shall
now view the reply he makes: First, he compares my dealing with an unnam'd
person in Cambridge, whose faculty was to make a clear text dark by his
Interpretation: whereas my way was the true and only way to clear his meanin^
by distinction, which is by Logicians called the light of speech, and in all
consideration of things to be first, as Keckerm. Log Syst, part. 2. lib. 1. c.
1 sp^aks: No^ h^^h Mr M. showed in his Defense, that any of those senses of his
words which I set down, might not be conceived to be his meaning; and therefore
his complaint of me is ridiculous, and I shall have cause to censure him as a
confused Dict^t^r rather than an accurate Disputer, who does so indistinctly
set down his main conclusion, That an adversary cannot determinely resolve what
is the meaning, and so neither easily examine his proofs, nor know what to
oppose.

B^^ he tells me he meant it of a visible privilege, in facie Ec^lesiae
visibilis, yet he does not tell what that visible privilege is. He tells me,
That they have their share in Foedus externum; but sets not down what share
they have, nor what he means by Foedus externum, in which they have share. And
after he says, God would have the children of them who by external vocation
and profession join to the Church of God even while they are children, to enjoy
the same privilege wi^h them, which has also ambiguity in it. For whereas
there are many privileges which the parents enjoy, as R. G. to be baptized, to
be admitted to the Lords Supper, perhaps the Father to be an Elder teaching or
ruling, or a Deacon in the Church, and by ( Children) may be meant persons of
ten or twenty years old, and while* they are children may be understood either
during their infancy, or during their relation as children to their parents
(which is as long as they are men) the words may be understood either that they
have the same privilege of admission to the Lords Supper or Church Government,
while they are infants, or that they have even in infancy the same privilege
to be baptized that the parent had upon his profession. Which last if it were
his meanng (as most likely it was) then his second conclusion being the same
with his Antecedent in his Euthymem, his argument is an inapt tautology,
Infants of professors have the same privilege with the parents to be baptized:
Ergo they are to be baptized, which is to prove the same by the same: yet this
I must needs take to be his meaning, till he show what other privilege wi^h
their parents children of vi-sible professors have in infancy.

Then he distinguishes of the Covenant of grace taken largely and strictly,
which distinction is showed before Sect. 25, to have no footing in Scripture,
and to be inaptly used by Mr M. He distinguishes of Jews some Abraham's seed
according to the promise, some only in the face of the visible Church, and of
being in Christ by the mystical union, and by visible and external profession
Which distinction I mislike not though they be not of use here, since they were
not the terms used in his Conclusion. He distinguishes of Seals belonging to
the Covenant, the Seal of the Spirit, and external Seals. But he neither
shew^s where the external seals (as he calls them) are termed Seals of the
Covenant: nor was the term ( Seal of the Covenant) at all used in his
conclusion. Yea to show how unskilfully he handles the matter in all these
distinctions, he does not distinguish any of those terms that were in question,
and were the predicate in his proposition, to wit, to be accounted Gods, to
belong to him, to his Church and family, and not to the Devils. And this piece
of unskilfulness is in that which follows.

When therefore I say they are visibly to be reckoned to belong to the Covenant
with their parents, I mean, look what right a visible professor has to be
received and reputed to belong to the visible Church, qua visi^le professor,
that right has his child so to be esteemed.

But first, this speech here explained was not in his Conclusion in his Sermon,
these words were not there, They are visibly to be reckoned to belong to the
Covenant with their parents, but this, They are to be accounted Gods, to belong
to him, to his Church and Family, and not to the Devils. 2. Were the sense here
given the meaning of his Conclusion, it would not be true. For if the right
belong to the visible professors, qua visible professors, the same right cannot
belong to the child except he be a visible professor. For what agrees to any
qua talis, as such, agrees universaliter and reciproce, and therefore by this
expression, every visible professor is to be received and esteemed, and every
one to be so received and esteemed, is a visible professor, which cannot be
said with any truth or show of truth of the infant child of a believer.
Besides, if this Conclusion were good, an infant should have right to be
admitted to the Lords Supper since the parent has right thereto as a visible
professor.

But Mr. M. makes a large discourse to prove, That to those to whom the
spiritual part of the Covenant belongs not, yet there are outward
Church-privileges which belong to them as they are visible professors. And to
prove this he cites, Genesis 6.1. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Gal. 3.26. Matthew. 8, 12. Acts 3.25.
Romans 9.4. Romans 9.3.1. John 8 17. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Deuteronomy. 33.4. John 4.22.

In answer to which I say, ^, That I grant this speech to be true. 2. I deny
that the Texts are pertinent to the purpose of Mr. M. who intends this speech
of Gentile visible professors, whereas the texts are most of them of the
privileges peculiar to the Jewish people, namely, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Matthew. 8.12. Acts
3.25. Romans 9.4. Romans 3.1. John 8.17. Psalm. 147 19, 20. Deuteronomy. 33.4. John 4.22.
Of the other two the former is of those before the Flood, who whether they were
called Sons of God by descent, or profession, or some other way, it is
uncertain. The other Gal. 3.26. is to be understood of being the Sons of God
really, and the term [ All] is to be limited, as v. 27. by [ye that are
believers] as the very words show. For when he says Ye are all the sons of God
by faith in Christ Jesus, it is plain this is meant only of those who had
faith in Christ Jesus 3. In all this discourse he does not show a Text proving
the privileges he mentions to belong to the infants of Gentile visible
professors. Certainly some of them cannot be applied; no, not to the Infants of
the Jewish nation, as v. 9. that to them were committed the Oracles of God,
that to them God showed his word, etc. 4 Nor does Mr M. distinctly tell us,
which of these, ^or what other outward privilege it is that belongs to the
Infants of visible professors, which is the only thing pertinent to the
present business.

After this he asserts, That there are some rightly admitted by the Church to
visible Membership who only partake of the visible privileges, and undertakes
to prove it from Romans 11. But I have in the first p^rt of this Review showed Mr
Ms, and others mistakes about the ingraffing, Romans 11.17. and proved that it is
meant of giving faith according ^o election. Yet I grant it true which Mr M.
asserts in those word, and do take notice that page 110. he acknowledges that
I grant in my Examen page 149. a lawfulness of admitting men into a visible
communion upon a visible profession, and that rightly even by a judgment of
faith, though their inward holiness be unknown to us. And yet in the next page
111. he tells me, This mistake runs through your whole Book, that none are to
be reputed to have a visible right to the Covenant of Grace, but onily such as
partake of the saving graces of it. But of this calumny more may be seen in my
Apology, Sect. 10. page 47.

After all these expressions of his meaning in his Conclusion he adds, page
111. This then was and is my meaning when I say, that infants of Believers are
confederates with their parents, that they have the same visible right to be
reputed Church Members, as their parents have by being visible professors, and
are therefore to be admitted to all such external privileges as their
infant-age is capable of; and that the visible Church is made up of such
visible professors and their children; that the invisible takes in neither all
of the one, nor the other, but some of both.

In answer whereto I say, 1. Neither Mr M. in his pretended explication keeps
the terms of his second Conclusion in which the words were not as Mr. M. sets
them down, That infants of believers are confederates with their parents. Nor
(2) do any of the words explain that proposition. Far would any that knows the
meaning of words, take this for a right paraphrase? Infants of believers are
confederate with their parents, that is; they have the same visible right, etc.
Is [ confederate] all one with [ to have visible right, to be reputed
Church Members, to be admitted to external Church Priviledges, to be of the
visible Church?] Yea would not a Grammarian count such a paraphrase to be quite
besides the words paraphrased, and the words paraphrased plainer than the
paraphrase it self? Sure [ Confederate] is [ being in Covenamt together] And
yet in all this Paraphrase there is not so much as the term Covenant mentioned,
much less any explication in what covenant, and in what manner, by what act
believing parents are in covenant together with their infants. 3. By this
Paraphrase we have 4 propositions of one, like so many Hydra's heads rising up
in the place of one* The first is, That Infants of believers have the same
visible right to be reputed Church Members as their parents have by being
visible professors. But this is manifestly false: For if the visible right be
by being visible professors, infants cannot have the same visible right but by
being visible professors, which to assert of them is all one as to say, the
snow is black. The second, [ And are therefore to be admitted to all such
external Church Priviledges as their infant age is capable of] is ambiguous:
for the capacity of their infant-age may be understood of Capacity from the
institution of God; and so infants of Gentile-believers are to be admitted to
no external privileges Sacramental, for none are appointed for them: or
natural capacity in respect of receiving the Sacrament, and then if by the
Sacrament be meant not only the outward element, but also the use or
signification by it, they have not a natural capacity of receiving the
Sacrament of Baptism: if only of the elements they are capable also of the
Lords Supper, as well as baptism. For they may eat and drink bread and wine as
well as be washed by baptism. The third proposition is, That the visible Church
is made up of such visible professors and their children. This is indeed the
conclusion of the Assembly in their Confession of Faith, chapter 25. art. 2. and
they cite to prove it, 1 Cor. 7.14. Acts 2.39. Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. Romans 11.16. The
impertinency of which is showed before in the first part of this Review, and in
that which goes before in this part of this Review: Of the impertinency of two
other texts, to wit, Genesis 3.15. Genesis 17.7. Somewhat is said also before, and
more is intended to be decla-in the remainder of this Review. The fourth
proposition, That the invisible neither takes in all of the one nor the other,
but some of both, I grant to be true.

After all these Mr M adds, I beseech you stand no longer doubtful of my
meaning: I mean of them as I mean of other visible professors, they are taken
into covenant both ways respectively, according as they are elect or not
elect; all of them are in covenant in respect of out-ward privileges, the
elect over and above the outward privileges, are in covenant with respect to
saving graces; and the same is to be said of visible members both parents and
infants under the N. T. in this point of being in covenant as was to be said of
visible members in the former administration, whether Jews and their children,
or Proselytes and their children.

Answer. Here again Mr M. explains the term Of Infants being taken into
Covenant, which was not in his second conclusion* However I note first, That in
respect of saving grace, all the infants of believers are not taken into
covenant, but only the elect. 2. That when he asserts, That all the infants of
visibls professors are taken into covenant in respect of outward privileges.
1, He never shows what those outward privileges are. 2. Nor any where ^lse
that I know, instanceth in any but the initiall seal, which is now no other
than baptism, and this then being the antecedent in his Enthymeme, his argument
is this, All infants of believers are taken into Covenant in respect of the
outward privilege of Baptism, Ergo, they are to be baptized; which is all one
as to say, They are to be baptized, Ergo they are to be baptized, unless he
mean they are taken into covenant de facto, and so his assertion should be,
They are already baptized (which is false) and if his inference be, Ergo they
are to be baptized, his argument is, They are already baptized, Ergo they are
to be baptized, which were to assert Anabaptism. 3. Nor does Mr. M. tell where
that covenant is that promises the outward Church-priviledge of an initiaall
seal, nor by whose act they are taken into^covenant, or who takes them into
covenant. 4. If he understand it of the outward covenant, meaning thereby the
outward administration, he uses, the word improperly by a Trope, and so speaks
obscurely in his main conclusion on which his whole dispute r^sts, which is
contrary to Logic Rules, and ^ll right Disputation. Besides, he does but
trifle thus in his arguings, I^fants of believers are taken into covenan^, that
is the outward covenant, that is the outward administration, that is (now)
Baptism, Ergo they are to be baptized, which is to prove the same ^y the same.
Lastly, if that speech of his be true, That in respect of outward privileges
the same is to be said of visible members both parents and infants under the
New Testament, in this point of being in covenant, as was to be said of visible
members in the former administration* whether Jews and their children, or
Proselytes and their children, it is apparent to me that he makes the covenant
now and then not only the same for substance, but also in respect of
administrations contrary to his first conclusion. For what are those outward
privileges in respect of which they are the same but outward administrations?
And if so, his speech is in my apprehension professed Judaism opposite to the
Apostles determination in the Synod Acts 15. And yet Mr. M. tells me he
endeavors in all this to speak as clearly as he can possibly, which makes me
hopeless of any thing but confusedness in his writing, when after I had
distinctly opened the various senses of his terms, yet he wilfully declines
making answer in which of those senses I should take his words, and when he
takes on him to explain his meaning, he takes on him to explain other terms
then were in his conclusion, and yet his explications are as dark as his terms
which he would explain, and in the upshot his second conclusion can have no
other sense consistent with his own Hypothesis but such as asserts Judaism, or
being co^ceived to be the antecedent of his Enthymeme, is the same with the
conclusion of it, which is merely to trifle, proving the same by the same:
which course how unfit it is for him who is to dispute, I leave it to them to
judge who know what belongs to Scolastick exercise.

Mr. M. next charge me with holding no more promises for believers children
in reference to the covenant, then to the children of Turks. And yet page 119.
he does in these words maintain the same which I do. I join with you that it is
an error to say, that all Infants of believers indefinitely are under the
saving graces of the covenant, for although I find abundance of promises in the
Scripture of Gods giving saving graces unto the posterity of his people, and
that experience teaches us, that God uses to continue the Church in their
posterity, and that Gods election lies more among their seed then others, yet
neither to Jew nor Gentile was the covenant so made at any time, that the
spiritual part and grace of the covenant should be conferred upon them all,
which is directly to contradict the usual plea of Pedobaptists, that the
covenant of grace is made to every believer and his seed, and particularly the
words of the Directory, The p^omise is made to believers and their seed* seeing
the covenant of grace is made to none but those on whom the spiritual part is
conferred, nor can (without wresting the words from the plain meaning according
to the Grammar sense) the spech of the Directory be understood of any other
promise than saving grace.

Mr. M. and with him Mr. G. Vindic. Paedob, page 12. charge me, that in my
judgment believers children are not actually belonging to the Covenant or
Kingdom of God, but only in possibility; that they belong to the Kingdom of
the Devil actually, which calumnies are re^u^ed in my Apology, Sect. 14.

Next, he speaks thus to me: But say you, to make them actually members of the
visible Church, is to overthrow the definitions of the visible Church, which
Protestant Writers use to give, because they must be all Christians by
profession. I reply, It overthrowes it not at all, for they all include the
infants of such professors, as the visible Church among the Jews did include
their infants male (and female too, lest you say that circumcision made them
members.)

Answer. Though Protestant Divines do hold many of them, that infants belong to
the visile Church, yet they put them not in their definitions. There are many
definitions cited by me in the first part of this Review Sect. 14. in which
infants are not included, not in that definition of the Church (visible) which
Baxter plain Scripture proof, page 82 says, Certainly all Divines are agreed,
That it is a Society of persons separated from the world to God, or called out
of the world, etc, Not in that of Dr. Featly Dipper dipped, page 4. A true
particular visible Church is a particular Congregation of men professing the
true faith, known by the two marks above mentioned, the sincere preaching of
the Word, and the due administration of the Sacraments. Norton Resp. ad
Appollon* page 10. Immota Thesis. Idem illud in professione constituit
Eccl^si^m visibilem, quod interna sua natura constituit Ecclesiam mysticam: i.
e. Fides usque adeo luculenta est haec veritas ut vel invito Bellarmino lib. de
Eccles* milit. etiam a praecipuorum inter Pontificos calamis excidisse
videatur. The Assembly Answer to the reasons of the seven dissenting brethren,
page 48. Precog 1. The whole Church of Christ is but one made up of the
collection and aggregation of all who are called by the preaching of the word
to profess the faith of Christ. Mr. M. himself in his Sermon at the Spittle
April 16*52. page 15.* Secondly, that part of the Church which is upon earth in
regard that the very life and being of it, and of all the members of it, lie in
internal graces, which cannot be seen, in that respect the Church of Christ is
called an invisible Church: But now as the said Church and members do make a
profession of their faith and obedience sensibly to the eyes and ears of
others, in that respect it is called a visible Church: But the visible is not
one Church and the invisible another, but merely the same Church under several
denominations, the one from their constituting graces, the other from the
external profession of them. The Church visible of the Jews consisted of the
whole nation, and was visible otherwise than the Christian, and therefore the
definition of the Christian Church visible is different from that of the Jewish
Church visible, and infants included in the definition of the one are not
included in the definition of the other.

Mr. M. says, I add also Baptism now (as well as circumcision of old) is a
re^ all though implicit profession of the Christian faith.

Answer. Baptism of it self (I mean dipping in water) is no real explicit or
implicit profession of faith, but only when it is done with consent of the
baptized to that end: Otherwise the Indians driven into the water by the
Spaniards against their wills, should be prof^ssors of the Christian faith. The
like may be said of circumcision.

Mr M omitting my next reason, [That to make infants [visible Church Members,
is to make a member of the visible Church, to whom the note of a member of the
visible Church does not agree] says thus to me: But say you, Infants are only
passive, and do nothing whereby they may be denominated visible Christians. I
answer, Even as much as the infants of the Jews could do of old, who yet in
their days were visible members.

I reply, It is so; yet that which made a visible Church member in the Jewish
Church, is not enough to make a visible Church member in the Christian Church,
which consists not of a whole nation known by circumcision, genealogies,
outward policy, national meetings, family dwelling, etc. But of so many persons
as are called out of the world by the preaching of the word to profess the
faith of Christ. Mr. M. adds, Yea (say you) further it will follow, that there
may be a v^sible Church which consists only of infants of believers. I answer,
no more now than in the time of the Jewish Church; it is possible, but very
im^roble, that all the men and women should die and leave only infants behind
them, and it is far more probable that a Church in the Anabaptists way may
consist only of hypocrites.

Answer. It is somewhat more possible, or more probable, there should be only
infants left in a Church of a house, town, or village; than in the Church which
consists of a numerous nation, as the Jewish Church did: nor is it unlikely;
^uch things h^ve happened in sweeping plagues. And if it be far more probable
that a Church in the Anabaptists way may consist only of hypocrites, the some
with more probability may be said of a Church gathered in the Pedob^^pists way,
in which there is of necessity so much ignorance in matters of Religion, all
being admitted Church Members before they know or can know anything of Christ.
Jam sumus ergo pares. But if it be possible, as it is granted, that a Church
visible of Christians may consist only of infants, it will follow that there may
be a visible Church of Christians in which there is no one professor of the
faith, contrary to the defini^ion of a visible Church, That it is a company of
professors of faith, and they shall be visible Church Members, who neither by
themselves or any for them, do any thing which is apparent to the understanding
by the meditation of sense, whereby Christianity is expressed. The case is not
the same of the Jewish Church and the Christian; for the Christian Church is
any company though but of two or three gathered together in Christ's name,
Matthew. 18.20. But the Jewish Church was the whole Congregation of Israel known
otherwise, as h^th been said, than the Christian.

Next, Mr M. against these words of mine [It is also true that we are not to
account infants [of believers] (which he omits in repetition) to belong to God
[before God] (which he likewise omits in repetition) in respect of election
[from eternity] (omitted by him) or promise of grace [in Christ] (omitted also)
of present estate of in-being in Christ, or future estate by any act of
Science, or faith without a particular relation: for there is no general
declaration of God, that the infants of present believers indefinitely all or
some either are elected to life, or are in the covenant of grace in Christ,
either in respect of present in-being or future estate, excepts two things- 1.
This makes nothing against that visible Church Membership be pleads for.

Answer. If that visible Church Membership he pleads for, arise from the
covenant of grace in Christ (as hitherto has been the plea) nor can they show
any other) then they are not visible Church Members who have not an estate in
that covenant which is the cause of it: For take away the cause and ^he effect
cease, and then the visible Church Membership of existing infants of present
believers is overthrown, since the cause of it appears not. And if they are not
to be accounted by act of faith to belong to God in respect of promise of grace
in Christ, and the Minister is to dispense the seals by a judgment of faith, as
Mr M. holds in his Sermon, page 47, in his Defense, page 111. then there being
no act of faith concerning existing infants of present believers, they are not
to be baptized.

2. Says Mr. M. I retort the Argument upon your self, and dare boldly affirm,
that by this argument no visible Church, or all the visible professors of any
Church, are to be accounted to belong to God either in respect of election from
eternity, or promise of grace, or present state of in-being in Christ, etc.
without a paricular revelation, because there is no declaration of God, that
present visible professors are indefinitely all or some either elected to life,
or are in the covenant of grace in Christ either in respect of present in-being
or future estate: look by what distinction you will answer this: For visible
professors who are grown men, the same will serve for infants of believers.

Answ. If Mr. M. had put in these words of mine, By any act or science of
faith, I should have granted the same might be said of visible professors grown
men, which I had said of infants. But this no whit hur^s our Tene^t or practice
who do not baptize grown persons because by no act of faith, or science we know
them to be in the covenant of grace in Christ, but because by an act of faith
we know Christ has appointed Disciples appearing such by heir profession of
faith, to be baptized by us, and by an act of science or experience by sense,
we know them to be such whom we baptize. Concerning whom though we cannot
account them elect and in the covenant by an act of science, or faith without a
particular revelation, yet we may by an act of certain knowledge mixed of
science and prudence from sense of their visible profession know them to be
serious, sober, understanding and free professors of Christianity, and by an
act of faith from Christ's institution of bapttizing professing disciples, know
we ought to baptize them, and upon their profession out of charity, which
believes all things, hops all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. judge them by an act of
opinion elect, and in the covenant of grace in Christ. None of all which can be
said of existing infants of present believrs, and therefore we ought to pass no
judgment on them in this thing, but suspend our judgmen^t, and act of
baptizing concerning our selves with that comfortable hope which we have from
indefinite promises.

Next Mr M. takes upon him to excuse some speeches of Mr. Cottons, against
which I excepted in my Examen, page* 42.4^. one was, That the covenant of grace
is given to every godly man in his seed. Concerning which Mr M. tells me, That
he takes M. Cottons meaning to be, that look as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
the other godly Jews were to their seed in respect of the covenant, that is
every godly man to his seed now, except only in such things wherein these
Patriarks were of Christ, in all other things wherein God promised to be the
God of them and types their seed, godly parents may plead it as much for their
seed now as, they could then, and what ever in^onveniences or absurdity you can
seem to fasten upon Mr. Cotton, will equally reach to them also. As for
example* suppose an Israelite should plead this promise for his seed, you will
demand if he plead it to his seed universally, that is false, add so of the rest
of your inferences, look what satisfying answer an Israelite would give you the
same would Mr. Cotton give, and as satisfyingly.

Answ. Mr Ms paraphrase of Mr. Cottons words, is such as no Rule of Crammar
will warrant, the words being so express, It (the covenant of grace) was given
to Christ, and in Christ to every godly man, Genesis 17.7. And in every godly man
to his seed: where the same covenant of grace, not an uncertain promise of any
thing whatsoever, is said to be given to every godly man's seed, which is said
to be given to Christ, and to every godly man, and in every godly man, using
the same pronounce which was used concerning Christ: no^ is it said, that it
might be pleaded by every godly man, but it was given, which in plain
construction is mean^ of the same grant which was made to Christ, and to a
godly man. 2. Nor perhaps would Mr Cotton have owned this explication of his
words. 3. If he had, they had not been true, for every* godly Gentile now
cannot plead the same for his seed now, which Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
some other Is^aelites could then, (because God made such peculiar promises to
them, particularly to Abraham, G^n 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. in respect of their seed)
^s he has made to any be^ieving Genti^e now. For much of that he promised then
was out of respect, to the future coming of Christ from them, which being
accomplished, the reason of those promises, and of circumcision and other rites
cease. And yet the promises were not then so universally to them and their
seed, but that God took himself not engaged to be the God of many of them, nor
ar^ Gentile-believers seed now Abraham's seed till they believe as he did, and
therefore in explic^tion of Mr. M. there can be no good sa^i^faction so as to
verify Mr Cottons words.

The other speech of Mr Cotton, that God will have some of every god^y man's
seed stand before him for ever, he confesses is not to be justified, if it be
meant in reference to election and everlasting life, tha^ every godly man shall
have some of his seed infallibly saved, nor does he think Mr Cotton meant so:
but for his part he thinks he only added to that promise made to Jonadabs
children, Jerem 35. that God would always bear a merciful respect unto the
posterity of his servants, according to that promise, Exo. 20.5. I will show
mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments. And that
being his scope (as he thinks it was) I need not to have kept such a stir about
it.

Ans. The words in the plainest sense they bare, had that sense which Mr. M.
counts unjustifiable, nor can they be construed in such an indefinite manner as
Mr. M. conceives, the good promised being no less than standing before God for
ever: which how ever it allude to Ionadabs promise, yet is not to be understood
in the sense made to him, nor in any other sense now than that of eternal
salvation, that I know, and by his declaration should belong to some of every
godly man's seed determinately. So that what ever his scope were, his words were
likely to be a stumbling block to many who are too much taken with his
dictates, and the place in which I examined them leading me to it, and both Mr.
Cottons letter to me, acquainting me with his Dialogue of the grounds of
Infant Baptism, of which the supposed interest in the covenant is the chief,
and the desire I have to make learned men more cautelous in venting such
passages as may occasion error, knowing how Luthers unwary speeches were the
seed of Antinomianism, and other learned men's writings have misled, most
Divines adhering pertinaciously to leading men, provoking me thereto, I did and
still do think it was necessary I should say what I said about those speeches.

Mr. M. tells me, page, 116, You do but lose time and waste paper in
endeavoring to confute what was never asserted by me, viz. That the covenant
of saving grace is made to believers and their natural seed that the infants
of believers are so within the covenant of grace as to be elected, and to have
all the spiritual privileges of the covenant belong to them. But this he
suspects to fasten on him against my own light: from which I cleared my self,
Apolog. Sect. 9. He then interprets his own words of infants being within the
covenant of grace as visible professors are qua visible (which speech is showed
false before) they are to be accounted to belong to God as well as their
parents, viz. by a visible profession they are made free according to Abraham's
Copy, viz. in a visible privilege for their posterity But he leaves out those
passages which I alleged, saying, The covenant of s^lvation is com^ to his
house, that in the first conclusion it is said, The covenant is the same, which
he means of saving graces, and then says, and children belong to IT, which can
demonstrate no other than the same covenant, that is made a part of the Gospel
preached to Abraham. To which I might add, that in his Sermon, page 40. he
says The text not only showing that they are within the covenant, but also
that a right to baptism is the consequence of being within the covenant, which
covenant is made by him the covenant of salvation, page 16 and in his Defense
page 88. We are enquiring after the salvation of them to whom a promise of
salvation is made., and hence infers the salvation of infants; of believers
dying in infancy, which were frivolous if he did not conceive, Genesis 17.7. to
promise salvation to believers infants: and page 98. counts it absurd that in a
covenant of grace temporal blessings should be ratified by the seal of it. So
that either M. M. heeded not his own speeches, or confounded things much
different, or said and unsaid the same thing, if that were not his meaning
which I conceived. And I must still profess that his setting down first
distinctly the identity of the covenant consisting in saving graces, and then
affirming Infants of believers to belong to it, and not understanding it of the
same Covenant, has the show of juggling tending to deceive not to instruct the
Reader. There are more speeches produced by me to show, that if he did speak
consonantly to other Writers and sayings, he meant as I interpreted his words,
two of which he chooses to vindicate, one the proposition of the Directory; (
The promise is made to belivers and their seed,) which how frivolously it is
interpreted by Mr. G. and Mr. M. is showed in my Apol. Sect. 9. in my Addition
to my Apol. to Mr. Bailee, Sect. 3. To which I add, that in the Assemblies
Confession of Faith it is said, chapter 7. art 3 that in the covenant of grace God
promises to give unto all those that are ordained unto life, his holy Spirit,
chapter 14. art. 2. The principal acts of saving faith are, accepting, receiving,
and resting upon Christ alone for justification, sanctification, and eternal
life, by virtue of the covenant of Grace, chapter 17. art. 2. The perseverance of
the Saints depends upon the nature of the covenant of grace. The other speech
he would clear, is thus by me expressed* Baptism seals only the promise of
saving grace, remission of sins, etc. So in the Directory of Baptism, That it
is the seal of the covenant of grace, of our ingrafting into Christ, and of our
union with him, of remission of sins, regeneration, adoption, and life
eternal: and after, And that the seed and posterity of the faithful born
within the Church have by their birth interest in the covenant, and right to
the seal of it In the Rules of direction in the Ordinance October. 20. 1645. That
the Sacraments are seals of the covenant of grace in the blood of Christ. And
therefore if there be not a promise of saving grace to infants, in vain are
they baptized, the seal is put to a blank, as some use to speak. To this says
Mr. M. I utterly deny your consequence, that unless there be absolute promises
of saving grace to infants, the seal is set to a blank: For give me leave but
to put the same case; First for the ^nfants of the Jews, was the seal put to a
blank with them, or had they all promises of saving graces? Secondly, let me
put the same case in grown men, who make an external visible profession, and
thereupon are admit^ed to baptism, can any man say, that all the saving graces
of the covenant, or the spiritual part of it is promised to all visible
professors? Is it not abundantly known, that in all ages even in the best
times, even in the Apostles times multitudes were baptized, to whom God yet
never gave saving graces, and therefore never promised them? for had he made a
promise, he would have performed it.

Answer. To the words in my Examen (the seal is put to a blank) was added, as
some speak, which I did to intimate that it was Paedobaptists phraseology, not
mine, and that they counted this an absurdity, not that I did so. So that my
consequence was, it being counted frequently in their writings an absurdity
that the seal should be put to a blank, that is, that baptism should be
administered to them that had not the promise, and it seals only the promise of
saving grace, if the promise of saving grace belong not to the infants
baptized, then in vain are they baptized according to Paedobaptists Hypothesis,
for the seal of the promise is put to them to whom it is confessed the promise
is not made. Mr. M himself in his Sermon, page 43. Infants are capable of
receiving the holy Ghost, of union with Christ, of adoption, of forgiveness of
sins, of regeneration, of everlasting life, all which things are signified and
sealed in the Sacrament of Baptism. The covenant then sealed is the covenant
of these saving graces, which if it belong not to infants baptized, but another
outward covenant, in vain are they baptized, for they have not the covenant
which baptism seals. And that this is the sense of other Writers, appears by
the words of Ampsing. Diolog. eontra Anabapt. p. 195. Dico ergo: Omnibus
fidelibus baptismum competere cum ipsorum semine tam mulieribus quam viris tam
infantibus quam adulti^: horum omnium enim se Deum fore declarat. Deus, his
remissionem peccatorum in Christi sanguine; his mentis renovatio^e^ per
spiritum sanctum; his vita^ aeternam promittit ac regnum coelorum: quare quoque
ipsis obsignabitur hac Dei gratia. Ames. Bellarm. enervat. tom. 3. l. 1. c. 4.
chapter 9. Protest. Circu^cisio a prima su^ institutione habuit promissionem illam
annexam qua nulla est major: Ero Deus tuus and seminis tui post te. Genesis 17.
quam Christus ita interpretatur, Matthew. 22. ut vitam aeternam illa doceat
contineri, and Paulus Ephesians. 2.12. Ostendit spem vivam ex illa pendere. I will
add the words of Calvin, Epist. 229. which are in stead of many othe^s, both
because of the great eminency of the man, being accounted almost an Oracle by
many of my Antagonists, and because they are full to the present purpose: they
are thus in English. This principle is still to be held, That baptism is not
conferred on infants that they may be made sons and heirs of God: but because
they are already with God reckoned in that place and degree; he grace of
adoption is sealed in their flesh Otherwise the Anabaptists should rightly keep
them from baptism: For unless there should agree to them the truth of the
outward sign, it would be a mere profanation to call them to the participation
of the sign it self. Moreover, if any deny baptism to them, our answer is
ready, that they are already of the flock of Christ, and of the family of God,
because the covenant of salvation which God makes with believers, is common
also to the sons, as also the words sound, I will be thy God and of thy seed
after thee, Gen 17.7. unless this promse went before, by which God adopteth
the children of believers not yet born* it is certain baptism is ill bestowed
on them.

Which words do plainly express the covenant of salvation which is made by God
with believers, is common to the sons, that so it is meant, Genesis 17.7, that
with God they are before baptism reckoned in the place and degree of sons and
heirs of God, who adopteth them not yet born, that unless the truth of the
outward sign (that is according to Mr. Ms. adoption, regeneration, remission of
sins, etc.) did agree to them, it were profanation to call infants of believers
to the participation of the sign, and Anabaptists should rightly keep them from
Baptism. Therefore Calvin thought the covenant of saving grace Genesis 17.7. made
by God to believers infan^s (which Mr. M. disclaism) and otherwise
infant baptism is profanation, and it is rightly opposed. Yea, the shifts that
are used to free their doctrine of infants interest in the covenant, and the
sealing of it from the difficulty of verefying it against the exceptions before
alleged, do all seem to suppose the covenant in which infants have interest,
is the covenant of saving grace. As when Mr. Baxters plain Scripture, etc. page
223. will have Baptism seal only the conditional promise Mr. Philips vind.
page 37. expresses the sealing by offering. Mr. Davenport's Confess. of Faith,
p 39. makes the benefits of the covenant not to be offered in the Sacraments,
but to be exhibited only to true believers. Mr. Cotton's grounds of Bapt. page
70, The covenant of grace does not give them saving grace at all, but only
offers it, and seals what it offers. Dr Homes, that the administration of
the covenant of grace, belongs to believers children though not the efficacy.
Dr. Twisse, that Infants are in the covenant of grace in the judgment of
charity, and that baptism seals regeneration, etc. not conferred, but to be
conferred. Dr. Th Goodwin, that they are to be judged in the covenant of grace
by parcels though not all in the lump, yet all make the promise, I will be the
God of thy seed, applied to infants of believers^ contain the promise of saving
grace, and therefore I had great reason to conceive Mr. M. so meant his second
conclusion. As for the two cases he puts, I neither grant all the Infants of
the Jews, nor visible Christian professors adult had all saving graces who
were circumcised or rightly baptized by the Apostles, nor do I say they were
sealed with the seal of the covenant, it is the Pedobaptists expression not
mine, except where I use the term to express their mind* nor do I count it an
absurdity to say the seal was and is to be put to a blank, that is, that those
should be baptized to whom the promise of saving grace is not made, when I
speak after mine own mind. But in the place of my Examen page 46. in which I
alleged that as an absurdity, that the seal should be put to a blank, it was
not because I took it so to be, but because the Paedobaptists so count it, as
Mr. Calvin's words before recited show.

SECT. XXXI, Of the novelty and vanity of Mr. Marshals and others doctrine
about Sacraments, being seals of the covenant, and the several sealings of
them.
BUt Mr. M. desires me a little to consider the nature of a Sacrament in what
sense it is a seal, and he te^s me, that in every Sacrament the truth of the
Covenant in it self, and all the promises of it are sealed to be Yea and Amen;
Jesus Christ became a Minister of the Circumcision to confirm the promises made
unto the Fathers, and so to every one who is admitted to partake of baptism
according to the rule which God has given to his Church to administer the
Sacrament, there is sealed the truth of all the promises of the Gospel, that
they are all true in Christ, and that whoever partakes of Christ, shall partake
of all these saving promises, this is sealed absolutely in Bapiism.

Answer. Mr M. would have me to consider the nature of a Sacrament, in what
sense it is a seal, and I am very willing so to do, as knowing that as Mr. M.
imagines that I am mislead for want of considering thereof, so I am sure Mr. M.
and other Paedobaptists are both mistaken, and do abuse others in this point,
by reason of their inconsideratenass, or superficial consideration of this
thing. The word Sacrament is a Latin word in profane Authors signifying an oath
made by a Soldier to his General; in Ecclesiastic Writers it is applied to
all the mysteries of religion, and it is used most by the African Writers,
Tertullian, Augustine etc. as the word Mystery is by the Greeks, Chrysostom
Cyril, etc. Chamier Paustrat. Cath tom, 4. l. 4. c. 4. Sect. 14. Saepe jam
dictum latissimam fuisse olim Saramenti significationem: sero tandem contractam
in angustos istos terminos quos hodie vix migrat: quod diligenter attendendum.
Certe sacramenti definitionem nullam est invenire ante Augustinum, qui suo
exemplo posteris praiit, deinde Augustini definitione, etc. Whence I infer,
that as the term Sacrament, so the definition of a Sacrament is but a novelty,
and possibly the great contentions about the number of the Sacraments, some
making seven, some three, most Protestants two only, would be lessened, if
moderate learned men had the handling of it. I confess that sundry Texts of
Scripture do plainly show the two rites of Baptism and the Lords Supper to be
the chief rites of the Church, as 1 Cor. 10, 1, 2, 3, 4. and 12, 13. Ephesians. 4, 5.
Mark 16.16. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. and 11.23, etc. Yet that the Scripture either
calls these Sacraments, or sets down one general nature of them in a certain
definition of them, cannot be demonstrated. They are certain rites appointed
for certain uses according to certain rules; but such a nature or essence
genericall as distinguishes them from all other rites, as laying on of hands,
etc. denied to be Sacraments I find not in Scripture. Divines elder and later,
have framed their definitions according to their own conceits. After Augustines
time that definition was commonly received in Schools, That a Sacrament is a
visible sign of an invisible grace: yet the Ancients did rent such speeches as
occasioned the opinion commonly received in Schools before the reformation by
Luther and Zuinglius, that they did confer gratiam ex opere operato, give
grace by the ^a^e outward use of them. Zuinglius denying them to be any more
than signs, the Lutherans denying that they give grace by the bare use of them
without the concurrence of faith, to which the Lutherans ascribe all the
efficacy; the Papists object the baptizing of infants who did not believe,
used by them all: whereupon the opposers of infant baptism, falsely termed
Anabaptists, proved infant baptism inconsistent with their own doctrine. I will
set down Mr. Bedfords words in his Epistle to Mr. Baxter, printed in the
Friendly Accommodation between them, page 352. The Anabaptists took occasion
from that position of Luther, No Faith no Baptism. Coetaneous with him was
Zuinglius and others, who to overthrow the real presence, insisted upon it
that Sacraments were but signs for representation; and when that doctrine was
once broached* the Anabaptists could easily make their advantage of it. To
answer whom the Lutherans maintain, that by baptism, or before they are made
believers, as the words of the Lutherans in the Conference at Mont^elgard,
cited by me in my Examen part 3. sect. 15, p. 143. show, Osiander epist.
Histor. Eccl. Cent. 26. l. 2. c. 68. pag^ 449. Cum autem baptismus ^it lavacrum
regenerationis (test Paulo) sentimus nos Deum dare fidem infantibus vel ante
baptismum ad preces parentum and Ecclesiae, vel in ipso actu baptismi and
regenerationis, quae si^e fide esse non potest. And to this opinion did many in
England warp, when the face of the Church of England became ceremonious, and
tended to symbolizing with the Lutheran Protestants, or with the more moderate
not Jesuited Papists in the time of the late Prelates potency, as may be seen
by the passages cited by me in Examen part. 3^* Sect. 15. page 143. and by the
printed writings of Dr. Davenant, Dr. Ward, Mr, Thomas Bedford, which have been
refuted by Mr. Gataker and Mr. Baxter, nor is it likely but still the same mind
is in Mr. Bedford, notwithstanding the late Synectism, or rather clawing of one
another which has been between him and Mr. Baxter in their painted Frindly
Accommodation. In which Mr. Cranfords Epistle has these words to Mr. Bedford,
Brother you know my mind, that I conceive the ground of Anabaptisme to have
been the erroneus Doctrine, de nudis signis, as is ^leare in the
Ecclesiastical Stories of old, and most arguings of Anabaptists. Which shows
they fear Infants Baptim will not be maintained without this doctrine of giving
by Baptism to the elect at least initiall seminall regerating grace real or
relative. But Mr. Baxter thinks otherrwise, that that doctrine will increase
Anabaptism, Leaving them to their several fancies, I proceed.

Mr. Calvin, and with him many others* take another course to avoid extremes,
neither making Baptism a naked sign, which is imputed to Zuinglius, nor
ascribing to it the giving of grace by the work wrought, with the Papists, nor
holding such initiall seminall regeneration or seed of Faith at Baptism, given
at least to the elect, as Lutherans and others (which perhaps will be found as
much as the Papists ascribe to it) but ascribing to Baptism and the Lords
Supper, not only signification, but also obsignation, and so making this the
general nature of Sacraments to be seals of the Covenant of grace, which they
say is made to infants of believers, though they want not faith at or before
Baptism; and from this promise they desire a title to the baptism of Infants of
believers, as is showed out of Calvin above. But 1. there is much ambiguity in
their determinations about the covenant of grace what it is, and what it
contains, and in what sense it belongs ^o infants of believers as such, and
what believers infants it belongs ^o, and how baptism seals it. So that in
their speeches there is much equivocation, and frequent saying and unsaying, as
chiefly about the promise, Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God and the God of thy seed
after thee: which is one way expounded in their Commentaries on Romans 9.7, 8,
and elsewhere, as meant of saving graces, and applied only to the elect and
true believers in their disputes against Arminius: But elsewhere expounded of
every Gentile visible professor of faith in Christ, and his natural seed, as
if thereby the outward privileges of visible Church membership, and initiall
seal were promised and applied to all infants of believers, whether elect or
not in their disputes against Anabaptists, as may be perceived by this and
other writings published by me. 2. The objection still holds, How can baptism
seal to an infant? Every seal is a sign, though every sign be not a seal; but
baptism is no sign to an infant, since it signifies nothing to it at the time of
baptism, because the infant has not understanding to perceive the use of it;
and when the infant comes to understanding there is no print of baptism to
represent anything to the person baptized some years before. If the person know
anything of it, it is by report, which is no visible sign, but audible to the
baptized. 3. A a seal is an assuring sign to the eye of what is promised to the
ear: but baptism assures nothing to an infant without faith, therefore it
seals nothing without faith* And thus in Mr Perkins his Exposition of the fifth
principle of his Catechism. Heretofore we were taught, A Sacrament is a sign to
represent, a seal to confirm, an instrument to convey Christ and all his
benefits to them that do believe in him. Faith therefore was a necessary
prerequisite in the person to whom the Sacrament was a seal of the Covenant of
grace, which infants wanting it is no seal to them, and consequently no
Sacrament, as Mr. Gataker argues in another case, Discep. de bapt. inf. vi and
effic. page 192. ^f it be a seal of the essence of a Sacrament.

The main if not the only Texts whence they ^etch this Doctrine of making the
nature of Sacraments to be Seals of the covenant of grace* are Romans 4.11. Genesis
17.7, 10, 11. In the former it is said, Abraham received the sign of
Circumcision a Seal of the righteousness of faith which he had yet being
uncircumcised; and in the other Circumcision is termed the Covenant* and token
of the Covenant. Vide Gat^k. Discept. de vi* and effic. inf. baptism. page 243.
Whence [the seal of the Covenant of grace] is either made the definition of a
Sacrament in general, or at least the genus of it, and in the writings of
Paedobaptists ^^^ls of the Covenant and Sacraments are used as terms of the
same signification. I^ the Confession of faith of the Assembly, chap. 27. art.
1. Sacraments are holy signs and seals of the Covenant of grace, and they cite
but two texts for it, Romans 4.11. Genesis 17.7.10 Yea, in the Ordinance of
Parliament October. 20* 1645. about Rules concerning examining persons to be
admited to the Lords Supper, this is one principle which every one who is
admitted to the Lords Supper, is required to give account of, that Sacraments
are seals of the covenant of grace in the blood of Christ: so that in effect it
is made as one of the first Credenda, or articles of faith necessary for all to
know. On the contrary, I have seen a little book in English of one Mr. Jackson,
in which are nineteen arguments to prove circumcision no seal of the covenant
of grace. For my part, as I express my self in my Examen, page 117. I should
not st^ck to yield that the rites of the New Testament called Sacraments, may
be called seals of the covenant of grace, being ^ightly expounded in this
sense, that they show forth Christ's death, and thereby to the true believer,
the benefits of the covenant of grace are assured: yet considering how Writers
make this the very Genus in the definition of them, and of their nature and
essence, and thence infer duties and draw arguments to determine cases of
conscience about the use of Sacraments as they are called, and make it a
necessary point to be acknowledged by all, I reject it, and except against this
use of that term for these reasons.

First, Because this use of that term is not in or from the holy Scripture,
That term Seal of the covenant of grace, is not expressly in the holy
Scripture, I suppose will not be denied: if it be, let it be showed where.
Though the term Seal, and the true Token of the Covenant, be ascribed to
circumcision, Romans 4.11 Genesis 17.11. yet is not the term Seal of the Covenant of
grace, applied to any Sacrament, no not to circumcision. Nor is the term Seal
of the righteousness of Faith, Romans 4.11. of the same sense with the term Seal
of the covenant of grace. For the Seal of the covenant of grace in the
ordinary acception, is as much as an assuring sign or mean of the grace of the
covenant to be bestowed, Romans 4.11. it is said, that Abraham received the sign
of Circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, which he had being yet
uncircumcised, and therefore it was rather a seal of certification of what he
had, than a prediction or promise what he should have. Mr. Baxter against Mr.
Blake, page 104. says truly, That circumcision was the Seal of the
righteousness of Faith, even a justifying faith already in being, Romans 4.11,
12. The New England Elders in their Answer to the third and fourth of the nine
positions, page 65. say truly thus, The scope of the Apostle in that place,
Romans 4 11, is not to def^ne a Sacrament, nor to show what is the adequate
subject of the Sacrament, but to prove by the example of Abraham that a sinner
is justified before God, not by works but by faith (thus) As Abraham the Father
of the faitfull was justified before God, so must his seed be, that in all
believers whether Jews or Gentiles, circumcised or uncircumcised, for
therefore Abraham received circumcision which belonged to the Jews, to confirm
the righteousness which he had before, even whilst he was uncircumcised, that
he might be the Father of both. And to speak truth, to conceive that
circumcision there is made the seal of the covenant of grace, that is, that God
would be the God of Abraham and his seed for the future, sanctifying,
justifying, saving him and them, ^is indeed to evacuate the force of the
Apostles argument, which is, that righteousness is not appropriated to the
Laws by the Law, but common to the Gentiles with them by faith, because
Abraham's circumcision sealed to him the righteousness of faith, which he had
before he was circumcised. Nor do I see that which Camier. Paust. Cath. tom. 4.
l. 2. c. 10. Sect. 47. says, does prove that circumcision Romans 4.11. is meant
of a Seal of a promise, because Genesis 17. in the institution it was termed a
token of the covenant, for the Apostle, Romans 4 11. mentions not what God
appointed circumcision to be to every circumcised person, but what peculiar use
Abrahrms circumcision had to him and all believers though uncircumcised. And
though it is true, that righteousness of faith supposes a word of God, or a
promise or covenant of grace, yet To 4.11. the citcumcision there mentioned is
said to seal not a promise of something future, but something past and already
had many years before, Genesis 15.6.

But were it granted, that ci^cumcision there sealed the promise to come, to
wit, that part of the covenant, Genesis 17.4. Thou shall be a father of many
Nations, and that v 7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their generations for an everlasting covenant to be
a God unto thee and thy seed after thee, or that Genesis 15.5. So shall thy seed
be, mentioned Romans 4.17, 18. and so did assure a future estate to others as
well as an estate already ob^ained to Abraham, yet this is ascribed in that
place to no ones circumcision but Abraham's. For 1. The occasion and scope of
the passage show it is meant of Abraham's circumcision, it being alleged to
prove, that Gentiles were to be justified by faith though uncircumcised,
because Abraham was justified by faith before circumcision, and his circumcision
after did but seal (not convey) the righteousness of faith we had before. 2.
The expression [ He received] standing in opposition to [ yet being
uncircumcised] shows that the receiving of the seal of circumcision was in his
own person. 3. The end of receiving it sh^wes it more plainly: for it was, That
he might be the father of them that believe. But this was the end only of
Abraham's personal circumcision: Neither Ishmaels, nor Isaacks, nor any others
personal circumcision were, that Abraham might be the father of them that
believe, but only Abraham's. 4. The time exactly noted of his believing, and
imputation of right^ousness to him, distinguished from the time of his
receiving circumcision show plainly that it was the same person who had the one
and the other, and the receiving it not as a command to execute it upon others,
but as a sign and seal to himself, and all believers whether circumcised or
uncircumcised, evidently show it is spoken Rom 4.11. of Abraham's personal
circumcision and of no others.

As for Genesis 17.10 11. it is true Circumcision is termed the Covenant, and a
token of the Covenant: But it is not said of that promise only, v* 7. nor of
that promise in the Gospel sense, and therefore it cannot there be proved to be
a token or seal of the Covenant of grace; but it follows that Romans 4.11. Genesis
17, 7.10, are impertinently alleged by the Assembly to prove this proposition,
Sacraments are holy signs and seals of the Covenant of grace. Yea the end of
circumcision was conceived generally by the Jews, and so used to bind men to
observe the Law of Moses for righteousness. And thus they taught who are
mentioned Acts 15.1. Except ye be circumcised after the manne^ of Moses ye
cannot be saved. And v. 5. That it was needful to circumcise them, and to
command them to keep the Law of Moses, Acts 21.20* 21. Thou see brother how
many thousands of Jews there are which believe, and they are all zealous of
the Law, and they are informed of thee, that thou teach all the Jews which
are among the Gentiles, to forsake Moses, saying, That they ought not to
circumcise their children, neither to walk after the customs, and the Apostle
Gal. 5.2, 3, says, Behold I Paul say to you, That if any of you be circumeised
Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to every man that is
circumcised, that he is a debtor to keep the whole Law. So that circumcision in
the ordinary use may seem to have been a seal of the Law rather than of the
Gospel or covenant of grace; and if your baptism be of the same nature with
circumcision, it is so far from being a rite of the Gospel, that it rather
binds us to observe the Law. But fourthly, were it granted that it was in the
use of it according to the institutton a seal of the covenant of grace, how
does it follow from thence, that this is the nature of every Sacrament? Whence
will it be evinced that that is the Genus of every Sacrament which is not so
much as once attributed to them. The Passover is counted a Sacrament, and we
find that it signified the Passover over the Isralites houses, and sparing
their first born, and that it typified Christ, 1 Cor* 5.7. But this does not
prove that it was a seal of the covenant of grace any more than Jon^hs being in
the Whales belly, which was a type of Christ's burial, was a seal of the
covenant of grace. I grant we are said to be baptized into Christ's death, to be
buried by baptism into death, Rom 6 3* 4* to be buried with him in Baptism, and
therein to be raised up through the faith of the operation of God who raised
him from the dead, Col. 2.12, and that they who are baptized into Christ, have
put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. And the Cup is called the new Testament in his blood,
1 Cor. 12.25. And therefore I should yelld to call both th^se ordinances signs
memorative of Christ's death in the first place, and by consequence seals of the
New Testament and its benefit^s, specially the Cup in the Lords Supper. But
this does not prove this is the Genus of Sacraments, much less of all
Sacraments. Nor does it any whit justify the determining of doubts of
conscience, and so binding duties on men's consciences concerning mere positive
rites without any institution of Christ, or Apostolical example, merely from
this devised term, The Seal of the Covenant, and mal^ing it so necessary to be
acknowledged, that it is pressed on persons to be admitted to the Lords Supper,
as it were a necessary Article of Faith.

2. This term Seal of the Covenant, applied to these Sacraments, as being of
their nature is, so far as my reading and memory reach, but a novell term,
not used till the 16. Century, and in that not used among the learned Romanists
and Lutherans, at least not frequently. I grant the Ancients say, Men are
sealed by baptism, and sometimes by laying on of hands or anointing after
baptism. And this sealing is attributed to infant baptism by Nazianzen in his
fortieth Oration. But this sealing was not a confirmation of the covenant of
grace, but a confirmation of their faith received in Baptism. The ancient
Greeks call it the seal of Faith, as the Latins call it the seal of Repentance,
and the Sacrament of Faith, in respect of the profession of Faith, as Grotius
Annot. on Mat. 28.19. observes when he says, And such were the Interrogations
of faith either in the first times, or those next the first in respect of which
by Basil and others, it is called the seal of faith, sealing of faith, of
repentance, by Tertul. in his book of Repentance, and this sealing was not to
assure a promise, but to strengthen and keep their faith or virtues. Whence as
Mr. Gataker observes in his Strictures on Dr. Davenants Epistle, page 44, 45.
they accounted Baptism to some not as (...), a pardoning of sins, but a seal of
virtues; and where Nazianzen calls ^t a Seal, he expresses it thus, (...)
(...), a seal as keeping and noting dominion. No where do I find any of them
use the term Seal of the covenant of grace, applied either to Sacraments in
general, or to baptism in special.

3. But were the use of the term Seal of the covenant of grace in the
Scripture, or the writings of the Ancients, yet it is against Logic to define
a Sacrament by a Seal of the covenant as the genus, and so to make it of its
essence. For it is a rule in Logic, Definitio non fit ex verbis metaphoricis,
Scheibler Top. cap. 30 number. 126. Ita Aristot, Topic. lib. 2. c. 2. sect. 4.
Keckerm. Syst. Logic. lib. 1. sect. cap. 8. Aristotle says, (...), Every
translated speech is doubtful till reduced to proper, for it may have diverse
senses. Besides, metaphors, or borrowed speeches, may be many, as in this point
we may call a Sacrament a Pledge, as in the Common Prayer Book Catechism, or a
pawn, earnest, as well as a seal Chamier. Paust. Cath. tom. 4. l. 2. c. 9.
sect. 10. You have also the similitude of a pledge somewhat diverse from Seals,
but nevertheless tending to the same, which we also do most willingly use. And
if we should define a Sacrament by a pledge, and from that metaphor infer, that
an infant must contract before it receive the Sacrament as a pledge, we might do
it with as good reason as they who infer they are to be sealed because the seal
follows the covenant. Well does Chamier call a Seal a Similitude, which cannot
show what a Sacrament is, but what it is like; and therefore all metaphors are
unfit to show the quid^^tative conceit of a thing, nor are to be used in
definitions except there be want of proper terms, of which there is not in this
case. Now to define a Sacrament by a Seal of the covenant, is to define it by
a metaphor, neither Baptism nor the Lords Supper are Seals in proper
acceptance, they make no visible figure or impression on the body, therefore
to use the term thus is an abuse, much more when positions and duties are urged
on men's consciences from it. I will subjoyn Mr. Baxters words in his Apology
against Mr Blake, Sect. 64. page, 11. Some sober men no way inclined to
Anabaptism, do think that we ought not to call the Sacraments Seals; as being a
thing not to be proved from the word; (for all Romans 4.) But I am not of their
mind, yet I think it is a Metaphor, and to make it the subject of tedious
disputations, and to lay too great a stress upon a metaphorical notion, is the
way not to edify, but to lose our selves.

Lastly, were all this yielded to Mr M. that the term Seal of the covenant were
the language of the Scripture and Ancients, and fit enough to express the
general nature of Sacraments, yet I conceive it of little moment to the ends
to which it is applied. For what is it to seal and not to confer grace, but
only to assure? And so the use of it is to represent to the mind as a moral
instrument. But that is not done to infants, who are not naturally capable to
understand the meaning, therefore this term [ Seal of the covenant] beyond. [
sign of grace] does not take away the objection of Papists, Lutherans, or
Anti-paedobaptists That without giving grace or faith by baptism, it is in vain
or without effect to baptize infants. And in like manner the deriving from it
Paedobaptism is very frivolous. These things will appear by considering what Mr
M. and others say of the covenant which they say is sealed, and of the sealing,
there being little agreement among Paedobaptists, whether the inward or outward
covenant, the absolute or conditional be sealed, whether the sealing be
absolute or conditional, to the Major, Minor, or Conclusion. I will examine
what I find said by Mr M. First, whose words are commended by Mr. Pry^^^ in his
Suspension suspended, page 19, etc. ^e says, In every Sacrament the truth of
the covenant it self, and all the promises of it are sealed to be Yea and Amen,
and this is sealed absolutely in baptism to all that partake of it.

But 1. there is no Scripture that says so: That Romans 5 8. is impertinent: For
Christ is not called the Minister of Circumcision because he did administer
circumcision to others, that were not true, he circumcised none, but he was a
circumcised Minister for the truth, he was of the circumcision, that is, a Jew
not a Gentile. Nor is it said his circumcision was to confirm the promises of
the Fathers that they were true; but that therefore he was a circumcised
Minister for the truth of God, that the promises of the Fathers might be
confirmed by his ministering the truth of God in his preaching, or in his
accomplishment of what the promises foretold. 2. Nor do I know any act in
baptism that has any aptness of it self, or by institution to seal this
position, that the covenant of grace and all the promises of it are Yea and
Amen. 3. Yet were it so, this sealing is not to Infants, who have no
intelligence thereof, and so no confirmation thereof by baptism. 4. Nor does
this sealing any more pertain to the children of believers, than unbelievers,
it is but of the truth of the covenant in it self, not of any persons interest
in it. 5. This is as well sealed by the baptism of others, yea by the baptism
of any one deceased, most of all by Christ's baptism, as by each persons own
baptism. 6. This sealing may be not only to them that are baptized, but to
them that deny baptism, yea to Infidels, yea to Devils, who may and do believe
the truth of the covenant it self, and all the promises of it to be Yea and
Amen, and have it sealed as well to them by the baptism of a person as to the
baptized, and better than to an infant. But perhaps Mr M. helps the matter in
the second or third.

But as to the second (says he) which is interesse meum, or the receivers
interest in that spiritual part of the covenant, that is sealed to no receiver
absolutely, but conditionally; in this particular all Sacraments are but Signa
conditionalia, conditional seals sealing the spiritual part of the covenant
to the receivers upon condition that they perform the spiritual part of the
covenant. Thus our Divines use to answer the Papists, thus Dr. Ames answers to
Bellarmine, when Bellarmine disputing against our doctrines, that Sacraments
are Seals, alleges then they are falsely applied oftentimes; he answers to
Bellarmin, Sacraments are conditional Seals, and therefore not Seals to us but
upon condition.

Answer. The spiritual condition is faith, so Ames Bell. enerv. tom. 3. l. 1.
^. 1. q. 4. th. 11. Sacramenta non sunt testimonia completa and absoluta, nisi
credentibus. Sacraments are not complete and absolute testimonies but to the
believing. Now if the Sacraments seal only conditionally, they seal only this
proposition, that he that believes shall be justified, saved, etc. But this is
all one with sealing the truth of the covenant in it self: nor does this seal
the baptized persons interest in the covenant any more than the unbaptizeds; no
more to the infants of believers than of unbelievers, not at all to any till
they believe, and so to no infants ordinarily, and if then the baptizing of
them must be derived from this interest and sealing of the covenant, either
none are to be baptized till they do believe, or all alike are to be baptized.
Besides, if Sacraments be but conditional signs, or testimonies incomplete,
and conditional till persons believe, then they are but conditional
incomplete Sacraments till a person believes, since to be a sign and seal is of
the nature of a Sacrament; and if so, then infants have not a complete
Sacrament or absolute, but an incomplete and conditional baptism, and
consequently though the baptizer begin to baptize the infants, yet he cannot
say he does baptize them, but must wait till they be believers, and then he may
say he baptizeth them, and gives them a complete Sacrament, and is bound to
baptize them when they come to years whom he did wash in infancy, or else he
mocks them, which is the mind of Christ indeed, that he that believes should
be baptized, and no other, Mark 16.16. Besides, whether there be any
conditional sealing may be a uqestion. Mr. Baxter Apology against Mr Blake,
Sect. 77. page 140. speaks of it as a strange thing useless and vain. But this
I shall leave till I examine Mr. Baxters exceptions against me about the
condirional covenant and sealing, only I take notice of his words Sect. 79.
page 141, A conditional seal is not a seal till the condition be performed, and
infers, that if baptism be a conditional seal, it is no seal, and consequently
no sacrament to an infant until he does perform the condition.

Mr M. adds, Now for the third thing the obligation which is put upon the
receiver, a bond or tie for him to perform, who is admitted to receive the
Sacrament, this third I say is also absolute, All circumcised and baptized
persons did or do stand absolutely engaged to perform the conditions required
on their part, and therefore all circumcised persons were by the circumcision
obliged to keep the Law, that is, the legal and typical administration of the
covenant which was then in force, and infants among the rest, are bound to this
though they had no understanding of the covenant, or that administration of the
Covenant when this seal was administered to them.

Answer. It is true, God required that his covenant should be kept, which is
expressed to be, That every man child among the Hebrews should be circumcised,
Gen, 17.9, 10. but this was the duty of the parents, not of the infants, who
were to be circumcised not to circumcise. And it is true, That all circumcised
persons were by the eircumcision obliged to keep the Law. And if circumcision
sealed this, its sealing of this was the sealing of a command not a promise of
God, for they are not obliged to keep Gods promise (that is the work of God
alone) but his precept, so that this sealing is not of the covenant of grace at
all: yea by this sealing obliging to keep the whole Law, the covenant of works
is sealed rather than the covenant of grace, as the Apostles speech shows, Gal.
5*2, 3, 4, And this sealing belongs to all infants and elder persons, for all
are tied to perform the condition of the covenant, that is to repent and
believe. And if hence be derived a title to baptism, either all are to be
baptized because all are obliged to the condition of repentance and faith, or
none are to be baptized but penitent and believing persons. To speak the plain
truth, the right use of baptism is first to seal to God, testifying our
repentance and faith by it, before God seals to us by it any benefit of the
covenant of grace. To conclude, Mr. M. has not yet acquitted himself from
putting a seal to a blank, which Mr Calvin counts a profanation of the
Sacrament when he baptizeth an infant, who has neither a promise of spiritual
grace from God, nor does perform the condition of the covenant, nor understand
by baptism any thing of the covenant, nor profess any accptance of the
covenant, nor is or can be known to have any part in the covenant of grace, nor
is there indeed any thing but vanity in this discourse of Mr. M. or the
Paedobaptists doctrine about Sacraments being seals of the covenant of grace,
and the interest of believers infants therein.

SECT. XXXII. The exceptions in my Examen, part 4. Sect. 5. against Mr Ms
speeches about the covenant and conditional sealing, are made good against Mr.
M. and Mr. Blake.
BUt that we may the better discern the vanity of Paedobaptists conceits about
the seal and covenant, I shall enquire a little more into this point, in which
I find much jangling and uncertainty among them. To which I conceive my self
the more engaged, because some words of mine in my Examen, part 4. Sect. 5.
gave some overture to Mr M. and after to Mr Bl. and Mr B. to except much
against me about this point. Two things which I said in that passage, it seems,
are not relished* one, that I said that God seals not to every one that is
baptized, but only to true believers; the other, that making Gods promise in
the covenant of grace conditional in this sense, that persons after agnize the
covenant, and that to speak of it so as if it were common to the elect and
reprobates, and conditional in this sense, as if God left it to men's liberty
to whom he had sealed, to agn^ze or recognize that sealing, or to free
themselves if they please, and so nullify all; yet so, as to afford them a
while the favor and privilege of being in covenant with him, ^s symbolizing
with Arminians. To this Mr M. replied but little, yet what he says in his
Defense, page 236, I shall briefly answer. First, says he, Was not
Circumcision Gods sign and seal, which by his own appointment was applied to
all the Jews and proselytes, and their children?

Ans. Circumcision was appointed by God to be applied to all the Jews, and
proselytes and their children being males of eight days old, and was by his
institution a sign of the covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. Abraham's own
circumcision in his own person, was, a seal of the righteousness of faith,
which he had yet being uncircum^ised, but that God did by Circumcision seal ^o
every one the righteousness of faith who was rightly circumcised, I find not,
nor if I did, should I think it were any thing to prove that God seals the
righteousness of faith to every one that is baptized rightly, since I do not
take circumcision and baptism to be all one, or to have the same use, or that
baptism seals in the same manner as circumcision. Mr. M. adds, Did it engage
God absolutely to every one of them to write his law in their hearts, etc.
Answer. No. And are not the Sacraments Signa conditionalia, conditional signs
and Seals?

Answer. I conceive baptism, according to Christ's institution, to be a sign of
the faith of the baptized, and so it is a sign absolute, and not conditional,
and because the object of that faith is Christ dead and risen again, whereby we
are justified, and baptism as fitted to mind the baptized of Christ's death,
but all and resurrection, Romans 6.2, 3, 4. Col. 2.12. it is in its nature, that
is in its right use* apt to seal* that is to assure justification and
salvation, 1 Pet. 3.21. and so may be termed in its nature a seal aptitudinall,
but yet it seals actually to none but those who truly believe, which it does
absolutely in respect of justification, and coditionally in respect of
glorification, which is not yet attained, nor to be attained but upon
conditition of perseverance: yet it does not seal that as an uncertain thing
because conditional, for even the condition also is assured by virtue of the
death of Christ confirming the covenant of grace, or the New Testament in his
blood. But when I say these things are actually assured by baptism, I do not
conceive they are actually sealed by God, not to the true believer without the
inward testimony or seal of the spirit, without which God never sealed actually
by his word or Sacraments these promises of the covenant of grace or the
persons interest in them, although both the word of God, the oath of God, the
death of Christ, the ordinances of Baptism and the Lords Supper, are in
themselves, or in their nature aptitudinall seals, that is, apt signs to assure
them. The like I say of the Lords Supper, both which are alike signs and
seals, neither to an infant without extraordinary operation. Mr M. adds,

And did any orthodox Divines before your self, charge this to be Arminianism,
to say that the Gospel runs upon conditions? I confess it is Arminianism to
say any thing is conditional to God, this I never asserted^, but that the
Gospel is both preached, and by the Sacraments sealed to us upon condition of
faith, will pass for orthodox doctrine when you and I are dead and gone.

Answer. I never charged this to be Arminianism, That the Gospel runs upon
conditions, that it is both preached and by the Sacraments sealed to us upon
condition of faith, according to the explication given. What I count
symbolizing with the Arminians, I have before declared, to wit, Gods
conditional sealing and covenant common to elect and reprobates, as Mr M. in
his Sermon seemed to conceive. To what I said that I did not well understand
that God required of the Jews infants to seal in their infancy, I reply says
Mr M. But I hope you understand, that the infants were sealed in their infancy,
and by this they received not only a privilege to be accounted as belonging to
Gods family, but it also obliged them to the several duties of the covenant,
as they grew up to be capable of performing them.

Answer. I understand the Jews were circumcised in their infancy, but that God
did seal to every circumcised infant, either the truth of the promises, or his
interest in them, or that they did in infancy seal to God, I do not yet
understand. For though they had the privilege mentioned, yet not by virtue of
Gods sealing to them, and though they were obliged to the duties mentioned, yet
not by virtue of their sealing to God.

But Mr. Bl. and Mr, B. are more earnest in this point, and in opposition to
what I said in my Examen, part 4. Sect. 5. in his Answer to my Letter Mr. Bl.
chapter 15. asserts, Sect. 1. The seals of the Sacrament are conditional, not
absolute, Sect. 2. The entrance into covenant and acceptance of the terms of
it, is common to the elect and reprobate, a heart steadfast in the covenant, and
the mercies of the conenant, are proper only to the elect and regenerate,
Sect. 3. To say that the seals of the Sacraments are conditional, and that the
reprobate are within the verge of the covenant, as tendered in the Gospel; and
accepted, is not to symbolize with Arminians. To which I replied in my
Postscript, Sect. 21. concerning which Mr. Bl. in his plain Scripture proof,
etc. page 224. of the first Edition, says, But to these Mr. Bl. has fully
answered Mr T. though in his Apology he passes over much, and is not able to
discern his meaning. For my part I speak impartially according to my judgment,
I think there is more true worth in those two or three leaves of Mr. Blakes
book, in opening the nature of the covenant, than in all Mr Ts book that ever
he wrote about baptism.

And page 222. he charge me with two errors in Apology, and says of them, I
conceive these dangerous errors of Mr T. about the nature of the Covenant and
Seals in general, are the root of his error about baptism, or at least much
strengthen it, and there he takes upon him to refute them. Since that time Mr.
Bl has renewed his exceptions, Vindic great. chapter 7. to which as touching upon
Mr B. about the thing sealed, and manner of sealing, Mr B. has replied in his
Apology against Mr. Blakes Exceptions, Sect. 60, etc. page 115. Because of Mr
Bs censure I have received the passages in Mr Blakes answer to my Letter, chapter
15. and in my Postscript Sect. 21. and leaving Mr. B. (who is no competent
judge of my Writings, by reason of his prejudice against me and the cause I
maintain) and others to conceive of my books as they please, I am not ashamed
to profess, 1. That I discern no such true worth in Mr Blakes mentioned
passages which open the nature of the covenant, but rather sundry that darken
it, the showing of which now would be but a digression. 2. That there is not
one of the three positions set down by Mr Blake, which does contradict anything
I said in my Examen, part 4. Sect 5. For I said not the Sacraments are Seals
absolute, not conditional; but that God seals not upon condition persons
agnize the covenant, as Mr M. said in his Sermon, page 49, nor did I deny, that
the entrance into covenant and acceptance of i^, is common to elect and
reprobate, but that Gods covenant of grace, or as I said before, his promise in
the covenant of grace, is common to the elect and reprobates, and this was it
which I termed symbolizing with Arminians, not that which Mr. Blake sets down.
3. That I do not find that I have need to make any further reply to Mr. Blake
therein, nor to the six arguments he brings, Vindic. Foed. chapter 7. to prove
Sacraments sealing conditionally. And for the flings Mr Blake has at some
spe^ches of mine, I shall briefly return answer. Those words of mine, I like
not to call the Sacrament a conditional Seal, for that which seals does
assure, and supposes the condition* In my apprehension, that which is called
conditional sealing, is not sealing, but offering or propounding, or
representing: but about this I will not contend, Mr. Bl. leaving out the later
words, thus oppose^h, Then our Lawyers have a long time decived us, who have
given us presidents (as they call them) for obligations under seal, to run in
these words; The condition of this obligation is such, and after an indication
of the condition, to conclude and close up all: then this present obligation to
be void and of none effect, or else to stand in full force and virtue: Seals we
see leave the condition to me doubtful. Whereto I reply.

Neither I nor the Lawyers do deceive Mr Blake, but he deceives himself, the
words of the president do intimate that the validity of the obligation is
conditional, and is left doubtful, not that the seal is conditional, which
does absolutely assure or testify the obligation: or, as the Lawyers speak,
the act and deed of him that seals, which is not future, but present, and so
not conditional. Mr Baxter Apol. against Mr Blake Sect. 77. I never heard of
nor knew a conditional sealing in the world, though I have often heard of the
effects of obligation and collation of right to be conditional, which are not
only separate from the terminus proximus of sealing, but also are directly the
effects of the covenant, promise, testament, etc. only, and but remotely of
the seals, inasmuch as that seal is a full owning of the testament of
conveyance: yet such a thing as a conditional sealing may be imagined. In a
word, a conditional engagement, or obligation, is one thing, and frequent; a
conditional seal, or sealing, is another thing but unknown. There are other
things at me as calumniating Mr. M. concerning his words, as symbolizing with
the Arminians, which I shall acqui^ my self from in answering Mr B. and that Mr
Bs questionist and my self are both of one pitch both for knowledge and
ignorance, and stand equally affected to Mr. Bl. both in respect of his person
and opinions; which intimate as if he were persuaded I were that questionist,
whom I profess to be unknown to me, and were disaffected to Mr. Blakes person,
though I knew not wherein I have showed any disaffection to him, and for my
knowledge or ignorance be it more or less, I hope it will appear in the
conclusion, that God has given me so much knowledge as to show the vanity of
Mr Blakes and Mr Bs pleas for Infant Baptism. And for his flirt or scoff at the
wide standing open of the door in my night Sacraments, I think my actions
justifiable in celebrating the Lords Supper at night as Christ did, with such
notes as the Apostle made thereon in calling it the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20.
and relating it so distinctly, v. 23, 25. My admitting none but bap^^zed
persons after profession of faith, is justified by Mr Blakes own words, though
somewhat misrepresenting my tenent, Vindic. Foed. chapter 23. nor do I admit any
one other profession to baptism than was done in the first times by men who had
the Spirit of God to guide them; and if any be baptized in the night, it is
justifiable by Paul's action, Acts 16.33. His flings also which he has, Vindic.
Foed. chapter 17. p. 126. show the same Satyricall vein, when he says, I establish
a new conditional covenant against the New Testament light, which I shall show
I establish in that sense, I do it according to plain New Testament light, and
censures these words, the not teaching one another spoken of, Heb. 8, 11. is
meant of that obscure teaching which was under the Law, Apol. page 154. said
somewhat Magisterially after my manner, whereas neither could I well dilate
then being straightened in time, and the exposition of that place there was but on
the by, and enough was said by me in those words answerably to the occasion,
and I conceived understanding men would gather the reason of my interpretation
from those few words, which is, that the new covenant being there declared
co^tradistinct to that in Horeb, as the writing the laws in the heart is
mentioned to distinguish it from the writing in stone, so the teaching is
mentioned to distinguish it f^o^ that obscure teaching which was under the Law,
which I said not magisterially, nor any thing else, as Mr. Bl. miscensures me.
This is enough, if not too much to answer these flirts of Mr. Bl.

Fourthly, I add, That I find sundry passages in Mr. Bl. which seem to me to
speak to the same purpose with my words, as Answer to my Letter, page 99. that
Baptism assures actually when men do believe, page 102. out of Mr. Ball, They
that be truly in covenant obtained the highest blessings, p. 106. This covenant
of Jeremies is no more than that promise, Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord thy God will
circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, that thou may love the Lord,
etc. And his words Vindic. Foed. chapter 7. page 46. That the Sacrament does
actually seal to believers and penitent ones, are answered by Mr B. Apol.
against Mr Bl. sect. 10. thus, I perceive Mr. T. and you are more of a mind
than I was aware off.

SECT. XXXIII. That it is no error as Mr Baxter calls it, but a Truth, That the
Covenant of grace is made only to the elect.
BUt that I may acquit my self of Mr. Bs charge of errors in these points, I
shall answer first what he says about my fifth imagined error, because as Mr.
B. says, Appendix to his Aphorisms, page 66. It is in vain to enquire whether
the Sacraments do seal absolutely or conditionally, till you first know well
what it is that they seal. And here I think it needful to set down Mr Bs words
against Mr, Bl. in his Apol. p. 103. Sect. 52. Arg. 17. That doctrine which
signifies an unsealed covenant for giving right to the covenant of grace, is
unsound. But such is Mr. Blakes, therefore no Scripture can be brought to prove
such an outward covenant of Gods: And it is against the common reason and
custom of men, that a second covenant should not be drawn to convey right to
the seal of the first covenant, seeing right to covenants seals go together,
and if there must be another covenant to give right to that, then by the same
reason there must be another to give right to that, and another to that, and so
in infinitum. To the Antecedent it is apparent that Mr. Bl. distinguishes ex
part Dei between the outward and inward covenant. It is probable that he thus
distributes them from the blessings promised, whereof some are inward, and some
outward: for though he explain not himself fully, yet I know no other sense
that it will bear. It is evident that his outward covenant has no seal. For it
is a covenant de conferendis ^igillis. If therefore it have a seal, it is
either the same which is promised, or some other: other I never heard of. They
no where tell us what is the seal of their outward covenant: The same it cannot
be, for the same thing cannot be the materia foederis, or the legacy it self,
or the benefit given, and the seal too of that covenant whereby it is given.
And page 6^. Mr Bls common phrase is, that they are [in the outward covenant]
and what that is, I cannot tell, and then proves, that God makes no such
outward covenant. From whence I infer, 1, That Mr. B. had not cause to blame
me for not disdaining Mr Blakes meaning when he understands him no better, 2,
Nor to magnify his writing so much, in which he finds so many flawes. 3. Nor
to rest so much upon an imagined ground of men's right to baptism by Gods
promise or covenant grant which the che^fest assertors of Paedobaptism cannot
well tell what it is. 4. That by Mr Bs judgment there is no such outward
covenant of God, as Mr Bl. and other Paedobaptists infer infant baptism from*
and for the inward covenant, or covenant of saving grace, Mr M. Mr G. and
others, disclaim it as made to all the infants of believers. Let us view what
Mr B. says about the covenant sealed by baptism and its sealing. In his
Confut. of my six imagined errors plain Scripture proof, etc. page 223, he thus
speaks, Error ^. Mr T. holds that the Covenant whereof Baptism is the seal,
is the absolute covenant of grace made only to the elect. Confutation. Many
more mistakes he utters in the way to this about the Covenant. This he
publicly pleaded for in his Dispute, and alleged Dr. Twisse as affirming the
covenant of grace to be absolute. To which I then answered, 1. That to thrust
in men's names and words, when in disputation we are enquiring what the
Scripture says, was unseasonable and diverting. 2. That Dr. Twisse does
constantly in all his writings affirm, That the promises of remission of sin
and salvation are conditional, though the promise of the grace [I will take
the hard heart out of their bodies etc] is absolute. This I dare affirm as
having read six of Dr Twisse his books again and again. And then he adds
somewhat of Dr. Twisse, which I leave to others to answer as they shall see
cause.

Answer. That Baptism is the seal of the covenant is not my expression, except
when I speak in answer to Paedobaptists according to their mind, and in what
seal and manner I allow it, I have said before. What I said of Dr Twisse in the
disputation, was neither unseasonable nor diverting, nor untrue. The dispute
was (so far as I can gather from my memory and the notes I have of the dispute)
whether the words Deuteronomy. 29.13. did prove that God did make the covenant ^here
with all that are said to enter into covenant, which I ^enied, and Mr. B.
endeavored to prove from the words [ and that he may be to thee a God] and
from Deuteronomy. 30.6* where he promises to circumcise the heart of them and of
their seed; which I proved could not be, since the covenant of grace is made
only to the elect, and it is absolute in that promise, I will write my laws in
their hearts, which is the same with circumcising the heart, and so could not
be meant of all that entered into covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12 (which Mr B.
since acknowledge^h in his letter to Mr. Bedford when he says thus, The Text
seems plainly to speak of their seed not in their infant estate but in their
adult, Deuteronomy. 30.) but of the elect only, and in respect of that promise the
covenant of grace is absolute, which I thought seasonable, no way diverting
from the business to confirm by Dr. Twisse his authority, whose tenent Mr B.
confesses was, That the promise of the first grace [I will take the hard heart
out of their bodies, etc.] is absolute. And to show that I did Dr. Twisse no
wrong, I shall allege some words of his which I find in his Animadversions on
Corvinus his Defense of Arminius against Tilenus, p. 235 Negamus Deum pacisci
foedus gra^iae cum omnibus and singulis: dicimus hoc fieri solum cum electis:
that is, We deny that God makes the covenant of peace with all and each, we say
it to be made only with the elect. page 346. At foedus gratiae absolutum est;
quod and nube testimoniorm divinorum comprobatum damus: that is, But the
covenant of grace is absolute, which also we prove by a cloud of testimonies.
But Mr. B. having given Dr Twisse a lash, on the by falls thus on me.

But Mr. T. his answer to me was, That the promise of saving grace is not
conditional, and that though some parts of the covenant be conditional, yet it
is all together that is called the covenant, the leading promise being not
conditional, therefore the covenant is not conditional, and that it was a
gross palpable error of me to say, That the promise of saving benefits was
made to infants that were not ^lest.

Answer. My answer is the same now that it was then, and having upon occasion
of this charge, reviewed the notes of the dispute, which though very imperfect,
I have yet by me, I find not but that in the greatest part of the dispute, I
answered Mr. B. rightly, though he have most shamefully and unbrotherlike
misrepresented me to the world, and made a noise in the world as if he had
driven me to gross absurdities, which having acquitted my self from in my
Pr^cursor, Sect. 17. he replies nothing to that Section, which I take to be a
tacit confession of his unworthy abusing of me, And I do think it necessary to
tell the world, that I find so little of brotherly love to me, or common
ingenuity in his insolent carriages toward me at the Dispute, and his
relations of me and of the Dispute in print, that I think I should have found
better dealing from a Jesuit than from him. And though I take him to be a
godly man, and an excellent Preacher and Writer in practical points, yet I
find him to be but a superficial Disputer, and a slight interpreter of
Scripture. But to the point.

Four things Mr. B. it seems mislikes in my answer, 1. That I said, That the
promise of saving grace is not conditional. To declare my self more fully, it
is requisite I should show what promise of saving grace I make not
conditional. There is the saving grace of redemption, regeneration,
justification, remission of sins, adoption, glorification. The condition
imagined as presupposed to the promise of saving grace, that is, to the
fulfilling of it, is either the well using natural abilities, as foregoing the
promise of conversion and regeneration; or faith and repentance as foregoing
justification, remission of sins, adoption, glorification. The promise of
saving grace may be said to be conditional in respect of these later saving
graces, and the conditions mentioned, yet in respect of the promisers intention
and act in the event, certain, necessary, and infallibly to be performed by the
person to whom the promise is made, and in this sense I grant the promise of
saving graces conditional, that is, that God has promised to none the saving
graces of justification, remission of sins, adoption, but on condition of true
repentance and faith; nor glorification but on condition of perseverance
therein: yet that these conditions are not uncertain in the event, or left to
the persons to whom the promise is made, to do by themselves, but by Gods
intention and actings certainly to be accomplished; or it may be said to be
conditional, that is, ^o as that the condition of any of these graces is made
the well using natural abilities, or that the conditions of these later saving
graces are uncertain in the event notwithstanding the promisers intention and
acting, and thus I deny the promise of saving grace to be conditional. More
briefly, I deny the promise of regeneration and conversion, to presuppose some
well using our natural abilities, or that justification, remission of sins,
adoption, glorification, are promised upon condition of our repentance, faith,
obedience, perseverance, left by God to be performed by us, and not promised as
certain in the event, which is the Arminian sense, yet deny that the promise of
justification, remission of sins, is absolute, so as that God promises that an
elect person shall be justified, or have remission of sins without a fore
faith, which is charged on the Antinomians.

The second thing which Mr. B. mislikes in my Answer is, That though some parts
of the Covenant be conditional, yet it is all together that is called the
Covenant. But this speech if it be liable to exception, Mr. B. must except
against the holy Ghost, who does expressly call all together the covenant, Heb.
8.10. saying, This is the Covenant which I will make, and having recited all
together, he adds, v. 13. in that he says a new covenant. And the like is Heb.
10.16.

The third thing misliked in my answer is, And the leading promise being no^
conditional, therefore the covenant is not conditional* But there is no just
cause of excepting against this, since ^t is usual, and that according to a
Logic Rule to determinate from the more famous part, or chief part, as a
visible Church is called Holy, or of Saints, even in Scripture, 1 Cor. 1.2.
from the better part, a field of corn where is much tare. Do not Paedobaptists
usually call the covenant Genesis 17. the eovenant of grace, though there be other
promises than of saving grace, and what promise is made of saving grace there*
is made under the covert of words expressing other things. And to show that
there is reason for what I said, I urge, 1. That the promise of writing the
Laws of God in the heart, Heb. 8.10* is not only the leading promise, but
also it is the comprehensive promise, including or inferring all the rest, for
therefore God will be a God to them, be merciful to their unrighteousness,
because he will write his Laws in their heart; to those and those only he
promises the later to whom he promised the former. Yea, it seems to be the
principal thing God aimed at in the new Covenant, to assure that he would not
write his laws in stone as he did before, but write them in their heart. 2.
That where Zacharias mentions Gods holy Covenant, and the oath he swear unto
Abraham, Luke ^.72, 73. he puts it to be in this (which I take to be absolute)
that he would give to us, that being delivered from the hand of our enemies,
without fear we should serve him in holiness and righteousness before him all
the days of our life, v. 73, 74 75.

The fourth thing misliked in my answer is, that I said, That it was a gross
palpable error of Mr. B. to say that the promise of saving benefits was made to
Infants that were not elect. If I understand Mr. M. he counted it a gross
error, when he disclaimed this asser^ion, That the covenant of saving grace is
made to believers and their natural seed. Defense of his Sermon, page 116. and
Mr. G. when in his Vindic. P^^dob p. 12. he said of this conclusion, that
infants are taken into covenant with their parents in respect of saving graces,
You know the conclusion in that sense is so manifestly against Protestants
principles and experience, that no Protestant can hold it But Mr. B. it is like
will not be convinced by men's sayings, let us try what we can do by Arguments

1. The promise of saving benefits is made only to those to whom saving
benefits are bestowed: But to elect infants only they are bestowed. Ergo. The
Major is manifest to them that acknowledge God to be true and faithful, it
being manifest falsehood and unfaithfulness to promise and not to perform. But
it is certain by experience and Scripture that God saves none but the Elect.
Therefore it is a gross and palpable error as charging God with lying to say,
that his promise of saving benefits is made to infants not elect.

12. This is proved directly from the Apostles words, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. which
also strengthens the former argument, where he concludes that the promises of
God must be understood as made to them only to whom they were performed,
otherwise the word of God should fall, which he abhorres as blasphemy. But I
argue further thus.

To them only is the promise of saving benefits made, who are children of that
promise, that God would be a God to them in respect of saving benefits, for to
be the children of the promise there is manifestly meant of those to whom the
promise of being God is meant, Genesis 17.7. as is proved before, Sect. 28, 29.
which the Apostle in that chapter understands of saving benefits, which I think
will not be denied; if it were, it might be proved from v. 8, etc. But the
elect only are children of the promise, this is proved before, Sect. 28, 29,
and might be proved from v. 11. Ergo.

3. I further argue from the same place; If any other than the elect infants
had the promise of saving benefits made to them; then all the natural seed of
Abraham, for no infants besides the elect, had more promises of saving benefits
than they: But they all had not the promise of saving benefits made to them,
the Apostle determines, that the promise was to Ishmael not Esau, but only to
Isaac and Jacob, That the purpose of God according to election might stand, or
be of him that calls, whom he will for the seed, v. 11. Therefore the promise
of saving benefits is made only to elect infants.

To the Allegation of this text, I find something said by Mr. B. in his plain
Scripture proof. and. Part. 2. chap. 1. 1. There is no strong appearance of
contradiction in this to what we have taught. For I willingly acknowledge, that
they are not therefore the children of God, because they are the seed of
Abraham, or others that were godly, but because they are the children of the
promise.

But Mr. B. c^ean mistakes the Apostles speech, for he conceives that all the
natural seed of Abraham were yielded to be the children of God, but not
because children of the flesh, bu^ because children of the promise, as if he
granted the thing, but denied the reason, whereas the Apostle denies the thing
it self, affirming, that all the seed of Abraham, were not the children of God,
Romans 9.7, 8, and contradisting the children of the promise to the children of
the flesh, which were nonsense if they were the same, and no distinction or
opposition between them. As if a man say, not all natives but freemen are
Citizens, he supposes all natives are not freemen, and denies all natives who
are not freemen, to be Citizens

Mr B. adds, I pray you observe, 1. That which the Apostle here pleads, is,
That salvation was not by the Covenant tied to all Abraham's seed. To which I
reply, This grants what I would evi^ce, that the promise of saving benefits
was not to all Abraham's seed, but only to the elect of them. But yet says Mr.
B. he denies not but Church Membership did for the time past belong to the
generallity of them. Now it is not the certain salvation, but the
Church Membership of Infants that we are disputing for (in regard of the
individuals

Answer. Though it be the Church Membership of infants which Paedobaptists
dispute for, and not the certain salvation, yet they would infer their
Church Membership from that Covenant which was a Covenant of salvation as it
was Evangelicall. And this Mr. B. must yield, who in the words forecited
against Mr. Bl. denies an outward covenant giving right to the Seals, and
asserts, A right to Baptism as it is a benefit given directly by God from his
promise, or covenant Apol. against Mr Bl. p. 80* which is no other than of
saving grace, by which if salvation be not tied to all Abraham's seed, then that
covenant is not the ground of their Church Membership, and right to the
initiall seal, and consequently not to our infants, for take away the Cause,
the effect is removed, and so this text is directly against infant baptism and
Churchmembership. Mr. B. adds,

2. The Apostle disputes not against the salvation or Church Membership of
every one of Abraham's seed; (for many of his seed were after this saved) but
against the salvation of the whole seed or posterity conjunctim. But now
Anabaptists dispute against the Church Membership visible of any infants.

Answer. If the Church Membership visible of the whole seed or posterity
conjunctim of Abraham be asserted (as it is by Mr. B.) from that covenant which
the Apostle denies to belong to the whole seed or posterity conjunctim (which
Mr B. grants) he disputes for the Anabaptists against the imagined visible
Church Membership of all infants of true believers.

3. Says Mr. B. That which the Apostle mainly drives at, is, that men are not
therefore saved because they are Abraham's carnal seed (and consequently not
because they are the carnal seed of any other. And I say so too with all my
heart. But the Apostle does not say, or mean, that Abraham's seed should not be
saved: for they shall again be called, and so all Israel shall be saved, Romans
11) But only that they are saved, not because they are his seed, bu^ because
they are children of the promise: And so say we, That the seed of the faithful
are Church Members, and Disciples and subjects of Christ, not properly or
directly because they are their seed (for so they are no better than others:
but because they are children of the promise; God having been pleased to make
the promise to the faithful and their seed; and having promised that the seed
of the righteous shall be blessed: and that he will be merciful to them, and
will take thm to be a people to him, and he will be to them a God, and he has
pronounced them holy. Isaac was Abraham's seed, and Jacob his, and yet not saved
because his seed directly and properly (yet remotely they were:) but because
children of the promise.

Answer. Mr. B. in his pass^ge shows, he neither understood the Apostles scope
nor answer, but according to his overly manner of handling Texts, perverts
both. I grant that from the Apostles words it follows, That men are not
therefore saved because they are Abraham's seed, and consequently not because
they are the carnal seed of any other. But it is manifest, and acknowledged by
all Interpreters almost I m^et with, that the Apostles scope is to answer an
objection as the words v. 6. show, That if the Jews were rejected the word of
God to Israel and Abraham's seed falls; which shows, that the objectors did not
conceive God by covenant tied to save all Abraham's seed, and Israel, because he
had by covenant tied himself to be a God to Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17.7.
and therefore Paul did not rightly suggest, Romans 9 1, 2, 3. as if they should
be rejected. The clearing of ^he consistency of these two things, the truth of
Gods promise, Genesis 17.7., and the Apostles intimation that the Jews should be
cast away, was his scope, not that which Mr. B. imagines the Apostle mainly
drives at, to show why the Jews are saved, for the Apostle supposes that they
should not be saved, and to maintain it, answers the objection. Whence also it
may be perceived, that Mr. B. quite perverts the Apostles answer: For he makes
it to be this, 1. That the Apostle does not say, or mean, Abraham's seed should
not be saved, whereas it is the very occasion of the objection, that he
determined that a great part, or the body or people of the Jews, who were
Abraham's seed, were then rejected, as his words show, Romans 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 31*
and 10, 1, 2, 3, 21. and 11.7.15.17.20, etc. and the Gentiles taken for Gods
people in their stead: the searching of which was the great quarrel the Jews
had against Paul* so that Mr B. makes Paul not to say that which he did teach,
and plainly intimated in that very place. 2. That he only says, that Abraham's
carnal seed were saved, not because they are his seed, but because they are
children of the promise, which is both contrary to the Apostles suppositions,
which is, that they are not saved, and that because they are not children of
God, nor children of the promise, though children of the flesh, and impertinent
to the removing of the objection concerning the rejection of the Jews, how it
could stand with Gods promise. For the answer as Mr. B. makes it, had no way
justified Gods truth, but strengthened the objection, if it were supposed they
were children of the promise, whom yet Paul counted for castawayes. Nor do the
Apostles words say the children of the flesh are saved though not because they
are Abraham's seed, but that they are not the children of God, who were only
children of the flesh, not children of the promise, nor counted for the seed to
whom the promise Genesis 17.7. was made at all, as it was Evangelicall. As for
what Mr. B. alleges, That the Jews shall be again called, and so all Israel
be saved, Romans 11. and therefore the Apostle does not say, or mean, that
Abraham's seed should not be saved, it is inconsequent, si^h the Apostle might
and did suppose the present should not be saved though hereafter the Jews
shall; it follows on the contrary, he supposed the present Jews should be
rejected, because he speaks of the calling and salvation of the Jews, was a
thing future, yet not till the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, in the mean
time he says, blindness happened to them in part. And what he says, that God
has been pleased to make the promise to the faithful and their seed, he
neither shows where that promise is, nor do I know where to find it, nor
where he promises to take them to be a people to him, and that he will be to
them a God, and for what he alleges, that the seed of the righteous shall be
blessed, and that God will be merciful to them, how little they make for the
visible Churchmembership of G^ntile believers infants, will be showed in
answering Chap. 21, 22,, of the first part of his Book. And for Gods
pronouncing them holy, he is fully answered, Antipoedob, part 1. Sect. 23^ etc.
It follows in Mr. B.

4 And observe further, That Paul here speaks not a word against the privilege
of the infants whose parents deny not God, nor violate his Covenant, and fall
not away. If any man should affirm, that all the infants of the faithful so
dying, are certainly saved, there is not a syllable in this text against him.
For Paul only pleads, that if men fall away and prove unbelievers, God will
not save them because Ahraham (or any other remote progenitor) was faithful.
The covenant never intended this: But yet children of those that fall not away,
or be not broken off for unbelief, do lose none of their privileges, but may
belong to the visible or invisible Church If any man should deny Christ, and
yet think to be saved because they are Englishmen, or because their progenitors
long since were faithful; I should use to them Paul's words here. But what is
this to those who do not deny Christ, and therefore are both Children of the
flesh, and of the-promise? Besides, those the Apostle here excludes, were aged
unbelievers, so that this text has not any color either against baptism, or
their Church membership.

Answer. There is little truth in this passage, Paul speaks, Romans 9, 6. 7, 8,
etc. against the being in the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. of Abraham's and Isaacs
natural seed, and therefore by consequence against the Church membership and
Baptism of believers children by virtue of that covenant being made to them,
and he excludes Esau before he was born, and therefore other than aged
believers, and if Esau the son of Isaac, no Apostate, were out of the covenant,
and declared so before he was born, then had he died in infancy, he had not bin
saved, and so there is more than a Syllable in this Text against him, who
should affirm, That all the infants of the faithful so dying, are certainly
saved; for this Text affirms some infants of the most holy believers, are not
in covenant, and if not in covenant, not certainly saved, but certainly
reprobate. The children of those who fall not away, have no such privilege,
that they do certainly belong either to the invisible or visible Church. If
there may be infant-children of believers who may be children of the flesh and
not children of the promise, then the promise of saving benefits is not made to
any other than the elect, for sure it is made to none other of other believers,
if it be made only to the elect ones of Abraham and Isaac. I go on.

4. The promise which is in Christ Yea and Amen, is made only to the Elect,
for it is not Yea and Amen to any other, since it is not ratified and
accomplished to any other. But the promise of saving benefits is in Christ Yea
and Amen, for so are as many promises as are in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. and such
is the promise of saving benefits. Ergo.

5. Those promises which were made to Christ, were made only to the Elect, for
whether Christ personal be meant the promises were made to him only for those
whom he represents, and they are only the elect, or Christ's mystical body
that is his Church they are the elect only: But the promise of saving benefits
made to Christ, Gal. 3.16. Ergo.

6. The promise which is of the Covenant confirmed unto Christ, is only to the
elect: But such is the promise of saving benefits, Gal 3.17. Ergo.

7. The promise which is of eternal life* is made only to the elect: But such
is the promise of saving benefits, Tit. 1.2. Ergo.

8. To whom the promise of saving benefits is made, are Heirs of the Promise:
But they are only to the elect, for to the Heirs of promise Gods counsel is
showed to be immutable for their salvation, Heb. 6.17. But so it is only to
the elect. Ergo.

9. Those promises by which we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, are
made only to the elect: But such are the promises of saving benefits, 2 Pet.
1.4. Ergo.

10. The promise of that Covenant is made only to the elect, of which Christ
is surety, for Christ's sureti^hip engages him to perform it, and he performs
it only to the elect, therefore he is surety of the covenant only for the
elect: But the promise of saving benefits is of that covenant of which Christ
is surety, Heb. 7.22. Ergo.

11. That covenant which is confirmed by Christ's blood, is made only with the
elect, for it was shed for them only. But such is the new covenant, or
covenant of grace, Matthew 26 28. Ergo.

12. That covenant which is different from the first covenant in that it is not
an occasion of complaint in that it was broken, and they continued not in it,
is made only to the elect: But such is the new covenant, or covenant of grace,
Heb. 8.7, 8, 9. Ergo.

13. The covenant which ingageth God to write his laws in the hearts of those
to whom it is made, ^s made only to the elect, for God does this only to
them: But such is the new covenant, or covenant of grace, Heb. 8.10. and 10.16.
Ergo.

14. The covenant of which Christ is Mediator, is made only to the elect. for
he is mediator for them only, since he prays for them only, John 17.9, And he
is Mediator of the new covenant, that by means of death they which are called
might receive the promise of eternal inheritance, Heb. 9.15. But such is the
new covenant or covenant of grace, Heb. 12.24 Ergo.

15. That covenant which is an everlasting Covenant, is made only to the
elect, for the covenant with reprobates is not everlasting. But such is the new
covenant, or covenant of grace, Heb. 13.20. Ergo

16 That in which are given the sure mercies of David, is made only to the
elect, for no other have them given to them: But such is the new covenant, or
covenant of grace, Isa. 55.3. Ergo.

17. That covenant which engages God to give to them to whom it is made,
deliverance from all enemies, and to serve God in holiness and righteousness
before him all the days of their life without fear, is made only to the
elect, for to them only God performs it: But such is the covenant of grace,
Luke 1.73, 74, 75. Ergo

That covenant which assures perseverance to them to whom it was made, is made
only to the elect, for they only persevere: But such is the new covenant of
grace, Isa. 54*9, 10. Jer. 32*40. Ergo.

19. If the covenant of grace be made with other than the elect, then it is the
absolute or condi^ionall covenant, as Mr B. distinguishes; but neither: Not
the first, as Mr B. confesse^h; nor the conditional, for it is made only with
believers, and they are only the elect. I grant it is propounded, as Dr Twisse
speaks, Animad. in Corinth. Defens. page 235* or as others say, offered or
tendered to others, but made with the elect. Ergo.

If the covenant of grace be made to any other than to the elect, then with
all, which seems to be Mr. Bs opinion, when he says, Plain Scripture Proof,
etc. page: 316, The new Covenant is conditional and universal. But it is not
made withal. That covenant which was made with all, had Adam for the common
head, but the new covenant was not made with Adam as the common head, but with
Christ who is given for a covenant of the people, Isai. 49.8. and therefore the
promise was, that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, Genesis
3.15. which Mr B most corruptly interprets, Of the whole seed of the woman,
infants as well as others. Plain Scripture proof, etc. part. 1. Chap. 24. page
69, but it is true primarily or only of Christ, Heb. 2.14. But Christ is not a
common head to all, but only to the elect, who are chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.
Ergo

I omit the Arguments which Doctor Twisse urges in his Animadversions on
Corinus, page 346. Answer to M. Hoard, page 283.286. Doctor Kendall, Vindic.
part 3. chapter 18* page 14, 15, and hasten to consider what Mr B. says further
against me.

And he says in his Examen and Apology, that Mr M. speaks like Corinus and
the Arminians, in his asserting the conditional sealing, and when he talks of
the Covenant, Christ's suretiship, etc. To which I answer, A great many hotspurs
of this age do make any thing Arminianism, which is but contradictory to
Antinomianism. I will not say Mr T. is an Antinomian, for I think he is not;
but this opinion, that the covenant of grace, which baptism seals, is only
to the elect, and is not conditional, is one of the two Master-pillars in the
Antinomian Fabric*

Answer. 1. If any Antinomian or Antipaedobaptist has been in this age a
verier hot-spur than Mr B. let him be disciplined at Bedlem: For my part I know
none that has in his Writings showed so much heat (call it fury or zeal as you
please) with so much confidence and peremptoriness, and so many mistakes
against Antinomians, Antipaedobaptists, and others, as he ha^h don. And surely
they want not considerate men that fear lest the esteem he ^a^h gotten by his
practical Writings, and for infant baptism, and the Ministry, may occasion the
swallowing down of some things he vents about univers^ll redemption, universal
covenant of grace, uncertainty of perseverance, and salvation, the condition of
justification, which without more than a grain of salt will turn to A^miniani^m
and Popery if received by such understandings as are not of good concoction.
Nor do I know any man who under so great a show of se^king truth and peace in
the Church, has more hindered both. For tha^ which he says, That this opinion
that the covenant of grace is only to elect, and is not conditional, is one
of the pillars of Antinomianism. I have made some search into my books, and
made use of my memory, and though I find that in the Synod at New Town in New
England, August 30, 1637, this is made the 81 Error of the Antinomians, That
where faith is held forth by the Ministry as the condition of the ^ovenant of
grace on man's part, as also evidencing justification by sanctification and the
activity of faith, in that Church there is not sufficien^ bread And in other
books they are charged wi^h error in holding the covenant of grace absolute, so
as if by it men were exempted from duty, they were justified without faith,
etc. Yet I never to my remembrance heard th^s charged with Antinomianism, that
the covenant of grace is made only to the elect, but find it avouched by many
of their best Antagonists; and the covenant of grace is held by able
Anti-Arminians unconditionall in th^se two senses, 1. That God requires no
condition from us to be performed by our power, but what he requires of us to
do, he promises to works in those to whom he makes promise in that covenant. 2
That in the covenant of grace God requires no condition which is of an
uncertain event, but to those to whom he makes his promises of righteousness,
forgiveness, eternal life, he also by covenant assures repentance, faith, and
perseverance: and therefore though some proposals of the covenant of grace be
conditional, yet no promise as it stands in the entire covenant, is
conditional: and therefore the covenant and all the promises to be termed
absolute and conditional.

Mr. B. adds, 2. But to these Mr B. has fully answered Mr. T. and fully
cleared Mr M. and himself from the charge of symbolizing with the Arminians;
and has fully proved, that the entrance into covenant, and acceptance of the
term of it (though not sincerely and unreservedly) is common to the elect and
reprobate; and that the reprobate are within the verge of the covenant, as
tendered in the Gospel, and accepted (as beforesaid with a half heart.) And if
any that are run into the other extreme, shall think that this affirming that
[Christ has brought the reprobate also into the covenant of grace
conditionall] be any part of the Arminian errors, as the whole Scripture is
against them, so Mr. Blake has said enough to satisfy.

Answer. What Mr Blake asserted and took upon him to prove, did neither
contradict what I said, nor vindicate Mr M. who said in his Sermon page 49.1.
That God did seal to Infants presently, and put their name into the Deed. 2.
That in the mean time until they come to years of discretion, Jesus Christ who
is the surety of the covenant, Heb. 7.22. and the surety of all the
covenanters, is pleased to be their surety. 3. That God accepts of such a seal
on their parts as they are able to give in their infant age, expecting a future
ratification on their part, when they are come to riper years. 4. That in the
mean time he affords them the favor and privilege of being in covenant with
him. 5. When they are grown men, they may refuse to stand to this covenant, and
nullify all.

These things I count symbolizing with Arminians, to say that infants who may
and do when they come to age, refuse to stand to this covenant, are for a while
afforded by God the favor and privilege of being in covenant with him, even
in that covenant of which Jesus Christ is their surety, and that for a while
Jesus Christ is their surety which contains three points of Arminianism, 1.
That God affords them the favor of being in covenant with him in that covenant
of which Christ is surety, who are reprobates. 2. That Christ is their sure^y.
3. That they may be thus in covenant for a time only. To say that any is
afforded the favor of being in covenant with God who may be so for a time, and
that Christ is surety for such covenanters, is to hold that God makes this new
covenant with other than the elect, and that Christ is surety for them, is to
hold that the new covenant is made with all, and that it does not assure
effectual calling and perseverance, but is upon an uncertain condition left to
man's will, which are condemned as the Arminians errors on the second and fifth
Articles, by the Deputies of Gelderland Act Synod. Dordr. Judic. Theol. Prove.
page 131. Of South-Holland page 141, 142. Of North-Holland* page 154. Of
Zealand, page 159. Of Virecht, page 162, 163, 171. Of Friesland, page 181, etc.
Profess. Belg* page 30^* Disput. G^ld. page 324. Transisul. page 371, and
others.

And whereas Mr. Bl. Vindic Foed. page 39. charge me with misci^ing Corvinus,
I confess I have not now his book by me, having lost it, yet such remaining
notes as I have by me, do give me cause to think there is somewhat to that
purpose in or near the place, and however it is carried on, Corvinus by the
Deputies at the Synod of Dort, in his Defense of Arminius against Tilenus, and
by Dr. Twisse in his Animad* page 346. and generally charged on the Arminians
by other Authors forecited: And though I count Mr M. far from Arminianism, yet
I again say, the speeches he used do symbolize with their language. Mr. B. adds,

He that will deny Reprobates to be so far within the covenant of grace, must
not only deny Infant Baptism, but all Sacraments, till he be able infallibly
to discern a man to be elect. And doubtless this interest in the covenant is ^
fruit of Christ's death.

Answer. I deny not but Reprobates may be in the covenant of grace in this
sense, they may have it tendered to them by the preachers of the Gospel, they
may accept of that tender with half an heart, they may think themselves to be
in it, they may by baptism engage themselves to believe unto the death, they
may be received into the Church, deemed to be really in the covenant of grace*
But it is not true that God ever made the new covenant to or with them, or that
Christ as a mediator brought them into the covenant of grace^ or was surety of
them, or that God afforded them for a time the favor of being in covenant with
him. And though I deny not that it is a fruit of Christ's death, that whosoever
believes on him should live, yet that this is not obtained for the reprobate,
but the elect; nor a part by it self, but together with this, that he should
gather into one the Children of God that were scattered abroad, John 11, 52.
And that they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance, Heb. 9.15. Nor need I by these assertions of mine deny Baptism or
the Lords Supper to any man till I be able to discern him infallibly to be a
man elect. For I have warrant to baptize him if he show by his profession that
he is a Disciple of Christ, and though I knew infallibly he were one of those
whom God would save, and had promised saving grace to him, and in that sense
were in the covenant of grace, yet for the present not a D^sciple, I should
justifiably refuse to baptize him. And this is a sufficient plea why we baptize
not infants of believers, because they are not then Disciples, no not though it
could be proved God had promised to be their God.

Mr. B. adds, Mr T. one day in the pulpit in pleading that the covenant
belonged only to the elect, was pleased to bring me in as witnessing thereto,
in the Append. of my Aphor. page 43. because I there say, that the absolute
promise, or prophecy there mentioned is made only to the elect; when yet
only the very scope of the place is to prove that it is not the absolute
promise that is most fitly called the Covenant of grace.

Answer. My alleging Mr Bs words was right and pertinent: For they
acknowledged the promise Heb. 8.10, to be absolute, and to the elect only,
which was enough for my purpose, and this the Author of that Episte calls the
new Covenant or Testament, and however, Mr Bs conceit is I have proved before
the holy Ghost does make it to be the Covenant of God, and therefore I deem it
fitly be called the covenant of grace, choosing to speak as the Scripture
speaks, rather than as Mr B. conceives sit.

SECT. XXXIX. Mr Baxter has not proved that the absolute promise or covenant
is not it that i^ sealed in Baptism and the Lords Supper.
HE adds, But that this absolute Promise, or Covenant (if you will call it so)
is not it that is sealed in Baptism and the Lords Supper, I prove against Mr T.
thus, clearly.

Answer. He should prove nothing against me though he should prove neither the
absolute nor conditional promise to be sealed in baptism and the Lords Supper.
For though it be true, that in some sense I grant Baptism and the Lords Supper
to seal the covenant of grace, yet in the sense and to the purposes
Paedobaptists use to say the covenant is sealed by them, I reject it, and can
freely yield that the use uf Baptism and the Lords Supper is not to seal Gods
Covenant either absolute or conditional to us, except by remote consequence,
but to signify our duty of engaging our selves to be Christ's Disciples in
Baptism, and to remember his death in the Lords Supper. But Mr Bs dispute in
this is against himself, in that his arguments will overthrow his own assertion
of infant baptism, and against his fellow Paedobaptists, who make baptism to
seal the promise of Regeneration from Titus 3.5, and the promise of being a God
to Abraham and his seed from Genesis 17.7. which the Apostle Romans 9.6, 7, 8. makes
absolute, and appropriates to the elect. I need not cite again Paedobaptists
speeches, making baptism the seal of Regeneration, and of the Covenant, Genesis
17.7. having cited before, Sect. 30, sundry, to wit, the Assembly in the
Directory, Mr M etc. In the Assembly at Westminster their confession of faith,
chap. 28. Baptism is ordained by Jesus Christ to be to the baptized a sign and
seal of the covenant of grace, of his ingrafting into Christ, of Regeneration,
of remission of sins, and of his giving up unto God through Jesus Christ to
walk in newness of life. Artic. 27 of the Church of England. Baptism is a sign
of Regeneration or Newness, whereby as by an instrument they that receive
baptism rightly are graffed into the Church, the promises of forgiveness of
sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy Ghost, are visibly
signed and sealed. In the French Confess. Artic, 35. By Baptism, as by a
certain and stable seal, this promise is sealed, that Christ will be to us
sanctification and justification. In Mr Gatakers two books against Dr Davenant,
there are so many passages out of the chiefest Protestant Writers which do make
baptism the sign and seal of Regeneration, and of the promise of it, that it
would be tedious to transcribe them, I shall point at some pages wherein they
may be found. Discept. de vi bapt. infant. page 23, 52, 110, 117, 1^8. Strict.
in Daven. Ep. page 76, 77, 78. There is one passage which he cites often out of
Vorstius, That the Gospel Preachers are wont to acknowledge one only general
effect of Baptism, to wit, the sealing of a double saving grace promised in the
Gospel concerning the remission together and the purging out of sins by the
Blood and Spirit of Christ, which is by inward renovation, which is absolutely
promised. Yea Mr Gataker, a man deservedly much valued by Mr B. Discept. de
bapt. infant. says, That Baptism does equally if not primarily design
internal renewing, regeneration, mortification, quickening, which in that sign
are not only most clearly shadowed, but also painted, both the thing it self
does lowdly speak, and the holy Scripture does most expressly, Romans 6.3, 6.
Col. 2.11, 12. Tit 3.5. Ephesians. 5 25. And though all express not the sealing of
regeneration alike by baptism, some placing it in the assuring to the
conscience, some in the giving of title, some of regeneration already given,
some of regeneration to be attained in time, yet all make i^ the seal of that
covenant wherein God promises it, and do commonly distinguish it from the
Lords Supper, which they make the seal of growth as they do baptism, of
new birth and entrance into the Church. So Mr M. in his Sermon, p. 43, 51. But
let us hear what Mr B. opposes,

1* That which is sealed to by the Sacrament, is a proper covenant, having a
restipulation on our parts as well as a promise on Gods part. But an absolute
promise is not a proper covenant with such a mutual engagement, but properly a
mere promise or prophecy, therefore it is not this absolute promise which is
sealed by the Sacraments. The Major M. T. cannot deny; for he pleaded it
himself ^n the pulpit as a reason to prove that infants might not be baptized,
because they could not engage themselves. And he brought that passage in my
foresaid Appendix, page 68. as attesting it, where I say it is a mutual
engaging sign or seal: As it is given it is Gods seal, as it is accepted it is
ours. And indeed the very definition of a proper Covenant (of which Grotius de
jure belli, and other Lawyers, will inform you) shows as much that it must be
a mutual engagement. Now in that absolute promise [ I will take the hard heart
out of their bodies etc.] There is no such matter, but only God tells what
he will do.

Answer. According to my own judgment I use not to te^m Sacraments Seals of
the Covenant, nor did I urge Mr Bs words otherwise than as an Argument ad
homin^m, to prove from his own words, that infants have not baptism rightly
according to his own grants. 1. because there is no restipulation on infants
part, therefore there is no covenant properly so called between God and them,
and so baptism of infants is not a seal of a covenant, and consequently
according to the supposition of Paedobaptists, no Sacrament. 2* Baptism is
says Mr B. a mutual engaging sign or seal, as it is given it is Gods seal, as
i^ is accepted it is our: But in infant baptism there is no mutual engagement
or signing. Infants promise nothing, nor sign or accept of any thing, Ergo
infant baptism is not, according to Mr Bs own grants, right; nor are these
objections avoided by saying the parents covenant for them: for neither is
there any the least ground o^ hint in Scripture that for baptismall covenanting
the parents covenant should go for the child's covenant, nor do in the practice
of baptizing the parents restipulate though they declare their faith, and if
they should promise or engage for the child, they should sin, and so should and
have those that have promised as sureties the infant should believe and obey
Christ, which they have not been able to perform, but have taken on them
Christ's prerogative, Heb. 7.22. Nor is the baptism of the infant his sign or
seal, he being merely passive, as they say, and so doing no act, nor engaging
thereby, and if the parent do engage for the child, the parent should be
baptized for the child, if baptism be the baptized party his seal. But as I
said, I do not call baptism a seal of the covenant, and therefore am not tied
at all to answer this Argument, except to show the fuci^ity of it. For which
end, 1. the mann^r of speech is liable to exception in the use of the term
Proper Covenant] which I imagine Mr. B. uses unskilfully for Properly so
called. 2. There is no proof of the Major, from this, that Baptism or the
Sacrament is a mutual engaging sign or seal. For that proves rather that
baptism or the Sacrament it self is a proper covenant, than that, that which is
sealed by the Sacraments is a proper Covenant. 3. Nor does it follow, That if
the very definition of a proper Covenant be, that it must be a mutual
engagement, that which is sealed by the Sacraments must be a proper covenant,
but only proves that upon supposition, that the covenant sealed to by the
Sacraments, must be a proper covenant, that then it must be with restipulation
or mutual engaging. 4. though Lawyers do determine that a covenant properly so
called, is a mutual engagement, yet this proves not that which in Scripture is
termed the covenant which they say baptism seals, is such. Yea, in all the
places (that I know) where the covenant of grace is mentioned, there is no
restipulation at all mentioned, neither Genesis 17. nor Jer. 31. nor Luke 1. nor
Heb. 8 and 10. But where there is a restipulation, it is rather the covenant of
the Law than of the Gospel. 5. That which is a mere prophecy or promise, is as
properly (...) and (...), which we translate Covenant, as a mutual engagement,
as I shall show hereafter against Mr. Bl. 6. Nor do I know why that may not be
a mutual engagement if the absolute promise were sealed to by the Sacrament as
well as if the conditional. For if the engagement in the conditional covenant
on Gods part is, that if he believe he shall be justified; and on man's part,
that he will believe: or rather in baptism he testifies, he does believe. The
absolute promise is to give faith: Is not God and Man in like manner engaged by
baptism in sealing this as well as the other? 7. I know not how it can be truly
said, That Baptism as given is Gods seal, and as accepted Man's seal. For
neither does God give baptism to be accepted but his promise, nor is the
baptized said to accept baptism, but the promise. Nor is there any act of God
which may be called his Seal, but he covenants, and I presume they will not
confound Covenant and Seal. 8. Nor does the infant accept, or seal, or engage,
and therefore in infant baptism there is no covenant or seal. 9 By this
description of Mr. B. there should be a mutual seal, and so a several seal,
and not baptism Gods and Man's seal too. For according to the manner of sealing
Covenants which are mutual as the one party seals with his own seal, so the
other party seals with his own distinct seal; and so if baptism be Gods seal,
the party bap^ized should have another seal to signify his engagement. 10. Mr.
B. tells me, that Grotius de jure belli, and other Lawyers will inform me, that
the very definition of a proper Covenant is, that it must be a mutual
engagement. But he does not tell me where it is in Grotius, nor in what other
Lawyer. I have lightly looked over the ^1. Chapter of the second book of Grot.
de jure belli ac pacis, which is, de promissis, and some other following, and
find not that which Mr. B. says, but find chapter 11. sect. 5. that he determines
that of an infant is no promise, because the use of reason is required to a
promise, and therefore in infant baptism there is no restipulation or mutual
engagement, and so no proper covenant by Mr B. his doctrine. But what ever
other Lawyers say, I am mistaken if it be not usual with the Lawyers in
conveyances to use this expression, That the seller is said to covenant to and
with such a person, who makes no restipulation or reciprocal engagement. And
both in the Scottish covenant, and in our solemn League and Covenant, I find
covenanters engaged to do many things without any restipulation or reciprocal
engagement, and therefore do not conceive it necessary to a covenant that it be
a mutual engagement, or with restipulation. Mr. B. adds,

2. If it were the absolute promise of the first grace that is sealed by the
Sacraments, then the Sacraments must be given to no man, or to all men: but
that is absurd, therefore so is the former. The consequent is manifest, because
that absolute promise or prophecy is only of the elect, and that before
regeneration. Now no man has any sign given him, so much as probable by which
to judge of the unregenerate elect, so that it must either be given to all or
none.

Answer. The whole frame of this Argument depends on these mistakes, 1. That a
person has title to baptism by virtue of its interest in Gods covenant of
grace, and that accordingly a Minister is to baptize. 2. That a probable sign
of such interest warrants the baptism of the party so interessed, which I have
often proved to be false, and that nothing but manifest discipleship certainly
known to the baptizer, warrants him to do it. And indeed if we must baptize
according to that rule of persons interest in the covenant, probably signified.
Salvages in New England are to be baptized upon the probable signs they give
of being wrought upon by a Sermon before they know and profess the faith of
Christ, and few or no infants are baptized, there being either no sign given to
any man of their being in covenant, or at most but of very few of the baptized.

Mr. B. Ap. to his Aphor. p. 70. If a Minister adventure to administer it upon
probability, then should he be guilty of proph^ning the ordinance.

3. Says Mr B. Or we may argue thus: It may be known to whom that covenant
belongs which is sealed by the Sacraments. But it cannot be known (before the
fulfilling, no not at all) to whom (particularly) that absolute promise does
belong; therefore that abs^lut promise is not it which is sealed by the
Sacraments.

Answer. 1. By denying the Major. 2. By retorting the argument thus, It may be
known to whom that covenant belongs which is sealed by the Sacraments: But it
cannot be known ordinarily in this to whom (particularly) the conditional
promise of the covenant of grace belongs, for to none (particularly) besides
the elect belongs the promise of justification, adoption and glorification.
Therefore the conditional promise is not it which is sealed by the Sacraments.

4. Says Mr. B. If (according to Mr T. his judgment) that absolute promise
must be fulfilled to a man before he be capable of receiving the Sacraments
which are seals of the covenant of grace, then is it not that absolute promise
which is the covenant of grace sealed to by the Sacraments: But according to
Mr. T. his judgment) that absolute promise must be fulfilled to a man before he
be capable of (a right) receiving the Sacraments, which are seals of the
covenant of grace: Therefore it is not that absolute promise which is the
covenant so sealed to. The Antecedent is evident, ^f you consider, 1. That it
is the promise of the first renewing grace which we speak of (for all after
grace is promised conditionally) 2. That Mr. T. pleads that believers only
are disciples, and such disciples only must be baptized. 3. That faith is a
part of this first grace abs^lutely promised (as is commonly judged) The giving
of a new soft heart, is the giving the seed of all graces, and so of faith. The
consequence is evident, because the mercy promised in the covenant which is
sealed, is not given before the first sealing: But the mercy promised in that
absolute promise is (according to Mr. T. and in part the truth) given before
the first sealing of the Covenant of grace; therefore, etc. God does not
promise a Seal to a man that has a new heart to give him a new heart, or to a
man that is a believer, that he will give him to be a believer; except we speak
of the continuance or increase of faith and newness which is not the thing in
question.

Answer. The consequence of this argument may be denied, and the reason of it
also: For according to the Apostle, Abraham received the sign of Circumcision,
a seal of the righteousness of faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised;
Rom 4*11. If then the sealing of the covenant of grace by baptism be the same
with the sealing of the righteousness of faith by circumcision, Romans 4.11
(which is the common tenent of many Paedobaptists, who from this Text draw a
definition of Sacraments, though falsely, as is showed before) then the mercy
promised in the covenant which is sealed, is given before the first sealing.
Yea, if the conditional covenant be sealed to believers now, justification
which is the mercy promised in the covenant which is sealed* is given before
the first sealing. For a man is justified actually as soon as ever he believes,
as I am confident Mr. B will grant: Bu^ he is not regularly baptized till after
his believing, therefore a believer is justified, and consequently the mercy
promised in the first covenant which is sealed, is given before the first
sealing, That all after grace is promised conditionally, is said by Mr. B.
without proof, and how inconsistent it is with the promises of perseverance,
how much it undermines the doctrine of the Saints perseverance, how it disables
the godly to plead the promises, and takes away their comforts when they are
sensible of their f^i^ings, if the after graces of recove^y after fal^s, and
perseverance to the end, be promised condi^ionally, I need no^ show it here,
^i^h Dr. Owen has done it amply in his Treatise of Perseverace, chapter 4* 5, etc.
Dr. Kendall in his sancti sanciti, chapter 3. and wou^d be here a digressi^n*

5. Says Mr. B. The benefits of the Covenant of grace which are sealed by the
Sacraments, are (by those of age) to be received by faith. But the benefits of
the absolute promise of the first grace are not to be received by faith:
Therefore this is not the covenant of grace so sealed. The Major is evident:
Mr. T. says, only believers must be baptized as disciples: The Minor is
proved before. Faith is part of the thing promised, and we do not by faith
receive our first faith, or our power to believe.

Answer. It is not I only, but Mr. B. himself, who speaks in effect what I
say, Plain Script. pr^of, etc. page 299, ^00. of the first edition when he
says, That in the insti^ution, and every example of baptism through all the
Bible, the first grace is prerequisite as a condition, is undeniable, as might
be manifest by a recital of the particular Texts could we stay so long upon
it. John required a profession of repentance in those he baptized. Jesus first
made them Disciples, and then by his Apostles baptized them, John 4.1. The
solemn institution of it as a standing ordinance to the Church, which tells us
fully the end is in Matthew 21.19, 20. Go and disciple me all Nations, baptizing
them; etc. Now for the aged, a disciple and a believer are all one, Mark 16 16.
He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, Acts 2.38. Repent and be
bap^ized every one, etc. 41 They that gladly received his word were baptized,
Acts 8.12, 13. The Samaritans believed and were baptized both men and women.
Simon himself believed and was baptized, Acts 8.36, 37. If thou believe with
all thy heart thou may (be baptized) and he answered, I believe, etc. Paul
believed upon Ananias instruction, and then was bapt^zed, Acts 10.47, 48. and
16.15, 33. and 18.8. and 19.4, 5, etc. You see it is still required, that at
all age do first believe and then be baptized.

I acknowledge he puts in these words [ for the aged at all age] by which he
would prevent the inference from his own words against infants baptism,
intimating that there are an institution and examples of infant baptism
elsewhere. But this is but a vain caution, when his own proposition is, That in
the institution and every example of baptism through all the Bible, the first
grace (to wit Faith) is prerequisite as a condition, is undeniable. So that
which he intimates in his caution, is contradictory to himself, and a palpable
falsehood, there being no other institution or example of baptism to any but
disciples or believers in all the Bible; and therefore baptism of infants who
are not believers or disciples, is a manifest abuse, deviation from Christ and
his Apostles appointment and practice, by Mr. B. his own words, and
consequently will worship and profanation of that ordinance. As for the present
objection, I deny the Major if it be universal, though Mr. B. says, it is
evident, but proves it not, nor does any concession prove i^. For though I
grant persons are to be believers before baptism, yet it does not follow that
the benefits of the covenant of grace, which is sealed by the Sacraments, are
to be receiv^d by faith, and not before. It is Mr. B. his mistake, that the
promise to which there is sealing, must be fulfilled after and not before. The
contrary is manifest in Abraham's circumcision, in baptism as I showed before,
and in the Lords Supper. For even in that very instant of Mr. B. Plain Script
proof, etc. page 296. to prove the Sacrament to be a mutual engaging sign,
when he says, Receiving the Elements is ^ur engaging sign, that we receive
Jesus Christ to be our only Savior and Lord; as giving is Gods si^n that he
gives us Christ: the sealing on the part of the receiver is to a thing
fulfi^led, that he receives Christ, and of the giver that he gives him.

6. Says Mr. T. The covenant sealed by the Sacrament, is a plainly propounded
unquestion^ble Covenant: But this absolute promise of the first grace is not
such but very dark and doubtful (and the most learned cannot agree whether
there be any such thing:) therefore, etc.

I have spoken my judgment of this in the Appendix of my Aphorisms. The places
alleged to prove an absolute promise of the first grace, some learned divines
I say do not prove it; because he new and soft heart there mentioned, may be a
further degree of newness and sof^ness, or though there be no condition there
expressed, yet it is in other places, and therefore to be so understood there:
To which end they cite Deuteronomy. ^0* where God promises the very same blessing (to
circumcise their hearts that they may love the Lord, etc.) on a condition which
is here thought to be promised absolutely. Mr. T. could not understand Mr.
Blake about this.

Answer. If Mr* B. mean by unquestionable Covenant, that which no learned man
has questioned, the Major is false, and must be revoked by Mr. B. if he will
maintain the conditional covenant to be sealed to by the Sacrament, for that
has been questioned by learned men; who have denied the covenant of grace to
be conditional, and they think this to be a very good proof, that the holy
Scripture where it speaks of the new Covenant, mentions the promises without
condition. If he mean unquestionable de jure, which ought not to have been
questioned, and which though it seem dark and doubtful to some, yet is plainly
propounded by God, and is in it self perspicuous; the Minor is false. As for
what Divines say, it little moves, when the Scripture opposes the new spirit
and soft heart to a strong heart, as being in them before, and to which the new
spirit, new heart of flesh, succeed. Ezekiel. 11.19. and ^6, 26* not to a less
new or fleshly heart. And if elsewhere conditions be put and not there, the
promises in those places are not proved conditional, though to me the
coditions Deuteronomy. 30.1; 2, seem not to be of the promise, v. 6. but of the
promise v. 3. I do not value Mr. B. his judgment so much as to be drawn by it
any farther than his reasons carry me, which, I take it, are the same in his
Appendix, with these in his mock-titled book which I have answered. I give Mr
Baxter our new Doctor Sub^ilis, leave to quip me with my dullness in being grown
such an old superannuated dotard, as that I could not understand Mr Blake, time
was when I thought I could have understood as profound a Doctor, but now I am
content not to understand such deep notions, I should say nonsense as these*
Disciple all, covenant all, etc: I hope I shall have by Divine assistance, so
much understanding as to demonstrate the frivolousness of those dictates in Mr
Blakes and Mr Baxters writings, whereby they have befooled the men of this age,
and my Strange and wild doctrine, as Mr B. calls it, will supplant Mr B. his
familiar and tame doctrine, without speaking like Mr Sal^marsh and the
Antinomians, and my speech about Mr M, will be justified after the clearing my
self from the fourth imagined error, to which I now have.

SECT. XXXV. My speeeh about Gods sealing to none but believers, is cleared
from Mr Baxters Objections.
Mr B. Plain Scripture, etc. page 222. calls it my fourth error that I affirm in
my Apolog. page 152, 153. That every right administration of Baptism is not
Gods sealing. Actually it seals not but when it is administered to a believer.
It may be called a right act of the Administrator according to Gods
appointment, but not Gods sealing, etc. And for confutation says thus. It must
be understood that our question is not about the internal seal of the spirit,
but only the external seal of the Sacrament, which are two distinct things.
The nature of this seal, and whether it seal conditionally or absolutely, I
have fully opened in the Appendix of my Aphorisms of Justification, whither I
must desire the Reader to turn and read it, ^o save me the labor of doing it
here.

Answer. That these imagined errors of mine about the nature of the Covenant
and seals are not the root of my pretended error about baptism, is abundantly
showed before; and it has been often affirmed by me, that the reason of my
opposing infant baptism is, because it agrees not with the institution and
e^amples of baptism (which Mr B: his words cited in the next Section before
verify) in the holy Scripture, and the arguments from the Covenant and seal,
and the pretended law of visible Church Membership, no way extant unrepealed,
of which the Apostles practice shows they were ignorant, though many godly and
learned men have embraced them, are merely an humane invention* That there is
no error of mine in what I hold about the covenant, much less dangeeous error,
is already show; I shall now show the subtilty of Mr B: his arguings against my
speech about Gods sealing.

According to his direction I have read over his sayings in his Appendix in
answer to the ninth Question, and what Mr Blake excepted against him, and his
reply to Mr Blake in his Apology, Sect 60, etc. And the issue of my thoughts
in this, 1. That there is nothing but jangling and uncertainty in their debates
about the imaginary sealing by the Sacrament, it being not agreed what is
sealed, the outward or inward covenant, what is the Syllogism, whose parts are
to be sealed, or what part thereof is to be sealed, the Major, Minor, or
Conclusion, nor how ^t is sealed conditionally or absolutely, actually or
aptitudinally, nor to whom the sealing is, whether to every communicant or
only to penitent believers. And in my reading of other Authors^ I find much
uncertainty in their determinations about this pretended sealing, and the thing
sealed, which I have briefly touched before. Mr. Humphrey in his Rejoinder to
Dr. Drake, part. 1. Sect. 4, 6. part. 2. Sect. 4, 5. tells us, That in the
nature of it the Sacrament is Gods seal only, not metaphorically or
tropically, but formally, not a seal of our faith but of Gods assuring the
tenor of it, not only man's particular interest absolutely, but conditionally to
all, and that as well the threatening of condemnation in c^se of unbelief, as
the promise of righteousness in case of Faith, the receiver of the Sacrament
seals not by way of assuring, or conveying, but engagement ^o the condition on
his part yet not in esse, but in fieri agreeing to the terms of Christ
pr^posed, expecting salvation if ever he have grace to perform his engagements,
and yeildeth to be damned if not. 2. That the dig^adiations of Pae^obaptists
one against another, are by Gods just judgment useful to show their iniquity
in ^ressing others to subscribe to their Dictates, which they oppose one
anoth^r in. 3. That they do evidently prove that the argument is not good which
they b^ing for infant baptism to prove their covenant-right to the seal. For if
infants be only in the outward covenant, and baptism seal another covenant,
then title to this seal comes not by bare interest in that. If it be a mutual
engaging seal, then it is no seal of an infant who does not engage; if it seal
the condi^ional covenant, and it belongs to all, then all may be sea^ed, if
covenant interest entitle to the seal, if baptism seal absolutely to none till
he beli^ve, then baptism is no complete seal, and so no Sacrament to a man till
he believe; if it seal the threatening as well as the promise, th^n those should
have the Sacrament to whom the threatening belongs, as well as those to whom the
promise; if it seal absolutely only Gods general truth, then it seals nones
particular interest, and then none can claim title to it. 4. That most of their
speeches are mere dictates without show of proof, and that from the metaphor of
the seal of the covenant, which the Scripture no where uses, and Mr B. thinks
it the way to lose our selves and not to edify, to make it the subject of
tedious disputations, and to lay too great a stress on it. As for what he
wishes me in his Apol. against Mr. Bl. Sect. 80. to take notice of it, I reply
to what he says against my distinction of actual and aptitudinal seal, I
think it not worth while to reply to it, si^h I used that distinction only to
show how Bellarmin might be answered without Mr Bl^kes way of conditional
seal: It is little material whether the Sacrament be called a seal actual or
aptitudinall, or no seal at all, the explication of my meaning before given is
enough to justify my words against any thing Mr B. has or can object. As for
that which he says, That the question is not about the internal seal of the
Spirit, but only the external seal of the Sacrament, which are two distinct
things, I answer, the question is about my words whether they be true, which
deny that God seals in every right administration of baptism, and affirm that
he seals not but when it is admistred to a believer: And though it be true
the seal of Baptism and the Spirit be two distinct things, yet I say God never
seals by Baptism without the Spirit, nor can baptizing without the sealing of
the Spirit be rightly according to Scripture language and truth, called Gods
sealing. Let Us see what Mr. B. opposes.

His opinion I prove unsound, thus, 1. If the Sacrament rightly administered to
an hypocrite, have all in it that is essential to Gods actual sealing, then
it is his actual sealing, etc. But, etc. Therefore, etc. A seal is an engaging
or obliging sign, or at least a testifying. He that actually uses a sign to
such an end, does actually seal. Now 1. God uses this sign. 2. And to this
end. He uses the sign while his Ministers use it in his Name at his command;
for immediately he never uses or applies it to any. 2. He commands it to be
used to this end, to engage himself to make good his promises. For 1. To what
other end should God command them? 2 Else he should command them to be used to
one end to one, and to another end to another, which cannot be showed that he
has done, (I speak of the end of the Ordinance, not of the event which God
has decreed shall follow.)

Answer. The Minor of this Argument is denied. And to the proof I say, 1. That
it is not always true, That he that actually uses a sign to such an end, does
actually seal. For if actual sea^ing be actual assuring ^as it is conceived
to be (...) Romans 4.11. whence this phrase is taken) the actual sealing must be
denominated, not only from the end but also from the event, as if God use a
sign to comfort, he does not actually comfort except the person be comforted.
2. That it is not universally true, that God uses the sign while his Ministers
use it in his name at his command, but then when they represent his person. As
for instance, when Aaron offered sacrifice, burned Incense, etc. which were to
signify Christ, they did these things in Gods name, that is, to his honor, at
his command, yet I do not conceive it can be said that God did offer Sacrifice
or burn Incense. And for baptism, though I confess it is commanded by God to
be done by his Ministers, and that it is to be done into his name, yet it is no
where intimated as if they did it in stead of God, or Christ, as their act. 3.
But let it be granted that baptism done right^y according to Gods command by
his Ministers, is his act; how is it proved that it is used by God to this end*
to engage himself to make good his promises? For my part I read not any where
in Scripture, that God used baptism for this end, to engage himself to make
good his promises, nor does Mr. B. prove that end by any passage of Scripture.
And to his reasons I answer, 1. To the first, though neither I nor Mr. B. know
any orher end, yet does not this prove, that that is the end. Besides, if I
should assign no other end, yet it were enough to answer Mr. B. his question to
say, it is to try obedience, as in Abraham's offering his son. But Mr. B. might
easily know if he would heed the Scripture, that there are other ends of God in
commanding baptism; to wit, the owning of Christ as our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.13. Gal.
3.27 joining all Christians into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.5^ The 19,
and 27 Atricle of the Curch of England acknowledge this to be one end of
baptism, to be a sign of profession, and to be a mark of difference of
Christians from others. To the second, though it were granted to be absurd,
that God should command the Sacraments to be used to one end to one, and to
another end to another, yet this does no whit prove that this is the end which
Mr. B* assigns for the foregoing reasons. Yet sure if infant baptism were
granted, baptism must needs be to one end, to wit, a sign of profession to the
aged, which it is not, nor can be to an infant. Lastly if it yielded that the
end of baptism were to engage God to make good his promises, it is a good
argument against Mr. B. that God seals not actually to an hyppocrite, since he
does not promise, and consequently not to engage himself, by the S^crament to
make good his promise unto them. But Mr. B. adds thus.

3. If the promise be to others besides believers, then so is the seal (for to
whom God promises, to them he engage^h himself to perform, but the promise
is to others therefore etc. This will be evident if it be once understood that
it is only the conditional promise which seals by the Sacraments [if thou
believe in the Lord Jesus thou shall be saved]* For this promise is made to
unbelievers, though the good promised is not to be enjoyed by any that perform
not the Condition. Thus I have fully proved in the foresaid Appendix to my
Aphorisms: and will fall under the next question.

Answer: I read, tha^ to Abraham and his seed were the promises made or said,
Gal. 3.16. That the promise through the faith of Christ might be given to them
that believe v. 22. Jf ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed and heirs
according to the promise v. 29. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and
precious promises 2 Pet. 1*4. The children of the promise are counted for the
seed Romans 9.8. Strangers from the Covenants of promise Ephesians. 2.12. But this is
to use Mr. B. His own words of my doctrine, str^ng and wild dostrine to say
that God promises to unbelievers, the promise of salvation is made to
unbelievers, that to them he engages himself to perform: nor do I see how he
can avoid Antinomianism, which he so much abhors, to wit the justification of
Infidels, if i^ be true, that this promise is made to unbelievers. Nor is he
relieved by saying, the promise is made to them though the good promised is not
to be enjoyed, For what is this but to say the promise is made to them by God,
but not performed, which is to make God false? Nor is he relieved by saying it
is made conditionally only to unbelievers (if thou believe thou shall be
justified.) For this is equivalent to this he that bel^eveth shall be
justified, and so the promise is made only to the believer: though it may be
said to be offered, tendered, propounded as a Law, or ordinance of God to
unbelievers. yet neither Scripture language, nor any other approved Au^hors
speech, will I concieve warrant this speech, God promises, engages himself to
perform, this pormise (of salvation, justification,) is made to unbelievers.
As for his dictates in his appendix, and the next question, the futility of
them is already showed. He goes on thus.

2. If God do no more in his actual calling to believers, than he does when the
Sacrament is rightly applied to hypocrites, then he actually seals to
hypocrites. The major is proved by the enumeration on the several acts. 1. God
makes the promise. 2. He commands ministers to publish it. 3. He has
instituted the Sacraments as mutual engaging signs or seals. He commands
ministers to deliver or apply them to those that profess their consent, and
desire to enter or renew the Covenant, (This I need not stand to prove, being
Mr. T. Here yeildeth that the giving of the Sacrament is the right act of the
administrator, which it could not be except it were commanded) as also the
initiating seal to the children of those believing parents that will enter him
into the Covenant, as is proved before. Now what act more than these does God
perform to the elect or believers.

Answ. It was assayed to be proved before, but not proved that God commands
ministers to deliver or apply the Lords Supper to them that desire to renew
their Covenant, or baptism to believers infant children; what I said of the
right act of the administrator I spoke perticularly of baptism. Nor is it true
that God makes promise to hypocrites, or commands ministers to publish it,
and how is it from Scripture speech, or truths to say, God has instituted the
Sacraments as mutual engaging signs or seals, and how destructive this is to
infant baptism is showed before. To this puestion, I answer, The witness of the
spirit is a further act of God necessary to his sealing as I meant my words,
and express my self in my Postscript. Sest: 21. Page 153. what says Mr. B. to
this?

Jf it be said that he add the seal of his spirit; that is nothing to the
question, seeing we are speaking only of the outward seal. Answ. though Mr. B.
spoke only of the outward seal, yet he should have spoken of the inward also.
If he would have opposed my saying, he should have proved that God actually
seals by the outward Sacrament without the inward testimony of the spirit, till
then, he spoke nothing to the question.

But says he. Jf it be said that he assures the conscience of the truth of
the promise, and makes the outward seal effectual. I Answ. 1. That is still
the inward seal, and so nothing to this. Answ. He should rather have said it is
all in all to this, since my words deny Gods actual sealing without*

2. That is the making of the seal successful, which is nothing to the sealing:
If you seal a deed of gift to three men and one believes it, and another does
not believe it, and another does half believe it, yet this does not make it no
sealing to him that believes not; you seal equally to them all.

Answ. 1. However it be in men's sealing, yet Gods actual sealing is still
effectual, they seal only to the eye, he to the heart, 2 Cor. 1.21, 22. 2. He
makes no deed of gift but to believers, nor seals to any but them Ephesians. 1.13.
and ^4.30. Romans 4.11. and 8.15, 16.

3. And God does not alwayee assure the elect or believers, but they often
conclude hardlyer against themselves than others do that have. So that I desire
Mr. T to produce any one act which God performs to believers, and not to
others, which may appropriate the name of sealing to them.

Answ. though God do not always actually seal to believers, yet this does
neither prove that his actually sealing is uneffectual, nor to any others.

Mr. B. has answer to his demand, and were it not that I much pity the souls
of many ministers and poeple who are by this notion of [seal of the Covenant of
grace] partly perverted to uphold and continue as manifest a Corruption as ever
was in the Christian church, I mean infant baptism, being by all, most by Mr.
B. Confessed to be without institution and example in Bible, parley perplexed
about delivering and recieving the Lord's Supper, it would much trouble me that
I have spent so much time de lana Caprina, a new devised notion* But overshooes
over boots, I must needs add few lines more in answer to Mr. B. whose page 1^6
says thus.

And by this the former question about sealing conditionally may be decided:
which Mr. T. darkneth with a m^ze of words; and adds [That God seals not
conditionally in this sense, as if he left it to a man's liberty to whom he had
sealed to agnize or recognize that sealing or to free themselves if they
please, and so nullify all: yet so as to afford them awhile the favor and
privileige of being in Covenant with him, which Mr. M. He concieves meant by
his conditional sealing] Hear are more things heapt up, then will be satisfied
in one answer: therefore I say 1. it is improperly called liberty of the will
which consists in an indifferency to good or evils as Gibeouf and Bradwardin
etc. will teach you. 2. more improp^rly is the nullif^ing of the Covenant
called a freeing themselves which is an enslaving themselves. 3. And the
violating of the Covenant is not fitly called a nullifying of it. 4. Yet if you
will needs use those terms; I say that God seals the conditional promise to
thousands that shall perish, and le^veth it to their own choice, whether they
will recognize and continue, and be faithful to the Covenant (giving them
only the common grace:) which men do prove unfaithful to, and break the
Covenant, and so p^rish for treading the blood of the Covenant under foot. And
does Mr. T. think that no wicked men perish as Covenant-breake^s with Christ?

Answer. I am so used to Mr. B. his snarling at me, that I think it not worth
while to take notice of all the noise he makes, and methinks a wise Reader
should be no whit moved with these frivolous accusations of me, as darkning the
thing with a maze of words (which is a pretty phrase) which are very few and
very plain, intimating as if* I would needs use those terms though improperly,
which were used of necessity when I was to set down M M. his meaning, not as
mine, but his, even his very expressions, except it be to observe the
quarrelsom vein he was in when he wrote that book against me. If the expression
be not proper, let him blame Mr. M. yet let it be observed, that the speech of
the nullifying the covenant, was neither mine nor Mr. Ms, but nullifying all,
which is to be understood of the sealing and privilege mentioned. As for his
reference of me to Gibeo^f and Bradwardin to show the impropriety of the use of
the term [Liberty] I am not likely to be taught by them, except I had the books
(one of which I have lost by the plunder of above three hundred books never
recovered) and Mr. B. had given me better directions where to find my Lesson. I
conceive it liberty of will properly so called, whereby men are moved to choose
evil, though the persons be in a state of servitude, John 8.33. Else it were
not penal to choose evil. And for what Mr. B asserts, I have showed before
that Gods covenant of grace is neither made nor sealed by God to any but the
elect; and I say, that though wicked men may perish as covenant-breakers with
Christ, that is, as breaking their own covenant or promise with Christ, yet no
man ever breaks the covenant of grace, that is Gods new covenant or promise of
saving grace in Christ, it being the very end of the making of the new
covenant, that whereas the old occasioned God to complain of Israel as not
continuing in it, there might be another covenant established or made a Law on
better promises, that it might be (...), which we read faultless, but more
rightly Plaintless, that is, not occasioning God to complain by reason of the
breach of it, as the Author to the Hebrews plainly shows, Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9,
10, etc. And this is expressly called Gods covenant to turn away ungodliness
from Jacob, Romans 11.26, 27. So that to deny the promise of the first grace of
regeneration, conversion, or effectual calling to be properly Gods covenant of
grace, and to make a conditional after to be Gods Covenant of grace, and to
say Gods covenant of grace may be broken, and persons with whom it is made not
continue therein, is to alter or deny the new covenant, and to make void the
grace of God and the comfort of his people, and to my understanding to
symbolize with Arminians.

Mr. B. adds, 5. It is unworthily said, That God affords these but a while
the favor and privilege of being in covenant with him, seeing it is their own
wilful act to cast themselves out of this privilege; they might have
continued it, and proceeded further in it if they would.

Answer. I agree that it is unworthily said; but by this censure though he aim
at me, yet heedlesly he hits Mr. M, whose speech this was. But whoever be in
the fault, it seems while the rod is in Mr. B. his hand, I must be lashed. Yet
Mr. B. his reason is so far from proving it unworthily said, that it seems
rather to be worthily said, that God affords them but a while the favor of
being in covenant with him, since it is their own wilful act to cast themselves
out I rather think it unworthily said, because God should fail them to perform
his covenant of putting his fear into their heart, so as that they shall not
depart from him; nor his covenant be everlasting contrary to Jer. 32.40.

6. Says Mr. B. Yet withal we affirm, That to his elect God freely gives, as
leave, so a will to enter sincerely into Covenant with him, and faithfully to
keep covenant, and so the continuance of the privileges of the covenant

Answer. If Mr. B. had as the Scripture does, ascribed this to Gods covenant,
and understood the difference between the covenant of grace under the Gospel,
and the national covenant made with the people of Israel, much of the
opposition between us had been saved. But since things are as they are, I am
resolved with Gods assistance to try his strength in what is yet unanswered of
his second main argument, after I have examined the remainder of what
Paedobaptists say after the old way of arguing from Covenant and Seal.

SECT. XXXVI. Christianity is not by Birth, or the Church, nor the Church at
Civil Corporations, as Mr. M. his equivocation in the use of the term Covenant
of grace.
I Return now to Mr. M. whom I meet in his Defense, page 119. passing over my
six Arguments, and thus answering me, I join with you that it is an error to
say, that all infants of believers indefinitely are under the saving graces of
the Covenant, for although I find abundance of promises in the Scripture, of
Gods giving saving grace unto the posterity of his people, and that experience
teaches us, that God uses to continue his Church in their posterity, and that
Gods election is more among their seed than others, yet neither to Jew nor
Gentile was the Covenant so made at any time, that the spiritual part and
grace of the covenant should be conferred upon them all.

Which if true, then all have not interest in the saving grace of the Covenant,
but so many as are elect, and then the baptism of them all cannot be deduced
thence: And for the conditional covenant, it is either to all, or believers
only, and baptism by it must be of all men or only believers. And for a third
covenant, which they call outward, Mr. Baxter against Mr. Blake, page 66, 67,
and elsewhere before cited, has proved it to be a signment, and consequently
there is no such to be sealed by baptism which may justify baptizing of
believers infants, as their privilege. Nor, if the covenant of saving grace be
not made to all believers seed, can the certainty of their salvation, dying in
infancy, be thence gathered, nor is the promise of salvation made to a believer
and his seed universally, then is the Anabaptists sentence no more bloody than
Mr. Ms, then do Mr Bailee and others, in pri,nt and pulpit clamorously abuse
them, accusing them of cruelty to infants of believers, and robbing parents of
comfort concerning them, when in truth we are as favorable in our sentence of
infants as they, and do give as much comfort as we truly can. As for the
visible membership which he ascribes to infants of believers in the Christian
Church, it will appear to be but a fancy in the examining what Mr. B. brings
for it.

I objected, that if the child of a Christian be a Christian, then Christians
are born Christians, not made Christians; whereas it was wont to be a current
saying, Christiani non nascuntur sed fiunt. And if the Covenant of grace be a
birth-priviledge, how are they children of wrath by nature? To this Mr. M.
answers, It is his birthright to be so esteemed, to be reputed within the
covenant of grace, or a member of the visible Church, and alleges, Gal. 2.15.
Romans 11.21. Natural branches, that is visible Church Members.

To which I say, were I to write as a Geographer, I should reckon the people of
England old and young for Christians, but as a Divine I should not so speak:
forasmuch as the Scripture no where calls any other Christians than disciples
and professors of Christianity, Acts 11, 26. and 26, 28. 1 Pet. 4.16. The term
[ Jew by nature, Gal. 2.15.] is not as much as visible Churchmember by nature,
but by natural birth of that nation: nor is the term [ Natural branch, Romans
11.21.] as much as visible Church Members by nature, but only descendents as
branches from Abraham the root, that is the father by natural generation. To
be a visible Churchmember I never took to be all one with; to be in the
covenant of grace, but to be in the covenant of grace to be the same with a
Child of the promise, which is expressly contra-distinguished to a child of the
flesh, Romans 9.8. The distinction of the outward and inward covenant is showed
before to be vain, and to serve only for a shift. I said in my Examen
Christianity is no man's birthright, and this I proved in that no where in
Scripture is a person called Christian, but he that is so made by preaching.

I said, it is a carnal imagination, that the Church of God is like to Civil
Corporations, as if persons were admitted to it by birth, which my words show
to be meant of the Church of Christians invisible, as well as visible: Nor is
it to the purpose to prove the contrary that Mr. M. tells me, The Jewish Church
was in that like Civil Corporations. For I grant it was, the whole nation being
the same Politic and Ecclesiastic body, but this Church State was carnal as
their ordinances* whereas the Christian Church has another constitution by
preaching the Gospel. Mr. M. his cavil at my words, [In this all is done by
free election of grace] had been prevented, if the following words had been
recited and according to Gods appointment: nor is God tied, or does tie himself
in the erecting and propagating his Church to any such carnal respects, as
descent from men, Christianity is no man's birth right.] Mr. M. shows not that
God has made it so in his Christian Church by any ordinance, that the child
should be baptized with the parent, and therefore the objection still stands
good.

The speech of Mr. Rutherf^rd* are Mr. Cotton. and not to be reconc^led without
making contradictories true. My answer bea^s not against the reason of the holy
Ghost Genesis 17.7. Nor is it true but that the Holy Ghost makes this his argument
why he would have the male children circumcised, and thereby reckoned to be in
Covenant with him, because their parents are in Covenant with him, but it is
refused by Mr. M's. own Concession page 182. That the command was the formal
reason of their being Circumcised. Yet this was not it which I called a carnal
imagination, but the speech that it is in the church of God as in civil
Corporations.

Mr. M. page 123 takes upon him to defend his speech, that in the time of the
Jews, if God did reject the parents out of the Covenant, the children were
cast out with them. Against which I excepted that parents might be Idolatries,
Apostates from Judaism, draw up the foreskin again, and yet the children were
to be circumcised, which he denies not but says, Is it not evident in the
Jews at this day, that they and their children are cast out together.

I grant this, but this does not make good his own assertion or overthrow mine.
Then he tells me, If I would show the falsity of it I should have given some
instance; not of parents, who remain Gods people in external profession, though
their lives might possibly be very wicked, but of some who were cast off from
being visible professors, and yet their Infants remain in the visible society
of the church, or of some who were visibly thus taken in, and their infants
left out.

Answ. If he means this of the christian church it is easy to give instances
of Infants of those who have turned Papists* Mahometans, excommunicate persons,
who are accounted baptiz^ble by virtue of their Ancestors faith, or for defect
thereof because they are of a chosen nation ^s Mr. Rutherfurd affirms in his
Temperate plea chapter 12. concl. 1. arg. 7^ But Mr. M. his speech was of the time
of the Jews, and of their times before Christ he must needs say the same
^^less he will acknowledge Idolaters such as Ahab, Ahaz, etc. to have remained
still Gods people in external profession. He concluds the reply to the fifth
Section of my Examen thus, But instead of this you still go on in your wonted
equivocation of the word Covenant of grace taking it only of the Covenant of
saving grace, not including the external way of administration with it.

Answ. I do confess I do so take the word Covenant of grace, not knowing any
other Covenant of grace under the Gospel* but that which is of saving grace and
concieving I should speak false, and nonsense if I should include in the
Covenant of grace the external way of administration. But to charge me with
wanted equivocation whom he accuses elsewhere for destinguishing so much, and
equivocating in the use of a term only one way ^s a ridiculous charge, it
being all one as to accuse a man of nonsense because he speaks good sense, to
say I do equivocate because I do not equivocate. For he that uses a word only
in one sense does not aquivocate, equivocation being when a word is used in
more senses than one. Falla^ia aquivocationis est quando ex unius vocis
multiplici fignificatione sophistice concluditur. Dr. Prideaux Hypomn. Log:
tract: 4. c. 7. Sect. 2. Arist: Sophist: Ele^ch. l. 1. c. 3. reckons (...) or
equivocation (...), when with the same names and vowels we signify not the
same thing. which evidently proves Mr* M. guilty of equivocating from his own
words. For in the first conclusion of his Sermon he distinguishes the covenant
of grace for substance (which he makes the Covenant of saving grace) from the
external way of administration, and yet blames me for not including it. And if
he by covenant of grace include the way of external administra^ion, how could
he say in his Sermon, page 26. in the recapitulation of his two first
conclusions, If the covenant be the same, and the children belong to it. Sure
he will not say the way, of external administration is the same: Wherefore
from his own words he is deprehended to equivocate in the term Covenant of
grace, in the first conclusion meaning by it the covenant of saving graces, and
distinguishing it from the external administration, but in the second
conclusion when he says, children belong to it, he understands not the inward
but the outward covenant, not the covenant of saving grace, bu^ the way of
external administration. And yet he dare not say, the ^nfant children of
Gentile Christian believers belong to it, that is the same way of external
administration, for that is in the Jewish Legal Rites. Asemblys Confess. of
Faith, chap. 7. Art. 5. Therefore he sophistically equivocates in the use of
that term, which is his frequent manner, and yet he is not ashamed to accuse me
of that, of which his own words acquit me, as if he had learned the Artifice in
scolding to call another that first of which himself might be detected. Nor is
Mr. M. clear from equivocating in what follows, in which I find much
confusednesse and ambiguity.

CHAP. XXXVII. That the promise Genesis 17.7. proves not an external privilege
of visible Churchmembership, and initiall seal to infants of Gentile believers,
as Mr. M. asserts
AFter twenty pages spent about the explication of his second Conclusion,
having varied it five or six times, and as I have showed in every of them still
speaking ambiguously even then when he tells us, he speaks as plain as he can
possibly, I pitch upon this which is page 116. as his second Conclusion, Having
said,

Infants of believers are made free according to Abraham's Copy, he thus
expounds himself, True, according to the promise made to Abraham, I will be a
God to thee and thy seed, that look as Abraham, the Proselytes and their seed
upon their visible owning of God and his Covenant, had this visible privilege
for their posterity that they should be accounted to belong to Gods kingdom and
household with their parents, so it is here. By which words it appears, thar Mr.
M. took this to be Abraham's Copy (as he calls it, that according to the promise
made to Abraham, I will be a God to thee and thy seed, Abraham and his seed,
the proselytes and their seed upon their (the parents) visible owning of God
and his Covenant, had this visible privilege for their posterity, that they
should be accounted to belong to Godt Kingdom and Household with their parents.
2. That so it is in the Christian Church by virtue of that promise I will be
thy God and the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7* Gentile believers upon their
visibly owning of God and his Covenant, have this visible privilege for their
posterity, that they should be accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom and Household
with their parents.

Concerning which Conclusion I say still Mr. M. uses ambiguities of speech,
there being diverse Covenants of God, to wit, the Old and the New, and diverse
ways of visibly owning God, as by sacrificing, circumcision, etc. by Baptism,
the Lords Supper, frequenting the Church meetings of Christians, etc. diverse
kingdoms and households of God, as the whole world, and his Church, the visible
or invisible, which might occasion various senses of Mr. M. his words. But I
guess his meaning to be thus; As the Jews and proselytes being circumcised,
their children were to be so also: so Gentile-believers being baptized, their
children are to be baptized as visible Church Members; which being the same
with the Antecedent of Mr. M. his Enthymeme, and the consequent, it is evident
Mr. M. his argument is a mere trifling tau^ology, as I have often said. But I
shall not insist on it, having in my Apology, Sect. 10. and elsewhere showed
it, That which I shall consider chiefly in his gloss on Genesis 1^.7. which to me
seems as (or more) absurd than the gloss of Papists, Thou art Peter, and on
this Rock will I build my Church: i. e. The Bishop of Rome shall be my Vicar
general of the Oecumenicall Church. For 1. according to Mr. M. his Gloss, [
Thee, that is, Abraham, to whom the words were spoken] is put for without all
rule of Grammar or Divinity, or as they speak in Logic supponit by [every Jew,
or Proselyte, and every believer or Christian Jew or Gentile, who does not
visibly own God and his Covenant.] 2. According to this gloss the natural
seed of proselytes though but visibly owning God and his Covenant, are called
Abraham's seed, without any use of Scripture, which speak of no other seed of
Abraham but 1. Christ, Gal. 3.16. By excellency so called, 2. by grace the
elect, Romans 9.7. 3. Believers, Romans 4.1^, 12, 16, 17. Gal. 3.29. 4 By nature,
Genesis 21*12. Psalm* ^05.6. Genesis 15.13.18. Neither o^ which are proselytes who do
only own God and his covenant.

3. The promise of God to be a God to Abraham's seed is thus expounded, The
natural seed of Abraham and the natural seed of Proselytes, and of Gentile
Christians visibly owning God and his covenant, shall have this visible
privilege, that they should be accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom and
Household with their parents. In which paraphrase I note what he calls to be
accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom a visible privilege. Now [ to be
accounted] I must refer to some person who does so account, and the accounting
must be either an act of opinion, or science, or faith, and then to be
accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom, is not a visible privilege, but invisible,
it being in the thoughts of anonother, and the sense should be, I will be a God
to thy seed, that is men as v. 9. administrators shall in their thoughts take
proselytes and their children to belong to my Kingdom, or it is some outward
trans^unt act, and then it is an initial seal, or I cannot conceive what it
should be: if an initial seal either of Circumcision or Baptism, if either of
these, then this promise [ I will be thy God and the God of thy seed] has this
sense, I will bring it to pass that thou, thy seed, proselytes, believers of
the Gentiles and their seed, even infants, shall be circumcised or baptized. If
any can make any other sense of the words, I shall be his debtor. And if this
be the sense, then the promise is made a pre^iction of infant-Circumcision and
Baptism, which whether it be not a ridiculous exposition, I leave it to any
considerate man to judge. The Apostle, Rom 9.6, 7, 8. where he expounds this
very Scripture, understands being a God, of saving grace according to election,
and by Abraham's seed the elect only. Romans 4 11, 12.13, 16 justifying of
believers by faith, Gal. 3.16.29. inheritance and blessing to believers thro^gh
Christ Jesus. Our Lord Christ, Luke 20, 36, 37, 38. Of being the children of
God and of the resurrection. Mr. M. his self in his Sermon, page 7. makes these
words a promise of salvation to the infants of believers dying in their
infancy. page 10. he says, The substance of the Covenant on God^ part was to
be Abraham's God, and the God of his seed, to be an all-sufficient portion, to
be an all-sufficient reward for him, to give Jesus Christ to him, and
righteousness with him, both of justification and sanctification, and
everlasting life: And this he distinguishes from the administration of the
Covenant. Yea in his Defense of his Sermon, page 98. he conceives the right
allegation of an expression of Cameron, That Circumcision did seal primarily
the temporal promise, sanctification secondarily, to have an untoward look, as
being inc^ngruous to a covenant of grace in Christ to ratify temporal
blessings, which they may have that shall have no portion in Christ. Has it
not then a more untoward look to make this pretended visible privilege to
proselytes children though but visibly owning God and his covenan^, of having
an initiall seal Circumcision and Baptism communicated to them, meant by the
promise, I will be thy God and the God of thy seed* Genesis 17.7. Much more to
call this the Copy of Abraham the Father of believers? Not that I deny
temporal promises in that Covenant, which I have proved to be mixed, but I
allege these passages only to show the inconsistency of Mr. M. his speeches.
Besi^es, the promise were not true so expounded; for if this were the sense; I
will be the God of the posterity of proselytes owning God and his Covenant,
that they shall be accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom and his Household with
their parents, then God does promise that visible privilege to them (for the
words are a promise of an event, not a declaration of a right, and show what
God would do, not what they might claim) which in many he performs not, there
being may of the seed of proselytes, that never had the privilege, and many of
the children of Christian gentile believers, who never had the visible
privilege of being accounted to belong to Gods Kingdom, whereas the word of God
must be so expounded that it do not fall, as about this very text the Apostle
resolves, Romans 9.6.

Mr. M. Defense part, 3. page 127. says, It was not a personal privilege to
Abraham, no nor to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to have their posterity taken into
covenant by virtue of that promise, I will be the God of thee and thy seed, and
p. 129. This I add to make it more clear, that that promise Genesis 17. I will be
the God of thee and of thy seed, is a Gospel promise, which from age to age
holds forth some benefits even to the natural seed of believers.

Answer. 1. What Mr. M. means by Taking into covenant, is somewhat doubtful to
me by reason of his using the term Covenant sometimes for the outward covenant
or administration, sometimes for the promise of God, and confounding these
terms [ taking into covenant, being in covenant, belonging to the covenant,
being covenanters, entering into covenant] sometimes meaning these terms of the
promise of grace, sometimes of the initiall seal termed by him the Covenant,
and taking into covenant, being in covenant, belonging to the covenant,
sometimes being understood, (as they should always be) in order to Gods act,
who alone takes into covenant, and puts a man into covenant with himself; but
frequently, though abusively, by another man's act, a^ the administrators act of
Circumcision and Baptism, very seldom of being in covenant, or belonging to the
covenant by the circumcised or baptized persons own act of promise, though in
respect of it only, in right speech, a person is said to be a Covenant^^, or
to enter into covenant. Of which thing I have often, though in vain complained,
it causing obscurity which a man who is a teacher of others should avoid. But
concerning the promise, Genesis 17 7. I will be a God to thee and thy seed after
thee in their generations. 1. I deny that Abraham's natural posterity were
taken into covenant, that is, circumcised, (as I conceive he means) by virtue
of that promise, as I have often proved, and is in effect confessed by Mr. M.
Defense page 182. when he says, The formal reason of their being circumcised,
was the command of God. 2. I deny that under the term [ Thee] is meant any
other than Abraham's individual person. 3. I deny that under the term Thy Seed,
is ever ^eant in Scripture the natural seed of proselytes, or Christian
believing Gentiles. 4. I deny that by the promise, I will be the God of thy
seed, can be concluded that which Mr M. asserts, That th^s promise Genesis 17.7. I
will be the God of thee and of thy seed, is a Gospel promise, w^i^h from age to
age holds forth some benefits even to the natural seed of believer, or that
this was Abraham's Copy, That upon his and the proselytes visibly owning God and
his Covenant, their posterity should have this visible privilege, that they
should be accounted to belong visibly to Gods Kingdom and his Household with
their parents. Nor does Mr. M. prove this sense of that promise, Gen 17.7.
either from the words, or their coherence, or by comparing it with any other
Scripture as yielding that exposition of it elsewhere: but says something page
127, 128. of his Defense, to which (though I have answered it sufficiently in
my Postscript to Mr. Blake, Sest. 6. page 119.) yet I repeat it with addition,
because much of pleading of Paedobaptists is hence.

First, says he, though Abraham was the Father of the faithful, and so in some
sense [the root as you elsewhere call him] yet the Covenant was made with him
for his faiths sake, and believers are his children, and heirs, and partake of
those privileges and promises which were made to him: and therefore look as
Abraham's faith justified him before God, and gave him interest in the spiritual
graces of the Covenant, and none but himself, yer it was so beneficial and
advantageous to his children, that for his sake they should be accounted to
belong to Gods Kingdom and household, and partake of the external privileges
of it, and thereby be trained up under the discipline of it, and so be fitted
for spiritual privledges and graces which God does ordinarily confer upon them,
who are thus tra^ned up, so shall it be with them who become followers of
Abraham's faith,

Ans. 1. Privileges of Abraham in that promise [ I will be thy God and the God
of thy seed] are either Evangelical belonging to Abraham's spiritual seed, that
is elect persons or true believers; or domestic and political, as that of
multiplying his seed, the birth of Jsaac, continuation of his church in and
from him in his inhereting posterity till Christ's coming. the birth of Christ,
deliverance out of Egypt, possession of Canaan, these belong to Abraham's
natural seed, yet not to all but to the inheriting, not to Jshmael, nor the
sons of Keturah. The former all are partakers of it who follow the faith of
Abraham whether Jews or Gentiles, but none are in refference to these promises
reckoned Abraham's seed, but those who are real believers in Christ. A Proselyte
owning barely God and his covenant vissibly is not either Abraham's seed or
partaker of the spiritual privileges of sanctification, justification,
salvation. The latter sort of promises belonged to Abraham's natural posterity,
yet not to all but to the ^eed inheriting, nor to all of them, but to the
Jews, and in them for one of them to the line from whence after the flesh
Christ came. None of these were made to the bare vissible Proselites and their
children, though I grant their children where taken into the polli^y of Israel,
and were to be circumcised and to eat the Passover, yet neither did this
privilege belong to them by virtue of the covenant, but the command, nor for
their faiths sake as the immediate adequate reason (for then these should have
belonged to pr^selites of the gate who believed in God as Cornelius the
Centurion, who was a believer, but they did not, for he was not Circumcised,
nor to be circumcised with his children if, he had any, nor blamed for defect
of it) but merely (so far as is expressed in Scripture) because it was Go^s w^l^
to have it so. Now Mr. M. brings not a word to prove either that the children
of prosylites vissibly owning God and his covenant, or the natural post^ri^y of
christian pro^essors of the Gentiles are either Abraham's seed, or have such an
Interest in ex^ernal church privileges as Mr. M. asser^s by virtue of that
promise, or tha^ wha^ agrees to Abraham in respect of ex^ernal church
privileges for his faiths sake must agree either to only vissible prosylites,
or christians, or real believers, but speaks like a dictator not a disputer.
Nor is there any good consequence in this, what, agreed to Abraham for his
faith's sake agrees to every believer, For then every believer should be Father
of the faithful as Abraham was for his faith's sake. It is true that if the
truth of Abraham's faith were the immediate adequate reason of external
privileges as i^ was of justification, it would follow them, what ex^ernal
privileges agree to Abraham for his faith's sake should agree to every
believer, but such believers then must be true real believers as Abraham was,
not bare vissible prosy^i^s or christian professors. But surly Mr. M. means no
more by [for Abraham's faiths sake] but this, that Abraham's faith was the
motive or occasion God took to enter into covenant with him, nor was it simply
his real true faith, but his remarkable exemplary faith described Romans 4.18,
19. which was the motive or occasion of Gods entering into covenant with him,
which is not verefied of every true believer, and the motive or occasion was
not barely the truth, but the eminent degree of his faith. In my Postscript
Page 119. I gave a like instance Matthew. 16.18, 19. the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, binding and loosing were given to Peter for his confession sake, yet it
follows not the keys are given to every one that makes the same confession as
he did. And the reason because the confession was eminent and exemplary at a
special time, and it was but the occasion, not the immediate adequate reason of
that gift to him* for that was only the special grace and purpose of Gods will.

2ly, says Mr. M. had it been a perculiar privilege to Abraham's natural seed
prosilites of other nations could never by virtue of their becoming followers
of Abraham's faith have brought their children into covenant with them so as to
have a visible Church-member-ship, as we know they did.

Answ. I do not know that the proselytes natural seed had the visible
church-member-ship Mr. M. Mentions by virtue of the promise Genesis 17.7. and
their parents faith, but of Gods command Exodus 12 48.

3ly says he, And we know also that this promise of being the God of believers
and their seed was frequently renewed many hundreds of years after Abraham,
Jsaac, and Jacob, were dead and rotten, as Deuteronomy. 30.6. so Esa: 44.2, 3. so
likewise Esaias 59.21. and this last promise your self acknowledge Page 54. to be
intended chiefly of the nation of the Jews, at their last calling in: And
whereas you use to elude these texts by saying these things belong only to the
elect. when they come to believe, and reach not to any privilege which is
external; I reply, by the same answer you might cut off the seed of Abraham,
Jsaac, and Jacob, for to believers then as well as believers now were these
promises made.

Answ: That which I say is no elusion of the texts, but so plain and evident,
that Paedo-baptists of note do concur with me. Mr. Rich. Baxter. in his letter
to Mr. Bedford in the friendly accommodation between them. To this and that
which follows I answer; 1. These following arguments persuade me that you
err; 1. no such promise (tha^ give^h certainly Cornovum or the first effectual
grace to all the rightly baptized or to all the children of believers) can be
showed in Scripture; I will circumcise thy heart and of thy seed, seems to me
to be none such 1. because else it should not be the same circumcision that is
promised to the parent of the child: but there is no intimation of two
circumcisions in the texr: one to the father, being only an increase or
actuating of grace; and the other to the child being the giving the first
renewing grace: 2. the text seems plainly to speak of [their seed] not in their
infant state but in their adult Deuteronomy. 30. For. 1. v. 2. The conditon of the
promise is expressly required, not only of the parents, but of the child^en
themselves by name. 2. And that condition is the personal performance of the
sam acts which are tequired of the parents viz: to return to the Lord and obey
his voice with all their heart and soul. 3. The circumcision of heart promised
is so annexed to the act that it appears to be meant only of those that were
capable of the act v. 6. The Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart and the
heart of thy seed to love the Lord thy God So that it is not meant of those that
are incapable of so loving, And after, A new heart is given to the elect only.
By this doctrine you feign a new heart not to be proper to the elect, which is
contrary to all the Anti-arminians that I know of. Out of which it plainly
appears that Deuteronomy. 30.6. Speaks not of an external privilege, but a spiritual
grace proper to the elect, nor can be meant of the seed of believers in their
infant sta^e, but in their adult.

In the text Jsai. 44.2, 3. speaking of Gods pouring his spirit on the seed of
Jacob his servant. And Ieshrim whom he had chosen (whom he bids not to fear)
and his blessing on his offspring and that they shall spring up as amongst the
grass etc. the terms Jacob and Jeshurim are taken not personally (for it were
in vain to bid Jacob dead long before not to fear) but Collectively either for
the nation of Israel, or the church of God called the Jsrael of God. Gal. 6.16.
In the former acception the seed and offspring must be meant of the children of
Israel, that is the Israelites by natural generation, and then the sense is (as
Mr. Gataker in his Annot. on that text) my spirit, that is my blessing (the one
expounds the other) whereby they and their state should thrive and flourish,
and mul^iply, and increase, that had been almost clean exhaust and exceedingly
impaired in a manner beyond al hopes of recovery before chapter 26.19 Ezekiel. 37.3.
11, 14. So of their land chapter 32.15. and of their ^eed chapter 61.9 He follows
still the comparison taken from grounds well watered as chapter 58.11. and the seed
sown in soil chapter 32.10* In the latter (...) he, it is a type o^ that spiritual
growth and increase of Gods church, and the members (...) under the Messiah, by
the graces and comfort^ o^ his spirit Acts. 9.31. E^hes. 4.12.15. Col. 2.19.2
^et. 3.18. S^e chapter 2^.6. and 37.3^. and 61.9.21. Take it either way it makes
no^hi^g for a^ external vissible privilege from age to age belonging to the
natural seed even o^ (...) believers: but in the first acception it n^^es a
future multiplying of the Jews then much wast^d, in the la^ter spiritual
graces and comforts to (...).

And for the last t^xt Ames. Coro^* Acts. 5 c. 2^ versum vicesimum, quem in
hanc partem Remonstrantes trahunt, in alteran part^m accipit Apostolus Paulus
Romans 11.27. promissionem absolut^m and electorum propriam in eo Contineri
manifestis verbis confirmans: Exterm^n nihil son^t spiritus meus qui est in
(...). ^eminis etiam inculcatio solos electos and ^^^caciter vocatos notari
docet Apostolo sic hunc citulum interpretante Romans 9.^. Gal 3.16. and 4.28. Mr.
Gataker annot: on Esai. 59 21. thy seed] the faithful the seed according to the
promise Deuteronomy. 30.6* Romans 9.6, 8 Gal. 3.16.29. Se Dr. Owen of Perseverance chapter
3. Sect. 41. chapter 4. Sect. 3. chapter 5. Sect. 9. chapter 7. Sect. 23.

And for what Mr M counts absurd I yield i^ that my answer cuts off Abraham's
Isaac's and Jacob's natural posterity from these promises except they be elect.
And as for Mr. M. deprehending me in absurdity and trifling such as I cenceive
in Mr. Cottons^ words, I tell him that his discourse runs upon a mistake of my
words and meaning (which he does almost in every thing he repea^s of m^n^ and
censu^es out of have to frame his book as I am willing to conceive.) For where
do I say that which he ascribes to me, and from which he would infer like
triflin^ and absurdity as was in Mr. Cottons speech, that God made this promise
to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to be the God of them and their seed in all
generations? And yet if I had said it, such trif^ing as Mr. Cotton used, would
not have follow^d on those words ascribed to me, unless I had said also, that
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were put for every believer and [ their seed] had
been meant in that proposition ascribed to me, of their spiritual seed by
faith. And for the close of that discourse in which he tells me, Thus by your
own argument you cut off all the Jews but such as were elect and inwardly
holy, as much as you do the Gentiles from having any visible communion in
external privileges, I say Mr. M. fathers on me his own brats, first a
proposition I deliver not, then an argument which was none of mine as he makes
it, and then a conclusion I never owned, nor would follow on that proposition
or that argument he would father on me. For if it were granted that I asserted
that God promised to Abrahaham, Isaac, and Jacob, to be the God of them and
their seed in all generations, and that my reasoning on Mr. Cottons words would
prove this proposition must be meant only of the elect, and inwardly holy (as
Mr. M. falsely imagines) I do not cut off the Gentiles from having any visible
communion in external privileges, unless I had said the elect Jews or
Gentiles only had visible communion in external privileges by virtue of that
promise, Genesis 17.7. whereas I never said that external privileges, as v. 9. of
the initiall seal of Circumcision was proper to the elect, and inwardly holy,
or derived it from the promise, Genesis 17.7, but only from the command, v. 9.10.

SECT. XXXVIII. Animadversions on the third Chapter of the first part of Mr. T.
Cobbe^s Jus^^ Vindic. Sect. 1, 2, 3. about Genesis 17. whereby his positions about
Church Covenant and external privileges of the covenant of grace are refelled.
TO how little purpose Mr. M. has alleged the promise, Genesis 17, 7. has been
considered* I shall now view what Mr, Cobbe^ Just. Vindic. part 1. ^hap. 3.
brings for his doctrine of federal holiness of Church Members children from
thence. First he begins, Sect. 1. with certain distinctions, The Covenant of
grace, says he, is considered either nakedly or as invested with a visile
political Church covenant, if not explicit, yet implicit. We are to consider
this place, Genesis 17. not so much in the former as the later sense; God making
of it with ference to the Church, which was to remain in the posterity of
Isaac, v. 18, 19, 20, 21. albeit at present it be to be contained in Abraham's
own family, whence also he ordains an initiatory seal, and way of
restipulation, to which they submitting together as one selected body
collectively, and as members thereof distributively, they did implicitly make
confession and promise to God and bind themselves in a nearer religious tie one
unto another. Hence then renewed Deuteronomy. 29. 2 Chronicles. 15. and 30. and 34. Nehem.
10. Ezekiel. 16, 8.

Answer. It had been well if Mr. C. had defined the covenant of grace in this
sense, and how it is fe^cht from Genesis 17.7. that I might have known whether he
takes it in the same notion which I do, whose Examen Mr. Cotton in his letter
to me certified me that he was to examine. A covenant in the proper acception
is a promise single or mutual, the covenant of grace is Gods covenant or
promise of grace, a term not used in Scripture, though agreeably enough to it.
Every covenant of God may be well enough termed A covenant of grace. It was of
his grace, that is, free favor, that God made any covenant with man in
innocence, that he entered into covenant with the Israelites at the giving the
Law at Mount Sinai: yet commonly Divines oppose the covenant of grace to either
of these covenants. It is true there are who make the covenant at Mount Sinai
the covenant of grace with a different administration, which to be a mistake,
is showed in that which follows. Usually difference is made between the
covenant of grace and the covenant of works, or of the Law, which is agreeable
to the Apostles expressions, Gal. 3.17. and 4.24. The one promises
justification by keeping the Law, the other by believing in Christ. I for my
part take the covenant of grace for Gods promise of Evangelicall saving grace,
to wit, regeneration, justification by Christ, etc. according to the doctrine
of the Author to the Hebrews, chap. 8, 9, 10, 1^*12. and 10, 16, 17. which our
Lord Christ calls The New Testament, Matthew. 26.28. I acknowledge also, that
Genesis 17.7. and elsewhere, this covenant was made to Abraham under c^vert
expressions, which in their first and most obvious sense held forth other
things. But I am put to guess what Mr Cobbet means by the covenant of grace,
and in which words, Genesis 17. and in what sense he places the covenant of grace
there. He speaks of a visible political Church Covenant, and conceives the
covenant of grace, Genesis 17. to be invested with it either explici. or implicit.
The visible poli^icall Church Covenant (as I conceive from sundry writings of
the New England Elders) is, that promise of members in a particular Church
gathered in a Congregationall way wherein over and besides the promise they
make of faith in God, and in the Lord Christ, they explicitly or implicitly
promise to each other to walk in holy communion of Gods Ordinances, and
subjection to those that are over them with the members of the congregation to
which they adj in themse^ves as members.

Mr. C. supposes this covenant as elsewhere so here, Genesis 17. to be included,
I wi^h many others see no clear ground for such a covenant there or elsewhere.
Besides, what he means by the covenant of grace considered as invested with a
visible political Church Covenant, if not explicit, yet implicit, is obscure*
[Invested] is as much as clothed, and it is used as a term of Law, as in the
great question about investures into Bishoprics in former ages, and so it
notes a legal admission. But in what sense the covenant of grace is said to be
invested, is somewhat dark. This I conceive is the meaning, That the covenant
of grace, Genesis 17.7. is made to Abraham and his seed considered as joined by a
visible political Church Covenant. But I conceive such a position neither true
nor safe: Not true, for no mention either explicit or implicit of such a Church
covenant is here or in any of the places he cites. None ^here: For though God
made the promise in reference to the Church which was to remain in the
posterity of Isaac, v. 18, 19 20* 21, yet that Church might be joined by common
profession of the same God, without a promise explicit or implicit of walking
together in communion under an eternal polity. God ordained Circumcision as a
sign of the Covenant made with Abraham: But in what words or f^ct there is any
implied way of rest^pulation, confession, or promise to God, I am yet to seek,
much m^re wherein they did bind themselves in a nearer religious^ie one to
another. For though God intended by Circumcision to bind them to leave sin and
keep his precepts, and to direct them to look for the Messi^h* yet that they by
any word or act of theirs, did promise to do so, I find not there, nor is it
likely that Ishmael did make any such profession or promise to God or to others
of the family, considering his after carriage to Isaac, and his expulsion from
Abraham's house. As for the other texts, Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13, there is mention of
entering into covenant with the Lord, not a word of entering into covenant one
with another, much less of submitting to any outward Ecclesiastical governors
or government. The same may be said of the Covenant, 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 34, 31, 32. there is a covenant to God mentioned, but not a Covenant to
each other called a Church Covenant. 2 Chronicles. 30 There Is no mention of any
covenant, but of keeping the Passover. Nehem. 10.29, 30. it is said, They clave
to their brethren, their Nobles, and entered into an Oath to walk in Gods Law:
but that they entered into a covenant one with another, I find not. If the
words, They clave to their brethren their Nobles, be meant of a promise to
them, yet a promise of subjection to them as Ecclesiastical superiors, of
holding communion with them in ordinances for admission to Church Membership, I
find not there, but an engagement with them to re^orm certain abuses: And then
Ordinances (not a Covenant) were made to charge themselves with for the service
of the Lord, Ezekiel. 16.8. There Is no mention of man's promise to God, or to one
another, but the promise of God to them, that he swear to Israel, and entered
into covenant with them, and they became his. Nor is the position safe, that
the Covenant of grace, Genesis 17.7. is made to Abraham and his seed considered as
joined by a visible political Church Covenant: for then should not the
proselytes of the gate, as for instance, Cornelius the Centurion be included in
the promise of being a God to him, because it is certain he was not j^yned by a
visible political Church Covenant to the Jewish Church, since he was
uncircumcised, and counted unclean, insomuch as that Peter's going in to him,
A^ts 11.3. was conceived as unwarrantable for that reason. And what can be the
issue of this doctrine, if received, but perplexing superstitious fears of
their salvation in some, if they be not in Church Covenant, for without the
promise of being God to a person, no man is s^ved, and injurious censures of
those not in Church Covenant, as out of the way of salvation, which will make
it like the grand Imposture (^s Dr. Morton calls it) of the Romish church That
out of communion with it is no salvation. I do not make such a Church Covenant
unlawful, for what we are bound to do, we may lawfully promise to do, nor do I
deny its expediency and usefulness, especi^lly if it be not in too strict and
intangling a form. But I think there is no suffici^nt proof that it is of Divine
institution, or the form of a particular Church either in resp^ct of its truth
or purity, much less that it is a condition of interest in the covenant of
grace, as if the promises thereof were m^de under that condition. But I
conceive this speech of Mr. C. he^e together wi^h that other excepted against
m^ by me in the first part of this Review* page 92 are very dangerous. I go on.

Again, says Mr. C. That Covenant of grace is considered either in it self, or
its administration; to which purpose Circumcision is called the Covenant,
partly because it was the sign and seal of the covenant of grace, Genesis 17 11,
12* 13* partly too, because it was the covenant of grace in the administration
of it, Ier. 13.11. and Isai. 24. and Zach. ^1.10. has reference to the
covenant of grace, both as invested with the Church covenant, and in respect of
Church administration thereof.

Answer. The administration of the covenant of grace is to me no way
intelligible but thus, that by it is meant the administering the promise it
self, which I know not how it should not be done but by making or writing, or
some other way representing or recording it, or the things promised in the
covenant of grace, to wit, justification, etc. which may be done either by
Divine authority and power conferring or bestowing, and this none can do but
the eternal Father, Son and Spirit, or by way of signification, revelation or
assurance of them, so I confess the preaching of the Gospel, and in some sense
the Sacraments (as they are called) may be termed Church-administrations of the
covenant of grace.

But this seems not to be Mr. C. his meaning, for he says, Circumcision is
called the Covenant, partly because it was the sign and seal of the covenant of
grace, Genesis 17.11, 12, 13. partly too because it was the covenant of grace in
the administration of it Which words are an in^pt tautology, if to be the
covenant of grace in the administration of it, be not somewhat beyond being a
sign and a seal of it; and since circumcision is said to be both, circumcision
must not only sign and seal the covenant of grace, but must be the
administration of it, which how it should do but by conferring the grace of it,
I know not. If it be that way, it must do it either ex opere operato, or ex
opere operantis: if this later way, then how do infants receive grace by it,
who believe not, nor do any other act pre-required? if the former, it is the
same with the tenent of Popish Doctors. And for the text, Gen* 17.11, 12 13.
his own words, page 43. refu^e him when he s^i^h, Every one that ha^h read
Catecheticall doctrine will say* that when in one verse it is said of
Circumcision in their flesh, that it was his covenant in their flesh: It is an
usu^ll Metonymy in speaking of Sacraments to call the outword sacramenntall
sign and seal by the name of the thing signified and scaled, page 44.
Circumcision is b^t a branch of the covenant, or condition of the covenant on
their part. As for the tex^ Jer. 13.11. there is not a word of ci^cumcision in
(...), only it is said that God had caused to cleave to him the whole house of
Israel, as the girdle cleav^th to the ^yns of a man, but to refer this to
circumcision is frivolous* God had by his Covenant, Providence and actings for
them in wonderful ma^er made them to cleave to hi^, That ^hey might be unto
him for a people, as i^ follows in the v^rse. In the other text, Isai. 24 5 it
is said the Jews had broken the everlasting covenant* which if it be und^rstood
of the covenant of grace, then may it be br^ken, and persons may fa^l from
grace; if of circumcision, as Mr. C. seems to und^rstand it* then it is no more
but they had uncircumcised themselves, which were both fa^se: for at that time
and after, even unto this day, ^he Jews keep the ordinance of circumcisioon
very strictly, and frivol^s as if this h^d been the great ma^ter for which the
earth mourned, did fade away, languished, was utterly emptied and spoiled. But
^the covenant here is meant of the covenant of ^he Law a (...)* which was
everlasting, that is, to continue as long as their p^^i^y stood, Exodus 24.7, 8.
as Ex^n. 27, 21, and 12.24. and 28.43, 2 Chronicles. 6.2.2. and 7.16. the word [ for
ever] is used for a long time, or the continuance of the Jewish S^ate. So Jer:
11, 3, 4, Jer: 31, 32, they are accused to break the covenant at m^un^ Sinai by
disobedience, chiefly by idolatry, and therefore neither of the T^x^s yield any
thing to prove circumcision to be the covenant of grace in the administration
of it. That Gods breaking of his Covenant, Zach 11.10: has no reference to the
Covenant of grace, either as invested wi^^ Church Covenant or
Church-administration thereof, is showed above, Sect 25, in the right
administration of it.

The distinction he makes of being in the Covenant intentionally and (...) I
allow, nor do I deny the distinction o^ being in Covenant internally and
savingly, and only externally in respect, of men, though I find not Ishmael
any where said to be in the Covenant, and the promises Romans 9.4. are meant of
the peculiar promises to the nation of Israel, by the Covenants are meant the
tables of the Covenant as Beza in his Annot. on that place, however all there
said is meant of the Israelites only as is showed before Sect. 29. and
therefore this place makes nothing for Christian Gentile professors being
externally in the Covenant of grace as Mr. C. imagines. Nor do I know any Text
in the Scripture wherein that phrase is used of being in Covenant or having the
Covenant belong to them externally only.

The distinction of being in Covenant externally in their own or their parents
right has no proof in the new Testament, however it have in the old. The seed
of Abraham by proportion is a new invented sort of Abraham's seed, no where
Proselytes of old (not true believers) in their Generations* and (were) visible
inchurched beleivers in their Generations scil. parents and children together
are terms Abraham's seed in Scriptue. That Deuteronomy. 29 14. notes the sorts of
persons, not the individuats cannot be true* for [ him that is here and him
that is not here] note individual persons distinguished according to their
present and future existence. That Genesis 17 7. is meant of a Church seed
indefinite or by proportion, is said, not proved by Mr. C. and denied by me. I
pass on to his Conclusions.

Sect. 2. I grant the first conclusion according to the explication I give in
my Exercit. Page 2. in my Examen part. 3. Sect. 2. that the Covenant Genesis 17 7*
was a Covenant ^f grace, and the same in nature with that Covenant of grace n^w
h^ld ^orth to us. But Mr. C. has a further meaning to wit that the Covenant as
it is a Covenant of Evangelical grace contains a promise to a Gentile believere
of the external privilege of an initial seal or external ^ight to outward
ordinances to them and their natural seed, and accordingly says Page 41 The
Covenant then of the Gospel has outward privileges of Gods Tabernacle annexed
as well as Abraham's Covenant, yea in that it is the same with it. Which
conclusion in this sense were manifestly false, for the Lord has of purpose
taken away such a Tabernacle according to Christ's prediction John 4.21. that
there might be no distinction of Jews and Gentiles all having one access by
one Spirit to the Father Ephesians. 2.18. As for his proofs I intend not to construe
every speech of Mr C. there being many of them if they be good sense yet very
dark, but only show the impertinency of his Texts to this purpose.

Le^i. 26.11, 1^. Contains a promise proper to the Isralites obeying God v, as
v 13 etc. and shows, and it is a promise of that which is not now to be
performed to us or settling his Tabernacle among us, the Tabernacle and Temple
being now taken away since Christ's incarnation. God has settled no Tabernacle
now among us but Christ's body or heavens John. 2.21. Heb. 8.2. and 9.24 or the
Church of God. 1 Cor. 3.6, 17. and 6.19 and his settling this Tabernacle or
Temple is by saving grace, has no reference to ou^w^rd Church privileges, such
as Mr. C. means.

Revel. 21.3. is a promise of something to be performed in the last time
whether at the calling of the Jews, or after the judgment. whatever it be it
notes another thing than external right to outward ordinances common to elect
and Reprobate, though it be expressed by a term illusive to the material
Tabernacle of the Jews.

Ephesians. 2.11, 12. It is said the Gentiles were without God in the world after
their Conversion; not because their children wanted an external right to an
initial seal, for Cornelius the Centurions children and such Proselytes of the
gate wanted such a right, and yet were not without God in the world; but
because they knew not the true God, and his will concerning them that believe
in Christ, Piscat: Analys: loci, or or worshipped not the true God after, his
will as the new Annot. even as Galat. 4.8 the Galatians before their Conversion
are said not to have known God, but to do service to them that by nature were
not Gods.

Exodus 29.45 is a promise to the Israelites whom he brought out of Egypt v. 46.
and from whom he had sanctified A^ron and his sons.

Revel. 21.4. as v. 3. is neither m^^nt of ou^ward ordinances, nor of an esta^e
which is yet pertaining to the godly who are still under persecutions.

Levit: 26.41, 42, 45. Certain promises of restoring the Israelites from
Captivity and bringing them back to Canaan as v. 43, 44. show.

Zech. 9.11. whether meant of temporal deliverance or spiritual it is another
thing than outward ordinances, in the former sense it is proper to the Jews
carried to Babylon, in the latter to the elect only. The like may be said of
Genesis 17.5.5.8 Psalm. 111.5. Ierem. 33.31, 51. (likely v. 35.36.) 2 Cor. 6.16*
18. Exodus 3.6. compared with Levi^ 20.37, 38. Heb: ^1.6. In none of which
their's a word of a right of Infants or mere professing parents to the visible
administration by virtue of Gods Covenant Gen: 17.7. to be Abraham and his
seed; nor does it follow because God says my Covenant shall be in your flesh
for an everlasting Covenant Gen: 17.13. therefore ou^ward ordinances and right
to them as then are to be perpetual, for then Circumcision of which those wods
are spoken must con^inue still, but rather as Mr: L^y in his Annot: on Gen:
17.13. The Covenant may be said to be everlasting in respect of the spiritual
part for which Circumcision was ordained, and in respect of the long
continuance of the outward ceremony.

If Ezekiel: 37.25, 27. be meant of the Jews calling in the time yet to come, and
the same phrases be used, yet that ei^h^r the promise should be meant v: 25. of
their childrens having ^n in^^ial seal, v: 27. their having a material
Tabernacle or Temple and outward ordinances as in the former time is but a vain
conceit: For then they must by the same reason have David the son of Iesse to
be their king. wherefore as by David is meant Christ typified by David, so
Circumcision is continued in the mortifying of sins Col. 2 11. and Gods placing
his Tabernacle is as Piscat: sch. in Ez^h: 37.27. The gracious inhabiting of
God in the hearts of the elect 2 Cor: 6.16. And if because in the new Testament
such allusive phrases are found as are in the same language with those used in
the old, therefore such outward things are imported by them as were in the Law,
then outward privileges, offices, rites should be meant by presenting our
bodies as Sacrifices, being Priests to God etc. It is in my apprehension a
manifest Anti-evangelical and Iudaizing assertion which Mr: C. has, that the
Covenant of the Gospel has outward privileges of Gods Tabernacle annexed as
well as Abraham's Covenant, yea itn that it is the same with it.

Sect: 3 ^^ when he says Conc: 2. that the Covenant of grace Gen: 17. is to be
considered as invested with Church Covenant, it is such an ambiguous expression
as I know not well how to understand what I imagine to be the meaning I have
refuted before in this Section. Nor does that which is here said, that there is
mention of this Covenant to be kept by them v: 9. and further expressed in one
particular thereof v: 10. and that this was required as an initiatory sign
incorporating them into one instituted Church body, whereby they were made
capable of further Church-ordinances and other duties which lay upon them
virtually by it, prove the Church Covenant he speaks of, unless it be proved
(which I think he cannot do) they did tie themselves thereby to walk with one
another in holy Communion with subjection to their Superiors as a distinct
visible political Church.

SECT. XXXIX. Animadversions on Sect: 4. of the same Chapter: whereby the
Co^ceits of Mr. C about external being in the Covenant of grace are showed to
be vain.
Sect: 4 Mr. C. sets down this conclusion, that there is a bare external being
in the Covenant of grace of persons who possibly never shall be saved. But he
no where showed in Scripture either the term Covena^ of grace, or the phrase of
being in the Covenant of grace externally or in^ernally. Did Mr: C. and other
Paedobaptists distinctly set down 1. What they mean by [ the Covenant of grace]
2. What they mean by [ being ex^ernally in the Covenant of grace] whether it be
any other thing than to be Baptized or Circumcised, and what it is distinct
from one of these or Title to one of them. 3. By what act ^t is that a person
is externally in the Covenant of grace, whether Gods or his own, or others as
v. 9. The administra^ors, parents, or the Churches, we might more easily judge
of his position. If he mean no more than this, that there is a being in the
Covenant of grace in respect of men, that is, men as administrators and others
do think or judge some to be in the Covenant of grace, that is, that God has
promised saving grace to some to whom he has not, I grant it, and I might say
in the like manner, some are excernally elected, regenerated, justified,
adopted who are not so savingly. And I should grant that such as are taken to
be in the Covenant of grace by reason of their own profession of faith in
Christ are rightly judged by us to be in the Covenant of grace and may be
baptized, though perhaps they shall not be saved. But such as are taken by us
to be in the Covenant of grace without Gods promise or act of their own
Profession of faith, by an administrators of baptism and others mistake.
Concerning the promise Gen: 17. As if it were made to every believing Gentile
by profession inchurched, and his natural seed as Abraham's Church seed (as Mr.
C. calls them) are not therefore rightly judged to be in the Covenant of grace,
nor rightly judged to be fit subjects of baptism which appears to be Mr: C's.
meaning by his words Page 51. when he says, the Covenant is theirs externally
and quoad homines considered as invested with Church Covenant, and in reference
to Covenant-ordinances whereof they are capable as of old they were of
Circumcision and are now of baptism. Let us consider what Mr. C. brings to this
purpose.

what he says the promise is said to belong to those Jews Rom: 9.4. on whom
yet the word took no saving effect v: 6. is not right. For v: 4. is not meant
by [ the promises] he promise by excellency called the promise of the spirit
Gal: 3.14. given to Abraham v: 17. distinct from the Law v: 18. But the
peculiar promises which are made to the Israelites upon the obeying of the Law
that they should possess Canaan, live long in it, and prosperously as Deuteronomy,
5.16. and 28.3, etc. For all that which is said Rom: 9.4. is meant of what was
proper co the Israelites after the flesh. But the Covenant of grace is
established or made a Law on better promises Heb: 8.6. And the phrase Rom: 9.6.
[ not as if the wo^d of God had taken none effect, which is word by word, not
as if or (...) it may not be, that is: it is not possible, or it may not be
yielded that the word of God fell or was not verified] is meant not of the
promises, v: 4, but of the promises mentioned v: 8. to wit that Gen: 17.7.
Which he does not say did belong to any exte^nally on whom it had no saving
effect: but supp^se it to have been verefied and made good to all to whom it
was made, who in Go^s intention were only the elect, called therefore Children
of the promise v: ^ that is those that were bego^t^n by the promise, not to
every child of Abraham by natural generation, in particular not to Ishmael, nor
Esau. Nor is it right which he adds, Hence Rom: 9.4. By opposition to the
Gentiles, hey (the Jews meant v: 4.) where those which were not strangers to
the Church, but of it, if he mean it of the Christian Church.

I grant the Jews were not strangers to the covenants of promise, but in the
same, Ephesians. 2: 11, 12. But that all the Gentile believers and their children
were then that which they were not before, is not a ^ight collection. For as
they were (...), uncircumcised in the flesh, so they were still; nor were they
ever of the polity of Israel. And if the Covenants of promise be meant of the
Tables of the covenants, and if the word [ promise] be placed thus (as some
place it) not having hope of the promise, they might be still said to be
strangers from the Covenants. However, if then they were acquainted with, and
partakers of the Covenants of promise, this can be understood of none but true
believers and the covenant as it was spiritual, which is nothing to the being
externally in the covenant of graces.

Mr. C. adds, Hence God makes his covenant with them all, Deuteronomy. 29:10, 12, 13,
14, 15. speaking there of that solemn renewall of the covenant of grace, as
Deuteronomy. 30:6, 10, 12, 13* 14. compared with Romans 10, 6, 7, 8. evinceth.

Answer. The more ample discussing this place, and vindicating my Exceptions
from what Mr. B. replies, I reserve till I answer his Plain Scripture proof,
etc. part 1. c. 17 and his Corrective, Sect. 5. For present I say, If God did
make his covenant with them all, and it appears to have been the covenant of
grace, as Deuteronomy: 30.6, 10, 12, 13, 14. compared with Romans 10.6, 7, 8. evinceth,
then all must be not only externally in the covenant of grace, but also
internally: For the promise Deuteronomy. 30.6. is to circumcise the heart to love the
Lord, cannot be expounded of the external being in the covenant of grace, but
internal. Mr B. in his Friendly Accommodation, A new heart is given to the
elect only, which is all one with the circumcised heart.

He goes on, So Ezekiel 16.8. He made a covenant with that Church and people, many
whereof proved very base, as that chapter shows. Now this was a covenant of
grace, albeit invested with Church Covenant, as appears in that v. 60. That God
for that his Covenants sake considered as his, will deal so graciously with
them after all their provocations, as v. 62, 63. Albeit he did not thus
properly for the sake of that investure of his covenant annexed, scil. thy
covenant, the Churches covenant abractively considered, v. 61. See more Ezekiel.
36. from v. 17. to the chapters end.

Answer. The thing that Mr. C. should prove is an external being in the
covenant of grace quoad homines. But Ezekiel. 16.8. neither speaks of the covenant
of grace, but the covenant of the Law, which was made in mount Sinai Junius the
new Annot: refer to Exodus 19. and 24. Piscat. Schol. in locum, visitari te per
Mosen, educendo te ex Aegypto, and pangendo tecum fedus, atque ita ducendo te
in uxorem: Nor is this meant of external being in covenant in respect of men,
but of Gods promise to them, as the words plainly import,, I swear unto thee
and entered into covenant with thee, says the Lord. As for the reason why the
covenant v. 8 must be the covenant of grace, because he will deal graciously
with them for that his covenant, v. 60. it goes on this supposition, that the
covenant v. 8, is the same with the covenant v. 60. But Piscat. Schol. on the
place reckons that v. 60, to be the covenant made in the times of Araham,
Isaac, and Jacob, and Levit. 26.42, leads to it. But were it granted to be the
covenant by Moses, it follows not that the covenant must be the covenant of
Evangelicall grace. For in Moses his renewing the covenant in the land of Moab,
there is a promise of reduction of them, Deuteronomy. 30.3. which being upon condition
of their returning to God, and obeying his voice according to all that Moses
commanded that day, must be understood of the Covenant of the Law, which had
its promises of such temporal favors, and not of the covenant of Evangelical
grace. That which Mr. C. says, That he did not thus properly, for the sake of
that investure of his covenant annexed, scil. this covenant, the Churches
covenant abstractively considered, v. 61. I know not what sense to make of it.
There Is not a word of Church Covenant, or investure with it. The plain meaning
is either this, Not by that covenant of the Law which thou have broken, but by
the new covenant of the Gospel, as Junius in his Annot. in locum, Diodati, the
new Annot. or this as Piscat. Schol. in locum, not because thou art worthy of
this aggregation of the nations, as if thou had kept covenant with me, as if
he had said, but of my grace or free favor, or as Grotius* It is a Metonymy as
if it were said, not because on thy part thou have stood to the covenant.

I have seen Ezekiel 36. from v. 17. to the chapters end, and I see nothing there
to Mr C. his purpose to prove a bare external being in the covenant of grace*
There Is not the word Covenant in all the passage: But on the contrary, there
are promises, v. 25, 26, 27. of a new heart giving his Spirit, which as Mr. B.
says truly, is proper to the elect, and notes an internal being in the
covenant of grace. There Is little but muddiness and impertinency in the rest.

He speaks of an external being in Christ, John 15.2. (which is not denied in
respect of profession of those that are so) and of an external partaking of
Christ, for which it is likely he cites (not as it is printed, Heb. 13.14.) but
Heb. 3.14. But sure that partaking is a saving partaking to which is required
the holding fast to the end the beginning of our confidence. For an external
partaking may be without condition.

The Jewish refusers, Ios. 1.11. are called Christ's own, either by kindred or
right to them from the old engagements of them to be his by their Ancestors, or
by virtue of this redeeming them from Egypt, the land of the North, or some
other way. Surely not because they did externally belong to Christ, or were
externally in the covenant of grace and were to be baptized. For they expressly
denied Christ, and rejected the counsel of God against themselves being not
baptized by John, Luke 7:30.

I grant there is an external being called, Matthew: 22.14, but this not
competent to infants: I doubt whether Heb: 10, 29, be to be interpreted of an
external being sanctified quoad homines in respect of others by the blo^d of
the Covenant. The New Annot: say thus, In regard of the meritorious sufficient
satisfaction purchased by it. Piscat: Schol. in locum per quem vide batur esse
sanctificatus quamdiu, scil. Christum confitebatur. Dictum (...), I think it is
meant of the same sanctification of which he speaks in the same chapter, v.
10.14. chapter 13, 12, to wit, an effectual sanctification by remission of sins,
and purging their consciences from dead works, chap: 9, 14, (which alone, and
not an external sanctificacion I find ascribed to the blood of the Covenant)
and the person there said to be sanctified with this sanctification not in
reality but according to his profession and opinion of himself, as Luke 15.7.
some are said to be just persons that need no repentance, that is, according to
their own profession and opinion.

The purging from sin, 2 Pet. 1.9. was external I grant, not inward in the
heart, yet it was not a mere purging by the outward ordinance of baptism, but
their own profession, and partial reformation of themselves not competent to
infants.

2 Pet: 2. ^ It Is doubt^ful whether it note an external being purchased by
Christ, or a purchase by Christ only sufficient, or an effectual purchase,
yet said of them only according to what they professed and conceived of
themselves, as Luke 15, 7, Heb: 10, 29, or others conceived of them.

That Deuteronomy: 33, 3, should be meant of an external Saintship, is supposed, not
proved, though it it were applied to the body of Israel, yet it might be
understood in respect of the better part, that the people were called Gods
Saints.

Psa: 50, 5, The Saints of God, and those that had made a covenant with him by
Sacrifice were Israel. verse 7, and it is true there were many hypocrites; but
as the new Annot: God in respect of his elect calls the whole body Holy,
Saints, and his people, not merely from an external Saintship. To which I add,
if it be referred to the covenant, Exodus: 24.8. to which Mr Ainsworth in his
Note on the place directs* it was the covenant of the law, not the covenant of
grace which is meant, Psalm: 50, 5,

It is true, There are invisible Churches, which are as Isaac was, Children of
the Promise, Gal: 4, 28, Children of the Gospel Church, v. 31, and 26. But that
this should be verefied in all the members of the Galatian Churches, unto whom
Paul wrote that Episte, Gal: 1, 2, is not true, nor is it proved by Mr C, that
the Apos^^e spoke what he says, v* 28, 31, of every member of the Churches of
Galatia. It is true that Jerusalem above is the mother of us all: but that [ us
all] should signify every profession of the faith in the Churches of Galatia,
is false: for then every one of them should be born after the spirit, v: 29.
and inherit, v. 3^. The new Annot: on Gal: 4.24.6. therefore say, The Christian
Church is the mother of all the faithful who are heirs of the kingdom of
Heaven whether they be I^wes or Gentiles. So that to be mother of us all, Gal.
4.26. is not to be mother of every professed Christian in Galatia, but of so
many as held the right faith with Paul, and were born after the Spirit. Thus in
like manner Rom: 8, 3, 21 when it is said, who spared not his own Son, but gave
him up for us all, it is not meant of every professor of Faith in Rome, but all
the elect and true believers, as that which follows in the same verse and verse
33 shows: So that we need not assert either that every professor of faith in
the Galatian Churches was a child of the Jerusalem above effectually and
savingly, or that there were some particular visible Churches in which were no
hypocrites (which yet may be true notwithstanding the Parables Matthew: 13 and
25. or 1 Timothy: 3, 15. compared with 2 Timothy: 2, 20) o^ that such as are savingly
interessed in the Covenant of grace, should fall from grace, or that all were
externally and according to men children of the promise, as Mr C* speaks.

Heb: 4, 1, 4, proves not that the promise of grace and glory may be to one as
his legacy or portion externally and according to men, of the saving good
whereof it is possible one may fall short. For though there be mention of a
promise left, yet not of a promise left to any that come short of it, unless by
being left be meant propounded or tendered only.

Antipaedobaptists do grant they admit false brethren to baptism and the Lords
Supper, called by Mr Cobbet seals of Church and Covenant fellowship, but it is
not in them to admit them into the fellowship of covenant, meaning the covenant
of grace; for that is Gods peculiar. We admit them to baptism on this ground,
not because to us they are in covenant (we suspend any judgment about their
interest in the covenant, as being out of our cognizance, and no Rule for us to
admit or keep back from baptism) but because we know them to be professors of
faith in Christ.

If by Blanks be meant such as to whom the promise of the covenant of grace is
not made, and by Seals, Baptism and the Lords Supper, we think we do ordinarily
put seals to a blank, nor do we make scruple thereof, or think it true that the
seal must follow the covenant, or that Gen: 17.9 10, 11, 13. Acts 2, 38 39. 1
Cor: 11, 25 prove it. That it is not taught Gen: 17.7, 10, 11, 13, Ast: 28, 39,
is showed in the fore part of this Review, Sect 5* and in this part, Sect 5 8,
13, 20, 21, 22, 23, 37, and elsewhere, 1 Cor. 11, 25* the cup in the Lords
Supper is called the new Testament in Christ's blood; but that all, or only
those who are in the covenant of grace must have the the cup, is not proved
thence, and the falsehood of it is showed above often.

We do not say when we admitted persons to baptism, we judged them to be in the
covenant of grace, else we had not admitted them; but we knew they professed
faith in Christ, and so were Disciples of Christ, and thereupon admitted them
according to our Rule, Matthew. 28, 19 leaving it to the Lord whether they be in
the covenant of Grace or no, we being not directed to enquire whether they were
in the covenant of grace, but whether believers and disciples by profession.

I for my part agree not to it, that either according to Scripture, or the best
Protestants any are said to be children of the promise, or that the covenant of
Evangelicall grace in the N. T. confirmed by Christ's blood, is made to them, or
belongs to them besides the elect. Such Doctrine gives great advantage to the
Arminians, undermines perseverance in grace, and the Polemicall Doctrine of our
choice Divines, as I showed Ex^men part 3. Sect. 4. and elsewhere in this part
of the Review. Mr. Norton, Mr C. his Colleague, commended by Mr Cotton with Mr
Cobbet, as a prime writer in the New English Churches, Resp. ad syl. quaest.
Apollon. p. 30. says, Objectum faederis gratiae sunt soli electi, objectum
faederis Ecclesiastici sunt tum electi tum reprobi

My own Tertulli^n in his book de Anima, chap. 21, 22, when he urges that
Tex^, 1 Cor: 7* 14, for a peculiar cleanness of believers children by privilege
of seed, means not the federall holiness Mr C. teaches, but holiness by reason
of the freedom from that unholiness in their procreation, which the Infidels
children had from the many gross idolatrous superstitions, by which they were
defiled, and as it were ded^cated to the Devil, as I show in my Apology, Sect
16, page 85. Paraeus, Peter Martyr, Bucer, Melancthon, Mr. Philpot, are all
Neotericks. Cyprian, Gregory, Nazianzen, Jerome, Austin, though they did plead
for Paedobaptism from the Argument of Circumcision, yet did not m^in^ain
Infants covenant-estate, as Mr. C. but a necessity of baptism to Infants ready
to die, because of the Text, The soul that is not circumcised shall be cut off
from his people, Gen: 17, 1^, Instances whereof in Augustine and others are
many cited by Chamier Pausir. Tom: 4, l: 3, c. 3, Sect 39, 40 41. And they
thought the Infant dying baptized was infallibly saved, whether believers child
or not: As for others, they denied their entering into the kingdom of heaven, as
I show you in my Examen, part 1. Sect 7, 8, 9, 10.

I have often considered Zech: 11, 10, and I conceive the sense as Mr C. makes
it of the covenant of grace in respect, at least, of the external
administration thereof amongst them, as verse 9, and their external right in
that his covevenant, to be very vain: For if it be meant of the covenant of
grace, then it is as much as to say, That I might not write my Laws in their
heart, forgive their sins, etc. as I ^romised them, Jer. 31.33. and then God
should break his promise, the^e should be falling from the covenant of grace,
etc. If the sense be of the covenant of grace in respect of external
administration thereof amongst them, and their external right in that his
covenan^, then it is as if he had said, That I might take away Circumcision,
the Passover, and the rest of the Temple-service, and the peoples right to
them. (For what is the external administration of the covenant of grace; but
the seals, as they call them, and the rest of the service of the Sanctuary?)
Now this neither agrees to the phrase; for Circumcision is never called Gods
covenant with all the people, and to break circumcision, what is it but either
to draw up the foreskin, and to forbid circumcision? If this be referred to
the time of Christ's coming, this had not been a prediction of an evil to them,
but of a benefit to be eased of that yoke, verse 9, mentions not external
administration of the covenant of grace, or external right there o. But
whenever it was accomplished, whether at the siege of Jerusalem, or at some
other time, it was the taking away of some who might be their protectors,
whereby they were exposed to destruction; which whether they were the Maccabees
or some others, may be doubted. However, it is so frigid an interpretation to
interpert it as Mr C. does, that methinks he should be ashamed to blot paper
with it.

The Covenant ch 10. whether it were that Genesis 17. or that Exodus 19. or 24. or
Deuteronomy. 29. ^t is certain it is meant not of the Covenant of grace common to all
believers Gentiles or Jews, but of the covenant which he made with the
Israelitish nation, which he brake by taking away their Leaders whether
Governors or Teachers Maccabees or some other, and so exposing them to ruin by
the Grecian or Roman Lords or some other.

Psalm. 44.17. Dan. 11.30, 31, 32, 33. to deal falsely in Gods Covenant, and to
forsake the holy Covenant, and to do wickedly against the Covenant, do not
intimate that Mr. C. would infer that there are some said to be in the Covenant
of grace only externally. For to deal falsely in Gods Covenant is no more than
not to keep Gods Commands, as the term Covenant is often put Synecdochically
Psalm. 25.10. and 131.12. To forsake the holy Covenant, is to forsake the Law,
to do against it, is to do against the Law, as Anticohus had imagination
against the holy Covenant, that is the Law of the Jews. And that this is the
meaning is apparent Psalm. 44.18. where v. 17. is thus explained, our heart is
not turned back, nor our steps declined from thy way. This Covenant then was no
other than the Law of Moses, the Covenant made in Horeb, specially the
Decalogue, whence the Ark called the Ark of the Covenant 1 Kings 8.1. the
Decalogue the words of the Covenant Exodus 34.28. And it is apparent in that
Antiochus endeavored to compel them to break that Law, as to sacrafice to
Idols, to eat Swines flesh and now this Covenant was not the Covenant of grace.
For the Apostle plainly distinguishes the Law from the promise 400 years
before Gal. 3.17. and the Covenant at Sinai is opposed to that of grace called
the Jerusalem above Gal 4 24. Nor is there any difficulty in that which Mr. C.
objects, that believers then might be in a free Covenant of grace, and at the
same time under the contrary Covenant of bondage. For the believing Jews to wit
David and the rest of those that believed Heb. 11. were under the command of
the Covenant in Sinai. yet under the Ceremonial part, yea were not under the
sentence or judgment of the Covenant of the Law so as to be justified or
condemned by it.

The everlasting Covenant Isai. 24.5. is no other than the Law as is proved
above. It is said Rom 3.3. (not 7. as it is printed) If some believed not,
shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? But the inference of
Mr. C. is frivolous, the faith of God was plighted to them, and they were
externally in the Covenant, though the faith of God took saving effect only in
the elect and in the believing. For I would know what the faith of God was
whether it were the Covenant of saving grace, or the outward Covenant? If it
were only the outward, how did it take saving effect in the elect? Did the
faith of God take effect in that which was never promised? The outward Covenant
me thinks Mr. C. should not say did promise saving grace, but external right
and administrations, therefore saving grace is not the effect of that Covenant.

And indeed the outward Covenant is but a mere notion (except understood
Metonymically as Circumcision is called the Covenant as being the sign of it)
there being no faith of God plighted to any Gentile believer and his seed,
wherein God promises that they shall be accounted visible Church members, and
as having external right or enjoyment of Church administrations. If he should
it would be false, many of them never attaining them or having right to them.
If it were the inward Covenant in which God plighted his faith, then it took
effect only in the elect and they only were in covenant.

Nor does Romans 9.6. intimate what Mr. C. dreams; that the word, or Covenant of
grace, took effect in all the Jews, in some externally, in the elect savingly.
But as the stream of Protestant writers (whereof some are alleged in my Examen
part. 3, Sest. 4. and others before in this part of the Review) and the very
words show it took effect only in the elect, who are therefore called v. 8, the
Children of the promise distinguishingly from others, and the Apostle plainly
resolves that the seed Genesis 17.7. as not Ishmael but Isaac, not Esau but Jacob,
and consequently no believers natural seed, except elected.

As for Romans 9.4. it is often showed that the Covenants there are meant of the
Tables of the Covenant and the promises, the special promises made to the
Israelites after the flesh, as is manifest v. 4.5. expressing peculiar
privileges to them distinct from what the Gentiles, though believers, have.

which Mr. C. says, the Covenant of grace and an outward Covenant are not two
distinct Covenants: but the Covenant of grace made with the elect in respect of
their saving interest in that, I will be a God to them, the same is made with
others in respect both of visible interest and the visible administration of
it, I see no truth in it. For there is no Scripture that ever expounds, I will
be a God to them, that is, they shall have visible interest, and the visible
administration of it, that is, they shall be circumcised etc. many have the
promise of saving intrest who neither have, nor ever had visible or visible
administration as their language is of the Covenant of grace, and on the
contrary many have no saving Interest, yet have the visible intrest and
administration Mr. C. speaks of which in truth follows the command, not the
Covenant. Nor is it consistent with Mr. C's. own suppositions, that a man may
be in the external Covenan^ who is not in the Covenant of grace savingly, that
the one is only the visible interest and administration, the other the promise
of saving grace, if they be not two distinct Covenants, For they must needs be
distinct Covenants which are made to different persons of different things, as
these are supposed to be by Mr. C* himself. Nor does Mr. C. prove by any text
that there is any other w^y of entering into the Covenant of grace ordinarily,
but by a true and lively faith. It is true Ezekiel. 16.20, 21, 23. the children of
the Israelites were Gods children by special right as his servants Levit.
25.55. because he redeemed them out of Egypt, and he had entered a special
Covenant with them, and they the whole nation had also engaged themselves in a
special Covenant to be his, and it is true the Covenants and promises were
theirs Romans 9.4 and they were the children of the Prophets, and the children of
the Covenant which God made to Abraham Act. 3.25. that is, the people among
whom and out of whom Christ came, to whom he was at first made known, to whom
the Prophets were sent* but this does not prove that they were all internally
or externally in the Covenant of grace. They had no right to be babtized, yea
the greatest part of them (for this is spooken of the people of the Jews
whether believers or not, even of them that offered their sons and daughters to
Divils*) denied Christ, and were broken off by unbelief Romans 11.20.

Gal. 4.28. is impertinently brought to prove a bare external being in the
Covenant of grace. For it is meant only of believers born after the spirit v.
29. who by the spirit do wait for the hope of the righteousness which is by
faith Gal. 5.5.

It is not true that any of the (...) members from the Churh of Ephesus Acts
20.30. are said to be purchased by the blood of Christ. It was judged an abuse
in Stapleton by Dr. Rainold, Apol. These. Sect: 20. to interpret the flock of
God redeemed by his blood, of any reprobates. Of 2 Pet. 2.1. I have spoken
before.

An external being in the covenant of grace, quoad homines, by the parties
profession, I never denied, but an external being in the covenant of grace of
believers infants by virtue of the parents faith in the New Testament, I still
deny.

Mr C. takes upon him to answer my Dilemma, Examen page 52. and tells me, The
covenant is theirs externally and quoad homines, considered as invested with
Church Covenant, and in reference to covenant-ordinances* whereof they are
capable, as of old they were of Circumcision, and are now of baptism. Thus it
is theirs at present in respect of the visible faith and interest of the parent
or parents in the covenant, and for the future it is theirs in the further grace
of the covenant upon condition of their believing if they do live to years of
discretion.

Answer. The position I intended to prove by the Dilemma, was set down page 48.
That the Covenant of saving grace in Christ expressed Gen 17 7. in these words,
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, is not made to a believer and his
na^urall seed, to which Mr C. his answer is, by telling me* The covenant is
theirs externally etc. which is to answer nothing to the Argument which
proceeded against the asserting Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.7. as a promise of
saving grace to belong to a believers natural seed. Nor does he prove, but
dictate that Genesis 17.7. There Is a promise concerning the external covenant, or
to any Gentile believers natural seed, or that there is any mention of
Church Covenant, or that ^itle to Church-ordin^nces, as Baptism and
Circumcision is derived from interest in the promise Gen* 17.7. Or that the
parents visible faith or interest in the covenant, makes it the childrens: or
that the covenant is such an ambulatory or revocable contract, as to be the
infants for the present in respect of the parents faith* but for the future
it is theirs in the further grace of the the covenant upon condition of
believing if they live to years of discretion.

These Dictates are hatched in Mr. C. his nest, but have nothing in the Text
for them, nor does he attempt to prove them in that chapter which is termed,
The Explication of Genesis 17.7, etc. In like manner he dictates in that which
follows.

I had said, if the covenant of grace to believers seed be absolute, then
either God keeps it or not: ^f he do not keep it, then he breaks his word,
which is blasphemy; if he do keep it, then it follows, that all the posterity
of believers are saved, contrary to Romans 9.13. Or if some are not saved though
they be in the covenant of grace, there may be Apostasy of persons in the
covenant of grace.

In answer to which he tells me, God may be said absolutely to covenant with
believers seed collectively and specifically considered, and yet all the
individual children not saved. It is absolutelely made, and made good that,
that sort of persons shall be and are saved by virtue of Gods covenant, for
some of them are infallibly saved: the covenant is to the indefinite collective
seed or children in respect of internal saving interest: else none of them
dying Infants should be saved.

Whereto I reply, The promise is to Abraham's seed, Genesis 17.^. But that the
promise is to be a God to any Gentile believers natural indefinite collective
seed in respect of the internal saving interest, as such, is not true. The
promise is not made indefinitely but definitely to Ahrahams seed, under whom
none but believers of the Gentiles, or elect persons are meant, nor is it made
specifically to a sort of men, but to such and such numericall persons as were
Abraham's seed by nature or grace: Nor is it made collectively to any of them as
part of the whole number of Gentile-believers natural seed, but as Abraham's
seed by grace, and if any of them be elect, it is made also to Gentile
unbelievers natural seed under the same consideration. It is true, some of the
believing Gentiles seed dying infants are saved; nor can we say that none of
the unbelievers infants, dying in infancy, are saved, notwithstanding the
Arguments brought to prove their perishing. But none of them are saved by
virtue of a promise made to that sort of persons, that is, believers natural
children (for there is no such promise) but by virtue of Gods election,
conformable to which is the promise of saving grace, Genesis 17.7. as the Apostle
expressly determines, Romans 9.6, 7.8, and consequently as election is of
individual persons (not of a collective indefinite specificall seed as Mr. C.
speaks) so is the covenant. M. C. goes on thus.

Supposing they are the Israel of God, a part of the elect seed, yet the means
of saving effect in and upon them, is the word of the Covenant, Romans 9.6. It Is
through the effectual word and engaged truth of God that that part of the
Church are savingly purged, Ephesians. 5.25, 26.

Answ. I grant this to be true, yet conceive that Ephesians. 5.25, 26. speaks of the
word of promise, not barely as made, but also as accomplished in Christ's
performance, and published by preaching, whereupon baptism follows, by both
which Christ sanctifies and purges his Church savingly by the one as the
means, by the other as the sign.

He adds, The covenant is to the individual seed of all and each of them in
respect of external interest, and yet many of them not saved.

Answer. This is an exposition which is without proof, or example of the like,
1. That where God says, I will be a God to Abraham's seed, he means other
believers, even Gentiles natural seed. 2 That he means this in respect of
external interest only to some. 3. That some of those to whom he promises to
be a God according to the covenant of grace in Christ, may not be saved. 4 That
by Abraham's seed he means in respect of saving effects, the indefinite
collective seed of Gent^le-believers, so as that it is only made good to that
sort of persons (which were true if none but Isaac and Jacob were saved; For if
the promise of salvation be only to the sort of persons, it is made good in
one or two of believers seed) but in respect of external interest to the
individual seed all and each of them, yea though the parents be but hypocrites,
and not savingly in the covenant of grace themselves. He goes on.

Nor yet is Gods faithfulness impeached or impaired, nor need the faith of
believers be shaken, if this or that child should prove, live and die wicked,
the force of the covenant is not to be measured by the fatal miscarriage of
many of Abraham's Church-seed.

Answer. Neither is Gods faithfulness impeached, nor need the faith of
believers be shaken, though all their chidren die wicked. It is not true, That
the Apostles reasoning, Romans 9.4, 6. compared mentions any such Church-seed of
Abraham, or takes them in as such, but only the elect. Mr C. does falsely
charge his adversaries doctrine, as denying any interest at all to any
believers infants in the covenant. I have often granted it to the elect, but to
none as believers infants. Mr Baillee charged me with this thing, to which I
answered in my Letter to him, Sect. 1. our doctrine is as comfortable as theirs
when they speak truth. It is no Gospel but a dream to affirm what Mr. C. does
of Abraham's fancied Church-seed, though it be Gospel to say, God will be a God
to Abraham's spiritual seed elect and true believers.

SECT. XL. Animadversions on Sect. 5. of the same Chapter, showing that Mr. C.
his supposed visible interest in Gods covenant is not the rule in baptizing.
SEct. 5, Mr. C. sets down this conclusion, That the Church in dispensing an
enjoined initiatory seal of the covenant of grace, looks unto visibility of
interest in the covenant, to guide her in the application thereof. Nor is the
saving interest of persons in view, which is her rule by which she is therein to
proceed.

Concerning which I say, that I grant it if the terms be altered into plainer
expressions as thus: The baptizer in the admitting a person to baptism, is not
bound to stay baptism till he know a person has saving interest in Gods
covenant of grace; but it is sufficient, if he be a visible disciple or
believer to admit him to baptism. And that M. C. may cease his wonder, he who
confessed that it is not to be denied that God would have infants of believers
in some sense to be counted his, to belong to his Church and Family, and not to
the Devils as true in facie Ecclesiae visibilis, etc. does not oppose his
fourth Conclusion reduced to the plain terms I have set it down (...). Yet
there are sundry things in which I oppose him. 1. That he makes it the Churches
business to dispense the initiatory seal (as he calls it) of the covenant of
grace, which I ^ake to belong to him that is sent or used to make disciples by
preaching the Gospel, not to the Church.

2. That he makes the rule of baptizing to be visible interest in the
covenant, which according to the institution is visible discipleship, or faith.

3. That he takes that person to have visible interest in the covenant of
grace, so as to have right thereby to baptism, who neither by extraordinary
revelation from God, nor by any act of his own, but barely by his parents
profession has a pretended visible interest in the covenant. But let us examine
what he says, because he seems to be the selected man in New England to plead
for Infant Baptism.

Whether John the Baptist did admit to baptism those which he knew would prove
false and frothy, is doubtful. Mr Norton Mr Cs. Colleague. Resp. ad* Appollon.
c. Prop* 1. seems to hold the negative, and cites to that purpose, Paraus and
Aretius. I agree with Mr. C. in his position, That person^ may be bapti^ed upon
visible profession without knowledge of the saving state of the party, yet I do
not think Ananias and Sapphira, or Simon Magus were known hypo^^ites when ^hey
were b^ptized, nor do I think the Texts Mr C. allegeth, Acts 21.20, etc, or 22,
20, etc. or 23, 12, 13, prove, that any of those baptized, Acts 2.41, or 4.1,
2.3; 4. were of the number of them that opposed Paul, or proved false. If
Christ did say to Judas that his body was broken or given f^r him, and his
blood shed, it will be hard to avoid thence the proof of universal redemption.
I think it the safest and most likely tenent that Judas went out before the
Lords Supper. For the Passover it was not administered to Judas by Christ, nor
do I know what warrant we have to make it a seal of the covenant, or to belong
to a Minister of the seals, as they speak. It was a rite instituted to remember
the delivery out of Egypt, and appointed to be used by each family without any
other administration than the providing, slaying, dressing and bringing to the
Table: If the Prist did any thing in it, it was at the Temple not at the Table,
each person was to take himself according to his eating, Abraeham and Isaac did
circumcise Ishmael and Esau rightly according to Gods command, which is the
rule in administering ordinances, not covenant-in^erest. But that they did
circumcise as Prophets or Priests at that time, to the Church in their
families, it is said without proof. The business of circumcising was not the
work of a person as a Prophet or Priest to his family, but did belong to the
parent or some other in his stead, though no Prophet nor Priest. Chamier
Paustr. cath. tom. 4 l 5 c. 14. sect 9, 10, says, We read of no certain
Minister of Circumcision either in the institution or elsewhere, so that there is
no obstacle but that Zipporah, and the woman in the second of Maccabees, c. 6.
might circumcise. So there is nothing read by which the immolation of the
Paschal Lamb was wont to be done in each family, is prohibited, though no
Priests were used. Ishmael and Esau, and Judas, were not visibly interessed in
the covenant; being discovered by God and Christ to be such as had no interest
in it. That a Minister cannot of himself admit to baptism, or reject from it
regularly, but by and with the Churches consent, is dictated without proof. I
grant that if particular persons saving interest in Gods covenant and promise
of grace, were the Rule to baptize by, administrators could not observe the
rule in faith, but doubtingly. But that such visible interest in the Covenant
as Mr C. means, is therefore the rule to baptize by, follows not. What or where
A. R. suggests to the contrary I find not, nor does Mr C. tell us. What he
adds, I say visibility of the parties interest in the covenant, I say not mere
visibility of faith and repentance, is quite besides the Scripture, which never
appoints persons to be baptized because of their visible interest in the
covenant, but their visible faith and repentance.

He tells us, The initiatory seal is not primarily and properly the seal of
men's faith and repentance, or obedience, but of Gods covenant rather; the seal
is to the covenant, even Abraham's circumcision, was not primarily a seal to his
faith, of righteousness, but to the righteousness of faith exhibited and
offered in the covenant: yea to the covenant it self, or promise which he had
believed unto righteousness. Hence the covenant of grace is called the
righteousness of faith, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. The righteousness of faith speaks on
this wise, v. 8. and the word of faith. Hence albeit Abraham must walk before
God, who is now about to enlarge the covenant to his as well as to make it to
him in a Church-reference, Genesis 17.1, etc. yet the initiatory seal in his as as
well as their flesh, is Gods covenant, v. 13. or a sacramental sign firstly
and expressly of Gods covenant, v. 11. and 7. compared; albeit it implicitly
oblige him and them to other duties formerly mentioned. Hence Acts 2.38, 39,
the seal of baptism is put to the promise as the choice matter and foundation
in view, and as that was a ground of repentance it self; repent and be baptized
for the promise is to you, not, for you have repented as if that were the thing
to be firstly sealed by baptism, but the promise rather.

Answ. The inititory seal is a late devised term not found in Scripture and it
is used upon an erroneous conceit as if the nature of Sacraments were to be
seals of the Covenant, and baptism were the initiatory seal. But the term [
initiatory seal] is chosen rather than the word [ baptism] (though it be the
Scripture term) by Mr. C. and others, that they may shuffle what they say in
and out under the term of ininitiatory seal, sometimes understanding by it
Circumcision sometimes baptism as if they were the same and what is said of the
one were meant of the other, which is mere fallacious arguing. But setting
aside Mr. C's lately devised term, the end of Christian baptism is in the first
place, that thereby the party baptiz^d may testify his repentance, faith and
hope in Christ, love to the people of God, and resolution to follow Christ to
the death. And this is proved in my Exercit: in the twelfth reason of my
doubting about Pedobaptism page 33. in the 2 part of this Review Sect. 5. from
these Scriptures Romans 6.3* 4.5. 1 Cor. 12.13. Gal. 3.26, 27. Ephe. 4.5. Col. 2
12. 1 Pet. 3.20. where the phrase of the answer of a good conscience, as Beza
rightly observes in his Annot. on that place, alludes to the manner of the
primitive baptizing after the answer to the questions propounded concerning the
parties repentance, faith and obedience: which were held so necessary to
baptism in the first ages of the Christian Church that none was baptized
without it; yea and when infant baptism came up even till our days, and in
some places according to the Common prayer Book even to the infants the same
questions are propounded, yea the Lutherans confess that without faith in
infants it is in vain to baptize them. The continuance of which questions, as
Lud: Vives Comment: in Augustine: de civit: Dei l. 1. c. 27. rightly says,
proves the original use of baptism to be of those only that could answer those
questions. In respect of which Basil and others call baptism the seal of faith,
Tertullian of repen^ance, the sealing of faith, Chamier: Paustr: Cath. tom. 4.
l. 2. c. 8. cites the treatise of the spirit under the name of Bazil chapter 12.
saying, Confession goes before bringing to salvation, baptism follows sealing
our consent. whence he infers thus manifestly salvation is ascribed to
confession, but baptism is the seal of confession. No where that ever I could
find among the Ancients is baptism termed the seal of the Covenant. Bucer on
Acts. 2.38. To be baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ* is by the sign
of baptism to testify that were the believers in Christ for remission of sins.
Grot: Annot: on Mark. 16.16. [ And is baptized] he that believes, and by
baptism makes profession of his faith. So that the profession of faith by it
is the primary end and use of baptism nor is there any place of Scripture that
I know which does make the end of baptism to be the sealing of Gods Covenant to
us* And here by the way it is to be noted what shifting is used in this matter
by Pedobaptist. They say the seal follows the Covenant and the parties interest
in it, and this Covenant they make the righteousness of faith as Mr. C. here,
but when they are pressed that then in vain are infants non-elect and
non-believers baptized, who are not in that Covenant, they fly to an imaginary
external Covenant, and visible interest in that as sealed by it, and there by a
right to be baptized; which yet by their own confession is not the Covenant of
grace, nor by sealing that interest is the Covenant of grace sealed, for that
is Gods Covenant of righteousness by faith, not the baptized persons Covenant,
or his right. As for Mr. C's. observations here they are false and slighty. For
neither is it true that it is hence (because baptism is not primarily the seal
of man's faith and repentance, but of Gods Covenant rather) Abraham's
circumcision was called a seal of the righteousness of faith: but the contrary
rather is true. For if it were a seal of the righteousness of faith which he
had yet being uncircumcised, it sealed rather his own faith, and the
righteousness by it already obtained, than Gods covenant to him of something to
come. And if circumcision be called Gods Covenant, yet it follows not that
baptism is rather a seal of Gods covenant, than of man's faith and repentance.
That which he says of Acts. 2.38.39. is as vain: For the promise is not
alleged there as sealed in baptism, or giving any right to baptism, but merely
as a motive to them to repent and to be baptized in the sense I give
Antipaedobapt. part. 1. Sect. 5. In this part of the Review Sect. 5.8.21, 22,
23* wherein Mr^ C's frivolous interpretation is examined. And though the
Apostle do not bid them be baptized because they had repented, yet he bids them
first to repent and then be baptized.

Infants have no visible title to baptism because they make no visible personal
profession. Parental faith in the Covenant made to them and their children is
but a delusion. What ever may be said of the texts Deuteronomy. 26.17.
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. etc. Concerning taking it of children (of which in
the examining of Mr. B's remainder) there is no visibility of infants
Church Membership in the Christian churches mentioned in Scripture. I know not
how the believing Gods testimony is the assent of charity. I still say there is
no judgment of charity concerning infants who do nothing which may be
interpreted to the better or the worse. Mr. C. if he had recited my words fully
in my Examen Page 41. might have found my words to yield him no help for his
fourth Conclusion. I pass on to the fifth.

SECT. XLI. Sect. 41. Animadversions on the sixth sect. of the same ch: showing
that Christ is not head of any unsound members, no^ parents profession of faith
unites children to Christ so as to entitle them to baptism.
SEct. sixthly he sets down this conclusion, That Christ is in Scripture
considered as head of the visible Church in which are many members of Christ
the ^ead in that respect, which prove unsound, as well as in other respects he
is considered as head of the visible Church, wherein are none but elect ones.

Concerning which I say, that part of the invisible Church which is on earth
professing faith, being both visible and invisible, visible in respect of their
profession, invisible in respect of their sincere believing* ^t must needs
follow that Christ is head of the visible, being head of the invisible Church
in respect of those persons which are of both. And I grant that Christ's
headship being a Metaphor and nothing, sundry things as Superiority, Government,
direction, union, participation^ of the same life, sense, motion etc. In
respect of some of these Christ may be said to be head of that part which is
only visible, as in giving them officers, outward order, direction, help
against persecutors etc. But that in Scripture Christ is made head to any
unsound members I find not. Mr. C. urges Gal. 3.16. that to Abraham and his
seed were the promises made; that is to Christ, yet not to Christ personally,
for the promise of pardon of sin did not belong to him, and to Christ personal
were not the promises made, but in him confirmed, Gal. 3.7. with 16. But rather
of Christ collectively head and members, Gentiles and Jews, v. 14.28. as Genesis
3.15. The seed of Eve is Christ, with his members in and with him.

Answer. I stick not to grant Gal. 3.16, by [ Christ] to be meant not only
Christ personally considered, but also collectively, as Beza, ^iseator, and
others conceive; yet I do not think the Arguments brought by them so cogent for
that sense, but that it may be understood of Christ personal as a common
person receiving promises for all his members. For the scope of the Apostle to
prove Gen^iles and Jews to have one manner of justification, is obtained by
understanding the promises made to his person as a common person in behalf of
all as well as to them as in him, and eternal life is promised to all the
members of Christ if it be promised to Christ as a common person standing in
their stead as the second Adam. As for Mr C. his reasons, the former is against
his own opinion. For if by Christ be meant Christ collectively, that is, Christ
and his Church, then the promises be made to Christ's person with his Church;
for what is Christ collectively but Christ's person with his Church. And if the
pardon of sin be a promise, then it must be made known to Christ's person
included in Christ collective: Therefore either it must be said, that the
promises were made to Christ collective respectively, to wit, some to his
person, as that he would uphold him, raise him from the dead, give him glory,
others to his Church, to pardon their sins, renew their nature, etc. or that
Christ's person had the promise of pardon of sin made to himself as a common
person, but not for himself as needing it, but for his Church or in their
stead, as 2 Cor. 5.21. The promises might be said to be given to Christ's person
as a common person, Gal. 3.16 and yet confirmed in Christ as a surety of them,
v 17. yet in this place the term [ Head] is not used, and therefore not
apposite to Mr. C. his purpose.

But Mr C. propounds a question, Whether this in Gal. 3. and 1 Cor. 12.12, 13.
be spoken of the visible or invisible Church, and answers it, that it seems the
places admit of the consideration of the Church as visible. First, in that the
Apostle speaks of all the Galatian Church Members as well as others as one in
Christ, Gal. 3.28. Now were all these members elected will any say? I suppose
not yet all are one in Christ their head.

Answer. Mr. C. a little before said, The promise Gal ^3.16, could not be made
to Christ's person, because the promise of the pardon of sin is not made to
Christ personal, which goes upon this supposition, that the pardon of sin is
promised to the seed, Gal. 3.16. But sure this promise is made only to the
elect, not to all Galatian visible Church Members: Yea the very scope and
coherence of what goes before and after, show that the promises v. 16. were of
the spirit, v. 1^. of the inheritance, v. 18. of life, v. 21. which are proper
to the elect. And therefore to apply the speech, Gal. 3.16. to the unfound
members of the visible Church, shows mere oscitancy. Nor is it necessary that
because it is said, Gal. 3.28. Ye are all one in Christ Jesus, that this must
be understood of every Galatian Churchmember, but of all those of whom he had
said, v. 26. That they were all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus. And
after, v. 29. that they were heirs according to the promise, which is true
only of the elect of them. And for what he adds, Secondly in that he speaks of
them all as sacramentally one with Christ in baptism, Gal. 3.27, 28. compared,
so 1 Cor. 12, 13, as if because he says, they were all baptized, he meant it
of all that are baptized, it is refuted from the very words [ by one spirit
made to drink into one spirit, put on Christ] which, if there were no more, do
show that these speeches though indefinite, yet pro subjecta materia, must be
limited to those visible baptized persons, who were sincere believers, and
united to Christ by his Spirit, and so those words, Ephesians. 1.23 and 4.6. Col.
3.11. and many more are to be understood. And to the other reasons, That Christ
has headlike influences into the Officers and Members, many whereof are not
savingly joined to him, and that it is the Church wherein he has set diversity
of Officers, which is the visible Church, not the invisible.

I answer, Christ as a Superior, and in some other respects, may have headlike
influences of command, governing, etc. on some not savingly joined to him, but
not the influence of union by his Spirit, which is that which makes any members
of Christ, of his flesh and of his bones, Ephesians. 4.4. and 5.30. Nor is it true,
that Christ does not set Officers in the invisible Church, though it be true
that he sets no Officers in the Church that is only invisible, but indeed he
sets Officers in the Church invisible, and chiefly to and for them, while they
are visible. And therefore the Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.10. said, He endured all things
for the elects sake. Hence, says Mr. C. Profession of Faith unites a man to
Christ as head of the visible Church without sincerity. But the Scripture says
not so, that any is united to Christ as head without the inhabitation of the
Spirit. Mr. C. adds.

Hence also a pa^ent, making profession of Faith in the covenant of grace as
invested with Church Covenant in reference to his children, it does unite them
also to Christ as head of the visible Church so far as to give right to solemn
initiation of them into the fellowship of the church in circumcision as of old,
or baptism, as now. Parents acts in this case being in the face of the visible
church, their childrens acts; ^s the places quoted, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18, and 29.10,
11, 12, 13, 14, and 16, 16, 17, declared.

Answer. Mr. C. tells us, Hence, etc. and this is the consectary he would infer
from his fifth Conclusion, and minding discourse about it: But how from any
thing said before [ That Christ is the head of the visible Church, that visible
Professors, though not sincere, are united to Christ as visible head] this
follows, That Parents profession unites the child to Christ, so as to give him
right to baptism, is a riddle to me. If it were formed into an Argument thus,
If the visible professors confession of faith unites him to Christ as visible
head, Then it unites the child so far as to give him right to baptism: But the
visible professors, etc. Ergo. I should deny the consequence of the Major, and
expect it to be proved ad Graecas Calendas, nor is there any proof in that
which follows: For were it granted that the parents act were the child's act,
yet it follows not that it is the child's act to give a right or title to
baptism without an institution. None of the texts produced, no nor any other do
show, that the parents act of professing faith, did entitle the child to
circumcision, much less to baptism. Cornelius his child was not entitled to
circumcision, though he and his house feared God, was a devout man, gave much
alms to the poor, and prayed to God always, Acts. 10.2. Even in circumcisi on
the use of it had its rule only from the command, as I have often poved. Not
one of Mr. C. his Texts mentions the parents acts as entitling the child to
fellowship of the church, but obliging to duty, Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17, there is an
injunction, That all the Males should thrice a year appear before God; but this
was enjoined not to parents only, but also to children married or unmarried.

And if it prove any thing like what Mr. C. would, it proves rather the males
act to stand for the females, than the parents for the children. More likely in
this the younger males did appear instead of the aged weak, and so the child's
act went for the parents. However here is nothing of the parents act giving
right to initiation into fellowship of the Church, there was nothing required
to that in the national Church of Israel but their descent. Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18.
there is no mention of a parents act for his child intitling him to solemn
initiation into fellowship of the Church. What is said [ Thou have avouched
this day the Lord to be thy God] is not said to be done by the parents for the
children, nor to be done to entitle them to solemn initiation into the
fellowship of the Church. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. whose act soever is
mentioned whether of the parents, or Captains, Elders, Officers, or men of
Israel. It was an act done in behalf of the nation both those born already and
those to be born after, not to entitle them to initiation into fellowship of
the Church, but to bind them the more firmly to their duty, and therefore none
of these instances are to the point of parents acts in the face of the visible
Church taken as the Childrens acts for solemn initiation in Church fellowship.
Yet if they had, that this had been enough for baptism and Church Membership in
the Christian Gentile Churches will not be proved, till the rule about
Circumcision, and the constitution of the Jewish Church be a rule to us about
baptism, and the Church Membership of the Christian Church, which neither
agrees with Christ's or his Apostles appointment or the practice in the N. T.
nor with the new english principles of Church constitution and Government, but
Judiazing notions opposi^e to the Gospel. What he says the parents omission to
circumcise his child is counted the child's act of breaking Gods Conant Genesis
17.14. depends on this that the parents omission of circumcision is the child's
act of breaking Covenant. but many Protestant Divines and others understand it
of persons of years as Piscat. Schol. in locum. Diodati, new Annot. Grotius
etc. And though Chamier counted it to be understood of the Infant Tom 4
Paustrat: Cath. l. 3. c. 2. Sect. 20. etc. Yet he expounds the verse passively
thus, the male, the flesh of whose foreskin is not circumcised that soul shall
be cut off from his people: my Covenant is broken. Either way expounded it is
inpertinent to Mr. Cs. purpose. they that expound it (as Aben Ezrae, apud
Christoph. Cartwright on the place) of the parent understand both the fault and
the punishment to be his. It is true John. 4.50, 51. Matthew. 15.22, to 29. Mark.
9.12, to 18. parents believing is accepted for the cure of children, and so
Mark. 2.5. the faith of the bringers of the palsy man was accepted, but this
does not prove a title to baptism by the parents confession any more than by
the Midwives or Gossips bringing to the Fo^^* nor was it the confession of
faith, but reality; though not known to men, which Christ lookd on, so that if
this be a good reason* the Fathers praying in Secret though not in the face of
the visible Church should give Title to Baptism.

After many dictates without proof he tells us, As the Covenant laid hold on by
the lively faith of gracious parents as made with respect to their elect
children has mighty force to effect very gracious things in the elect feed,
yea albeit dying young, as sundry of those elect ones of Abraham's race did Romans
9.6. yea so as to make their outward washings to become effectual in Christ to
an inward cleansing Ephesians. 5.25.26. yea so as to bring in and bring home many
of such covenant-children. Whence those revolters beloved for their
covenant-fathers sake as such, Romans 11.28. and hence made as a ground of their
return* v. 15, 16. so is there such validity in the covenant invested with
church covenant, albeit but unworthily oft-times held forth by the parents,
which does beget upon the children an external filial relation unto God and
to his Spouse the visible church, whence that respect of children of God and
his church, by virtue of that espousall covenant, Ezekiel. 16.8. Even in the
children of idolatrous members, v. 20:21 23. Great is the force of this way of
the covenant so clothed. Albeit many unworthy members are gi^t up in it, to
hold them and theirs in external communion, Jer. 13.11. until either the
church be divorced from God, or the particular members be disfranchised by some
church-censure of such a covenant-privilege.

Answer. Though this reasoning contain nothing but dictates unproved, and
incoherent, yet since it carries some show of an Argument a comparatis, I shall
say somewhat to it. 1. There Is not aword in the texts alleged, that shows what
Mr C. here asserts, that the covenant laid hold upon by the lively faith of
gracious parents as made with respect to their children, has mighty force to
effect very gracious things in the elect seed: Nor is there a word in those
Texts to prove such a covnnant made to any gracious parent concerning his
natural children. It is true, Romans 9.6 it is said, the word took effect; and
this I deny not to be the word of promise to Abraham, I will be thy God, and
the God of thy seed. But then it is expressly said, v. 7, 8. that this seed of
Abraham is not his children by natural generation, but the special choice seed
whether they were his seed according to nature, or ingraffed: there is not a
word of the efficacy of this covenant by the lively faith of the parents, but
by virtue of Gods election, v. 11. The Text, Ephesians. 5.26. seems to me to
contain not only the word of promise, as sanctifying or purifying the Church,
but also the word of narration contained in the Gospel, as Luke 1.2 Acts 8.4.
and 10.36.44. Joh. 17.8.17. Romans 10.8. preached and believed, not by the
parents but the parties purified, Acts 15.9. who as they hear the word and
believe, so are baptized upon their believing. It is true that the Jews
hereafter to be ingraffed again, are said, according to the election to be
beloved for the Fathers, Romans 11.28. But this is meant of the Jews only, and
it is not at all meant of the immediate parents of those Jews reingraffed (for
they doubtless will be Infidels) but of the ancient Fathers, Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, out of the remembrance of their following God, and Gods covenant to
them, which were both singular, and therefore cannot be verrified of every
believers natural children as it is there meant and shall be verified of them.
2. There Is not a proof for the other part of the comparison, that there is any
such validity in the Covenant invested with Church Covenant albeit unworthyly
oftentimes held forth by the parents to beget upon the children an external
filial relation unto God and to his spouse the Church visible. For Ezekiel. 16 8.
mentions Gods covenant which he swear, not their's, by which they became his,
and those whose sons and daughters were born to him v. 20. are said to
sacrafice them to be devoured, had caused them to be slain, and deliverd them
to pass through the fire for them. Mr. C. confesses they were Idolatrous
members, and the text mentions their Idolatry to be of the highest kind, even
the sacraficing their children, and if these were in the Covenant of grace and
in Church-covenanant, and did thereby beget an external filial relation to God,
and to his spouse the visible Church, then may the worst of men even open
Idolatrers that offer their children to Moloch and sacrafice them to the Devil
be in the Covenant of grace, and in Church Covenant, and thereby in those whom
God hates and who go a whoring after Idols, yea the Devils in a most horrid
manner, there may be validity in this horrid estate to beget an external filial
relation unto God and to his spouse, the visible Church for their children.
Horrendum dictu! The meaning of the text, and the impertinency of its
allegation by the Assembly, by Mr. C. and others has been often showed. Jerem.
13.11. makes nothing to the purpose. God in the wilderness had made the whole
house of Israel to cleave to him in the Covenant at mount Sinai, and by his
special deliverances and providence for them. What is this to prove that the
Idolatrous posterity of that people are by the Covenant clothed with
Church Covenant held to God they and theirs in external Church Communion until
either that church be devorced from God, o^ the particular members
disfranchised by some Church censure of a Church covenant privilege? 3. were
the first part of the comparison proved, that the Covenant laid hold on (...)
the lively faith of the parents as made with respect to their elect children
has mighty force to effect very gracious things in the elect seed, yet there
is not any liklyhood that the other part should be true, that a bare dissembled
profession should make such an external relation to God and his Church, as if
because Peter's faith and confession obtains from God a special privilege, Judas
his profession must obtain something of God for his children though he were a
Devil. If there be strength in these dictates of Mr. C. their's weakness is
nothing. The answers to the objections of I. S. proceed upon a conceit of a
relative grace, and implicit calling, and of in-being in Christ without either
Christ's spirit, or faith, or profession of faith, which are things that have no
Scripture grounds. The absurdity objected against his opinion that it entails
grace to generation, that it upholds a national Church, ^e puts off only thus,
He knows we in N. E. which hold the one, yet do not maintain the other in the
usual sense of a national Church. But this shows not how he will acquit his
doctrine from maintaining that by consequence, which is disavowed by those of
N. E. For if there be such a covenant and Church covenant now as there was
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. and Ezekiel 16.20.21.22. of validity to beget an external
filial relation to God and to his visible spouse the Church, it cannot be
denied, but that the worst Idolaters even Papists are visible Church Members,
and by consequent the whole nation elder and ^onger are in the Church. Which
what it makes less than such a national Church as was of the Jews I understand
not.

SECT. XLII. Animadversions on Sect. 7: of the same chap. showing that the body
of the Jewish Church even the worst of them was not under the Covenant of grace
in respect of external Interest therein.
IN the seventh Sect. Mr. C* sets down this conclusion, that the body of the
Jewish Church was under the Covenant of grace as invested with Church Covenant,
in respect of external interest therein. In which as almost in all his writings
about this point, there is much ambiguity. He neither shows whom he means by
the body of the Jewish Church whether every Jew or some only, and if some who
those are whether the most part or the chiefest; nor what he means by the
Covenant of grace, what promise they are under nor how they are under it: Nor
does explain what he means by Church Covenant or investing with it, nor what is
the external interest therein which they have, nor how they are under the
Covenant of grace as invested with Church covant in respect of external
interest therein, and not with respect to internal interest. For my part so far
as I am able to discern his meaning this is it, that all the Jews from the
promise made to Abraham I will be thy God and the God of thy seed Genesis 17.7.
have this privilege; that all should be accounted members of that Church and
the males circumcised. But I know not how it comes to pass, this author either
affects, or it is his vein to use ambiguous expressions when he might use
plain, and to talk in a new phrases hard to be understood of the Covenant,
seal, Church-seed etc. And not to explain his conclusions before he proves, nor
to show how he proves out of the text he allegeth, but leaves his reader to
fish out his meaning as he can from scattered passages. However I shall view
his dictates.

He denies that the Jews had only a Covenant of grace among them which was
made to some choice ones among them. And yet the Apostle directly teaches that
the promise I will be a God to thee and thy seed as a promise of saving grace
was not made to all Israel, but the elect only Romans 9.6, 7, 8. And clear it is
that the Covenant made with the body of the Israelites at mount Sinai was the
Covenant of works, as is plain from Romans 10.5. 2 Cor. 3.6, 7, 9. Gal. 3.12,
and 4.24, 25. Heb. 8* 9, 10, 11. etc. and 12.18, 19, 21.

It is false that he has any where proved that the external and Ecclesiastical
right to circumcision came from the circumcised persons interest in the
Covenant of grace invested with Church Covenant. Neither did God appoint all
them to receive the visible seal thereof meaning Circumcision: for he did not
appoint the females or males under eight days old to be circumcised though in
the Covenant as well as the infant male of eight days old.

He bids us see Genesis 17.7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. and 26.3, 4, 5. and 28.12, 13,
14. But I can see none of his dictates in those texts. I find there that God
made a covenant with Abraham. after renewed it to Isaac and Jacob assuring to
their inheriting posterity the inheritance of Canaan, the multiplying of them
etc. that God enjoined circumcision to them for a memorial and assurance of
that covenant. This covenant as, containing the promise of Canaan etc. to the
natural postority of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob* is expressed to be by reason of
Abraham's obedience Genesis 26.5. circumcision is required Genesis 17. and Exodus 19.
Levit. 26. obedience is required to the laws given by Moses. They that term the
Covenant Exo. 19. a covenant of works speak suitable to the Apostle Romans 10.5.
Gal. 3.12. yet I deny not but in Covert expressions Genesis 17. and elswere God
promised Christ to the elect whether Jews or Gentiles and blessing that is
righteousness and eternal life by faith in him Gal. 3.16. etc. which Abraham
and all the ancient Saints expressed by faith John. 8.56. and elsewhere. Now it
is not true, that those covenant Fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob recieved the
covenant Evaneglical in referrence to their natural children: nor in respect of
justification before God and external life had a contrary covenant of life and
death, grace and works made with them. For though the Jews succeding were
under the whole law of Moses because of transgressions, yet not so as to have
life by it Gal. 3.17, 18, 19, 21. no^ is it any absurdity to say that the legal
justitiaries who rested in the law were at one and the same time externally
under the blessing of God in respect of their outward prosperity in Canaan, and
yet internally under the curse of God Gal. 3.10. as seeking righteousness
before God by their observing the Law.

It is, no where said that any other than Abraham is the root or first fruits
to his seed Rom 11.16. nor they termed his seed, lump, branches any other way
than either naturally or spiritually, that is by natural generation or by
following his faith by virtue of election Romans 11 16. does not say, Abraham was
the root as recieving the covenant for the branches, but as propagating the
branches. Nor need we say that he either received a covenant o^ works alone, in
referrence to them all elected, or that he recieved the Covenant of grace with
Ecclesiastical respect to them all. The plain doctrine of the Scripture is set
down above, Mr. C's. dictates are mere phantasms without Scripture.

The substance of the Covenan^ is a novel expression, and ambiguous. I deny not
the covenant Genesis 17. to be evangelical. yet I concieve it not purely such, but
as I say in my Exercit. page 2. mixed, that is containing political and
Evangelical promises. I deny not but it was the jews covenant-right to have the
Tabernacle of God or their ordinances as their privilege, yea and his presence
therein until the Messiah came, yet so as that when they set up Idols the glory
of God departed from them Ezekiel. 11.22, 23. They had also Gods oracles with
them, deliverance from Egypt, Christ to be with them in the wilderness: nor do
I deny these to have bin by virtue of Christ's mediation, yet so far as these
were national mercies they were proper to the Jews. What ever be meant by the
Covenant and the promise Rom 9 4. they do not agree to Gentile believers. And
though I say they were by virtue of Christ's mediation, yet I concieve the
mediation of Christ was directly for the elect only, for others only obliquely,
by consequent, and by accident by reason of the Cohabitation of them on earth.
I deny not that filling the Temple with smoke Rev. 15.8. allusively to that
which was 1 Kings. 8.10, 11. Isai. 6.1, 2, 3, 4. might restifie the presence of
God in the Churches after Christ's ascension in a way of mercy to his people,
and for their sakes in a way of justice against his and their enemies.

I neither do, nor need say that Canaan was all which God promised the Jews I
grant it was promised to them as an everlasting possession Genesis 17.8. But the*
wrod (...) which the Gr: translate (...), everlasting, notes freequently but a
duration of some age or ages as 2 Chronicles. 2.4. etc. I deny not but the
Patriarchs looked futher than Canaan Heb. 11.9, 10. I deny not that the promise
of Canaan was in some sense ratified in Christ, and all other temporal
blessings to the elect now 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. that Christ is said to drive
out their enemies Exodus 23.20, 21. and that the land they possessed was called
Immanuel^ land Es^i 8.8 that sundry were excluded from thence for unbelief Heb.
3* la^^ compared with chapter 4 2. though if it be not warily explained Moses and
Aaron should be guilty of the Gospel sin of unbelief. If God promised to be a
God to them, and as one branch thereof instanceth in giving them Canaan Genesis
17, 7, 8. then the promise of Canaan is a branch of the promise, I will be a God
to them* If the Proselyted strangers were to have Abraham's Covenant sealed to
them and theirs by circumcision, yet had no lots in Can^an, then persons were
to be circumcised to whom the promise belonged not.

I grant that Christ was mediator of the Covenant with Abraham so far as it
contains evangelical promises, but deny that it was held out to all the Jews by
the sacrafices. For though the typical sacr^fices in respect of purif^ing the
flesh did purge the whole Congregation, yet none were pur^ed by Christ's blood,
but the elect. The high Priest bare the names of the 12. tribes and these
represented the elect for whom Christ made intercession, and atonement not
every I^raelite Romans 9.6.

What Mr. C. says, the Covenant of works holds out pardon or mercy to
transgress I do much question. It seems to me that A^ab, though under a
Covenant of works yet, had some mercy 1 Kings 21.29. And whether the offense
against some of the laws were not in some respect forgiven Levit. 4. to them,
who had not faith in Christ, for the sacrafice they offered ( which were all
offered according to the Law Heb. 10.8.) I do make question. Nor do I think but
that by the Covenant of the law in respect of temporal evils there was some
pardon by virtue of obedience to legal prescriptions, though some sins as of
presumption Number 15. were not, no not to them that were in the covenant of
grace, as its li^ely in Eli. his Case 1 Samuel 3.24. see Gethard. Ioh. Voss.
resp. ad Judic. Ravensp. c. 22.23. Concerning the Covenant of the Law though it
require no faith in Christ, or repentance for justification, yet whether
according to the covenant of the law some repentance were not accepted for
revoking some temporal evils contrary to the promises of the Covenant with the
Jews at mount Sinai may be doubted from Deuteronomy. 29 21.25. and 30.2, 3, 8, 9, 10.
But of these Chapters. more hereafter in answer to M. B. I grant no salvation
but by Christ, but denies that therefore all the Jews best and worst had
salvation and external covenant-right: nor though all the Jews best, and worst,
had the same dispensers of the covenant mentioned Exodus 19.5.6. and 24.7.8. will
it follow they had all right at least externally in the covenant of grace. For
that speaks of the covenant of the law. I grant that the first Covenant of
works was made withal in Adam, and that the Covenant Genesis 17. was a particular
covenant made with the seed of Abraham, yet the Covenant at mount Sinai was not
made with all men, without distinction, but only with Israel, whom he brought
out of Egypt* the Jews To. 11.20. were broken off from the invisible church of
true believers, which was in that nation in their progenitors, as I show in the
first part of this Review Sect. 2. etc. I agree with Mr. C. that the Covenant
in Horeb Deuteronomy. 29.1.2. with Deuteronomy. 30.6. had the stipulation of, do this and
live, and that the Covenant of the law was differnt from the promise, Genesis 17.
that it held out temporals, this externals. How the Gentiles were ingraffed in
the room of the Jews, and not into the external right and privilege, as by Mr
C. imagines is showed in the Review, ubi supra, That the covenant of Sinai was
without mercy, I question as above. And methinks, Ezekiel. 16.60. proves, That God
would remember his covenant with Israel in the days of their youth, and show
them mercy for it.

Now the covenant made with Israel in the days of its youth, is meant of the
covenant made with them when they came out of Egypt: for so the whole
description of their pitiful estate (which can be referred to no other than the
time of their bondage in Egypt, v. 4, 5, 6, 7. after which was his covenant in
the days of their youth, v. 8) shows the covenant in the days of their youth
to have been the covenant at mount Sinai. And so the new Annot. on Ezekiel. 16, 8,
[ I swear unto thee] I made a solemn covenant with thee that I would take thee
to be my people, Exodus 19 and 24 chapters, Ier. 2.2. Piscat. S* hol: in v. 7*
nudissima] i. e. destituta omni open pressa, sc: servitute in Aegypto, in v: 8,
visitari te per Mosen educendo te ex Aegypto and pangendo tecum fedus atque ita
ducendo te in uxorem. Grot. in Ezekiel* 16.5, Populus enim in Aegypto natus est in
v. 7. and sic exprimitur miseria Ge^tis in Aegypto in v. 8, and ingressus sum
pactum tecum] in Sinai. As for Mr C. his paraphrase on Ezekiel. 16.60. I will
remember my covenant with [Thee] not with this or that particular Jew, but with
them all in an Ecclesiastical way, and in respect of external right: albeit
some only had the saving benefits thereof, as being the select covenanters
mainly intended, He therein supposes that some had the saving benefit of that
covenant, which is contrary to Romans 3 20. That by the deeds of the Law shall no
flesh be justified in Gods sight. And he supposes the covenant was made with
them all in an Ecclesiastical way, and in respect of external right.

Which what it is else but this, that they should all have a right to
circumcision, and other Ecclesiastical privileges, I know not: Whereas the
covenant was of prosperity in Canaan, continuance of long life, etc. to them
upon obedience to the law he gave them by Moses, which notwithstanding they had
broken, and were carried captive; yet he would remember his covenant made with
that people when he brought them out of Egypt, and upon the prayers of Daniel,
etc. restore them to their own land, Esaias 48 1, 2, 3, etc. teaches the Jews,
that notwithstanding they were evil, yet he would for his names sake, that the
heathens might not say that God could not deliver them and bring them from the
north, v. 10, 11, 14. The like is, Ezekiel. 20, 14.

The objection from Romans 9 7, 8, is ill framed, and as ill answered: 1. it is
proved from the Text, that the promise of ful^^lling, of which the Apostle
speaks, was the promise to Abraham, I will be the God of thy seed, Genesis 17.7.
from the terms used Romans 9.7, 8. which shows that the question was, how Gods
word could be true concerning Abraham's seed, if the Jews were rejected, as the
Apostle supposes, v. ^. 2. That the answer is directly this, that this promise
was not made to all Israel, or to all the children of the flesh, that is,
begotten of Abraham by natural generation, for it was not promised to Ishmael
and Esau, but to the elect as Isaac and Jacob, whence this proposition arises,
They only are children of the promise (that is by an usual Hebra^sm) subjects
of the promise to whom it belong, as children of wrath to whom wrath belongs, a
son of perdition to whom perdition belongs) who are elect, therefore not all
the natural seed of Abraham. And consequently the promise. Genesis 17.7. belonged
not in the Evangelicall sense to the body of the Jews, even the worst.

Now what does Mr. C. answer? He distinguishes between children of the
promise, in respect of external filiation, and external salvation, and
applies it thus, In the later they were not, but if you take it of the
Church-seed of the promise, and such as were externally adopted of God, and
instated in the covenant of grace as invested with church covenant, so they
were children even of the free covenant of blessing in Christ, Acts 3, 25, 26,
and had the promise indefinitly, as Deuteronomy: 30.6, Jerem: 31.37, Genesis 17.7.

In which answer. 1. he makes a distinction to include them in the promise whom
the Apostle excludes from it. 2. Whereas the Apostle determines the elect only
to be included in the promise taken in an Evangelicall sense, Mr. C. includes
the elect and non-elect, even the worst of the Jews whom the Apostle excludes.
3. He abuses Acts 3.25, 26, Deuteronomy: 30.6, by interpreting them as belonging to
the worst of the Jews in respect of external right, which are express about
turning from iniquities and circumcising the heart,

The second objection is better framed, yet not so fully as had been requisite:
Mr C. his conclusion is, That the covenant of grace as invested with
church-covena^nt, belonged to all the Jews even the worst of them, in respect
of external right to outward ordinances.

But that is false: For it did not belong to the children after the flesh, to
the Jerusalem that then was, which was in bondage with her children, they were
to be cast out being of the bond^woman, Gal. 3.23, 25, 28, 30, 31. Ergo, the
covenant of grace, etc.

Again, They to whom belongs the covenant of grace as invested with
church covenant in respect of external right, are children of the promise,
Genesis 17.7. But many of the Jews were not children of the promise, Genesis 17.7.
as is proved from Gal. 4.28, 29, Romans 9 8. Ergo,

Now what does Mr. C. answer? He tells us, That they are called children of the
flesh, not begotten by natural generation, for then Isaac also should be a
child of the flesh. But he is called a child of the flesh, who though born by
natural generation of Abraham, yet sought righteousness by the Law, which was
not Jerusalem of old, but Jerusalem which was when Paul wrote this, long after
Christ's time.

Res. But was not it true also of the Jerusalem that was when Christ was? Did
not our Lord Christ deny them to be Abraham's children, and told them they were
the Devils children, John 8.39, 44. though he granted them to be Abraham's seed
by natural generation, v. 37. and yet Mr C calls them Abraham's Church-seed, or
Church-seed of the promise instated in the covenant of grace, as invested also
with Church-cavenant, children even of that free covenant of blessing in
Christ, Acts 3.25, 26, and had the promises indefinitly, as Deuteronomy. 30, 6. Jer.
31, 37. Genesis 17.7. etc. beloaging to them, Romans 9.4. and were children of God,
Christ's, Matthew. 15, 26. I deny not but John 1.12. those that rejected Christ
are called Christ's own, but not because of their right in him, or promise to
them to own them as in the covenant of grace, but as they were engaged to him
in respect of his deliverance out of Egypt, and other mercies to them, and
their nearness of consanguinity to him, as Paul calls Israel his flesh, Romans
11.14, Christ being from them according to the flesh, Romans 9, 5. But to say
that even then they were in the covenant of grace when they received not
Christ, is to conceive they were in the Olive when they were broken off. And
yet I deny not that they had in Christ's time a right to circumcision, but no
external right to the covenant of grace, as Mr C. dreams.

SECT. LXIII. That the Covenant at Mount Sinai was a Covenant of Works, and not
of Evangelical grace, and that the Jewish Church and State were but one body.
A Third objection against Mr C. his sixth Conclusion is, they were under the
old and first covenant which was formerly, etc. and not under the new, or in
the covenant of grace.

To this he answers, That even Sinai covenant could not disanull that covenant
formerly made with them in Abraham, and being much later than it, Gal: 3.16,
17. And after, when the covenant is said to be new and old, it is not divisio
generis in species, but subjecti in adjuncta. So the phrases [first and second]
Heb. 9, note not two Testaments specifically different, but numerically.
Besides, it is called a first and second Testament, scil* in order of
succession: so the former is said to be faulty comparatively, not absolutely.
In a word, in way and manner of dispensation, that was different from the
covenant now dispensed in respect of ceremony of administration, not in the
essentials.

Reply, The answer of Mr C. I conceive is reduced to these two points, 1. That
the Jews were under both covenants, that of Sinai, and that of Abraham: 2.
That these two covenants the first and the second, the New and Old, mentioned
Heb: 8, and 9. differ in the way and manner of dispensation, in respect of
ceremony of administration, not in the essentials.

To which I reply, That this is contrary to the Apostles supposition, that the
same men which were under the covenant of mount Sinai, should be under the
promise: For he supposes them to be cast out, Gal: 4.21, 30, and says, v. 31,
we are not children of the bondwoman, that is, under the Law, v: 23, but of the
free, that is, the promise. Yea, cha: 5.18, If ye be led by the Spirit ye are
not under the Law. The like whereto is said, Rom: 6:14, Gal: 3, 10, 11, 12, I
deny not but that the Jews who were under the covenant of grace, that is,
believers in Christ were both under the obedience of the Law, and the hope of
the Gospel, and under the covenant of the Law so far as concerned their
prosperity in Canaan, but not in respect of righteousness and life, or any
other Ecclesiastical privilege.

As for the other part of the answer, I find Mr Perkins on Gal: 5, 24, 25,
saying it is a main pillar in Popish Religion, that the Law of Moses and the
Gospel are all one in substance, etc. Which I know not well how to distinguish
from Mr C. his position, that the new and old covenant differ not in
essentials. But let us examine it, The essentials of a thing are the genus and
difference: It is granted that the new and old, first and second covenant
differ not in the genus, no more does the covenant with Adam in innocence with
Noah after the Flood, they are all covenants of God: But that there is no
essential difference distinguishing between the covenant at mount Sinai, and
the new covenan^; and that they differ in way and manner of dispensation, in
respect of ceremony of administration, not in the essentials, ^s I am assured,
a manifest error both against Scripture, and I think the Authors themselves,
though not only Mr C. here, but also the Assembly Confession of Faith, c. 7.
Art. 5. says, The covenant of grace was administered, etc. and is called the
old Testament, which to be meant of the covenant of mount Sinai, I conceive
from these words of Mr M: D^f^nce page 188. Alas Sir, why do you run into this
needless and erroneous digression? I said in my Sermon that the Moral Law was
added 430 years after the covenant with Abraham, not as a part of that
covenant, but as a Schoolmaster to whip them to Christ, that they finding the
impossibility of keeping the Law, might more earnestly long after Christ,
exhibited in those shadows of rites and sacrifices, etc. But to say that this
covenant mentioned in the eighth of the Hebrews, was the covenant of works, is
a most erroneous doctrine: Look into the text and you shall find that the
covenant which is there mentioned (which God finds fault with, and calls the
first covenant, in opposition to this better covenant) had ordinances of divine
worship, had a Sanctuary, a Tabernacle,, Priests and Highpriests, Sacrifices
and other rites belonging to the administration of it. Sir, was this the
covenant of works? I hope you will not own it in your next.

Mr Anthony Burgess, another Assembly man, Vindic. Legis, Lect. 24, maintains
with a distinction, the Law at mount Sinai to be a covenant of grace, Like
whereto are the opinions of Mr John Ball of the covenant of grace. chapter 7, page
102, Dr. Samuel Boulton, True bounds of Christian freedom, page 130* etc. Mr
Thomas Blake, Vindic. Foeder. c. 24, etc. But as in other things there is much
dictating besides the Scriptures, in the received writings of men, so in this.
Mr C. says, The difference between the old and new Covenant, is in the way and
manner of dispensation in respect of ceremony of administration, not in the
essentials.

Concerning which it is to be observed, that to dispense is to lay out as a
Steward does lay out money. To dispense a Covenant may be understood either by
making it known, or performing the things promised on either side; the same may
be conceived to be meant by administration. The ceremony of administration I
understand not what it is, unless by it be meant the rites of the Old and New
Testament. This then seems to be either all or the main difference Mr C. makes
between the covenant made with Israel at mount Sinai, and the new covenant
confirmed in the blood of Christ with Jews and Gentiles; that the former had
Circumcision, the Passover, Sacrifices, etc. by which the covenant of grace was
made, or the things promised conferred, the new covenent had Baptism and the
Lords Supper. A Covenant is a promise, and so an action; and when mutual
there is a reciprocal action. I know not what other predicament to place it in.
The essentials of a thing are in corporeal substances, matter and form, in
other beings those things which in proportion to them show what it is, and
wherein it is differenced from others under the same genus, which essentials
the Logicians call the genus and difference. The essential difference of one
action from another, is the terminus or effect, as heating from cooling, in the
object, subject, end. A Covenant being essentially a promise, differs
essetntially from another promise, when the things promised are different, as
the promise of land differs essentially from the promise of life; and when the
conditions are different, though the things promised be the same, as the
promise of land to one for so much money is essentially different from the
promise of land upon the condition of thanks. The covenant of works and of
grace, are terms not used in Scripture. But Romans 11.5, 6, Election by grace and
of works, Rom 4, 4, it is said, to him that works the reward is reckoned not
according to grace, but according to debt, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, Ye are saved by
grace, not of works, 2 Timothy: 1.9, who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, Titus 3.5. He saved us not by works of righteousness which we have done,
but according to his own mercy. Yet I think the distinction right and good of
the covenant of grace and the covenant of works. And the difference between
them is, 1. in the thing promised, the one promises life upon obedience to the
Law given, but not strength to do it; the other promises the Spirit to enable
for doing. 2. in the condition the one promises life upon perfect obedience,
the other upon faith in Christ. These differences are confirmed from sundry
Texts, Rom: 10.5. 2 Cor. 3.6, 10, Gal. 3.10, 12, 22, etc. I think in a promise
the different end of the promiser makes not an essential difference. I think it
is the same promise essentially when one promises land upon condition of
giving thanks, to show his bounty; and another to engage him to his party,
though the ends be different. My determination in this Writing is as it was in
the former Exam. page 102. That the new Covenant is not the old renewed, but
that they differ specifically in the essentials, and not only in Rites, and
that the Covenant at mount Sinai was a covenant of works: And this I prove,

1. From that Text which here Mr. C. Mr M. the Assembly and others stand so
much upon, to wit, Heb 8, 8, 9. and 10. The old covenant there meant, is the
covenant made with Israel at mount Sinai, which appears in that it was the
covenant which God made with the Fathers of the Jews in the day that he took
them by their hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt. Now that covenant
differs essentially more than in Rites from the new covenant; yea, as a
covenant of works is diffrent from the covenant of Evangelical grace, ^.
Because the new covenant is said to be established or settled as a Law ^n better
promises, Heb: 8.6. Now if the promises be better promises, it is because they
be of better things* and if of better things then of different things, and so
the difference is more than in Rites, yea it is in essentials: for promises of
different things essentially, make different covenants essentially. And that
the difference is in the meliority of promises: and that these promises be of
better things, is apparent from the recital of the promises, Heb: ^.10, 11,
12. and 10. ^^.^7, where also by the offering of Christ, that Testament is said
to be of force. By this also the covenant at mount Sinai is proved not to be
the covenant of Gospel Grace: For then it had had as good promises, yea the
same promises. 2. If it had been the covenant of grace, they had abode in it.
For that is a covenant, which they that are in continue in. But in the old
covenant, or that at mount Sinai they abode not, v. 9. Ergo, etc. 3. That is
not the covenant of grace which is faulty, or (which is the meaning of ^t)
occasioning God to complain, for (...), which we translate Faultless, is that
which is without complaint, and the meaning is, the first covenant occasioned
complaint of the Israelites, as it is v. 8. (...), complaining of them (he does
not say it, as Mr. M. seems to have understood it, as if God had found fault
with the covenant; that is a mistake, he should then have found fault with his
own act) he says, therefore for remedy of such complaint and jarring, a second
covenant was established, which should be (...), plaintless, and therefore the
covenant of grace takes away occasion of complaint, or finding fault, because
it provides for them to whom it was made, that they should not occasion God to
complain by their breaking of it, as the first covenant had done, which was
faulty, occasioning God to complain in that it was broken. Mr. C. says, it was
faulty comparatively, not absolutely, and his meaning seems to be that the
first covenant was faulty because of its imperfect manner of teaching the
Gospel. But he is therein mistaken: For, as I showed from the words, the first
covenant is said to be faulty, because of the complaint of God against the
Israelites, as not keeping ^t, as the holy Ghost expounds the word (...), v. 7.
by the expression v. 8. proving it not to have been faultless, that is, without
complaint, because he complained of them, v. 8, to wit, that they abode not in
it. v. 9. which if it had been the covenant of Evangelical grace, they should
certainly have done, because that provides for the keeping and perseverance in
it, by writing the laws in their hearts, and forgiving their sins.

2. The same is further proved from chap. 12.18, etc. where 1. the covenant at
mount Sinai is set down as given with horror, to show that it begat nothing but
affrightments even in the best Moses himself, whereas the covenant of grace
begets joy and gladness before God. 2. It is said the Hebrew Christians were
not come to, therefore it was not the covenant of grace. 3. That they were come
to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, v. 24. in opposition to Moses the
Mediator of the old.

3. From chapter 10, 29. where the blood of the new covenant is said to sanctify.
And chapter 13.20. Christ brings back the sheep by the blood of he everlasting
covenant. This everlasting covenant is that which was confirmed by the blood of
Christ oppositly, or in contradistinction to that which was confirmed by the
blood of Calves and Goats, Heb. 9.19. Therefore that covenant was not
everlasting, nor confirmed by Christ's blood, and consequen^y not the Covenant
of grace

4. The same is the express doctrine of Paul, Gal. 4.24. where he says, Agar
and Sara are two covenants, and he says, Agar, or one Covenant, was* from
mount Sinai, and that this genders to bondage, and is in bondage with her
children, v. 25. calls them that are under it such as are begotten according to
the flesh, v. 29. to be cast out, v. 30. and opposes it to Sarah, that is, the
promise, the Jerusalem above who is free, mother of all believers, begetting
children of the promise, born after the spirit, children of the free woman. Now
what is this but the covenant of grace, and the other of works. For the
covenant of grace never genders to bondage, nor is in bondage with her
children, who are not according to the flesh to be cast out, but free, the
mother of believers, bringing forth children of the promise born after the
Spirit, children of the free woman. Therefore the covenant at mount Sinai, was
not the same with the covenant of Gospel Grace, but a covenant of works.

5. In the same Epistle, chap. 3.12. he says, the Law is not of Faith, that is
the covenant of the Law does not promise righteousness before God upon faith,
but by works* v. 13. therefore the covenant of the Law was not the covenant of
Gospel Grace.

6. The same is expressed v. 16, 17, 18, 21, where the Law is opposed to the
promises, the inheritance is denied to be by it, or that it could give life, or
righteousness by it, therefore it is not the covenant of grace, for life,
righteousness and inheritance is by it. The like is Gal: 2.21. Rom: 4.13, 14,
15, 16, and 3, 20, 21.

7. From Rom 10.5. where the Apostle expressly says, that Moses described the
righteousness of the law that the man that does them shall live in them, and
this he makes opposite to the word of Faith: whence it follows it was the
covenant of works, which was the Law: For what is the covenant of works but
that which promises life by doing the Law? Nor does it make against it to say,
the Apostle, v. 4. says, Christ was the end of the law for righteousness to
every one that believes: for in whatsoever sense that be meant, yet it is
certain the denomination of a covenant of grace or of works, is not taken from
the end of the Covenanter, or the consequent on the covenant or command, but
the promise and condition; therefore what ever end God had in giving the law,
or what event soever fell out upon it, yet the covenant of the law promising
righteousness upon perfect obedience to the law, and not otherwise, it is to be
termed a covenant of works, not of Gospel Grace.

8. From Romans 6.14. where the Apostle says, Sin shall not have dominion ^ver
you, for ye are not under the law, but under grace, which supposes that they
who are under the law, are not under grace; which cannot be understood of the
command of the law, for men may be and are under the command of it, and yet
under grace: therefore by the law is meant the covenant of the law, and then
they which are under the covenant of the law, are not under grace, which they
should be, i^ the covenant of the law were generally the same with the covenant
of grace.

9. From Rom: 7.4. We are dead to the Law by the body of Christ, v. 6, We are
delivered, or as I would read it, we are discharged ((...)) from the law, even
the Moral law, v. 7. not as a rule of obedience, but as a Husband, or Covenant,
on which we depend for maintenance, help, supply, sentence, countenance,
reward. But if the law were the covenant of grace, we should not be dead to it,
or delivered from it: Ergo.

10. From 2 Cor. 3, 6, the covenant of the law is called the letter which
kills, opposite to the new covenant in which the Spirit which quickneth is
ministered, and v 7. he expressly calls it the ministration of death graven in
stones, the ministration of condemnation, v. 9, opposite to the ministration of
righteousness, of which Paul denies himself to be a Minister, therefore it was
not the covenant (...) Evangelical grace, but of works.

Yea Mr Cobbet himself, page 65. The covenant in Horeb had the stipulation of.
Do so and live, not so in the covenant of grace that was imbondaging, showed
the way of worship, gave not grace to act it, was against us, etc. The Assembly
Confess. of Faith, c. 7. Art. 2. chapter 19, Art. ^, cite Gal: 3.12, Romans 10* 5,
Gal. 3, 10, which speak of the covenant of the law to show the covenant of
works made with Adam, which shows they take them, to be the same, or heed not
what they cite, chap. 19. Art. 6. True believers are not under the law as a
covenant of works, not as due to them by the Law as a Covenant of works.
Greater Catech: page 25. The regenerate are delivered from the Moral law as a
covenant of works. Yea Mr M. his words denying the law to be part of the
covenant made to Abraham, but as a Schoolmaster to whip them to Christ,
impossible to be kept (which are not to be ^rid of the covenant of grace) does
in effect make it the covenant of works. Mr Anthony Burgess when he
distinguishes vindic. legis, lect. 24. page 223, says the law considered more
largly, as that whole Doctrine delivered on mount Sinai with the preface and
promises adjoined, and all things that may be reduced to it, was a covenant of
grace, but more strictly, as it is an abstracted rule of righteousness holding
forth life upon no terms but perfect obedience abstracted from Moses his
administration of it; was not of grace but of works.

In which words, he denies not that it held forth life upon no terms but
perfect obedience, and so it was a Covenant not of grace but of works. 2 he
shows not that it was given as a Covenant upon any other terms, or that it did
propound or promise righteousness before God upon condition of faith in Christ:
but only tells us, take the Law for the whole doctrine etc. Which is in effect
all one as to say, The covenant God made was of works, yet withal he delivered
many things, which showed he would also have them look at Christ, (which we
grant true) but no where that he promised righteousness through Christ in that
Covenant Mr. Blake Vindic. Faed c 24. page 174. the Law is taken sometimes in
that strict sense as containing a Covenant of works and holding forth life upon
condition of perfect obedience. So Romans 10.5, 6. and 3.21, 22. Gal 3.18. It
were no hard matter to show many of Protestant Writers who call the Covenant of
the Law at mount Sinai the Covenant of works, but these suffice. What is
objected to the contrary is not from the tenor of the cov^nant, but from some
adjuncts of it. as 1 because there were sacrafices and other rites appointed,
it must be a Covenant of grace. Answer* the sacrafices as they were commanded,
so they did belong to the Covenant of works. But as God used them as shadows
and types of Christ to come, so they signify Gods purpose o^ Gospel Grace in
Christ, but by another Covenant, not that at mount Sinai. 2 Gods end was not to
give life by the Law, but to direct to Christ. Answer 1 I grant the first and
thence it appears he intended it not for a covenant of grace. 2. it directed
not to Christ as it was propounded Covenant-wise, but by accident in that it
made known sin, and so made Christ appear necessary, and this also proves that
it was of it self as propounded a Covenant of works. 3 God could not enter
into a Covenant of works with man fallen. Answer: True, so as to justify him
by it, yet for other ends he may, as to discover sin, show man's impotency. As
Christ said to the young man Matthew. ^9 16. if thou will enter into life keep
the commandments though he knew he could not have life that way, and v 21.
commands him to sell all, though it did but show his covetousness, not make him
perfect. The covenant of grace is to be judged such, from the tenor of the
promise and condition, not from Gods ends. For if so, then the Gospel it self,
being sent to some to harden them, should be a Covenant of works, because the
end was to to condemn them by it, 4 That God begins the Decalogue with I am the
Lord thy God etc. Answ, 1 He is said to be the God of the spirits of all flesh:
Numb. 16.22. yet thereby is not proved all are in the Covenant of grace. 2 It
may be understood, that he was their God de jure, that he had right to command
them, because he brough them out of Egypt. 3 the plain answer is that he was
their God according to the Covenant of grace made with Abraham antecedently to
the giving of the Law, not by the Covenant of the Law. And for that which is
often objected that in the second commandment God promised mercy to thousands,
but he promises no mercy but in a Covenant of grace, I know how that can be
proved, I concieve that God did and does show temporal mercies out of his long
patience, by the Covenant of the Law, though no man be justified by it before
God. neither Psalm. 105.8. nor any other prove that the Covenant at mount Sinai
was the same with that to Abraham, though the promise of Canaan was to a 1000
generations, yet on condition of obedience Dan. 9.4 Ierem. 11.4, 6, 7, 8. when
they brake Gods Laws they were expelled, and so when they slew the heir of the
Lord of the vic^ard he took his kingdom from them and gave it to a nation
bringing forth the fruits of it, Matthew. 21.43. I do not say that a natural
covenant ex natura rei, is a covenant of works, but it is undoubted, that the
covenant on mount Sinai was a covenant made with the whole nation of the Jews,
and it is proved before to have been a covenant of works. It is untruly said,
That the Gospel^covenant, Gal. 3.9. was of a national nature. For that is a
national Covenant, which is made with a whole nation, that is all the people
descended from such a st^^k, whereas v. 9. the Apostle by saying, so then they
that are of the faith of Abraham are blessed with faithful Abraham, plainly
expounds who he means by all nations v. 8. to wit not whole nations, but
believers of all nations. The Covenant of works at mount Sinai though it did
not justify before God; yet it held that nation in Canaan till they set up
other Gods and revolted from the true God, and upon their forsaking Idols, they
might plead it for the restoring of them to their own land, or continuance in
it. Yea God did condescend so far that if there had been in Jerusalem a man
that had executed judgment and sought truth he would have pardoned it, and not
brought the Chaldeans upon it to burn it Ierem, 5.1. It is true the Gospel
threatens and executes corporal punishments, and promises rewards to the
disobeying or obeying of it, but not an expulsion out of or settling in any one
Country of an entire nation, but personal evils or rewards upon personal
disobedience or obedience. The Covenant of grace admits of no carnal
hypocrites, nor is it so said Gal 4.21, 22, 23. though it is not denied but many
who are admitted into the visible Church are such.

To the eight objection, That was in the flesh, this in the heart, Mr. C.
speaks thus. Answ. was that only in their flesh? was not the word of Covenant
as well in their heart as Moses judging Ecclesiastically avoweth of Israel
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. etc with 30.11, 12, 13, 14. so Isai. 51.7. Gods covenant now
is to write his Law in our hearts Heb. 8. but is not all that included in this,
I will be your God? whence all is enclosed up in that phrase ibid. or was not
the first made to the Jews after their return from Captivity more expressly,
Ier. 3^* as before more implicitly Genesis 17.

Reply. The objection I concieve (though I do not well know whose it is) is
this, that the covenant at mount Sinai with the Jewish nation, or the covenant
with Abraham. Genesis 17. were not the same with the covenant, for that was in the
flesh in circumcision, or with the fleshly Jew in that at mount Sinai, this is
the heart by writing Gods Law there and comprehends only them in whose hearts
Gods Laws are written. And indeed this difference the Apostle makes between the
Covenant of the Law and the Go^pel, the one was of the letter, the other of the
spirit 2 Cor. 3.6. the promise of the spirit is said to be by faith Gal. 3.14.
and in the new covenant this is made the promise different from what was in the
first which was faulty for want of it Heb. 8.10. ^ that God would write his
laws in their hearts. now what Mr. C. speaks seems to me no whit to infring
this. For though it is true, the word of Covenant was in their hearts, yet it
is true, if meant of sanctifying implantation, only of the elect, not all
Abraham's natural seed, or the whole body of Israel. How Moses is said to judge
Ecclesiastically I understand not. Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. etc. with 30.11, 12, 13,
14. do not prove that Moses avowed of every Isralite that the word of covenant
was in their heart. In some places doubtless the promise [I will be your God]
includs also the writing of Gods Laws in our hearts, nor will I deny it
included in the promise Genesis 17.7. But I do then not understand it of every
Israelite in that sense: for if so then I must make Gods word fall, since he does
not perform it to al. And for that which Mr. C. seems to hold, that they had
the promise dispensed unto them with execution of the covenant, it is in my
apprehension to charg God with falsehood. if any say I wrong Mr. C. let him
construe this passage otherwise if he can [ yea but God did not actually write
such holy dispositions in them: suppose he did not: that is the execution of
the covenant, as for the very ^erith or Covenant itself, it is the promise
whereof dispensed to them, and this they had both Genesis 17. and Deuteronomy. 30.6. To
circumcise the heart to love God is* to imprint gracious dispositions; to
promise the same to them is a Covenant to imprint it and so he did covenant
with them and theirs ibid] In which words he seems plainly to make God promise
to imprint in some the gracious disposions he does not actually imprint, which
is to make God not keep his word; nor is the matter mended by asking, is not
Gods Covenant now also sacramentally on our bodies too, and in many no further?
For I grant many are baptized, who are not regenerate, yet I do not believe
Gods Covenant of grace is to any such, or as Mr. C. speaks Gods Covenant to
write his Laws in their hearts is to any such. Nor do I think that either
Ierem. 31^33. or Deuteronomy. 30.6. God promises to all Israelits to write holy
dispositions in their hearts, but only to the elect; nor to these in his
covenant at mount Sinai, though he made these promises to some of the natural
seed of Israel. neither Romans 11. from 16. to 24. nor Genesis 4.15, 16. Compared
with Genesis 6.1, 2. nor Genesis 17.18.19, 20, 21. compared with Genesis 21.9, 10, 11,
12. and Gal. 4. nor Heb. 12*15, 16.17. prove that either Cain or Ishmael or
Esau were ever in the Covenant of Evangelical grace, nor is there any text that
proves that he new covenant is intailed to natural generations of the most
Godly men. Mr. C. in answer to the tenth objection says thus. But it is false
to say the Commandment gave right to Covenant Interest* since Covenant right
was first promised and declared to be the ground of that commanded service of
the init^atory seal Genesis 17 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. etc. Thou shall therefore keep my
Covenant. He does not say you must be or are circumcised, and therefare I will
be your God: But I will be a God to thee and thy seed, therefore thou and they
shall be circumcised; the nature of a seal supposes a Covenant to be sealed.

To which I reply, I confess it were ridiculous for any to say the commandment
gave right to covenant interest, or covenant-right. For what is
covenant interest, but interest in the covenant, and covenant-right, but right
from the covenant? But setting aside Mr C. his inept phrasifyings, (which I
count to be Paedobaptists-gibberish) it is not false, but manifest truth, that
it is the command of God only that gave title to persons to be circumcised,
and is the Rule to know who are to be circumcised and who not, as I have often
proved and showed to be in effect confessed by Mr M. As for Mr. C. his
inference from [ thou therefore, Gen, 17.9.] it is answered often before in the
first part of this Review, Sect. 5. and elsewhere, that neither is the reading
certain [ thou therefore] nor does the inference arise merely from the promise,
v. 7. nor is the inference at all of a right to circumcision, but of a duty,
nor is this duty urged from each circumcised persons interest in the covenant
but Gods making it with Abraham. Nor is it true, That the nature of a Seal
supposes a covenant to be sealed, since other things are to be sealed, as
Letters, Books, Stones, Men, Fountains, etc. besides covenants, Abraham's
circumcision, Romans 4.11. was a seal not of a covenant of some things to be
done, but of the righteousness of faith which he had yet being uncircumcised,
and if it were true, yet is it as little to the purpose, since there may be a
covenant sealed to a person that has no interest in the promise, as when ones
name is used only as a Trustee for others. And for what is said, That the
commandment required only a male of eight days old to be circumcised, (which
Mr. C. seems to conceive false) meaning not before the eighth day, is so plain
by reading the chapter, that I should make question of his wit or his forehead
that should deny it. And the reason thus expressed is as frivolous, The promise
heing made indefinitely to the seed whether male or female, and not to the
eighth day old seed, but to the seed albeit but a day old. For though the
promise be to the child of one day old, yet the command is not to him, nor is
he to be circumcised, and therefore the seal follows not the covenant, but the
command even where the promise goes before. What he adds, Else what had become
of them if they had died then, in respect of the ordinary covenant means of
their good, Romans 9.6: Methinks Mr. C. might have as easily answered himself as
he would do a Papist pleading this very plea for the necessity of infants
baptism to salvation, or about the case of famales, or still-born infants.
Surely he would say, God supplies that without means, which he bestows on
others by ordinary means, and so infants of a day old may speed well without
circumcision. To what purpose Romans 9.6. comes in here I know not: This and some
other passages seem to be the inconsiderate speeches of a man dreaming.

To the objection, with the Jews, the Church and State were the same, but not
so now. Mr. C. thus writes. Answ. God never confounded Church and Civil State
either then or now. Who dare make God the author of confusion which is the God
of order? He then kept them several, paling in the Civil State with the
Judicials, with which the Church as such dealt not, but as Civil cases came
under a Church consideration. She had her Ceremonials and Morals to regulate
her Kings and Princes, Priests Levits, and Elders had their proper work, and
word, only in their own Spears. The Elders of the Assemblies knew and acted
in their places Ecclesiastically without interruption from Civil officers, or
intruding upon Civil Officers as such, as Josh. 9. and 16.1, 2, Acts 14. Luke
4. The matters of the King and of the Lord were carefully bounded and sundred,
2 Chronicles. 17.11.

Answ. According to the constitution of the Jewish people by God, the Church
was not one body and the State another, but all the same persons were of the
Church, who were members of the Commonwealth, he that had the right of a Jew,
had the right of a Churchmember, nor were any taken in or cast out of the one,
but withal he was taken in or cast out of the other. Nor hereby is God made
the Author of confusion, but good order was settled and kept in this way of
coincidency of State Civil and Ecclesiastical. Nor is it true that God kept the
Church and Civil State several, or paled in the Civil State with Judicials,
by which it was divided from the Church. In the Church the Priest dealt as well
in judicials as in ceremonials, the Priest and the Levite as well as the Judge
gave sentence in matters of blood and plea, as well as between stroke and
stroke, Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9. Eli, Samuel, Iehoiadah judged Israel, managed
State Affairs as well as Temple service. Nor do I know any such Judicials, but
that they did belong to the Church or Priests (who were Judges) as well as to
the Civil State, that is, the Princes. As there were ceremonials and morals to
regulate Kings and Princes, so there were also laws to regulate the Priests.
But no where do we read of any Court kept by the Church, or Officers of the
Church, that is, Priests and Levits, wherein to censure Kings and Princes for
mere moral sins called now (somewhat besides the Scripture use of the word)
Scandals) though we find Princes deposing Priests. It is true, Priests, Levits
and Elders had their proper work and moved only in their own Spears. And so
had Princes and Soldiers, but not so as to make two distinct Corporations in
Israel. If by Elders of the Assemblies which knew and acted Ecclesiastically in
their places, he mean any other than the Priests, and by their Ecelesiasticall
knowing and acting, the taking cognizance of moral evils, and proceeding
against them by Ecclesiastical censure in a Court distinct from the Civil, I
must confess I find not either such Assembly, or such proceedings in the texts
brought by Mr C. or any other. I grant there was a dististinction between the
matters of the King and of the Lord, 2 Chro. 19.11. and that Amaziah the chief
Priest was over the Judges whom Iohoshaphat sent forth in all matters of the
Lord, and Zebadiah the Ruler of the house of Judah, for all the Kings matters.
But this does not prove that these men did keep several Courts, but that in
the same Synedrium these persons were best fitted to direct, the one in one
sort of matters, the other in the other; As in a Parliament, Senate, or Council
of Lords, Bishops, Lawyers, Soldiers, though they sit and act together, yet
one may be more specially for one business and another for the other. Nor does
it appear that Iehoshaphat assigned in the Cities some Judges for one kind of
causes, and others for others But because there was occasion to have recourse
in many difficult cases to the Synedrum at Jerusalem, he instructs them whom
they should have there for their help, according to the law, Deuteronomy. 17, 8, 9,
etc. But I leave the Reader to Mr Seldens books de Synedrijs Etraeorum, to
resolve him in this point.

What Mr C. gathers out of the words of I. S. that he says, That God made a
covenant of grace in general and so with the body of the Jews infants and
all, serves not Mr C, his turn, unless he meant his natural seed in-generall,
which that he did grant in respect of Evangelicall grace, I do not believe*
What he says touching Baptism, that it seals the Covenant indefinitely to
all sorts, and that it seals an infants present, federall grace, and unto
future grace: likewise unto grown ones it seals personal grace less
principally, covenant-grace principally, is mere fancy without any Scripture,
which makes no such distinctions of federall grace and personal, of the
sealing one grace principally, another less principally, of sealing an infants
present federall grace, and unto future grace, of baptism, sealing the covenant
indefinitly to all sorts, which the Scripture makes the act of the person
baptized only to testify his own repentance and faith.

I proceed to examine the ninth Section of that Chapter. Sect. 9 Mr C. sets
down this Conclusion, That the covenant interest, at least external and
Ecclesiastical of Infants of inchurched believers is Gospel as well as such
Covenant Interest of grown persons.

SECT. XLIV. Animadversions on the ninth Section of the same Chapter, in which
the Covenant Interest external and Ecclesiastical of infants of inchurched
believers is pretended, not proved to be Gospel, in which his allegations of
Deuteronomy. 30.6, etc. Genesis 17.8. Luke 19 9. Deuteronomy. 29.10, etc. Ezekiel. 16.1, etc. Genesis
9.25.26. and other places are examined.
Answ: IN my Examen page 51. I said, They that say the Covenant of grace
belongs not only to believers, but also to their natural children, whether
believing or not, these add to the Gospel, and the Apostle says of such, Gal.
1.8, 9. Let him be accursed. And page 122. It is no wrong to say it, that it is
a new Gospel to affirm that this is one of the promises of the covenant of
grace, That God will be the God of believers and of their seed; that the seed of
believers are taken into covenant with their parents, I cannot derive its
pedigree higher than Zuinglius. To this Mr C. opposes his seventh Conclusion
with ambiguity and seeming hesitancy. For what else can be the reason of those
terms [ at least as well] which are not like the expressions of a man that is
well resolved what to hold? But that we may rip up this Conclusion, 1. He
supposes that right to outward ordinances, or more particularly to an initiall
seal, is covenant interest from the covenant of grace, which is a mistake, as I
have often showed. 2. That such external covenant interest of grown persons is
Gospel without Scripture, which mentions only justification by faith and life
by Christ to be the Gospel, not such a covenant interest (as they call it)
which may be to reprobates as well as to elect persons. 3. He speaks to
believers inchurched by such a covenant as the Scripture mentions not. 4. He
annexeth the covenant interest he speaks of to this Church Covenant as well as
to the covenant of grace without any warrant but his own conceit, nor shows
how far it is annexed to the one with or without the other, 5. He asserts the
covenant interest at least external and Ecclesiastical of infants of
inchurched believers. 6. That this is Gospel. The first place he brings for his
Conclusion is Deuteronomy. 30, 6, 11, 12, 13, 14, compared with Romans 10.6, 7, 8, and
says, The matter of the promise, scil: inward power of grace shows it was a
Gospel-promise like that Heb. 8.10, 11, 12.

Ans. This is enough to show the impertinency of this text to prove the mere
external Ecclesiastical interest of infants of inchurched believers. For it
contains that promise of inward grace, which Mr. B. says, belongs only to the
elect. Friendly Accom. page 362. 2 Says he, Now this was made to the seed or
children of these church members, as chapter 29.14, 15. here is not any evasion as
is usual in mentioning Abraham's seed, etc. this people to whom this was made,
being not so spiritual themselves.

Answ. I grant that the promise Deuteronomy. 30.6. of circumcising thine heart and the
heart of thy seed, is meant of the seed of those then assembled, but not of all
their seed, but only such as were elect, nor at all times, but a special
time, upon their return to God when they were in captivity, nor at all to their
infant seed but to their grown seed, as Mr B. proves in the words and place
above cited, Friendly Accom. page 361. And whereas Mr. C. conceives the people
to whom this promise was made, not so spiritual, he is mistaken. For if God
promised to circumcise their heart, they must be spiritual. 3 That it was not a
bare tender, which I grant. 4. says he, Lest any doubt should arise how this
should be ratified and made good, Moses prophetically sets out Christ as
dead and risen in wh^m this covenant was ratified, v. 12, 13. All* which the
Apostle further explaineth, Romans 10.6, 7, 8*

Answ. I do not conceive that either Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13. uses the
words there to show how the promise, v. 30.6. should be ratified, or that he
prophetically sets out Christ as dead and risen, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13. or
that the Apostle, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. so explains it. He that reads the chapter
may perceive, that Deuteronomy. 30. v 11, 12, 13, 14. are brought to this end, that
Moses might prevent the excuse which might be made for their disobedience by
alleging that Gods laws were at such a distance from them as that they could
not come to them. And though it is true that the Apostle appli^s those words to
the word of faith, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. yet it is manifest that it was not a
prediction of Christ's resurrection, as there the words stand, 1. from Deu.
30.10. where the commandment mentioned v. 11. is said expressly to be [ Gods
commandment and statute which are written in this Book of the Law.] 2. That it
was that which was nigh to them that they might hear it and do it. v. 14 which
is meant of the Law, not of the word of faith concerning Christ dead and risen,
which was not to be done by us, but to be believed. Rightly says Beza, Annot.
ad Romans 10.8. (...), Hebr. (...) baddabar, quo vocabulo Moses intelligit legem
quam Dominus voce sua promulgavit, audiente universo populo suo, ita ut nullam
ignorantiam possit ^raetexere, eum ejus tabulas baberet, descriptas, tanquam
adeo singuli ex re citare possent, and intus haberent quasi in cognitio^e and
animo insculptam: sed quod Moses dixit de lege, hoc totum Paulus ad Evangelium
acommodat per allusionem. Pisc: Analys. alludit Apostolus ad verba Mosis, Deuteronomy.
30.12. Diodati Annot. on Romans 10.6. [ speaks on this wise] S. Paul makes use
of this passage, though spoken in another sense.

The like to which he does in the same Chapter: v. 18. alleging the words
Psalm. 19.4. concerning the preaching the Gospel in all the world, which is
undeniably meant of the course of the heavens. Nor is it of force to overthrow
this exposition, to say, that the word Deuteronomy. 30.14. is said to be in their
heart, for to be in their heart is there no more than to be understood by them
though they were ^isobedient, and might be true of the law ^s well as the
Gospel. No^ is it any disparagement to the holy writings, to say that sometimes
holy writers accommodate to their purpose words that have other meaning in the
places where they stand. Whence I infer that the words v. ^1. [ he Commandment
which I command thee this day] do not prove that thereby is meant the very
Gospel Covenant ratified in Christ, but the Commandment given in Horeb Deuteronomy.
29.1. nor is there any show of likelihood that the words Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12, 13,
14. should be meant of the promise v. 6. of circumcising the heart of their
seed, for that was not to be done by them, but God. And though it be true that
Moses had that day propounded the Commandments as a mutual Covenant betwixt
them and God, as well as God and them the parents or rulers stipulating therein
in behalf of themselves and Chidren (or rather in the behalf of the whole
nation in present being and unborn posterity) and so in reference to them also
a conditional covenant that day in the plains of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29.1.9, 10, 11,
12, 13, 14, 15, 29, and 30.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. yet the covenant was
on their part to keep the commandments of the Law for their prosperity Deuteronomy.
29.9. not to believe in Christ (which few of them understood). And when it is
said Deuteronomy. 29.13. that it was that God might establish them that day for a
people to himself, and that he might be unto them a God, it is not meant that
they should be all believers, and God to them a justifying and saving God in
Christ, Mr. B's. words in his Friendly accommodation, page 361. And for that
which you urge [Ero Deus tui and seminis] I doubt you will not prove that it
reaches so far as you speak. It suffices that God will be to them a God of
mercy and do for them all that is necessary to put them in statum salutis pro
condition parvulorum, and Mr. C's own exposition, I will be a God to some in
respect of external interest, show that to be a God to some does not
necessarily infer they shall be regenerate and so the covenant of saving grace
in Christ be gathered thence. And therefore I deny that Deuteronomy. 30.6.11, 12, 13,
14. compared wi^h Romans 10 6, 7, 8. do evidently or obscurely prove, that the
Covenant Interest (external as he calls it) of inchurched stipulating parents
children is Gospel, or that the Apostles preached this doctrine, or that
believers are to eye the covenant in such a latitude as to their children with
them by faith, or that the essentials of the Covenant of grace in the latitude
of the extent thereof to covenant parents with their children held forth in the
old Testament was delivered and held forth as valid to the faith of the Saints
in the new and after Christ's incarnation. Nor does Peter propound the word of
true faith in such a latitude as with reference to their children, (in Mr. C's
sense) Acts. 2.38, 39. And though Paul hold forth Romans 5.14, 15. the abounding
of Christ's grace (to them that are Christ's) in the gift of righteousness, yet
that any such thing as external Ecclesiastical covenant interest to the natural
seed of believers is held forth Romans 5.14, 15. is Mr. C's, palpable dotage. And
how Acts. 2.38, 39. Romans 11.16, 17, 18, 19. 1 Cor. 7, 14. are mistaken is
showed in the first part of this Review and in this third part. But Mr. C.
fa^ls to disputing thus, That which believers, as such, have, do, and ought to
believe as a branch of the Covenant of grace, that is Gospel; but this is of
that in nature, ergo. The major needs no proof: the former text also clearing
the same: the major de jure is evident: they ought to believe the whole
Covenant made with them, as is evident, faith must be as large as the object,
the Covenant is the word of faith. And so he proceeds in more words.

Whereunto I answer, I grant his major, but Mr. C. seems not to heed his own
Syllogism. For he tells us the minor de jure is evident, they ought to believe
and by which words he seems to have concieved, that this was the minor, that
they ought to believe the wh^le Covenant: whereas his minor to be proved was
this [ the external, Ecclesiastical interest of Infants of inchurched believers
is that which believers, as such, have, do and ought to believe as a branch of
the Covenant of grace]. But Mr. C. as a man weary of disputing falls to his
dictating way again after his confused manner leaving his reader to aim at what
he would prove, and how. That which he should prove is, that the external
Ecclesiastical interest of Infants of inchurched believers is that which
believers, as such, have, do and ought to believe as a branch of the covenant
of grace: surely if they ought to believe it he should produce some promise or
declaration that avowes it as a constant and certain thing. But instead thereof
he falls to Genesis 17.7. and tells us, God in making a Covenant in a Church
reference especially, as was that with Abraham Genesis 17.7 he takes in their
seed or children as joint covenanters but what he means by Gods making a
covenant in a Church reference, or in which words he takes believers seed as
joint covenanters with their parents, or in which words the external
Ecclesiastical interest of every believers natural child may be proved, he
shows not, nor can show, there being no man's seed: but Abraham's there
mentioned. He goes on thus; Hence the phrase of seed in their generations
taking in parents generating and children begotten as those in and by whom
Churches, are like to be continued. Answ. It is true it is said Genesis 17.9. to
Abraham [thou shall keep my Covenant; therefore thou and thy seed after thee in
their generations] and this Covenant is v. 10. every man-child among you shall
be circumcised. But that this phrase [ seed after Abraham in their generations]
should infer that God takes in believeng parents generating and children
begotten even of the Gentiles in the Covenant of grace at least in respect of
external ecclesiastical interest is yet to me a riddle, I know no more to be
inferred thence but this, that not only Abraham, but also the Israelites his
posterity were bound to circumcise their males in their generations. But we
have more of this stuff.

Whence ( says he) God, when to speak in reference to the Church-seed as well
as to the choice elect-seed of Isaac's line in which the visible, and not
merely the invisible Church was to be continued, he says, he will establish
his Covenant with Isaac, not with Ishmael, Ishmael was Abraham's seed too, and
therefore externally in the Covenant, and therefore sealed; but God knowing
that Ishmael would reject this, he warns Abraham of it a little before that
it might not trouble him afterward: It is not to be with him in his
generations for that cause Genesis 17.8* compared with Genesis 21.9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
but with Isaac in his generations; God not opposing therein Isaac to his
Church-seed, who by rejecting the Covenant will and did love, he and his to be
cast out.

Answ. Mr. C. in this passage speaks so obscurely that it is hard to say what
he drives at, and I may take up the saying, reed me a riddle what is this? He
makes a difference between Gods speech of Ishmael and Isaac, that God says he
will establish his Covenant with Isaac not wi^h Ishmael, it was not to be with
him in his generations, who was to be cast out: all which I grant true, and
thence infer, that God never made his Covenant with, to, or for Ishmael, and
yet he was to be circumcised, and therefore the initial seal (as it is called)
was given to him to whom the Covenant belonged not. But Mr. C. using this blind
index [whence] leaves us to ghess, what he drives at. [whence] importes it is
from somewhat before that God said this of Ishmael, but that before was that
God takes in parents generating and children begotten. But me thinks it is from
the contrary (as the Apostle conceived Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9.) that God speaks this
of Ishmael, who was Abraham's seed, and yet not taken into the Covenant, who yet
should be taken in, if yet Mr. C's. principles were good, that the Covenant was
made to Abraham and his seed in their generations. And how Mr. C. reckons
Ishmaels as not Abraham's Church-seed I know not, nor do I understand how
Ishmaels posterity should be cut off from external right to the Covenant he
being a Church member according to Mr. C's dictates.

Mr. C. then tells us, that God says in reference to our times he will be a God
to the families throughout the earth, and page 83. he cites for this purpose
the prophecy Ierem. 31.1. but there it is, the families of Israel: But were it,
the families throughout the Earth, this proves not that it is Gospel, that
Infants of inchurched believers have external Ecclesiastical covenant interest.
If it did, it may as well infer infants of inchurched believers, yea servants
(who are part of the families of the earth) to have the same interest, yea all
in the world, if we must understand it without limitation, and if with
limitation then it is most rightly expounded as the Apostle does Gal. 3.8. the
promise of blessing all nations, of believers v. 9. and so all the families of
the earth; to whom God will be God shall be only believers of all the families
of the earth Gentile believers as Mr. C. truly says, without Infants. As ^or
what Mr. C. observes, that God said to Abrahaham to be a God to him and his
seed in their generations not in their regeneration, it is frivolous. For none
of the Gentiles seed are Abraham's seed but by regeneration, and so to be
Abraham's seed in their generations applied to Abraham's spiritual or Church-seed
among the Gentiles is all one as to be Abraham's seed by regeneration. And for
the prophecy of being a God to all the families of the earth, it is meant not
of every member of the family, but the meaning is that God would not restrain
his Gospel and Church to the Jews, but take in any of the families of the
earth, who would embrace it, as when it is said Mark. 16.15. preach the Gospel
to every creature, (that is) to any Gentile as well as Jews, yet infants not
meant. This is proved from the event because parents did believe when children
did hate them for it Mat. 10.35, 36. and the husband was often a believ^r the
wife an infidel. But says Mr C. it was usually otherwise, and God speaks of
things as they usually prove: extraordinary occurrences cross not such a rule.
To which I say, if the prophecy were as Mr. C. would, that it should be Gospel
that God will be a God of children with parents, because he will be god of all
the families of the earth, than it must be true of the children of all and
every of the families of the earth which recieve the Gospel. Nor are prophecies
to be expounded at, if they foretold only contingents what may be, and what
may not be, but what shall certainly be* nor can there be a rule, much less
Gospel, made of that which is uncertain, sometimes it is sometimes it is not, a
rule being, as they say in logic, a determinate and known thing* nor is it
true that the occurrent of the families being divided in religion was
extraordinary. For our Lord Christ speaks of it rather as ordinary and commonly
to be expected Matthew. 10.34 35, 36. But Mr. C. would have i^ a rule from Acts.
11.14. Acts. 16 31. Luke. 19 9. To this may be answered 1 that three instances
make not up an induction of particulars whence a rule may be made. 2. The first
instance is not meant of infants, for none are th^re said to be saved but those
that heard the words which Peter spoke. The next includes not infants. For the
very next v 32. shows that by the house were meant those to whom the word of
the Lord was spoken. Nor is there any intimation of an infant meant Luke. 19 9.
And it is certain that none of the texts speaks of that which they are produced
for, a bare external interest: for they expressly speak of salvation, and
therefore if they prove it to be a rule that parents and children are joint
Covenanters, or are taken in together they will prove they are saved together,
which Mr. C. I suppose will not assert. But some other answers are in my Examen
which I must vindicate with these. I had said Examen part. 78 there is a
necessity to make (...) a restrinctive particle and to expound this house Luke
19.9. of Zach^us his family only in reference to his person. Against this Mr.
C. speaks thus.

Nor by salvation come to his house, is meant the coming of salvation to
himself: as if he and his house were all one: nor do I know any parallel
Scripture speaking in such language, that when the scope and intent is to
mention the coming of such or such a mercy to such a person, that phrase is
used to denote the same; that such or such a mercy is come to his house. what
need such a circumlocution? if so intended, the word might more plainly have
been set down, this day is salvation come to this publican, this person, this
man or the like, in as much as he also is become a son of Abraham. And what
though the Greek word be used in Acts 2.45. and 4.35. for secundum according
as, yet not for quatenus, or in quantum: forasmuch as the text and sense
thereof are clear, that it notes proportion of such administration, not
merely the cause or reason thereof. Or if it be supposed to imply the cause or
reason thereof its evident it notes the proportion also. they gave to every
one as, or according as they needed scil: proportionably to their need: it
being regular as to give to the needy, so to give them according to the measure
of their present necessity. But how that sense will here be fitly applicable I
see not, to say that salvation is come to his house or to him according as he
is a Believer, but rather as our translators render it, it is to be taken as a
reason of the former, salvation is come to this house, forasmuch as he is a son
of Abraham.

Answ. By restraining the salvation come to Zacheus his house to his person, I
do not make Zacheus and his house all one; but salvation is come to his house
that is, to this place, inasmuch, or in that Zacheus is also become a Son of
Abraham. But whereas Mr. C. thinks no Scripture using such language, I will use
Grotius his words showing the contrary even in Luke, because they are full to
answer this passage of Mr. C. Annot. in Luc. 19.9. (...), Synecdoche. Domus
enim pro Patre familias dicitur: ita supra. 10.5. (...) (...). Domum autem ideo
nominasse videtur Christus, ut ostendat rel^tam hospitii gratiam. Dixerat enim
Zachaeo Christus, (...). Quare quae ad hunc locum afferri solent de beneficiis
Dei in familiam pii Patris familias, quanquam vera sunt recte accepta, tamen
huc pertinere non arbitror. As for what he says that (...) does not signify
quatenus, he may know that Scapula puts quatenus for the first signification of
it. What I said, that (...) was not only a causal particle, but also a
restrictive is not denied by Mr. C. But he thinks it is not good sense to say,
according as he is a believer, but rather it is to be taken as a reason of the
former. I confess it would not be good sense to say [ according, that is after
the proportion that he is a believer] but thus it is good sense to make it to
note the reason with restriction, and so our Translators do when they render it
[ for so much.] And this is confirmed in that, if it be expounded that
salvation did come to his house, that is his wife, children, servants for this
only reason, or cause, because he was a Son of Abraham, in that he was a
believer, it may be gathered thence that a man's whole house, or posterity, may
be saved barely by his believing: To this Mr. C. says, No: but as Acts 16.31.
upon his believing they shall come in the Gospel-way, in the Covenant road, and
ordinary means of salvation. But that this is a false Exposition both places
show. That Luke 19.9. must needs be meant otherwise than of the means of
salvation with which Zach^us might not have been saved. For besides that to his
being a Son of Abraham (not a Son of Abraham's Covenant as Mr. C. speaks (though
that be true also) but a follower of Abraham's Faith) salvation is certainly
annexed; nor had it been so joyous if he had not meant salvation it self: it is
put out of all doubt that he means salvation it self by verse 10. where he
gives this reason why he said salvation was come to him, though some murmured
at his going in to him; for (says he) the Son of man came to seek and to save
that which was lost; therefore he had both sought, and did save Zachaeus who
was lost. And for the other place it is as frivolous to expound Acts 16.31. of
the means of salvation. For, 1. Paul's Answer is of that of which the Jaylour
asked him, else he had deluded him by his Answer; but the Question was not,
What may I do to be put in the road, ordinary means of salvation, the Gospel
way? But, What may I do to escape the wrath due to me? 2. That salvation is
meant which was consequent on his believing, but the ordinary means of
salvation was not consequent, but antecedent, that which followed on his
believing in Christ was the certainty of salvation. Yea to interpret thus,
Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, that is thou shall hear the
Word, be Baptized, etc. is so frigid and sapless and interpretation as no
considerate man, sure no Interpreter besides Mr. C. that I know, did ever give
a sense of it. But Mr. C. tells me:

Nor is this sense of salvation for covenant means of salvation, or the
covenant and promise it self unusual in Scripture. The salvation which Christ
and his Apostles preached, and those Heb. 2.3. neglected, was not barely
salvation it self, but the promises holding the same forth, this was that
mercy, and riches, and salvation also which came to the Gentiles, as rejected
by the Jews, Romans 11.11, 12, 17, 19, 30 verses compared. So Esaias, 1, 6, 8,
Gods salvation is his promise or covenant on which their salvation did depend,
Calvin in locum. 2 Samuel 23.5. David speaking of his house or posterity, which
albeit it were not so orient then, yet God had made a covenant with him, scil.
in reference to his house, ordered in all things and sure; And this, scil. this
covenant with me and my house, is all my salvation and all my desire, albeit he
makes my house not to grow or flourish in such a sort: this covenant then was
his salvation objective, causaliter, or instrumentaliter.

Answ. If this sense of salvation for covenant means of salvation, or the
covenant and promise it self were usual in Scripture, yet it could not be the
sense, Luke 19.9. or Acts 16.31. whether we understand it of the outward means
of salvation, the Word and Sacraments, or of the promise of salvation: but must
be understood of saving by justification, as Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. For neither is the
outward means of salvation, nor the promise of salvation consequent upon being
a son of Abraham, and believing as salvation is in those places. 2. Yet in none
of the places alleged by Mr C. is salvation put for being in the Gospel way the
ordinary means of salvation competent to infants. And for the covenant or
promise of salvation it self, he dares not avoch it to be Gospel, that all the
infants of inchurched believers have interest in it, and therefore if salvation
Luke 19.9. were put for the covenant or promise of salvation, yet it would not
prove that it belongs to every son of Abraham's whole house, but Mr C. must
limit it to the elect, as I do. Yet let us consider his Texts, that it may
appear with how little heed he brings Texts, as if he never examined their
pertinency, but heaped them together whether to the purpose or not. They are
said to neglect salvation, Heb. 2.3. Ergo, salvation is taken for the outward
means of salvation competent to infants or the covenant of salvation. Nay
rather salvation is taken for salvation as it was preached and offered, not for
the means of salvation competent to infants, nor for the promise of salvation,
but for salvation it self neglected in that they did not take hold of it by
believing and obeying the doctrine of the Gospel. Acts 28.28, salvation is said
to be sent to the Gentiles, and that they would not hear it. But salvation
there is the doctrine of salvation, not competent to infants who could not hear
it. Romans 11.11, 12, 17, 19, 30, is not meant either of the bare outward means
of salvation, or the covenant of salvation only, much less the outward means
competent to infants, Es^y 51.6, 8, the term Salvation is not taken for the
bare outward means of salvation competent to infants of inchurched believers.
If Salvation 2 Samuel 23.5, did note outward means of salvation, because it is
said, This covenant is all my salvation, desire should note outward means of
desire, because it is said, This covenant is all my desire. I grant the
convenant is termed his salvation Causaliter, or Instrumentaliter, and his
desire objestive. The covenant everlasting in all things ordered and sure, was
made with David in reference to his house, not in respect of outward covenant
interest to the infants of his house (it is a wonder to me that such a man as Mr
C. should ^o dote, especially after the publishing of Mr Cottons book of the
Covenant on that Text) but in respect of the great promise of raising Christ
out of his loins, Acts 2.30. or as it is Luke 1.69. Raising up a Horn of
salvation for his people in the house of his servant David, and this (that is
the accomplishment of this promise) was all his salvation and all his desire,
although he did not make his house to grow in secular greatness. I deny not but
parents faith may be an occasional means to stave off destruction from, and to
further the salvation of their children, as Heb. 11.7.23, 25, 27, 28, Jonah 3,
and 4. But this I deny, that barely in this respect, in that the parent is
such, the infant of an inchurched believer, whether professing or real, is a
visible member of the Christian Gentile Church, and capable thereby of Baptism,
or that this is any part of the Gospel. But Mr C. tells us,

Shall it then be yielded that such benefit should come as was before spoken of
to adult servants of the house, etc. And is here no reference to the poor
Babes by reason of their tender age? Has the mercfull God revealed no ordinary
help for them?

Answer. It is yielded that benefit came to the servant of the Jaylors house,
Acts 16.31. but not the benefit there mentioned barely by the Jaylors faith
without their own. Though we conceive infants not meant Acts 16.31. because the
Texts, v. 32, 34, lead us to understand by [ the House] the persons who heard
the word, believed and rejoiced, yet we exclude not infants from salvation, nor
do we deny to the elect the ordinary help of the Spirit regenerating them, and
Christ's mediation for them* if they die in infancy, although they have not the
ordinary outward means of the Word and Sacraments. And therefore he might have
spared his pathetick interrogation sitter for an Orator than a Disputant, and
for a Papist than a Protestant. Nor need we exclude them from salvation for
want of actual faith because of the words Mark 16.16* Heb. 11.6. For either
those places may be understood of the act of faith in those to whom the word is
preached, or else if it be understood of all infants, they may have faith in
seed and act by immediate operation of the Spirit, and yet they not to be
baptized, because it is undiscerned by the Minister of Baptism. The Jailer
might have encouragement to hope for his Infants salvation, though they were
not meant in those words, Acts 16.31. If the election of God be not any thing
visibly to comfort him concerning his Children, no more is the covenant of
salvation, which is comensurtae with election, Rom 9.8. nor is discernable any
more than election, both are alike discerned by the fruits of repenting and
believing.

As for Baptism, it could not assure salvation, nor the want of it deba^ from
it. If it be not said, That the Jaylors house believed before they were
baptized, yet it is said in the next verse, and in the verse before, that Paul
spoke the word to all that were in his house.

As for that he says, It follows not that what is applicable to the adult
persons in the house, scil. that joy of faith must exclude children from
baptism whereof they were capable, no more than when it is said, Deuteronomy. 12.7.
that they and their households were to eat before the Lord, and to rejoice in
all they put their hands to, etc. Because therefore their little children could
not so actually express joy in what they put their hands unto, therefore they
were none of the household which did eat before the Lord* Anabaptists would not
like this arguing, which urge the joint communion of the Jewish Children in all
sorts of Church-ordinances.

I answer, ^f by little children be meant infants of a day or two, or some
months old (at which age they baptize infants) I affirm that they are not mean^
by the Households, Deuteronomy. 12.7. and that for the reason given, because they could
not (...) before the Lord, and rejoice in all that they put their hands unto.
Nor do I know any whom he calls Anabaptists, but would like of this arguing:
The Jewish Households were to eat before the Lord, and rejoice in all that they
put their hand to; therefore little children of a day or two, or some months
old, are not any part of the households to whom that precept is given, or of
whom that which is there said, (...) there meant. For though we all grant that
^nfants were circumcised, and in my Examnen, page 169. I say the males that
could eat, though not come to years of discretion fit to receive the Lords
Supper, were to eat the Passover, yet I know none of the so called Anabaptists
which urge the joint communion of the Jewish children (infants of a few days
or months old) in all sorts of Church-ordinances.

What Mr C. says further, Suppose a man's household, Men, Women and Children,
all diseased and cured at the Bath, and afterward the household expresses
their joy for it by leaping and dancing for joy; and it be said such a man, he
and all his were washed at such a Bath, and he and his whole household
afterward even danced for joy: none will say, that because little ones could
not so leap for joy, and are excluded from the notion of the [whole houshold]
in this later, therefore they were not in the account of [all his] in the
former, if it were granted him, yet the arguing from Acts 16 32. where it is
said, That P^ul spoke the word of the Lord to all that were of the Jaylors
house: and v. 34, He rejoiced believing in God with all his house, with the
constant narration of the Evangelist in the Acts of the Apostles, mentioning
baptizing of none but believers, do evidently show, that by [ all his, v. 33]
were meant only those that heard the word and believed. It is true more or
fewer of this or that sort of persons or things born or unborn are meant by the
terms [House or Houshold] as the matters and circumstances of the speech lead
to, nor need I say that Gen 34.50. under the term House are not meant little
children, because of the words Genesis 35.1, 2, 3, 4. Nor need I deny that Infants
are often intended by the term House and Household, an Genesis 30, 30, etc. or that
they are chiefly meant thereby, as 1 Samuel 20.15, etc. or that they are intended
when some parts of the family are expressly instanced in, and children not
withal mentioned, as Genesis 14.16. or that children are ordinary instruments to
build or hold up a house in natural, civil, religious and Church-respects
too, as Exodus 1* 21. or that the Covenant-expressions of Seed and Seed in their
generations, do more directly reach them as such, than either Wives or
Servants, as such, as Genesis 17.7, etc. Yet all this does neither take away the
force of the reasons before given why under [ all his, Acts 16.33.] infants are
not meant, much less prove that which Mr C. should prove (which he must do if
he will prove his covenant interest Ecclesiastical of believers seed thence)
that in the Iaylors house were infants, and they baptized.

Ezekiel. 16.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. has been often showed to be impertinently
alleged being meant of the Israelites when brought out of Egypt and then God
said [ live] to them when they had been ready to perish in Canaan first, and
then in Egypt by oppression and after brought them to mount Sinai and entered
into the covenant of the Law, which Mr. C. ^ndeavoring to apply to an
Ecclesiastical external privilege of Gentile believers infants in the time of
the Gospel does toto Coelo errare. It is neither said there to Jerusal^m then
live, nor Micah. 7.20. that the same mercy and truth engaged to Abraham and
Jacob God did both swear to other Jew fathers of families, or that there is
mention of pardon of sins externally made over to them or pleaded there for
that end v. 18, 19 And though I deny not that in respect of the covenant made
with Jacob at Bethel Genesis 35.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. God is said there to
speak with Israel in Hoseah his days Hos. 12.2. yet I deny there is a word
that says that external Church interest of inchurched Gentile believers
infants is Gospel. Nor is there any thing 2 Samuel 23.4, 5* about external
covenant-Church-interest, but of the peculiar promise made to David of the
continuing the kingdom to his posterity, which having its full accomplishment
in Christ Acts. 2.30. was indeed in that respect the covenant of grace, and was
so believed both by David and all believers before Christ, that it should be
done, and now by all believers that it is done. But this promise was made of
David's house only not of every particular believers, and therefore it is
impertinently brought to prove that it is Gospel that to every believers house
God has made such a Covenant, or that the children of every believer have an
external covenant interest with the parent. As for the instances of Eve and
Lamech concerning Seth and Noah Genesis 4.25. and 5.29. there is no mention of any
Covenant, nor that these were Covenant babes, much less of a Covenant belonging
to all believing parents with their children, but an acknowledgment in the
former that God had appointed Eve another seed instead of Abel whom Cain slew
in respect of the preisthood say some, others in respect of propogating
mankind, others because of Christ to come from him: in the other a prophesy of
Noah that he should comfort them concerning their work and toil of their
hands, because of the ground which the Lord had cursed, which is concieved by
some as meant of the invention of plowing* vide Christoph. Cartwright in locum:
the new Annot. follow that sense. But were it true Eve had respect in that
speech Genesis 4.25. to the promise Genesis 3.15. and that she believed God would
continue the Church in Seth's posterity, and that thence came the distinctions
of the sons of God and daughters of men Genesis 6.1, 2. and Lamech believed that
Noah should be a root, as it were to the Church albeit that corrupt world
should be destroyed: yet all this is note^ing to the point Mr. C. should prove,
that it is Gospel that the children of every inchurched Gentile-believer have
an external covenant church-interest, there being in those Texts not a word of
such an external covenant Church-interest, nor of any general promise to
them, but only a mention of speeches which had their rise from particular
Revelations about those persons which are there mentioned,

Psalm. 102.25, 26, 27, there is not a word of the external Federall Church
state of inchurched Gentile Church-believers. But if the Psalm were made
toward the later end of the captivity of Babylon, and were the prayer of the
Jews* as v. 13, 14, makes it probable, then it seems to be meant, as the new
Annotations on Psa. 102.28, thus* The children of thy Servants shall continue]
This is the literal (as I may call it) immortality proposed in the Law to them
that fear of God, their surviving in their posterity: If of the Saints
prophesying of the calling of the Gentiles, or, as some would, of the
reingraffing of the Jews, that Paraphrase of Junius may be right: ^. Vera and
germana Ecclesiae tuae membra conservabuntur in aeternum virtute tua and tibi
curae futura sunt. Take i^ of whomsoever the words may be verified, it mentions
no such thing as external federall Church-interest, but continuance and
establishment before God, that is, as Ainsworth notes, as much as so long as
God does dure, meaning for ever. For assurance whereof they had a word of
faith, to wit, some revelation of God, though no such covenant as Mr C.
imagines, int^tuling children of inchurched Gentile-believers to external
Church-interest.

Mr C. urges a second Argument to prove the federall interest of believers
infants to be Gospel because from the beginning, and he begins with Genesis 3.15.
to prove that it was held as Gospel, that the Species of the infants of
believers in Church Estate were taken into the Verge of the Covenant of Grace;
as if infants of believers were a Species, and not Individuals, or that it were
denied that some infants were taken into the verge of the covenant of grace.
And then he dictates without proof, that Adam and Eve were eyed by God as a
seminall visible Church; whereas in that promise they were eyed either as the
root of mankind; or if as a Church, more likely as the seminall invisible, than
as the visible Church. He interprets The Seed of the Woman, not only of the
principal Seed Christ, in, and by whom it was ratified and fulfilled, but her
Church-seed also whom the same promise did comprehend. But I would know of Mr
C. whether Cain were not her Church-seed, who by Mr C. his Dictates was the
infant of inchurched believers. For Adam and Eve were eyed, says Mr C. as a
seminall visible Church? If so, then it is true of Cain, that he should bruize
the Serpens head as Eves church-seed: which how he did, unless being of the
wicked one, and slaying his brother, as is said of him, 1 John 3.12. be
bruising the Serpents head, I understand not. Many Interpreters comprehend Cain
under the Serpents seed; but none I have met with, comprehend him, or any
reprobate, under the Woman's Seed mystically understood. There are Interpreters
that understand the promise, Genesis 3.15. as made to mankind in respect of the
natural Serpent, and the best of Christ's destroying the works of the Devil, as
John speaks, 1 Epist. 3.8. and others of the elect overcoming Satan, and
treading him under their feet, Romans 16.20. But none do I find who understand it
of infants of believers external Covenant Church-interest. Believers, it is
true, are called Abraham's seed, but no where true believers, as such, are
called Eves Church-seed, nor does Eve by faith from thence thus interpret the
scope of the promise, Genesis 4.25, 26. And if infants be meant by the woman's
seed, Genesis 3.15. in a spiritual sense of overcoming the Devil, yet no infants
but elect can be meant thereby, since no other overcome the Devil. So that it
is so far from being true, that this Gospel of Infants of believers external
Covenant Church-interest, was held in the beginning of the world, Genesis 3.15.
that I rather conceive that it is no elder than Mr C. and am sure is a mere
figment. But there is more of this Rubbish to be removed. He tells us,

The same Doctrine is implicitly held forth, Genesis 9 in the opposition of the
servile condition of Canaan, v. 25, 26. to the future Church state of Japhet,
v. 27. the one accursed parent and child to servitude, so that Chams Babes as
soon as born, were to be slaves: but Japhet parent and child, are prophetically
voted to Church Estate in Sems tents, so that inchurched Japhets babes are
actually within Sems Tents so soon as born. As God would accurse collective
Canaan, Noah prophesies that God would enlarge, or cause collective Japhet to
turn into the tents of Sem; which Interpreters expound of the joining of the
Gentiles unto the visible Church. Now visible Church Estate supposes visible
Covenant-estate, as is evident.

Answ. If Mr. C. may be allowed to make Gospel of Doctrine so implicitly held
forth as his new Gospel is here; I see not why we should so much blame, as we
do, Popes for making new Articles of Faith out of places clearer for their
purpose, than this is for Mr. C's. The servil condition of Canaan is refered
generally by Interpreters to the bondage they were in when Joshua subdued them,
and the Gibeonites were made slaves: which though it did extend to their
Children, yet was not such, but that even they were Proselytes many of them to
Israel, as Araunah the Jebusite, and after the woman of Canaan is commended for
her Fa^^h, Matthew. 15.28. and therefore not excluded from the visible Church.
And for the blessing of Japhet, whether we read it, God shall enlarge Japhet,
as some, or persuade Japhet, as others, I see not how it is well cleared, that
the accomplishment of it is in the Calling of the Gentiles descended from
Ja^het, as the Greeks, and others into the visible Church, because it is said
that Canaan should be servant to Japhet, whereas the Tyrians, and Sidonians,
and Carthaginians, and others descended of Canaan were in the visible Church as
well, if not as soon, as many of the Posterity of Japhet, as is apparent by the
Histories of the Church mentioning Bishops and Synods held among them, and
famous Writers. And therefore for my part I incline to think it a Prophecy of
the Civil condition rather than Ecclesiastical, whether it were fulfilled in
Alexander the great, and the Greek Kings of Asia after him subduing Tire and
Sidon, and possessing Palaestina, of which Judaea was a part, or of the Romans
subduing Carthage and poss^ssi^g Judaea: But ^e it taken as a Prophecy of the
Ecclesiastic state of these people, with what Argument will Mr. C. prove, That
the dwelling in the Tents of Sem, is refered rather to the visible, than the
invisible Church? They who will have it accomplished when the Gentiles were
fellow-heirs of the same body, and partakers of Gods promise in Christ by the
Gospel, Ephesians. 3*6. or when the Gentiles were grafted in the stead of the Jews
Romans 11.17. have more reason to understand it only of true believers converted
by the Gospel, and so of the invisible Church, than to understand it of the
visible Church as visible, as I have showed in the first part of this Review:
yet were it meant of the visible Church, there is no Argument to prove it meant
of the Babes of Japhet as soon as they are born. For what though it be that
Canaan, and Sem, and Japhet ^e all collectively taken, yet Mr. C. himself, page
161. has taught us, That Speeches of the whole Body of the Jews, collectively
taken, are true, in respect of the choice or refuse part; and so may, or rather
must be the speeches here necessarily understood, Canaan collective neither
comprehending every Canaanite in their greatest servitude, nor collective Sem,
or Japhet, comprehending every Israelite or descendent from Japhet, but a
notable part. And if those of Japhet that dwelt in the Tents of Sem, that is
according to the Exposition of Mr. C. were of the visible Church, were brought
in by persuasion, and this persuasion was by the Preaching of the Gospel
according to the opinion of many Interpreters, the Argument is forcible to the
contrary, that Babes are not here meant among the Inhabitants in the Tents of
Sem Ecclesiastically expounded, but only such as could hear and understand, and
were persuaded by the Gospel to join themselves to the visible Church of Christ.

After this Mr. C. dictates out of Gal. 4.23, 24. Genesis 21.10. That even as
Ishmael and hi^ were cast out of Abraham's family, and the legal Jerusalem and
her Children even the body of the Jews adult and infant were dis-churched, so
Ecclesiastical Isaac, Abraham's Church-seed with their Children should be
instated in the visible politi^al Gospel Church. But the Apostle does not speak
of ^asting out of the visible Church as such, but out of the Inheritance of
Sons, that is justification and salvation, and Jerusalem that now is and her
Children is not J^ws as Jews or the body of Jews or adult and infants as Mr.
C. speaks: for then many Myriads of Jews believing should be cast out: But
Jerusalem that now is, notes the legal Covenant, and her children not Infants
born at the City Jerusalem, bu^ so many whether of Jews or Gentiles, as sought
righteousness by the Law, and not by Christ, as Hagar signifies the legal
Covenant, and her Son Ishmael such as were born of the flesh, that is, trusted
in the flesh, as the Apostle speaks, Phil 3.3. that is, in their legal
righteousness, and carnal privileges. And on the other side, Sarah and
Jerusalem above, signify the Gospel Covenant, verse. 24, 25. which begets
Children by Promise, that is, ^^cording to the Doctrine of Faith in Christ
typified by Isaac, and these that believe are born after the Spirit, and do
inherit life, righteousness, salvation. There Is not a word of Abraham's
Church-seed there, or any where else in Mr. C. his sense; and [ Ecclesiastic
Isaac] is a new Notion, and a mere figment of Mr. C. in his sense; and [ the
casting out] is meant of the invisible Church of the saved, such as do rej^ct
Christ, and adhere to the Law; and the taking in is meant of the taking into
the invisible Church of the justified and saved, them that believe in Christ,
or a^e united to him, and not of an in-Churching of mere visible Professors,
Paren^s, and Children into the visible Church by an outward ri^e.

The three Texts next alleged by Mr. C. are all mis^alleged to prove an
external Covenant Church Interest of the Infants of in-Churched-believers, to
wit, Esaias 65.20. the impertinency of which to this end, is showed in the Second
Part of this Review Sect. 11. the impertinency of Isa. 61.9 and Ezekiel 37.27. in
this Part of the Review before Mr. C. proceeds to a Third Argument.

In answer to which I deny, 1. the Major, or sequel, that [ if Infants and
little ones of visibly believing parents in their Church estate, before they
can make any personal confession or profession of faith in the covenant, yet
then are Abraham's Church-seed, then is it Gospel that the promises belong to
them.] Nor is it in substance or circumstance the Apostles, Gal. 3.16. To
Abraham and his seed are the promises made. For though it is granted, that it
is Gospel that to Abraham and his seed the promises are made, yet it is utterly
false that the^e is meant a seed of Abraham, who are neither elect nor true
believers, but only the natural children of Gentile inchurched believers, yea
of Gentile visible inchurched professors of Faith, whom Mr C. in a new language
of his own without Scripture, calls Abraham's Church-seed; yea, the Text is so
manifestly against it, that I wonder Mr C. could imagine any Reader would
receive his Dictates about this Text. For the Apostle expressly limits the
promises to Christ as the seed of Abraham, and whether Christ be understood
personally or mystically, as Beza and others, yet by the Seed are not meant the
fictitious Church-seed of Abraham, to wit, the natural children even of
infants o^ visible inchurched Gentile-believers, or visible professors of
Faith* but true believers, or elect persons, who alone are members of Christ
mystical. And the promises are of the Spirit through faith, v. 14. the
inheritance, v. 18. life and righteousness, v. 21, 22, which are made to none
but true believers, or elect persons. To which I add that external
covenant interest (if there were such) is never in Scripture termed the Gospel,
no not in those who rightly have it, as true believers, but Christ's dying for
our sins, and justification by faith in him.

2. I also deny the minor [that the Infants and little ones of visibly
believing parents in Church Estate before they can make any personal confession
or profession of faith in the Covenant, yet then are Abraham's Church-seed] Mr.
C. takes upon him to prove the minor; 1. in those of Abraham's loins in the
elect seed. I should think (says he) it should not be questioned, but yet it
has by some; that Infants while Infants and till believers are not in the
covenant etc. And by such other speeches of our Adversaries in this point, the
covenant-right not only of the individual Infants of believers, but the
Covenant estates of that species and sort of persons is wholly denied, and so
since it is evident and acknowledged that some are elected of that sort, yet
it is denied that they have part in the word of Gods covenants, so that if they
die in Infancy, as many of the choice seed of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob did
etc. Yet that ordinary means of saving efficacy in all the saved elect is
denied, contrary to that principle Rom* 9.6. But more hereof anon: but Romans 9
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. is so clear for it I wonder any deny it. Isaac and Jacob are
made precedential instances of interest not only of election, but of Gods
calling unto the fellowship of his free covenant without respect either to
their desire or endeavor of it personally v. 16.

Answ. There are sundry reasons which make me conceive that in this and many
other passages in this argument Mr. C. aimed at my self. Mr. Robert Baillee
minister of Glasgow in Scotland had in the 2. part of his Diswasive entitled
Anabaptism chapter 4. page 92. charged me with spoiling all Infants of all interest
in the Covenant of grace, and denying all right to the new Covenant to Jewish
Infants till in their ripe years they became actual believers. From which
false criminations I have vindicated my self in the Addition to my Apology
printed at London 1652. Mr. C. here tells of some who speak as if they held that
Infants while Infants, and till believers are not in the covenant, that wholly
deny the covenant estate of that sort of persons, though they acknowledge some
of them are elected of that sort, yet it is denied they have part in the word of
Gods covenant, and if they die in Infancy that ordinary means of saving
efficacy in all the saved elect is denied them. I have reason to conceive that
these are calumnies of others, sure I am if theyrae meant of my self they are
calumnies, and so showed in my Books before cited and in other of my writings.
From which that I may stand free I further express my self distinctly thus. 1.
That by [ in the Covenant of grace] I mean the promise of righteousness and
external life by Christ Jesus. 2. That I mean by [ being in the Covenant of
grace or belonging to it] the having this promise made to them by God whether
Genesis 17.7. or Genesis 3.15. according to the speech of the Apostle Tit. 1.2. that
God promises eternal life (...) before the times of the ages, that is before
any age of man was past* 3. that all the elect of God whether children of
believers or unbelievers dying in Infancy, or at the riper age are in this
covenant of grace, that is, God has promised eternal life to them by Christ,
they are given to Christ to save, are children of the promise Romans 9.8. 4. That
all these are Abraham's seed meant in the promise Genesis 17.7. though not actual
believers. 5. That all these have Christ's me^^^s and the spirits inbeing in
them before they dye as ordinary means of salvation. 6. That none but these
elect persons have the said covenant of grace or promise of righteousness and
life by Christ made to them. 7. That no where visible prof^ssers of faith is in
the Covenant of grace. 8. That the natural child of a believer, no not the
natural child of Abraham the Father of believers was or is in the covenant of
grace, as their child, or barely by virtue of their faith, but only the elect
of them by virtue of their election by God. 9. That these elect persons, though
elected, and having the promise made to them, yet have not the things promised
(if of years of understanding) till they do believe, they are not justified
till then, and so are not actual partakers of the covenant of grace, or not
actually therein. 10. That no where in Scripture is the natural child of a
Gentile-believer, or a visible professor of Christian faith, termed Abraham's
Seed, and the term of Abraham's Church-seed, applied to such is a novel
expression, not grounded on Scripture. 11. That the formal, proper, and
adequate reason why any was to be circumcised, was, not his being in the
covenant made with Abraham, nor is the reason why any should be baptized,
bare^ly his interest in the covenant of grace, but the command of God, in the
one, appointing males of eight days old of Abraahms house, and Proselytes
thereto to be circumcised; in the other, discip^es by their own profession of
faith in Christ to be baptized. 12. That the use of the terms, Being in the
outward Covenant, external covenant interest of Infants, and such like are
mista^es upon the im^gined connection between the covenant of grace and the
initiall seal, as hey call it. Now to Mr C. his proof.

His proof is from Romans 9.7, ^, 9, 10, 11, 16. That elect infants were Abraham's
seed in covenant, which I deny not, but say that Romans 9.8. proves not only,
that all the elect seed be included in the promise, Genesis 17.7. but also that
the Apostle expressly affirms, that only the elect are the children of the
promise understood spiritually, and they only Abraham's seed* Acta Synod.
Dordrac Judi^. profess. Belgic* de 20. Art. page 113. Haec propositio [solis
electis hoe promissiones sunt factae] ex professo probatur a Paulo, Romans 9.7.8.
Ames. Coron. Art. 5. c. 2. Seminis in^ulcatio solos electos and efficaciter
vocatos notari docet Apostolo sic hunc locum interpretante, Romans 9.8 Gal. 3.16.
and 4.28., Mr. Rutherford Exercit. Apolog. 2 c. 2. number. 7. Soli electi dicuntur
in Scripturis faederati, filii and hoeredes promssionis, Romans 9 8. Mr Norton,
Mr C. his Colleague, commended by Mr. Co^ton with him, Respons. ad Apollon. c.
2. page 30. Objectum faederis gratiae sunt soli electi. Dr. Twiss Animadv. in
Corvin. page 235. Negamus Deum pacisci faedus gratiae cum omnibus and singulis:
dicimus h^c fieri solum cum electis. More may be seen to this purpose in my
Examen* part. 3 Sect. 4, in this part of the Review, Sect. 33. and almost in
every Pr^t^stant Wr^^er of note wh^ opposes the Remonstrants of Belgia, and
other patrons of Universal grace, freewill, and falling away from grace. But
what Mr C. says and I grant, proves not that Infants and little ones of
visibly believing parents in Church estate, before the Infants can make any
personal confession or profession of faith in the eovenant, are Abraham's Church
seed to whom the promise, Genesis 17.7. belongs, but the contrary: Nor is it
he^eby proved, that such Infants are covenanters engaged, or as Ifants of
Abraham and Isaac, children of the promise, as if (...) formalis ratio of their
childrens being children of the promise, were Abraham's and Isaacs believing and
inchurching, as Mr. C. seems to conceive, it being contrary to the express
determination of the Apostle, Rom 9.8. which excludes Ishmael and Esau from
being children of the promise. Nor is it true, that the change of Abraham's
name, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, etc. compared proves that the children of believers
inchurched are Abraham's seed, but only that believers of all nations are such,
Romans 4.17.

Mr C. glanceth at a passage in my Examen, page 96. wherein I say, that the
Apostle, Romans 4 12. makes Circumcision, a Seal of the righteousness of faith,
but not to all, or only circumcised persons, but to all believers whether Jews
or Gentiles; so that according to the Apstles doctrine, Circumcision in as much
as it sealed to Abraham the righteousness of faith, which he had yet being
uncircumcised, so that it is so far from being true that persons have the
promise, therefore they must have the seal in their persons; that it follows,
persons have the promise, therefore they have the seal in Abraham, though they
never are nor may be sealed in their own persons.

To this Mr. C. says, The Apostles discourse clears it to be otherwise, his
scope being not to infringe any Gospel-right to the Gospel-se^l, but to take
off any reasoning in point of justification from any work of the Law considered
apart from Christ: As for the sealing of Abraham's believing children the
Gentiles in Abrah^ms sealing, if that were intended, as much might have been
affirm^d of the b^lieving children of Abraham, as they such, and so the
circumcising of such Jews at least had been more than were needed ^o far forth.

I reply, I grant the scope to be ^o prove Justification by faith; but I say*
in respect of the present point the words prove no more, but that Abraham's
personal ci^cumcision was to him and all that belive as he did, whether Jews
or Gentiles, the seal of the righ^eousness of Faith. And I do acknowledge, that
if that were all the use of ci^cumcision, there was no simple necessity of any
Jew believer to be circumcised in their own persons, yet God might think good
ex abundanti more ab^ndantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability
of his Council, as the words are, Heb. 6 17. and therefore would have them
also circumcised in their own persons to that end. But however there were other
ends of circumcision, as ^he prefiguring of Christ to come, the distinguishing
the Israelites from other people, etc. And therefore notwithstan^ing Abraham's
circumcision sealed to Jew-believers the righteousness of faith, yet it was not
needless that they should themselves be circumcised in their own persons for
the ends to which God appointed it. And the command being express for their
circumcision, they could plead no exemption from their personal circumcision
upon that pretense that quatenu^ believers they were circumcised in the
circumcision of t^eir father Abraham while the command stood in force, no not
though all the ends had ceased, as that Christ were come, all other nations
were circumcised as well as they, etc. I say, had these ends and all other
ceased, yet without Gods releasing of the command, they were to be circumcised.

How little that Act of Christ, Luke ^8* 1^, 16, 17. with Mark 10.16. makes for
Mr C. his purpose, is showed in the second part of the Review before, and so
likewise how impertinently Esaias ^ 1.9. and 65, 22. are alleged, is showed
before in this part of the Review. I neither grant that inchurched Gentile
visible believers are any other where called Abraham's spiritual seed: Nor do I
think Anabaptists will grant, that if they were, then are their children also.

But, says he, The parents being not merely abstractively considered the
Covenant-seed, Genesis 17.7. ^ut as in reference to their childen with them. For
the seed of Abraham to whom the Covenant Genesis 17.7. is made, is the seed in
their ge^erations, which necessarily imply and supp^se as the parents
generating, so the children begotten of them, the parents make not the
generation alone, nor the children alone, but ^oyntly considered together.

Answer. No person is the Covenant-seed, Genesis 17 7. but Abraham's seed, which
being meant of his natural seed, so it includes all descended from him by
Isaac and Jacob in their ^uture g^nerations; if meant of his spiritual seed [
their g^nerations] notes either the ages in which they were born by natural
generation, or by spiritual regeneration by Fathers in Christ, who beget them
by the Gospel* 1 Cor. 4 15.

But, says Mr. C. Here Anabaptists sever the subject parties taken into the
covenant-consideration, they agree it is Abraham and his spiritual seed, but
leave out the notation of the seed, soil. seed in their generations the
proselyte Gentiles in Abraham's house, they were not his carnal seed; why are
they then sealed, but as they were Abraham's spiri^ual and Church-seed.

Answer. We sever not the subject parties taken into Covenant consideration, as
Mr. C. speaks, but distinguish them: Nor do we leave out that No^ation of Seed,
scil. in their generations; but take it in, as I have said* the Proselytes, if
believers, as Abraham, they are his seed by Faith, if no^, they are not (...)
seed according to Scripture Abraham's Church-Seed is a new-devised term without
Scripture: Yet the proselytes and their chi^dren were to be circumcised by
virtue of the command, whether they had any part in the covenant or not, as
being in his house, though not of his seed. And if by Gods solemnly enjoining a
Seal to a Blank, or a seal to no Covenant of his, ^e meant, that circumcision
of the Proselytes was a token of that Covenant which was no covenant of Gods, I
deny it; it was a Covenant of Gods, in which he made many promises, it was not
a token of a Covenant that assured nothing, as a paper in which nothing is
written (which we call a Blank) there were promises and persons specified in
the covenant. But if the meaning be this, That God solemnly enjoined that such
should be circumcised to whom no promise was made in that Covenant, I grant it
true Ishmael, etc. and count it no absurdity to say, God in that sense did
solemnly enjoin the Seal to be put to a Blank.

Circumcision, in the Institution of it, was a token or sign of the Covenant
made with Abraham, Romans 4.11. to be a Seal of the righteousness of Faith, is
said of no ones circumcision but Abraham's. What Mr. C. means, That it was a
seal of the righteousness of Faith, not so much Subjective as Objective, Romans
4. I understand not, except this be his meaning, that it did seal not so much
the righteousness of faith to the persons circumcised, as this truth, That
righteousness is by faith. Being understood of Abraham's personal circumcision,
I conc^ive it sealed both ways, of any other man's circumcision; I find not the
Apostle calling it the Seal of the righteousness of Faith. But of Seals and
sealing I have spoken sufficiently in sundry Sections before. I shall not
contend about that passage, That the Baptism of Simon Magus was in the nature
of it, and Gods institution, a visible Seal of the most spiritual part of the
covenant, and yet did not Iscariot and Magus partake of the spiritual part of
the Covenant, my former explication being remembered. And I take it as true
which next follows, It is peculiar to the elect to be in the covenant in
respect of the participation of the saving efficacy of it, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. And
hence observe* that none but the elect are rightly said to be in the covenant
of grace: For none are in the covenant of grace but they to whom it is made
(for what is it to be in the covenant, but to have it made to him? So the
Directory, so Romans 9.8.) But they to whom the covenant of grace is made, are
the elect only. The covenant of grace is the covenant of Saving grace, Heb.
8.10, 11, and 10.16. Romans 11.26. 1 Cor. 11.25. Heb. 13.20. of Regeneration,
Justification, etc. But that is made only to the Elect: Ergo. The Minor is
proved thus, They to whom it is made, they have the saving efficacy, otherwise
God should make it and not perform it, and so his Word fall, which is not to be
granted: But the elect only have the saving efficacy, as Mr. C. con^esseth.
Ergo. I deny not, Reprobates may in respect of their own profession, be said to
be externally in the covenant of grace, in appearance to me^, in the face of
the visible Church, but not in respect of Gods promise and before him, which
they say is sealed in the Sacrament. Nor do I deny the appointment of God to be
to circumcise or baptize Reprobates as well as elect, and that the nature of
these ordinances is the same on both sorts, though the use and efficacy in part
be various. Nor do I deny the covenant with Abraham one, yet hold it is mixed,
which is proved from the words of Mr C. here in that it holds forth variety of
covenant-blessings; some more common to all, and some more peculiar to a few.
But I deny the Gospel does hold forth blessing, common to any other than the
godly. It is true, there are promises of this life, 1 Timothy 4.8. 1 Cor. 3.22.
Mark 10.30. and Reprobates have some such outward things as the elect, as
clothes, ai^e, life, but not as blessings from the Gospel, neither sanctified
in the same manner, nor upon the some tenure. As for circumcision, it was the
covenant metonymically only, and did confirm the whole covenant sacramentally
to elect and reprobate.

Mr. C. yet adds, That if that sort of persons, to wit, Infants, or Abraham's
spiritual seed without personal actual faith by which it is said only
persons come to be Abraham's seed, it is enough to prove, that Gentile inchurched
believers infants are the the seed of Abraham. But that is fully proved from
Gal. 3.7.6.9.16.27, 28, 29. where, by Christ, is meant Christ mystical, that
is, Christ with his Body the Church, as 1 Cor. 12.13. If then Infants be not
Abraham's seed, then are they not members of Christ, nor of the invisible
Church, and so are without salvati^n.

To which I answer, That I never denied that elect infants were Abraham's
spiritual seed, nor said only by actual faith persons are Abraham's spiritual
seed* but grant that some infants are Abraham's spiritual seed, whether by
election only, or by seed of faith, or by such a special secret work as is
unknown to us, like Jacobs struggling in the womb, and taking hold on his
brothers heel, or John Baptists leaping in the womb of his mother for joy, and
so are of the body of Christ, and members of the invisible Church, and thereby
saved. But I deny that infants of Gentile believers, whether elect or not, are
Abraham's spiritual seed, and in that respect in the covenant of grace or
promise of God being their God, and thereby admitted to baptism.

But Mr. C. adds. I say to exclude that sort of persons scil. believers Infants
from being a part of the visible-church in genera^ is to exclude them from any
ordinary state and way of salvation. Nay I will go further and say, that for
any to suppose all the individual Infants and each of them which came of such
inchurched parents, not to be also par^s of this body of Christ the visible
Church, and consequently not to be Abraham's spiritual seed, is to exclude them
from a state and way of salvation. In respect to the ordinary course thereon,
and so to leave them all under the consideration of such a way to be saved in
as is only extraordinary: ordinarily they are not to be supposed to be saved,
or at least it is not to be supposed, that ordinarily, or that in an ordinary
way any Pagans, or Turks out of the visible Church, or any in and of Rome as
Tridentine and Antichristian should be saved: yet God may and sometimes does,
and will have some souls brought on to him thence, and even from amongst
Mahometans etc. But all will yield I suppose that this is an extraordinary
case: and so crosses not that rule, that without even the visi^le Church there
is no salvation; scil. Taking the maxim in reference to ordinary times, and
with all to the ordinary course and w^y of attaining unto salvation.

Ans. Mr. C. his drift I conceive is to prove, that if Infants of believers be
not visible Church Members they have no ordinary state and way of salvation,
and that the maxim is true, that out of the visible Church in reference to
ordinary times and withal to the ordinary course and way of attainining unto
salvation there is no salvation. Against which I oppose that if the maxim out
of the Church there is no sal^a^ion, be understood of the visible Church, and
the ordinary state and way of salvation, it will as well concern Mr. C. to show
how children of believ^rs endued with a reasonable soul and humane body, yet
still-born or dying in their mothers womb with her and never born are provided
for an ordinary way of salvation as well as for us concerning Infants born
alive. I suppose they will not say infants dying in their mothers womb and
there buried, and never brought to light, are visible members of the Church,
who were never visible men, nor that they are to be baptized. What ordinary way
and state of salvation external have they more than Mahometanes? If it be said
they have election, the virtue of Christ's death the promise of God according to
election, the secret work of the spirit I grant it, and the same may be said of
Infants living, nor can it be certainly and without doubt denied of Papists and
M^home^a^s infants. Though I confess it is far more probable that oridnarily
God gives these means to Infants of believers whether Churched or unchurched
than to the Infants of others, and rather to the Infants of true believers,
than (...) professors of faith. Yet I dare not determine certainly thereof
because of the express resolution of the Apostle Romans 9. concerning Ishmael and
Esau, and his reference thence v. 15, 16, 18, 20, 21, 22. And if he count ^e
certain there is no salvation out of the visible Church in an ordinary way
there being no ordinary way to estate Infants in the visible church (which I
grant not as well as he) but baptism, then he does as good as affirm, that
ordinarily no infant is saved without baptism, which is either the Popish
tenent or not much shor^ of it. This will the more urge M. C. because he limits
the promise to Abraham's visible Church-seed in reference to Church Covenant,
and I supp^se they of N. E. baptize not infants of parents not inchurched; what
ordinary way of salvation have children of believers not inchurched, who are
not accounted visible Church members when their parents were not? And the like
must be said of the children of excommunicate persons, of uncertain original
Apostates, who are with them, or some of them no visible Church Members: how
are they in the visible Church, and what provision is for them? For my part I
conceive that if the matter be impartially considered, I think their doctrine
is pressed with the like difficulty that mine is. I affirm that believers
infants, and infants of unbelievers, if elect, are certainly saved ordinarily,
that is, according to the constant course of Gods purpose by virtue of Gods
p^omise, Christ's death, and the Spirits secret working, though they be neither
baptized, nor are visible Church Members and I think they can say no more
concerning infants of believers dying with the mother in the womb, and never
brought to light, which is no unu^uall thing. I say that it is very probable
because of general indefinite promises and frequent experience that the
infants of believing parents are e^ect, when the infants of Infidels are not.
Yet I cannot affirm they are elect, because the promises are not universal to
every believers infants; yea, if they were, as Pedobaptists would have them,
universal in respect of external privileges (which is not true) yet rhere
could be no certainty of election and salvation inferred thence. And therefore
though there be a better ground of hope of the salvation of a believers infant
than others; yet in a question concerning ^he certain^y of the event whether
they are saved or no, I must suspend my judgment, and leave it to Gods secret
will, having no rule revealed whereby to determine it. If Mr. C. assure any
more, I conceive he wiil deceive himself and others. Dr. Twiss. Animadvers. in
Corvin. page 35. says thus: Ad h^c forte in ea sententia sunt nostri Theologi
ut propositum Dei de salvandis fidelium liberis in infantili aetate morientibus
haud liquido satis demonstrari in sacris literis. Et sane non diffiteor exitia
hujus rei suppeditari nobis ex sacris li^eris indi^i^, quibus tamen
acquiescimus. But Mr C. adds, Such then as exclude all Infants of believers one
or other from the notion of Abraham's spiritual seed, from covenant and
Church Estate, they put them in the Pagans, Genti^es estate, (...) of which
Paul speaks, who being they and others strangers from the promise and
covenants, and from the visible Church: they place them in that respect in an
estate of persons that are without God in the world, and so under the Devil the
God of the world; and in an hopeless estate, neither they nor any for them can
have any grounded hope of them, they are without hope, in regard at least of
any ordinary way or mean of salvation, Ephesians. 2.11, 12.

Answ. I exclude not all infants of believers one or other from the notion of
Abraham's spiritual seed, from Covenant and Church Estate, meaning this of
being Abraham's spiritual seed, and included in the covenant of grace and
invisible Church, which alone can make God to be their God, estate them in
Christ, be the ground of a certain hope of their salvation, and that according
to an ordinary way. They that teach them to be visible Church Members and
baptize them, cannot give parents a grounded certain infallible hope of
salvation without this ordinary way; I assen, nor can they give more assurance
of that way of Baptism, than may be given without it, baptism not saving
without the answer of a good conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. Neither that
nor their imaginary visible Church Membership assuring that they are not under
the Devil, nor without God in the world. And if they do, they do it without
Scipture, and experience does too often refute them. Mr C go^s on.

Nor let it seem grievous that our friends and brethren in the Lord of ^ame and
worth in the Church, have, as it seems, urged that in case of such an
exclusion of believers children, they are made as Turks or Indians, so far
forth in regard that not being in covenant nor Church Estate, the Apostle truly
states such persons cases, they are without hope, and without God in the world:
He makes no distinction of potentia remota and propinqua in that case.

Answ. It is a grievance to us their brethren in the faith, that Mr M. and such
men of name and worth in the Church, should so misrepresent our Tenet as they
do, with whom Mr C. seems to concur. Mr. M. his calumny in misrepresenting my
words in his Defense, part 2. sect 10. as if I had said, That I know no warrant
to think election to reach believers children more than unbelievers children,
that I know no more promise for them than for the children of unbelievers, is
answered in my Apology, sect. 14. I have showed here and in my Examen, Part 2
Sect. 10. and in my Apology Sect. 14. that I put the elect of them into the
covenant of grace, and in the invisible Church, and this only is the ground of
a sure hope of their interest in God, and Christ; and salvation. And that they
are elect I give 4 probable reasons which are not competent to the infants of
Turks and Pagans, 1. general indefinite promises not made to Turks and
Pagans, 2. The payers of parents and godly for them, 3. Their education and
breeding among the godly, whereby they are in a nearer possibility to be godly,
than others. 4. The ^requent experience that the children of the godly prove
such; which yet because those promises are not particular and definite, that
is, determining this particular go^d of salvation to each particular person,
and prayers are made and heard with limitation of Gods will and the education
may fa^l in its effect, and experience is not so constant, but that it falls
out otherwise in many, therefore there is no sufficient ground for certain hope
but only probable. Mr M. Mr C. and others, assign ^ more, to wit being in
Covenant and Church Estate. But Mr C. page 93. confesses, It is peculiar to
the elect to be in covenant in respect of the saving effi^acy of it, Romans 9.6,
7, 8. And that being in covenant and Church Estate, which he makes common to
all, elect and reprobate, cannot assure them certainly of salvation; therefore
were it granted that there were such a covenant of Church-privileges and that
they were visible Church-m^^bers and to be baptized which I conceive to be
fictitious) yet this c^uld (...) m^ke the h^pe of their salvation more than
probable, no no^ ^o probable as the reasons I give, where I infer that they do
us wrong to instill into peoples (...) tha^ which tends to make us odious, that
our doctrine takes aw^y all (...) hope of infants salvation, dying in infancy,
when in truth the promise of salvation as we assign it is the same with ^he
promise as they assign it, and the grounds we give of the hope of the infants
interest, are as sufficient to make it probable as th^i^s, ^f they were
supposed true, which yet notwithstanding all they say, we know a^e fictitious.
Now hereby is a plain answer to Mr. C. If Infants of Tur^s be any of them
elected, which Mr. C. seems to grant when he says, God may and sometimes does
and will have some souls brought on to him from Rome, and even amongst the
Mohometans, etc. We do grant they are really and before God in as good a
condition as believers children, though not in appearance to us and in respect
of their present estate, nor can they be said to be without Christ, without God
in the world in all respects. But in respect of present state and appearance to
us, neither Infidels nor their children are in any condi^ion so hopeful as
believers and their children, because of the general indefinite promises they
have, the benefit of prayers, which are not with a like a^dency: for Infidels
though we pray for them also in a more general manner, the benefit of their
education, which if it be to Indians children, yet not with a like care. And if
it be, we should not think it absurd to say, that if they be brought into godly
families, their salva^ion is hopeful as well as believers children. Else why
does Mr Cotton conceive in the way of the Churches of New England, in the
latter end they may be baptized. And the experience is very frequent concerning
godly men's children proving godly, but very rare that an Infidels child living
among Infidels, is converted. And for a word of promise for faith and hope to
rest upon, as I said, it has been showed, that neither Mr M. nor Mr C. nor any
other can produce any promise in Scripture that assures the salvation of an
Infant of a real believer, much less of a mere professor dying in infancy;
yea, to retort Mr C. his Argument, we are not to sorrow without hope,
concerning our brethren that dye at age: yet we have no certain word of faith
to rely on, but that Go ^ will be the God of elect and true believers, Luke
20.36 37, 38. But tha^ this promise reaches to our brother deceased at age, we
know only probably, though the probability is greater by reason of his
profession and conversation, yet at most but probable, notwithstanding those
signs, we are not certain he is elect, he may live and dye an hypocrite. Many
are canonized for Saints in ^eaven who perhaps are among unclean spirits in
hell. We therefore in this case are fain to suspend our judgment about the
certainty, and to content our selves with a likely hope upon probable grounds.
And so we may do concerning our children according to my doctrine, though I
confess the hope is more probable of such a one than of an infant; yet
sometimes also there appears as much cause of ^ear. How ever this I say, that
were it not to make our doctrine of Antipaedobap^ism odious to parents, who
being indulgent to their children, are easily moved to passion toward them,
that say any thing of them that seems harsh, and are very much inclined to them
and their words that tend to feed them with such conceits as occasion their
hopes, though but fond, of good to them, our doctrine would be free from this
exception. But such courses should be far from men of worth, who should present
truth nakedly, without respect to men's affections. As Mr C. tells us, he has
been the longer in proof of this seventh Conclusion, in that it is the very
Hinge of the Controversy: So I have answered it more fully, though it have
been very tedious to me by reason of Mr. C. his confused and impertinent
Dictates. And I do declare that I do not see reason from that which Mr. C. has
said to unsay what I said, that the children of believers covenant-estate, at
least Ecclsiasticall, as asserted by Paedobaptists, is a new Gospel, not elder
than Zuinglius, and therefore rejecting it, I shall hold that to be Gospel
which I find so called, 1 Cor 15.1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Romans 1.16, 17. Gal. 3.8. 2 Timothy, 2.8. Romans 2.16. and such like places and wish Mr. C and others of his
mind, who upon such uncertain and impertinent allegations, impose their Gospel
upon men's consciences, to ponder with more seriousness the Apostles words^,
Gal. 1.9. If any man preach any other Gospel than that ye have received, let
him be accursed.

SECT. XLV. Mr C. his Answers to objections against his seventh Conclusion,
part. 1. c. 3. Sect. 9. of his Just Vindic. are considered, and Mr. Bl. his
Tenent concerning the general term of a Covenant, that it is a mutual
agreement.
I Wave the first Objection here, and for my speeches about Pharez, Zara, and
others, and that of the Jews being branches of the Olive by their birth, that
I forget not my self, and how far I own them and wherein I correct them, or
explain them, may be seen in the first part of the Review, Sect. 6.1^, 21.

The second objection is thus, If Infants be in the Covenant of grace, and born
so, then such Infants were born in the Covenant, and never out. And besides,
Gods Covenant of saving grace bi^g absolute, and undertaking to give saving
grace to such as are in covenant with him, all such must be saved, unless God
fail of his truth.

To this Mr. C. answers, 1. That Covenant of grace, as I. S. acknowledges it
to be mentioned, Deu. 29. it was made with little ones then unborn
intentionally, v. 14, 15. as well as with those then present actually: So that
when they were born* they were born in the covenant and never out. As much may
be said of the Infant Elect seed, or children of the promise dying infants,
they were born so, and never out of that estate after they were actually
existent: yea they were all girded in the covenant, Jer. 13.

Answ. The passage Deuteronomy. 29.15. is not meant of Gods covenant or promise to
them, but their promise or covenant to God, as appears in that v. 14. Moses is
said to make the covenant with them, that is, to engage them in their own
persons for themselves and little ones to own God and his laws, and v. 15. it
is said, before the Lord our God, which shows that the person making that
covenant, v. 14. was distinct from the Lord, and this Covenant he made with him
that was not there with them that day, to wit, the unborn posterity, as rightly
M. C. and others eonceive, and this Covenant Moses made with them by engaging
them by an oath of their P^inces and progenitors, in the same sense as Saul and
the Israelites were bound to the Oath made by Joshuah and the Princes of
Israelites to the Gibeonites* So that those unborn are not said to be in Gods
Covenant of grace as made by him, and so intentionally only because not
existent; but they were in covenant with God virtually, because of the
Obliga^ion which lay on them by their progenitors and Princes engagement for
them to take the Lord for their God, and upon their obedience God engaged
himself to establ^sh them to be a people unto himself. And this, I confess, did
ever oblige them; but it is nothing to the objection which speaks of Gods
Covenant as made to infants, not of infants Covenant as made to God.
Nevertheless I confess what ever were the Authors meaning in that Objection, it
is no absurdity to grant, that elect infants dying so, were born in the
Covenant and never out, that is, they had the promise of God made to them at,
yea and before their birth, and in respect of the actual possession of the
benefits of the covenant, they were in the covenant before their death and
never out. But so are not elect infants dying in respect of outward
Church-privileges, they are not born visible Church Members, nor subject to be
baptized.

2. Says Mr C. Gods Covenant did not barely offer, or promise to covenant; but
made a Covenant, a Covenant and an Oath with them that day, Deuteronomy. 29.12, 13,
14, 15. and amongst other promises engaged himself to circumcise their hearts
chap. 30.6. yet were not all in heart circumcised, and yet the promise of God
failed not, being in the general propounded to them conditionally, and not as
it is said here absolutely, at least it had reference to them all in common.
The word of the promise took not effect in as many of the Jews to whom the
covenant promises externally belonged, yet it followed not, that therefore it
took no effect at all, and that God was unfaithful, for it took effect in
others, Romans 3.3. and 9.6, 7, 8. And so here.

Answ. What this is to the objection which is here answered, I do not well
understand. Gods covenant of saving grace, whether expressed Genesis 17.7. to
A^raham and his spiritual seed, or Heb. 8.10 or elsewhere, is absolute in
respect of the persons to whom, God takes into covenant persons of his own good
pleasure without any previous disposition moving him to promise to this rather
than that, though some benefits of that covenant are promised upon condition,
and all those to whom it is made, must be saved, unless God fail of his truth.
But for the Covenant, Deuteronomy 29.12, 13, 14, 15. it was their covenant to God, as
well as Gods covenant to them, nor was it the covenant of grace according to
the Gospel made to Gentile-believers, but a national engagement of the
Israelites to observe the laws of God which Moses made with them at Gods
command in the Land of Moab, besides the Covenant which he made with them in
Hor^b, and Gods engagement thereupon to take them for a people while they
observed his Laws In which covenant first Moses tells them what God has done
for them, notwithstanding their dullness to perceive it; and then ejoyns them,
v. 9 to keep the words of the Covenant and do them, that they might prosper in
all that they did: and then tells them, that they all stood there in a full
Assembly, that they might be engaged for themselves, their little ones,
strangers within their Camp, and posterity to observe Gods Commands, and then
tells them that God would establish them for a people unto himself, that is,
that he would continue them to be a distinct people to him from other nations,
and be a God to them according to his oath to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, that
is, to drive out ^he Canaanites, to give them their Land, to make them great
and prosperous, which is manifestly a covenant proper to Israel, and it is not
denied to be propounded to them conditionally, and to have reference to them
all in common, and was of the same sort with the covenant at mount Sinai* not
the covenant of regenerating and saving grace made to the Gentiles, called the
new Covenant confirmed by Christ's blood, Deuteronomy. 30.6. God promised to circumcise
their heart and the heart of their seed: which promise I do not now conceive to
be conditional: For though v. 2. there be a condition expressed, yet I think
it is not a condition of the promise v. 6. but of the promise v. 3. to wit, of
restoring from captivity upon their seeking of God. But if it be made a
condition of the promise v. 6. yet it is not a condition competent to Infants,
nor is it there made to any but the Israelites, and to them only at the time
of their return from captivity in reference to their reestablishing in the land
of Canaan, and so was not common to them all, much less to all believing
Gentiles at all times. It is untrue that the promise of saving grace is made to
any only externally, or that it takes not effect in all to whom it is made, or
that any such thing is meant Romans 3.3. and 9.6, 7, 8. though I deny not that
there were many promises to Israel after the flesh, which being indefinite in
respect of persons, and conditional upon obedience to the laws given by
Moses, took not effect in all the Israelites, though in general propounded,
and therefore notwithstanding some attained them not, yet the faith of God was
not without effect. But all this is nothing to the objection concerning Gods
covenant of saving grace in Christ, which is not showed to be made to any but
the saved, nor showed to be in respect of the persons taken into covenant
conditional.

3 Says Mr. C. This Argument supposes that one cannot be within the Covenant
of saving grace externally, but they must be in a saving estate, the contrary
whereunto appears, Concl. 3. And it is said of sundry illegitimate Jewish
Children, that they were within the covenant of saving grace, namely
externally: for the Author cannot mean other. And yet of all such who will say,
they were all in a saving estate? Even Esau's Birthright was more than right to
Isaac's temporal estate as born of Isaac, it was a Church blessing as well as
a Natural and Civil.

Ans. That any one is in the covenant of saving grace only externally, is not
proved before. My words Examen page 78. which M^ C. seems to mean, [^h^t Pharez
and Zarah of Judah and Tamar, Jephie of Gilead, and many others were within the
covenant of saving graces and Church-privileges] are not meant of the covenant
of saving grace ex^ernally only, but also internally. Esau's birthright was
more than right to Isaac's temporal estate as born of Isaac, it is that which
Jacob was not born to, for it was (...), the right of the first born, which
Jacob had not but by purchase and blessing, nor is it denied to be a
Church-blessing, but that it was the spiritual blessing promised to Abraham's
seed, to wit justification and salvation from the covenant of saving grace I do
not conceive: for that was not limited to the first born as the birthright
was, and therefore it se^ms to have been either the superiority, or the
inh^ritance of Canaan, or the descent of Christ and the Chuch of God from him
(to which I most incline) the loss of which being a great loss, and having
with it the privation of interest in the covenant of saving grace, he being
h^ted of God, made Isaac tremble and Esau cry, and were a (...) instance to set
before the Cristian Hebrews, lest they through profane under^^^^ing Christ,
fail of the grace of God.

Mr. C. adds 3. Object But says ^. S. the Covenant of grace being a Covenant,
there must be a mutual agreement betwixt the Covenanters, and so knowledge and
consideration of the terms thereof, and restipulation as in men's covenants.
Henry Den a little differently makes a necessity of the persons entering into
covenant with God, scil. by faith unto covenant-right, and not merely Gods
entering into Covenant with the creature, for so he entered into covenant with
the Beasts, etc. Genesis 9 10. Answer. To which I answer, the covenant of grace is
as well a Testament, 1 Cor. 11. Heb 9. Now a Testament may be, and uses to be
made in reference to little ones without their knowledge, nor do any us^ to
deny a Child's right in the Testators will because it was taken in amongst other
Legacies in the bequeathed Legacies before it understood the same. Nor will it
be denied in the case of the elect seed, the choice parties in Gods Covenant,
Genesis 17. That they, many of them, dying Infants, without actual knowledge,
were not therefore children of the promise, or that that solemn Covenant Deuteronomy.
29.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, and 30.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc. with that people,
wherein conditions also were propounded on their parts, that therefore the
Covenant was not made betwixt the little ones there present because they
neither understood* nor could actually subscribe to the conditions, the
contrary being there expressed: No, rather it sufficed, that the childrens
covenant-estate being the parents privilege, whence the encouragements to
Abraham to walk with God, Genesis 17.1, etc. from that amongst other
encouragements, that God would become his Seeds God also, and,. v. 7. and so
Deuteronomy. 29 and 30. amoongst other encouragements to the parents that is one, v.
6. that God will do so for their seed also: yea the children being reckoned as
in their parents, as Levi paid Tithes in Abraham, etc. Yea, the external
avouching a Covenant may be of God, being owned as the children^, Deuteronomy. ^6.16,
17. yea the childrens circumcision being as well the parents covenant duty:
whence called the Covenant, or the covenant parties covenant part or duty as
well as the token of Gods Covenant, Genesis 9.7, 9, 10, 11. they restipulate in
their parents knowing acceptance of the Covenant and professed owning of it
upon the Covenant terms, as well upon their childrens part as their own and
they restipulate in a passive reception of the Cvenant-condition and Bond too
after imitation of their Father Abraham's faith and obedience: To which purpose
^. S. confessed circumcision was annexed to the covenan^: yea, the bastard
children of Judah and Gilead, and others, are acknowledged to be in the
Covenant of saving grace, which yet could not personally restipulate in a way
of actual knowledge, or faith, or the like.

Answ. The Objection, as it is not mine, so I might let it and the answer
pass, but that there are some things in the answer to it, that do requi^e
consideration. In the first part of this Review* Sect. 5. answering Mr.
Stephens his argumen^s for the Convertibility, as he ca^ls i^, of a word of
promise and a word of command, from the general nature of Covenants between men
and men, I had said, the words (...) and (...) ^o not always note a mutual
covenant, and mutual performanc^s* and instanced in Genesis 9.10. and said,,
there is a single covenant as well as mu^uall, and further added, that if it be
true, that such a convertibility must needs be between those persons that do
contract according to the general nature of Covenants, then there can be no
Covenant between God and Inf^nt (...) Infant cannot contract. If any say the
Parents do (...) act for them to: I say, Be it so; then according to this
arguing, they should also seal o^ be sealed for them Hereup^n Mr Bl. Vindic
F^d. Append. page 470. taks occasion to answer part of this, maintaining page
479. that there is a mutual contract, and mutual performances, to which
persons are engaged, not only usually in covenants, but in all covenants, and
that i^ is of the general nature of Covenants, that there should be such a
convertibility as that both must, if not seal, yet contrast or perform, and
where a Seal is vouchsafed, must accept of it. And to the allegation of Genesis
9.9, 10. answers (...), is taken improperly, as Job 5.23.

Whereto I reply, That it must needs be confessed, that Covenant, Job 5.23.
must needs be understood improperly, for the stones of the field cannot
properly covenant, that is, promise any thing, who are there said to be in
covenant with Man, But Genesis 9.9, 10. where God is said to establish his
covenant with all living. I see not why it should be taken improperly, since
covenanting does properly agree to God, who does in proper sense promise, and
in improper sense it would not be rightly said of God, that he did not make a
Conant, but as it were make a covenant, or do some other thing which is
resembled by making a Covenant, which must be the explication of that phrase if
God be conceived to speak improperly. If Mr Bl. do conceive any Tropicall
impropriety of speech in that expression, I suppose he cannot reduce it to any
Trope in Rhetoric, but that he will man the sense of the words. And if Gods
Covenant with Noah and his Sons, be properly understood v. 9. I see not any
reason why the same term without repetition applied to beasts, as the object of
the Covenant, c^n be taken any otherwise than properly. Besides, this Covenant
Genesis 9.15 seems to be called Gods Oath, Isa. 54.9. and therefore is properly
taken. Nor do I know any Interpreter who understands it improperly. Paraeus
hence gathers, Foedus hoc est universale Dei cum omnibus creaturis
terrestribus. and est absolutum non conditiona^um. And the New Annotations of
Mr. L^y* on Genesis 9 10 have it thus: Some allege this place against the
Anabaptists, and thus it may serve to refute this fancy, viz. that the Covenant
of God may be made with, and the seal of the Covenant applied to creatures that
have not the use of reason, which they deny, in denying the administration of
Baptism to them. Which pass^ge although it have this falsehood, that we deny
that the Covenant of God may be ma^e with or to Infants: yet it appears that
they who speak thus, understand Gods covenant Genesis 9.10* properly. The promise
Heb. 8.10. of writing Gods Laws in their hearts, is called the Covenant, unto
which no covenant is prerequired, and to take away the evasion, as if it were
not a covenant properly so called, but a prophecy, or but a part of the
covenant, there being other promises which prerequire conditions, it is to be
observed, that it is not only called the better Covenant, v. 6. as being made
a Law upon better promises, and having a better Priesthood to execute it, but
also it is opposed to the Old Covenan^, and as coming in its stead, and
therefore if in the one it be properly meant, it is so in the other: and Jerem.
32.^0. the promise, that He will not turn away from them to do them good, but
will put his fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from him* is his
Covenant. The Covenant to Abraham and his se^d is called Promises, Gal 3.26.
which shows that promis^s on one part may b^ called ^ Covenant. And though in
De^ds indented there are mutual promises, yet in Deeds Poll as the Lawyers
call them, I think a person is said to covenant to another, though there be no
condition or promise required of him to whom the Deed is made. As for that
which Mr. Bl. says, Where there is a Seal vouchsafed, the party to whom the
promise is, must accept of it: it is true if it be required, but it is expected
that it should be showed, that God ever required the Infants of believers to be
baptized in their own persons.

To return to Mr. C. Most of the things he answers are granted, or else
examined before; but the chiefest thing in the answer is denied, to wit, that
Parents knowing acceptance of the Covenant, and their passive reception of the
Covenant-condition and Bond to after imitation of their Father Abraham's faith
and obedience, is or may be termed the Infants restipulation intituling to
Baptism.

In the answer to the next Objection, Mr. C seems to charge us rather than
himself, to block up the ordinary way to regeneration, and to debar believers
children from the ordinary means of their chief good, by denying them interest
in the Word of Promise, the which is such a means, etc.

But therein Mr C. his charge is but vain: For the word of Promise, which is the
means of regeneration, is not the covenant of external privileges, but the
promise of saving grace in Christ, which we debar them of no more than Mr. C.
does. And when he denies that he makes every believer to be Abraham, sure he
must do so if he expound Genesis 17.7. I will be a God to thee Abraham, that is,
to every believer, and to thy seed, that is, every believers seed. And when he
grants that God does not promise such a particular Land now as to Abraham, and
that the multiplying of Abraham's, etc. was of peculiar consideration, he must
grant that the Covenant made with Abraham had peculiar domestic promises not
common to all believers, which is all one as to say, it was a mixed covenant,
and that circumcision had some reason from the promises in the covenant, which
were p^culiar to Abrams natural posterity, which is sufficient to prove there
is not par ratio* or the same reason of bapt^zing infants, as for circumcising
them. I find no where any but Abraham a Covenant-Father, as Mr. C. would have
it, no where does God say he would be a God to Isaac, and Jacob, and to their
seed: Nor is it said, Romans 11.16.28, that they were covenant Fathers to their
posterity, nor Jesse a Covenant-root to David, Isai. 11.1. And by Mr C. his
Doctrine, inchurched believers are made Abraham's, since it makes the prom^ses to
be to them and their seed, which is ascribed to Abraham only, Gal 3.16. Luke
1.55.

But Mr. C. objects, That the Apostle calls all those inchurched Jews of old,
our Fathers, Fathers to him and to the Gentiles, Corinthian members, 1 Corinthians:
10.1, etc.

To which I answer, They could not be called the Corinthians natural parents,
being not descended from them; nor their Covenant-fathers, for they were many
of them such, as God was not well pleased with, v. 6. and the Corin^hians
descended not from them, and therefore derived no ex^ernall Church-privilege
from them: therefore either it must be understood that they were called
Ancestors of the Corinthian Christians, who are called Idolaters, chap. 12.2.
either in the sense we call any in foregoing generations our Fathers though we
are not descended from them by natural generation, or else by the Figure of
communication, wherein that is spoken as common to others with the persons
mentioned, which is not common indeed, but either ou^ of familiarity,
indulgence, desire to ingratiate, or such like reason we attribute it to them
to whom it is not to be attributed, as Paul, Ephesians. 2.2, 3. Peter 1 Pet. 4.3.
which was not true of them. Philip. 3.6. Acts 23.1. but meant of the Gentiles
to whom they wrote, Col. 2.13. Gal. 2.15. and so Our Fathers is not of you
Corinthians, but of me and Softheues, 1 Cor. 1.1, or by an enallage of persons,
as when Paul says, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. we which are alive, it is not to be
conceived to be true of himself, or of any of the Thessalonians to whom he then
wrote, but it is [ We] for [ They] the first for the third person.

But says Mr. C. If Isaac and Jacob were not such Fathers to their seed also,
as was Abraham in Covenant and Church-respects, how then are the Jews said to
be beloved for their [Fathers] sakes? Surely it was not for their sakes as men,
and natural Fathers, but as spiritual and Covenant-fathers, Romans 11.26, 28.
compared; yea the Covenant is expressly made in those terms to Isaac and to his
seed, to Jacob and to his seed, Genesis 26.3, 4, 5, and 28 13, 14. And so though
they were Abraham's Church and Covenant seed, yet Covenant Fathers to others,
and so Gentile inchurched believers are Abraham's Church-seed, yet
Covenant-fathers to their Children.

The term Root, and first Fruits, and the term Fathers, Romans 11.16.28. are not
proved to be the same. The Fathers, it is not denied to comprehend Isaac and
Jacob, as well as Abraham: But they are called Fathers there in respect of the
natural genera^ion of the Israelites to be re-ingraffed, not as
Covenant-Fathers propagating external Church privileges even to Gentile
inchurched believers: For they are there reckoned as the Israelites
progenitors, not the Gentile inchurched believers progenitors. Yet I deny not
that God has reference in that passage to his covenant made with them, and his
love to them* and so the Jews now broken off, yet are beloved by God, with an
intention to restore their posterity out of remembrance of his ancient amity
and covenant with their forefathers, which cannot be verified of the Gentile
inchurched believers in respect of their children. Neither Genesis 26.3, 4, 5, nor
Genesis 28.13, 14, is either of the Evangelicall promises made to Abraham, Genesis
17.5, A Father of many Nations have I made thee, or that v. 7. to be a God to
him and his seed, made either to Isaac, Genesis 26.3, 4, 5, or Jacob, Genesis 28.13,
14. though the promises of multiplying their Seed, blessing them, giving them
the land of Canaan in their Seed, blessing all the Nations or Families of the
earth, be there mentioned, which, with sundry passages, of the Apostle Romans
4.11, 12, 16, 17. Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Gal. 3, 16, 29, and other places assure me
those Evangelicall promises, Genesis 17.5.7. were made to Abraham peculiarly,
neither as a Patriarch out of a reason common to him with other Patriarks, nor
as a believer ^ut of a reason common to him wi^h other believers, but out of a
peculiar consideration of ^im, either as Father of believers by his exemplary
faith, or as a person elected by God to have the covenant instated in him and
his seed.

As for Mr. C. his answer to the objection from Romans 4.16. if that Text prove
not that all that are Abraham's seed are actual believers, yet i^ proves that
the promise is sure to all that are Abraham's seed by actual believing as he
did, and consequently are saved.

To his qustion, If all members of the visible Church be not Abraham's seed,
what right have they to the seal of the covenant made to Abraham's seed? I
answer* Right to Circumcision and Baptism is not from the Covenant, but
according to Gods appointment to some, whether they be in covenant or not,
Abraham's seed or not.

Gal. 4.26, 28, 31. Gal. 3.29. I have formerly showed that by [ Us all] are not
meant every Galatian Christian Professor, but true believers, as Romans 8 32. 1
Cor. 12, 13. 2 Cor. 3.18. and therefore thence it cannot be gathered, that any
mere professor of faith is Abraham's seed, much less his infants. None but true
believers are said Gal. 3.27, to be baptized into Christ, and to put on Christ,
though others were baptized into his Name: which appears verse 26. where they
are said to be the Sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus, and yet there
were other than elect persons in that Church, and they baptized. Mr. C.
methinks should not be ignorant that what is said of persons in the Churches
indefinitely, is sometimes verified only of the choice party, 1 Cor. 1.1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 1.5. and 2.9. by a Synecdoche of the whole for a part Nor
does Mr C. his distinction of baptizing into Christ, putting on Christ, being
Children of the promise, being by one spirit baptized into one body,
attributing these to all Sacramentally, and in facie Ecclesiae, suit well to
these places, in which the predicate cannot be attributed in truth to those
that are merely such.

As for the last Objection, Mr. C. must needs be guilty of making three parties
in the Covenant, Abraham, his seed Believers, and their Infants. For Believers
are not comprehended under Abraham, but under his seed, nor believers natural
infants comprehended under Abraham's seed, except they be true believers, or
elect persons, nor in the covenant made to Abraham and his Seed does Abraham
sustain the person of all believers, Jews and Genti^es, but of the Father of
them, and therefore as yet Mr. C. his Conclusion remains unproved, that the
Covenant interest at least External and Ecclesiastical of Infants of
inchurched Believers, is Gospel, but a Figment of Mr. C. not found in Scripture.

SECT. XLVI. The 27, 28, 29 Chapters of Mr. Blakes Vindic. Faeder is are
examined, and it is showed, That he has not proved the Covenant of Grace in
Gospel times to admit or to be made to any but the Elect regenerate.
Since Mr. Bl. is accounted one of the chief Patrons of Infant Baptism, my
purpose is to examine the remainder of that which he has written in his
Vindic. Foed. against me for Infant Baptism, and may be conceiv^d to be yet
unanswered. Chapter 27* page 189, 190. he heaps up many texts to prove that in old
Testament times the Covenant was made with Israel in the uttermost latitude and
extent with all that bore the name of Israel, which I grant, understanding it
of the National Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29. and of the Covenant of the Law, Exodus 20.
etc. but deny it being meant of the Covenant o^ Evangelical grace, which is the
only Covenant the people of God are now under, and which alone is the question
now, Who are in this Covenant? or to whom is this Covenant or the promise^ of
it made by God? I assert as before, Sect. 33. That it is made only to the
Elect* And M. Bl. page 191. yields that many Orthodox writers seemingly
restrain the Covenant one^y to the Elect and regenerate. But he adds some
distinctions, whereby he thinks what they say may be salve^ from self
contradictions. 1. Of a two fold Covenant, 1 a single, 2* a double to perform
both parts, to save upon repentance, and to give a new heart: But he does not
show that there is any Evangelical Covenant now which is not double, nor that
either the double or single is made with any but the elect. 2. Of an inward
Covenant, which ^e grants to be made only to the elect; and an outward, which,
he says, is a Covenant properly so called, and which Scripture holds out for
the Covenant of God with his people, in which all professed Christians so
called are, which puts them into a capacity of Sacraments, and their children
of the initial Sacrament: But what this outward Covenant is, or where it is to
be found I know not; what I find about it ^s showed to be vain, Sect. 25. and
Mr. Bs. refutation of it in his Apology against Mr. Bl. page 66, 67, 10^* saves
me any further labor to show it to be a figment 3. Of being in Covenant
according to title to the Covenant, or to the benefits of the Covenant; and
says, the right of Covenant belongs to all that externally mak^ profession,
the benefit only to the elect. But I know no right of Covenant, but what is by
Gods promise, and surely all to whom God promises have the benefit of the
Covenant; and to imagine, that the Covenant of grace is to any to whom the
grace following the Covenant is not, is to make Gods Covenant and word to fall,
which the Apostle abhorred, Romans 9.6. and to make the Covenant of grace as
liable to complaint ^s the first Covenant, contrary to Heb. 8*6, 7, 8, 9, 10*
4. Of entering into Covenant, which all visible professors do, and stedfastness
in it, which do only the elect and faithful, Psalm. 78.3^. But this text
speaks not of the Covenant of Evangelical grace as if any were entered into it
who were not steadfast in it: but of the Covenant of the Law with the Jewish
people, which is not the Covenant in which the Gentiles are under the Gospel.
And to Mr. Bls. confused talk I again say, 1. That the Covenant of Evangelical
grace is made by God only to the Elect, and that in respect of Gods promise
none but they are in the Covenant, nor is there to any right to Sacraments or
capacity of an initial Seal barely by that being in Covenant. 2. That
profession of Faith may cause a man to be taken to be in the Covenant by the
guides and brethren of the visible Church, in the face of which he may have
title to Sacraments, but his infant children have no title thereby to Baptism.
3. That from the beginning none but the elect had the Covenant of grace made to
them. 4. That from the beginning it is not proved the children with their
parents to have been no not in the imaginary outward Covenant. But let^s v^ew
what Mr. Bl. says*

1. He alleges Matthew. 28.19. and takes it as freely con^est, that a Disciple
of Christ is in Covenant with God, and tells us that the Covenant Matthew. 28.19.
is committed to man to work, and to judge of it being wrought, to put a seal
for ratification and confirmation of it; which cannot be restrained to the
elect, for they only are known to God; an elect person and a Church member
should be termini convertibiles, the seal of the Spirit, and the seal of the
Sacrament are in equal latitude; to baptize an unregenerate person is to put a
seal to a blank, as high an abuse of that sacred Ordinance as the circumcision
of the Sichemites, Genesis 34* 24.

Answ. It is not confessed by me that a Disci^le of Christ, that is every
Disciple of Christ is in Covenant with God, meaning it in respect of Gods
Covenant or promise of Evangelical grace made to him, nor do I know of any
Covenant, Matthew. 28.19. committed to man to work, and to judge of it being
wrought, and to put a seal for ratification and confirmation, though I grant
every Disciple professing Christ is in some sense in Covenant with God, that
is, by his act of profession does engage himself to follow Christ, and so in
that respect is in Covenant with God, and that Matthew. 28.19. the Apostles are
enjoined to make Disciples by preaching the Gospel, and baptize them, which may
be done without working a Covenant between God and man, (which phrase does
imply that a Minister can work God into Covenant, which is in my apprehension
an absurd conceit) or judging of a Covenant being wrought, or putting to a seal
for confirmation of it. And for the absurdities Mr. Bl. infers from the denial
of restraining the Covenant to the elect, I count the first not to follow upon
my tenet, since I conceive a man may be a Churchmember who is not in the
Covenant of grace; and for the second, I count it no absurdity according to my
explicat^on before given, Sect. 34*35. though I do withal declare, that the
seal of the Sacrament is a term I reject for the reasons given before, Sect.
31. And for the third, I count it no abuse to put a seal to a blank, that is,
to baptize a person who is not in the Covenant of Evangelical grace. As for the
2d. argument Mr. Bl. would draw from Matthew. 28.19. to prove that the Covenant
of God is only a Covenant professed, because Matthew. 28*19. a whole Nation is
in Gods ordinary way of administration in a capacity to attain and enter into
it, it is answered in the 2d. Part of this Review, sect. 9. where it is showed
that Matthew. ^8.19. there is no such command as to make Disciples, and bap^ize
the whole of a Nation, even the infants.

Mr. Bl. adds a 2d. text, Matthew, 20.16. and 22.14. whence he argues thus; If
there be a call from God in the times of the N. T. in a far greater latitude
then the grace of election, that of many called few only are elected, then the
Covenant in the N.T. times is not to be restrained to the elect and regenerate,
but contains all that professedly accept the terms of the Covenant, and visibly
appear a people of God. This is evident, seeing the call is into Covenant; all
at the feast were called ones, all the hired Laborers were Covenant-servants.
To conceive men to be called of God, and not to be in Covenant with God, is a
full contradiction. The call has its terminus a quo and its terminus ad quem;
a state which upon call they leave, and a new state on which they enter. They
are upon this call in a nearer relation to God then the rest of the world,
otherwise they were the same as ever, and not called at all. But there is a
call in N. T. times, etc. Ergo.

Answ. The consequence of the major is denied, and to the proof of it I say, 1.
The call is not into Covenant with God in the sense which (...) n^w in
question: For now the question is, Whether there be a Covenant in the N. T.
wherein God engages himself to be God, and to account for his people any
besides the elect? Now no man is called into Covenant in this sense, for no man
is called to engage God to be God, etc. it were an arrogant act to call or
invite men to engage God, it is God only who is to do this, and therefore if
any were to be called to this, it were God himself. 2. It is not true, that to
conceive men to be called of God, and not to be in Covenant with him is a full
contradiction. For though the calling mentioned Romans 8.30. do always bring men
into an estate of being in Covenant with God, yet not the calling Matthew. 20.16.
and 22.14. For though the calling there have a Terminus a quo and ad quem, in
the one resembled by calling to work in the Vineyard, in the other by calling
to a Wedding feast; yet that every one that was called had a new state on which
he did enter, is not true: For even those who refused to come were called,
Matthew. 22.3, 4. and the m^n who came in without a Wedding garment, though he
sat down, yet was not in a state of Covenant, or acceptance, but was thrust
out. Nor is Mr. Bls. arguing of any force. Men are called into Covenant with
God, therefore they are in Covenant with God: For by the same reason it might
be inferred, the same men are called into the fellowship of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9.
into the Kingdom and glory of God, 1 These. 2.12. therefore some non^elect
persons are in the fellowship of Christ, in the Kingdom and glory of God, which
is false.

Mr. Bl. adds Mat. 13.24, 25, 47. and 3.12. and 2 Timothy 2.20. whence he argues
thus. A man in the Kingdom of Heaven is a man that is in Covenant with God;
unless he stood in a Covenant relation he could have no standing there; and the
comparison were very strangely drawn, if this Kingdom thus set out had all
that were good, none bad in it.

Answ. It is granted that good and bad, elect and non-elect are in the visible
Church, and so in the Kingdom of Heaven, if by it be meant the visible Church:
but that a man in the Kingdom of Heaven is a man that is in Covenant with God,
that is a man in the visible Church is a man that is in Covenant wi^h God, so
as that God has made a Covenant or promise of Evangelical grace to or with
him, is denied, nor is; or ever will be proved by Mr. Bl.

A 4th. text is Heb. 10.29. whence he says, These must needs be granted to be
wicked, yet cannot be denied to be in Covenant, being sanctified with the blood
of the Covenant. And then sets down three interpretations; one of the
Arminians, that say they were sanctified internally and in Covenant, but fall
from both, which he lets pass* Another, that Christ is said to be sanic^fied,
which seems to him to be very much strained. A third, by external separation
for God and dedication to him, which he embraces.

Answ. Neither do I conceive tha^ it is Christ who is said to be sanctified by
the blood of the Covenant: For though I grant he is said to be sanctified, Joh.
10.36. and to sanctify himself, Joh. 17.19. and (...) to consecrate or make
perfect, Heb. 2.10. and 5.9. and 7.28. Yet I do not find (...) phrase applied
to Christ any where, that he is said to be sanctified by the blood of the
Covenant; but still applied to those that a^e bought by Christ, Heb. 10.10, 14.
and 13.12. Nor does it so well suit with the Apostles aim of aggravating the
s^n o^ Apostasy from Christianity, to mean it of Christ's being sanctified, as
of the Apostates being sanctified heretofore by that blood of the Covenant
which he now counted common, or unclean: Nor do I conceive it can be meant of
such a mere external sanctification, whether by Baptism, or external
profession, as Mr. Bl. and others conceive. For 1. the sanctification here is
the same with the sanctification meant, ver. 10, 14. and 13.12. But that
sanctification i^ more then such an external sanctification, even such as
perfects for ever them that are sanctified, v. 14. and has with it the writing
and remission of sins according to the Covenant which is set down v. 15, 16,
17. 2. No where is such an external sanctification ascribed to the blood of the
Covenant; but to ascribe to it such a mere external sanctification in any
sanctified by it, is to d^minish the virtue of it, as if it did no more then
the legal sacrifices, contrary to the Apostles arguing, Heb. 9.12, 13, 14. 3.
Nor thirdly, had it aggravated the Apostates sin to say that he had counted the
blood of the Covenant wherewith he was sanctified only externally, a common
thing: For this had showed no more evil in the disestee^ of Christ's doat^, then
if the blood of the legal sacrifices which did san^^ifie externally, Heb. ^.12.
had been counted unclean. Therefore I conceive the sanctifying Heb. 10.29.
meant of the effectual sanctifying before God, meant Heb. 2.11. and 10.10*14.
and 1^.12. but yet understand the sanctifying, Heb 10*29. not of what was so
really, but of what was according to their own opinion, and profession
embracing the Christian Doctrine. Even as Gal. 5.4. Whosoever are justified by
the Law, that is, Whosoever of you do avouch that you are justified by the Law.
Luke 15.7. some are said to be just persons needing no repentance; that is, in
their own opinion and profession, as those Luke 18.9. And thus I conceive is
that speech also to be understood, 2 Pet. 2.1. and hereby the Arminian argument
from both places for Universal Redemption, and Apostasy of Saints is avoided.
Now these may be denied to have been in Covenant, that is, to have been of
those to whom God promised Gospel grace, since they were only sanctified
according to their own opinion and profession* yea though the sanctification
were meant of being sanctified externally, and this were from the blood of the
Covenant, yet it follows not that those who are sanctified thus are in Covenant
with God, as the meaning of those is who say the elect only are in Covenant,
that is, the Covenant of Evangelical grace is made by God only to the elect.

Mr. Bl. adds Neither can all the noise which Mr. T. has made about 1 Pet.
2.9. take off that text, but that it speaks fully to hold up a Covenant in this
latitude; and from thence I thus argue. If those phrases, a chosen generation,
a royal priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculiar people, be applied to Christians
as to Jews in an equal latitude to one ^s to other; then it must needs follow
that there is a Covenant in Gospel times in like latitude as in the time of the
Law, including all that accept the terms of the Covenant, and visibly appear as
the people of God, and is not restrained only to the elect regenerate. The
consequence is evident, seeing the terms plainly imply a Covenant. Here is a
Covenant people or no where: But these terms, a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people, are applied to Christians as
well as to Jews, to one in as great a latitude as to the other. That which God
speaks to Israel in the Wilderness, that Peter speaks to the Church to which
he writes* All Israelites in Moses days, all Christians professing, in Peter's
time, had those titles, when only those that kept Covenant were at any time
worthy of them, and had the comforts of them.

Answ. The noise I make is not a mere sound without reason, nor is any one of
my reasons made void by Mr. Bls. answers. To him I reply* 1. That his speech is
inconsiderate when he says the text speaks fully to hold up a Covenant in this
latitude, which comprehends non-elect persons, when there is not a word of any
Covenant, and the terms he only says plainly imply a Covenant. And though I
deny not that the people there mentioned were a Covenant people, yet I deny any
one of the terms does imply a Covenant; for a chosen generation does not imply
a Covenant, since both electi^n and generation may be without a Covenant; and
the like may be said of the other terms, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a
peculiar, or purchased people: ^o that in this respect the consequence may be
denied. Nor is the consequence good for another reason. For it is not true that
all Israelites in Moses days had those titles, which I find Exodus 19*5, 6. yet
there only three of them, and those not said of all the Israelites in M^ses
days, but a promise of being to God such as these titles import, upon condition
they did hearken to his voice, and kept his Covenant, which was neither
verified of all Israelites in Moses days, nor in after times. And therefore
though those terms were applied to Christians as to Jews, yet it does not
necessarily follow that there is a Covenant in Gospel times in like latitude as
under the Law, since those titles were not verified of all the Jews at any time,
but of them and then only when they were obedient But I deny the minor also of
Mr. Bls. argument, that the terms are applied by Peter in an equal latitude to
Christians as by Moses to Jews, and assert as in my Postscri^t, sect. 10. page
128. that they are applied only to those who are members of the invisible
Church. Whereupon Mr. Bl. speaks thus to me.

But I would wish Mr. T. to take into more serious consideration. First,
whether the first verse of this second chapter be meant only of invisible
members? Whether the Apostle pe^swades regene^ate men, and only regenerate
men, to lay aside all malice, and all guile, and hypocrisies, and evil
speakings?

Answ. To the first question I say affirmatively, that by new born babes, v* 2*
are meant only members of the invisible Church; for they are said, chapter 1.23.
to be born again, not of corruptible seed, but incorruptible, by the word of
God which lives and abides for ever* Ver. 2. to be elect according to the
foreknowledge of God the Father, begotten again unto a lively hope, ver. 3.
And to the 2d. that he mentions only regenerate persons, whom he persuades,
though the duty is incumbent on others.

2 ly. Whether the 3d. v. be to be thus limited; Whether the Apostle makes
doubt in that manner, whether they had tasted that the Lord is gracious? And
yet those words in both those verses must needs be understood of the same men,
and under the same notion as these, ver. 9. The Apostle brings his speech to no
full period till v. 11. Those that must lay aside all malice, guile, etc. of
whom he makes question, whether they had tasted that the Lord were gracious;
they are this chosen generation, this royal priesthood.

Answ. 1. (...) 1 Pet. 2.3. is translated [ if] and may seem to import doubt or
uncertainty, but it may be as well translated [ seeing] as it is 2 These. 1.6.
and so it imports certainty that they had tasted how gracious the Lord is,
without making question of it. And this reading is more apposite to their
condtiion, and more suitable to the exhortation; For it is more agreeable to the
nature of a motive to the duty, ver. 2. to conceive it thus, Desire the word to
grow by it, since or seeing you have tasted how gracious the Lord is. 2. But if
it were read [ if] yet in such pass^ges as these [ if] does not import doubt,
but only is as a rational particle, noting the connection between the terms, as
Joh. 15.18. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. And so the sense is here, If you have tasted
(which he supposes, not questioneth) then you ought to desire the milk of the
word, that you may grow by it. 3. Were it the Apostle had doubt whether they
had tasted how good the Lord is (which is not to be conceived, considering what
he says of them, c. 1. v. 3, 23. c. 2.2, 5. etc.) yet this doubt might be of a
more full taste, which every regenerate elect person might not have. 4. The
exhortation to lay aside malice, etc. does not intimate they were any of them
whom he calls new born babes, v. 2. a chosen generation, an holy nation, v. 9.
unregenerate or non-elect; for such exhortations are necessary for the most
holy Saints, in whom are relics of corruption, and liableness to temptation.

3 ly. Says Mr. Bl. Let him seriously consider the Apostles further
enlargement of this honor of these Christians, which in times past were not a
people of God; words borrowed from Hos. 1.10. Hos. 2.23. and spoken of the call
of the ten revolted Tribes: And in Deuteronomy. 32.21. of the call of the Gentiles
into a visible Church state and profession, and so applied by the Apostle, Romans
9.24, 25, 26. Whence I argue. The call of the ten revolted Tribes, and of the
Gentiles into a visible Church way, is not to be meant of the Church as it is
invisible only. This Mr. T. has taken into consideration, and answered.
However it be in the p^aces to which the allusion is, yet it is certain that
here it is meant of such a calling as is from darkness to mavelous light;
taking it, it seems, for granted, that there is no mavelous light in visible
Churches; that in the land of Zebulon and Nephthali where they saw a great
light, there were only invisible members. Matthew. 4.15, 16.

Answ. My answer to this objection was in two things. 1. That terms appli^d to
Christians in the New Testament with allusion to passages in the Old, yet are
not always to be applied to Christians in the same latitude they were to Jews.
2. That in that place such a calling is meant as is from darkness to his
mavelous light by his virtues or powers; which therefore deserve to be showed
forth, and which they do show forth that are thus called. And both these I
confirmed from Romans 9.24, 25, 26. which is manifestly said of them who were
called v. 23. vessels of mercy; Nor is this a denomination a part
praestantiori, for it is expressly said (...) were the same whom he called
vessels of mercy. And the same place of Hos. 2.23. is alluded to in Romans 9.25.
and 1 Pet. 2.10. and can be understood of no other then the elect. And
therefore if the places Hos. 1.10. Hos. 2.23. Deuteronomy. 32.21. should be understood
(which I grant not) of any other then the elect or members of the invisible
Church; yet 1 Pet. 2.10. can be understood of no other, since no other have such
a calling as is there meant, v. 9. nor any other obtain mercy as there is
meant. That which Mr. Bl. replies after his flirting fashion, goes on this
false insinuation, that I took it for granted, that there is no mavelous
light in visible Churches, which he would refute from Matthew. 4.15, 16. and that
this was the force of my reason; whereas my reason did not suppose that at all,
but that none are so called from darkness to light in that manner the Apostle
there describes the calling, but only the elect, which is true; though there
be mavelous light in visible Churches, yea, and in mere visible professors,
yet none so called as Peter describes 1 Pet. 2.9. but only members of the
invisible Church.

4 ly. Says Mr. Bl. As honorable titles as these are frequently given in
Scripture, as shall be shown, to visible professors, why should then these be
limited to invisible members?

Answ. 1. No titles so expressly noting elect persons as those 1 Pet. 2.9. are
given any where to mee^ visible professors. 2. If they should be in any pl^ce
given to the visible Church, yet they are to be restrained to the elect only;
as when a heap of corn is so called, which has much chaff^ or a fie^d of corn,
which has much tares; the denominatio^ is from the better part, and is to be
applied ^s verified only of it.

5 ly. Says Mr* Bl. Mr. T. in his Letter made this Text to be parallel with
those Texts, Gal. 6.10. 1 Timothy 3.15* 1 Pet. 2.10. And those Texts I have
demonstrated to be meant of visible Churches, to which Mr. T. ^eplies nothing.

Answ. I do not find that in my Letter I made 1 Pet. 2.^. parallel with those
Texts, Gal. 6.10. 1 Timothy 3.15. 1 Pet. 2.10. But in my Exercit* 12. I do allege
to ^rove that onel^ bel^evers may be meant by a holy Nation, as they are by a
family or kindred, Ephesians. 3.15. the housh^ld of faith, Gal. 6.10. the house of
God, 1 ^im 3.15. a people, 1 Pet. 2.10. Now says Mr. Bl. these texts I have
demonstrated to be meant of visible Churches. But he has not demonstrated them
to be meant of mere visi^le Churches, or mere visible Professors in them, who
are not also of the invisible Church; and therefore I thought in my Postscript,
and think still I need make no further reply. Mr. Bl. considers my arguments to
prove 1 Pet. 2.9. meant of the invisible Church.

1. I argue (says Mr. T.) from the terms, chosen generation, royal priesthood,
an holy nation, a peculiar people, that is by Christ's death, Tit. 2.14. which
cannot be affirmed of any other then elect and true believers* Ergo. Answ. 1.
Such a way of arguing would not pass with Mr. T* in his adversary; as peculiar
people is taken in one place of Scripture, so it must be taken in all places;
but in one place it is taken for the elect regenerate If this would ^old, much
labor might be spared in finding out the various acceptance of words in
Sc^ipture.

Reply. M. Bl. it seems has such a spirit of Divination, as to foresee what I
would do in a contingent thing. But thi^ ^olly of his I impute to his Satirical
vein* which makes him that he can neither relate nor answer any t^ing of mine
heartily. My argument was not drawn only from the term [ peculiar people] but
also from the terms [ chosen generation, royal priesthood, an holy nation]
which with the other term [ a peculiar people] or as in the Margin of our last
Translation [ a purchased people] have been applied to the elect only by these
interpreters, whose words I here set down. Beza analys. Loci oppositum membram,
electorum videlicet summam excelien^tiam describit, etc. Piscat analys*
Hortatur commemoratione duorum maximorum beneficiorum Dei, electionis ad vitam
aeternam, and vocationis efficacis. Electionem indicat his verbis: vos autem
estis genus electum, vocationem vero illis regale sacerdotium gens sancta, etc.
Dicson. Vocantur autem regale sacerdotium quia sunt and regni Christi and
sacerdotii participes, imo per Christum sacerdotes and reges constitut^
vocantur, genus electum, quia Deus eos prae aliis populis sibi adoptaverat.
Gens sancta, quia eos sibi dicaverat Deus in vitae puritatem. Populus in
acquisitionem, quia Deus eos redemerat, and sibi in thesaurum and haeredita^em
asciverat, Diodati. v. 9. A royal] that is to say, a company of Priests who are
likewise Kings, Exodus 19.6. Priests to Godward, to whom believers do yield
spiritual worship. v. 5. and Kings over the creatures, over which Christ their
head has given them the dominion, which they had lost in Adam, and has made
them fellows in the glory of his Kingdom, Matthew. 19.28. 1 Cor. 6.2, 3. Revel.
1.6. and 2.26, 27. and 3.21. and 5.10. and 20.6. A peculiar] which he has
purchased with a price and made his, by a sove^aign title to hold them for his
own people. New Annot v. 9. A chosen] that is, whom God has effectually called
out of the would, see Chap. 1.2. Deuteronomy. 7.7. Royal] that is Kings and priests,
See Exodus 19.6. Revel* ^.6. and 5.10. Kings, beeause of that power which they
have, through Christ, over their lust, see Ph^l. 4.13. Priests, because
separated to the service of God, see v. 5. Holy nation] see Exodus 19.6. and
Deuteronomy. 7.6, etc. A peculiar people] or a purchased people peculiar] or a people
for possession: that is, a people (...) God has purchased to be his own. See
Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 7.6. and 26.18. Psalm. 135.4. Tit. 2.14. Act. 20.28.
Ephesians. 1.14. 1 These. 5.9. Dr. John Rainold Apolog. ^hes.. 21. Nam prim^ nomen
populi sanctorum Dan. 7.27. ex Daniele satis clare indicat significari electos,
1 Pet. 2.9. Gentem sanctam and populum Dei peculiarem, Exo. 19.5* Mal. 3.17.
Tit. 2.14. Eximie nuncupatos quandoquidem hic est populus cui soli regnum
amplissimum in Christo, and cum Christo, ut ibidem Dan. 7.27. promissum est,
ita da u^iri testantur sacrae iterae Apoc. 5.10. and 20.6. and 22.5.. 20. ad
designandum populum electum, 1 Pet* 2.9. qui Deo cedit (...) in possessionem
seu peculium. By which allegations it may be perceived, 1. that the
interpretation I give is the common interpretation of most learned Protestants:
2. that it is proved no by one title only but by four titles, whereof not one
of them can be applied in the sense Peter uses them to any but the elect: 3.
that this interpretation and application is confirmed not by one only place of
Scripture, but by many: 4. that though I alleged but one place, to wit Tit.
2.14. yet being so manifestly parallel, and so clearly pregnant for my purpose
it was enough, and such as I would allow the like in any adversary for good
proof, though] do not take it that in all places the sense is proved by the
alleging one scripture in the sense conceived, nor do I think it unnecessary
to find ou^ the various acceptance of words in scripture.

2. Says Mr. Bl These terms and others equivolent to these are given to the
Israelites Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Deuteronomy. 7.6. Deuteronomy. 32.9. not as a church invisible, but
as visible members. Their qualifications are often a low, as their appellations
by reason of their relation to God raise them high. And setting apart Christ's
death, I would know how they came to this honor.

Answ. These terms are given in the places cited to Israelites, yet that they
are given to them as visible members, and not as a church invisible, or as I
would say to the church visible of Israel, in respect of and with limitation to
the elect or members of the invisible church, as a field of corn in respect of
the good grain, is not proved. Yet if it were the titles 1 Pet. 2.9. spoken of
christians, cannot be verified of them but in a sense appropriate to the elect.
They are no way a royal priesthood, but as priests that offer spiritual
sacrifices to God, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, v. 5. which none but
the elect and true believers can do; no other way royal but in that they are
Kings to God, r^ign ov^r sin, Satan, etc. through Christ, which none but the
elect do; a chosen generation, but by Gods election to life eternal; a holy
nation, but by regeneration of the spirit; a peculiar people, but by Christ's
purchas^; which can be verified of none but true believers, and elect persons.
And to Mr. Bls. demand I answer, setting apart Christ's death, I know not how
Christ^ans should come to this honor which is expressed 1 Pet. 2.9.

3. Says Mr. Bl. The gift of Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and
Teachers, were the gift of Christ, and purchase of his death. These are for
constitution of ^^sible Churches, visible members enjoy these privileges in
common with regenerate persons, to which more is already spoken.

Answ. Though I find Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers,
termed Ephesians. 4.11. the gift of Christ; yet I do not find them said to be the
purchase of Christ's death as such: nor do I know how they can be truly said to
be the purchase Christ's death, as is meant, 1 Pet. 2.9. Tit. 2.14. so as that
every Apostle, etc. should be redeemed from iniquity, be of the people of Gods
possession, to show forth the virtues of God, etc. nor do I conceive to what
purpose this is brought in here by Mr. Bl. except he mean that the titles 1
Pet. 2.9. are given to the visible Church in respect of the Ministers, which is
so frivolous that I am unwilling to imagine it of him.

2. Says Mr. Bl. Mr. T. objects from that which is said of them, they are
called by God, by his power and virtue into his mavelous light, and v. 10.
that now had obtained mercy which they had not before; which cannot be affirmed
of any but true believ^rs and elect persons.

Answ. Men brought into a visible Church State, are brought into a mavelous
light. The seven golden candlesticks Rev. 1.20. had a mavelous light in their
lamps, and yet in some of those there were only a few names, that had not
defiled their garments; And this light is a mercy, the fruition of it a great
mercy, Psalm. 147.19, 20. Yea, it is applied by the prophet, Hos. ^.23. (whence
the Apostle gathers it) unto the mercy enjoyed in a visible Church communion,
as is not denied by Mr. T. himself.

Reply. Where it is that I deny not that Hos. 2.23. is applied unto the mercy
enjoyed in a visible Church communion, I remember not, yet if I did grant it
any where, I might understand it of saving mercy, proper to the elect, for that
is mercy enjoyed in a visible Church communion.

But Mr. Bls. answer is not to the argument as by me urged; For I did not form
it thus, they who have mavelous light, who have obtained a great mercy are
elect: But thus; they who are called by Gods power or virtue, which therefore
they are to show forth, out of darkness, into his mavelous light, which in
time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which had not
obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy, are the elect, which I confirmed
from Romans 9.23, 24, 25. where the same place of Hos. 2.23. is alleged and
applied only to the elect. But these things are said of those 1 Pet. 2.9.
Ergo. Which argument is confirmed by the words of Piscator above cited, and of
Beza in the place cited, where he says, Simulque ne quis ambigat sit electus
necne revocat nos Apostolus ad vocationem efficacem, ex qua aeternum illud
alioqui occultissimum electionis nostrae decretum certo intelligamu^, idque ex
una Dei gratuit^ eligentis and vocantis misere^ordia. The new Annot* praises]
or virtues. That is, that we might glorify God in our conversations, thereby
showing forth the abundant mercy and great power of God in calling us. Isa.
8.13. Darkness] that is ignorance, chapter 1.14. whereby is meant our sinful and
miserable estate by nature, under which men are kept, through ignorance of the
Gospel, Ephesians. 4* 18. and 5.8. Col. 1*13. His marvellous] hereby is meant our
estate of grace, through the effectual calling of God by the knowledge of the
truth. See 2 Cor. 4.6. Acts 13.47. and 26.18. called mavelous, because of the
great mystery of godliness, which is revealed in the Gospel; and called his,
because God reveals it. Dr. John Rainold Apol. these 15. Neque soluni e
tenebris in admirabi^em Dei lucem vocati, 1 Pet. 2.9. sed and electi, 1 Pet.
1.2. nuncupantur, atque genus electum, 1 Pet. 2*9. Now though mere visible
Church Members may have mavelous light, and obtain great mercy, yet they
cannot be said to be thus called, to be a people of God, and to obtain mercy,
as Peter there describes.

3. Says Mr. Bl. It is said that those persons did believe contradistinguished
to them that were disobedient and stumbled at the word: but such are only the
Elect, Ergo. Answ. So did all they that made shipwreck of the faith, 1 Timothy
1.19. So did Simon Magus, Act. 8.13. So did the hearers compared to the rocky
ground, Luke 8.13. And whereas it is said, these believers are
contradistinguished to them that were disobedient and stumbled at the word, it
fully makes against him; Those disobedient ones, are those that disallow
Christ, as we see v. 7. that reject Christ upon tender, that persist in Judaism
or Gentilism. All others no^ professed Jews nor Gentiles, are in that place
believers (and in all other Scriptures respective to visible prerogatives)
which are all visible church members.

Reply. It is true some^imes they are termed believers, who are mere visible
professors, but here the believers are such as to whom Christ is precious, and
are contradistinguished to them that were disobedient and stumbled ^t the word,
unto which also they were appointed (which Mr. Bl. did ill to leave out) which
shows they were reprobates appointed to perish, and consequently the
contradistinguished believers are such as are saved, which cannot be said of
them that ma^e shipwreck of the faith, or Simon Magus. Which is confirmed from
v. 9, 10. which Mr. Bl. confesses is understood of the same men, v. 3. and
under the same notion a^ these, v. 9. the Apostle brings his speech to no full
period till v. 11. which reasons are confirmed by the note of Diodat^ on 1 Pet.
2.7. It is that precious thing, namely, that precious foundation whereof Isaiah
speaks, which the text leads to, and is verified only of the elect, to whom
alone Christ i^ the precious foundation. And the other by the note of Beza on
v. 8. Preterea particula (...) adjuncta and quod mox subjicit, vos autem genu^
electum nonne manifestam antithesin ostendit rosorum ad d^cus and ad d^deeus
conditorum, sicut credentes and immorigeros ante opposuerat? Nor is what is
said, that they disallowed Christ, v. 7. any thing against this* that they that
believed, v 7. were true believers and elect, any more then it follows all that
are mere visible professors are termed believers ordained to eternal life, Acts
13.48. because they are contradistinguished to those who re^ected the word of
God, and judged themselves unworthy of eternal life, v. 46*

4. Says Mr. Bl. They are said to be built as living stones, etc which can
agree to none, but elect persons and true believers. Answ. That is left out in
the quotation of this t^xt, which would wholly spoil the argument, and carry it
on the other h^nd; namely those words, to whom coming as unto a living stone.
The Apostle shows them the way, and points out the condition called for; which
being done, they are then built as living stones: And this implies that it was
so with some, but not with others. Here is that which is done by some and and
neglected by others, and their happiness upon discharge of their duty; so that
if Mr. T. his confidences were not far higher then his arguments, he might well
sit down, and fairly acknowledge that these titles are giv^n to visible
Church Members.

Repl. Mr. T. his confidences are strengthened by Mr. Bls. slight answers to
his arguments. His argument was, They who are said to be built as living sto^es
on Christ the living stone, a spiritual house, a holy priesthood to offer up
spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, they are true believers
and elect persons. But such are those v. 5. who are termed a holy nation, v. 9.
Ergo. The major is proved from this, that these things can agree to no other;
the minor from Mr. Bls. own words cited before, that they are the same, v. 3.
and 9. the Apostle not bringing his speech to a full period till v. 11. Thus
Dr. John Rainold, the^^ 4. 24. ap^lies this passage only to the elect. And Mr.
John Geree, Vindic. Vind. calls it a misapplication of 1 Pet 2.5. to the
visible Kingdom, which expressly note the spiritual house, chapter 5. page 20, New
Annot. on v. 5. lively stones] that is, as having life from him. See v. 4.
Diodati annot. on 1 Pet. 2.5. Lively stones] namely participating of that
foresaid life of Christ; and therefore opposite to the dead stones of the
material temple. Are built up] or be ye built up. An holy priesthood] that is
to say, a multitude and company of priests. By Jesus] whose perfect
righteousness and intercession gains all Gods grace to believers and to their
works. Now what says Mr. Bl to this? He neither denies major nor minor; But
tells us, that those words, to whom coming as unto a living-stone, if they had
been cited would wholly spoil the argument, and carry it on the other hand;
which is very strange to me, who find those words thus intepreted by the new
^nnot. v. 4. Comming] that is by faith* See Joh. 6.35. and 5.43, 44, 45. Heb.
10.22. By Diodati, v. 4. To whom] that is to say, being united to the Lord
Jesus, and made his members by a lively faith, that they should prove that the
titles 1 Pet 2.5. are given to mere visib^e Church members, as i^ any mere
visible Churchmember did come to Christ as a living stone by a lively faith,
and were a living stone, built up a spiritual house, etc. But let us view Mr.
Ils reasons. 1. The Apostle shows them the way, and points out the condition
called for; which being done, they are then built as living stones. But 1. it
is plain that the Apostle speaks of them as built up already, (...), ye are
built up, as our translation best reads it, not as of a thing to be done: and
this is confirmed in that v 2. they are said to ^e new born babes, ver. 3. to
have tasted how gracious the Lord is, chapter 1.22. to have purified their souls,
v. 23. to be born again. And for (...), it may be as well read unto whom being
comen, as unto whom coming. And so Piscal. in anal. loci. Argumentorum unum
est a pari, videl a vocationis initio, quod significat qu^m ait, eos jam ad
Dominum accessisse, id est fide eum recepisse, atque it a super eum adificari
caepisse, and therefore notes more then the way and condition called for, even
the thing already begun. 2. But had the Apostle showed only the way and
coodition called for, what had this been to prove that the titles, v. 5. are
given to mere visible Church members? Sure nothing at all; for were they comen,
or coming, or to come, their coming must have been by faith, and they had not
been living stones, built up a spiritual house, nor a holy priesthood to offer
up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, without a lively
faith and election: And therefore neither Mr. Ils. concei^ being granted, i^ it
proved that any other then elect and true believers are meant 1 Pet. 2.^. 2.
Says Mr. Bl. And this implies that it was so with some, who did their duty and
were happy, but not with others who neglected. But 1. how those words, unto
whom coming as unto a living stone, implies the neglect of duty, I am yet to
learn: If they did note a condition, yet they could imply only a possibility
of neglect, not that some did neglect. 2. If some did neglect, yet this is
nothing to prove that ver. 5. which is said only of those that did come and so
were happy, the titles are given to mere visible professors. The rest of the
Chapter is to vindicate himself from what I said, that I ha^dly believe any
approved Writer joins with him in his interpretation. To which he says, 1. It
is not like my confidence, who dare affront the body of protestant Divines
(...) Tenants that ex professo they have handled against the Papists. Answ.
That I do so is not showed; that I dare do so when I have truth on my side, is
no vice. If Mr. Bls. reasons had been good, his singularity had not been
culpable. 2. He would insinuate that in my interpretation I follow Escius and
Gerhard, whom I neither have, nor ever made use of about this text. 3. That he
has Mr. Ball, whose book I now have not, and his words cited by Mr. Bl. seem
not to speak any thing of 1 Pet. 2.9.10. 4. That A Lapide, is wholly for him,
to whom he says I use to be beholding. But I think the words of A Lapide cited
by him, are not clear for him; nor do I use to be beholding to A Lapide, he
being an Author I have not, nor do I remember that I have made use of him but
in the first part of the Review, 22. only about 1 Cor. 7, 14. 5. That Gerhard
mentions others that understand 1 Pet. 2.9. of common and general ele^^ion. But
whether approved Writers or not, he does not say, so that my words stand good,
notwithstanding Mr. Bls. vindication of himself, his injurious insinuations of
me, and his futile arguments and answers about 1 Pet. 2.9.

Mr. Bl. chapter 28. proceeds in proving. That the Covenant of grace in Gospel
times admits Christians in profession, in a state of unregeneration, and is not
limited in the bounds of it to the elect regenerate* And 1. he argues from four
terms, believers, saints, disciples, christans, which he proves out of
Scripture to be g^ven to persons not elect (which is not denied) and they imply
a Covenant undeniably: and this he proves from my confession, that the titles
men ioned by Peter 1 Pet 2.9. from Moses, argue a people in Covenant, and
therefore I am so shie to confess them to belong to visible professors: But
those titles are as high as these, and as undeniably implying a Covenant are
given to visible professors; those then even according to me are on this
account in Covenant with God.

Answ. Mr. Bl. does but mock the Reader, and abuse me, by speaking of a
confession which he does not show, and by assigning a reason of my not
confessing the titles, 1 Pet. 2.9. not to belong to visible professors, which
is never given by me, but imagined by himself. As I said before, so I say
again, though I hold those who are (as 1 Pet. 2.9. the the terms are used) a
chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, are in
Covenant with God, as having Gods Covenant of Evangelical grace made with them;
yet I deny that the terms imply a Covenant. And as for the other four terms Mr.
Bl* alleges to prove mere visible professors being in Covenant, he does in
like manner mock his Reader, 1. not telling what Covenant those terms imply, 2.
nor how they imply it, 3. nor on whose part they imply it, whether on the
persons part thus entitled, or on Gods, which is the only thing in question,
Whether God have made his Covynant of grace in Gospel times with any non-elect?
which sure those terms imply not, since they imply either the act; as Believers
and Disciples; or the state, as Saints and Christians, of the persons entitled;
not any act of God, covenanting or promising to them Gospel grace. 4. The proof
likewise from my confession (if it were so) is as vain: For the terms Christ,
holy Angels, only begotten Son of God etc* are as high as those 1 Pet. 2.9.
yet they do not imply a Covenant by my confession; and therefore I may well
deny his inference to be my confession, though I should have yielded that which
he says I confess to be mine.

2. Mr. Bl. argues from some absurdities. 1. This restriction of the Covenant
makes an utter confusion between the Covenant it self and the conditions of it;
or the Covenant it self, and the duties required in it; between our entrance
into Covenant, and our observation of it, or walking up in faithfulness to it:
For there are that enter and keep Covenant with God, Psalm. 44.17, 18. Psalm.
103.17, 18. And there are those that break Covenant, Psalm. 78.10, 37. Jer.
34.18, 19, 20. Levit. 26.2^. Isa. 24.5. Now according to this opinion,
regeneration is our entrance into Covenant, and regeneration is our keeping of
Covenant; before regeneration we make no Covenant, after regeneration we break
no Covenant, there is no such thing as Covenant breaking: All this makes an
utter confusion in the Covenant.

Answ. They that hold, that the Covenant of grace in Gospel times is limited to
the elect regenerate, do not think either regeneration our entrance into
Covenant, or our keeping of Covenant, or that before regeneration we make no
Covenant, or after regeneration we break no Covenant, or that there is no such
thing as Covenant breaking; all these are Mr. Bls, fictions, and so is his
imputation of making an utter confusion in the Covenant. But this they hold,
that God enters none into his Covenant of Evangelical grace but regenerate
persons, and that they do all keep Covenant; and that though many before
regeneration make Covenant with God, and break that Covenant they make, and so
there is Covenant breaking on their part, yet that God keeps the Covenant of
Evangelical grace with those he makes it, and that no reg^nerate person does so
break it as to be ever cast out of Gods Covenant. And for Mr. Bls. texts, they
are impertinent to prove that after regeneration any do break the Covenant of
Evangelical grace God has made. For Psalm. 78.10, 37. Levit. 26.25. Isa, 24.25.
do speak expressly of breaking the Covenant of the Law made with the people of
Israel in mount Sinai, which is another Covenant then the new or Evangelical
Covenant, Heb. 8.9, 10. But our question is of the Covenant of grace in Gospel
times* And Jer. 34.18, 19, 20* is ridiculously alleged, since it speaks not of
the Covenant Evangelical, but of the particular Covenant which Zedekiah and the
Princes of Judah made to let their Hebrew servants go free, which they brake
contrary to the Law. Yet to show Mr. Bls. futility in arguing there is no
consequence in this reasoning. In men's Covenants there are that enter Covenant
and keep it, and others that in like manner do enter into Covenant and not keep
it, and so men enter into Covenant with God, and some keep it, and some not,
therefore they that hold that God makes his Covenant of Evangelical grace only
with the elect regenerate, do confound the Covenant it self and the conditions
of it, or the duties required in it, or the entrance into Covenant and our
observation of it, or walking up in faithfulness to it. For the distinction
remains still between all these, though they be eonjoyned in the same persons,
as heat and light are distinct though together in flame, and justification and
sanctification though conjoined in the same persons. Yea, since Mr. Bl. holds
some that enter into Covenant are steadfast in it, he makes according to his own
superficial arguing the same confusion we do, and so falls into the same
imagined absurdity.

The 2d. absurdity Mr. Bl. would fasten on the tenet that the Covenant of grace
in Gospel times is limited to the elect, is; that then there is no such thing
as an hypocrite in the world, as in reference toward God; For an hypocrite is
one that personates the man that he is not, an hypocrite respective to religion
and in Scripture use of the phrase, is one that pretends for God, and is not
Gods; now according to this opinion, that only regenerate men are in Covenant,
there is no such thing as an hypocrite, no such sin as hypocrisi; where the
Gospel is preached, God makes tender of himself in Covenant, and in case none
but regenerate persons enter Covenant, then only they take upon them the
persons of people in relation to him.

Answ. If Mr. Bl. and other Paedobaptists had any will to deal ^onestly, as men
that sought to clear truth, and not to pervert read^rs, they would, being so
often particularly in my Postscript 6. admonished, distinguish of being in
Covenant by their own a^t of covenanting, and G^ds act of promising. I never
den^ed, that in respect of their own act of ^ovenanting, mere visible
professors may b^ said to be in Covenant with God, but denied that in resp^ct
of Gods act of promising (which alone was in question, since the question being
of infants, they cannot be said to be in Covenant with God by their ow^ act of
covenanting, but only by Gods act of promising) any other ^hen elect persons
are in Covenant with God* Now I grant it, that of them to whom the
Gospel Covenant is made by God, there is none an hypocrite; but there be
hypocrites of those that enter into Covenant with God; that is, of those that
promise to be Gods and are no^; to whom, though God tenders himself in
Covenant, yet he makes no Covenant or promise to them of Evangelical grace, and
therefore notwithstanding this imagined absurdity, yet the position is true,
that the Covenant of grace in Gospel times, as made by God to men, is limited
to the elect.

The 3d. absurdity is, then no Minister in any Church may baptize any person,
for none can now discern inf^llibly whether a person be regenerate, and Mr. Bl.
finds Christ giving charge to disciple Nations, and to baptize them, but
finds him not giving Commission, that when in the judgment of charity men
have cause to conceive them to be disciples, then to baptize them. The Apostles
staid not for observation of those signs, that might in a well-grounded
chari^y persuade that they were regenerate persons. And these that fix it here,
^oo ordinarily make interests the chief ground to carry their charity to a more
favorable construction. They that are most like to make a party with them, or
drive on interest their way, must be ^udged persons meet for baptism; of this
in a shor^ time we have large experience. Those that gather up Churches, and
initiate them by baptism (the way of the Apostles I confess, in case that they
would make good that they have to deal with Heathens, and therefore a way of
more color then theirs, that set up new Churches, and retain the old baptism)
we see what manner of saints are received among them, such that civil persons
(respective to sobriety, chastity, or upright dealing with men) cannot without
stain of their reputation* make their companions.

Answ. Paedobaptists do usually plead, that infants are in the Covenant of
grace, therefore they are to be baptized. The antecedent can be meant of being
in the Covenant of grace no otherwise then by Gods act of promise, to be the
God of a believers seed; therefore they make the being in Covenant by Gods act
of promise to be a persons God, the rule of baptizing. Now I assert, that God
has not promised to be a God to any man or his seed in respect of Evangelical
grace, but the elect. Therefore this absurdity is justly charged on the
Paedobaptists, that according to their hypotheses, no Minister can baptize any
infant in fait^. For he must ^aptize according to them, only those infants
that are in Covenant, and whom he knows to be in Covenant; but those infants
only are in Covenant who are elect, and no Minister can know which infant is
elect, or in Covenant with God, which not, all infants are not, no not of
believers, not all Abraham's, or Isaacs, Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
Therefore according to this rule no Paedobaptist can baptize any infant in
faith, and a judgment of charity Mr. M. Mr. Bl. and others agree and that
according to truth, is not it we are to baptize by. So that this absurdity does
unavoidably follow on Paedobaptists opinion, which Mr. Bl. endeavors, but in
vain, to fasten on us, who do often disclaim baptizing persons upon their being
in Covenant with God by his act of promise to be their God, as our rule; and do
continually assert our baptizing persons, because disciples by profession, and
by reason of their own covenanting to follow Christ (which Mr. Bl. confesses
to be according to Christ's Commission, and the Apostles way in dealing with
Heathens) and therefore the absurdity follows not our opinion, but the
Paedobaptists, who can baptize no infant by their rule, because they cannot
know any infant whom they are to baptize to be in the Covenant of grace. As for
Mr. Bls. confession, that our practice is the way of the Apostles in case we
would make good that we have to deal with Heathens, I wonder Mr. Bl. a learned
man, should require us to make good that which of it self is so manifest. For
sure we have to deal with Heathens or with Jews, si^h all the men in the world
are either Heathens, that is (...) of the Nations, or Jews: but me thinks he
should not say we have to de^l wi^h Jews, therefore we have to deal with
Heathens, and consequently our practice is the way of the Apostles, by Mr. Bls.
own confession. To confine the term [ heathens] only to them that are not
Christians in name, is indeed according to the vulgar speech, but besides the
Scripture use, which Mr. Bl. me thinks in his writing should have followed. But
if Mr. Bl. mean i^ in the vulgar sense, it is easy to make it good that no
Englishman or his child is a Christian till he be made a disciple by preaching
the Gospel* since to be a disciple of Christ and a Christian are terms of the
same sense, Acts. 11.26. Yet in b^ptizing by Christ's commission and the
Apostles practice, th^re is no difference made between Jews and Heathens, both
are to be baptized upon their believing, Mark. 16.16. neither the one nor the
other were, or were to be bap^ized by the Apostles, without their own personal
profession of faith. Our way then by Mr. Bls. own confession is the way of the
Apostles. His confession also is true, that our way is of more color then
theirs that set up new Churches, and retain the old baptism, for acknowledging
them church members at Bap^ism, and not admitting them as church members though
without scandal, is after their own principles to contradict themselves; and to
set up Churches in a congregational way, disclaiming the National and
Parochial, and yet to admit infants to Baptism by virtue of Circumcision, and
Abraham's covenant and church-gathering, what is it but to dissert that in
practice which they plead in dispute, and to make the frame of the national
Church Jewish, the rule of the Christ an Church catholic Nor have
Presbyterians any color for their reformation of Baptism or the Lords supper,
if they will stick to their allegations of taking a rule for Baptism from
Circumcision, or of the Lords Supper from the Passover; for, to them all sorts
whether ignorant or scandalous were admitted; and if we must retain whom the
Jewish Church re^ained as visible church members, there will be no
Ecclesiastical juridica^ excommunicat^on for moral miscarriages, there being
(...) ^uch among them. As for what Mr. Bl. charge the baptized C^urches with,
of the unholin^ss of their members* though I can say litt^e of those near Mr.
Bl. (if there be an) yet I am able to say of some and Mr. Baxter himself has
in print said somewhat of one of the Churches, which might refute this calumny,
and I think there are many able to testify of the holy conversation of many of
the Churches of baptized persons, however Mr. Baxter imagines they in the end
prove wicked. However, we do neither in practice nor opinion maintain such
impure Churches of ignorant and vicious persons as Mr. Bl. Vindic. Faed. chapter
47. does, and Presbyterians commonly do: Nor is it likely, the worst of the
baptized Churches should be worse then the ordinary sort of the Paedobaptists
Churches of Mr. Bls. way.

Chap 29. Mr. Bl. answers to some objections against his assertion. 1. That
regenerate persons only are in New Testament times honored with the name of
the people of God, they therefore only are in Covenant* To which he answers,
1. That there are terms equivalent, Believers, Saints, Disciples, and
Christians, which are given to the unregenerate. To which I reply, that though
this argument be not mine, yet it may be said, that the term Gods people does
rather imply being in Covenant wi^h God then the other terms. But I think the
argument not cogent, since the term [my people] does not in the force of the
word necessarily import a Covenant of God, and men man be conceived his people
by election, or purchase, without a Covenant, and therefore own it not.

2 ly. Says he, It is not often that that phrase is found in New Testament
Scriptures, with such restriction only to regenerate persons. He denies not
Tit. 2.14. is taken for a people separate by grace out of the state of nature:
But he is not resolved whether Revel. 21.3. serve to purpose, it being in
dispute whether to be fulfilled on earth or in heaven; if on earth, then it
sets out a singular glory in the Church through Ordinances in purity, yet with
a mixture of close hypocrites. and for Christ's personal reign on earth, that he
lets go as the opinion of others, of a considerable part of whom he is not very
well conceited it seems.

Answ. His not denying Tit. 2.14. to (...) pregnant* and being alleged by me
as the parallel place to 1 Pet. 2.9. confirms m^ restriction of the titles
there used ^o ^he regenerate. And ^e thin^s the promises, Revel. 21.3, 4. That
God would be their God with them, that he would wipe away all tears from their
eyes, there should be no more death, nor crying, nor labor, should be
sufficient to prove the people of God there meant to be only the regenerate.
And me thinks Matthew. 1.21. and 2.6* Luke 1.17, 68, 77. and 2.32. and 7.16. Acts
15.14. and 18.10. Romans 9.25. and 11.1* and 15.10* 2 Cor. 6.16. Heb. 4, 9* and
8.10. 1 Pet. 2.10. Revel. 18.4. the term [ my people or Gods people] should be
restrained to the elect.

3 ly. Says he, My people, or people of God, is us^d more frequently in the N.
T. without restriction to the elect regenerate. He alleges three places, 2
Cor. 6.^6. which with him is plain quoted from Levit. 26.16. where it is a
national promise, to be understood of Gods visible abode in ordinances, being
tendered to those that were over bu^^e w^^h Idols, from which he disswades with
this argument, that they were the temple of the Lord, separate of God for his
worship and servic^, and the promise is no more then is made good to visible
Churches, Revel. 2.1. whereof some members were not regenerate.

Answ. To dwell in them to walk in them, to be their God, and they to be his
people, the temple of the living God, 2 Cor 6.16. whom he receives, to whom he
is a father, and they his sons and daughters, cannot be meant of any other then
the elect: For they only are the temple of God in which he dwells, who have h^s
spirit, 1 Cor. 3 16, 17. and 6.19. (a bare separation by outward cal^ing to his
worship and service is not enough) which is the most fo^cible argument to
diss^ade from meddling with Idols. However it be Levit. 26.16. here i^ is not a
national promise, but a promise to particula^ persons, separate from the rest
of the nation, v. 17. Nor can it be understood of Gods visible abode in
ordinances, but in persons who were holy; nor is it made to every visible
Church, in r^spect of every visible member: Nor is the promise of Chrst,
walking, Revel. 2.1. so much as this of Gods dwelling in them.

The 2d. he alleges is Romans 9.25. which is to be understood no otherwise,
where the call of the ten Tribes, from Hos, 1* 10. and 2.23. is applied to the
call of the Gentiles into a Church state and condition. And to the objection
from Romans 9.23. he says, God sets up visible ^rd^nances, and calls to a Church
state as is there prophesied, that he may there work to himself a people of
invisible relation, that thereby he may make them vessels of mercy, having a
sore prepared them to glory.

Answ. The call, Rom 9.25. is not as Mr. Bl seems to conceive, an outwa^d
refusable calling into a visible Church state by visible ordinances; but as v.
7, 8, 11, 24, 26. calling is effectual calling, which gives being to the
called, and is never refused, but proper to the elect onel^: Which is apparent
from v. 24. where he says (...) whom also, which can have reference to ^one
but vessels of mercy mentioned v. 23* who are also sons of the living God, v.
26. Which being ^rged by me ^n my Postscript. sect. 10. and not refelled,
stands as a firm (...) that the people of God there are only elect ones, or as
Mr. Bl. speaks, a people of invisible relation, vessels of mercy ^so^e prepared
to glory.

The 3d he all^dgeth is Revel. 18.4. where all professors of faith are included
in that exhortation, and so all Ministers are to press it* B^t though it were
the duty of all, yea of them that were not professors of faith, to qui^
Babylon; yet the invitation is a fruit of Gods special care by a voice from
heaven, and therefore is more ^hen an exhortation to a commoh duty, to wit, a
special effectual call, whereby Gods people, that is his elect ones; shall be
brought out of Babylon as Lot out of Sodom, and is to be conceived of the elect
only, not of hypocritical professors of faith. So that Mr. Bl. has not
brought one Text out of the New Testament, in which [ Gods people] is applied
to mere visible professors; and yet if these had served his turn, his assertion
had been false, as is showed by the number of places wherein [Gods people] is
limited to the elect.

Another objection is out of Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. which he says is set up
against all New Testament light, to prove that none must be of the called of
God in^o Covenant, for fruition of Church privileges, but those that are
r^generate: Men in Old Testament Covenan^ broke Covenant, as is there expressed;
men in the new Covenant shall keep Covenanant, and these are only the elect
and regenerate.

Answ. The Text joined with Heb 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. proves that God makes his new
Covenant with none but those who keep it, who are the elect only. I prod^ce it
not to prove (as Mr. Bl. suggests of some) that none must be of the called of
God into Covenant, for fruition of Church privileges, but those that are
regenerate; nor to prove that none shall enter Covenant and transgress it* that
the Covenant that now is, is not in any possibility to be transgrest: but to
prove, that no^e to whom God makes his new Covenant do break it; which the
Author to the Hebrews does affirm, in that he differences this from the former
Covenant, that the former was faulty, or occasioned God to complain that it was
broken; but this is such as that to take away occasion of complaint for breach
of it, God makes provision by better promises, that it shall not be broken by
those to whom it is made. Nor does it hence follow, as Mr. Bl. speaks (this
being the characteristical difference) that as none in New Testament times
enter Covenant, but they keep Covenant; so none in Old Testament times were in
Covenant, but did transgress it: For we do not say as he perverts the position,
that none in New Testament times enter Covenant but they keep Covenant; we know
many have by their profession and baptism entered into Covenant, and have no^
kept i^: but this we say, that God mak^s with none his new Covenant, whether in
New Testament times, or in Old Testament times, but they do keep it; and that
this is the characteristi^al difference between the Old and New Covenant (not
Old and New Testament times) which are in the Epistle to the Romans and
Galatians called the Law and the Promises; that the one might be and was
broken, yet the other is and shall be kept by those to whom it is made, because
of Gods undertaking to write his Laws in their hearts. As for an outward
Covenant made by God distinct from these and yet in force, it is Mr. Bls.
figment as Mr. B. has proved in his Apol. against Mr. Bl. page 66, 67, ^03,
etc. As for the answers, 1. that the Covenant, Jer. 3^.31, 31, 33. is not a
Covenant ^roperly so called, it is refuted before, Sect. 33. as I remember. 2.
That it is not the whole of the Covenant. But if it be but a part, it is made
only to the elect, the other part whatever it be being made to none other. 3.
If the new Covenant be another Covenant, then there must be two distinct Gospel
Covenants. But this is said upon ^he mi^take refuted Sect. 43. that the
Covenant at Mount Sinai with the Jews was the Gospel Covenant. I have again
viewed page 105, 106, 107. of Mr. Bls. answer to my Letter, and do not find any
explication of the promises Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. which may show that the
promises there are made to any but the elect; nor do I find an explication of
them, whereby to know how he would have them understood, but of the term [ new
Covenant] which he would have understood as if it were meant only of a clearer
explication of the old Covenant not well understood before, as Joh. 13.34. the
new commandment is a clearer explication then was formerly. But neither is
true: For the new commandment Joh. 13.34. is not so called from a new
explication, but a new motive, his own example, as the very words show: And the
new Covenant is so called, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33. not from a clearer explic^tion,
bu^ better promises, Heb. 8.6. And I still profess, that I find not that Mr.
Bls. answer is quit from enervating the argument for effectual grace and
perseverance in it, since he makes the Covenant to be to the non-elect; nor does
he demonstrate, that I cannot bui^d effectual grace and perseverance on that
text, making it a distinct Covenant from the first, without the o^erthrow of
effectual grace and perseverance in Old Testam^nt times. Thus much for answer
to those three Chapters of Mr. Bl. he that would see more of Mr. Bls. mistakes
about the Covenant, may read Mr. Baxters Book before quoted.

SECT. XLVII. Mr. Bls. Vindic. F^ed. Chapter 34. Concerning the stating the
question of the Birth-priviledge of the issue of ^elievers, is examined; and
his Objections against my stating it removed.
MR. Bl. chapter 34. complains, that my confusion has mudded the way, that my
mixture brings a cloud upon all] he might as well say light is darkness. He
says, I undertake a full Comment upon these words of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7.
Exercit. page 3. in which the Reader will not find this undertaking. He sets
down my distinction of Abraham's seed Exercit page 3. and then says, here by
the way Mr. T. mistakes himself. 1. In casting Ishmael out of Covenant in that
manner, that all the time of his Circumcision he had not title to it, to that
end that he might make (were it possible) the Covenant and the Seal distinct of
themselves, without any relation one to the other, conceiving some to be sealed
that were never in Covenant, and some to be in Covenant that were never sealed.
Ishmael was in Covenant, as was Esau at his Circumcision, and his Circumcision
does w^tness i^, Genesis 17.11.

Answ. I do assert, that ^he Covenant Genesis 17* was not made with Ishmael, for
none of the promi^es there did belong to him, and I have further proved it f^o^
v. 19 ^0, 21. Heb. 11.9, etc. though not to make the Covenant and Seal distinct
of themselves, without any relation one to another; yet conceiving some were to
be circumcised that were never in Covenant, and viceversa. But Mr. Bl. thinks
it proved that Ishmael was in Covenant, because he was circumcised, for it is
said, Circumcision shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you, Genesis
17.11. To which ^ said, the Covenant was between God and Abraham and his seed
in their generations, v. 7. and this seed is declared exc^^sively of Ishmael to
be ^saac, v. 2^. and them that should be of him, Genesis 21.12. Romans 9.7, 8.
Though every persons Circumcision after Gods appointment was a token of the
Covenant God made, yet not of the Covenant God made between himself and the
circumcised: for the covenant of God with Abraham was not to ev^ry circumcis^d
stranger, nor to every circumcised child, but between God, and ^braham and ^is
seed in their generations which should be called in ^saac, and accordingly the
covenant to be kept, v. 1^. is said to be between God and Abraham and Sarah,
and Abraham's seed. ^areus com. on Genesis 17.7. Two heads there are of the
Covenant, God and Abraham; on Abraham's part also his seed or posterity are
comprehended. But the seed is understood according to the limitations of
Scripture here, and in other places, Genesis 17.21. and ^1.12. Romans 9.7, 8. What
therefore is here added in their generations* extends not the Covenant to
Ishmaelites, Idumaeans, and Keturaeans. There is no truth in that which Mr. Bl.
adds, men in Covenant were the ^dequate subject of Circumcision, and are of
Baptism. For the females and the males of the seventh day were in Covenant, yet
not subjects of Circumcision; many Proselytes and others were the subjects of
Circumcision, though not in Covenant. Nor is the reason why either this or that
person was to be circumcised, and is now to be baptized his being in Covenant,
but the command of God concerning them whether they be in Covenant with God or
no* in that sense in which Paedobaptists mean when they say infants are in
covenant, because of Gods covenant made to them without their own covenant, as
has been often proved. The casting out which I observe Apol. 114. of Ishmael
does not sufficiently argue (as Mr. Bl. says) that Ishmael was once in
Covenant, but that he was once in Abraham's house, from whence he was cast out.

2 ly. Says Mr. Bl. Mr. T. does i^l in laying upon Ishmael the brand of
Bastardy, as though he were a son of whoredoms to faithful Abraham; Co^cubines
in Scripture have the name of Wives, and their seed was ever accounted
legitimate* neither will this serve his p^rpose at all to argue Ishmael out of
covenant.

Answ. I ter^ed Ishmael Abraham's base natural seed, but not to argue him out of
covenant, nor b^ terming him base did I term him the son of whoredoms, but of
an unlawful bed. And though Concubines in Scripture have the name of Wives, and
whores are usually called those that are common to more then one, and the sons
of Concubines counted le^itimate in respect of inheritances, yet be that should
say tha^ Concubines were lawful Wives, and their children legitimate before
God, must maintain the lawfulness of Concubinate and Polygamy in the
P^triarchs, which our Lord Christ's words g^insay, Matthew. 19.4, 5, 6.

M. Bl. having recited my words Exercit. page 3. concerning the different seed
of Abraham, and the different manner of Gods promise to be God ^o them, he
(...) after his calumniating manner infers: So that it evidently appears, that
he casts out all the natural seed of Abraham ( legitimate or base, as he calls
them, inheriting or not inheriting) from any ^itle to that Covenant* save in
domestic and political benefits. Which if true, I should cast ou^ Isaac,
Jacob, David, Christ Jesus himself from any title to that Covenant Genesis 17.7.
save in domestic and political benefits: which is so gross a thing, and so
manifest a falsehood, that I wonder Mr. Bl. has the face to write such a thing
of me, and to pervert my words so palpably; but that I perceive he cares little
how he hazards his own credit, so he may impair mine. I say, that God promises
he will be a God to Christ, impartin^ in him blessing to all nations of the
earth, to the spiritual seed of ^braham in Evangelical benefits; to the natural
seed inheriting in domestic and political benefits. How does it sufficiently
appear hence, that I cast out all the natural seed of Abraham from any title to
that Covenant, save in domestic and political b^nefits? Does it follow, that
because I assign Ev^ngelical benefits to Abraham's spiritua^ seed, I deny any
of his natural seed to be his spiritual?

To this loud calu^ny, he adjoyns his own gross p^sition in these words. Here I
shall undertake a position in full opposition, I will establish my Covenant,
etc. Genesis 17.7. in their fullest latitude as they are there spoken* in the
largest comprehension (which according to Scripture they can be taken) are
entered with all the natural seed of Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob. Which if true,
then God breaks his word if he be not a God in spiritual, and all other
bl^ssings comprehended under the phrase, will be a God to thee and thy seed; to
Judas, Ahab, the Pharisees that said Christ ca^^ out devils by the help of
devils, and so blasphemed the Holy Ghost, the Jews that rejected Christ, in
effectual calling, justifying, raising to eternal life, which the Scripture
comprehends under that phrase of being a God to a person, Romans 9.11. Gal. 3.16.
Luke 20.37, 38. He says, the confirmation of this position, is a matter of
ease if any. Which I acknowledge, if by [ confirmation] be meant such as Mr.
Bl. in his dictating and flirting fashion uses to ^onfirm things; not
distinctly opening terms, nor the meaning of the texts he brings, nor showing
by any Logical deduction the pertinency of them to prove his position. But I
shall as soon expe^^ a new world in the Moon proved as that position, by any
true Logical deduction out of Scripture. He talks of my trifling circumstances
in my Examen, and foul miscarriage in my stating of the question, even in that
which was most necessary according to the rule of all Logicians, that in ever
consideration of things, distinction of ambiguous terms should be used (...)
before any definition, proposition, proof, or answer be made, as Keche^m. syst.
Log. l. 1. sect post. c 1. out of Cicero, Boethius, Aristotle, Galen, etc shows;
and for endeavoring to bring Mr. M. to state his ^wn proposition without
ambiguity, that I might know what to de^y or grant, which Mr. Bl. terms ineptly
my soul miscarriage in my stating of the question, when I stated not a question
at all, but only so^ght to find out how Mr, M. meant his 2d. concl. in his
Sermon. But Mr. Bl. will have his position limited. An^ he speaks thus. 1. We
take not in all the natural seed of Abraham, as the position plainly
expresses, but the seed by promise, which I understand not of the elect or
regenerate seed: but of that seed which G^d by miracle according to promise)
gave to Abraham by ^arah, when she was past years of child bearing.

Answ. 1. If he take not in all the natural seed of Abraham, as comprehended in
that promise Genesis 17.7. but the seed by promise, then the Covenant Genesis 17.7.
was never made to Ishmael, which was signified by circumcision, and
consequently though Ishmael was circumcised, yet he was never in covenant, and
Mr. Bls position is false, men in Covenan^ are the adequate subject of
Circumcision. 2. If he understand not by [the children of the promise Romans
9.8.] the elect or regenerate, then he does not understand as the Apostle does,
who declares v. 11 that the seed v. 7. who are children of the promise v* 8.
are such as are by Gods calling according to Gods purpose of election, v. 11.
whom ^e loves, v. 13, has mercy and compassion on, v. 15. and deserts the
contra^^monstrants, as I have often showed in this and other writings. 3. If he
understand the seed by promise only of that which God by miracle (according to
promise) gave to Abraham by Sarah, when she was past years of child-^earing,
then h^ asserts the Covenant Genesis 17.7. in the fullest latitude to be made
wholly to Isaac, no to Jacob, or any other, for no other but Isaac individually
taken was that seed which God by miracle (according to promise) gave to Abraham
by Sarah, when she was past years of child bearing.

Mr. Bl. adds, The natural posterity (which was the birth by promise) we only
understand; and so the Apostle explains it* Romans 9.7, 8. neither, etc.

Answ. If Mr. Bl. understand only Genesis 17.7. by [the seed of Abraham] the
natural posterity (which was the birth by promise) and that according to Mr.
Bls. description in the words immediately precedent is no other then individual
Isaac, then he takes in no other then ^saac into the Covenant Genesis 17*7. as
meant by Abraham's seed. Now the A^ostle is so far from explaining it so, that
the contrary is most true* For 1. the Apostle expressly says, that is they
which are the children of the flesh, that is begotten by m^er natural
generation of Abraham which is all one with the natural posterity of Ab^aham,
these are not the children of God, that is those to whom the promise is made
Genesis 17.7. as the contradistinction to the children of the promise in the
latter part of v* 8. shows* And that by [ children of the flesh] are me^nt mere
natural posterity appears in that v. 7. which is explained v. 8. the term [ the
seed of Abraham] is put as equipolent to [ children of the flesh,] which
understood any otherwise then thus [^he seed or children of Abraham by mere
n^tural generation] should exclude Isaac also, who was the natural posterity of
Abraham, and so the seed of Abraham, but not by mere natural generation. 2. If
the Apostle had explained the seed, Genesis 17.7. of the natural posterity only,
which was the birth by promise (which according to Mr. Bls. description can be
no more then individual Isaac) then he had said Romans 9.8. but the child of the
promise is counted for the seed, not as he does in the plural number, the
children of the promise, (by whom are meant all elect persons, who are by
su^ernatural calling counted by God for the seed of the Gentiles as well as the
Jews, as he affirms v. 24.) are counted for the seed to whom the promise Genesis
17.7. is made. But Mr. Bl. ^oes on thus.

Where children of God is taken in the same latitude as adoption, v. 4.
comprizing all the visible body of the Jews, as it is also taken, Deuteronomy. 14.1.

Answ. ^he right reading (as I have before proved) of Romans 9 4. should be [
whose was the adoption] and this is meant indeed of the visible body of
Israelites in former generations, excluding the present; nor do I deny it to be
so me^nt, Deuteronomy. 14.1. but not so as either then or at any time comprizing every
particular Jew, but as Mr. Bl. himself rightly explaineth such passages in his
answer to my letter page 51. (though (...) applied to Romans 9.25, 26.) the
denomination being a praestantiori part, as we call it, a heap of corn, where
yet there is a mixture of chaff, and a corn field, where there is a mixture of
tares and other weeds; and as the Apostle (writing to the Church of the
Thessalonians) says, knowing brethren your election of God, and yet I suppose
you do not believe that each particular man was a vessel of glory. But I go
after Mr. Bl.

Only, says he, those that are born by promise are included, and so all the
sons of Ishmael and Keturah, though the^r parents were once in Covenant, are by
Gods special command shut ou^.

Answ 1. There are no more born by promise according to Mr. Bls. description
but Isaac, and so no more according to him included; not Jacob, much less all
the visible body of the Jews. 2. If those that are born by promise only are
included, then Ishmael, and the sons of Keturah who were not born by pro^ise,
are not in^luded in the Covenant Genesis 17.7. then they were never in Cov^nant,
for none were never in that Covenant, who were not included in the promise. 3.
The Scripture does not mention any special command to shut out ^shmael out of
the Covenant he was once in, but to (...) out of Abraham's house. Nor do I see
in what sense Abraham could be said to cast him out of Covenant. Surely not by
revoking (...) promise, that were little less then blasphemy, to ascribe to
Abraham the evacuating of Gods word: not by uncircumcising him for (...) was
any such thing done, though Abraham obeyed God, nor perhaps could be done. What
other way he might shut him out of ^ovenant I do not understand. 4. If Ishmael
were once in the Covenant, as it comprehends the promise of Evangelical grace,
then ^od promised to be his God in respect of regeneration justification,
adoption, sanctification and raising up to eternal li^e, and he was in that
esta^e, and if h^ were shut out again, ^hen a man may be in the covenant of
Evangelical grace and shut out again, which is contrary to the very end of the
new C^venant, as it is expressed Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10. and infers falling away
from Gospel grace.

Mr. Bl. proceeds thus. Neither are all these included; for as God cast off
Ishmael and his seed, so also Esau and his posterity; therefore the Apostle
having brought the former distinction of seeds, rests not there but adds v. 10,
11, 12, 13. And therefore the denomination of the seed is in Jacob, surnamed
Israel; Therefore when the head, or if you will, root of the Covenant is
mentioned; usually in Scripture it is not barely Abraham, but Abraham and
Isaac, to exclude all Abraham's seed of any other line; not barely Abraham and
Isaac, but Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. The natural seed of Jacob then (not
according to ours, but Gods own limits) is included in that Covenant in the
full latitude and extent of it.

Answ. 1. The terms head or root of the Covenant, are not Scripture
expressions. I find Gal. 3.16. that to Abraham and his seed were the promises
made, and Romans 11.16. If the root be holy so are the branches, v. 18. thou
bear not the root, ^ut the root thee; but this root is I conceive, no other
then Abraham, who is ^ot termed either head or root of the Covenant singly or
jointly, but of the olive or branches in respect of their propagation from him
partly as a natural father, and a spiritual father in respect of Is^aelite
believers, an^ partly as a spiritual father only in respect of Gentile
believers. But if any be to be termed the head and root of the Covenant, I
think it is most fit to give that title to Christ, the surety and mediator,
Heb. 7.22. and 8.6. to whom the promises were made, Gal. 3.16, 17. 2. When God
is styled the God of Abraham, I^saac, and Jacob, that it is to exclude all
Abraham's seed of any other line, and to say that God cast off Esau and his
posterity from the Covenant, is more then the Apostle says, or is according to
truth. For the Apostle does only say, that therefore the Oracle was delivered
concerning Esau and Jacob, and the words of the Prophet concerning Jacob and
Esau are alleged, that he might show that God confined not his Covenant to
Abraham's natural posterity, nor included them all; not to show that he cast off
or excluded all Abraham's seed of any other line then ^saac and Jacob from the
Covenant. For then Jo^, Jethro, and all other Proselytes of Abraham's seed by
Keturah, of Esau^s posterity had been excluded from the Covenant of grace in
Christ, which is contrary to Scripture; and in like sort, all the Gentile from
Ishmael, Keturah, Esau, ^ad been excluded from being called Christian
believers. For none are called by God who are excluded out of the Covenant of
grace. 3. That the natural seed of Jacob is included in that Covenant. Genesis
17.7. in the full latitude and ex^ent of it, as it comprehends a promise of
Evangelical grace, is so far from being the Apostles determination, tha^ he
resolves in the contrary in those words Romans 9.6. All are not Israel, that are
of Israel.

Secondly, says Mr. Bl. We d^ not say that this Covenant was entered with
Abraham as a n^tural Father, nor his seed comprehended as natural children; but
a^ a p^ofessour of the Faith ^ccepting the Conant, taking God for his God he
accepts it for himself, and f^r his seed, his natural p^sterity. And all that
profess the Faith hold in the like ten^re, are in Covenant, and have the
Covenant; not vested in their own persons, but enlarged to their posterity.

Answ. I do not remember that I did any where say that Paedobaptists said, that
covenant Genesis 17.7. w^ entered with Abraham as a natural ^ather, but the Author
of the little Treatise entitled Infants Baptism proved lawful by Scripture,
asserted the Covenant was made with Abraham as a believer; to which I replied*
that as it was Evangelical it was not made with Abraham simply as a believer,
for then it had been made to every believer as to Abraham, but with Abraham as
the Father of believers, and with his seed as believers as he was. But that
ever any Paedo^aptist did before Mr. Bl* assert that the Covenant Genesis 17.7. as
it was a Covenant of Evangelical grace, was entered by God with him as a
professor of the faith, accepting the Covenant taking God for his God,
accepting it for himself and for his seed, his natural posterity, I do not
remember. If they should, yet I take it to be false, and without likelihood of
truth. For if the Covenant of Evangelical grace were made with Abraham under
that formal consideration, then God had promised Evangelical grace,
justication, adoption, to him as a professor of faith only, so that if it
were supposed he had been an hopocrite, yet he should have been justified,
adopted in that he was a professor of faith, or else it is to be conceived
justification and adoption were not to Abraham by this Covenant, contrary to
Gal. 3.16, 17, 18. nor has it any likelihood of truth, that God would single
out so exemplary a believer as Abraham was, Romans 4.18, 19. and enter so solemn
a Covenant with him barely as a professor of faith, which was competent to an
hypocrite. Nor do I well know in what sense God entered the Covenant with him as
^ professor of the faith accepting the Covenant for himself and his s^ed. For
Gods entering the Covenant is no other then his making of it: But God did not
make it on this condition that Abraham should accept it f^r him and his seed,
but as knowing Abraham's integrity, b^ way of testification of his love and
grace to him being so eminent and tried a believer before this C^venant was made
with him. Nor is it true that all that profess the faith hold in the like
tenure, are in Covenant, and have the Covenant; not vested in their own
persons, but enlarged to their posterity, there being none in the Covenant Genesis
17.7. but Abraham and his seed, of whom no mere professor of faith, much le^s
his seed, except elect or true believer is either. Nor was the Covenant ever
made to Abraham's or Isreal's mere natural posterity as it is Evangelical; much
less enlarged to the posterity natural of every professor of faith.

Thirdly, says Mr. Bl. We entitle the seed o^ Abraham, as before, to spiritual
mercies (and so the seed of all that hold in the tenure of Abraham) to saving
grace, and justification to life eternal; not by an absolute conveyance
infallibly to inherit (we know though Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant only shall be saved, Romans 9.27.) but upon Gods terms, and conditions
in the Gospel of God, held out of God to his people; salvation is made over by
virtue of Covenant, to all thus in Covenant in that sense as Christ speaks Joh.
4.22. salvation is of the Jews. In that sense as Christ us^th it of Zacheus
family; this day is salvation come to this house, Luke 19.9. In that sense as
the Apostle to the Hebrews speaks of it, where he sets out the danger of
neglecting so great salvation, Heb. 2.3. In that sense (as I conceive) the
Apostle speaks of it, where he says, that upon the call of the Jews all Israel
shall be saved, Romans 11.26.

Answ. That by [ salvation Luke 19.9. Heb. 2.3. Romans 11.26.] is not meant
outward privileges, in which salvation upon Gods terms may be obtained, has
been showed before Sect. 44. And though I grant that salvation is said to be of
the Jews, in that from them was the doctrine of salvation, yet I see no
necessity to expound the term [ salvation] metonymically, as if by [ salvation]
were meant barely the doctrine of salvation, but the sense may be truly
conceived thus, salvation, remission of sins, justification, adoption, eternal
life, is of the Jews, as instruments by preaching the Gospel of converting, and
so saving men. But that God when he promised Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God and
the God of thy seed (as this promise is Evangelical) meant this, all the
professors of faith and their seed shall enjoy those privileges, in which
salvation upon Gods terms may be obtained, is proved false. 1. In that the
writers of the New Testament never so explain it, but where the promise is
mentioned as Evangelical, they declare it imports a further thing proper to the
elect and true believers. 2 That they never by Abraham's seed as Evangelically
understood, mean any other then elect persons and true believers: both which
are proved largely before Sect. 28. 3. That in this sense the promise were not
made good, for God does not make good to every professor of faith that he
shall have those privileges, as to be baptized, be in Church Communion, have
the the Lords supper, have a Pastor to preach the Gospel, much less to every
one of his natural seed, as frequent experience shows. 4. By this exposition
nothing is assured to the infant of a believer, or to a professor of faith,
which is not also to an unbelievers child, yea to an unbeliever, who as well as
they have title to saving grace, and justification to eternal life, upon terms
and conditions in the Gospel of God, held out of God to his people.

Mr. Bl. adds, And this [that professors of faith or believers upon their call
shall enjoy those privileges, in which salvation upon Gods terms may be
obtained] is all that c^n by any means be squeezed out of their words, that
say, the Covenant of grace was made of God, with Abraham and hi^ natural seed,
or with believers and their seed. It is even irksome to read the large business
that Mr. T. makes of it, to find out Mr. Ms. meaning, about the Covenant of
God made with Abraham and his se^d; and both Mr. M. and my self must per force
confess that we mean ^t of a Covenant, infallibly absolutely to confer grace,
and cons^quently salvation.

Answ. 1. That more may be squeezed out, is proved in my Exam. part 3. sect. 3.
in this part of the Review sect. 30.31, etc. And if no more be m^ant by them,
these things w^ll follow. 1. That they mean by the Covenant of grace, a
covenant of outward privileges, of viable C^urch-membership. Baptism, the
Lords Supper, to every believer by prof^ssion, though a Gentile, and his
natural seed, under the pretense of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. which pretended
outward Covenant of outward privileges is a mere counterfeit, neither Gen,
17.7. nor any where else to be found in the holy Scripture. 2. They do most
grossly abuse the text, Genesis 17.7. for proving such a Covenant, quite besides
the expositions given of it throughout the New Testament, as is proved in this
Part of the Revew, sect. 28. and quite besides the expositions even of the
reformed Divines, though Paedobaptists, in their commentaries on the N. T. and
writings against Arminians. 3. They do mock Readers most palpably* 1. in
telling them the Covenant of grace cen^ains the promise of remission of sins,
etc. is for substance the same in all ages, and say it belongs to all the
infants of believers, that they are in it, that is that Covenant of grace, they
are confederate with parents, as the words of the Directory, Mr, M. and others
cited by me, Exam part. 3 sect. 3 show; and yet deny this Covenant of saving
grace is made to them all, but upon such conditions as upon which it is made to
unbeleevers children, yea, to every man in the world. 2. In that they when they
make the Sacraments to be seals of the Covenant of grace, and attempt to prove
it from Romans 4.11. which mentions only a seal of the righteousness of faith*
they make them seals of the righteousne^s of faith, and say infants are in the
Covenant, and the seal must follow the Covenant, and yet nevertheless deny all
the infants they baptize by virtue of being in the Covenant (of which Baptism
is a seal) to be in that Covenant of which Baptism is a seal; but say they are
in a mere imaginary Covenant, which they call an outward Covenant, of which
Baptism is no seal, but rather according to their conceits, the thing it self
covenanted or promised. 3. They mock parents, by telling them in wr^tings and
sermons, that they are to be comforted concerning their children, that if they
be believers their children are saved by virtue of the promise Genesis 17.7. that
they are bound to believe it; and yet when they are pressed with the Apostles
determination. Romans 9.6 7, 8. and other arguments, they deny that they
understand it of the ^ovenant of saving grace, which alone can infer salvation)
infallibly and absolutely to confer grace; but either they make it only
conditional if they repent and believe, which no man is sure any infant does;
or they say in the judgment of charity (which is fallible, and is no object of
faith) we are to take them to be in Covenant and to b^ saved, or else they say
(which is now the common shif^) they are in the outward Covenant, which is a
figment, and of which they cannot say but that a person may be in it and not
saved. 4. That since it is commonly conceived by readers and hearers that they
mean that which Mr. M. Mr G. Mr. Bl. etc. do disclaim, Paedobaptists are bound
to ^each the people at their baby sprinklings, and at other ti^es when they
avouch the infants of believers and of mere visible professors of faith to be
in the Covenant of grace, Gen^ 17 7. and thereupon derive their title to
Baptism that they mean but as Mr. M. Mr. Bl. say, that they may acquit
themselves from deceiving the people, and being judged impostors.

2. It is no marvel that the 3d. Section of the 3d. Part of my Examen is
irksome to Mr. Bl. to read, since it does so fully lay open the fallacy of
Paedobap^ists in their speeches concerning the ^nfants of believers being in
Covenant. Not did I set down the position I conceived Mr. Ms. 2d.. concl. any
otherwise then in fair candid way, giving my reasons thereof; and not as Mr.
Bl. faith, per force imposing any thing on him. And for Mr. M. it is showed
above. 30. that Mr. M. in his Defense has rather hidd^n then explained the
m^aning of his 2d Conclusion. As for M. Bl. [did acknowledge, Exam. p. 46. that
he spoke most warily, and therefore was far from obtruding upon him. But yet
Mr. Bl. for want of other exceptions against me, charge me with wronging him
in a passag^ in my Apology, page 156. where I say, How does this stand with
tha^ which he asserts, chapter 3. sect. 2. of his answer to my Letter, page 13.
That infants of believers have salvation, if they die in their infancy, by
ver^ue of the Covenant? These words, he says, were none of his, and that I
could not but know it, when I published them; and that the meaning was not his,
I knew also, seeing he ex^ressed it in these words, That they are in the
ordinary way of Gods dispensation saveable. ^o which I reply. The assertion I
co^ceived his, I gathered from those words in the place cited by me, That
Scrirture therefore, 1 Cor. 7.14 in this controversy is still brought in by
our Divines, as evidently holding out a Covenant holiness, and consequently
salvation of infants. And truly I must confess* I thought his words so plain,
that I never dreamed he would have denied it to be his meaning, conceiving he
alleged the Protestant Divines as con^onant to his own opinion; and that if
salvation of Infants be inferred consequently from covenant holiness (which Mr.
Bl. asserts from 1 Cor. 7.14.) then it is Mr. Bls. meaning, that infants of
believers have salvation in their infancy, if they die in their infancy, by
virtue of the Covenant, and that he asserts a certainty of salvation from the
Covenant. That which he says. I knew that the meaning I impute to him was not
his because of the words he sets down, and therefore a calumny tending to make
a brother odious, is I am sure false, and a calumny which I never expect to
have fairly answered by him, nor almost any thing else he is charged with by me
to have dealt foully in his opposing ^e about this point. The words he mentions
were in the period before th^s. This Papists deny, as not knowing how to avoid
the salvation of infants, but that they are in the ordinary way of Gods
dispensation saveable, when they are thus admitted within the verge of Gods
promise. Which being spoken of the Papists, I did not conceive so likely to
explain the speech of the period following, as that other a little before,
Protestants affirm that infants without actual admission to Baptism are saved
The main argument wherewith Protestants assert it, is the Covenant* in which
with the parents, infants are included: and I conceived [ are saved] is as much
as are actually saved. Nor am I yet so well indoctrinated by Mr. Bl. as not to
think it had been nonsense (which I would not impute to Mr. Bl.) to expound
salvation of infants, by saveab^eness in the ordinary way of Gods dispensation.
Nor did I Imagine that by M^. Bl. much less by Protestant Divines, a
saveableness only in Gods ordinary way of dispensation, should be made the
consequent of Covenant holiness, but a certainty of salvation. For the Covenant
or prumise does not assure only ^ possibility, but a certainty; yea,
possibilities are not the things which men ever assure, they are antecedent to
Covenants and promises, but certain events; an^ to imagine Gods Covenant to
assure only a possibility, a saveableness, and not a certainty of salvation,
is to make God to promis^ nothing, b^t what is without such a Covenant, which
is to make it a blank. And if the Covenant holiness infer only a conditional
salvation, it infers no more salvation then damnation: yea, if infants have no
more by their Covenant holiness then a saveableness in Gods ordinary way of
dispensation, then they have only a saveableness if they be baptized, hear the
Gospel preached, believe it, profess it (which is the ordinary way whereby God
dispenses salvation.) But if this were Mr. Bls. meaning, he ha^ made Baptism
etc. a necessary condition of their salvation, and so he had tied their
salvation with the Papists to Baptism, or rather been more rigid then they,
durior pater infantum Augustino, requiring the hearing the word, actual faith,
and profession of them to salvation. So that I hope by this time Mr. Bl. will
forgive me this wrong, in setting down his opinion better then he meant it, and
that he will let fa^l hi^ suit against me for this thing: And if so, I will
forgive him for his next insinuation of my setting up a man of straw and then
beating it down (though it be indeed the common saying of Paedobap^ists, who
usually say, the Covenant of grace sealed by Baptism, (which is that of
justification) is made to believers and their seed, the promise is to them and
their children, A^^s 2.39. which is meant by them of remission of sins) and for
his frivolous charge of my using the arguments of Jesuits, and making use of
Protestants names, when I do bring not only the names, but the very words and
arguments of the most approved Protestant writers in great number, and produce
one Papist, Estius alone, no Jesuit, but, though a Papist, of the better sort;
and do, and may safely protest, that some of those Mr. Bl. charge me with I
did not read; and for one, what I read in him came not into my mind when I
wrote that Examen of Mr. Ms. sermon. So that what Mr. Bl. does so often
insinuate, as tending to make me suspected as if my arguments against Infant
Baptism were borrowed from Papists even then when I avouch Protestants, is a
most unworthy calumny, though I still say I am glad when I find truth, that I
meet with i^ in any Authors, whether Protestants or Papists, and think it not
the worse for their owning it.

Mr. Bl after his false accusations of me, and limitations of his own tenet,
speaks thus. To draw all up toward a conclusion. All that is necessaril^
included in Gods entrance of Covenant with a people, engaging to be their God,
and taking them for his people; is here by this grand Charter of Heaven made
over to Abraham, and his natural issue by ^saac and Jacob. All their posteri^y
are branches of this root by nature simply considered, and they are holy
branches by virtue of this Covenant, which necessarily implies privileges of
Ordinances, the fruition of Gods Oracles, which are his Covenant draughts*
without which no people are in Covenant, but all are strangers: And this
privilege of Ordinances implies also all privileges, leading to, and
accompanying salvation, and salvation it se^f upon Gods terms in his word
revealed. And so before the disputation, the Reader has my supposition.

Answ. The Reader has a supposition indeed, but such a one, as if he examine
it, he will be more to seek concerning Mr. Bls. mind, then if he had omitted
it. But I shall as fairly as the ambiguity of his expr^ssions will permit,
search out his meaning. There are no fewer then nine Propositions thrust
together in these words of his, That all that is necessarily included in Gods
entrance of Covenant with a people, engaging to be their God, and taking them
for his people; is here by this grand Charter of Heaven made over to Abraham,
and his natural issue by Isaac and Jacob. In which, 1. he asserts the promise
Gen 17.7. to be the grand Charter of Heaven: And I grant it to be so in the
sense in which the Apostle means, it, Gal. 3.16, 17, 18 Romans 4.16. and
elsewhere, to wit* as it is a promise of regeneration, justification, eternal
life, which I call Evangelical grace. 2. He speaks of Gods entrance of Covenant
with a people, engaging to be their God, and taking them for his people, and of
things necessarily encluded in this entrance of ^ovenant. But there are many
ambiguities in these expr^ssions The term entrance into Covenant is ambiguous:
He may be said to enter into Covenant who offers it, or who makes and concludes
it. The term people of God is ambiguous; it may be meant either of his people
by special right, as the ten Tribes were when they fell off to idolatry; or his
people by outward profession only, or his people by effectual saving calling.
The terms engaging to be their God, and taking them for his people, may be
understood in respect of temporary protection, advancement, rule, etc. or
righteousness and eternal life. The word people may note either singular
persons, or the collective body of a Nation which may not include every
sing^lar person. He supposes things necessarily included in Gods entrance of
Covenant with a people: But I am not yet convinced that any things are
necessarily included in Gods entrance of Covenant with a people engaging to be
the^r God, and taking them f^r his people; but that all things therein included
are arbitrary, or of his free will. And if there be any things necessarily
included, sure they are not privileges of Ordinances, I mean initial and after
Seals, visible Church Membership of Infants; for God entered into Covenant wit^
Abraham long before, and never promised those things; so he did with Noah; and
with Adam. And that which agreeably to the Scripture was promised Gen 17.7. was
to the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob, peculiar protection,
provision, rule, 1 Samuel 12.12. by giving Laws to them, appointing them Judges,
directing t^em by Oracles in war and peace, etc. To the spiritual seed of
Abraham the promise was of Christ, righteousness, adoption, and the inheritance
of eternal life; not those petty things which Mr Bl. does frivolously imagine
to have been contained in that grand Charter of Heaven, as he calls it, which
is the thing that Mr. Bl. would fain squeeze out of that text, though there be
not the least color in all the holy Scripture for it. His second Proposition
is, that All Isaac's and Jacobs posterity are branches of this root by nature
simply considered; which if he understand of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, as
a natural root, propagating them by natural generation, I grant it; if he mean
it of a Covenant root, as he calls it, as deriving from them Evangelical grace
by the Covenant Genesis 17.7. I deny it. His 3d. is, and they are holy branches by
virtue of this Covenant; which if he mean they were holy in respect of Gods
special rule, setting up his Tabernacle among them and such like prerogatives
as are mentioned Romans 9.4, 5. I grant it: But if he mean it of holiness
according to election of grace, as Romans 11.16. is meant, it is not true. His
4th. is, that this Covenant necessarily implies privilege of Ordinances, the
fruition of Gods Oracles: which if he mean in this sens^, that Gods worship
should be among them, that the Laws of God, and his Word should be to the
collective body of Israel, I grant it; but if he mean it of visible
church membership of infants, initial and after Seals, which is the thing he
aims at,) I deny it. The 5th. that privilege of Ordinances, and fruition of
Gods Oracles, are Gods Covenant draughts, has the same answer. The 6th. and
7th. that without this privileges of Ordinances and fruition of Gods Oracles,
no people are in Covenant, but all are strangers; if it be meant of the
Covenant of Evangelical grace, and of particular persons, the Propositions are
manifestly false; for then no infants dying before they have an initial Seal,
hear the Word, etc. should be in Covenant: if it be meant of the privileges of
Ordinances, and fruition of Gods Ordinances in any sort, I grant, that if there
be no worship of God among them, no fruition of Gods Word written or unwritten,
no people of ripe age, whether families, or nations, or single persons, can be
said to be in Covenant, but are strangers from it; but if they be understood of
such peculiar O^dinances and Oracles as the Jews had, Romans 9. 4, 5. I deny it;
for Adam, Seth, Enoch, Noah, etc. were in Covenant with God without them. His
8th. And this privilege of Ordinances implies also all privileges leading to,
and accompanying salvation; if meant of in-being in Christ, having his spirit
to dwell in them, which are the chief privileges leading to, and accompanying
salvation, and of all that have the privilege of Ordinances. I deny it; unless
he mean it as he does the 9th. Proposition, that this privilege of Ordinances
implies salvation it self upon Gods terms in his word revealed, which are
Repentance and Faith in Christ, and then both Propositions are granted, the
8th. and the 9th* that the privilege of Ordinances does imply both in-being in
Christ, and his spirits in dwelling, and salvation it self to them that repent
and believe in Christ. Which is true also of them that have not this privilege
of Ordinances, as Cornelius, and many more. And thus Mr. Bl. also has my
exposition and answer concerning his position and supposition: Let Us now see
what he proves.

SECT. XLVIII. The 35th. and 37th. Chapters of Mr. Bls. Vind. Faed. are
examined, and his Arguments concluding the natural issue of believers to be
taken into Covenant, are answered.
HE intitles thus chapter 35. Arguments concluding the natural issue of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob to be taken into Covenant; which he may prove and not oppse
me, who grant, that God promiset^ Genesis 17.7* to be a God to the natural seed of
Abraham, inheriting in domestic and political benefits: From whence he falsely
infers* that I cast out all the natural seed of Abraham from any title to that
Covenant, save in domes^ick and political benefits; and then undertakes this
Position in full opposition, That Covenant* in those words expressed Genesis 17.7.
in their fullest latitude, as they are spoken in the largest comprehension
(which according to Scripture they can be taken,) are entered with all the
natural seed of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob. So that if to be a God, Genesis 17.7.
to Abraham and his seed, comprehend Evangelical benefits of regeneration,
justification, eternal life, his position is, That the Covenant is entered in
respect of these benefits, with all the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac and
Jacob; which can be meant no otherwise then thus, God had promised, Genesis 17.7.
these benefits to them all: For the Covenant could be no otherwise entered with
them, Isaac and Jacob being not then begotten, nor in being, and therefore the
entry into Covenant could not be mutual. Here then the Question between us is
not, Whether the natural issue of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob were taken into
Covenant? Genesis 17.7. for I grant that God there promised to be a God to them by
domestic and political benefits, to wit, by setting up his worship more
peculiarly in that nation, by raising up the Messiah out of them, by giving
them peculiar Laws himself, raising up Judges and Governors for them,
vouchsafing them peculiar protection which he vouchsafed not to other people,
directing them by his Oracle when they enquired of him, etc. And these benefits
he promised to them all conditionally if they adhered to God: But the Question
between us is; Whether Genesis 17.7. God have promised to all the natural issue of
Abraham by Isaac and Jacob, the Evangelical benefits of regeneration,
justification, and eternal life, supposed to be meant in the words, to be a God
to thy seed? This I deny, and Mr. Bl* should prove, if he dispute in opposition
to me. However let us view what he writes.

My first argument (says he) is taken from the addition annexed to this
Covenant in the words immediately following v. 8. That seed of Abraham* that
had possession of the Land of Canaan through the gift and by virtue of the
promise of God, is the seed here taken into Covenant to have the Lord for their
God. This is so plain, that nothing can be plainer to any that read the words;
but the natural seed of Abraham, all the seed of Jacob in their several Tribes
(according as God set them their bounds) inherited the Land of Canaan, which is
called the Land of their inheritance, and not only the spiritual seed
regenerate, they that only sojourned in Canaan, Heb. 11.13. and were never
possessed of it, had title to it: It was theirs in reversion, though they never
came into actual possession.

Answ. 1. The major is not true, if the subject of the Proposition be
understood exclusively, or universally, and the phrase in the predicate [ to
have the Lord for their God] be meant in respect of the Evangelical benefits of
regeneration, justification, and eternal life. It is not true, that God has
covenanted to be a God in respect of these benefits to all, or only to that
seed of Abraham that had possession of the Land of Canaan through the gift, and
by virtue of the promise of God: nor does the Text at all make it plain. For
though it prove that the seed of Abraham meant in the forepart of Genesis 17. v.
8. were also meant v. 7. yet it does not prove that all, or they only that had
the promise of Canaan, had the promise of being a God to them in Gospel grace.
The minor is granted, [ all] being meant, as they speak in Logic,
distributively in genera singulorum, that is, of any sorts of them, but not in
singulos generum; and with limitation to certain times fore-appointed of God,
not in all times. All sorts inherited, but some were not to inherit till a
certain time, and for a certain time; A bastard, Mamzer, Deuteronomy. 23.2. was not to
enter into the congregation of the Lord, and so not to inherit regularly till
the tenth generrtion. But were Mr. Bls. conclusion granted, it proves not what
I deny, that to all, and every Israelite God promised Evangelical benefits,
Genesis 17.7. or visible church membership and initial seal at all to any in that
promise, Genesis 17.7.

My next argument, says he, is drawn from the seal that is annexed in the
words immediately following this additional promise, v. 9,10, 11. They that had
the sign and seal of the Covenant, that had it by Divine appointment they were
a people in Covenant. This is so plain, that nothing can be more plain; God
does not enter Covenant with one and give the sign and seal to another: But all
the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob had the seal, viz all the males,
those that were in a c^pacity of it; it was not limited to the spiritual seed.
There had been no place for that distinction, of circumcision in the flesh, and
circumcision of the heart; if none must be circumcised in the flesh, but those
that are circumcised in heart.

Answ. 1. Waving my exception against the title of seal of the Covenant, not
given to circumcision, or any other Rite in the Scripture, and inconvenient as
is before proved, and putting in [ Circumcision] instead of it; I deny the
major, if understood universally: nor is the major plainly true, but plainly
false, it being manifest in that very Covenant, that God entered it not with
Ishmael and others whom he appointed to be circumcised. Nor is any thing more
plain then the contrary to what Mr. Bl. asserts. For God did enter into
Covenant with the natural seed female inheriting of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob,
according to Mr. Bl. himself; the daughters of Zelophehad were in Covenant, and
yet he did give the sign of the Covenan^ to others, and not to them. Nor is the
minor true; for the males of seven days old were in a capacity of circumcision,
yet they had it not. I grant that circumcision was not limited to the spiritual
seed* yet conceive Mr. Bls. proof of no force: For though it had been so
limited, yet there had been place for the distinction of circumcision in the
flesh, and of the heart, since things may be distinguished* which are not
separate. But were the conclusion granted, it fails as the former in proving
what I deny.

My 3d. argument, says he, is drawn from the Comment that God himself makes of
th^s Covenant, holding it every where out in this way of tenure to Abraham and
his natural issue, as before, Exodus 20.2. Deuteronomy 5.6. All that whole people he
owned as his, all of them being Abraham's natural issue; yet all of them were
not spiritual. Exodus 5.1. Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. Amos 3.1, 2. is very full to our
purpose. Every one that descended from Jacob, the whole of the family that came
out of Egypt, were a select people to God in Covenant; he was according to the
terms of that Covenant, their God. There is not a place where God calls them by
the name of his people (which are almost endless) but there we have this
confirmed, that that people were the Lords by virtue of this grant made to
Abraham and his seed.

Answ. This last speech might be granted, and what else Mr. Bl. infers from the
Text; yet he attains not his end, unless he prove that by virtue of that
Covenant all the Israelits by natural descent we^e God^ regenerate, j^stified
people; for the thing he should prove against me, is, that Genesis 17.7. God
promises to be a God in respect of Gospel benefits to all Abraham's natural
issue by Isaac and Jacob. Yet I conceive there are places wherein the
Israeli^es were termed Gods by virtue of the Covenant of the Law Ezekiel. 16 8.
and 20.5. etc. without mentioning the Covenant Genesis 17.7 which the Apostle
conceives differently of, Gal. 3.16, 17. And the spee^hes Exodus 20.2. Deuteronomy.
5.6. Exodus 5.1. Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. though spoken of the body of Israel, yet may and
are to be understood, at least in some senses of them, not of every individual:
Surely he was not God Evangelically to those that believed not, nor were they
his people, nor legally, so as to afford them that protection, and tem^oral
blessings which are promised in the La^, Deuteronomy. 28. etc. to Ahab, Achan, Korah,
and such like. But in the Evangelical sense the denomination is from the better
part, the people he fore knew, as the Apostle himself expounds it, Romans 11.2,
5. and in respect of political blessings according to the Covenant of the Law,
to the obedient to the Law, as of long life to dutiful children* safety* while
they kept the Solemn Feasts. Exodus 20.12. and 24.24. Nor does Amos 3.1, 2.
which he says, is full to his purpose, say, that God was a God to that whole
family which he brought out of Egypt by virtue of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7.
much less to every one of them Evangelically, nor does he say he had known them
^ll Evangelically, but had known them only, that is, had distinguished them
from other people by giving them his Laws, etc. which makes nothing to prove
according to Genesis 17.7. God took every descendent from Jacob into Covenant in
respect of Gospel benefi^s.

In the 4th place, says he, I argue from the practice of the people of God,
making this Covenant of God entered with Abraham and his seed, a Plea to obtain
mercy from God for all Israel, the worst of Isra^l, in their lowest state and
condition, Deuteronomy. 9.26, 27. If this Divinity had been th^n known, Moses might
have been sent away with this answer; That he spoke for dogs, and not for
children; not for Israel but for Aliens and strangers to the Commonwealth of
Israel. But as this an^ the like requests of the people of God were made in
faith, so they prevailed with God; Moses there urges, they are thy people and
thine ineritance, v. 39. as does the Church, Isa. 64.9. and Moses petition
takes, as the History shows, Exodus 32.14. Yea, when God vouchsafes mercy to his
people thus in Covenant, Levit. 26.42. it is upon this account of the Covenant.
And appearing for the deliverance of Israel out of their hard and pressing
bondage, he says to Mose^, Exodus 3.6. and that to stay up his faith in
confidence of deliverance.

^nsw. Tha^ which Mr. Bl. should prove, is, That Covenant expressed in those
words Genesis 17.7. in their fullest latitude as they are spoken, in the largest
comprehension (which according to Scripture they can be taken) are entered with
all the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob. And in his answer to my
Letter, chapter 10. page 55, 56. he urges Exodus 32.13. Deuteronomy. 29.27, Levit 26.42.
Exodus 3.6. to prove that Gen* 17.7. was a promise of grace and mercy to Jacobs
posterity, such as of which Circumcision was a seal, Romans 4.11. which he says
is no other then a Covenant of grace, and says Circumcision did seal that
Covenant, to be the God of believers, and their seed, Gen, 17.7, 10. But not
one of the petitions or speeches alleged do prove either the former, or this
last assertion. The petition of Moses, Exodus 32.13. was upon occasion of the
making of the golden Calf, and Gods speech to Moses concerning the consuming of
them for it, and making Moses a great Nation: Moses to divert God from this
thing, alleges, 1. That they were his people which he brought out of Egypt
with great power, and a mighty hand; and if he should consume them, the
Egyptians would reproach him, as intending mischief to them when he brought
them out of Egypt. Where it is true, God calls the body of them his people:
But this must be understood, if Evangelically, in respect of the better part
only; if Legally, either de jure because they ought to have been his people,
being delivered from Egypt, and having engaged themselves Exodus 19.8. to obey
God; or de facto, because he had done so great things for them, and thereby
owned them in respect of his actings for them above other people. 2. He
presses God with his Oath to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. But the Oath he
mentions is concerning the multiplying the seed of Abraham, Isaac* and Jacob as
the stars of heaven, and giving the land of Canaan to them, and that they shall
inherit it for ever* not a word of being God to all the natural issue of
Abraham by Isaac and Jacob in respect of Evangelical blessings, nor a word
tending to show the extent of the promise Genesis 17.7. in respect of gospel
grace. The same answer I give to his allegation of Deuteronomy. 9.26, 27, 28, 29. And
to Mr. Bls. flirt I answer, this Divinity was then known to God, and God might
have sent away Moses with this answer, That he spoke for some who were dogs, or
reprobates, and not children of God according to the election of grace, which
is the Apostles Divinity, Romans 9.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 10.5. Heb. 3.10, 11, 16, 17,
18, 19. and that they were strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel, that is,
of the Israel of God, Gal* 6.16. And t^is is also the Apostles Divinity, Romans
9.6. and therefore I count this no absur^ity. But I grant they, even the worst
of them were not dogs, but children, and of the Commonwealth of Israel
political, in respect of their outward state, and in that respect holy, and
different from other people. To the other I answer, it is true, Moses prayed in
faith, and was heard; but there is no mention in the places alleged of his
praying for spiritual Evangelical grace for every particular Israelite, but for
the preventing an utter destruction of them: Nor does he at all express any
such faith, whereby he believed God had promised to be a God to all the natural
issue of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob in respect of Evangelical benefits. but
that God would not destroy them, in which respect he was heard. And in like
manner the Covenant upon the account of which God did vouchsafe mercy, is that
of giving them Canaan, which Mr. Bl. will not have the Covenant it self, but an
Appendix to it; and yet Exodus 32.13. that is it which is pleaded, and Levit.
26.42, the Covenant it is plain is that he made concerning their seating in
Canaan, for it expressly says, and I will remember the Land, and v. 44. I will
not utterly destroy them. The Church it is true, says, Isa. 64.9. We are all
thy people; but if this Church be meant of all and every Israelite by natural
descent, then all and every of them were a praying people, which is not to be
said, and therefore is to be understood of the believing remnant only, or else
that they were Gods people in the sense before given of Exodus 32.12, 14. Deuteronomy.
9.29. Exodus 3.6. It is true, God says to Moses, to stay up his faith in
confidence of the deliverance of Israel from Egypt, that he was the God of his
Father, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob, and it is ^rue, our Lord
Christ hence proves the resurrection of the dead, Luke 20, 37, 38. and
therefore it proves eternal life included in the promise, Genesis 17.7. but this
is so far from proving God to be a God in respect of Evangelical blessings
meant Genesis 17.7. to every Israelitte, or to be a God to believers and their
natural seed, that it is a good argument to the contrary; for this absurdity
would follow, That every one of them are certainly saved, if he were a God to
every of them in the sense, Luke 20.37, 38.

Mr. Bl. next excepts against me for censuring of Chamiers calling the promise
of the Land of Canaan an Apenpendant to the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. And says, The
thing is so clear in the narrative of it, Genesis 17, that nothing can be more
evident. The Covenant is full, v. 7. To be a God to Abraham and his seed; and
this he might have been, had he pleased, in the Land of Ur of the Caldees, or
in any L^nd whatsoever that his seed had been planted^: But when the Covenant
is thus made, there is added; v. 8. And I will give unto thee, etc.

Answ. My censure of Chamier was no more then this, I like not, and I say the
same still, that the promise of the land of Canaan Genesis 17.8. is not a mere
appendant, but as truly a part of the Covenant God made with Abraham Genesis 17.
as v. 7. And to Mr. Bls. strong conceit I oppose my strong conceit of the
evidence to the contrary (being backed by the Scripture) as sufficient of
countervail his saying; And for his reasons. 1. God might have been a God to
them in Vr* Ergo, the promise of Canaan is but an appendix, not a part of the
Covenant. I answer, 1. by the like reason it might be said, thou shall be a
Father of many Nations, is but an appendant to the Covenant, contrary to Genesis
17.4. because God might be a God to him, though father of one Nation only. 2.
By denying the consequence, which is in my slender conceit a baculo ad angulum*
The other (if it be a reason and not a dictate) is, the Covenant is full, v. 7.
but when the Covenant is made there is added, v. 8. I answer. 1. By like reason
it might be said, The Covenant is full* v. 4, 5, 6. but when the Covenant is
made v. 4, 5, 6* there is add^d v. 7. ergo, v. 7. is n^ part of the Covenant,
but an appendant to it. 2. It is not proved that at v. 7. the Covenant is full,
yea v. 8. being as Mr. Bl. himself styles it, an additional promise, it is
proved, that the Covenant is not full without it being added as a promise, and
so a part of ^he Conant.

I said the Holy Ghost me thinks speaks otherwise Postscript.. 12. Mr. Bl
opposes. The force of this argument must needs be this. That which is any
where called a Covenant, that is not an appendant to a Covenant. But the giving
of the land of Canaan to the seed of Abraham is there called by the name of a
Covenant. Mr. T. sure will not say that Circumcision is the Covenant between
God and his people, he will not deny but it is a sign and seal annexed to the
Covenant; and yet Genesis 17.10. it is called a Covenant. Mr. T. well enough
knows a Metonymy of the adjunct and the common use of it in Scripture; but
that it is his wisdom for his advantage to conceal it.

Answ. Mr. T. well knows, that Mr. Bl. uses artifices to elude, when he should
answer. The words of the Psalmist were alleged as a plain testimony, which
need not be formed into an argumen^, but if it need forming, I should not form
it as Mr. Bl. forms it (that he may the eas^er slight what he cannot answer)
but thus. That promise which is called Gods Covenant for ever, the word which
he commanded to a thousand generations, which he made, was his oath, confirmed
for a Law and everlasting Covenant, decl^red by saying in words what God would
do, that is a Covenant, at least in part, and not a mere appendant. But such is
the promise of the land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8. and elsewhere, ergo. The major
might be proved from the definition of a Covenant, which is either a promise or
an aggregate of promises single or mutual. The minor is the very text. And to
Mr. Bls. shift I reply. I knew well enough a metonymy of the adjunct or sign
to beuied Gen 17.10. But I withal knew it would have been my folly to have
expounded the term [ Covenant] Psalm. 105.8, 9. by a metonymy like that Genesis
17.10. For I should have made the Psalmist speak nonsense, and perverted his
plain meaning if I had thus expounded, he has remembered his Covenant, that is
not his promise it self* but the sign and seal of it, which he made, swear,
said And I think it had been Mr. Bls. wisdom to have concealed this shift,
and rather have let it pass without saying any thing to the objection.

Mr. Bl. adds his fifth and last argument, from Texts in the N. T. which
interpret this Covenant thus en^ered with Abraham in that latitude as extending
to his natural issue, and not with limit to his spiritual seed; and that not
barely in domestic civil, but in spiritual promises; so that this one has
many in the bowels of it.

Answ. Abraham's spiritual seed are true believers as he was and elect persons,
spiritual promises are so called from the things promised, called Ephesians. 1.3.
spiritual blessings in heavenly things in Christ, such are regeneration or
circumcision of the heart, remission of sins, justification, adoption, eternal
life. If Mr. Bl. holds the Covenant with Abraham extending to his natural
issue, and not with limit to his spiritual seed in spiritual promises, he holds
r^generation, remission of sins, justification, adoption, eternal life, to them
who are neither true believers nor elect persons. Let Us view his proofs.

First, says he Romans 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. The Apostle aggravating his sorrow for
Israel, not respective to civil or domestic but higher concernments for the
whole body of Israel, he reckons up their privileges, the privileges of all
that according to the flesh were Israe^ites; privileges formerly enjoyed, but
now lost, nine ^n number. Here sure is enough to conclude them of the seed thus
in Covenant t^ be of Gods adopted seed under the promises.

Answ. He might more truly have said, here sure is nothing (as it was printed)
to conclude all the natural issue of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to be of Gods
ad^pted seed under the promise of spiritval blessings in the Covenant Genesis
17.7. as it contained Gospel grace. The privileges could not be o^ all that
according to the flesh were Israelites, for of them all as concerning the flesh
Christ could not come, now were all (if any of them) privileges Evangelical
from spiritual promises in the Covenant of grace, but rather all of them
Domestic or civil privileges which believers of the nations had not. Nor were
the privileges to the Israelites at all times, but at some times. And
therefore this text is impertinent to Mr. Bls, purpose, yea this Scripture and
that which follows put together, are an antithesis to his thesis.

Secondly, says he, Romans 11. The Apostle speaks of the casting off of Gods
people. Those that are cast off from being a people of God, were once his
people; those that are put out of Covenant, were a people in Covenant: but the
natural issue of Abraham ( called natural branches, v 21. being by right of
birth of that Olive) are there broken off, cast off; therefore the natural
issue were the seed in Covenant.

Answ. The conclusion is granted, the natural issue of Abr^ham who were also
the spiritual seed were the seed in Covenant, and such were a great part of the
Jews in former ages, but those broken off, were never in the Covenant of grace;
Nor is it said they were put out of the Covenant of grace, or broken off from
the Olive in which they were in their persons, but in which their progenitors
were; nor are they said to be natural branches v. 21. because by right of birth
of that Olive, but by reason of their descent from Abraham they are natural
branches of that Olive which at first was by natural as well as spiritual
descent from him, but never by right of birth. It is false if meant of casting
off from being his people, as it is meant Romans 11.1, 2* that those that are
cast off from being a people of God were once his people, understanding it in
their own persons. But of this text, and this argument, more has been said in
the first part of this Review, and more will be, if the Lord permit, in that
which follows.

Thirdly, says he, Matthew. 8.11, 12. whence he thus argues. Children of the
Kingdom that are to be cast out, are in the Kingdom only upon an in^erest of
Birth, for the fruition of the privileges of Ordinances, and not upon any
spiritual title, infallibly giving interest in salvation: But the children of
the Kingdom were upon our Saviors sentence to be cast out, therefore they
were in the Kingdom only on an interest of birth.

Answ. This argument 1 concludes not Mr. Bls. position, that the Covenant
expressed Genesis 17.7. in the fullest latitude of the words as they are there
spoken, in the largest comprehension (which according to Scripture they can be
taken) are entered with all the natural seed of Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob. 2.
It contradicts his own position, for if it be as, he here says, tha^ they
were not children of the Kingdom (though the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac
and Jacob) upon any spiritual title infallibly giving interest in salvation,
and yet the Covenant Genesis 17.7. wherein God says, he will be a God to Abraham's
seed, comprehends such saving grace as creates a spiritual title, infallibly
giving interest in salvation, as the Apostle Gal. 3.16, 17, 18, etc. expounds
it, then the Covenant Genesis 17.7. is not entered with all the natural seed of
Abraham by Isaac and Jacob, in the fullest latitude of the words as they are
there spoken, in the largest comprehension (which according to Scripture they
can be taken) therefore this argument overthrowes his own positi^n. 3. If by [
being in the Kingdome] be meant being visible members of the visible Church
Jewish, the conclusion is granted, but withal it is proved from the same text,
that they were never in the visible Church Christian, but were opposite to it,
in that they embraced not the Christian Faith, but opposed the Lord Jesus
Christ, and so had no right to baptism, though they had circumcision, and did
eat the passover. 4 It is manifest from the text, and agreed upon by
interpreters, that the Kingdom of Heaven in that place notes the Kingdom of
glory, or the state of eternal life and blessedness in heaven, and not the
visible Church only, or a being in it for the fruition of the privileges of
ordinances. For 1 the Kingdom of heaven is that wherein Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob were then sat down, for it is said v. 1*1. they shall sit down with
Abraham Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of heaven. But they were then sat
down not in the visible Church only, nor had being in it for the fruition of
^he privileges of ordinances, but in the state of eternal life and blessedness
in heaven, ergo* 2. The Kingdom of heaven there is directly opposed to the
outer darkness, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth v. 12. But that which is
directly opposed to the outer darkness in which is weeping and gnashing of
teeth, is the Kingdom of glory, or the state of eternal life and blessedness
in heaven, and not the visible Church only, or a being in it for the fruition
of the privileges of ordinances, ergo. 3. The scope of the speech of our
Savior is conceived by most interpreters, to be to abate the insolency and
pride of the Jews, who contemned the Gentiles. Upon occasion of the Centurions
faith v. 10. he tells them, though they now despised the Gentiles as not worthy
to eat with them, yet they should come from East and West and should sit down
with the best of their Ancestors, in the best, highest, and happiest place and
condition. 4. Ex^ounding it of the visible Church it were not true which our
Savior speaks; For the Gentiles did never sit down with them in the visible
Church for the fruition of the privi^edges of ordinances, such as C^rcumcision,
the Passover, Baptism, the Lords Supper, for some of these Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, did never partake of, nor ever shall, nor may the Gentiles with them,
partake of circumcision, and the passover, for that had been to have foretold
that the Gentiles should have been circumcised with those Fathers, which had
been to establish Judai^m, contrary to the Apostles decree Acts 15. to Paul's
determination Gal. 2. and 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Yea, if it had been foretold
that the Gentiles should come and join themselves to the visible Church Jewish,
which began in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, our Lord Christ had foretold that
conjunction, which was so far from proving true in the event, that they who did
come to Christ were persecuted and cast out of that Church Gal. 4.29. 1 These.
2.15.5. Hence it follows, that the children of the Kingdom are not so called
because they were in that* Kingdom of heaven which is there meant, for then
they had never been cast out: but they are called children of the Kingdom,
because as Diodati notes, by the prerogative of Gods Covenant the Jews seemed
to be heirs of this Kingdom, or as the new Annot. as chapter 9.15. who were born
of those parents to wh^m the Kingdom was promised, and by virtue of the
Covenant Romans ^.4. it had still belonged to them, had they not forfeited it by
their unbelief and wickedness. Pisch. sch. Filios vero regni] id est, Judaeos
qui hacteni^s per aliquot saecula ad regnum illud coelorum vocati sunt and
vocantur. Beza Annot. Filios regni, (...), Id est, indigenas, quos vocant vulgo
naturales subjectos. Intelligit autem Dei regnum, ad quod pertinebant in gener^
quicunque erant ex Abrahae genere, cum long alia sit ratio coram Deo censendi
filios Abrahae, nimirum ex fide. So that they were children of the Kingdom not
before God in actual title or possession, but only in appearance to men, and
likelihood, considering their descent and the first manifestation of Christ,
and the Gospel to that people. 6. Out of this it appears that a man may be said
to be ^ast out of the Kingdom of heaven, who was never in actually, but only
in possibility, according to what was apparent to men, and consequently Mr.
Bls. propositions are not true in his precedent argument, Those that are cast
off from being a people of God, were once his people; those that are put out of
Covenant, were a people in Covenant; nor the argument good, Ishmael was cast
out of Covenant, therefore once in. Nor is it seldom, that men are said to be
brought up from the grave, as Psalm. 30.3. and to be redeemed from the grave and
hell, who were never in, but only in danger of it.

But Mr. Bl. has yet a fourth text, which was his text in his
Birth-priviledge, it is Gal 2.15. From whence after some explication given of
the text he t^us argues, That which is a privilege of nature or birth, belongs
to the natural issue, that cannot be denied. But to be in Covenant with God as
a people holy and exceeding others that are without as sinners, is a privilege
of nature or birth, therefore this privilege belongs to the natural issue.

Ans. To be in covenant with God may be understood either in respect of the
Covenant with Abraham Gen 17. or the Covenant at Mount Sinai Exodus 19. To be in
the Covenant Gen 17. may be in respect of Evangelical benefits, or of domestic
and political benefits or privileges, as, to be accounted members of the
Israelitish nation and so of that church, to have the service of God among
them, the law among them, education under it, freedom from idolatry, and other
pollutions of the Gentiles. To be as a people holy, may be understood either of
holiness by inward sanctification, called circumcision of the heart, or of
outward holiness in being distinguished from other people, as set apart visibly
for God, whether in reputation or truth, either by Gods distinction or by an
outward sign, or by their own profession. I grant the minor of being in
Covenant either Exodus 19. or Genesis 17. in respect of the domestic and political
benefits, at least some of them, and to be a holy people exceeding others that
are without as sinners, if understood of outward holiness in reputation or
truth, by Gods distinction, and by the outward sign of Circumcision, was (I do
not grant is) a privil^dge of nature or birth, and accordingly grant the
conclusion, that this privilege did (I do not say does) belong to the natural
issue (I do not say to all) of Abraham by Isaac and Jacob, and was proper to
the Jews, and no more can be gathered from Gal. 2.15. there is not a word of the
same privilege as belonging to the natural poste^ity of believing Gentiles.
But the minor is denied, if understood of Evangelical benefits and of holiness
inward (of which alone the question should have been formed, his position being
in full opposition to my words) nor is it proved out of the text, himself
expounding Jews by nature, that is by birth and off spring of a nation that is
holy though in themselves sinners, reputed an holy people, a people by covenant
holy to the Lord, which they might be though to be in Covenant with God Genesis
17.7. and as a people holy and exceeding others that are without as sinners by
inward holiness be not a privilege of nature or birth.

But Mr. Bl. thinks my grant involves me in not a few contradictions. 1. To
what I say Exercit. page 3. the natural seed inherit only domestic and civil
benefits. But Mr. Bl. falsely charge me, the word [ onely] is Mr. Bls.
addition not mine, as the Reader that shall read the words may perceive. 2. To
what I am wont to deny, that birth entitles any to such privileges as interest
in Circumcision, and observance of Moses law. But this is another of Mr. Bls.
forged calumnies: let him show if he can that I say so any where, and he
deserves some credit, if not let him suffer as a Calumniator. 3. That I deny
the natural seed any promise of spiritual mercies, which is another forgery of
his like the former. 4. That I say this was proper to the Jews in that Church
state, who had prerogatives peculiar to them. And then says thus. And here we
urge it no further, and it fully concludes Mr. T. in a contradiction, that will
have the natural seed of Abraham, and no other then his spiritual seed to be
entitled to such privileges. Here Is more of his forgery, that I say no other
then Abraham's spirit^ul seed are entitled to such privileges as were proper
to the Jews in that Church state, who had prerogatives peculiar to them. Let
him show any such thing in my writing, or let him, as he and his fellow
Paedobaptist Mr. Robert Baillee (who has in like sort wronged me) as they
ought, testify their repentance by righting me. Otherwise the Lord will to
their shame discover their evil dealing, i^ their own conscience be so blind
or so hard as to slight such a sin.

He concludes thus, Any one of these arguments severally, much more all
^ointly, make good this position, that all the natural seed of Abraham by Isaac
and Jacob, are in that great Charter (vouchsafed of God) taken into Covenant so
as to be the people of God, and to enjoy all privileges of his people in order
(upon Gods terms) to everlasting salvation. But 1. not one nor all prove that
God did promise to all Genesis 17.7. or any such outward privileges as he means,
to wit, to be circumcised, or right to it and the Passover, nor that all enjoy
them. 2. The promises of justification, adoption, eternal life, upon Gods
terms, without the promise of regeneration and effectual calling, make no^ a
person to be in the Covenant, nor a people holy to the Lord Evangeli^ally. Now
this promise Mr. Bl. has not proved to be made to all the natural seed of
Abraham, by Isaac and Jacob, and till he does so, he proves nothing against my
assertion Exercit. page 3 which he pretended fully to oppose, but has failed
to do it. His 36. chapter is answered before sect. 29. I pass on to chapter 37. which
is thus entitled, The Covenant in New Testament times takes in parents with
their children; This he sets himself to make good first by interrogatories, and
then by Peter's words Acts 2.38, 39. which is answered before sect. 21. A little
o^ his interrogatories.

To his first, if by the grant he mean the Covenant of grace Evangelical, I
deny it to have been ever made to a beli^ver and all his seed, nor is it proved
by Mr. Bl. If a Covenant of visible Church Membership and initial seal, I deny
any such Covenant ever made by God to a believer and his seed, or the grant
thereof to have been held by the Church of God in fee from Abraham to this
present hour, and therefore need show no reverse of such a grant.

To his 2d. demand, I grant a whole nation may enter into Covenant as Deuteronomy 29.
nor do I restrain any from engagement of their infants and posterity unborn by
an oath and curse to own God But I find there no promise or grant of visible
Church Membership and initial seal to believers and their seed, by virtue of
such a Covenant. His other frivolous questions in that demand are answered
often, that the difference arises from the different institution of
Circumcision which is the rule of administering them, not interest in the
Covenant if there were such.

To his 3d. demand, I know no scandal ever given or likely to be given to the
Jews by not baptizing infants. His random talk of s^riking out of the Covenant
infants, is showed often before to be vain, as going on suppositions not
proved. To his alleg^tions of Genesis 17.7. Ezekiel. 16.20. 1 Cor. 7.14. I have often
answered before.

To his 4th. that the reason why in the Apostles days and the next age to
them* no question was moved about the baptizing of infants, though infants were
circumcised by the Jews is manifest, to wit, Christ had not appointed infants
to be bap^ized, the Apostles and primitive Christians did not at all use it, it
was contrary to the end and use of baptism as appointed by Christ, they knew
not of the Paedobaptists doctrine, about the title to baptism from the
Covenant, and its succession to circumcision.

But Mr. Bl. further refers me to Mr. Baxters Treatise of Infants
Church Membership, proving that infants were sometimes Church members, page 26,
27. that there is no repeal of this grant vouchsafed of God page 27, 28.
waiting for some fair answer to the former demands Whereto I shall address my
self, as being very desirous wi^h the assistance of the Lord to do my endeavor
for the freeing of men from the delusion of that Book, wherewith a great number
of Paedobaptists have been gulled.

SECT. XLIX. The 4th* Chapter of Mr. Baxters, Part 1. of Plain Scripture Proof,
etc. is examined, his conceits about Infants visible Church membership and
their admission considered; and sundry Animadversions made on that Chapter.
MR. B. part 1. chapter 4. of his Plain Scripture Proof, etc. writes thus. My 2d.
argument, and the chief I shall make use of is this. All that ought to be
admitted visible Church Members, ordinarily ought to be baptized: But some
Infants ought to be admitted visibl^ Church Members; therefore some Infants
ordinarily ought to be baptized. Mr. T. has gone over and over the terms of
this Argument; so often* as if he could not possibly find out my meaning in them:
when they are as plain as I well know how to express my self. A great while he
fain would have denied the major Proposition; but at last he is content to deny
only the minor: And indeed that is the very heart of the controversy. The
question between us is no^ so much Whether infants may be baptized? as Whether
they are in the number of Christians, and to be added as members to the visible
Church? If Mr. T. did grant the minor, and not deny our children Christianity,
and to be members of the Church, I should for my part, think his error (though
foul) yet of less consequence in denying of Baptism. But it is their
Churchmembership that he denies, and yields that all that ought to be
admi^ted members should be baptized.

Answ. That I did often in the dispu^e at Bewdly go over and over the terms of
this argument, need not seem st^a^ge, when Mr. Thomas Hooker having the book he
was to examine before him in Print, in a like point, says thus, survey of the
sum of Church Discipline, Part 1. chapter 12. When I had read over Mr. Rutherford
once and again, I was at a stand in mine own thoughts, to determine certainly
what was his proper intendment by the catholic and visible Church. I might
well doubt what he meant by the visible Church, how he defined i^, (wherein his
notion is different from what others have, as is showed before in the 2d. part
of this Review, sect. 17.) whether he meant the visible Church catholic, or
particular; and if particular, whether Jewish, or Christian. And for the
admission, what he meant by it, how, and by whom it ought to be, was doubtful.
I perceived in the very entrance of the dispute, by his preface, and his
propounding the question about our baptizing, representing it as odious, as if
it were murder and adultery; and after by his denying liberty of repeating to
me, refusing to explain his own terms, scoffingly putting if off as if it were
catechizing of him, when I desired him to open some terms to me which he used;
and when I told him that it was needful the people should understand us, he
replied, he came to dispute with me, not to instruct them: nor would clear
them, except I could by distinction force him to it. I deprehended that he was,
as I found him, bent to catch advantages to insult over me, and carry away the
same of a victory, and not in a brotherly candid way to discuss the point, that
truth might appear to all the hearers, which I hoped from a man so seemingly
godly. Upon which reasons I confess I was hesitant, both about the answering of
this, and other arguments all along the dispute, finding that Mr. B. had
studied arguments in unusual expressions, that he might the more easily
entangle me, having no time to weigh his words, but being required presently to
give answer. For which reason I was also necessitated sometimes to vary my
answers as I deprehended his meaning to be. Now presuming I shall better
understand Mr. B. then I could do before, I shall give a more determinante
answer to his argument. Which that I may do, I conceive it necessary, that in
the entrance I do enquire into his opinion concerning the visible Church, and
admissi^n into it, and the meaning of his expression [ ought to be admitted
visible Church Members.]

1. Mr. B supposes that the reason of the appellation given to the visible
body, is its seeming (to the judgment of man) to be the same with the
mystical. Praefestin: Morator sect. 11.

2. That to be a member of the Church visible, is but to be one that in
seeming, or appearance, or to the judgment of man does belong to the invisible
Church or the Kingdom of Heaven, if a man be known (or any sort of men) to
belong to the Church invisible, then they visibly belong to it; and then they
are visible members of the Church. Plain Script. proof, etc. part 1. chapter 31.
page 105. chapter 27. page 73. He says, to be member of the visible Church, or of
the Church as visible, or a visible member of the Church are all one, and is no
more but to seem to be a true member of the Church of Christ, (commonly called
invisible) or of the true mystical body of Christ. Answ. to my Valedict. Orat.
page 176. You say you dispute them not out of the invisible Church. Answ. 1.
But will you yield that they are so much as seeming probable members of the
invisible Church? If you do, then they are members of the visible, which you
deny: For to be a visible member of the Church, or a member of the visible
Church as such, is no more th^n to be a seeming member of the invisible Church,
or one that we ought to take in probability to be of the invisible Church.
Wherein how Mr. B. is mistaken, is showed in the 2d. Part of this Review, sect.
17. page 229, etc.

3. Chapter 20. He imag^nes an universal visible Church existent, not dissolved;
which is all one as to say, there is or was an universal visible Church,
consisting of indivi^ual members immortal, or perpetually visible: Which
mistake of his will come under consideration in that which follows.

4. Chapter 5. and chapter 20. he imagines having infants to have been of the
essentials of the Jewish Church. But therein he is mistaken: For though they
may be termed substantial parts, yet not essential, (the Jewish Church had been
a visible Church though there had been no infant in it) but integral.

5. Chapter 20. that the nature of the Jews Church was not repealed, that the Jews
Church was not repealed, chapter 5. that the Law or Covenant on which the species
or essential form of their Church (and many of its accidents) was grounded, is
not changed or repealed. Though the Jews are cast off, yet the law and nature
of Churches is still the same* Which speeches, with other more of the like
kind, shall be (God willing) examin^d in that which follows, and the nonsense
and vanity of them showed.

6. Chapter 23. that infants visible church membership did not begin at the
institution of circumcision, but rather with the first infant of faithful
Adam, though he after fell off.

7. That this is grounded on a Law and Covenant of God, which is made higher
then that, Genesis 17.7. even that Genesis 3.15. Chapter 23. Yea, he makes it to antecede
the fall of Adam. Chapter 19. it is said to be of the Law of nature to have infants
to be a part of a Kingdom: And chapter 13. therefore infants to be church members.
Page 60. That infants must be church members, is partly natural, and partly
grounded on the Law of grace and faith: as if Church constitution were natural,
and not by mere institution.

8. Animadv. on Mr. Bedfords treatise of Baptismal regeneration. Plain Script.
proof page 3^6. page 15. and elsewhere he makes the condition of the infants
church membership and justification to be wholly without him in the faith of
the parent. The falsity of which conceit is showed by me in the 2d. part of
this Review, sect. 10, 17. and elsewhere.

9. That this visible church membership, notwithstanding the continuance of the
parents Faith the imagined Law and Covenant, yet endures not but til they, when
they come to years, do themselves make profession. So Plain Scrip. proof, part
2. chapter 6. page 119. He is not to be taken for a Christian, who will not visibly
by himself when he comes to age (as he did by his parents in infancy) publicly
profess both his assent to to the fundamental Articles of Faith, and his
consent that the Lord only shall be his God, and Christ only his Redeemer,
and so his Savior and Lord, and promise in heart and life to be true to him
accordingly: And I deliver the Sacrament to none that will not thus profess and
promise. And page 335. He says, He will not contradict this proposition of
Davenant, Those who in Baptism were truly justified, regenerated, and adopted
suitable to their infant state; when they come to the use of reason, are not
justified, regenerated, and adopted suitable to the special state of the aged,
unless by repenting, believing, and abrenunciation, they fulfill their vow made
in Baptism.

10. That there is no other way of admitting visible members now into the
Church, but by Baptism, page 24.108. But they are visible members before Baptism
according to his tenet, page 24. We and infants are Church Members before
Baptism.

11. I presume that when he says, All that ought to be admmitted visible
church members, ordinarily ought to be baptized, he means this of Christian
Churches, church members, and admitting into them, not the Jewish: For though I
find him speak as if the Jews Church were not repealed, (as in his nonsense he
speaks, chapter 20.) that is, as I imagine, in the nature or essence the Jewish
Church visible and the Christian were the same, and so they that were admitted
into the Jewish, are to be admitted into the Christian; which caused me to
suspect at the Dispute an ambiguity in that expression [ ought to be admitted
visible church members.] Yet I do not imagine that he holds the proposition in
this sense, All that ought heretofore to be admitted visible church members in
the Jewish Church distinct from the Christian, ordinarily ought then to be
baptized before Christ's coming* while the Jewish Church stood: if he should, I
should deny it.

12. That this admission which infants are to have is, as he often speaks, into
the visible Church: But what this admission into the visible Church is, by
whom, and unto whom it ought to be, according to Mr. Bs. judgment, is yet to me
uncertain. Admission is, according to the common use of i^, the taking in of a
person into an Office, Army, or Family, or the like, to perform the work, enjoy
the benefit, profit, etc. of such an Officer, Member, etc. And it is usually
done by some Officer to whom that business is committed; and the person upon
his admission, and by virtue of it, takes his place, work, benefit, or what
else he is admitted to, as his right and due. But I know no such thing in the
baptizing of infants. Indeed by Baptism regularly, a man is admitted to the
Communion of the Church in prayer, hearing, receiving the Lords Supper, and
such other acts of Christian Communion as belong to visible Church Members. But
an infant by Baptism is not admitted to these Prayer and hearing are in some
sort allowed to unbaptized persons, and they are admitted to them who are
infidels, when infants baptized are sent away as incapable of them, and
disturbers by their crying and playing. The Lords Supper they are not admitted
to by their Baptism, till they themselves profess, as Mr. B. and other
Paedobaptists agree; The being, name, repute of Chur^h-members is antecedent to
Baptism, and therefore they are not admitted to it by Baptism. I must confess
therefore I do not well know what this admission of infants i^ which is by
Baptism, and I think the proposition in Mr. Bs. argument to be void of truth or
sense, if it be not thus construed: All that ought to be admitted visible
church members are baptized, or, which is all one, ordinarily ought to be
baptized before they are admitted, unless the admission and baptism be one and
the same, and then the speech is an inept tautologie, as if he had said: All
visible church members that ought to be baptized, ordinarily ought to be
baptized. So that now Mr. B. may see some reason of my demur about his major
proposition, which though it were as plain as he well knew how to express
himself, yet there is so much ambiguity in it, that in the sense which the
words in any good construction will bear, it is to be denied: But if he
understand it in the later sense, the Syllogism is nugatory, the minor and the
conclusion being the same. Nevertheless, as in the Dispute I let the major
pass, so I shall do in this answer, only taking notice of some things in his
proof of it, and insist upon my denial of the minor.

The first argument of Mr. B. to prove admission into the visible Church is to
be by Baptism, I approve, and thence conclude against infant Baptism thus. If
we have neither precept nor example in Scripture since Christ ordained Baptism,
of admitting any by Baptism as visible members but believer^ by profession,
then all that must be admitted visible members ordinarily by Baptism, must be
believ^rs by profession. But since Baptism was instituted (or established) we
have no precept or example in Scri^ture of admitting any a^ visible members by
Baptism, but believers by profession. Ergo, all that must be admitted visible
members must be believers by profession. I know not what in show of reason can
be said to this. For what man (yet Mr. B. and Paedobaptists dare) dare go in a
way which has neither precept nor example to warrant it, from a way that has
full current of both? yet they that will admit infants into the visible Church
by Baptism do so. If he say there is precept before, I answer, his own major
requires precept or example since Christ ordained Baptism, and therefore that
shift avoids not the retortion of his argument. To what he replies to this
argument in his Praefestin. morator, sect. 16. besides what I have said in the
2d. part of this Review, sect. 4. page 66.67. there is enough in the same book,
sect. 10, 11, 12 etc. to manifest, that infants are not in any Scripture
disciples appointed to be baptized, Matthew. 28.19. Nevertheless, I find
Alstedius in his Supplement to Chamier de natura Ecclesiae, cap. 7.. 4. thus
writing. Baptismus admittit in Ecclesiam particularem: sed in Ecclesiam
catholicam potest aliquis admitti sine baptismo; quia hanc ad rem sufficit vera
fides. And whereas Mr. Ball in his reply to the answer of the New-Ergland
Elders about the nine positions, page 60. had said, Baptism is the seal of our
admission into the congregation or flock of Christ; but not evermore of our
receiving into this or that particular society as set members thereof: Mr.
Allin rejoyns in his Defense, page 163. Baptism does not admit actually into
the Church, and your own expression secrety implies as much, when you say,
Baptism is a seal of our admission into the Church or flock of Christ: If
baptism be the seal of our admission, then there is admission thereunto before
baptism: but who does admit, and where and when is any admitted to the Church,
but in particular congregations? ^an any be admitted into a Charch, that whole
Church being ignorant thereof? Fulwood sermon. of the Church, etc. p* 14. The
children of believers, born in the Church are not (though virtual) actual
members of the visible Church before Baptism. This I produce, to show the
uncertainty among Paedobaptists about admission into the Church by baptism, and
membership before Baptism.

Like also what Mr. B. says in his 2d. arg. To be above ordinances is to be
above obedience to God, and so Gods: And when he says in his 3d. The nature
and end of baptism, is to be Christ's listing, engaging sign; it is a good
argument to prove that infant baptism has not the nature and end of baptism,
^ith it is not Christ's (that is, according to his appointment) listing,
engaging sign, the infant neither lists nor engages himself by it as Christ
appointed: And when he says, If it be the use of baptism to engraff and enter
us into the body or Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. and into Christ, as Romans 6.3. then
sure it must be used at our engraffing and entrance, it rather follows, it is
before, since the means is to be before the end in execution. To what he says
about Church Members, Disciples, Christians, enough has been said in the 2d.
part of this Review, sect. 10. etc.

In his 6th. argument, having formed an argument from Ephesians. 5.26. he says of
me. Mr. T. in his Exercit. objecteth, 1. That then the thief on the cross, etc.
were no church members. Answ. It follows not from [he that is baptized shall
be saved] that therefore he that is not baptized shall not be saved: so here,
for the former speaks but ad debitum, and the later de eventu; it will follow,
that it is a duty to baptize all members where it may be done; but not that it
shall certainly come to pass.

Refut. What I said Exercit. page 21. of that text, Ephesians. 5.27. was not an
objection against what Mr. B. would evince from the text, but in answer to an
argument urged for infant baptism from that text by a London Minister, in a
conference anno 1643. Which argument being drawn from an act or end of Christ,
which was not only duty* but his performance: it was urged, that if infants
were not baptized, and to be baptized, they belonged not to the Church: To
which I answered, (...), by an answerable illation, by the same reason the
thief on the cross should not belong to the Church because not baptized. That
which Mr. B. answers is not true, that Mark 16.16. the former part speaks but
ad debitum, and the later de eventu. For though a duty may be gathered from the
subject of the proposition, it being clear, that salvation being promised to
the believer baptized, Faith and Baptism are required duties to that end; yet
the former part of the proposition does as fully speak of an event as the later
part does. And though Ephesians. 5.26. it is proved a duty to baptize, as also to
preach the word, because it is Christ's way (in which we are to concur with him)
of clensing his Church: yet the clensing of the Church with or in the washing
of water by the word, does not note a duty, but an end intended, and event to
follow by Christ's action. Mr. B. proceeds.

2. He objecteth, that therefore it must be understood of the more famous part
of the Church, or that purification is to be understood of that which is for
the most part. Answ. The Apostle speaks plainly of the whole Church; and to
take it for part, is to cross the Text, except you show a necessity for it. 2.
It speaks of all quoad debitum, in regard of the means of it, which they are
capable of. 3. And usually quoad eventum of the said means too.

Refut. 1. It cannot be understood of the whole visible Church, in which are
many reprobates; for it is that Church which Christ loved with that peculiar
love which is the Husbands pattern to love his Wife by, for whom he gave
himself, that he might sanctify it, that he might present it to himself
glorious, and a Church not having spot or wrinkle, or any of such things; but
that it might be holy, and without blemish: which are true only of that part
of the visible, which is also of the invisible Church of the elect. 2.
Whomsoever it speaks of, [ that he might purify it in or with the washing of
water by the word] it speaks of the intention of Christ; which being supposed
that it is not frustrated, it follows, that those who are said to be purified
in or with the washing of water by the word, are all in the event converted by
preaching, and baptized with water. Which since it cannot be said of all elect
infants, for they are not purified by the word, it must be understood as I say,
either by a synocdoche of the whole for the more famous or apparent part; or
else the act is meant of that which is usually done, or for the most part, not
what is universally and perpetually. 3. It is granted, that we may gather
thence the duty of preaching the word, and baptizing with water, and that they
who are sanctified by preaching are to be purified by baptism, and that this
was usual in the event, a known use in the primitive times: But expressly it
notes only Christ's act, not the Ministers duty, which is only implied, and
follows from this, that Christ does it by them; and it supposes, that they who
are capable of the one, to wit^ baptism, are capable of the other, the hearing
of the word* for these two are conjunctively put, not dis-junctively either the
one or the other, as if some were purified in the washing of water only,
others by the word; but the same who are purified by the one, are purified by
the other. Mr. B. adds.

Object. But some may say, that [by the word] is here added, which infants are
not capable of* Answ. 1. Infants are sanctified by the word of promise and
precept to parents to dedicate them to God, though not by the word preached to
infants. 2. The means is to each member as they are capable. Washing by water
to those that are capable of that, and by the word to those that are capable of
that, which blind and deaf men are not any more then infants.

Ref. There is no word of precept to parents to dedicate infants to God by
baptism, though there be to pray for them; nor do I think M. ^. would allow
every parent to dedicate his or her infant to God by baptism, which they must
do if there were a precept to them to do it. That there is no such word of
promise as entitles every infant of a believer, or any definitely to baptism,
much less that appoints parents to dedicate their infants to God by baptism, is
amply showed in this book before. Nor can the meaning be, Ephesians. 5 26. of such
a sanctification. For 1. no word of promise, and precept to parents to dedicate
them to God, is that which Christ does sanctify or cleanse them by, partly
because there is none such, partly because the word of precept to parents (if
there were such) to dedicate them to God, would not cleanse or sanctify the
infants, it has no effect on them, nor notes their duty: nor does the precept
sanctify or cleanse, but the observing of it; nor was the parents dedication
ever made by God a means to cleanse or sanctify the child, as there is meant.
Nor, were there such a word of promise to a parent, would that of it self
sanctify and cleanse. 2. The word there meant, is the word of the Gospei
preached to those who are said to be cleansed by Christ. For 1. all along the N.
T. and particularly in that Epistle, by [the word] is meant the word of the
Gospel, as it is preached or published. Acts 10.22, 36, 37. Romans 10.8, 9, 17.
Ephesians. 6.17, Heb. 6.5. 1 Pet. 1.25. Luke 3.2. John 3.34. and 6.63, 68. and
8.47^ and 12.47, 48. and 15.7. and 17.8. Acts 5.32. Matthew 13.20, 21, 22, 23.
Mark 2.2. and 4.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20. and 16.20. Luke 1.2. and 5.1. and 8.11,
12, 13, 15; 21. and 10.39. and 11.28. John 5.24, 38. and 8.31, 43, 52. and
14.23, 24. and 17 6, 14, 17, 20. Acts 4.4, 29 31. and 6.2, 4, 7. and 8.4, 14,
25. and 11.1, 19. and 12.24. and 13.5, 7, 26, 44, 46, 48, 49. and 14.25. and
15.7, 35, 36. and 16.6, 32. and 17.11, 13. and 18.11. and 19.10. 1 Cor. 2.4.
and 14.36. and 15.2. 2 Cor. 2.17. and 4.2. and 5.19. Gal. 6.6. Ephesians. 1.13.
Phillip. 1.14. and 2.16. Col. 1.5, 25. and 3.16. and 4.3. 1 These. 1.6, 8. and
2.13. 2 These. 3.1. 1 Timothy 5.17. 2 Timothy 2.9, 15. and 4.2. Tit. 1.3, 9 and 2.5.
Heb. 13.7. Jam. 1.21, 22, 23. 1 Pet. 2.8. and 3.1. Revel 1.9. and 6.9. and
12.11. and 20.4.2. It is the word of the Gospel preached or published, by which
persons are said to be purified, converted, regenerate, sanctified, John 15.3.
and 17.17. Acts 20.32. and. 26.18. Romans 10.17. Gal. 3.5. Ephesians. 1.13. Jam.
1.18. 1 Pet 1.23. not any where by the word of promise barely as made by God,
but as it was fulfilled and preached, is Christ said to sanctify or cleanse his
Church. And by this, all said to be purified, Ephesians. 5.26. are cleansed, and
therefore no infants, who are not at all capable of understanding it, and
therefore not so capable of being cleansed by it as the blind and deaf. Mr. B.
yet adds.

Object. But it is the invisible Church that Christ is said thus to cleanse,
Answ. 1. Certainly those that are washed with water, or hearing the word, or
either, are all visible members. 2. The visible Church has the outward
privileges and titles of the invisible, because as to us they must in
prohability be judged to belong to both. Therefore Paul freq^ently calls them
all saints and sons of God by faith, etc.

Ref. Though they be of the visible who are so washed, yet the Church Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27. cannot be meant of the merely visible; but only of them who are
so of the visible, that they are also of the invisible, as is proved before
from the things said of the Church, which agree to none other. And thus Mr. B.
has my answer to that Chapter and my apprehension of his major; let us now view his
minor, and try his Achilles which he is so confident of.

SECT. L. The fifth Chapter of Mr. Bs. Plain Scripture proof etc. Part. 1. is
examiand the texts Gal. 4.1, etc. Matthew. 28.19. cleared so as to prove infants
now no visible Church Members.
CHAPTER 5. he begins thus. Though I have many and clear a^guments from the new
Testament, to prove infants to be members of the visible Church, as I shall let
you see, God willing, when I come to them; yet because I think it most orderly
to take them before us from the beginning, I will first fetch one from the old
Testament, and that such as is fully confirmed from the new: For I hope you are
none of those who have wiped out all the old Testament from your Bibles, or
that presently look upon a text as no text, if you hear it come from the old
Testament.

Answ. I Know none at Bewdley so erroneous or foolish. But Mr. B. may see (if
his high soaring meditations and studies will allow him time to descend to view
such a low argument, as he often disdainfully speaks) something written in the
2d. part of this Review, Sect. 2, 3. which tends to prove that no good argument
can be drawn from the old Testament for his admission of infants visible Church
members. And for his many and clear arguments from the New Testament to prove
infants to be members of the visible Church; he did wisely put in the caution,
God willing when I come to them I shall let you see them, to save his credit,
though he never show them. For my part I despair of ever seeing them. As for
those I have found brought by him, the chief have been examined in the first
and second Part of this Review, and found impertinent. The dispute that remains
to be viewed is so immethodical, that had Mr. B. ever been bred up in Schools,
I am confident he would have been ashamed of it. But I must now follow him in
his own track.

I therefore, says he, argue thus; First, If by the merciful gift and
appointment of God, not yet repealed, some infants were once to be admitted
members of the visible Church, then some infants are to be so admitted still:
But by the merciful gift and appointment of God not yet repealed, some infants
were once to be admitted members of the visible Church: therefore they are so
to be admitted still.

Answ. Mr. B. page 24. plainly says, that by [admitting] he means solemn
admitting, that since baptism was instituted (or established) we have no
precept or example of admitting visible members any other way, that as a
soldier before listing, and as a King before crowning and taking his oath, so
are we and infants Church Members before baptism: He says page 26. of this
argument, I will first fetch you one from the Old Testament. Whence 1. it is
apparent that his visible Church membership and admitting visible
Church Members, are not the same. 2. That a merciful gift and appointment of
God of visible Church Membership is not a^l one with the merciful gift and
appointment of God of admission of visible Church Members. 3. That a merciful
gift and appointment of God of admitting visible Church Members, is by some
solemn rite. Which is confirmed in that he speaks of admitting visible
Church Members, as a duty to be performed by some persons, as when he says chapter
4. ought to be admitted visible Church members, and in this place were once to
be admitted visible Church Members. Visible Church Membership might be and was
a gift of God, not a duty, (which is some action to be done by man) but a state
or relation resulting from the foundation, or cause, or reason of it. Now if
Mr. B. cannot show (as I am confident he cannot) any other gift or appointment
of God of admitting infants visible Church members in the old Testament
unrepealed, besides that of circumcision, then either his antecedent (as he
terms it) must be meant of it, or else he mocks the people of God with a
pretended merciful gift and appointment of God of admitting infants visible
Church Members unrepealed, which is no where extant, but is fained by himself
to delude them: and if it be that of Ci^cumcision, then his minor asserts the
appointment of Circumcision, and h^s conclusion is, that our infants are still
to be circumcised. Nor can I, with all my enquiry and study, conceive (if he
had understood himself) he could mean any other. For by his making admission
solemn, comparing it with listing of a Soldier, crowning of a King, it is
manifest that he understood it of a solemn Rite; and speaking of it as a thing
that ought to be, he must mean it of an act to be performed by man; and
limiting it now to Baptism, he intimates it was by some Rite answerable to
Baptism heretofore, which I hardly think any learned man but would conceive
must be meant of Circumcision and no other, since no other was appointed by God
to infants for admission of them as visible Church Members. It is true, he
often, when I pressed him in the Dispute to speak plainly whether he meant by
his appointment or Law unrepealed that of Circumcision, did deny it, and
distinguished between the Law of infants visible Church Membership and that of
Circumcision; but he never showed me a Law of infants admission as visible
Church members besides it. And in his arguments whereby he proves the not
repealing, he concludes about the not repealing of the Law of infants visible
Church Membership, not of their admission. Of which fallacy I had in the
Dispute some obscure apprehension, and therefore pressed him so often to speak
plainly, and told him he must mean it of Circumcision, (which fact of mine Mr.
B. did in the Dispute, and does here chapter 23. represent as defective in
tenderness of conscience, fear of God, love of truth, charity to a brother,
common modesty, after his usual fashion of making outcries without cause,) but
could not then c^ear it, having not then so well understood his opinion, nor
his shifting of the terms, nor being able to show it for want of a Notary, and
time to view his arguments, he being also very quick in urging and pressing me
to answer, without allowing time to weigh his arguments: and therefore after
much altercation concerning his meaning, gave way to his proof of the Law of
visible Church Membership unrepealed, and neglected to keep him to the proof of
the Law of admission unrepealed, to mine and the Causes great disadvantage.
Whether Mr. B. did fraudulently or ignorantly manage the Dispute, belongs to
God to judge; though I must needs say, that I did then, and do still suspect he
was not free from deceit, or dolus malus in it: finding in a Copy I have of the
Dispute, That he distinguished then between visible Church membership and
admission. As for my self, had I perceived so clearly as now I do, his mind
about the kind of visible Church Membership and admission of infants he
asserts, I should have stuck to this, That though infants could have been
proved visible Church members, according to the Law he pretends unrepealed; yet
were they not to be admitted by Baptism, which is appointed only for visible
Church Members by profession of faith: And therefore whereas he says he
contends more for infants visible Church membership then Baptism, and makes
tha^ the very heart of the controversy, I conceive otherwise, and do let him
understand, that were it not that I know that he has very much abused me and
others in that which follows, I should think my tenet not overthrown, nor much
regard it, though his Law of infants visible Church Membership were yielded,
and my answer to his arguments omitted. But since things are as they are, I
resolve to go on.

The Antecedent (says he) has two parts. 1. That by Gods merciful gift and
appointment some infants were once to be admitted members of the visible
Church: This is as far beyond all doubt as you can expect. 1. Mr. T. granted it
in his public Dispute: and so he does in his Apology, page 66. where he says
[ I acknowledge that in the visible Church of the Jews, the infants were
reckoned to the Church] yet lest any should be so impudent as to deny it, I
briefly prove it thus. 1. If infants were part of them that entered into
Covenant with the Lord God, and into his Oath, that he might stablish them for
a people to himself, and he might be to them a God; then infants were part of
the Church: But the former is plain, in Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. to any that will
read it. Therefore infants were part of the Church.

Answ. What I did I still grant, that infants were part of the Jewish Church,
and were circumcised; but the conclusion Mr. B. infers from Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11,
12. is not that which Mr. B. should prove. For it is not all one to say,
Infants were part of the Church, and by Gods merciful gift and appointment
some infants were once to be admitted members of the visible Church. Nor does
Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. prove either infants were part of the Church, or their
admission. Their entering into Covenant was not by any act of their own, but by
the Elders or parents, who in like manner Covenanted for the unborn, v. 15. who
could not thereby be visible Church Members, being not then existent; and
therefore the Covenant there made them not vis^ble Church Members. Nor is there
any proof of their admission thence, they were admitted either after or before,
the Covenanting was not their admission, for admission is the act of some
person that has that trust or office committed to him; but their Covenanting
was the persons own act, and if it did admit the infants, then it did admit the
parents, Elders, Captains, and so they did admit themselves, which is absurd;
and the establishing them for a people to himself, is no more then as Piscator
rightly Schol. in Deuteronomy. 29.13. That he might require from thee the worship of
himself by obedience toward his precepts, and so may bind thee to himself. So
the obligation of the people precedes, and he might be to thee a God, that is
may in like manner promise to thee that he will follow thee with his grace, and
do thee good and so make thee happy. So Gods promise follows. It was a
Covenant neither to make nor admit them visible Church members, but to engage
them to obedience, and to assure them thereupon of protection and blessing: and
this extended to their posterity v. 15. who could not be then visible
Church Members, or admitted then as being not existent.

2. Says Mr. B. If infants were engaged to God by the seal of his Covenant
(Circumcision) then they were members of his Church: But some infants were so
engaged: therefore they were Church members; this is all undeniable. I never
yet met with any that denied either.

Answ Circumcision is not styled in Scripture the seal of the Covenant, but I
grant that infants were members in the Jewish Church visible, admitted by
Circumcision, and engaged thereby though not by their own act, yet according to
Gods injunction and severe exaction to keep the Law, and t^is is the only
proof of their admission Mr. B. brings out of the old Testament. He adds,

3 If infants were part of those that were baptized to Moses in the cloud and
sea, and drank the spiritual drink, even of that rock which was Christ, then
sure they were part of the visible Church: But the antecedent is plain 1 Cor.
10.1, 2, 3. They were all baptized, etc.

Answ. I deny the antecedent to be plain, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2, 3. and have proved
the contrary to be true, in the 2d. part of this Review Sect. 21. whither I
refer the Reader:

4. Says he, the Martyr Stephen calls that assembly, whereof they were
members [the Church in the Wilderness] Acts 7.38. Therefore they were Church
members.

Answ. The conclusion and proof is granted, but I observe that the conclusion
to be proved is altered from this [ by Gods merciful gift and appointment, some
infants were once to be admitted members of the visible Church] into this [
infants were Church members, part of the visible Church.]

The 2d. part of his antecedent, which he says is the only thing I deny, and
which the whole weight of this argument lies on, is [ that this merciful gift
of God to infants, and ordinance of Church membership is not repealed] and he
says he has here the negative, and the proof lies not on him yet he will
examine my proofs, and then prove the negative by a multitude of evident
arguments from the Scripture, that he has showed Scripture not questioned for
it, and that he may justly expect plain Scripture or argument to prove the
repeal of that Law.

Answ. He has showed no plain Scripture, nor any argument for a Law or
Ordinance that infants are, were or shall be visible Church Members of which I
need prove a repeal, though I grant he has proved a Law or Ordinance for the
admission of infants by Circumcision, which is the only Law or Ordinance I
find in him, either for infants visible Church Membership or their admission,
and if he hold it unrepealed, I can quickly prove the contrary. Nevertheless I
follow him in his wild goose race.

And first, says he, I expected some plain Scripture. 1. Because it must be a
plain word of God only that can prove the repeal of any part of his word, and
men's reasonings may as likely prove vain in this as any thing, if they be not
grounded upon plain Scripture. And 2. because I deal with those men that call
for plain Scripture proof of infant baptism from us: therefore did I over, and
over, and over, desire Mr. T. to bring some word of God to prove the repeal of
infants Church Membership. But what text do you think he brought? In his
public dispute he never offered to name one text: nay, in his sermon which he
preached after upon deliberation, he never offered to name one text in all the
Bible, to prove that God has repealed infants Church Membership. Is not this
enough to make his cause suspicious? Nay, I am confident he cannot bring one
text for it.

Answ. And I have long expected from Mr. B. some plain Scripture in which I
might see any such Law or Ordinance distinct from Circumcision for infants
visible Church Membership and admiss^on, which I might consider whither it be
repealed or no^, or capable of a repeal or not. 1. Because it must be a plain
word of God only that can prove such a law, and men's reasonings (as it will
appear in the examining them Mr. Bs. are) may as likely prove as vain in this
as any thing, if they be not grounded upon plain Scripture. And 2. because I
deal with those men, particularly Mr. B. that pretend plain Scripture proof for
infants Church membership and Baptism, but to those that justly call for such,
bring no express precep^ or example of infants baptism in the N. T. (which
alone can be counted plain Scripture p^oof in this thing) but consequences from
Circumcision and the Jewish Church State, which have no validity but on the
grant of such suppositions as are false; yea in these men's disputes against
Papists, and Prelates, and others, are rejected; and yet they are so extreme
blind as to think, and so impudent as to bear the people in hand, these are
plain Scripture proofs of infants Church Membership and Baptism. And therefore
did I over and over and over desire Mr. B. to bring me some word of God for
such a law. But what text do you think he brought? In his public dispute he
never once offered to name one text: nay, in his Praesest. morator sect. 6.
printed some few years after upon deliberation he brings none, though pressed
by me in my Praecursor. Nevertheless, since M. B. forces me to it, I determine,
as I have done to others, so to si^^ Mr. Bs. allegations (...). He goes on in
his venomous way thus.

What if Mr. T. should use Magistrates as he does infants (as former
Anabaptists have done) has he not as good ground? and would they take it well?
May he not as well say, when I show him Scripture in the old Testament for
Magistrates in the Church, and being Gods people [that it was from the peculiar
state of the Jews: God has set up no Magistrates of Christians in the Church
now] would not our Magistrates bid him bring some Scripture to prove the
repeal, or else they shall take their old Testament Commission for current? and
let him bring me any more Scripture to prove the repeal of infants visible
Church Membership, then is brought to prove the repeal of Magistrates in the
Church if he can: (O how just is it with God, that those Magistrates who
favor, countenance and cherish those men, that would keep all Christians
infants out of the Church, should by the same men be put out themselves, both
of Church and State?)

Answ. What Anabaptists in former times did or held, it is hard to say, since we
have the narration of their facts and tenants only from their adversaries.
Notwithstanding Augustines reckoning Jovinian among heretics, and Hieromes
invectives against Vigilantius, yet learned Protestants have excused or
defended both. Dr. Reynold Conference with Heart, chapter 5. div. 3. Jewels defense
of the Apol. Field of the Church book chapter 30, 31. Cracanthorp vindic. Eccl.
Anglic. contra Spalat. Andr. Revet. sum. contr. tom. 1. quest. 1. etc. Mr. B.
himself would not pass without a deep censure, if the writings of Mr. Crandon,
Mr. Air, Dr. Kendal, etc. should be taken for good proof of his tenets. It is
much harder, and indeed a most injurious thing, that the conceived opinions and
practices of men of former times, should be charged on Antipaedobaptists now
who do disclaim them. And as for this spiteful passage of Mr. B. though I have
said enough to answer it in the 2d. part of this Review sect. 3. yet I add.
That I have not so good ground to deny Christian Magistracy as infants visible
Church Membership, that I have Scripture to prove the repeal (if it must be so
called) of the pretended visible Church Membership of infants, which was only
in the Jewish national Church now dissolved, and another frame erected by
Christ: but not so of the Magistracy which was not proper to the Jewish people.
Melchisedech was a King, Job was a Magistrate Job 29, etc. Civil Magistracy as
the power of Parents, and Masters, are of the law of nature and nations, Christ
and his Apostles did not alter the state of Magistracy, but left them as they
found them, and confirmed them; sundry converted Governors kept their place
after conversion: bu^ the visible Church Membership of infants was only in the
Jewish Church, the frame of which is quite altered by Christ and his Apostles,
and not the least hint given of any infants being in or solemn admission into
the Christian visible Church, but much to the contrary in the new Testament. We
keep infants out of the Church no otherwise then Christ and his Apostles did,
and if Magistrates do favor, countenance and cherish us in this, they do but
cherish us in the doing of what the Apostles of Christ did, and M. B. that does
animate the Magistrates to molest us, and in his 7th. humble advice to the
Parliament December. 24. 1654. would have us deprived of all Pastoral Cure having
the public maintenance, does show his mind to persecute us, and by his
grounds had conceived himself bound in conscience to have dealt so with the
Apostles, if he had been in their days. But O how good is God to us, and just
to him and such as he is, that the madness of such a Balaam is rebuked, his
advice rejected as injurious, and pernicious, tending to take away that liberty
of examining things rece^ved, and to impose on men's consciences new
subscriptions and conformities, as intolerable as those the Prelates urged,
and consequently shutting out light from shining, and inducing persecution
afresh; and that he and such as he is, who are partial in Gods law, profaning,
yea quite changing or dissolving the prime solemn ordinance of Christ, and
opposing (contrary to their solemn Covenant) the reformation of that abuse,
should be made contemptible before all the people! Mal. 2.9.

Mr. B. adds, yet in private I confess he cited two texts to prove the repeal
of Gods Ordinance and merciful gift, that infants should be Church Members: and
I will read the two places to you (which private conference I would not
mention, but lest it should be thought a wrong to him to overpass his only
proofs) The first was Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. when I considered that such a man
should deny all infants Church Membership, and affirm that God has repealed
that his Ordinance, and merciful gift, and have no more Scripture for it then
such as this, and yet be so confident, it makes me amazed. Has he not a good
wit, that can prove that Christ has repealed his merciful gift, because he
has redeemed us from under our bondage and tutorage? or that he has shut out
all infants from his Church, because he has delivered them from the
inconveniences of their minority? If I had no better proof then this for infant
baptism, I should be ashamed once to open my mouth for it.

Answ. Had Mr. B. any true love, or justice toward me, as he seems to have by
his pretended loathness to mention my private conference, he had not so often
and with such false calu^niatory inferences mentioned in his writings what past
in private conference concerning my censure of men's not receiving the doctrine
of Antipaedobaptism, my plea for plurality of places, etc. whereby he has done
what in him lay, to defame me as proud covetous, schismatical, and given over
by God to a reprobate mind, though there was no necessity of such divulgings.
But much experience has taught me to expect no better usage from an
intemperate Zelot for his opinion, though a pretended friend and seeming godly,
then from an open enemy. Mr. B. is amazed that I alleged Gal. 4.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
as I did, and but that I have learned nil admirari of such passages, I should
be amazed at his dealing with me, in setting down my proofs, though they were
but in a private conference without study. The thing of which he urged me to
prove the repeal, I remember not whether it were of the visible
Church Membership of infants, or of their admission. The latter was it, the
repeal of which he denied; For so was his antecedent [ By the merciful gift and
appointment of God not yet repealed, some infants were once to be admitted
members of the visible Church] and this is proved plainly from Gal. 4.1, etc.
that the ordinance of admission (which was no other then circumcision) of
infants is repealed; yea, if that explication of Beza, Legem enim (id est totam
illam legalem oeconomiam) dicit fuisse instar tutoris sive curatoris ad certum
tempus dati, thus Englished in the New Annot. For he says that the law, that
is the whole Government of Gods house according to the law, was as it were a
kind of tutorship or office of an Overseer appointed for a time, be right, the
Church Membership visible of infants (which was peculiar to the Jews, and
belonged to the legal Church State) is plainly limited in that place to a
certain time now expired, and consequently the ordinance of such
Church Membership (if there had been such) repealed. And I say, that if he had
so good proof for his infant baptism, as this is for the repeal of his
pretended ordinance of infants admission and visible Church Membership
unrepealed, I would plead for it as he does. But Mr. B. as one that ha^h a good
wit, can by his Chemistry prove hence his non repeal.

Nay, says he, I pray you do but consider, whether his own proof be not
sufficient against him ^ Does not this text plainly tell us, that the heir in
his minority is Lord of all? and so approve of the natural birth privilege of
our children in civil things? And will God then deny children to be heirs of
any thing, and bereave them of their spiritual or Church-priviledge, and
neither tell us why he does it, nor that he does it.

Answ. Gods heirs are but coheirs with Christ* Romans 8 17. true believers or
elect persons, who are not deprived by me of any truly so called spiritual
Church privilege. The privilege of infants visible Church Membership as it
came with the spiri^ual Church State of Abraham's family, so it ceased with the
dissolution thereof, of which God has given us reason in that it was but for
an appointed time by God, which as it began with Gods special love to Abraham;
so it ended upon his loathing his unbelieving posterity, and setting his love
on the Gentiles.

Again, says he, more plainly: if Christ came to free the heir from his
bondage and tutorage only, and from the servitude of his minority; is it
likely that he came to free them from their Church Membership? Can any man
think that this was any part of the ^ondage? require those whose consciences
are not wholly enslaved to their fancies and conceits, to judge of this
soberly, whether they can possibly think it a bondage to be a member both of
the universal Church and of a particular! Let them not here tell me that
Circumcision was a bondage* or that the Law was a Tutor; For I speak of none of
these, but of their being members of the Church of God.

Answ. Whom Mr. B. means by person whose Consciences are wholly enslaved to
their fancies and conceits I cannot determine, I know few men who give me more
cause of fear that they are such then Mr. B. who seems to me to have more
conceits and ^ancies then one, and those with so much pertinacy and violent
zeal promoted, as (me thinks) searce agree to a sober man. For my self I say,
that such a visible Church Membership as the infants of the Jews had, in my
soberest judgment, I not only can possibly think (which Mr. B. himself also
may do, since it implies no contradiction) but do verily think to have been a
part of the imperfect state of the Church, and in some respect of the bondage.
For though Churchmembership be a privilege of it self, yet comparatively, and
in respect of some consequents attending it, as namely subjection to the whole
Law of Moses, it is a manifest imperfection and bondage. As the state of the
Apostles was a state of minority, bondage, imperfection, while Christ was on
earth in comparison of the estate after his ascension, when the spirit was
powered out upon them John 16, 7. And I doubt not to affirm that Christ came to
free his whole Church from that visible Churchmembership it had then, by
natural descent, and consequently to alter the visible, Church membership of
infants into a more perfect way, by setting up a Church throughout the world,
not by carnal descent in one nation, but in a spiritual way by faith in Christ,
through the pre^ching of the Gospel. And I must tell Mr. B. of Circumcision and
the Law, it is bondage and Tutorage (whether it like him or not) since infants
had no where else visible Church Membership then in the Jewish Church, whereby
they were in bondage to Circumcision and the Law. Nor can I tell what ordinance
of admitting visible Church Members unrepealed he means, besides that of
Circumcision, and therefore he must speak of these if he speak of the visible
church membership in the Jewish Church which had these annexed.

3. Yet further, says he, when this text tells us that Christ came to redeem us
from under the Law, and the bondage of minority, is it not a clear proof that
he has brought us into a far better state then we were in before? and has
advanced us in his family, as the Heir at age is advanced? And can any man of
common sense and conscience expound this of his casting all their infants out
of his family? Christ's Church is his family; and does the Heir use to be freed
by being cast out of the family? Why may he not as well say, that all the body
of the Jewish nation are now delivered by being cast out of the Church or
Family of Christ? Is it not more agreeable to the scope of the Apostle here to
affirm, that certainly they are so far from being turned out of the family or
Church of Christ, that by Christ they are now brought into a far higher state,
and made members of a far better Church, then that particular Church of the
Jews was.

Answ. It is true, Christ has advanced his Church into a far better state then
it was in before, and that is the reason why infants are left out (I say not
cast out) of his visible Church. For whereas the particular Church of the Jews
(in which alone infants were visible Church Members) was as well a civil
Commonwealth as a Church of God, and was by descent of birth, and by
proselytism made up of all in the Commonwealth; it seemed good to God to make
his Church more spiritual, consisting only of them who owned Christ as their
Lord; and therefore till infants do so, they are no parts of the visible Church
Christian. And thus men of common sense and tender consciences may and must
expound the Apostle, it being agreeable to his scope, if they will speak
rightly: And the body of the Jewish nation, I mean the greatest or most
considerable part, if embracing the Gospel they had been baptized, their
children being not baptized till they professed, had been rightly said to be
delivered from the minority and bondage they were in before in the sense before
declared. Mr. B. adds.

4. And if any yet say, that it is not the infants, but only the parents that
are thus advanced by Christ to a better state, is not this text plain against
him? For the Apostle extends redemption here to those that were under the
Law; and who knows not that infants were under the Law? And if it did not
belong to each individual under the Law, yet it cannot in any tolerable sense
be denied to belong to each species or age; (yet I can prove, that
conditionally this deliverance was to each individual person in the sense as
God sent his son Jesus to turn every one of them from their iniquity, Act. 3.
last.) And now judge I pray, whether this be not a pitiful ground for men to
prove the repeal of Gods merciful gift and ordinance of infants
Church Membership.

Answ. That which I say is, that the particular Church of the Jews being
dissolved, a Church of a better constitution is by God erected, and so the
Church of God is advanced by Christ into a better state, that is, from carnal
to spiritual, which necessitates the leaving infants out of the visible Church
Christian, till they be disciples or believers: and this is a better estate to
infants as well as parents, since that Church State did engage them to
Circumcision and the Law, which were their bondage. Nevertheless Mr. Bs. proof
is not to be allowed: For it follows not, redemption is extended to those that
were under the Law, therefore to each individual, or to each species or age,
the term being indefinite, and the speech true if any under the Law, and those
of one species or age be redeemed; as in like sort, when God is said to choose
the poor, the weak things of this world, this proves not universal election of
the poor, or weak, since the terms being indefinite, they need not be understood
universally except in necessary matter. I remember once in a Dispute it was
urged thus for universal redemption, Christ came to redeem them that were under
the Law, all are under the Law, Ergo. To which I answered by denying the minor,
producing Gal. 4.21. Romans 6.14, etc. though I might h^ve answered also by
denying the indefinite term to contain all. But if Mr. Bs. reasoning be good
that it cannot in any tolerable sense he denied to belong to each species or
age because they were under the Law, it will follow, that it cannot be denied
in any tolerable sense to each Jew, for they were under the Law, and then it
will follow tha^ the Jews were universally redeemed that they might re^eive the
adoption of sons. And it seems by his words in his Parenthesis, Mr. B. holds a
conditional deliverance for each individual person meant Gal. 4.5. concerning
which, besides what I have said before, Sect. 33, 34, 35. I add this censure
of Mr. John Collings, Provoc. provocatus in answer to Boatman, chapter 5. page 61.
Universal redemption; conditional Covenant. Two Covenants, one absolute,
another conditional, are notions in Divinity I do not understand, and think
them hardly reconcilable to truth, (if to sense,) they are the canting language
of those that would supply Franciscus de Sancta Clara's pla^e, as to
reconciling us and Arminians, and are no better then Arminianism minced for the
better digestion. But those words of Mr. B. that God sent his son Jesus to turn
every one of them from their iniquities, Acts 3. last, in the sense he can
prove (as he thinks) that conditionally this deliverance was for each
individual person, do import that he holds that Christ was sent not only for
universal redemption conditionally, but also for universal conversion
conditionally. Which if true, then Christ blesses all by turning every one
from his iniquity, Acts 3.26. conditionally; and then unless he can assign
another condition then the act of a man's free will, he must hold universal
grace of conversion, and conversion by Christ's blessing conditional upon the
concurrence of man's free will, which is indeed the venom of Arminianism. Which
if Mr. B. hold (as his words import) I may well say he stands on pitiful
ground, a very quagmire, however men judge of my proof from Gal. 4.1. etc. of
the repeal of the pretended ordinance of infants Church Membership.

Mr. B. proceeds. But one Text more was named, and that is my Text, Matthew.
28.19, 20. Go disciple all nations, etc. Is not this brave proving the repeal
before mentioned? What says this Text to any such matter?

Answ. The first question has so much insolent folly, that I think fit to give
no answer to it. To the second I say, 1. This Text compared with Mark 16.15.
proves, that Christ appointed after his resurrection, that his Church should be
gathered in all nations by preaching the Gospel, and baptizing, and no
otherwise; and consequently, the Church not gathered this way is not agreeable
to Christ's institution. The forepart of the antecedent is plain; For as Pareus
rightly paraphraseth the words, Com. in Mat. 28.19. Christ's words have this
sense, Make to me Disciples, gather to me a Church among all nations by your
preaching bringing them to the faith of the Gospel. And Piscat. observe. Matthew.
28.19. By the coherence of the sentences it is signified, first by the doctrine
of the Gospel the nations were to be brought into the Church, then to be
baptized when they should enter into the Church and profess the faith. And that
neither the institution of Christ, nor practice of the N. T. allows any other
way of gathering the Church, is proved in the 2d. Part of this Review, sect. 5.
etc. 2. I say this Text excludes infants from being baptized, as is proved in
the same place, and consequently from being visible members of the Christian
Church. The antecedent is confirmed from Mr. Bs. words, Plain Scrip. proof,
etc. against Mr Bed. page 299, 300. where he proves from Mat. 28.19. Mark
16.16. etc. That in the institution and every example of Baptism through all
the Bible, the first grace is pre-requisite as a condition, which he makes to
be faith included in the term [Disciple.] The consequence is also proved from
Mr. Bs. assertion, Plain Scrip. proof, etc. Par. 1. chapter 5. page 24, 25. and
elsewhere, proved from Mat. 28.19. All visible Church members are to be
baptized. Whence I infer, All visible members of the Christian Church are to be
baptized. No infant is to be baptized. Therefore no infant is a visible member
of the Christian Church. Now if no infants are now visible members of the
Christian Church, and the Church which is gathered without making Disciples by
preaching the Gospel first to them, and then baptizing them, is not agreeable
to Christ's institution, then Christ has repealed the gift and ordinance of
visible Church Membership of infants. I expect now some brave answer from Mr.
B. to these plain arguments without any bravery. But what do I meet with.

Nay, says he, I am confident the contrary will be proved from this Text also:
For if it be nations that must be discipled and baptized, certainly all infants
can never be excluded, but must needs some of them at least be included. I do
not believe that men were to be made Disciples by force; nor that all were
Disciples when the King or greater part were so: But that the Apostles
commission was to disciple nations; this is their work which they should
endeavor to accomplish: and therefore this was a thing both possible and
desirable: therefore when the parents are by teaching made Disciples, the
children are thereby discipled also: As if a woman escape drowning, the child
in her body escapes thereby, yet this is not by any natural cause, but by force
of Gods grant or Covenant.

Answ. Though Mr. Bs. confidence, and his foolish admirations and exclamations
have taken much with the shallow and heedless both Ministers and people of this
age, yet they appear ridiculous to me. His speeches in this place are but
dictates, that if nations be to be discipled, infants cannot be excluded; that
because they were to endeavor the discipling all nations, therefore infants;
that when the parents are by teaching made Disciples, the children are
discipled also: all which I deny, and have demonstrated to be false so fully in
the 2d. Part of this Review, sect. 5. etc. that I shall as soon expect the snow
be proved black, as any of them proved by Mr. B. or any other. His similitude
is frivolous, no child being included in the parent in respect of discipling,
as the child in the womb is in respect of drowning. If it were, then also in
respect of baptizing, so that if the mother with child be baptized, the child
also is baptized as well as discipled, and then baptism of such infants after
would be rebaptization. Such a grant or Covenant, by force of which infants are
made Disciples is a mere figment. If infants were made Disciples by a Covenant,
it must be of God to them, wherein he promises it to them upon their parents
being discipled; and if so, then they are discipled ere they be born, and
consequently not made Disciples by the Apostles, and so no part of the nation
to be discipled by them, nor they to endeavor their discipling unless they
should actum agere, do what is already done; whence it will follow, that they
had no commission to disciple or baptize infants, for they had no commission to
disciple by Gods Covenant, or to baptize such Disciples, but those who were
made by their preaching Disciples; and as Mr Collings says truly in his
Provoc. provoc. chapter 5. page 54. The Apostles notwithstanding that precept,
Matthew. 28.19, 10. did not think themselves obliged to baptize any, but such as
believed and confessed their sins Mr. B. adds.

When all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron were turned to the Lord, the whole
cities, infants and all, were discipled.

Answ. Though our last translation read Acts 9.35. And all that dwelt at Lydda
and Saron saw him, and turned to the Lord; yet in the Greek, and agreeably the
vulgar, Beza, etc. And all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron saw him, who turned to
the Lord; which seems to import, that all they who turned to the Lord saw him,
and so [ they that saw him] is limited by [ them turned to the Lord,] which is
not to be said of infants. But were the reading retained as it is in our last
translation, yet it is a gross conceit of Mr. B. to apply this to infants. For
it is said of these, 1. That they saw Aeneas cure. 2. That they were converted
to the Lord. 3. That by seeing the cure of Aeneas they were moved to turn to
the Lo^d, as Piscator in his Sch^lie says, to wit, moved by the miraculous
healing of Aeneas by Peter. Now to affirm these things of infants, is in my
apprehension (however it be in Mr. Bs.) against common sense. Besides me thinks
Mr. B. should not be ignorant that fre^uently in the Scripture such expressions
wherein the word [ all] is used; are limited to a greater part, and those of
years the matter so requiring it, as Matthew. 2.3. and 3.5. Acts 8.10, etc. Mr.
B. adds.

How can Christ bid them, Go and disciple all Nations, if infants and so all
the Nation are utterly incapable of being disciples? or how will Mr. T. expound
the word all nations?

Answ. Had Mr. B. heeded the words of the 13. Section of the first part of my
Examen, or the 14th. section of the Postscript to my Apology in answer to Mr.
Bl. he might have found answer to these questions. But I conceive upon very
probable signs Mr. B. never studied my writings, but lightly read them, and I
find he has dealt with me in like manner concerning my answers in the dispute
at Bewdley, and such passages as he excepts against which fell from me in
private conference, and that this is the reason of these and many more
unnecessary questions he puts me to answer. But if the Reader please to read
the 2d. part of t^is Review sect. 5, etc. he may see a full answer to these
questions, the sum whereof is this; that Christ bids them Go, and by preaching
the Gospel Mark. 16.15. make disciples of or out of all nations, and then
baptize them, who by believing the Gospel became disciples, Mark. 16.16. which
may and must be understood with exclusion of infants, as when he bids them
preach the Gospel to every creature Mark. 16.15. and Col 1.23. it was preached
to every creature under heaven, yet no infant meant. And by way of retortion, I
do s^riously ask Mr. B. how he will expound the word all nations? and how
Christ can bid them disciple infants without making Christ a fool and a tyrant
in commanding that which is ridiculous and impossible?

Mr B says of me further. He often says, It is here one and there one out of a
city or nation that God will call: I shall say more to the shame of this speech
afterward: yet let me say this much at present. If it be but some few* or
here and there one, yea or but the most that Christ commands to disciple,
then we must endeavor to make but those few or most disciples (for our
endeavor must not go beyond our command and commission) But this is most
horrid Doctrine, and notoriously false, [that Apostles and Ministers ought not
to endeavor the discipling of all, but of some.] (For Paul often professes his
longing and endeavor to the contrary:) therefore it is as false that the
command is not for the discipling all.

Answ. What Mr. B. has said to the shame of my speech plain Scripture proof,
etc. page 279, 280. (which is I think the place he means) is to the shame of
so impudent an affronting of plain Scripture proof refelled in my Praecursor
sect. 22. which shame is not at all covered by hi^ reply in his praefestinis
morator sect. 22. in which he does not at all answer my proof out of Scripture
for my speech, but only seeks to acquit himself from that which I charge him
with as not rightly setting down my words, which is his frequent fault. Two
parts of my speech he excepts against, 1. that God will not call nor ever did,
a whole nation so as that every individual should be within the visible Church.
Against this he refers to his Addition page 339.340. and there he turns me over
to Mr. Hudson, and refers me to the answering of him when I answer the 20th.
Chapter of the first part of his plain Script. etc. But many of the texts, and
consequently the rest are showed to be impertinently alleged, in the 2d. part
of this Review sect. 9. (where page 129. I was mistaken in what I said, I know
not what is in Mr. Bs. addition page 339, 340. thinking then it had been some
addition which was not in his first edition, which now I find otherwise) and
therefore if I say no more of that, the Reader will not want an answer to the
allegations in his addition page 339, 340. 2. He excepts against what he
conceives I say [that Apostles and Ministers ought not to endeavor the
discipling of all, but of some] which he terms horrid doctrine and notoriously
false. On the otherside if my meaning be rightly understood, to wit, of persons
that have not the use of reason, such as in^ants, natural fools, etc. I aver
the contrary doctrine to be horrid and notoriously false, for the reasons
fore-given. If he charge me with it, that because I say God will not call a
whole nation (which I mean of effectual call alluding to 1 Cor. 1.26, 27,
etc.) therefore I mean that we should endeavor to disciple none but such, his
charge is but a calumny. No words of mine either in pulpit w^iting, or private
speech, tended to such a sense. As for what he says, Paul often professes his
longing endeavor to the contrary, if he mean contrary to my assertion, it is
most false. He no where professes his longing and endeavor to disciple the
whole of a nation, even the infants. The profession he makes Philip. 1.8. is
the fullest and likeliest to be meant by Mr. B. that comes to my thoughts,
which it were ridiculous to apply to infants, [they all] being the same to whom
he wrote entitled, Saints in Christ v. 1. with whom he had fellowship in the
Gospel v. 5. in whom God had begun a good work v. 6. who in his bonds and in
the defense and confirmation of the Gospel were partakers of his grace v. 7.
whose love he mentions v. 9.

Thus much for the proof of which Mr. B. was confident. To his words. If this
[my alleging Gal. 4.1, etc. Matthew. ^8.19. as before] be not to feign God to
say what we would have him; yea contrary to what he does say, then I am quite
mistaken. I answer, I grant it, and add that I do not call to mind that ever I
found a man of so much fame, and confidence, so foully mistaken as Mr. B. is in
this point. I proceed as fast as I can after M. B. who has made the way foul
by his scribbling.

SECT. LI. The arguments from the altering of the Jewish Church constitution
and call, the ceasing of the High Priest, etc. to prove Infants now no visible
Church Members are made good against Mr. Bs. 5th. Chapter plain, etc. part. 1.
BUt let us hear, says he, whether his arguments be any clearer then these
texts for him. The sum of all his arguments, that I can hear, is this: If the
Church constitution whereof they were members be taken down, then their
membership is taken down: but the Church etc. therefore etc. To prove the
antecedent this is added: If their Church call be altered, then their Church
constitution is altered: but their Church call i^ altered, therefore, etc. To
prove the minor, he shows the different calls then and now. 1. Then they were
called by Moses or Abraham* ^he Magistrate; but now by Ministers. 2. Then all
the nation was called in one way, even servants and all; but now God cal^ here
one and there one. Besides he shows, that the Temple Priesthood, sacrifices are
taken down and therefore the Church constitution. This is the very strength of
all that Mr. T. has to say, to prove the repeal of Gods merciful Ordinance of
infants Church membership. And I cannot choose but say, They are silly souls,
and tractable to novel^y, and easily seduced from the truth of God and far from
the stability of judicious tender conscienc't Christians, who will be drawn by
such misty, cloudy arguing, without any Scripture proof; yea and against so
much Scripture.

Answ. And I cannot choose but say that Mr. Bs. dealing is dis^ingenuous and
Sop^istical* in sore ^a^ling Readers by such censures, which are the mere
evaporations of his own ignoranc^ and confidence, and I might add arrogance.
But to the argument. I deny that this is the very strength of all that I have
to say to prove the repeal, or that it is cloudy, misty arguing, against any
Scripture, But from it. The argument is ta^en from the notation of the word
Church, put into the definition of it by the generality of Divines, yea by Mr.
B. himself plain Scrip. proof, etc. page 71, 8^, that the Greek word for Church
is from calling out, and that the Church is a people or a society of persons
called out of the world. Whence it follows, that they who are not called out of
the world are not of the Church, they that have not an outward call, are not of
the visible Church: But infants have not the outward call of the Christian
Church, therefore are not visible members in the Christian Church. The minor is
proved from the proper call of the Christian Church, which is proved negatively
not to be as the Jewish Church, 1. by authority, 2. of a whole people together.
2. affirmatively by assigning 1. the only way of outward call in the Christian
Church to be by preaching the Gospel, 2. that this call is of single persons
severed in their habitations, relations, etc. The former is proved by story.
Two remarkable outward calls there were of the Church of Israel, one by
Abraham, and that was Genesis 17. (perhap^ there was some other, but no other
occurs to me) and that was according to Gods direction by authority, taking in
all his house together, not by preaching as the Apostles did. The other of
Moses Exodus 19 etc. which was done in like manner. The later is proved by
institution and practice to be seen in these and many more Scriptures, Ephesians.
4.11, 12, etc. Acts 2.41, 47. Act. 8.12, etc. But of this which is the only
outward churchcal infants are not the subjects, therefore neither of visible
churchmembership, which is always this way and no other in the Christian
Churches. This is further confirmed from those Scriptures which deny the
new birth necessary to admission into the Christian Church to be by humane
generation (which it must be if it be as the Jewish church membership was) as
Joh. 1.13. and ascribe it even in Jews themselves to the word Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet.
1.23. It is further confirmed in that the distinction of the Church visible and
invisible, is from their different calling. They are not of the invisible who
are not inwardly called, they are not of the visible who have not the outward
call. Primum illud quod actu Ecclesiam constituit, est vocatio: unde etiam and
nomen suu^ accipit and definitionem. Hudson vindic. p. 67. exte^nal vocation
and submission gave right in foro Ecclesiae to be admitted members of the
Church. Ecclesia enim est caetus hominum vocatorum 1 Cor. 1.24. cum 10.32. Ames
Medul* Th. l. 1. c. 31.. 6.7. But infants have not the outward call, they are
not brought into the Church by the word. Therefore they are not visible
Church Members.

What says Mr. B. now? 1 You must distinguish between the particular Church of
the Jews, and the universal visible Church. And here I lay down these three
propos^tions. 1. The Jews Church was not the whole universal visible Church
that God had then in the world. And this he alleges as my opinion with others
and confirms it by sundry arguments.

Answ. Though the Assembly at Westminster say Confess. of faith chapter 25. art. 2.
The visible Church, which is also Catholic or universal under the Gospel (not
confined to one nation, as before under the law) consists, etc. yet I agree
with Mr. B in his proposition though not in all his proofs. For the text Genesis
18.19. proves not the continuance of the Church in any of Abraham's posteri^y
but those by Isaac, nor do, the instances of Bethuel, Hiram, the Ninivites,
Candace Queen of the Ethiopians, evince a Church of God distinct from the
Jewish.

His 2d. proposition is, if the Jewish Church had been the whole visible
Church, yet it would have been con^^derable in both respects; both as the
Jewish Church and as the universal, which (...) pass. His third is.

There is no member of any particular Church, who is not also a member of the
universal Church: Therefore infants were members of the universal visible
Church as well as of the Jews particular Church; so that if it could be proved
that their membership in that particular Church is overthrown, yet that is
nothing to prove that they have lost their standing in the universal Church.
But this shall fullier improve and vindicate her after.

Answ. It is much to prove they have lost their standing in the universal, if
they had no standing in the universal distinct from that in the particular: as
an excommunicate, Apostate, etc. has lost his standing in the universal
visible Church, if he have no standing therein distinct from that in the
particular Church, which he has lost. And this was the case of infants, they
had no standing in the universal distinct from that which they had in the
Jewish Church; and therefore if that particular Church State or frame be
dissolved in which alone infants are reckoned as members, (as it is,) and
another erected in which they are not reckoned, infants are not any longer to
be reckoned as visible Church Members. And ^his I shall make good when I come
to Mr. Bs. fuller improvement of this.

2. Says Mr. B. You must distinguish between the essentials, and some
accidentals of the Jewish Church: The Priesthood, Temple, Sacrifice, etc. were
merely accidental, and might be repealed without the re^eal of the essentials,
or the ordinance establishing the Church it self.

Answ. I grant the distinction, but find it of no use, till it be showed what
are the essentials* and what not; what the ordinance is that established that
Church, that it is of the essentials of that Church, that infants be visible
members is of the essentials of that Church: which to assert were all one as to
say, the Jewish Church had been no Church visible without infants, which I take
to be absurd.

3. Says Mr. B. You must distinguish between their Church conside^ed in it
self, and considered comparatively as to othe^s. The Jews were a peculiar
people and Church of God, no other had the like privileges. Now if they had
b^lieved, they should have kept all their privileges absolutely considered:
(except it be a losing them to change them for greater.) But comparatively
considered, they should not have kept some relative privileges: For they
should no longer have been a singular peculiar people, seeing others should
have enjoyed as great privileges as they; yet this would have been without any
loss of theirs, much more without wholly unchurching them or their children.
When a man has but one son, he has the privilege of being his Fathers only
Son: But when his father has many more, he has lost that privilege; and yet
is not therefore turned out of the Family; nay, the adding of more Brethren in
our case, is an increase of the happiness of each p^rticular: for this is the
very case of the Jews. The adding of the Gentiles would have made the Jews no
more to be so peculiar as to be singular in their privileges; and yet they
should have enjoyed never the less. Therefore mark i^, the Scripture speaking
of taking in the Gentiles, it exp^esseth it as by taking down the partition
wall, and making of both one Church; but it speaks not of unchurching the Jews
first, and their children, or bereaving them of their privileges. And when in
his Vision Peter was taught the Doctrine of the Gentiles reception into the
Church, Acts 10. it was not by making the Jews unclean, but by clensing the
Gentiles to be clean as the Jews. So that if the Jews would have believed, they
should have lost only their comparative privileges consisting in the
singularity of their enjoyments, which is no loss to them, to have the Gentiles
enjoy them as well as they; but their privileges in themselves considered,
would not have been diminished, but some lesser turned into greater: And
therefore certainly God would never have turned their children all out of the
visible Church.

Answ. The distinction is of the ^ewish Church considered in it self, and
comparatively as to others; but the application is (as if Mr. B. had forgotten
his distinction) of their privile^ges considered absolutely, and compara^ive,
and t^en he says if the Jews had believed, they had lost only their
comparative privileges, not in themselves considered. Concerning which
conceits, it had been requisite, if he would be understood, that either he
should have given a catalogue of each sort of privileges, or such a
description of them as whereby we mi^ht understand which are of the one sort,
which of the other. My opinion is, that had the Jews believed, that is every
individu^l Jew of age, or the greatest part ^ad received the Gospel, they
should have enjoyed with the Gentiles all the privileges of the Covenant of
saving graces; the Jewish people should have enjoyed their possessions in their
own Land, which me thinks Christ's words import, Luke 19.4^, 42, 43. But deny
that they should have this as a privilege to them, that their children should
be accounted visible members of the Christian Churches. For Gods purpose was to
erect a Church universal uniformly by preaching the Gospel, and not by birth;
and it appeared plainly by the practice of John Baptist, Christ and his
Apostles, who never took in any believing paren^s infant to Baptism and the
Christian Church, no^ admitted any Jew without his own personal profession of
Faith in Christ. Nor is the contrary proved by Ephesians. 2.14. but that very thing
I assert. For the taking down the partition wall was by taking away the Jewish
rites, and Church State, that none could be joyn^d to them without conformi^y
to the Law, now one Church is made of both by faith through the Gospel, Ephesians.
3.6. And in like manner when Peter took in Cornelius, Acts 10. he declared Gods
mind in his Vision. v. 35. that in every Nation he that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted with him; but he does not say that every one of their
infant children are taken into the Church, nor did he any act whereby to show
that to be Gods mind. Nor are Mr. Bs. observations of any force, for they
suppose that if the Church state of the Jews were altered, Paul would have
spoken of their unchurching, Ephesians. 2.14. and Peter, Acts ^. of their making
unclean which implies as if there were no other way then these to alter their
Church State, and to leave the infants out of the visible Church Christian;
whereas I have often showed the contrary, that it was done by taking in only
to bap^ism b^lievers, releasing from the burden of Circumcision and the Law,
which might have been though all the Jews of age had been believers.

4. Says Mr. B. So when we call the Jews [a National Church] and when Mr. T.
says God to^k the whole Nation to be his Church, it may be meant either in
regard of the appropriation and restriction to that Nation only, as if God had
not called any other whole Nation: and so it may be true, that the Jews only
were a National Church (though yet it is doubtful, as what is said of
Melchizedek before shows:) and also in regard of their National and Church
unity (which yet is the excellency and strength of all other Churches;) or else
by a National Church may be meant, as if all were Church members that were of
that Nation, and no more were required to the being a Church member but to be
of that Nation: And thus I perceive it is by many understood. But this is
notoriously false.

Answ. It is in this last s^nse I mean it, and I think it manifestly true with
these explications. 1. That they were of that Nation by birth property, or
proselytism. 2. That they were Church Members while they continued to be of
that Nation any of these way^. 3. That they were Church Members with some
dis^uiparance or inequality of privileges. Let Us view Mr. Bs. proofs.

For it was then as well as now, the Covenant of God (wherein he took them for
his peculiar people, and they took him for their only God, the parents
engagiag for themselves and their children) which made them members of the
Church For 1. No aged person, no not servants, much less ordinary proselites
were members, except they entered the Covenant; though they are commanded to
circumcise all in their house, yet it is supposed, that by their interest and
authority, they caused them first to enter the Covenant: Therefore they were to
circumcise the servants bought with money, as being absolutely their own, whom
they had most interest in; but not the hired servants, whom they had no such
authority over (except they became proselytes voluntarily)

Answ. A mutual Covenant, such as that at Mount Sinai, I deny not to have made
the people of Israel the Church of God, and consequently the infants then born
visible Church Members. But I d^ny that it was then by reason of the parents
engaging for themselves and their children, since it appears plainly by Exodus
19.7, 8. and 24.3. that the Elders of the people only engaged for the whole
Nation. And the same I conceive of the Covenant Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. The
Covenant Genesis 17. if it were mutual, it does not appear that any other then
Abraham himself engaged for his house. Nor do I deny such a mutual Covenant, if
the Lord should enter into it, or declare his mind concerning it, would make a
Nation, and consequently infan^s Church members. But according to the
constitution of the Christian visible Church I deny God makes any such Covenant
or declares his mind that by such Covenant he will gather his Church. Yet were
it yielded that the Covenant made them members of the Church, the Propositions
are true nevertheless with my explications, That all were Church Members that
were of that Nation, and no more is required to the being a Churchmember but
to be of that Nation. And to what he alleges, I acknowledge that ordinary
Proselytes at first admission were not members without their Covenant engaging
them and theirs in their power to the observance of the Law of Moses, and the
some reason I conceive of hired servants, and that thereby they became of that
Nation, or as the Jewish Doctors say were regenerated, and lost their former
kindred, and became Jews. But it was not enough to make them of that Church,
though they covenanted or professed to take Je^ovah for their only God, except
they took on them to observe Moses Law. Therefore Cornelius was no visible
member of the Jewish Church, though he feared God with all his house, but was
shunned by them, Acts 10.28. and 11.3. as an unclean, uncircumcised person of
another Nation. Nor do I find any proof of that which Mr B. suppose^h, that all
aged persons, as servants bought were before they were circumcised ^aused by
their Masters interest and authority to enter the Covenant first. But this does
no whit overthrow the Positions, That all were C^urch-members that were of that
Nation, and that no more was re^uired to the being a Churchmember but to be of
that Nation. Nor is there any more force in what Mr. B. adds. 2. And though
they were taken into the Church in infancy yet if they afterward forsook or
renounced the Covenant, they were to be cut off from the Church, yea to be put
to death. 3. And in many cases their children were to be put to death with
them. And therefore their Church was not so National as that any in the Nation
should be a member of it who forsook the Covenant. Which I grant: For t^en they
ceased to be of that Nation, that is in that policy or Commonwealth de jure at
least, if not de facto. What he adds, Indeed God chose the seed of Abraham ^n a
special manner? but not to be Church members immediately, but first to enter
into his Covenant, and take him for their God, and so to be Church mem^ers, is
not true. For immediately upon their birth, the seed of Abraham were
Church Members visible, though neither they nor their parents, or any other
entered into Covenant for them: and if this speech of Mr. B. were true, neither
had Jews infants been visible Church members, and so not to be circumcised
(contrary to the command) nor according to Mr. Bs. and other Paedobaptists
principles our infants visible Church Members, nor to be baptized without such
entering in to Covenant going before, which will nullify the infant Baptism of
many, and overthrow the argument from the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. produced as
sufficient for infant Baptism by most Paedobaptists without any other entering
the Covenant.

5. Says Mr. B. You must distinguish betwixt breaking off that particular
individual Church or some members of it, and the repealing or breaking off the
species or essential nature of the Church.

Answ. The breaking off the particular individual Church of the Jews is a term
I meet with Romans 11.20. But the term of repealing or breaking off the species
or essential nature of the Church is a new term not used that I know of any
where, but, if I may use Dr. Kendals phrase, in the Schola illustris of
Kederminster A repeal of a Law is an obvious wo^d; but this term of repealin^
of the species or essential nature of the Church is like the speech of a man
doting. I have heretofore learned that the essences of things are invariable,
eternal, definitions are of eternal verity, conformable to the Idea in Gods
mind, though existences be mutable: and therefore to expect a proof of a repeal
or breaking off the species or essential nature of the Church, is to expect a
proof of an impossibility.

6. Says Mr. B. And so you must distinguish betwe^n the repealing of the Law
or grant upon which the very species or nature of the Church is grounded; and
the execution of the threatening of Law upon particular persons or Churches
offending. The repeal of the Law or ordinance does take away all right to the
mercy granted by that Law or ordinance even the remote conditional right, and
that from all men, one as well as another to whom that Law gave that right. But
the punative execution of the threatening does only take away the absolute
right to the mercy and the right in it, and that from none but the particular
offenders. This punitive execution of the Law (or the curse of the Covenant, as
it is called Deuteronomy. 29.20, 21.) is so far from being a repeal of the Law, that
it certainly proves it is not repealed: For a repealed Law is of no force, and
so cannot be executed. And upon these two last distinctions, I add this for
application of them: The individual Jewish Church is (for the most part) broke
off, and so they that are so broke off are now no Church, and consequently have
lost their privileges: But the Law or Covenant on which the species or
essential form of their Church (and many of its accidents) was grounded, is not
changed or repealed. So the Church of Smyrna, Thyatira, Laodicea, and the rest
of Asia (for the most part) are now unchurched: But this is but by a punitive
execution of the Law for their sin, and no change in the Law, or in the nature
of the Church; And so it is with the Jews also in their unchurching. Though
they are cast off, yet the Law and Nature of Churches is still the same; and
only the Laws about ceremonial worship* and some other accidents of the Church
are repealed. So that the casting off of them and their children, is no proof
that the whole species of infants is cast out of the Church visible.

Answ. The nature, species, essential form of the Church is that which is
expressed in the definition of it, in which Mr. B. himself page 82. says,
certainly all Divines are agreed, that it is a society of persons separated
from the world, to God, or called out of the world, etc. now a law on which
this might be said to be grounded liable to repeal is in my apprehension a
dream: Laws repealeable determine not of essences, but things to be existent,
to wit, particular actions to be done or omitted. Nor do I conceive that the
essential form of the Church is grounded upon a Covenant. For though God
separate or call a people to himself by a Covenant single or mutual, and so may
be of the existence of a Church, yet if God do separate or call by authority,
preaching, power, or any other way, without a Covenant, they will have the
essence of a Church. The Jewish Church I never conceived to be a species, but
an individual, and of it I grant that it might be and was dissolved without the
change of the nature, species or essential form of the Church, unto which the
having of infants visible Church Members did not belong. For if so, without
infants and that as visible Church Members it could not have been a Church.
What the privileges Jewish infants had as visible Church Members except
preservation, as part of that people, such inheritance, and other benefits in
part which their parents had, which they must needs lose with their parents
breaking off, I do not well understand: Nor do I know any privilege, which the
believing Jews infants did lose by being left out of the Christian Church
visible, which they should have had if they had been taken in. For the
privileges of the Jewish infants by being visible Church Members, were, as I
conceive, to cease upon the coming of Christ, and the erection of the
Christian Church, not by any punitive execution of a Law, but a wise
dispensation of God, as he conceived fittest for his own glory, and the
enlarging of the Kingdom of his Son. The species, as Mr. B. speaks, that is,
the whole order, rank, series or sort of men in infancy was never in the
visible Church, but only the infants of the Jewish Nation. Nor were they cast
out of the Church visible by any judiciary sentence, but by altering the
Church State from Jewish into Ch^istian as God thought best.

7. Says Mr. B. Again, you must distinguish betwixt breaking off primarily and
morally only by Covenant breaking and merit, (as an adulterous woman does
break the marriage bond, and so cast out her self;) or else breaking off in a
following act by punishment (both morally and physically) as a man that puts
away his adulterous wife:) In the former sense all the Jews that were
unchurched did unchurch themselves and their children; and God only unchurched
them in the later sense: And therefore the children of believing Jews (who did
not adulterously violate the Covenant) were never unchurched; God casts out
none but those that first cast out themselves.

Answ. If this last speech were true, absolute Reprobation should be an error.
But perhaps he means it of casting out by judiciary sentence, and so I grant it
true of persons of age. But in the present business, the leaving out infants
out of the visible Church was neither by any sinful voluntary dissertion or
transgression of Gods Law, morally deserving it; nor by any act of judiciary
sentence legally, or punitive act executing or physically ejecting: But by a
free act of his Sovereignty, altering the Church State from a more carnal to a
more spiritual, without any detriment to believers or theit children.

Mr. B. applies his distinctions thus, Let us now review Mr. Ts. arguments. 1.
He says, their Church constitution is taken down; and therefore their
membership. To which I answer: 1. By [constitution] is meant either the
essential nature, or some ceremonial Accident: And by [taking down] is meant
either [by repealing the Law, which takes down the whole^species,] or [by mere
punitive execution taking down that individual Church*] In the first sense of
[constitution and taking down] I utterly deny the Antecedent, and may stay long
enough I perceive before he prove it. 2. By [their membership] either he means
the individual infants of unbelievers, unchurched Jews (which I grant,) or else
the whole species of infants (which I deny.) 3. Besides, the argument
concludes not for what he should bring it: That which it should conclude, is
[that the merciful gift and ordinance of God, that some infants should be
Church Members is repealed:] This is another thing from what he concludes.

Answ. 1. By [constitution] I neither mean the essential nature, nor some
ceremonial accident, but the composing of the integral parts which make up a
Church an entire whole or totum integrale. I do not find by such notes as I
have of the Dispute at Bewdley, January 1. 1649. that I used the term of
[taking down,] but rather the term [altered,] which even Mr. Bs. setting down
my argument shows to have been the term I used. And this alteration I conceive
was made neither by repealing the Law which takes down the whole species, nor
by mere punitive execution taking down that individual Church; but by a free
act of his Sovereignty as Rector or Lord, who may at his pleasure alter the
frame of his Church as he pleases: As when a Lord or Governor one while takes
in^o his house men, and their wives, and children, another while only single
men, he neither perhaps repeals a Law which made the whole species members of
his house, nor punishes the individual persons that were in his house, but
because it likes him better to have his house only of strong able men, alters
the state of his house in respect of the members; so it is in this case. 2. By
[their Churchmembership] I mean not either the individual infants of
unbelievers, unchurched Jews, nor the whole species of infants; but the
individual infants of the Jewish Church Members, whether believing or
unbelieving. 3. If I conclude (as I did) that the Church Membership of infants
was altered in the visible Church Christian from what it was in the visible
Church Jewish, I prove the pretended gift and ordinance of God that some
infants should be Church Members is repealed. Let Us view his answer to my proof.

He proves, says Mr. B. that [their Church constitution is altered, because
their Church call is altered.] To which I answer, 1. Here is still nothing but
the darkness of ambiguity and troubled waters to fish in. As we know not what
he means by [constitution] as is said before; so who knows what he means by
[their Church call?] Is it meant first of Gods Law or Covenant enacting*
making, and constituting them a Church? 2. And, if so, then is it meant of the
essential parts of that Covenant or Law giving them the essence of a Church [I
will be to thee a God, and thou shall be to me a people, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12.] 3.
Or is it meant of the lesser additional parts of the Law or Covenant giving
them some accidentals of their Church, as the land of Canaan, the Priesthood,
the Sacrifice, etc. 4. Or is it meant of Gods immediate call from heaven to
Abraham or any others to bring them into the Covenant? 5. And if so, whether of
Abraham only? or Moses only? or both? or whether Aaron and all other be
excluded or not? And what he means by a Church call to infants that cannot
understand, I know not; except by a call he means circumcising them? And 6.
whether he mean that call by which particularly they were at first made a
Church? or that also by which in every generation their posterity were so made,
or entered members? 7. And if so, whether that which was proper to the Jews
posterity? or that which was proper to converted proselyted members? or some
call common to both? and what that was? When I can possibly understand which of
all these calls he means that is altered, then it may be worth labor to answer
him.

Answ. The speeches are inept of the essential parts of the Covenant and the
accidental, the essential parts of that Covenant or Law, giving them the
essence of a Church, [I will be to thee a God, and thou shall be to me a
people, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. Which suppose either God could not make a Covenant
without that promise, or that a Church could not be without that promise, or
that Covenant might be without the promise of the land of Canaan, which was as
essential to that Covenant as the other, they being both but integral parts, of
which each is essential to the integrity of the whole. And for the essence of a
Church, which consists in the association, or union of the members, it is not
given by a Covenant of God, promising what he will be to them, and they to him
for the future, (for that assures them only of continuance, does not give
their present essence,) but by such transeunt fact as whereby he separates them
from others, and unites or incorporates them together, which I call, as usually
Divines do, the Church call; agreeably to the Scripture, Rom 9.24, 25, 26. 1
Cor. 1.2, 24. etc. Which Church call is either inward by his Spirit, and is
still the same; or outward, and was, though by various acts of his providence,
yet most manifestly by the authority of Abraham and Moses, not by mere
persuasion and begetting of faith, as in the Christian Church, when the
preachers of the Gospel called the Christian Church: But the authority and
power of Rulers, who did as well by coercive power as by persuasive words, draw
all in the compass of their jurisdiction into a policy or Commonwealth, which
was called the congregation or Church of Israel, in which the infants were
included, and by virtue of the settlement by Abraham and Moses it so continued
to the time of the dissolution. This Mr. B. might have understood easily to be
my meaning, by my instances which he sets down, that the way, means, or manner
of outward Church call into the Christian visible Church is altered from what
it was in the Jewish: For the Christian Church outward call was only according
to institution and primitive practice by the preaching the Gospel to each
member of the visible Church Christian, and by that means persuading persons to
receive Christ, and not by any coercive power of Rulers, whereas the Jewish was
otherwise. Mr. B. proceeds.

In the mean time briefly thus I answer. 1. The additional lesser parts of the
Covenant giving them the ceremonial accidents of their Church is ceased, and so
are the ceremonies built thereon. 2. The Essential part of the Law or Covenant
is not ceased; God yet offers the Jews to be their God, and them to be his
people. If they heartily consent it may be done, only the World is taken into
this Covenant with them, and neither Jew nor Gentile excluded, that exclude not
themselves. 3. Gods immediate call of Abraham and Moses did quickly cease, when
yet the Church ceased not. 4. And for the Ministerial call, 1. That which was
by the person of Abraham and Moses numerically did cease when their act was
performed; yet the effect ceased not: Nor did the Jews cease being a Church
when Abraham and Moses were dead and gone. 2. If he mean it of that species or
sort of Ministerial call, then what sort is that? And indeed for ought I can
possibly learn by his speeches, this is that he drives at: [God then called by
Magistrates, but now by Ministers: And secondly, then he called all the Nation
in one day, but now he calls he^e one and there one.]

Answ. The Reader may hence easily perceive, that Mr. B. might have understood,
or rather did understand me well enough, that I meant it of the sort of
Ministerial call, which he could learn by my speeches, that drive at it. But
whether he heeded not my words at first when he wrote the questions, or whether
he thought it best to make show of not understanding, what he could not well
answer, he has chosen to pretend ambiguity where all was plain. But for what
he says, that the essential part of the Law or Covenant is not ceased, because
God yet offers the Jews to be their God and them to be his people, he therein
shows two mistakes: 1. That he makes that promise to be the essential part of
the Covenant, as if God could not make a Covenant without it, which is false,
the Covenant Genesis 9.9, 10. with Phinehas, Numb. 25.12, 13. with the Rechabites,
Jer. ^5.19. being without it. 2. That the Covenant did not cease because God
still offers, which implies either the Covenant to be all on^ with an offer, or
that there is a Covenant when there is an offer, whereas there may be an offer
yet no Covenant, and there may be a Covenant and yet no offer upon condition of
consent, as Mr. B. means. But Mr. B. proceeds thus

Let us therefore see what strength lies in these words. 1. What if all this
were true? is there the least color for the consequence from hence? It is as
good a consequence to say, That when God judged Israel by Debora a woman, which
before was judged by men, that then Israel ceased to be a Commonwealth, or the
constitution of the Commonwealth was altered. O^ when the Government was
changed from Judges to Kings, that then the essential constitution of the
Commonwealth was changed, and so all infants lost their standing in the
Commonwealth? What if the King inviting the guests to the marriage feast did
first send one kind of Officer, and then another; first a man, and then a
child, and then a woman, does it follow that the feast is therefore altered? If
first a man, and then a child, and then a woman be sent to call you to dinner,
or to any employment, or company, does this change the nature of the company or
employment? What if a Bishop call one man to the Ministry, and a Presbytery
another, and the people a third, is not the Ministerial work and office still
the same? What if a Magistrate convert one man now, and a Minister another, and
a woman a third, does it follow that the Church or State that they are
converted to is therefore not the same? What a powerful argument is here for a
man to venture upon to unchurch all the infants in the world? The efficient
cause enters not the essence: or if it did, yet not every less principal
inferior cause, such as the Messenger or Minister of our call is: If you had
proved that God had repealed his Law which is the Charter of Church membership,
then you had said something, else you say nothing to the purpose.

Answ. I neither attempted nor needed to prove the essence, nature, or
essential constitution of the Jewish Church to be altered, and therefore if the
different call I assign prove it not, yet what I was to prove, that the Church
constitution in respect of the integral parts, and consequently of infants
being included, is alt^red, might be, and indeed is firmly concluded from
thence. For as Alsted. suppl. Chamier. de naturae Eccl. chapter 2.. 3. The matter
of the Church are men called, Mat. 20.16. The form is the call it self, and
that is either simple, that is, either extern^l only, or internal only; or
conjunct, that is, external and internal together.. 7. The inward call is that
in which God calls inwardly by his spirit: the outward, in which he calls
outwardly by the ministry of the Church. And this is the call of the Church,
which as it is the action of God calling, is in God himself; but as it is
received of the Church, is it is form: Or as Ames med. Th. l. 1. c. 31.. 6, 7.
That first thing which in act constitutes the Church, is calling; whence also
it receives it is name and definition. For the Church is a company of men
called, 1 Cor. 1.24. with 10.32. And Cameron in his praeiect. of the Church, in
his definition of the Church, makes it to be a society of men called by the
ministry of the word, and says, called and believers are the same in
Scripture. Mr. B. confess. of Faith, page 284. The Church is, Caetus vocatorum
vel fidelium. If then infants be not called by the word, which is the only way
of calling into the Christian visible Church, nor believers, then they are no
part of the visible Church Christian, and consequently the Church constitution
is altered, and the Law of visible church membership of infants (if there were
such a Law) is repealed. And this argument is powerful enough (if there were
no more) to venture upon to unchurch (though I like not the expression) all the
infants of the world, that is, to prove none of them to be members of the
visible Church Christian. That which Mr. B. objects, does not invalidate the
consequence. For the consequence is not grounded on this only, that the
Magistrate called then, and the Minister now; then all together, now here one
and there another: but on this, the Magistrate did it then by his authority,
though without persuading one after another; but in the Christian Church the
Minister does it by preaching the word, teaching and persuading one after
another, as the word takes, and not by any commanding power, or outward force,
or legislative, or coercive virtue. And this is sufficient to alter the
constitution of the Church in this respect; because if none be called but those
that receive the word, and none be members of the Church but the called, and
infants be incapable thereof, they are not members of the visible Church
Christian. And therefore Mr. Bs. frivolous questions all run upon the mistake
which out of negligence he runs into, as his own words show, as if I had argued
only from the different persons, and their different office, and not also from
the different way, manner, or sort of call, whereas he acknowledges that my
speeches do drive at this, that my meaning was of the species or sort of
ministerial call; and so I might answer them all negatively, and grant what he
would have me, and yet my proof stands good. And for what he says, that the
^fficient cause enters not the essence, I find to the contrary in Keckerm.
syst. log. l. 1. par. 2. c. 2. That in the definition of accidents, the notion
of distinction, or the difference is taken from the subject, efficient, end,
and object. Yet this, if true, were nothing against me, who do not make the
Messenger or Minister of our call of the essence of the Church, no nor of the
existence, though the Apostles wo^ds* Romans 10.14. speak near to it: But this is
that which I hold, no person is ordinarily a member of the visible Church
Christian, but who is called by the outward preaching of the word, who ever be
the Messenger or Minister of the call; and since infants are not so called, they
are not members of the visible Church Christian.

Mr. B. adds, 2. I utterly deny that there is any more truth in the Antecedent
then in the consequent* God has not altered the nature of the call in any
substantial point, but in mere circumstances.

Answ. What Mr. B. means by the nature of the call, and what points he makes in
the call substantial, what near circumstances is not easy to tell, but that
God has so altered the Jewish Church call, as to exclude infants from the
Christian visible Church is so apparent, that I know not how to conceive of the
denial of it. but as a fruit of oppositeness without reason. For all the way
that John Baptist, Christ, the Apostles and other teachers took and appointed
to be taken for gathering the Christian visible Church, was by preaching the
Gospel to all that would hear it, to make them disciples or believers, and so
by baptism to join them to the Church. But that the Jewish Church call was
different is apparent, in that there were no such teachers sent out to unite
them, but that by the authority of the Magistrates, whether household or
national they were imbodied. Rightly says Mr. Hudson vindic. chapter 4. sect. 5.
page 94. Gods method of conveying Church Priviledges used in the national
Church of the Jews, being in populo Israelitico, must needs differ from the
method in populo Catholico. And the same is true of Gods call. But what need we
any other to show the proper call of the Christian Church visible then Mr. B.
himself, in his Saints Everlasting rest, part. 2. chapter 6. sect. 1. Edit. 1. page
223, 224. he is so ample, and his words so plain, that I think if there were no
more to show his perverse stiffness in this thing it were enough. I will
transcribe some passages. Consider in what way Christ spreads his Gospel: to
bring men in from the world into his Church from Paganism, Turcism or Judaism
to Christianity, he never gave the sword any such Commission; he never levied
an army to advance his dominion; nor sent forth his followers as so many
Commanders to subdue the Nations to him by force, and spare none that will not
become Christians: He will have none but those that voluntarily list themselves
under him: He sent out Ministers, and not Magistrates or Commanders to bring in
the world. Can he say this of the Jewish Church, and their call? But let us view
his wincings against the plain truth, and in some sort against his own light,
though perhaps forgotten when he wrote this later book.

It is, says Mr. B. said, it was then by Magistrates and now by Ministers. I
answer; 1. What was by Magistrates? the first call? or all after? For the first
I know not which or when it was, let him that can tell, see that be prove it. I
find when Circumcision was first instituted in Abraham's family; But nev^r
when their Church Membership begun; shall I dare to think that either Abraham
or his family were no Church Members till they were circumcised? Romans 4. would
confute me.

Answ. Mr. B. says he answers, but indeed puts questions to me to answer, and
those impertinent. For though I could not tell him which was the first call,
nor when the church membership of Abraham's family begah, yet it might be true
and proved, that the call of the Jewish Church was by the magistrate. But yet
for clearing of the truth, I shall make some answer. 1. That I find God calling
Abraham out of Ur of the Chaldees, Genesis 12.1. Acts 7.3. Isa. 41.2. and sundry
times I find Abraham sacrificing to God, and God covenanting with him: Nor
would I deny Abraham, Sarah, and those of his family who worshipped the true
God, to have been visible church members before circumcision. 2. But yet I
find not the whole family of Abraham men women and children made a visible
Church, by any act or ri^e which might be termed a Chur^h-call, whereby they
were separated from all other people and united in a little nation unto God
till the appointment of circumcision by God, and the performing of it by
Abraham's authority. Now if Mr. B. could not tell which and when the Jewish
Church call was, or the Jews childrens church membership began, I think he is
very unreasonable to require of me to show a repeal of a thing which he finds
not when it began. But there is more of this wild posing sc^ibling to be
answered.

2. Says he, suppose it were true that Abraham's family began then to be a
Church; (which will never be proved) yet did not God call them to Circumcision
immediately? What is this to a ministerial call?

Answ. 1. It will never be proved that any whole family, infants, servants,
etc. were joined in a little national Church as the Jewish before that time,
there being no such covenant, and token of it till then. 2. God did immediately
make his covenant with Abraham then and appoint circumcision, But the call of
the Church was medlate, the revealing of the covenant, and the administering the
token of it, whereby they were separated to be a people to God, being done by
Abraham himself as the minister of this call. Yet we have more questions to
answer.

3. Are you sure that which Abraham did in it was as a Magistrate? and not as a
Prophet? nor Priest? nor Master of family? prove that if you can.

Answ. It is easy to prove that what Abraham did was done not as a Prophet,
nor Priest: for then it should have been the work of Prophets and of Priests to
have circumcised: but as the Master of the family, or parent, and consequently
as the Magistrate of that house. For I count a parent or master of a Family to
be a Magistrate in a little compass.

Yet more. 4. What was it that Abraham did? He circumcised them when God had
commanded; And was circumcising the call? then the infants in the Wilderness,
nor the whole camp almost had no Church call; And then the women had never any
Church call.

Answ. Circumcising was part of the call; the declaration of God concerning
Abraham's posterity, and his other providence separating the Israelites in the
Wilderness and with them the women, as bringing them out of Egypt, bringing
them into Covenant, giving them Laws by Moses, etc. which reached to women and
males uncircumcised, were also a part of the Church call. Yet again,

What was it then that Abraham did more then now may be done? If you say, he
compelled them to be circumcised by violence without their consent, I deny it
as a forgery; And if he had done so by those at age, it had been no making them
Church Members; for their consent is absolutely necessary thereto. If you say,
Abraham by his interest and authority persuasion did win all at age in his
family to consent; dare you say, that every Master of a family and Magistrate
ought not to do so now? So that I cannot find any more that Abraham did in
this call then may now be done.

Answ. I do not think Abraham did compel them by violence to be circumcised, I
think it could hardly have been so done; nor do I think Abraham did it as
preachers do now, by reasons and proofs of their duty persuading them to it,
and leaving it free to them to consent or not; (perhaps the time was too little
to do it in, and not unlikely, Ishmael would have then refused, being a
scoffer, and then thirteen years old:) But he did it by his command, authority,
and interest; which if Magistrates and Masters of Families do use with
persuasion to win persons to consent to the Gospel, they do what is
commendable, and in some cases their duty: And if they win any, so they make
them visible church members by their preaching to them, not merely by Authority
as Abraham, who I think was bound to have circumcised by force if any had not
yielded to it, or else to have cut him off by that law which is Genesis 17.14. And
I hardly think Mr. B. will yield a Magistrate or Master of a family to do what
Abrah^m did, to administer as they call it, the initial seal, whether it be
circumcision or baptism. Yet were his conclusion yielded him, neither it nor
any thing he has s^id does at all overthrow my position, which was, that the
Christian Church call is by preaching, the Jewish, by the Mag^strates
authority, and so different.

Mr. B. goes on thus. And then for Moses what more did he? did he make them
members without their consent? No, he sets before them life, and death,
blessing and cursing; and bids them choose which they would. Deuteronomy. 28, 29, and
30, chapters. Does he circumcise them? No, not his own Son. Nor the infants
forty years, nor the women at all. Does he command them to obey the commands of
God? And should not every King and Magistrate do the like? Does he persuade
them? why, you know he was a Prophet; and if he had not, yet sure he must do it
as a King, and as a servant of God. Where then lies this peculiar call by the
Magistrate? I think by that time we have search^ this to the quick, we shall
find the Magistracy less beholding to Mr. T. then was imagined. No wonder that
he told the people in his pu^pit that it was Doctrine of a dangerous
consequence which I delivered [that Magistrates had their power from Christ the
mediat^u^, and not only from God as creatour] I doubt by this arguing of his,
that he will not allow the Magistrate to call all his people together* and
propound the Covenant of God to them, and command them to obey God. You find
not Moses by prison or fire forcing any man to consent: And if he had, you must
have a little further work to prove that it was that which made them a Church,
or that the Magistrates may not still do as much as was done herein then.

Answ. Mr. B. herein does most shamefully wrest my words and meaning: For
whereas to show the different call of the Jewish and Christian Church, I
alleged only matter of fact, that the one was by the Magistrates authority,
the other by Ministers preaching the Gospel, which could not take in infants;
Mr. B. wrests my speech as if I had said, Magistrates might not do what Moses
then did, and goes about to insinuate, as if the Magistracy were less beholding
to me then were meet; and endeavors to increase the suspicion of my lessening
his power by my Doctrine in the Pulpit at Bewdley. But of my judgment in this
thing, I have given account in the same Pulpit on occasion of the Swearing of
the Magistrate there on Romans 13.4. in these Positions. 1. That all power is
committed to Christ to manage as Mediator, Mat. 28.18. Joh. 5.22, 27. 1 Cor.
15.24. And consequently, what they do for or against the Church, it is from
Christ enabling or permitting even as Mediator. 2. That Magistrates as well as
others are subject to, and are to yield obedience to Christ's commands as he is
Mediator, Mat. 17.5. Act. 3.22. 3. That they have power and authority in many
things which concern the Church of God, and are bound to use their power for
Christ, and his Church, so far as their power extends, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. And in
this sense it is that Christ exercises some of his Government by Magistracy
under him, as also by Parents and Husbands, Ephesians. 6.4. But I conceive it a
business of much difficulty, to set the right bounds of their power Many things
few or none but Papists restrain them in, as the calling of Assemblies, judging
of Ecclesiastical persons for civil crimes, ordering the maintenance, and
estates of such persons, with many more such things as are to be done circa
Ecclesiam, not in Ecclesia: On the other side, few or none but Erastians allow
them power in the Church, so as to act as civil Magistrates in that which is by
special commission appointed to proper Officers, viz. the preaching of the
Gospel, administering the peculiar Rites of the Christian Church, ordination of
Elders, government by Ecclesiastic censures, and such like things. The
chiefest difficulty has been, how far they are to use their power for making
men profess Christianity, accept of Teachers, punishing of Heretics and
excommunicate persons, and such like acts, in which f^r the most part
Magistrates by instigation of Popish Priests, Prelates, and others, have much
miscarried, and been unhappy instruments of much oppression. Yet for my part I
do not deny altogether their power about such things as these, especially if
they go no further then what Mr. B. here speaks of, the commanding them to obey
Gods commands, propounding the Covenant of God to them, restraining pernicious*
Teachers, and go upon very sure grounds, that they urge nothing but what is
certainly Gods command, or agreeable to it, nor punish or restrain men for that
which is questionable whether it be an error, or pernicious. But this I hold,
should a Magistrate as Moses did, by his authority, upon fears or hopes, or
other compliance, draw all the people of the Land into a Covenant, to engage
themselves and posterity to be Christians, yet this would not make the whole
Nation to be a Christian Church, the infants visible church members, capable of
Baptism, since Christ has not appointed this way, but another, to wit, by
preaching the Gospel to call his Church, and the preachers of it to baptize
believers so called. 4. I say, that a civil Magistrate is not an Officer of
Christ as Mediator, since he has no new Commission from him as the Apostles,
John 20.21. and others, Ephesians 4.11. And I conceive to hold the affirmative is
of dangerous consequence: it will follow, 1. That a civil Magistrate is bound
to produce a further commission from Christ as mediator, besides the appointmen
of God as creator, which I neither think Mr. B. has showed, nor can show. 2.
That he who shows commission from Christ as mediator to rule, has the
authority of a civil Magistrate, which puts both Swords into Elders hands. 3.
That if a civil Magistrate be an Officer of Christ as mediator, he is in the
Church, in which alone Christ as mediator sets Officers; and then he must be a
Christian or no Magistrate, yea, a church member, and then he has rule in the
Church, and power to do Ecclesiastical acts. 4. Then dominion is founded in
grace, which it seems Mr. B. holds. Praefestin. Mor. sect. 19. as most certain
that it is founded in the grace of redemption and universal; and brings for it
plain Scrip. proof, etc. page 229. Romans 14.9. which v. 8. shows plainly to be
meant only of those that live and die to him, and are his own peculiar people;
and the word (...) notes not such a Lordship as is over enemies, as Devils, and
children of perdition by power and force; but such a Lordship as is with
property over them as his possession, to whom he has right as his own, 1 Cor.
6.^0. such as a wife, an obedient child, or servant. The other Texts prove ^ut
my first Position. The Reader I presume will pardon this excursion, being
necessitated by Mr. Bs. frequent and continued mal^gnant suggestions, tending
to make me accounted an adversary to Magistracy. I now return to the point in
hand. And in answer to Mr. Bs. demand, I say, the peculiar call of the Church
of the Jews by Moses the Magistrate was, in his bringing them out of Egypt,
into the Covenant at mount Sinai, settling them under Laws, Priesthod,
Government, whereby they were fashioned or established as a national Church.
But in the Christian Church, the Apostles and other holy Teachers did gather,
and fashion, and establish the Church Christan by preaching of the word,
without such a way of authority and power as Moses exercised. It is true he did
as we read, Deuteronomy. 30.19. but not so as the Apostles, who when the Gospel was
refused exercised no power over the refusers; for Moses would suffer none to
live in the Commonwealth of Israel who did not own the God of Israel, and if
they worshipped an Idol he put them to death.

Mr. B. adds. 5. This argument, if good, would help the Seekers to prove that
we have no Church on earth, because not called by Apostles, and so the Church.
Constitution taken down, and none by God substituted. Let them that have better
eyes then I find out this peculiar church-making call* for I cannot.

Answ. My argument, the Church call is altered from the way of making the
Jewish Church by Abra^ams and Moses authority, into the persuasive way of
begetting faith by Ministers preaching the Gospel, therefore the Church
constitution is altered, does not help Seekers, except it be acknowledged,
there is no Church now by Ministers preaching the Gospel, but by mere authority
of Magistrates, which was heretofore the objection of Papists against the
English churches, b^t refelled by Protestants, Jewel, etc. For I do not
appropriate the Church call to the Apostles, or men who could speak that which
was merely, wholly, undoubtedly, insite, implantedly the word of God, as
Borelius spoke; but to the preaching of the Gospel by any Minister of Christ,
or other instrument, whereby faith is begotten, and whereby a^one the Christian
visible Church and all its members were called, in a different way from the
Jewish Church call; which if Mr. B. do not see to have been the Christian
peculiar church making call, after his wr^ting in his Saints everl. rest, par.
2. chapter 6. sect. 1. it seems he will not see i^, and then we may apply to him
the Proverb, Who so blind as he that will not see?

Mr. B. passes on thus. Well, But may it not yet lie in the second point [that
they were all taken in to be a Church in one day?] Answ. 1. What day was that?
I would Mr. T. could tell me He says Moses did it: but that is no truer then
the rest. For sure they were a Church before Moses time. Did they begin to be a
Church in the Wilderness? or did Moses only express the Covenant to them more
fully, and cause them often to renew the Covenant, and so only confirm them a
Church? was not the circumcised seed of Abraham a Church in Egypt? and was the
uncircumcised Host only in the Wilderness the Church? This is excellent
arguing.

Answ. This is excellent answering, not to deny what is objected, but to
propound cross interrogatories. Suppose I could not assign the day, is not the
thing true? But that Mr. B. may not lose his longing, I tell him it was when
Abraham circumcised his house, Genesis 17.23. When Moses made a Covenant with them
in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 29.1. If I say Moses did it, I say but what the Scripture does,
Deuteronomy. 33.4, 5. nor does it want of truth if it be no truer then the rest. It is
not true Israel had their Church call from Moses, for sure they were a Church
before Moses time; this is Mr. Bs. excellent arguing. As if the seed of
Abraham, a fluent being, consisting of a succession of people, might not have
one Church call in one age, another in another; one by Abraham, another by
Isaac, another by Jacob, another by Moses. Does not Mr. B. himself, page 122.
tell us, that Moses did cause them often to enter and renew the Covenant? I do
not say they began to be a Church in the wilderness, or that the seed of
Abraham was not a Church in Egypt, or only in the wilderness: But this I say,
the Church call of that people was often in several ages by the authority of the
several Patriarchs and Rulers, as God saw it needful to bring them into
Covenant, for better fashioning, establishing, or recovering the Church fallen,
but for the most part by the authority of Rulers; or if by a Prophet, in an
extraordinary manner, as Elijahs days, 1 Kin. 18. and that not by the way used
in the Christian Church, by a daily adding to the Church, and multiplying it by
preaching, as Acts 2.47. and 6.1. but by authority calling the whole nation and
people together into Covenant at once.

Again says Mr. B. But Abraham took all his family to be a Church in one day,
you will say. I answer. First, It is not proved when they began to be a Church.
Repl. Nor needs it. 2 ly. And would not Mr. T. now have a whole family made a
Church in a day? Is that his charity?

Repl. Yes, and the whole world, if it seemed good to God: But we find not that
he does so, or gives us any rule or president for us to do so, in the
constitution of the visible Church Christian, any otherwise then by preaching
the Gospel to them, and baptizing Disciples or believers, Mat. 28.19. Mark
16.15, 16. And sure my charity must not be my rule about the use of Gods
Ordinances, but my Lord and Masters appointment.

3 ly. Says Mr. B. And what of it had been true if the whole Kingdom? either
it was with their c^nsent, or without: without their consent they could not be
made church members; for they could not enter into Covenant with G^d.

Answ. If this be true, then no infants are church members. And though it were
true, that none could enter into Covenant with God who is of age without his
consent, (which seems to me otherwise,) yet the consent obtained merely by the
authority of Masters or Governors, through fear or hopes without teaching, and
free acceptance of Christ upon the preaching of the Gosp^l, does not make a
visible member of the Christian Church, however it did in the Jewish. I do not
think the Americans forced to be baptized by Spaniards, or other people by the
conquests of Charles the Great, and other Christian Princes, before they knew
Christ by teaching made Christians, were such, though there was some consent
out of fear of loss of life or liberty if they were not. Mr. B. adds.

And never was any such thing attempted. Even Joshua treads in Moses steps, and
bids them choose whether they will serve the Lord or not. Jos. 24.

Answ. Whether Abraham had the free consent of all his house to enter into
Covenant with the Lord, or whether he did circumcise some and take them to his
Family Church without their consent, is uncertain: However, if Abraham had a
slave refractory, which he was loath to lose, yet he must circumcise him
against his will, because of the command with the penalty, Genesis 17.12, 13, 14.
And in the circumcising the Sichemites what was done and attempted is known.
Neither Moses, nor Joshua did so leave it to the Jews liberty, but that they
would have cut off from the people by death any that refused to acknowledge
God; or that set up an Idol. Asa's Covenant was of putting to death whosever
would not seek the Lord God of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 15.13. Whereas there is no such
Law in the Christian Church, that whoever shall not believe in Christ shall be
put to death.

Yet further says Mr. B. And it being with their consent that the nation were
church members, may not the like be done now? What, may not any or all the
nations of the world be added to the Church, if they will consent, and enter
the Covenant?

Answ. Yes, they may, so many as upon knowledge of Christ do freely consent to
receive him in all nations: But infants, natural fools, madmen in their fits,
are neither fit to consent, nor to be members in the Christian visible Church,
no nor such ignorant people as do not competently know the Christian faith. Mr.
B. adds.

What then is this making them a Church in one day that Mr. T. so cloudily
talks of? If he say, it is that then the infants were taken in: I answer, that
is to prove the same by the same, or else to argue circularly: As to say, their
Church call did take in infants, therefore the taking in of infants was
peculiar to their Church call; this begs the question: Or to say, their Church
constitution is ceased, because their Church call is ceased; or, their Church
call consisting in the taking in of infants is ceased, therefore their Church
constitution is ceased; and that Church constitution is ceased, therefore the
taking in of infants is ceased. This arguing is like their cause.

Answ. I have sundry times told Mr. B. that the call in one day of the whole
nation was by Abraham's authori^y, Genesis 17. and by Moses, Exodus 19 etc.
otherwise then in the Christian visible Church, which was by a daily addition
of believers out of several families, cities, and nations, by preaching to them
the Gospel. And how my arguing is framed without begging the question, or any
circle, is before showed. And the [call in one day] I mean^ of Abraham's and
Moses act, whether the hearts of the whole nation were bowed to consent to take
the Lord for their God, or no. I neither envy nor deny the enlarging of the
Church by Christ, nor do I think the converting or taking in more or less makes
an alteration in the nature of the Church call or constitution; but a call by
preaching the Gospel makes an alteration in the Christian visible Church call
and constitution from the Jewish, sufficient to exclude infants from Christian
visible church membership. But Mr. B. clamours thus against me.

And what means Mr. T. to talk of here one and there one? To speak so
contemptuously in such disparaging language of the Kingdom and Gospel of
Christ? Is not the wonderful success of the Gospel one of our strong arguments
for the truth of the Gospel and our Christian Religion? And it seems Mr. T.
will give this away to the Pagans, rather then admit infants to be members of
the Church.

Answ. I mean to speak as, the Holy Ghost speaks, 1 Cor. 1.26 27, 28, 29. James
2.5, 6. Rev. 5.9. and as by the Histories Ecclesiastical may be made apparent,
which rashly Mr. B calls speaking contemptuously in disparaging language of the
Kingdom and Gospel of Christ, as he formerly did my denial of infant Baptism
accusing of my own children. Nor by my saying is the argument for the truth of
the Gospel and Christian Religion a whit infringed. For the force of the
argument is not from hence, that whole nations, cities, houses were converted
by the Gospel; but that though the persons were contemptible who preached,
their Doctrine likely to affright men, without arms* against opposition of
great ones, there was so great success over the world as to conv^^t so great
numbers, though few in comparison of the rest, even in most barbarous
countries, from their long accustomed idolatry to embrace a crucified Lord. Yet
says Mr. B.

Was it but here one and there one when three thousand were converted at once,
and five thousand afterward? and many myriads or ten thousands even of the
Jews that continued zealous of the Law did believe? Acts 2.41. and 4.4. and
21.20. besides all Gentiles? Was it but here one and there one, when all that
dwelt at Lydda and Saron turned to the Lord, both men and women, Acts 9 35. and
all that dwelt at Samaria, Acts 8.

Answ. It was but here one and there one as I meant it. 1. It was not any whole
nation or city, and perhaps few whole households, sure I am not one infant in
any of the places. For in Acts 2.41. they who were baptized gladly received the
word; and Acts 4.4. they heard the word and believed; and Acts 21.20. they
believed and were zealous of the Law; Acts 9.35. they saw it, and turned to the
Lord; Acts 8.2. they believed Philip. 2. These three thousand, five thousand,
ten thousands inhabitants might, and li^ely were but one out of one house, and
another out of another house: As God had much people in Corinth, Acts 18.10.
yet but few households, the Husband a believer, the Wife an unbeliever; the
Servant a believer, not the Master, 1 Cor. 7.11, 12, 16, 21. So many miriads
might be, yet but here one and there one, considering that Jerusalem,
especially at the Feasts, was full of people; an^ that the myriads are not
restrained to Jerusalem, but ^ight be in Judaea, or perhaps in remoter parts.
It is evident that the number of Christians was not able to match the
Persecuters, and that even in Jerusalem: Yea, it is said, Acts 21.30. that all
the city was moved against Paul, and the people ran together, all Jerusalem was
in an uproar, v. 31. much ado the soldiers had to rescue him from the
multitude, v. 35. even at that time when the myriads are said to have been of
believing Jews, v. 20. The Texts Acts 9 35. and 8.12. say not as Mr. B. that
all that dwelt at Samaria believed, nor all that dwelt at Lydda and Saron both
men and women, but those that turned to the Lord, as is showed Sect. 50. before.

Yet more. Let him show me when three thousand Jews were made church members in
a day, if he can, before Christ's time: I say, if he can, let him show it me.
Sure ever since Abraham's time (and I doubt not but before too) they were added
to the Church by one and one as they were born.

Answ. If I cannot show it Mr. B. gains nothing, my assertion, that the Jewish
nation were a Church together in one day by Magistrates authority, the
Christian Church was gathered by Apostles and others preaching whereby one was
made here one day, another there a believer another day, not a na^ion, city,
nor always a house together, stands good. But since M. B. will allow me so much
favor as to show him any thing, me thinks he should not deny that more then
three thousand were made church members in one day, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15. And if in the time of Solomon's reign, when Judah and Israel were many
as the sand which is by the sea in multitude 1 Kin. 4.20. three thousand were
born in one day, by Mr. Bs. own grant there were three thousand added to the
Church in one day.

Yet again says Mr. B. And I have showed you before, that Christ sends his
messengers to disciple all nations: It is a base exposition that shall say he
means only, Go and disciple me here one and there one out of all nations, and
no more.

Answ. And what childish vanity, if not worse, he has showed in his ridiculous
including infants to be discipled in that commission, is showed before in the
second Part of this Review, Sect. 12. etc. If it be a base exposition which he
sets down, it is base dealing if he set it down as mine exposition: who yield
that their commission was to disciple all of a nation who could be discipled,
though it is true that they could not do it to a whole nation in a day as Moses
did; and in the event they discipled but here one and there one in a house for
the most part.

Yet more says Mr. B. And what means that in Revel. 11.15. Are not these
Kingdoms added to the Church as well as Israel?

I answer, That it means not as Mr. B. imagines, that the whole people of
Kingdoms shall become Christ's visible Church, but the rule or dominion of them
shall be his, as the close of the v. and ch 12.10. show, which makes nothing
for Mr. B. as will appear by ex^minining his frivolous arguing, chapter 13.

Yet again says Mr. B. like a brave Goliath, And are not all professors of
Christianity in England, as truly in the Church as all in Israel were? I
challen^e any to answer me herein, and undertake to make it good against them
(as far as will stand with modesty to challenge) whatsoever any Separatist
(commonly called Independents) or Anabaptists may say to the contrary; (for I
have pretty well tried the strength of their arguing in this.)

And I have pretty well tried Mr. Bs. strength in disputes, and find it small
though his words be big. I do not answer to the name of a Separatist or
Anabaptist, they are Mr. Bs. abusive language of me. Let Independent
Paedobaptists answer it as they please. I th^nk if they will baptize infan^s
from the rule of circumcision and the Jewish-Church-state, they must assert a
national Church, admit all that avo^ch themselves Christians to breaking of
Bread, and their infant males to Baptism. And I conceive Presbyterians by the
grounds they maintain Paedobaptism are debarred from keeping the ignorant and
scandalous from the Lords Supper; and though I challenge not as Mr. B. yet
presume I shall make both good in their season. As for the present question of
Mr. B. I grant it, and then I hope we shall not fight about it. Yet I t^ll Mr.
B. I do not take all for professors of Christ^anity whom perhaps Mr. B. does,
nor do I think Mr. B. can find me one professor of Christianity among all the
infants in England.

Yet a little further, s^ith Mr. B. Either Mr. T. by [Church call] means that
which was the means of entering infants, or men at a^e or somewhat common to
both. The Jews did all enter into the Church as members in infancy, even they
that deferred Circumcision till forty years old, and the women that were not
circumcised. And what call had these infants that cannot understand a call?

Answ. The Church call of the Jewish nation or family of ^braham, was by his
authority, in a way common to men of age and infants: Abraham and his house
were by circumcision and declaring Gods Covenant formed into a visible Church,
and accordingly all that were born of Abraham, and all that were taken into his
house while they continued in that Family or Nation, were of that Church. And
this way of Church call, by bringing into the bond of the Covenant the whole
Nation, infants, servants, men and women together, was by the authority of
Moses renewed at mount Horeb, and in the land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29.1. though
circumcision were deferred for a time. And this call was of the infants, though
not by themselves apart, yet conjunctly with the whole Nation, the chief
representing the rest, Exodus 19.7. Deuteronomy. 29.10. and among them the infants, who
might as well understand a call as a Covenant, into which Mr. B. contends they
did enter.

Mr. B. adds. The Proselytes, who were made Church Members at age, were first
converted to God, and professed the true Religion, and so brought in their
children with them: They were converted not all in a day, but by times; not
only by Moses, or succeeding Magistrates, but chiefly by Priests or Levites,
or zealous people, or by what way or means God was pleas^d to use for that end.
I did int^eat Mr. T. to show me any material difference between the call of
these Prosely^es into the Church in all ages till Christ, and the call of us
Gentiles into the Church: And truly he gave me an answer of mere words for a
put off, (wherein he has a notable faculty,) which I can find no weight nor
sense in, nor am I able to tell what he would say to it; nor can I conceive
what possibly can be said of any moment. And as Camero well notes, (...), is
now used in the Church as it were in the place of (...): Discipling new to us,
is as Proselyting was to them. So that you see now what this Church call is
which he lays so great a weight on, and how much in the main it differs
from ours.

Answ. When that time was that Mr. B. made this request to me, and what
imperfect answer it was which I gave him, I do not well remember: I guess it
was when I had conference with him alone, Jan. 25. 1649. in his chamber, when
he drew me to a conference with him, pretendi^g friendliness; but (as the event
showed, having Jan. 15. before, when I suspe^^ed no such dealing, written his
abusive Epistle before his Saints everlasting rest, in which he falsely accused
me and proclaimed his driving me to absurdities in the Dispute, Jan. 1.) drew
from me what he could ^or his advantage, and then printed it in this Book,
without my revising my answers, or his acquainting me with his printing them,
or rightly according as they were printing them, as may be perceived by this
Review; and mocking me with this fraudulent trick, when I expected according to
his promise to see his arguments written from some of his own or my auditors to
whom he would communicate them. But leaving him to the Lord, I shall now give a
plain answer to his demand. Proselytes were of two sorts, 1. Of the gate, as
Cornelius, ow^ing the God of Israel, but not joining to the Church and policy
of Israel. These were not of the Jewish Church visible, though they were of the
Church invisible of true believers, and of the Church visible universal of
professors of the true God: For they were accounted unclean, and shunned by the
Jews, Acts 10.28. and 11.2, 3. Their calling I conceive was as ours is, by the
word of God made known to them; nor do I find that infants were any part of the
Church of them, whether domestic as in Cornelius house, Acts 10.2. or
congregational, of which I find not an instance, nor of any rites or discipline
they had. 2. Of righteousness, who were made such partly by persuasion as Mat.
23.15. and so far their call agrees with our call, and the other sort of
Proselytes, partly by entering them into the Jewish Church, by Baptism,
Circumcision, and an Offering, and with them wives and children; and this was
done by authority of Elders imposing on them the precepts of Moses Law, and
acting according to rules of their own. In which how much their Church call
differs from ours is showed in the 2d. Part of this Review, sect. 24. in answer
to Dr. Hammond. Now though they were joined to the Jewish Church one
after-another, and the infants of the Jews as they were born; yet the
Jewish-Church, whether at the first erection, or after estab^ishing, were
constituted of the whole Family and Nation together by the authority of Abraham
and Moses differently from the call of the Christian Church visible in so
material a point as excludes infants from church membership, (...), which thing
I was to demonstrate.

Mr. B. goes on thus. But yet one other argument Mr. T. ha^h to prove the
Church constitution altered, and consequently infants now cast out, or their
church membership repealed: And that is this; They were to go up three times a
year to the Temple; they had their Sanedrim, and High Priest: Now he appealeth
to all, whether these be not altered: And therefore the Church constitution
must needs be altered; and so infants put out.

Answ. My argument is this, If that which had the same reason with infants
church membership be altered, then infants church membership is altered: But
that which had the same reason with infants visible church membership is
altered, Ergo. The consequence is made good by the rule of Logic, Where there
is the same reason of things, there is to be the same judgment. De paribus
idem est judicium. The minor is proved thus. The High Priest, Sanhedrim, repair
to their Feasts, had the same reason with infants visible church membership:
But they are altered, Ergo. The major is proved thus. Infants church membership
was no where but in the Jewish Church, we read of it no where else, nor upon
any other reason but their being part of the Nation, which God had made his
Church; they were visible church members upon no profession of their own, nor
from any general determination of God, Law or Ordinance that the children
should be reckoned of his Church with the parents in any country whatsoever,
there being no such Law; but merely from hence, because he would have the
Nation of Israel to be his fixed people out of whom the Messiah should come,
and so a National Church till then. And for the same reason he would have one
High Priest, Temple, repair thither at solemn Feasts, a Sanhedrim, their
genealogies kept, their possessions by lot, etc. But all these are altered now,
the Church is not National, no one High Priest, Temple, Sanhedrim, etc.
therefore neither infants visible Churchmembership, which had the same reason
and no other. What says Mr. B.

Alas, miserable Cause that has no better arguments! are any of these
essential to their Church constitution? How came there to be so strict a
conjunction between Priesthood, Temple, Sanhedrim, etc. as that the Church must
needs fall when they fall? may it not be a Church without these?

Answ. Alas miserable Cause that has no better answers! Is infants
church membership essential to Church constitution? How came there to be so
strict a conjunction between the Church and their membership, as that the
Church must needs fall when they fall? may^it not be a Church without these? If
the Temple, etc. might be altered, and and were, because no^ essential to the
Church; infants Churchmembership did cease too, which was no more essential
then those, and which has been proved to have the same reason with these, to
wit, Gods making his Church National out of which the Messiah was to come.
Hitherto nothing is indeed answered, and what is said is retorted. The rest is
according to Mr. Bs. vein of frivolous putting impertinent questions to me.

I would entreat Mr. T. or any Christian who has the least good will to truth
lest in him, considerately to answer me to these. 1. Was not the Jewish people
a Church before they had either a Temple, or Sanhedrim, or High Priest, or any
of the ceremonies of the Law of Moses? Ans. I think not: there was no time they
were a Church, but they had a Priest, an Altar, Sacrifices, distinction of
clean and unclean beasts, etc. Were they not a Church in Egypt, and in the
families of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob? Ans. They were. 2. Did the adding of
these Laws and ceremonies take down any former part of the Church? Ans. No. Or
did every new ceremony that was added make a new Church, or constitution of the
Church? Ans. No. 3. If the adding of all these ceremonies did not make a new
Church, or overthrow the old, why should the taking of them away overthrow it?
Ans. Who says it does? 4. If the Jews Church constitution before Moses time
was such as took in infants, why not after Moses time? Ans. Who denies it? Or
if infants were Church Members long before either Temple, or Sanedrim, or High
Priest, etc. Why may they not be so when these are down? why must they needs
fall with them when they did not rise with them? Ans. Because if they did not
rise with them at the same time, yet they were erected upon the same
foundation, the Jewish National Church, as the walls fall with the roof, though
they rise not together, because they rest on the same foundation. 5. And if the
very specifical nature of their Church be taken down, then men are cast out,
and women too, as well as children. Ans. I say not the specifical nature of
their Church was taken down, but the particular Church constitution Jewish
altered; and I grant it, that men and women under the consideration as they
were in the Jewish Church, are left out (I will not say cast out, for they were
never in) of the Christian visible Church as well as children. If it be said
that Christ has appointed men and women to be church members anew, I answer,
What man can imagine that Christ first repealed the Ordinance that men and
women should be members of the Church, and then set it up anew? Ans. And what
man can imagine otherwise who reads the New Testament, but that (if there were
such an Ordinance that men and women being Jews by birth should be members of
the Jewish Church) Christ repealed it, when neither John Baptist, nor Christ,
nor his Apostles admitted any Jew because a Jew into the Christian Church by
Baptism, without his personal faith and repentance?

Mr. B. says. I will wast no more time in confuting such slender arguments,
but shall willingly leave it to the judgment of any understanding unbyassed
man, whether Mr. T. have well proved that God repealed his Ordinance, and
revoked his merciful gift, that some infants shall be Church members.

Answ. It is my burden that I must waste more time in refuting such empty
scriblings as these, containing questions, and those not touching the argument,
instead of answers; and I leave it to the Students of Divinity in the
Universities, and elsewhere, who are understanding unbyassed men (if there be
any) yea to any that have studied Logic, to judge whether I have not proved a
repeal of his pretended Ordinance, after I have added some more proof out of
the New Testament in the next Section, and answered his Letters to me, to which
I hasten.

SECT. LII. It is proved, that infants were not reckoned to the visible Church
Christian in the primitive times, nor are now.
1. I Thus argue, If no infants were part of the visible Church Christian in
the primitive times, then whatever Ordinance there were of their visible
church membership before, must needs be repealed. But the antecedent is true,
Ergo the consequent. The consequent of the major I think will not be denied:
For supposing there were infants even of Christians, and an Ord^nance before,
that the infants of the godly should be visible church members, and yet no part
or members; then it must needs be from the revocation of that Ordinance, if
there were such a one. Now that the antecedent is true, I prove thus. If in all
the days of Christ on earth, and the Apostles, no infant was a part or member
of the visible Church Christian, then not in the primitive times: For the
primitive times of the Christian Church go no further, though I think I might
extend my proof somewhat further. But the antecedent is true, Ergo.

That no infant was a part or member of the visible Church Christian in the
days of Christ and his Apostles on earth, is proved by these arguments.

1 All visible members of the Church Christian were to be baptized. This is
often asserted by Mr. B. plain Scrip. proof, etc. page 25. The whole Church
must be sanctified by the washing of water, page* 342. As the whole Church is
one body, and has one Lord, and one faith, so it has one common baptism. And
he alleges 1 Cor. 12.13* Ephesians. 5.25, 26. Ephesians. 4.5. out of which this
proposition may be proved. But no infants were to be baptized. This is proved
at large in the 2d. part of this Review Sect. 5, etc. Therefore no infants were
visible members of the Christian Church.

2. They were not visible members of the Church Christian who were not of the
visible body of Christ. This is proved from Mr. Bs. words plain Script. etc.
page 25. The body 1 Cor. 12.13. is the visible Church. page 342. As the whole
Church is one body etc. page 39. What is the Church? Is it not the body of
Christ? The same he confirms page 60.318. from 1 Cor. 12.13. which he proves to
be meant of the visible Church, and it is affirmed by the Apostle Col. 1.24.
Ephesians. 1.22, 23. that the Church is the body of Christ, and so the visible
Church is his visible body. But no infant was of the visible body of Christ.
This is proved 1. from 1 Cor. 12.13. all that were of the body were made to
drink into one spirit, namely in the cup of the L^rds supper. Diodati annot. in
locum hanc rationem confirmat testimonio baptismi and caenae dominicae piscat.
analys. 1 Cor. 12.13. Arg. 9. Sacramento baptismi etcaenae dominicae omnes
fideles connectuntur. Dicson expos. Anal. 1 Cor. 12.13. ut utri usque
Sacramenti unus scopus and idem etiam esse intelligatur, Beza annot. in 1 Cor.
12.13. Calicem quoq^e Domini in hanc spem bibimus. Grot. annot. in locum. But
no infant was made to drink into one spirit, for none of them did drink the cup
in the Lords supper, Ergo. 2. From 1 Cor. 10.17. All that were one body and one
bread, did partake of that one bread which was broken v. 16. But no infant did
partake of that one bread, if they did they must do so still and* be admitted
to the Lords supper, Ergo. 3. From Ephesians. 4.5. The whole Church is one body,
and has one Lord and one faith. Mr. B. plain Script. etc. page 342. But no
infant has one faith, Ergo.

3. They were no members of the visible Church, who were left out of the number
of the whole Church, all the believers, the multitude of the disciples in all
the places where there is an enumeration of the members of the Church, or
mention of the whole Church, the number of believers or disciples in the new
Testament. But infants are left out of that number in all places in the new
Testament, Ergo. The major is evident of it self. For as we know who was in the
church by their mention, so we know who were not by their being left out in
those passages, which make an enumeration or reckoning of all, there being no
other way to know who were in or out; and if this be not true, the speeches are
false which mention all, the whole, the multitude, as the full number if they
were not so. The minor is also proved from those texts where such enumeration
is mentioned. Acts 1.15. Peter is said to stand up in the mids of the
disciples, and that the number of the names together were about an hundred and
twenty* and in the verses before are reckoned the Apostles with the women, Mary
the mother of Jesus and his brethren, and they are said to continue in one
accord in prayer and supplication. Here I conceive is an enumeration of the
disciples or church that then was at Jerusalem visible. Dr. Lightfoot in his
Com. on Acts 15. says, the believers at Jerusalem no doubt were many hundreds
if not thousands at this time; though we read of no Converts in this book till
the next chapter. For what fruit or account can else be given of all Christ's
preaching and pains bestowed in that city? Let but Joh. 2.23. and 3.2. and 4.1.
and Mar. 3.8. and Joh. 7.31. and 8.30. and 11.28, 45. and 12.19, 42. and diverse
other places be well weighed, and it will be utterly unimaginable that there
should be less believers in Jerusalem now then many hundreds, much more
unimaginable that these one hundred and twenty were all, who were all
Galileans, and no inhabitants of Jerusalem at all. The like is the arguing of
the Assembly in their answer to the Dissenters, page 66. Nevertheless it seems
not improbable to me, considering the narration all along ^he chapter, that v.
4, 6. they are said to come together, go to mount Olivet, and then to return to
Jerusalem, and their action noted with special notice of some, v. 13, 14. and
then next, v 15. that Peter stood up in the mids of the Disciples, that this
enumeration of 120 is not an enumeration only of men of note, but of all the
disciples of Christ then at Jerusalem, me thinks the terming of Peter a
Galilean, Mark 14.70. does intimate few of the Hierosolymitans were disciples
of Christ; Christ's preaching most in Galilee, his directing them to go into
Galilee where they should see him, Matthew. 26.32. Mark 16.7. the disciples
shut^in^ the doors and assembling at evening for fear of the Jews, Joh. 20.19.
do show that most of ^he disciples were Galileans, few of Jerusalem; specially
when all the disciples forsook Christ and fled, Matthew. 26.56. the shepherd
being smitten and the sheep scattered, v. 31. H^wever the enumeration being of
disciples, and the women being reckoned with them, and not their children, nor
the actions of prayer, etc. such as are to be ascribed ^o infants, it is
evident that infants were not then countted among the disciples, and
consequen^ly not counted for visible members of the Christian Church.

Acts 2.1. They are said to be all with one accord in one place. The Assembly
ubi supra alleges reasons why they all should be meant of the Apostles only,
but not cogent. For 1. the narration does not any more limit the words Act.
2.1. by Acts 1.26 then by v. 15. 2. not only the Apostles, but others were
filled with the holy Ghost women as well as men, v. 17. Acts 4.31. and 6.5. 3.
though they were Galile^ns that spoke v. 7. yet it proves not the [all] v. 1.
to be Galileans. 4. the mention is of the Apostles v. 14, 37, 42. not to show
that it was a meeting of the Apost^es only, but because they were the leaders
and chief actors in that Church.

And that the meeting was of the whole Church at Jerusalem then, is proved from
v. 41. th^s, The meeting was of them to whom the three thousand souls were
added; But they were added to the Church v. 47. not only to the Apostles, or
teachers. For then the sense should be, that that 3000 should be added to the
teachers, and so many more teachers added: whereas they are said to continue in
the Apostles doctrine v. 42. by their profession of it, the Apostles teaching
an^ not the^. And hence I gather, that not one infant was reckoned to the
Church, because the [ all] v. 1. are said to be together (...) with one
accord, or one mind and consent, which is not to be said of infants.

From Acts 2.41. I further argue, The Church did then consist of such persons
only as were of like sort with those who were added to it, which must be
granted except it be said, the added and those who were added were of different
sorts. But of those who were added there was no one infant. This is proved from
the words v. 42, 43. that they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine
and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers, and fear came upon
every soul, v. 41. they gladly received the word, which cannot be said of
infants; therefore no infant was reckoned then a^ a part or member of the
visible Church Christian.

Again v. ^4. the whole Church is meant by all that believed, who are said to
be together* to have all things^common, sold and imparted their possessions,
continued with one accord in the temple, brake bread from house to house, eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praised God, had ^avour with
all the people, v. 45, 46, 47. which cannot be said of infants, therefore no
infants were then reckoned as parts or members of the Christian visible Church.

Again Acts 4.4. it is said, many of them which heard the word believed, and
the number of the men was about five thousand. That this is an enumeration of
the whole Church then at Jerusalem, is more probable the^ that it is an
enumeration only of the newly added; however the addition being of the same
sort of persons with those to whom they were added, and no one infant reckoned
to the Church, but all men, that heard the word and believed, it is clear that
in the number of the christians or disciples infants were not reckoned, and
consequently no visible church members then.

V. 23, 24. Peter and John are said to go to their own company, and to report
to them the speech of the chief Priests and Elders, and then upon hearing they
lift up their voice with one accord to God, v. 31. to pray, to be assembled
together, to be filled with the holy Ghost, to speak the word God with
boldness; and the Church is called v. ^2. the multitude of them who believed,
to be of one heart and one soul. All which show, that the Church consisted of a
company of praying people, of a multitude of believers, which is not to be said
of infants, therefore they were no visible church members then.

Acts 5.11. it is said, And great fear came upon all the Church, and upon as
many as heard these things. Here the whole church is mentioned as
contradistinguished from the many that heard these things. But no one infant
was a member of the Church, since none was capable of the great fear that came
upon all the Church from the notice of Ananias and Saphira's death, therefore
they were not then church members.

V. 13* 14. They who were magnified by the people, who were joined to the Lord,
who were of the same sort with believers, who were the more added to the Lord,
multitudes both of men and women, were not infants: But such were the Church
then, therefore it did not consist of infants then.

Acts 6.1. The Church is expressed by the number of Disciples, by the multitude
of Disciples, v. 2. the whole multitude, v. 5. the number of the Disciples
obedient to the faith, v. 7. But none of these were infants, as their
conventing, the speeches to them, and other acts show; therefore infants then
were not reckoned Christian visible church members.

Acts 8.1. The Church at Jerusalem are said to be all scattered abroad except
the Apostles, v. 3. to consist of men and women haled to prison, which is not
to be conceived of infants, therefore they were not then reckoned as visible
church members.

Acts 15.22. The whole Church is said to send chosen men of their own company.
But this does not agree to infants, therefore infants were not reckoned as part
of the whole Church.

1 Cor. 14.23. The whole Church is supposed to come togeter into one place. But
this is not to be said of infants, they were no part of the company that met,
they were not capable of the end and actions of the meeting, therefore they
were no part of the whole Church, The same may be said of all other like places.

4. They were no part of the Christian Church visible, to whom the things
ascribed to the whole Christian Church did not agree. But the things ascribed
to the whole Christian Church visible did not agree to infants. Ergo. The major
is of it self evident, as in like manner this is a plain truth, that they are
no soldiers to whom what is said of the whole Army does not agree. The minor
is proved from many places of Scripture. Matthew. 16.18. Christ says he will
build his Church on this Rock, this is meant of the whole Church, and the
building is meant of building by preaching, Ephesians. 2.20. and 4.11, 12. But
infants are not built by preaching, therefore they are not parts of the Church
visible.

1 Cor. 1* 2 The Church is of them who are called to be Saints which is by
preaching the Gospel, v. 23, 24. But infants are not so called, Ergo, they are
not of the visible Church Christian.

Acts 2.41, 47. and 5.14. They who were added to the Church did all hear the
word and believe: But infants did not so, therefore they were not added to the
Church, and consequently were not visible church members.

They were not parts of the Church who did not come together, were not gathered
together; for all the Church did come together with one accord in Solomon's
Porch, Acts 5.11, 12. were gathered together by the Apostle, Acts 14.27. But
infants were no part of them, they were not with one accord any of those to
whom the Apostle told what God had done with them, therefore they were not part
of the visible Church.

They were no part of the Church of God, who were none of the flock of God to
whom the Elders were to attend as made overseers over them by the Holy Ghost to
feed them. For all these things are attributed to all the flock or Church of
God at Ephesus, Acts 10.28. But infants were none of the flock to whom the
Elders were to attend as made overseers by the Holy Ghost to feed them, Nurses
were to attend and feed infants, not teaching and ruling Elders, whose work was
in the word and doctrine, 1 Timothy 5.17. therefore infants were none of the flock
or Church of God visible at that time.

They were no part of the Church of God, who were not in duty to be sanctified
by the Word. For the whole Church was in duty to be sanctified by the Word, as
Mr. B. plain Script. etc. page 342. gathers from Ephs. 5.26. concerning
Baptism. But no infant is in duty to be so sanctified, it were a ridiculous
thing to the Preachers to sanctify or wash infants by preaching the Word to
them, therefore they were no part of the Church. The Churches had rest, and
were edified; walked, were multiplied, Acts 9.31. Acts 12.5. Prayer was made of
the Church unto God for Peter. The Church at Jerusalem, Acts 11, 22. is said
to hear tidings, to send Barnabas, who with Paul assemble with the Church, v.
26. fit persons to convene, Acts 21.22. to receive orders, 1 Cor. 16.1. With
many more such attributes, which neither are, nor can ordinarily be said of
infants, no nor any attribute in all the New Testament, which is said of the
visible Church Christian is said of infants, therefore they were not accounted
visible members in the first Christian Churches, nor are rightly now so taken.

5. They who were not reckoned as Christ's Disciples, were not visible
church members; For as Mr. B. rightly says, plain Script* etc. All
church members are Christ's Disciples. But infants are no where reckoned as
Christ's Disciples. This is proved, 1. from the places in all the Acts of the
Apostles, and elsewhere, where there is mention of Christ's Disciples, there are
such things declared of them as do exclude infants from the number of them. I
omit Acts 1.15. and 6.1, 2, 5, 7. before mentioned. Acts 11.26, 29. It is said
that Barnabas and Saul a whole year assembled themselves with the Church, and
taught much people, and the Disciples were called Christians first in Antioch:
And upon the prediction of a dearth it is said, Then the Disciples, every man
according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which
dwelt in Judaea, which they also did, and sent it to the Elders by the hands of
Barnabas and Saul. From whence this is apparent, that the Church, the
Disciples, the Christians were then Synonyma, or terms importing the same
p^^sons, so that he who was not a Disciple was not of the Church, nor a
Christian. But no infant was then reckoned as a Disciple. This is proved from
what is said of every Disciple, v. 29. they determined to send and did send,
which none will say infants did. Ergo, infants were not then reckoned among
Disciples, Christians, or members of the visible Church Christian.

Acts 14.20, 21, 22. it is said, that the Disciples stood round about Paul,
that he and Barnabas taught many, or made many Disciples, and that they
confirmed the souls of the Disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith.
From whence it is manifest, that the Disciples then were such as stood round
about Paul, that they were taught, or made Disciples by teaching or preaching
the Gospel, that they were in the faith, capable of confirmation, and
exhortation. But such were not infants, Ergo, they were not then reckoned as
Disciples, and consequen^^y not church members. Acts 8.3. made havoc of the
Church. Acts 9.1. against the Disciples, v. 13. the Saints at Jerusalem, v.
19. the Disciples at Damascus, v. 25. the Disciples, v. 26. joining to the
Church is joining to the Disciples, v. 35. the Brethren, v. 31. the Churches,
v. 38. the Disciples heard, v. 41. called the Saints. Acts. 15.1. it is said
they taught the Brethren, v. 3. being brought on their way by the Church, they
caused great joy unto all the Brethren; v. 4. they were received of the Church.
v. 10. the Disciples are they whose hearts were purified by faith; the whole
Church v. 22. are the Brethren, v. 23. who send greeting to the Brethren. v.
30. they were the multitude gathered together, v. 32. they exhorted the
Brethren, v. 33. were let go in peace from the Brethren, v. 36. let us visit
our Brethren, v. 40. recommended by the Brethren. v. 41. confirming the
Churches. Acts 10.2. well reported of by the Brethren, v. 5. And so were the
Churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily, v. 40. and
when they had seen the Brethren they comforted them. Acts 17.10, 14. the
Brethren sent away Paul. Which passages do show, that these terms were then of
the same extent, and synonymous, the Church, the Disciples, the Brethren, the
Believers, the Saints: But infants were none of the Church, the Disciples, the
Brethren, the Believers, the Saints as all the passages where they are
mentioned show, therefore infants were not then visible church members

Acts 18.18. Paul took leave of the Brethren, v. 22. he saluted the Church, v.
23. strengthened all the Disciples, which strengthening was by teaching and
exhorting, as Acts 14.^2. shows: Which infants were not capable of, therefore
they were not Disciples* V. 27. the Brethren wrote, exhorting the Disciples to
receive Apollos* who helped them much who believed through grace. Acts 19.1, 2.
Paul finds certain Disciples who were Believers, v. 9. separates the Disciples,
v. 30. the Disciples would not suffer Paul to enter in unto the people. Acts
20.7. Upon the first day of the week, when the Disciples came together to break
bread, Paul preached unto them at Troas. Which shows plainly, that the
Disciples did use to break bread on the first day of the week, and that those
who were Disciples did break bread; which cannot be said of infants, therefore
they were not Disciples, and consequently not visible church members.

2. The same is proved by those arguments which are in the second Part of this
Review, sect. 10. to prove infants not Disciples appointed to be baptized,
Matthew. 28.19. and by the answers to the allegat^ons of Mr. Cotton, Mr. B. and
others, Sect. 11, 12, etc. to prove them Disciples.

6. If in the distributions of the members of the Church then, infants are not
comprehended, then infants were not visible church members, this must needs be
granted, or exception must be taken to those distributions. But in the
distributions of the Church, where all sorts of members are expressed, infants
are not comprehended; Ergo. The minor is proved from the distributions
according to the sex, Acts 5.14. and 8.12. men and women, among whom was no
infant, for in the former place they are termed Believers, in the latter they
are said to believe Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God,
and the Name of Jesus Christ; which is not to be said of infants. 1 Cor. 12.13.
they are distributed into Jews or Gentiles or Greeks, bond or free, but none an
infant, as is proved before, in that all were baptized, and did drink the Lords
cup. The like is Gal. 3.28. There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither
bond nor free, there is neither male nor female; for ye are all one in Christ
Jesus: and that is by faith, v. 16. and therefore no infant meant. Col. 3.11.
Where there is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision,
Barbarian, Scythian bond nor free; but Christ is all and in all, that is by
faith, which is not to be said of infants.

To which I may add, that in Tertullians time the children of believers were
not accounted actually members of the visible Church, because he terms them in
his book De anima* c. 39. Designatos sanctitatis, intended to be holy; that is,
to be bred up to profess the faith, and so to be baptized. Which is the more
apparent, in that Hierome expresses the same as from Tertullians bo^k de
monogamia, in his Epistle to Paulinus, tom. 3 d. edit. Basil. That the children
of believers are termed holy, because they are as it were Candidates of the
faith. And Erasmus in his Scholie on that Epistle says, Therefore they which
are born of Christians, are called holy also before Baptism, because they do as
it were seek and expect Baptism. Which shows they were not counted actually
church members, but such as were designed to be believers, and so as it were
seekers for Faith and Baptism, and consequently church members only in
expectation.

2. I argue from the common received definitions of the visible Church. Artic.
19. of the Church of England, The visible Church of Christ is a congregation of
faithful men. In the answer of the Assembly to the reasons of the seven
dissenting br^thren, p 48. of the Edition 1644. the first praecognitum is this;
The whole Church of Christ is but one, made up of the collection and
aggregation of all who are called out of the world by the preaching of the
word, to profess the says of Christ, unto the unity thereof: From which union
there arises unto every one such a relation unto, and dependence upon the
catholic Church, as parts have to the whole. Dr. John Rainold 2 d. concl. The
Church of Christ betokens a company called out from among the multitude of
other men, to life everlasting through faith in Christ Jesus. Ball, trial of
Separ. page 296. chapter 13. The Church is a society of the faithful. Hudson,
vindic. c. 1. p. 12. The universal Church is the whole company of visible
believers throughout the whole world. chapter 6. sect. 3, 127. The Church visible
is called entitive, not because of the inward grace, which is essential to an
invisible member; but from the reception and embracing the Christian catholic
faith, which is essential to a visible believer. Mr. B. himself, plain Script.
etc. part 1. chapter 26. The common definition of the Church, affirms them to be
a people called (...) of the world. Hence I argue, All that are of the visible
Church Christian are faithful, called out of the world by the preaching of the
word to profess the faith of Christ, visible believers receiving and embracing
the Christian catholic faith. This is proved from the definitions of the
Church* and positions received. And it is clear in reason, the Church being an
aggregate, as a flock of sheep, a heap of stones; as it follows therefore every
part of the flock is a sheep, every part of the heap a stone, so every part of
the Church a believer. But no infant is such. Ergo. In this very manner does
Guliel. Apollonii. considerat. controv. cap. 1. page 8. argue. Thus almost all
the famous reformed Divines do affir^ the matter of a visible Church to be men
outwardly called, professing the faith of Christ. For they define it a company
of men called out by an outward calling, or preaching of the word, and
communication of Sacraments, to the worship of God, and to celebrate
Ecclesiastical society among themselves.

To this Mr. M. in his Defense, part 3. sect 3. page 113. says. I reply, it
overthrows it not at all; for they all include the infants of such professors,
as the visible Church among the Jews did include their infants, male (and
female too, lest you say that Circumcision made them members.)

Answ. Mr. M. should have showed who, and in what words of their definitions
Protestant Writers include the infants of professors. That some of them,
especially of late, have asserted infants of believers to be a part of the
visible Church, I grant: But I think Mr. M. cannot make it good, that the Elder
Protestant Writers did include them in their definitions of the visible Church.
I have produced some of the later, who have so framed their definitions as that
infants must be excluded. And if any do include them, they err from the
Scripture, which never accounted them visible Christian Church members, as is
proved before. And Sect. 51. of this Part of the Review does sufficiently show
the Christian Church visible to have another call and constitution from the
Jewish, and that no person is a member of the Christian Church visible by
natural generation of a believer, but by profession of faith. Wherefore Mr. M.
says.

I add also, Baptism now (as well as Circumcision of old) is a real, though
implicit profession of the Christian faith.

Answ. That circumcision was a profession of the Christian faith either
explicit in Elder proselites, or implicit in infants circumcision, does not
appear. The Apostles speech Gal. 5.2, 3. and the tenet of the Jewish doctors
Acts 15.1, 5. is to the contrary. Baptism after a verbal profession of faith by
the baptized being his act is a real, though implicit profession of the
christian faith, it being used by the baptized to declare his putting on
Christ, and so a sign of his assent to his verbal profession. But infants
baptism is no profession of any faith either explicit or implicit, there being
no act done by them tending to make any show of faith, which they neither
understand, nor take ^o be true upon the trust of their teachers, as Papists
do in their implicit faith (which yet we d^ny to be christian faith) but are
every way passive, both in respect of the act of the baptisers, and the reason
and end of it, they neither do any thing toward their baptism, nor understand
any thing of it. Yea were it true that such an implicit profession of faith
were in infants baptism, yet were it not enough to make them visible members of
the christian church, no not according to the definition of Protestant writers,
who when they define the church to be a company of professors of faith, do mean
more then an implicit profession, to wit, an intelligent and free profession;
and do blame the baptising of the Indians by the Spaniards, forcing them to own
the Christian Faith before they understand it, though there be more implicit
profession of the faith by them, then is or can be by an infant.

3. I argue. They are no visible members of the christian church, to whom no
note whereby a visible christian church, or church membership is discernible
does agree. For that which is visible, is discernable to the understanding, by
some sensible note or sign by which it is known: But to infants of believers
no note whereby a visible church, or churchmember is discernable does agree,
Ergo. The minor is proved 1 by showing the right notes of the visible church
and church members not to agree to infants. The right notes of the christian
church and church members are the profession of the whole Christian faith, the
preaching and hearing of the Word, administration and communion in the
Sacramen^s, joining in Prayer, discipline, etc. with believers. Hudson. vindic.
page 229. But none of these agree to infants. Not profession of of the whole
Christian faith, For they neither understand nor show by any thing they do that
they assent to the christian faith. Not the preaching or hearing of the Word:
For infants can neither preach nor hear the Word. I mean as it is speech or
significative language, though they may hear it as a sound, much less as
yiedling assent to it, which hearing alone is a mark of a visible
churchmember. Nor do they administer or have communion in the Sacraments: None
will say they administer, nor though they should be baptized in water by a
Minister, or eat bread or drink wine at the Lords supper, can it be said they
have communion in the Sacrament. For he only has communion in a Sacrament,
who uses it as a sign of that for which it is appointed, and this use only
is a note of a visible churchmember, otherwise a Spaniards forcible baptising
of an Indian without knowledge of Christ should make him partaker of the
Sacrament, or doing it in sport or jest should make a visible churchmember.
See Mr. B. himself correct. sect. 6. page 253. But infants neither use baptism
nor the Lords Supper as a sign engaging to Christ, with acknowledgement or
remembrance of him, therefore they have no communion in the Sacraments, no not
in baptism, nor is their pretended baptism any note of visible Church
membership. Nor do they join in prayer* discipline, or any part of Christian
worship or service, which might show they own Christ as their Lord, and
therefore they are not discernable to be of the visible Church christian by any
right note.

2. By showing that the notes whereby they are conceived to be discernable as
visible Church Members, are not notes of their visible church membership. Two
notes are usually alleged, the one the covenant of God, the other the parents
profession of faith; neither show them visible Christian church members, nor
both together. Not the covenant or promise of God: For there is no such
covenant that promises to every believers child, much less to every professor
of Faith's child saving grace, or visible church membership, and a promise to
save indefinitely, not expressing definitely who, is not a note whereby by this
or that person is discernable to be the person to whom it belongs. Besides, if
there were such a promise to every child of a believer, yet unless it were a
promise of it to them in their infancy, it would not prove they were actually
visible church members, but only that in the future they should be. Nor is the
parents Faith a note of the infants visible church membership. For whether it
be a note of it self, or conjunctly with the covenant, it is a note of the
infants visible church membership because it is his child, and if so, then it
is a note of his child's visible church membership at twenty years of age,
though he should be then a professed Infidel, as well as a day old, a note of
an Embryo's visible church membership in the mothers womb, as well as a child
born, which are absurd. Other reason then this I know not. But sure I am there
is not the least hint in Scripture of a childs being discernable to be a
visible Christian churchmember by the parents faith or profession, but to the
contrary. To this argument briefly propounded in my Examen of his Sermon part.
3 sect. 3 Mr. M. replies not in his Defense, and therefore I see not but it
stands good.

4. I argue. They who have not the form constituting and denominating a visible
Christian churchmember, are not visible Christian church members. This
proposition is most sure according to Logic rules, take away the form, the
thing formed is not; if the form denominating agree not the denomination agrees
not; Scheibler Top. c. 5. de forma Stieri. praec. doct. Log tract. 2. c. 4. But
the form constituting and denominating a visible Christian churchmember,
infants have not: Ergo. The minor is proved thus. They which have not the
outward profession of Faith within, have not the form constituting and
denominating a visible Christian churchmember. For profession of Faith, is the
form constituting and denominating a visible churchmember, as is proved from
the constant sayings of Divines. Ames Marrow of Divinity, first book c. 31..
11. Faith is the form of the Church.. 25. visibility is the affection or manner
of the Church, according to its accidental and outward form.. 27. The
accidental form is visible, because it is no other thing then the outward
profession of inward faith, which may easily be perceived by sense. c. 32.. 7.
It is a society of believers, for that same thing in profession constitutes the
vis^ble Church, which in its inward and real nature makes a mystical Church,
that is Faith. Ball trial of separat* c. 13. p. 302. A lively operative faith
makes a man a true member of the Church invisible; and the profession of faith
and holiness a member of the Church visible. Norton answer to Apollon. ^ 1.
prop. 2. page 10 An unmoved position. That same thing in profession constitutes
the Church visible, which in its inward nature constitutes the mystical Church,
that is faith* Hudson. vindic. chapter 4 p. 90. Every visible believer is called a
Christian, and a member of Christ's visible Kingdom, because ^he form (viz.
visible believing) common to all Christians and all members is found in him.
And this may be proved out of Scripture, which denominates visible Christian
church members from their own profession of faith, in respect of which they are
termed believers, 1 Timothy 2.12. Acts 4.32. and 5.14 etc. nor is there any such
denomination in Scripture, or hint of such a form constituting a visible
Christian churchmember or believer as the faith of another, of the parent,
church, etc. It is a mere novel device of Papists, who count men believers from
an implicit assent to what the Church holds; and Paedobaptists, who ascribe
unto infants faith and repentance implicit in their sureties, the Church, their
owners, the nation believing, their parents next or remote faith. Which is a
gross and absurd conceit. For that in profession alone makes visible believers,
which makes in reality true believers. But that is a man's own faith Hab. 2.4.
not another; therefore a man's own and not another profession of faith makes a
visible believer. Again, the form denominating must be inherent, or in or
belong to the person denominated, so as that there is some union of i^ to him,
but there is no inherence, or union of another faith to an infant, Ergo.
Naturally there is none, nor legally; if there be, ^et him that can, show by
what grant of God it is. Infants may have civil right to their parents goods, a
natural interest in their mothers milk, parents, and masters may have power
over the bodies, labor, etc. of their children and servants, they have no
power to convey Faith, or Ecclesiastical right without their own consent. But
this conceit is so ridiculous, that I need spend no more words to refute i^ I
subsume. Infants make no profession of faith, they are only passive, and do
nothing by which they may be denominated visible Christi^ns as experience
shows, yea at the Font while the faith is confessed by the parent or surety,
and the water sprinkled on their faces they cry, and as they are able oppose
it, Ergo.

To this faith Mr. M. I answer, even as much as the infants of the Jews could
do of old, who yet in their days were visible members.

Answ. The infants of the Jews were never Christian visible church members,
though they were visible members of the Jewish Church: But Mr. M. neither has
proved nor can, that the same thing, to wit natural birth, and Jewish descent
and dwelling, which denominated the Jewish infants visible members of that
church, does denominate a christian visible churchmember. And till he do this,
the force of the argument remains.

5. I argue. If infants be visible Christian church members, then there may be
a visible Church christian, which consists only of infants of believers; for a
number of visible members makes a visible Church entitive, though not
organical. But this is absurd. Ergo, Infants of believers have not the form of
a visible Churchmember.

To this Mr. M, says, I answer, no more now then in the time of the Jewish
Church; it is possible, but very improbable, that all the men and women should
die, and leave only infants behind them.

Answ. 1. It is no absurdity to say that of the Jewish church which it is
absurd to say of the Christian: For the Jewish church was the people of God of
Abraham's, or Isreal's house, which they might be, though but infants. But the
Christian visible Church is a people or company that profess faith in Christ,
which infants cannot do, and therefore it is absurd to imagine that a Christian
church visible may be only of infants of believers, whereof not one is a
believer by profes^ion, not so of ths Jewish church. 2. The possibility
acknowledged by Mr. M. is enough for my purpose, though it never were or should
be so in the event, since the absurdity follows upon that grant, as well as
the actual event.

6. I argue. If infants be visible Christian church members, then there is some
cause thereof. But there is none, Ergo. The major is of it self evident, every
thing that is has some cause by which it is. The minor is proved thus. If
infants be visible-Christian church members, by some cause, then that is the
cause of all infants Christian visible church membership or of some only. But
of neither, Ergo. I presume it will be said of some, since they account it a
privilege of believers infants. But to the conttary, there is no such cause by
which infants of believers are Christian visible church members. Mr. B. plain
Script. etc. part. 1. c. 29. page 92 Denies that the parents faith is any cause
(not so much as instrumental properly) of the childs holiness, by which he
means visible Church Membership, but he makes it a condition (which is an
antecedent or causa sine qua non) of childrens holiness. I answer, says he,
fully: If this be the question, what is the condition on which God in Scripture
bestows this infant holiness? It is the actual believing of the parent: For
what it is that has the promise of personal blessings, it is the same that
has the promise of this privilege to infants: Therefore the promise to us
being on condition of believing, or of actual faith, it were vain to say, that
the promise to our infants is one^y to faith in the habit: The habit is for the
act, yet is the habit of necessity for producing of the act: therefore it is
both faith in the habit (or potentia proxima) and in the act that is necessary.
But yet there is no necessity that the act must be presently at the time
performed: either in actu procreandi, vel tempore nativitatis, vel baptismatis.
It is sufficient that the parent be virtually and dispositively at present a
believer, and one that stands in that relation to Christ as believers do: To
which end it is requisite that he have actually believed formerly (or else he
has no habit of faith) and has not fallen away from Christ, but be still in
the disposition of his heart a believer, and then the said act will follow in
season; and the relation is permanent which arises from the act, and cease
not when the act of faith intermitteth. It is not therefore the mere bare
profession of faith which God has made the condition of this gift, but the
former act and present disposition. Chapter 2. page 15. The parents faith is the
condition for himself and his infants. The causes of this condition of
Discipleship or Churchmembership may improperly be called the causes of our
Discipleship it self: but properly Christ by his Law or Covenant grant is the
only cause efficient. Page 69. All these Church mercies are bestowed on the
standing Gospel grounds of the Covenant of grace entered with our first parents
presently upon the fall. Page 110. The seed of the faithful are Church members
and Disciples, and subjects of Christ, because they are children of the
promise; God having been pleased to make the promise to the faithful and their
seed. Page 59 It is of the very law of nature to to have infants to be part of
a Kingdom, and therefore infants must be part of Christ's Kingdom. Page 52.
That infants must be Church members is partly natural and partly grounded on
the Law of Grace and Faith. So that Mr. Bs. opinion is, Christ by his law of
nature, or nations, or covenant grant on the standing Gospel grounds of the
covenant of grace, the promise to the faithful and their seed not without
actual faith, formerly and present disposition, beyond the mere bare profession
of faith, is properly the only cause efficient of infants membership in the
visible Church Christian.

Against this I argue. 1. If there be no such covenant of grace to the faithful
and their seed, nor any such promise upon condition of the parents actual faith
the child shall be a visible Christian churchmember, nor any such law either
of nature or nations, or positive, which makes the child without his consent a
visible Christian churchmember, then Mr. Bs. opinion of the cause of infants
of believers visible Christian churchmembership is false. But the antecedent is
true, ergo, the consequent. The minor I shall prove by answering all Mr. B.
has brought for it, in that which follows.

2. The Covenant of grace according to Mr. B. is either absolute or
conditional; the absolute, according to Mr. B. is rather a prediction then a
covenant, and it is granted to be only to the elect, in his Appendix answer to
the 8th* and 9th. object. and elsewhere, and by this covenant God promises
faith to the person, not visible churchmembership upon the faith of another.
The conditional covenant is of justification, salvation on condition of faith,
and this p^omiseth not visible Churchmembership, but saving graces, it
promises unto all upon condition, and so belongs to all according to Mr. B.
therefore by it visible churchmembership Christian is not conferred as a
privilege peculiar to believers infants on condition of their faith.

3. If there were a covenant to the faithful and their seed to be their God,
yet this would not prove their infants Christian visible Church membership;
because God may be their God, and yet they not be visible Churchmembers, as he
is the God of Abraham, of infants dying in the womb, of believers at the hour
of death, yet they not now visible Churchmembers. 2. The promise if it did
infer visible Church membership, yet being to the seed simply, may be true of
them though not in infancy, and to the seed indefinitely may be true if any of
them be visible Church members, especially considering that it cannot be true
of the seed universally and at all times, it being certain that many are never
visible Churchmembers, as ^ll still-born infants of believers; many that are
visible Churchmembers for a time, yet fall away; and therefore if that promise
were gran^ed, and the condition and law put, yet infants might not be visible
Christian Churchmembers.

4. If all these which Mr. B. makes the cause, or condition of infants visible
Church membership may be in act, and the effect not be, then the cause which
Mr. B. assigns is not sufficient. But the antececedent is true. For the
promise, the parents actual believing, the law of nature, of nations, any
particular precept of dedicating the child to God, the act of dedication as in
Hannahs vow may be before the child is born, and yet then the child is no
visible Church member, Ergo. The consequence rests on that maxim in Logic,
That the cause being put, the effect is put. To this Mr. B. plain Script.
proof, etc. page 100. Moral causes (and so remote causes) might have all their
being long before the effect, so that when the effect was produced there should
be no alteration in the cause, though yet it has not produced the effect by
the act of causing. I reply this answer deserved a smile. 1. For Mr. B. as his
words show before cited, makes Christ by his law or covenant-g^ant, the only
cause efficient, therefore it is the next cause, according to him, and not
only a remote cause. 2. If the covenant or law be as much in being or acting,
and the parents faith and dedication before the child is born as after, and
there is no alteration in the cause, though yet it have not produced the
effect, then it is made by M. B. a cause in act, and consequently if the effect
be not produced then it is not the cause, or the adequate sufficient cause is
not assigned by assigning it. 3. Though moral causes may have their absolute
being long before the effect, yet not the relative being of causes, for so they
are together. So though the covenant and law might be a covenant and law, yet
they are not the cause adequate, and in act (which Mr. B. makes them) without
the being of the effect: nor is there in this any difference between moral and
physical causes. And for the instances of Mr. B. they are not to the purpose.
It is true, election, Christ's death, the covenant, etc. are causes of remission
of sins, imputation of righteousness, salvation, before these be, but they are
not the adequate causes in act: For there must be a further act of God,
forgiving, justifying, delivering, before these are actually. They are causes of
the justificab^lity, the certainty, futurity of justification of themselves,
but not of actual justification without man's faith, and Gods sentence, which is
the next cause. A deed before one's born, gives him title to an inheritance,
but not an actual estate without pleading entering upon it, etc. 4. I think Mr.
B. is mistaken in making visible Churchmembership, the effect of a moral or
legal cause. He imagines it to be a right or privilege by virtue of a grant
or legal donation. But in this he is mistaken, confounding visible Church
membership with the benefit or right consequent upon it. Whereas the
Churchmembership and it is visibility are states arising from a physical cause
rather then a moral, to wit, the call whereby they are made Churchmembers, and
that act or sign what ever it be, whereby they may appear to be Churchmembers
to the understanding of others by mediation of sense. The privilege or benefit
consequent is by a law, covenant, or some donation legal or moral; not the
state it self of visible Churchmembership. Which I further prove thus.

5. If visible Churchmembership be antecedent to the interest a person has in
the Covenant, then the Covenant is not the cause of it; for if the Covenant be
the cause it is by the persons interest in it. But visible Churchmembership is
immediately upon the persons believing professed, which is a condition of his
being in Covenant; therefore it is before the Covenant, and consequently the
Covenant not the cause.

6, If the Covenant or law upon condition of the parents faith as the
antecedent or cause without which the thing is not, be (as Mr. B. says) the
cause of infants visible Church membership the sole efficient, then infants
bought, orphans of Turks, etc. wholly at our dispose, are not visible Church
members: For they have no covenant made to their parents, nor do their parents
believe. But by Mr. Bs. doctrine page 101. where he would have them baptized,
they are visible Churchmembers, for such only are to be baptized, Ergo, the
Covenant is not the sole efficient, there may be visible Church membership
without it. The same may be said of foundlings, persons of unknown progeny, etc.

7. If the Covenant or law with the parents actual faith without profession,
make not the parent a visible Churchmember, neither does it the child; For the
child who is by virtue of the parents being a visible Churchmember only, a
visible Churchmember, cannot be such without his being such. But the parent by
the law or covenant is not made upon his faith a visible Churchmember without
profession, Ergo, The parents faith is not the condition on which God bestows
the infant holiness, nor is it true that the actual believing which has the
promise of personal blessings, is the same that has the promise of this
privilege to infants.

8. If persons are visible Church members and not by the Covenant of grace,
then it is not true, that Christ by his Law, or Covenant of grace is the sole
efficient of visible Churchmembership. The consequence is plain, and needs no
further proof. But the antecedent is true, Ergo. The minor is proved by
instances of Judas and other hypocrites, who are visible Churchmembers, but not
by the Covenant of grace, for that promises nothing to them.

9. If infants be visible Churchmembers by the Covenant on the condition of the
parents actual believing* then either the next parents, or any in any
generations precedent. If the next only, let it be showed, why the visible
Churchmembership should be limited to it: if in any near g^nerations, let it be
showed where we must stick, and go no further; why, suppose the visible
Churchmembership be stopped at the Grandfathers faith so as that we must go no
further in our count, the great Grandfathers faith should not infer the infants
visible. Churchmembership as well as the Grandfathers: if there be no limit;
why this visible Churchmembership should not be common to all the infants of
the Jews, yea to ^ll the world. If the succession be broken off upon the Jews
unbelief, why not upon the unbelief of each ancestor?

10. If an infants visible Churchmembership be by the covenant, upon the
parents actual believing, and not a mere bare profession, then it is a thing
that cannot be known, because the parents actual believing is a thing unknown.
But that is absurd. Ergo. The major I have confirmed more fully in the first
part of this Review, sect. 35.

11. If other Christian privileges be not conveyed by a covenant upon the
parents faith without the persons own act or consent, then neither this. But
the antecedent is true, the child is not a believer, a disciple, a minister, a
son of God, etc. without his own consent, Ergo. The consequence of the major is
confirmed in that there is like reason for them as for this.

12. If there be no Law or Ordinance of God unrepealed, by which either this
infant visible Christian Churchmembership is granted, or the listing of
infants, or entering into the visible Church Christian is made a duty, then that
is not a cause of infants visible Churchmembership which Mr. B. assigns. But
there is no such Law or Ordinance unrepealed, Ergo. If there be it is either by
Precept or other Declaration, but by neither; Ergo. If by Precept, in the New
Testament, or the Old: Not in the New, there is no Precept to Minister, or
paren^s, or any other, to take infants for visible Churchmembers, or to list
them as such: Nor in the Old, there is no such Precept I know but that of
circumcision, which is repealed; vowing, praying, etc. did neither then, nor
now of themselves make visible Churchmembers, although upon the prayers and
faith, not only of parents, but of others, God granted remission of sins,
conversion, cure of plagues, yet did not these make any visible Churchmembers
of themselves. If there be any other Declaration of God, it is either a
positive law, or law of Nations, or of Nature: Not any positive law, if there
be, let it be produced, not any law of Nations. This Mr. B. sometimes
alleges, that as it is in Kingdoms and civil States the children are
subjects and citizens as well as the parents, so in the Church: But if this
were a rule in the Church of God, then not only ^hildren must be visible
Churchmembers, but also all the inhabitants where the Church is servants, and
their children, as all in the territories and dominions of a King are his
subjects; and since Christ's Kingdom is over all the world, yea if Mr. Bs.
Doctrine were right in his Sermon of Judgment, page 14, 15. All are bought by
Christ's death, and are his own, every man in the world should be a visible
Churchmember. Nor any law of Nature: For though Mr. B. sometimes pleads this,
yet the vanity of it appears, 1. In that since the fall of man, the nature of
man being corrupt, the call and frame of the Church is altogether by grace, and
free counsel of God. 2. Churches if they should be fashioned after the way or
law of Nature, where the husband is, there the wife should be a visible
Churchmember, as well as where the paaent is a Churchmember, there the child
should be so too. For the law of Nature makes them more nearly in one condition
then father and child. But that is false, Ergo. 3. If the law of Nature should
form Churchmembers, then Churches should be by natural descent: But that is
false, it is by calling, as is above proved. 4. Churches are by institution,
therefore not by the law of Nature. This is proved from Mr. Bs. own hypothesis,
that they are made Churchmembers by grant, covenant, gift on condition. 5. If
they were by the law of Nature, all Churches should be domestical, not
congregational or parochial; for they are not by nature, but by institution. 6.
If Churches should be by the law of Nature, they should be formed by an
invariable uniform way and model: But they are not so; they are called
sometimes by Preachers, sometimes immediately by God, sometimes by authority;
sometimes they are national, sometimes catholic; sometimes under one form of
service and discipline, sometimes under another; sometimes the son is the means
of making the father a visible Churchmember, sometimes the father the son;
sometimes the wife of the husband, sometimes the husband of the wife, by which
the order of Nature is inverted.

To all these arguments against infants visible Christian-Churchmembership,
this one may be added, That there is neither example, rule, nor hint in all the
New Testament, of their admission into the Church, or ordering in it, or care
of the Elders and Officers of the Church for them as members, nor any other
sign that Christ would have them reckoned as visible members in the Christian
Church: which is a strong presumption against it. I know none that has
disputed for it, so much as Mr. B. I will therefore go on to examine what he
says.

SECT. LIII. Letters between me and Mr. B. are set down concerning the Law and
Ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, which he asserts,
whereby the point is stated.
THat the Reader may understand the true state of the Dispute between me and
Mr. B. he is to take notice, that when at first in the Dispute at Bewdley, Jan.
1. 1649. Mr. B. urged for infant Baptism his argument of the ordinance or law
or appointment of God, whereby infants were once to be admitted members of the
visible Church, now Printed in his book of Baptism, chapter 5. part 1. I not
knowing what other it might be, and he denying it was that of circumcision,
urged him often to tell me what it was, which he would not, which occasioned
the Dispute to be more confused then otherwise it might have been. After, in my
Praecursor, I again told him, I found it not but in the peculiar national
policy of the Jews, no universal law or ordinance for it. To which what elusory
reply he made, is showed in the second Part o^ this Review* sect. 2. page 8, 9.
Which moved me, being then upon the examining of his 4th. and 5th. chapter from
Bewdley within two miles of Kidderminster* to write and send April 3d. 1655.
this Letter to him.

Sir,
Not finding yet that Law or Ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership
which you assert in your book of Baptism to be unrepealed, I do request you to
set down the particular Text or Texts of Holy Scripture where you conceive that
Law or Ordinance is written, and to transmit it to me by this bearer, that your
allegations may be considered by him who is Yours as is meet;

April 3. 1655. John Tombs.


The next morning I received from him this Letter, directed to me.

Sir,
I mean to see more said against what I have already written, before I will
write any more about infant Baptism, without a more pressing call than I yet
discern. I have discharged my conscience, and shall leave you and yours to take
your course. And indeed I do not understand the sense of your Letter, because
you so join two questions in one, that I know not which of the two it is that
you would have me answer to. Whether there were any Ordinance or Law of God
that infants should be Churchmembers? is one question: Whether this be repealed
is another: you join both into one. For the first, that infants were
Churchmembers, as you have not yet denied that I know of, so will I not be so
uncharitable as to imagine that you are now about it: And much less that you
should have the least doubt whether it were by Gods ordination. There are two
things considerable in the matter. First, the benefit of Churchmembership, with
all the consequent privileges. It is the work of a grant or promise to confer
these, and not directly of a precept. Secondly, the duty of devoting and
dedicating the child to God, and entering it into the Covenant which confers the
benefit; and this is the work of a law or precept to constitute this duty I am
past doubt that you doubt not of either of these: For you cannot imagine, that
any infant had the blessing without a grant or promise, (that is impossible;)
nor that any parents lay under a duty without an obliging law, (for that is as
impossible.) Taking it therefore for granted that you are resol^ed in both
these, and so yield that such a grant and precept there was, there remains no
question but Whether it be repealed: which I have long expected that you should
prove. For citing the particular Texts in which the ordination is contained,
though more may be said then is said, yet I shall think it needless, till I see
the ordination contained in those Texts which I have already mentioned to you,
proved to be reversed. Nor do I know that it is of so great use to stand to
cite the particular Texts, while you confess in general, that such a promise
and preeept there is, by virtue of which, infants were till Christ's time duly
members of Christ's Church (for Christ's Church it was) even his unive^sal
visible Church. Still remember that I take the word [law] not strictly for a
precept only, but largely, as comprehending ^oth promise and precept, and I
have already showed you both and so have others.

So much of your endeavor as has any tendency to the advancement of holiness,
I am willing to second yo^ in; viz. that at the age yo^ desire people might
solemnly profess their acceptance of Christ, and their resolution to be (...):
But I hope God will find me better work while I must stay here, then to spend
my time to prove that no infants of believers are within Christ's visible
Church, that is, are no infant Disciples, infant Christians, infant
Churchmembers. I know no glory it will bring to Christ, nor comfort to man, nor
see I now any appearance of truth in it. I bless the Lord for the benefits of
the Baptismal Covenant that I enjoyed in infancy, and that I was dedicated so
soon to God, and not left wholly in the Kingdom and power of the Devil. They
that despise this mercy, or account it none, or not worth the accepting, may go
without it, and take that which they get by their ingratitude. And I once
hoped, that much less then such an inundation of direful consequents as our
eyes have seen, would have done more for the bringing of you back to stop the
doleful breach that you have made. I am fain to spend my time now to endeavor
the recovery of some of your Opinion who are lately turned Quakers, or at least
the preventing of others Apostasy: which is indeed to prevent the emptying of
your Churches. Which I suppose will be a more acceptable work with you, then
again to write against rebaptizing, or for Infant Baptism.

Sir, I remain your imperfect brother, knowing but in part, yet loving the
truth; Rich. Baxter.


Being the same day to return home, yet loath to be put off thus, I wrote
immediately upon the reading of his Letter, this also to him.

Sir,
I confess infants were by Gods fact of taking the whole people of the Jews for
his people, in that estate of the Jewish Paedagogy (not by any promise or
precept) visible Church members, that is of the Congregation of Israel. I do
not confess that there was any law or ordinance determining it should be so,
but only a fact of God, which is a transeunt thing, and I think it were a
foolish undertaking for me to prove the repeal of a fact. Wherefore still I
press you that you would show me where that law, ordinance, statute or decree
of God is that is repealeable, that is, which may in congruous sense be either
by a later act said to be repealed, or else to be established as a law for
ever. This I never found in your books, nor do I conceive that law is implied
in any thing I grant; and therefore I yet pray you to set me down the
particular text or texts of holy Scripture where that law is. Which need not
hinder you from opposing the Quakers (in which I have not and hope shall not be
wanting) of whom I think that you are misinformed that they are Anabaptists, I
think there are very few of them that were ever baptized, and have good
evidence that they have been formerly Seekers, as you call them. And I think
you do unjustly impute the direful consequences you speak of to the denial of
infant baptism, and to the practice of adult bap^ism, and that as your self are
deceived so you mislead others. I yet expect your texts, knowing none in any of
your books that mention that law of infants visible Churchmembership which you
assert either explicitly or implicitly, and am yours as is meet;

Bewdley this 4th. of April. 1655. John Tombs.


About a fortnight after I received this Letter to me from him.

Sir,
If you will needs recall me to this ungrateful work, let me request you to
tell me fully, exactly and plainly, what transient fact you mean, which you
conceive without law or promise did make Church members: that so I may know
where the competition lies. When I know your meaning, I intend, God willing,
to send you a speedy answer to your last. Your fellow servants,

April 16. 1655. Rich. Baxter.


Upon the receipt whereof, I speedily returned to him, on the day of the date
of it, being then at Bewdley, this following Letter.

Sir,
The transeunt fact of God, whereby infants were visible Churchmembers, was
plainly expressed in my last to you, to be the taking of the whole people of the
Jews for his people, which is the expression of Moses, Deuteronomy. 4.34. Exodus 6.7.
And by it I mean that which is expressed Levit. 20.24.26. when God said, I have
severed you from other people, that you should be mine. The same thing is
expressed 1 Kings 8.53. Isai 43, 1. This I term [fact] as conceiving it most
comprehensive of the many particular acts in many generations, whereby he did
accomplish it. Following herein Stephen, Acts 7.2. and Nehem* 9.7. I conceive
it began when he called Abraham out of Ur, Genesis 12.1. to which succeeded in
their times the enlarging of his family, removing of Lot, Ishmael, the sons of
Keturah, Esau, distinction by Circumcision, the birth of Isaac, Jacob, his
leading to Padan Aram, increase there, removal to Canaan, to Egypt, placing,
preserving there, and chiefly the bringing of them thence, to which principally
the Scripture refers this fact, Exodus 19.4. Levit. 11.45. Nehem. 1.10. Hos.
11.1. the bringing them into the bond of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, giving
them laws, settling their Priesthood, tabernacle, army, government,
inheritance. By which fact the infants of the Israelites were visible
Churchmembers as being part of the Congregation of Israel, and in like manner
though not with equal right (for they might be sold away) were the bought
servants or captives, whether infants or of age, though their parents were
professed idolaters. And this I said was without promise or precept, meaning
such promise or precept as you in your Letter say I confess, and you describe,
a promise conferring to infants the benefit of Churchmembership with all the
consequent privileges, a precept constituting the duty of devoting and
dedicating the child to God, and entering into Covenant, which confers the
benefit. For though I grant the promises to the natural posterity of Abraham,
Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. and the Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai, and
Deuteronomy. 29. wherein Israel avouched God, and a precept of Circumcision, and
precepts of God by Moses of calling the people, and requiring them to enter
into Covenant, Exodus 19. and Deuteronomy. 29. Yet no such particular promise
concerning infants visible Churchmembership, or precept for parents or others,
concerning the solemn admission of infants as visible Churchmembers, besides
Circumcision, as in your Book of Baptism you assert. Nor do I conceive that
infants of Israel were made visible Church members by the promises in the
covenants or the precepts forenamed, but by Gods transeunt fact which I have
described. Which I therefore term [transeunt] because done in time, and so not
eternal, and past, and so not in congruous sense repealeable as a law,
ordinance, statute, decree, which determines such a thing shall be for the
future, though capable of continuance in the same or the like acts, or of
interruption. Which continuance or interruption is known by narration of what
God has done, not by any legal revocation, or renewing, or continuance of a
promise or precept concerning that thing. Now as the Churchmembership of the
Israelites began as I conceive with Abraham's call, and was completed when they
were brought out of Egypt to God, Exodus 19.4. so I conceive it ceased when
upon their rejection of Christ as was fore^told Matthew. 21.43. they were broken
off from being Gods people, which was completed at the destruction of
Jerusalem, when the temple was destroyed, as Christ foretold Luke 19.43, 44.
And instead of the Jewish people by the preaching of the Gospel confirmed by
mighty signs, God gathered to himself a Church of another frame in a spiritual
way, according to the institution of Christ, Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16.
in which he included not infants, the Jews themselves were no part of the
Christian Church without repentance and faith in Christ professed at least.

Having now fully, exactly* and plainly told you my meaning as you request, I
do now expect your speedy answer to my last, and therein to fulfill my request
of setting down the particular texts of holy Scripture wherein that law largely
taken comprehending promise and precept of infants visible Churchmembership,
which you assert to be unrepealed, is contained. If you shall in your answer
set down wherein the blessing, benefit, and privileges of infants visible
Churchmembership, which you assert unrepealed, did consist; I may better
understand you then I do: But I shall press you no further then you shall be
willing in this thing. I am, Yours as is meet,

Bewdley, April 21. 1655. John Tombs.


On May 29. 1655. I received this following answer.

Sir,
A probability of doing or receiving good, is to me a call to action. Seeing no
such probability, I told you at first my purposes to forbear any further
debates with you, till you had better answered what is said. In your next you
seemed to deal so plainly, as if some small probability of good did yet appear:
But in your 3d. you fly off again and eat your own words, and jumble things in
much confusion, so that I now return again to my former thoughts. For you that
expressly say and unsay, and contradict your self, are not likely to be brought
to a candid management or fair issue of the Dispute. You Will sure think it no
great matter to be driven to a self contradiction (which with others is to lose
the Cause) who so easily and expressly run it upon it your self.


Answ. It was a call sufficient to Mr. B. to do what I requested in my first
Letter, in that a brother and fellow servant (as he takes me to be) desired it
of him. If he love the truth* as he says, he should be willing to let us know
his Scriptures he alleges for that which he asserts as a truth. If he
conceive himself imperfect, knowing but in part, why should he not be jealous
of his own opinion, especially resting on remote consequences, rather then
violently oppose mine, which his own acknowledgements do make plainly agreeing
with the New Testament? If I were a sophistical adversary, yet I should think
it were meet Mr. B. should debate that with me which he has so clamourously
and confidently opposed me in. What better answer I need make to what is said
then I have done, so far as I have gone (which is if not the greatest part, yet
the chiefest, and indeed for Scripture Texts all that requires an answer) I see
not. I have set down almost all my Antagonists words, in Mr. Bs. book, at least
all that is argumentative and pertinent, with my answers distinctly, fully, and
plainly, in the two foregoing Parts of this Review: And what way any man could
take, more candid and agreeing to Logic rules, then I have gone in my answers,
is yet to me undiscernable. Mr. Firmin, in his Separation examined, page 31.
says thus, I can easily discern Mr. Tombs to dispute more like a Sophister,
then a Christian, that did desire to see truth: and he cites the words of Mr.
M. in his Defense, page 147. which I have answered so fully in my Apology, page
78, 79. and showed that very way which Mr. M. charge me with, to be as
contrary to sophistical disputing as light is to darkness, that I had thought
impudence it self would not have charged me with that, in a book printed six
years after the Edition of my Apology. Mr. Simon Ford, in his Epistle
Dedicatory to his frivolous scribbled Dialogue, charge me with railing down
rather then disputing, even in that which as he sets it down has no show of
reviling, but a plain calling a straw a straw. And for my heavy censure, I
still profess I know not how to conceive more favorably of Paedobaptists, but
wish they would search their own hearts impartially. Mr. Gataker in his letter
printed by Mr. B. to whom it was written, doubts in part it to be my
disposition to braze my forehead, not regarding at all what men deem or say of
me, so I may seem to say somewhat, and have the last word; then which, a more
unrighteous conceit could hardly have been entertained by him. Mr. Bs. printing
it, together with other passages, makes me almost hopeless of ever meeting with
any just, or candid dealing from Paedobaptists. Mr. B. here says, I jumble
things in much conf^sion, that I contradict my self, eat my own words; none of
which is true: But he takes on him to prove it thus.

In your 2 d. you say [I confess infants were by Gods fact of taking the whole
people of the Jews for his people, in that estate of the Jewish Paedagogy, not
by any promise or precept, then visible Churc^-members, that is, of the
congregation of Israel; I do not confess, that there was any Law or Ordinance
determining it should be so, but only a fact of God, which is a transeunt
thing, etc.] In your 3 d. you say [For though I grant the promises to the
natural posterity of Abraham Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7 8. and the Covenants made with
Israel at mount Sinai, and Deuteronomy, 29. wherein Israel avouched God, and a precept
of Circumcision, and precepts of God by Moses of calling the people, and
requiring of them to enter into Covenant, Exodus 19. and Deuteronomy. 29. yet no such
particular promise concerning infants visible Churchmembership, or precept for
paren^s or others concerning the solemn admission of infants as visible
Churchmembers besides Circumcision, as in your book of Bapt. you assert] Before
there was no [Law or Ordinance determining it should be so, but only a fact]
now there are Laws or precepts and promises that it should be so, but [not such
as I assert in my book] And if I should show you never so many, you may reply,
they are not such as I assert in my book, and waste the time in that trial,
when it is better for me to see first what you say to that book: For this is
but to lead us about to trifling.

Answ. 1. There is not a shadow of self contradiction in the latter words to
the former. For though the latter acknowledge promises to Israel, yet not that
by them they were visible Churchmembers; and Laws and Ordinances, yet not
determining they should be visible Churchmembers. Had Mr. B. heeded my words,
he had forborne this accusation, if he were not bent to find a knot in a
bulrush. 2. If I should answer as he forebodes, I should answer rightly. And it
is certain, that if Mr. B. should bring never so many promises, and not show
that they made infants visible Churchmembers, as he asserts in his book, he
would waste time, and lead us about to trifling; and therefore it is just I
should tie him to that, and his excepting against my so doing would show his
wrangling, and will be taken for a losing of his cause. But I am resolved to
follow him, even in his vagaries, and to examine whether it be true which he
says, that I jumble things in much confusion.

To make any clear work, says Mr. B. upon the things in question we must
necessarily speak to the questions distinctly, many of which you too much
confound. The first question in order fit to be resolved is [whether infants
before Christ's incarnation were Churchmembers? or not?] you grant they were:
and therefore this is past dispute with us. The 2 d. Qu. and tho first
unresolved, is [what Church it is that infants were members of?] This you give
me occasion to take in the way, because you twice explain your meaning, when
you confess them Churchmembers, by an [i. e. of the congregation of Israel.] By
which you seem to imply two things: First, that none but the infants of the
congregation of Israel were Churchmembers: Secondly, that the infants of Israel
were members of no Church but what is convertible with the congregation of
Israel.] The 3 d. Qu. is* What it is that gives the Israelites that
denomination of [the Congregation of Israel] of which infants were members. For
you jumble both together, both causes Civil, and Ecclesiastical, and of both
those that make to the being and well-being. So that our enquiry must be
Whether the Congregation and the Commonwealth be the same thing in your sense?]
and what constituteth it formally? For in this you speak in dark ambiguities.
The 4 th. Qu* is* [Whether there was any Law, Ordinance, or Precept of God
concerning man's duty herein, or obliging him to the Covenant acceptance and
engagement, and so to membership and any promise, grant, or Covenant,
conferring the right of Churchmembership and the consequent privileges to
infants?] To this you say both Yea and Nay, if I can understand you, or at
least as to much of the Qu. concerning the being, and part of the effect of the
precept and promise. Yet you conclude, that you [do not conceive that infants
of Israel were made ^isible Churchmembers by the promises in the Covenants, or
the precepts fore named, but by Gods transeunt fact.] I will not suspect that
you imagine any other promise does it besides that in the Covenant, because
your tying the effect to the transeunt fact does exclude them. Here we are cast
upon these Qus. next. 5 th. Qu. [ Whether there be such precepts and promises
as you grant (or as I shall prove) which yet make not infants Churchmembers?] 6
th. Qu. [Whether there be any transeunt fact of God, which without the
efficiency of precept or promise did make the infants of Israel Churchmembers?]
7 th. Qu. [ Whether those which you have assigned be such facts?] 8 th. [Which
are the Texts of Scripture that contain or express the said laws, precepts, or
grants which I maintain?] this you insist upon. 9 th. [Whether such laws,
preceps, or grants as I shall prove, are capable of a repeal or revocation?] 10
th. Qu. [ Whether they are actually revoked or repealed?]

Answ. The 8th. Qu. is the only Qu. needful to be resolved* All the rest are
brought in to clog the Dispute, to weary me, and the Reader, in an indirect way
most of them raised out of my words; in which if I should be mistaken, yet were
it not thereby proved, that there is such a Law or Ordinance of infants visible
Churchmembership unrepealed, as Mr. B. asserts. Nor by waving of these
questions did I jumble things in much confusion, but decline drawing in things
impertinent. Nevertheless, since Mr. B. has used these shifts to clog the
Dispute, I am resolved to prosecute it in his method, having first premon shed
the Reader, that many things here said are not true, as that I seem to imply
that the infants of Israel were members of no Church but what is convertible
with the congregation of Israel; that I jumble both causes Civil and
Ecclesiastical, and of both those that make to the being and well being; that I
say Yea and Nay to the 4 th. Qu. that I tie the effect to the transeunt fact.
He adds.

Before all these Qs. are well handled, we should easily be convinced that it
had been better either have let all alone, or else, if we must needs have the
other bout, at least to have agreed on our terms, and the stating of the
questions better before we had begun. And I think that even that is not easy
to do. For when I desired your plain exact and full explication of one word
[transeunt fact] and you tell me you have plainly, fully, and exactly told me
your meaning: It falls out, either through the unhappy darkness of my own
understanding, or yours, that I know but little more of your mind then I did
before, and that you seem to me to have raised more doubts and darkness then
you have resolved and dissipated. Yet being thus far drawn in, I shall briefly
say somewhat to the several Qs. not following your desires to answer one alone:
which cannot be done to any purpose while the foregoing are unresolved, because
it is the clearing up of truth, and not the serving of your present ends in
your writings now in hand that I must intend.

Answ. I affect no more bouts with such a captious wrangler, nor know I any
need to Dispute so many questions, or to agree on terms; I shall answer him as
I see meet. What he desired I gave him, not only an explication of one word,
but also of the thing, which that it raises so many doubts, seems not to be
from the darkness of the understanding, but either from the lightness of the
fancy, or the bent of the will to find a way to blunt the Readers attention ere
he comes to the 8th. Qu. which it was just Mr. B. should have answered alone,
since otherwise it were an unjust thing for him to put me to prove a repeal of I
know not what. His serving me hereby in my present ends of writing had been
equal, my ends and writing being only for the truth: His appear to be for a
shift to uphold a while by indirect courses a tottering corruption, which must
fall. I follow him.

SECT. LIVE. Infants were visible Churchmembers only in the Congregation of
Israel.
THe first question ( says Mr. B.) being resolved that infants were once
Churchmembers, to the resolving of the second question, I shall prove these two
Propositions. 1. That it was not only the infants of the congregation of
Israel that were Churchmembers. 2. The infants of Israel were members of the
universal visible Church, and not only of that particular congregation. The
first I have proved already in my book. And 1. Isaac was a Churchmember, yet
none of the congregation of Israel; it was not Israel till Jacobs days. If you
say that by the [congregation of Israel] you mean [the seed of Abraham which
had the promise of Canaan] yet 2. I say, that Ishmael and Abraham's seed by
Keturah and Esau had none of the promise, and yet were Churchmembers in their
infancy. [ In Isaac shall thy seed be called] that is that seed which hid the
promise of Canaan. And so it was confined to Jacob, who got the blessing and
the birthright, which Esau lost, and was excluded, yet was of the Church from
his infancy. The son of the bond woman was not to be heir with the son of the
freewoman, yet was Ishmael an infant member. If you say, that by [the
congregation of Israel] you mean all the natural seed of Abraham: I add 3. The
children of his bond men born in his family, or bought with money, were none of
Abraham's natural seed, and yet were Churchmembers in their infancy. If you go
yet further, and say, that by [the congregation of Israel] you mean all that
were at the absolute dispose of Abraham or his successors, and so were his own:
I add 4. The i^fants of free Proselyt^s were none such, and yet were
Churchmembers. If you yet go further, and say, that you mean by [the
congregation of Israel] any that came under the government of Abraham or his
successors: then I add 5. That the Sichemites, Genesis 34. were not to come under
Jacobs government, but to be his allies and neighbors, being so many more in
number then Jacob, that they concluded rather that his cattle and substance
should be theirs; yet were they circumcised every male, and so were made
members of the visible professing Church. For it was not the bare external sign
that Jacob or his sons would persuade them to, without the thing signified: For
the reproach that they mentioned of giving their daughter to the uncircumcised;
was not in the defect of the external abcision; for so Moses own son, and all
the Israelites in the wilderness should have been under the same reproach, and
all the females continually: But it was in that they were not in Covenant with
the same God, and did not profess to worship the same God in his true way of
worship as they did. And therefore as Baptizing is not indeed and in Scripture
sense Baptizing, if it be not used for engagement to God, even into his Name;
so Circumcision is not indeed and in Scripture sense Circumcision, unless it be
used as an engaging sign, and they be circumcised to God.

Answ. By [the congregation of Israel] I meant the same with the Hebrew people,
or house of Abraham* which I termed the congregation of Israel by an
anticipation usual in Scripture; as when, Genesis 12.8. it is said that Abraham
removed unto a mountain on the east of Bethel, though it were not so named till
Jacobs time, Genesis 28.19. Which term I the rather chose, because it is most
frequent in Scripture; and I remember not the phrase any where [the Church or
congregation of Abraham, but of Israel] in Scripture, the phrase of which I
thought best to use. Now taking the congregation of Israel for the Hebrew
people or the house of Abraham, I say, the infants only of the congregation of
Israel, as I say here, Sect. 51. by birth property, or proselytism were visible
Churchmembers. Nor is it any thing against this my Tenet, that the Sichemites
infants, Genesis 34. were visible Churchmembers; for they were circumcised as
consenting to become one people with them as is expressed v. 16, 22. and
therefore of the congregation of Israel. So that what ever were the reason of
the reproach, v. 14. what ever were the ends of Jacobs sons or the Sichemites,
how ever the fact is to be construed, or it be to be judged that they were
circumcised or not, yet that instance proves not visible Churchmembership of
infants any where but in the congregation of Israel, since the Sichemites if
they were truly circumcised, and so visible Churchmembers, it was because they
were by agreement one people, and so of the congregation of Israel. Mr. B. adds.

6. It was then the duty of all the nations round about (if not of all the
nations on earth, that could have information of the Jewish Religion) to engage
themselves and their children to God by Circumcision. That all that would have
any alliance and commerce with the Jews must do it, is commonly confessed:
that it must extend to infants, the case of the Sichemites (though deceitfully
drawn to it by some of Jacobs sons) does show, and so does the Jewish practice
which they were to imitate: that the same engagement to the same God is the
duty of all the world, is commonly acknowledged, though Divines are not agreed
whether the distant nations were obliged to use Circumcision the Jewish sign.
The best of the Jews were zealous to make Proselytes, and no doubt but the very
law of nature did teach them to do their best for the salvation of others. To
think such charitable and holy works unlawful, is to think it evil to do the
greatest good. And if they must persuade the neighbor nations to come in to
God by Covenant engagement, they must persuade them to bring their children
with them, and to devote them to God as well as th^mselves. For the Jews knew
no other Covenanting or engaging to God. As the Sichemites must do, so other
nations must do: For what privilege had the children of the Sichemites above
the rest of the world?

Answ. This argument in form would be thus. If it were the duty of all the
nations round about to engage themselves and their children to God by
Circumcision, then it was not only the infants of the Congregation of Israel
that were Church members. But the antecedent is true, Ergo the consequent. Of
this argument I deny the consequence of the major, and the minor also. I deny
the consequence, because they that did engage themselves and children to God by
Circumcision, did thereby ingraff themselves and children into the congregation
of Israel. I deny also the minor. For though I acknowledge it was the duty of
all the world to engage themselves to God by covenanting to take him for their
God, yet I do not conceive that they were all bound to do it by circumcision.
For I conceive that precept given only to the Hebrews or house of Abraham. In
which I am confirmed, in that I find not that Sem, Melchisedeck, Lot, Job,
ever did so or are blamed for not doing it. It is most certain that Cornelius,
though a man that feared God with all his house, yet was neither he nor his
house circumcised, Acts 10.2. and 11.3. and yet accepted of God. It is true, if
any would keep the Passover, and be admitted to the rites of the Tabernacle,
he was to be circumcised with his males: But they might devote and engage
themselves and children to God without it, nor was it necessary that God should
be their God in covenant or to their salvation that they were circumcised, or
joined to the people of the Jews. I confess it was of much moment to reduce the
nations, and to preserve them from the idolatry that defi^ed the world, to be
of that people: for generally the uncircumcised who were aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, were without God in the world, without Christ, without
hope aliens from the Covenants of promise; and therefore it was a good office
to endeavor to bring the nations to God by circumcision, and a desirable
advantageous thing, as it is now to be in a well ordered fixed Church, yet I
cannot say it is or was necessary for all, either as a duty or means of
salvation to do either. Mr. B. goes on.

7. ^n Hesters time many of the people became Jews Hest. 8.17. who yet were not
under their government. And to be Jews is to be of the Jewish profession. And
it ^s well known that this was to be circumcised, they and their little ones
(as the Proselytes were) and so to keep the Law of Moses.

Answ. Though they were not under the Jews Government in respect of all power
and command, yet they were incorporated into the Jewish people, and were under
their government as far as other Jews by birth were, having some exercise and
liberty of using their own laws, though with subjection also to the Persian
Princes. I confess their being Jews was by circumcising of them and their
males, but hereby is not proved that any infants were visible Churchmembers but
in the Congregation of Israel, but rather the contrary. Since they were become
Jews, that is of the Congregation of Israel.

8. Says Mr. B. The scattered and captivated Jews themselves were from under
the Government of Abraham's successors, and yet were to Circumcise their
children as Churchmembers.

Answ. Though they were from under the Government of Abraham's successor in
respect of all power and command, yet they were under their Government so far,
as they were permitted the exercise of the Mosaic Laws, and were of the
Congregation of Israel, and were Circumcised as members thereof; and therefore
no infants yet proved visible Churchmembers out of that Congregation.

9. Says Mr. B. When Jonas preached to Ninive, it was all the race of man
among them, without exception, from the greatest to the least, that was to fast
and join in the humiliation: Ergo, all, even infants as well as others, were to
partake of the remission. If you say, the beasts were to fast too: I answer, as
they were capable in their kind of part of the curse, so were they of part of
the benefit, but their capacity was not as man's: They fasted to manifest man's
humiliation. And if by the humiliation of the aged the beasts sped the better
in their kind, no wonder if infants sped the better in theirs, and according
to their capacities, and that was to have a remission suitable to their sin.

Answ. All this is quite from the business, for it proves not that either the
aged or the infants were visible Churchmembers out of the Congregation of
Israel. If the fasting prove the visible Churchmembership, it proves the
visible Churchmembership of the beasts as well as the infant-men. If the
repentance be alleged to prove it, I hardly think such a sudden quickly past
repentance will prove any of them visible Churchmembers of Christ, any more
then the Mariners prayer, fear, sacrificing, making vows, Jonah 1.14.6. If it
do, yet it proves only the aged who turned from their evil way, Jonah 3.10. to
be visible Churchmembers; there is no proof yet of an infants visible
Churchmembership out of the Congregation of Israel.

10. Says Mr. B. What I have said of Sem and many others, and their posterity
already* I shall not here again repeat: and more will be said anon to the
following questions.

Answ. What is said shall be answered in its place. Mr. B. goes on thus.

The 2d. proposition to be proved is, that [the Israelites children were
members of the universal visible Church of Christ as well as of the
Congregation of Israel] But this you did heretofore acknowledge, and therefore
I suppose will not now deny. I suppose it past controversy between us; 1. That
Christ had then a Church on earth. As Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced, and
Moses suffered the reproach of Christ, Heb. 11.26. and the Prophets enquired of
the salvation by Christ, and searched diligently, and prophesied of the grace
to come, and it was the spirit of Christ which was in those Prophets signifying
the time, and testifying before hand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory
that should follow, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. So were they part of the Church of Christ,
and members of the body of Christ* and given for the edification of that body:
Though it was revealed to them that the higher privigledes of the Church after
the coming of Christ, were not for them but for us, 1 Pet. 1.12. 2. I suppose
it agreed on also between us, that there was no true Church or Ecclesiastical
worshipping society appointed by God in all the world since the fall, but the
Church of Christ, and therefore either infants were members of Christ's Church,
or of no Church of Gods institution. Moses Church and Christ's Church according
to Gods institution were not two, but one Church. For Moses was Christ's Usher,
and his ceremonies were an obscurer Gospel to lead men to Christ: And though
the foolish Jews by misunderstanding them made a separation, and made Moses
Disciples to be separate from Christ's Disciples, and so set up the alone
[shadowes of things to come, yet the body is all of Christ] Col. 2.17. and by
so doing they violated Gods institution, and unchurcht themselves. 3. I suppose
it agreed also, that Christ's Church is but one, and that even those of all ages
that are not at once visible, yet make up one body. 4. And that therefore
whoever is a member of any particular Church is a member of the universal.
(Though the Church was more eminently called Catholic, when the wall of
separation was taken down.) But I remember I have proved this in my Book, part.
1. chap. 20. and therefore shall say no more now.

Answ. I grant as I did heretofore, that the Israelites children were members
of the universal visible Church of Christ, as well as of the Congregation of
Israel, or rather in that they were of the Congregation of Israel, nor do I
deny that Christ had then a Church on earth, nor that there was no true Church,
or Ecclesiastical worshipping society appointed by God in all the world since
the fall but the Church of Christ. But as for the third, though I grant that
Christ's invisible Church is but one by unity of the same spirit and faith, and
that the visible Church is but one in some respect, namely in respect of the
profession o^ the same faith and hope in Christ: yet they are not so one, as
that whoever is a visible member of one particular Church, is a member of each
particular Church; and though I yield that whoever is a member of any
particular Church is a member of the universal, yet it follows not, which is it
that Mr. B. drives at, and vainly talks of his proving it elsewhere, as will be
showed hereafter) that every one who was a member of the universal Church, in
that he was a member of the Jewish Church particular, was a visible member of
every particular visible Church of Christ; nor that every one that was a member
of the universal Church, in that he was a member of a visible particular
Church of Christ, was a visible member of the Jewish particular Church. As for
instance, Cornelius and his house who feared God, Acts 10.2. were visible
members of that particular Church of his house, and so of the universal, yet
were not visible members of the particular Church Jewish, as may be proved
from their uncircumcision and shunning as unclean by the Jews, Acts 10. and
11.3. The reason is manifest: For the universal has not a distinct existence
from the parts, nor is any part existing in another part, because it is part of
the whole, as the finger is not in every part of the body because it is in the
body, in that it is in the hand, which is a part. And therefore Mr. Bs. arguing
(which he confides so much in, part. 1. chapter 20. of plain Script. etc.) will
appear to be vain; that because infants were visible members of the Church
universal, in that they were of the Church Jewish, therefore they are in the
Christian, properly so called, contradistinct to the Jewish. Which speech I
use, as commonly Divines do, because though the Jewish Church were Christ's
Church, yet the appellation of Christians being not before the days of the
Apostles Acts 11.26. we may fitly say the Church in the wilderness was not the
Christian properly so called, that is, which is gathered out of the nations by
the Apostles preaching, nor Moses in the Christian Church, nor Cornelius in the
Jewish Church, as Egypt though in Africa, and Persia though in Asia, yet are
not said to be in Asia the less, or Africa propria. Mr. B. proceeds.

Concerning the matter of the third Qu. I assert that [it was not only of the
Jews Commonwealth that infants were members of, but of the Church distinct
from it.] This is proved sufficiently in what is said before.]

Answ. As yet I do not find it proved, that the Jewish Church was distinct
from the Commonwealth, or that there was any member of the Church who was not
of the Commonwealth. What is said about it, sect. 43. may be there seen by the
Reader.

Moreover, says Mr. B. 1. Infants were Churchmembers in Abraham's family before
Circumcision, and after when it was no Commonwealth. So they were in Isaacs,
Jacobs, etc.

Answ. Abraham's family, and Isaacs, and Jacobs, were a Commonwealth, although
they were but small; they had government within themselves. Abraham had his
trained servants and made war of himself, Genesis 14.14. Isaac made a league as a
Prince co^ordinate, Genesis 26.31. so did Jacob, Genesis 31.53. These with other acts
show they were an independent Commonwealth.

2. Says Mr. B. The banished, captivated, scattered Jews, that ceased to be
members of their Commonwealth, yet ceased not to be of the Church.

Answ. They were then of the Commonwealth of the Jews, as they were of the
Church, both de jure, and de facto, they acknowledging themselves to be of that
people, and to a^here to their laws, although somewhat restrained of their
liberty, as a captivated, imprisoned King or subject is head or member of that
Republique to which he has not access.

3. Says Mr. B. The people of the land, that became Jews in Hesters time,
joined not themselves to their Commonwealth: Nor the Sichemites.

Answ. The contrary is true* as concerning the Sichemites is showed before.

4. Says he, Many Proselytes never joined themselves to their Commonwealth.

Answ. Those Proselytes were not of the Jewish Church visible members.

5. Says he, The children of Abraham by Keturah, when they were removed from
his family were not unchurched; and yet were no members of the Jews
Commonwealth. But I shall take up with what is said for this already,
undertaking more largely to manifest it, when I perceive it necessary and
useful.

Answ. Abraham's children by Keturah, when out of the Commonwealth of the
Hebrews were unchurched, at least, in respect of the Church of the Hebrews; nor
do I conceive Mr. Bs. larger manifestation of the contrary, will be any thing
but more words without proof.

SECT. LV. Infants of the Jews were not visible Churchmembers, by Promise, or
Precept; as Mr. B. teaches.
MR. B. proceeds. To the 4th. Qu. I assert that [1. There was a Law or Precept
of God obliging the parents to enter their children into Covenant with God, by
accepting his favor, and re-engaging and devoting them to God, and so entering
them solemnly Churchmembers.] And [2. there was a Covenant, promise or grant of
God, by which he offered the Churchmembership of some infants and actually
conferred it, where his offer was accepted.] I should have mentioned this
first, and therefore will begin with the proof of this. By these term*
Covenant, promise, grant, or deed of gift, etc. we understand that which is
common to all these, viz. [ A s^gne of Gods will conferring or confirming a
right to or in some benefit] such as we commonly call a Civil act of Collation
as distinct from a mere Physical act of disposal. I call it [a sign of Gods
will de jure] because that is the general nature of all his legal moral acts*
they are all signal determinations de debiro* of some due. 2. I say conferring
or confirming right to some benefit] to d^fference it from precepts which only
determine what shall be due from us to God, and from threatenings, which
determine what punishment shall be due from God to us.

Answ. That which Mr. B. asserts here, is in opposition to what I said in my
2d. Le^ter; I confess infants were by Gods fact of taki^g the whole people of
the Jews for his people, in that estate of the Jewish paedagogy (not by any
promise or precept) visible Churchmembers, that is of the Congregation of
Israel* and in my 3d. I explai^ my self, a promise conferri^g infants the
benefit of Churchmembership, with all the consequent privileges, a precept
constituting the duty of devoting and dedicating the child to God, and entering
into Covenant, which confers the benefit (which were his own words in his first
Letter) so that if we prove by any other gr^nt or deed of gift, physical or
moral, which is not a promise of it, by which it is conferred, or by any Law
which is not such a pr^cept, he contradicts not my speech, and so disputes not
ad idem. Which whether he do or no, will be perceived by examining what follows.

Having thus, says he, explained the terms, I prove the proposition. If
infants Churchmembership with the privileges thereof were a benefit conferred,
which some had right to or in, then was there some grant, covenant, or promise,
by which this right was conferred: But the antecedent is most certain: Ergo, so
is the consequent. I suppose you will not deny that it was a benefit to be the
covenanted people of God* to have the Lord engaged to be their God, and to
take them for his people* to be brought so near him, and to be separated from
the common and unclean, from the world, and from the strangers to the covenant
of promises, that live as without God in the world, and without hope.

Answ. I do not deny it, but I deny that this is to be visible Church Members
formally, or connexively. For men may be visible Church Members, and yet not
have all this benefit, and they may have all this benefit who are not visible
Churchmembers. Hypocrites may be visible Churchmembers, yet not be Gods
covenanted people to have the Lord engaged to be their God, and to take them
for his people, to be brought so near him, etc. And some believing Saints that
are dumb, may have all this, and yet not be visible Churchmembers.

Mr. B. adds, If it were asked what benefit had the Circumcision? I suppose you
would say, much every way.

Answ. I should, but I would add; that to be the Circumcision is not all one
as to be visible Churchmembers: Cornelius and his house were visible
Churchmembers yet not the Circumcision: Nor were the benefits mentioned Romans
3.1 2. conferred to them as visible Church Members, (For then all visible
Churchmembers had been partakers of the same benefits, they had had the Oracles
of God committed to them, the giving the Law, Christ from them after the flesh,
etc. Romans 9.4, 5. which is raise) but as to a people specially loved and
gratified with these privileges.

He adds. If Infant-Churchmembership were no benefit, then they that had it,
were not (when they came to age or their parents in the mean time) obliged to
any thankfulness for it. But they were obliged to be thankful for it. Ergo, it
was a benefit.

Answ. Visible Churchmembership simply notes only a state, by which was a
benefit. By the infant visible Jewish Churchmembership was a benefit of honor
and special dignity above other people, which God then vouchsafed to the Jews,
and does not so now to infants of believing Christians as such, and for it the
Jew parents and children were to be thankful.

He goes on. The next thing in the antecedent to be proved is, that there was a
right conferred to this benefit, and some had a right in it. And 1. if any had
the benefit, then had they right to or in that benefit: But some had the
benefit, Ergo. The consequence of the major is certain. 1. Because the very
nature of the benefit consists in a right to further benefits. 2. If any had
the benefit of Churchmembership, Covenant Interest, etc. without right; then
they had it with Gods consent and approbation or without it. Not with it: For
he is just, and consents not that any have that which he has not some
right to or in, not without it: For no man can have a benefit from God against
his will, or without it. 2. If no infants had duly and rightfully received
this benefit, God would have somewhere reprehended the usurpation and abuse of
his ordinances or benefits. But that he does not as to this case, Ergo. 3. God
has expressed this right in many texts of Scripture, of which more afterward.

Answ. Mr. B. is guilty of that which he charge me with unjustly, jumbling
things together which are to be distinguished, visible Churchmembership, right
to or of visible Churchmembership, to the benefits of it, duly and rightfully
receiving of it. The infants of the Jews were visible Churchmembers, not by a
legal right to it, antecedent to their being such visible Churchmembers, which
they or any for them might claim as due; nor was it capable of duly and
rightfully being received or usurped: For it was nothing but a state of
appearing to be part of that people, who were in appearance from things
sensible, Gods people; and this they had by Gods fact of making them to be a
part of that people visibly, to wit, his forming them and bringing them into
the world, and placing them so as to be ranked among his visible people, and
known by things obvious to sense to be of this people, from which this state
results without any such receiving as may be denominated duly or rightfully
done or usurped. Yet I grant they had a right in it, that is, they had it by
Gods donation, without any usurpation by them or any other; and they had right
to the benefit consequent, as to the honor and esteem and dignity absolutely,
and to other benefits, if there were any other annexed to it, whether
absolutely or conditionally. Yet to the proofs of Mr. B. I say, 1. That it
seems to me not true, that the nature of the benefit of infants visible
Churchmembership consists in a right to further benefits. 2. That if it were
true, yet I see not how it proves this consequence, If any had the benefit,
then they had ri^ht to or in that benefit. A man may have a benefit without
right, though the nature, or as I would speak, the condition of it be such as
to draw with it a right to further benefits; as a man may have a Lordship
without right, which gives him a right to further benefits. 3. That Mr. B.
jumbles together Churchmembershi^, Covenant interest, etc. whereas a person may
have no interest in Gods Covenant, who is a visible Churchmember; and he man
have interest in Gods Covenant, who is no visible Churchmember. 4. His speech,
God is just, and consents not that any have that which he has not some right
to or in, as the words seem to import, is not right. For 1. they intimate a^ if
visible Churchmembership were given out of distributive justice, which gives to
every man his own. But this I conceive to be very erroneous. For as
Regeneration, so also visible Churchmembership are of bounty by God as
Sovereign Lord, nor of distributive justice by God as a Judge. 2. That all that
any man has from God, he has of debt, contrary to the Apostle, Romans 4.4. 5.
That visible Churchmembership is conceived as a thing offered, and to be duly
and rightfully received, or to be attained by usurpation and abuse of Gods
ordinances or benefits. But this I understand not how it is according to Mr.
Bs. Doctrine. 1. He conceives visible Churchmembership distinct from
Circumcision. What Ordinance is there then which may be abused by receiving
visible Churchmembership? 2. The visible Churchmembership of infants among the
Jews, does not to me appear to be a thing tendered or offered by God upon
condition of parents faith, and to be accepted or refused: but to be a state
resu^ting from Gods fact forementioned without such offer. 6. What is in the
Scriptures after expressed, shall be viewed in it is place.

Mr. B. adds* I am next to prove the consequence, that [this right was coferred
by some grant, promise, or Covenant of God.] And this is as easy as to prove
that the world was made by Gods power and efficiency or will; or to prove that
God is the owner of all things, and no man can receive them but by his gift. 1.
If there be no other way possible for right to be conveyed from God to us, but
only by his grant, promise, or Covenamt, (which we call donation, and is a
moral civil action,) then it is by this means that it is conveyed. But there is
no other possible way of such conveyance: Ergo. We have no right till God give
us right. His will signified creates our right No man can have right to that
which is wholly and absolutely another, but by his consent or will. This will
is no way known* but by some signs of it. These signs of such a will for
conveyance of right to a benefit, are a civil moral action, called a donation
or gift simply. If the sign be in writing, we commonly call it a Deed of gift.
If it be by word of mouth, conferring a present right, we call it a verbal
grant or gift. If it confer only a future right* we call it a promise, and
sometimes a Covenant; and sometimes the word Covenant signifies both, that act
which gives a present right, and promises the continuance of it. Right being a
moral or civil thing, can be no way conveyed but by a moral or civil action. A
gift that was never given, is a contradiction. So that this part of our
controversy is as easy as whether two and two be four.

Answ. Visible Churchmembership is not a right, but a state of being; as to be
healthy, strong, rich, etc. which are not given by a civil moral action, but by
providence of God acting physically, as the sovereign disposer of all. It is
certain, that it is by Gods will, as all things are; but this will is no
otherways signified then by the event, as conversion and many other gifts of
God are. My meaning is, though these things are by virtue of Gods will, and are
signified in the general by some Declaration of Gods purpose and order by which
he acts, which may b^ called his Covenant; yet in the particulars, I mean for
the persons, time, etc. there is not any Covenant that assures these persons
conversion or visible Churchmembership, or that estates infants in either of
those benefits as their right by virtue of Gods promise as the sole efficient
of it, upon that condition Mr. B. asserts, that is, the parents faith, as I
have proved before, Sect. 52. I deny therefore that there is such a promise of
God as conferred infants visible Churchmembership upon ^he parents faith. And
to Mr. Bs. argument I say, that though it be easy to prove that visible
Churchmembership is by Gods donation, or grant; yet to argue therefore it must
be by a promise, such as Mr. B. asserts, follows not, it being no good argument
which is drawn affirmatively from the genus to the species, it must be by Gods
gift or grant, ergo b^ promise. Yea, according to Mr. B. here a promise confers
only a future right, and therefore it does not make actually visible
Church Members without some further act, and therefore not the promise or
Covenant of God is the next adequate cause of it, but some other act of God,
and consequently there is another poss^ble yea manifest way, without the
promise of it upon condition of parents faith, which Mr. B. asserts.

But Mr. B. says. 2. God has expressly called that act a Covenant or promise
by which he conveyeth this right: which we shall more fully manifest anon when
we come to it.

Answ. These a^e but words, as will appear by that which follows.

The 2d. Proposition, says Mr. B. to be proved, is, that [there was a law or
precept of God ob^iging the parents to enter their children into Covenant and
Churchmembership, by accepting of his offer, and re-engaging them to God.] And
this is as obvious and easy as the former. But first I shall in a word here
also explain the terms. The word [law] is sometimes taken more largely, and
unfitly, as comprehending the very immanent acts or the nature of God,
considered without any sign to represent it to the creature. So many call Gods
nature or purposes the Eternal Law: which indeed is no law, nor can be fitly so
called. 2. It is taken properly for [an authoritative determination de debito
constituendo vel confirmando.] And so it comprehends all that may fitly be
called a law. Some define it, [ Jussum ma^estatis obligan^ aut ad obedientiam
aut ad paenam.] But this leaves out the praemiant part, and some others: So
that of Grotius does, Est regula actionum moralium obligans ad id quod rectum
est. I acquiesce in the first, or rather in this, which is more full and exact;
[A law is a sign of the Rectors will constituting or confirming right or
dueness.] That it be a sign of the Rectors will de debito constituendo vel
confirmando, is the general nature of all laws. Some quarrel at the word [sign]
because it is logical and not political: As if politicians should not speak
logically as well as other men! There is a twofold due; 1. What is due from us
to God (or any Rector;) and this is signified in the precept and prohibition,
(or in the precept de agendo andnon agendo.) 2. What shall be due to us; and
this is signified by promises, or the praemiant part of the law, and by laws
for distribution and determination of proprieties. All benefits are given us by
God in a double relation, both as Rector and Benefactor: or as Benefactor
regens; or as Rector benefaciens: though among men that stand not in such a
subordination to one another as we do to God, they may be received from a mere
benefactor without any regent interest therein. The first laws do ever
constitute the debitum or right: afterward there may be renewed laws and
precepts to urge men to obey the former, or to do the same thing: and the end
of these is either fullier to acquaint the subject with the former, or to
revive the memory of them, or to excite to the obedience of them: And these do
not properly constitute duty, because it was constituted before; but the nature
and power of the act is the same with that which does constitute it, and
therefore does confirm the constitution, and again oblige us to what we were
obliged to before. For obligations to one and the same duty may be mul^iplied.
3. Some take the word [law] in so restrained a sense as to exclude verbal or
particular precepts, especially directed but to one; or a few men; and will
only call that a law which is witten, or at least a well known custom
obliging a whole society in a stated way. These be the most eminent sort of
laws: but to say that the rest are no laws, is vain and groundless, against the
true general definition of a law, and justly rejected by the wisest
politicians. That which we are now to enquire after, is a precept, or the
commanding part of a law, which is [a sign of Gods will obliging us to duty,]
of which signs there are materially several sorts, as 1. by a voice, that is
evidently of God: 2. by writing: 3. by visible works or effects: 4. by secret
impresses, as by inspiration, which is a law only to him that has them.

Answ. Mr. B. undertook to explain the terms, and he only, and that
unnecessarily and tediously, explains one term, to wit [law,] which was not the
term in my Letter, to which his Proposition was to be opposed, but the word
[precept;] whereas he should have explained what he meant by the parents
entering their children into Covenant and Churchmembership, and what offer he
meant they were to accept, and how, and how they were to engage them to God,
and how this entering, accepting, re-engaging did confer the benefit of visible
Churchmembership to their children, and what precept it is that is unrepealed
distinct from the precept of Circvmcision, which I presume he does not hold
unrepealed. All these were necessary to have been distinctly set down, that I
might have known his meaning, and thereby have known whether his assertion
opposes my position, and whether he prove it or not. But that the Reader may
the better perceive where the point to be proved lies, I shall set down
distinctly what I conceive Mr. B. means, and then what I assert, and what Mr.
B. should prove in opposition to my assertion.

1. I conceive he imagines an offer of God to parents, which he calls a promise
or Covenant, that upon their taking him to be their God, he would be a God to
their children, even their infants. 2. That parents are and were bound to
accept of this offer for their children. 3. That by it they do enter them into
Covenant, that is, they do Covenant for them that they shall be Gods people,
and consequently they partake of the Covenant that God is their God. 4. That by
virtue of this entering into Covenant, accepting, and re-engaging them to God,
they are visible Churchmenbers.

I assert 1. There is no such offer, promise, or Covenant. 2. That though there
are precepts for parents to pray for their children, to breed them up for God
by example, teaching, etc. yet they are not bound to believe this; that upon
their own faith God will take their infant children to be his, and he will be a
God to them, nor to accept of this pretended offer, since there is no such
promise or offer. 3. That though parents may enter into Covenant for their
children, that is, they may do it as those, Deuteronomy. 29.12. either by charge and
adjuration, or by wishing a curse to them if they did not cleave to God, as
Nehem. 10.29. Josh. 6.25. and this may have an obligation on them beyond the
precept, and influence on them as a motive, as the Oath to the Gibeonites,
Josh. 9.16. yet by this their entering into Covenant for them, they do not make
them partakers of the Covenant or promise that God will be their God. 4. That if
there were such a promise, and such a duty of accepting the pretended offer,
and re-engaging; yet this neither did then, nor does now make infants visible
Churchmembers. So that the point between us is, Whether there be such a precept
to parents besides Circumcision, of entering into Covenant, accepting an offer
of God to be their God for their children according to a promise that he will
be so, and re-engaging them to God, whereby they become actually visible
Churchmembers? This Mr. B. affirms, I deny. He speaks thus.

Having thus opened the terms [law and precept,] I prove the Proposition thus.
1. If it was the duty of the Israelites to accept Gods offered mercy for their
children, to engage and devote them to him in Covenant, then there was a law or
precept which made this their duty, and obliged them to it. But it was a duty:
Ergo, there was such a law or precept. For the antecedent, 1. If it were not a
duty, then it was either a sin, or a neutral indifferent action: But it was not
a sin, (for 1. it was against no law, 2. it is not reprehended;) nor was it
indifferent, for it was of a moral nature, and ergo either good or evil, yea
sin or duty: For properly permittere is no act of law, (though many say it is,)
but a suspension of an act: and so licitum is not moraliter bonum, but only
non malum; and ergo is not properly within the verge of morality. 2. If there
be a penalty (and a most terrible penalty) annexed for the nonperformance,
then it was a duty: But such a penalty was annexed (as shall anon be
particularly showed) even to be cut off from his people, to be put to death,
etc. If it oblige ad panam, it did first oblige ad obedientiam: For no law
obliges ad paenam, but for disobedience, which presupposes an obligation to
obedience. 3. If it were not the Israelites duty to enter their children into
Gods Covenant and Church, then it would have been none of their sin to have
omitted or refused so to do: But it would have been their great and heinous sin
to have omitted or refused it; Ergo. Now to the consequence of the major. There
is no duty but what is made by some law or precept as it is proper efficient
cause or foundation: Ergo, if it be a duty, there was certainly some law or
precept that made it such. Among men we say, that a benefit obliges to
gratitude, though there were no law: But the meaning is, if there were no
humane law, and that is because the law of God in nature requires man to be
just and thankful. If there were no law of God natural or positive that did
constitute it or oblige us to it, there could be no duty. 1. There is no duty
but what is made such by Gods signified will, ergo, no duty but what is made
such by a law or precept. For a precept is the sign of Gods will obliging to
duty. 2. Where there is no law there is no transgression, Romans 4.15. ergo,
where there is no law there is no duty; for these are contraries: it is a duty
not to transgress the law, and a transgression not to perform the duty which it
requires of us. There is no apparent ground of exception, but in case of
Covenants. Whether a man may not oblige himself to a duty merely by his
consent? I answer, 1. He may oblige himself to an act, which he must perform,
or else prove unfaithful and dishonest: but his own obligation makes it not
strictly a duty: ergo, when God makes a Covenant with man, he is as it were
obliged in point of fidelity, but not of duty. 2. He that obliges himself to
an act by promise, does occasion an obligation to duty from God, because God
has obliged men to keep their promises. 3. So far as a man may be said to be
his own ruler, so far may he be said to oblige himself to duty, (that is duty
to himself, though the act be for the benefit of another:) but then he may as
fitly be said to make a law to himself, or command himself: so that still the
duty (such as it is) has an answerable command. So that I may well conclude,
that there is a law, because there is a duty. For nothing but a law could cause
that duty, nor make that omission of it a sin. Where there is no law, sin is
not imputed, Romans 5.13. But the omission of entering infan^s into Covenant with
God before Christ's incarnation would have been a sin imputed; ergo, there was a
law commanding it. 2. If it was a duty to dedicate infants to God, or enter
them into Covenant with him, then either by Gods will, or without it: certainly
not without it. If by Gods will, then either by his will revealed, or
unrevealed. His unrevealed will cannot oblige; for there wants promulgation,
which is necessary to obligation: And no man can be bound to know Gods
unrevealed will, unless remotely, as it may be long of himself that it is not
to him revealed. If it be Gods revealed will that must thus oblige, then there
was some sign by which it was revealed. And if there were a sign revealing Gods
will obliging us to duty, then there was a law, For this is the very nature of
the preceptive part of a law, (which is the principal part,) so that you may as
well say, that you are a reasonable creature, but not a man, as say that men
were obliged to duty by Gods revealed will, but yet not by a law or precept. 3.
We shall anon produce the law or precept, and put it out of doubt that there
was such a thing. In the mean time I must confess, I do not remember that ever
I was put to dispute a point that carries more of it is own evidence to shame
the gain-sayer. And if you can gather Disciples even among the godly, by
persuading them that there were duties without precepts or laws, and benefits
without donations, covenants, or promise confirming them, then despair of
nothing for the time to come: You may persuade them that there is a son without
a father, or any relation without it is foundation, or effect without it is
cause, and never doubt but the same men will believe you, while you have the
same interest in them, and use the same artifice in putting off your conceits.

Answ. This tedious unnecessary discourse I have set together, lest it should
be said I omitted it because I could not answer it, though I might have well
done it, and granted him his conclusion without any revocation of what I had
written to him. For his conclusion is, that there was a law or precept to the
Israelites to accept of Gods offered mercy for their children to engage and
devote them to him in Covenant, which I never denied, only I denied that this
was any other then Circumcision, or that this conferred the benefit, that is,
made them visible Church Members, or that this mercy, as he calls it, was
offered by a Covenant to be a God to believers and their seed, or that parents
did by their act enter the children into Covenant, that is, Gods Covenant to be
their God, or Covenant to God, in proper speech whereby they covenanted to be
his people. And for the first, it seems to me, 1. That Mr. B. can produce no
other law or precept binding the Israelites to this duty besides that of
Circumcision, because he neither here nor elsewhere that I know of produces
any other. 2. That he means no other by two passages in this discourse; 1.
because he says there was a most terrible penalty annexed to this law obliging
Israelites for nonperformance (as shall be anon particularly showed) even to
be cut off from his people, to be put to death, etc. which he neither shows to
be any other, nor do I think he could mean any other then that of Circumcision:
2. He says, the omission of entering infants into Covenant with God before
Christ's incarnation, would have been a sin imputed; his limiting it to the time
before Christ's incarnation, intimates he meant it of Circumcision. 3. That he
deals like as if he meant deceitfully, in putting off the naming the law or
precept to another place, which it had been requisite for the Answerer and
Reader to have found here, that it might be discerned what law he meant. And
for the 2d. I say, if he could prove or produce that or any other law or
precept; yet if he did not prove that thereby the infants were made visible
Churchmembers, he proves not the contradictory to my writing. The other two
points belong to the two foregoing and following questions. As for his
confession, though his injurious insinuations of me are so frequent and so
frivolous, that I could pass by them as the hissing of a Goose, or the snarling
of a Curre; yet because his speeches do much wrong the truth and way of God
through my sides, I judge it fit to reply, 1. That I see not reason to be
ashamed of my assertion, but Mr. B. has cause to be ashamed of his own
heedlesness, and misrepresentation of my assertion, and roving from the point
he should prove. 2. That I gather no Disciples to my self; but endeavor to
reform the abuse of Infant Baptism, and to restore the right use of Christian
Baptism, according to the plain appointment of Christ in Scripture, and
practice of his Apostles. 3. That he that will be persuaded by Mr. B. that
infants are Disciples meant Matthew. 28.19. and that in Genesis 1.26. and 3.15. is a
law or ordinance of God for infants visible Churchmembership, will believe any
thing that he says. 4. That were it not for the opinion he has obtained of
godliness by his Book of Rest, the esteem he has gained by his writings for
the Ministry, and the advantage they have by his Book of Baptism to maintain
their practice and station, it were not likely so vain a Book would be esteemed
among Scholars. 5. That were it not for the affrightments of Mr. B. through
his calumnies and slanders, as if Ranters, Quakers, and all sorts of errors
and sects sprang from Antipaedobaptism, godly tender conscienc'd persons durst
not maintain as they do so gross a corruption as their Baby sprinkling is, nor
neglect so great and fundamental a duty as Baptism is according to the
Scripture. But the Lord will judge between us. I proceed.

The 5 th Qu. says Mr. B. requires me to lay down this assertion, that [there
is no law or precept of God which does not oblige to duty; and no actual
promise or donation, which does not confer the benefit.] This I aver on
occasion of your last Letter, where in contradiction to the former, you confess
[the promises to the na^ural posterity of Abraham, Genesis 17. and the Covenants
made with Israel at Mount Sinai, and Deuteronomy. 29. and a precept of C^rcumcision,
and precepts of God by Moses, of calli^g the people, and requiring them to
enter into Covenant, Exodus 19. Deuteronomy. 29.] Yet you [do not conceive that the
infants of Israel were made visible Churchmemb^rs by the promises in the
Covenants, o^ the precepts forenamed.] If so, then either you imagine that
among all those precepts and promises there was yet no promise or Covenant that
gave them the benefit of Churchmembership, or precept concerning their entrance
into that state; or else you imagine that such promises were made, but did not
actually confer the benefit, and such precepts were made, but did not actually
oblige. Your words are so ambiguous in this, that they signify nothing of your
mind to any that knows it not some other way. For when you say [there is no
such particular promise concerning in^an^s visible Churchmembership, or
precept, etc. besides Circumcision, as in my Book of Baptism I assert,] who
knows whether that exception of [Circumcision] be a concession of such a
precept or promise in the case of Circumcision? or if not, what sense it has?
and what you imagine that precept or promise to be which I assert? and before
the sense of your one syllable [such] is discerned by trying it by a whole
volume, I doubt you will make what your list of it. However, if you should
mean, that such precepts there are as have for their subject [the avouching God
to be their God, the entering into Covenant Circumcision] of infants, but not
their Churchmembership; then 1. I have proved the contrary to the negative
before; 2. and more shall do anon; 3. and it is a palpable contradiction to the
precedent affirmative. But if you mean that Churchmembership of infants as well
as others is the subject or part of the subject of those promises or precepts
and yet that infants were not made or confirmed thereby; it is the contrary
that I am asserting, and I have no further need to prove, then by showing the
contradiction of your opinion to it self For an actual Covenant or promise that
does not give right to the benefit promised (according to it^s tenor and
terms,) is like a cause that has no effect, a father that did never generate,
and it is all one as to say, A gift or Covenant which is no gift or Covenant,
seeing the name is denied, when the thing named and defined is granted. So a
precept or law to enter infants solemnly into Churchmembership, which yet
obliges none so to enter them, is as gross a contradiction as to say, the Sun
has not heat or light, and yet is truly a Sun.

Answ. I grant his assertion, that there is no precept of God which does not
oblige to duty, nor donation which does not confer the benefit; though sundry
things which have the title of Gods laws oblige not to duty, and an actual
promise does not put the thing promised in present being as the next cause, but
the thing promised is thereby only made future, yea a promise that it shall be
does suppose it not to be, and that there is something else the next and
immediate cause of its actual being. The imagined contradiction in my later to
my former Letter, is before cleared not to be so Sect. 53. Though I have said
enough before in this and other fore going Sections, yet to take away all
color of charging me with ambiguity, 1. I acknowledge that the Covenant at
Mount Sinai* and the Covenant Deuteronomy. 29. did declare the people of the Jews to
be Gods people, or his visible Church, in that the Covenant was mutual, and
open between them and God. 2. That they were Gods visible Church not barely by
Gods promise to them to be their God, but by their promise to God: Gods call of
them made them his Church, their promise to God with other acts made them
visibly so. 3. The promises of God Genesis 17. did not of themselves make the
house of Abraham Gods visible Church. 4. The call of God, and such acts as
whereby he separated them from others to be his (which were many) made the
house of Abraham Gods Church 5. The infants were members of that Church, in
that they were part of that people. 6. Such things as whereby they were visibly
of that people, their birth, cohabitation, etc. did make them visible
Churchmembers. 7. Circumcision was one sign not by its^lf but with other
things, whereby the male infants and adult were known to be of Gods visible
Church. 8. No promise of God, nor duty of parents did make the infants actually
visible Churchmembers, as the next cause in act either formal or efficient. If
Mr. B. or any Reader will heed these passages, with what goes before, he may
easily discern my mind, and acquit me from self-contradiction, if not I think
it in vain for me to use more words. I pass on to that which follows.

SECT. LVI. That the People, and thereby the Infants of the Hebrews, were made
visible Churchmembers by a transeunt fact, is made good against Mr: Bs.
exceptions.
I Come next ( says Mr. B.) to the 6th. Qu. Whether indeed there be any
transeunt fact, which without the causation of any promise or precept, did make
the Israelites infants Churchmembers. This you affirm (if you would be
understood;) whether this your ground of infants Churchmembership or mine be
righter, I hope will be no hard matter for another man (of common capacity) to
discern. By a [transeunt fact] thus set as contradistinct to a law, precept, or
promise, either you mean the act of legislation and promise making, or some
other merely physical act. If the former, it is too ridiculous to be used in a
serious business: For you should not put things in competition excluding the
one, where they both must necessarily concur, the one standing in a
subordination to the other. Was there ever a Law or Covenant made in the world
any other way ^hen by a transeunt fact? Sure all legislation is by some
signification of the Sovereigns will. And the making of that sign is a
transeunt fact. If it be by voice is not that transient? If by writing is not
the act transeunt? If by creation it self, the act is transeunt though the
effect be permament. And certainly if legislation or promising be your
transeunt fact, you do very absurdly put it in opposition to a law (or promise)
it being the making of such a law. And the legislation does no way oblige the
subject, but by the law so made: nor does the making of a promise, grant or
covenant, confer right to the benefit which is the subject of of it, any
otherwise then as it is the making of that grant which shall so confer it. As
the making of a knife does not cut, but the knife made: and so of other
instruments. So that if the law oblige not, or the grant confer not, certainly
the legislation or promise-making cannot do it. I cannot therefore imagine that
this is your sense, without charging you with too great absurdity. As if you
should say, It is not the will of the testator, i. e. his testament, that
enti^leth the legatary to the legacy, but it is the rranseunt fact of the
testator in making that will: or it is not the Sovereigns commission that
authorizeth a Judge, soldier, etc. but it is the transeunt fact of writing or
making that commission. It is not the sign that signifies, but the transeunt
fact of making that sign. Were not this a contemptible arguing? To charge you
with this were to make you tantum non ununreasonable. And yet I know not what
to say to you, that is, how to understand you. For if you mean a mere physical
transient fact, which is no such legislation or promise-making, then it is far
more absurd then the former. For if it be not a sign of Gods will obliging to
duty, or conferring benefit, then can it not so oblige to duty, nor confer
benefits. It is no other transeunt fact but legislation that can oblige a
subject to duty, nor any other transeunt fact but promise, or other donation,
that can convey right to a benefit, or oblige the promiser. A moral or civil
effect must be produced by a moral or civil action, and not by a mere physical
action; which is unfit to produce such an alien effect, and can go no higher
then it^s own kind. What sense therefore I should put on your words, without
making them appear unreasonable, even much below the rates of ordinary rational
peoples discourse, I cannot tell. For to say, It is not a law but legislation,
is all one as to say, It is not the fundamentum, but the laying of that
foundation that causes the relation, or from which it does result. And to say
it is an alien physical act, which has no such thing as right for us subject
or terminus, is to confound physic and morals, and to speak the grossest
absurdities; as to say that the transient fact of eating, drinking, going,
building, etc. do adopt such an one to be your heir. I must needs think
therefore, till you have better cleared your self, that you have here quit your
self as ill, and forsaken and delivered up your Cause, as palpably as ever I
knew man do, without an express confession that it is naught. When men must be
taught by this obtuse subtilty to prove that infants Churchmembership needed no
revocation, forsooth [because their Churchmembership was not caused by a law,
precept, promise or covenant, but by a transeunt fact] then which as you leave
it, the world has scarce heard a more incoherent dream. But I pray you
remember in your reply that you being the affirmer of this, must prove it.
Which I shall expect, when you can prove that you can generate a man by
spitting or blowing your nose, or by plowing and sowing can produce Kings and
Emperors.

Answ. I make not the Jews infants visible Churchmembers by bare legislation or
promise-making, but by the transeunt fact described in my Letters, which was
without promise or precept, that is promise of it on condition of the parents
faith, or precept of accepting that offered mercy, entering into Covenant, and
re-ingaging them to God, which are the promise and precept Mr. B, derives their
visible Churchmembership from. Infants were visible Churchmembers among the
Jews, in that they were visibly a part of that people, who were Gods Church.
So that to visible Churchmembership was requisite, 1. that God should make that
people h^s Church, this he did by the transeunt fact described. 2. That the
infants should be visibly a part of that people, this he did by their bringing
into the world, ranking them among his people, so as that they were discernable
by their birth, nursing, circumcision, habitation, genealogy, and such other
signs, to be part of that Church. Their visible Churchmembership imports a
state of visibility in the relations, 1. of a part to the whole, 2. of a people
that are Gods, that is 1. separated from other people, 2. called and taken or
brought to God. These things are done by various acts, which I conceive I did
fitly call a transeunt fact. A physical and moral cause are thus described by
Scheibler, Metaphys. lib. 1. c. 22. tit. 13. Topic. c. 3. tit. 14. Stierius
part. Gen Metaph. c. 12. A Physical or natural Cause, is that which truly flows
into the effect, and nextly reaches it by its activity. A Moral Cause, is that
which does not flow into the effect so as to reach to it, yet so behaves
himself, that the effect may be imputed to him to praise or dispraise, reward
or punishment. Such are causes applying the agent to the patient, counselling,
commanding, persuading exhorting, instigating, meriting, permitting when they
might and should binder, etc. Visible Churchmembership is not as Mr. B.
conceives it, formally a right to a benefit, or a benefit, though it may be so
consecutively, or they may follow on it. But it is a complex term, noting a
state with a dou^le relation and imports a natural effect or term of action, as
well, if not more then a moral, and is from physical as well as moral causes;
and in infants visible Churchmembership, I judge it altogether an effect of a
physical cause, as not knowing any moral action of God or man that makes them
such; though to the visible Churchmembership of the people or body of which
they are a part acts physical and moral do concur: which I shall clear in
answering Mr. Bs. exceptions to my last Letter to him. As for his outcries of
grossest absurdities, incoherent dreams, unreasonable even much below the rates
of ordinary rational peoples discourse, contemptible arguing, obtuse subtility,
contradictions, palpable forsaking and delivering up my Cause, generating a man
by spitting or blowing my nose, with the rest of his Canine Scoptical
Rhetoric, I pass by it as being of ill savor, hoping Mr. B. will in time come
to better consideration of his writings, and either show me my error, or
discern his own.

Mr. B. goes on thus. In consideration of the 7th. Qu. I shall consider the
nature and effect of the transient fact which you here describe. And first of
the reason of that name. You say that you call it [transeunt] [because done in
time and so not eternal, and past and so not in congruous sense repealeable as
a law, ordinance, statute, decree, which determines such a thing shall be for
the future.] And do you think this the common sense of the word? or a fit
reason of your application of it to the thing in hand. Answ. I do.

1. Says Mr. B. I think your intellection and volition are immanent acts, and
yet not eternal.

Answ. Yet all Gods immanent acts (of whom I spoke) are eternal.

We use, says he, to contradistinguish transient acts from immanent, and that
because they do transire in subjectum extraneum. Answ. So do I.

But it seems you take them here as distinct from permanent.

Answ. Yea and immanent too.

But use your sense as long as we understand it.

Answ. With your good leave then I may use this term, if you understand it, if
not I must alter it.

2. Says Mr. B. If it be only [past] actions which you call [transeunt] it
seems your long fact which was so many hundred years in doing, was no transeunt
fact till the end of all those years* and so did not (by your own doctrine)
make any Churchmembers till the end of those years.

Answ. It does but seem so: the truth is, in this long fact each particular act
was a transeunt fact in each year, and in each age and space of time in which
those acts were done, Churchmembers were made by one or more of those and other
acts used by God to that end, and yet the transeunt fact not so fully
accomplished, but that there was an addition till that people came to their
(...), or full stature, in which respect I comprehended all those many acts
which I set down under the name of a transeunt fact, which I hope when he
understands it, Mr. B. will give me leave to do.

3. Says he* But Sir the question is not, Whether it were a transeunt fact
that laid the foundation by legislation or promise making; but Whether the
effect were trasient, or the act as it is in patien^e: Whether the law were
transeunt which was made by a transeunt fact? and whether the moral action of
that law were permanent or transient? it being most certainly such a moral act
that must produce a title, or constitute a duty. Gods writing the ten
Commandments in stone was a fact soon past, but the law was not soon past, nor
the moral act of that law, viz. obligation. There are verbal laws, that have no
real permanent sign: and yet the law may be permanent, and the obligation
permanent, because the sign may have a permanency in esse cognito, and so the
signifying virtue may remain by the help of memory, though the word did vanish
in the speaking.

Answ. The question between us is, Whether the infants of the Jews were made
visible Churchmembers by a promise of God to be the God of believers and their
seed, and a precept obliging the parents to accept of this mercy offered for
their children, and to enter them into Covenant; or by the transeunt fact I
describe. The questions which Mr. B. here sets down, so far as I understand
them, are no questions between us: and therefore this exception is but roving
from the matter in hand.

2. Says he, When you come to point out this transient fact individually, you
say [it is Gods taking the whole people of the Jews for his people,] which you
term [fact] as conceiving it most comprehensive of the many particular acts in
many generations whereby he did accomplish it.] 1. I did not well understand
before that [a fact] did so vastly differ from on [Act,] as to contain the acts
(rather then the facts) of many generations.

Answ. Though I think in use there is some difference, that act is applied to
the particular actions, fact to them as they amount to some thing brought to
pass by them; yet if there were no such difference, me thinks if Mr. B. had not
been minded to multiply exceptions unnecessarily, he might have allowed me to
use a term (which in Disputes is frequent) for my purpose especially since he
understands it.

2. Says he, This is a long fact according to your measure, even from Abraham's
call out of Ur: but how long it seems you are not well agreed with your self.
For in the first part of your Letter you enumerate to the other acts that
compose this fact [the bringing them into the bond of the Covenant at Mount
Sinai, giving them Laws, settling their Priesthood, Tabernacle, Army, Government
inheritance:] But before you end, you change your mind, and say [the
Churchmembership of the Israelites began as I conceive with Abraham's call, and
was completed when they were brought out of Egypt to God. Exodus 10.4.] But
sure that was long before the settling their inheritance. Your fact according to
your last account was about 430 years in doing; but according to your first
opinion, it was about 470 years long.

Answ. In my first and last account there is no change of my mind. I did
conceive, that the taking the whole people of the Jews for his people was
completed when they were brought out of Egypt to God, Exodus 19.4. as Christ
said It is finished, John 19.30. and yet more was to be done, because the chief
or hardest thing then was done which would draw after it all the rest. As after
the great battle at Arbella, Alexanders conquest might be said to be finished,
though more were after to be done. I never meant to limit the fact to the time
of their bringing out of Egypt to God, but included all other additionals,
though it were the main, and which brought along with it the rest.

3. Says Mr. B. If it were one individual fact of about 470 years long that
made infants Churchmembers, then they could not be Churchmembers till that fact
was past: For the effect is not before the cause, or causality of the
efficient; the relation cannot be before the fundamentum be laid: and it seems
this long fact was the laying of the fundamentum: But the consequent is
certainly false; for infants were Churchmembers before the end or completing
of your long fact: For they were Churchmembers (you will grant) when Ishmael and
Isaac were circumcised. Ergo, it was not this long fact that made them
Churchmembers.

Answ. I said I termed Gods taking the people of the Jews a fact, as a
collective term, comprehensive of the many particular acts in many generations
whereby he did accomplish it. By which it may easily be perceived, that I did
not make the fact an individual action, for I called it many acts, nor did mean
that the Churchmembership was not till all the acts were past, but that it was
accomplished by them, that is, they were brought to full stature and growth as
a formed people and Commonwealth: As we say a child is a man accomplished when
he is brought to the years of a man, and yet he is a man before. And I answer
to Mr. Bs. argument taken from my words; that when I drew out the fact so long,
and said, by it the infants were visible Churchmembers as a part of the
Congregation of Israel, my meaning was, that respectively as the Congregation
of Israel were made a Church by that fact, so were the infants members. By the
call out of Ur, whereby God separated Abraham and his house from other people,
the Congregation of Israel began to be Gods Church, and if there had been
infants they had been visible Churchmembers; but they were not a completed
Church till they were brought out of Egypt to God, Exodus 19.4. nor infants
members of a Church completed till then when they were become a great nation,
and were formed into a Theocratical Commonwealth. And being thus rightly
understood (as my words imported) I said nothing which infers the absurdity of
putting the effect before the case, nor the putting off infants visible
Churchmembership till the end of 470 years.

4. Says he, If you mean that it was not the whole, but some part of this long
fact that actually made infants Churchmembers, then you would have assigned
that part, when that was the thing desired, and which you pretended exactly to
perform; or at least you would not have told us it comprehended all these acts.

Answ. I did exactly tell Mr. B. in my Letter, it began with the call of
Abraham out of Ur; and when I told him that the fact comprehended all those
acts, yet I added for explication, [whereby it was accomplished or completed.]

5. Says he, And if each particular act did make infants Church Members, or
lay a sufficient ground of it, then it seems that it was done before the
institution of Circumcision. For Gods calling Abraham out of Ur was before it.
So that the children born in his house must be Churchmembers upon that; and a
sufficient ground laid for his own to have been such, if he had then had a
natural issue: And it seems then that Ishmael was born a Churchmember many
years before Circumcision.

Answ. I grant all this,

6. Says he, If this be your meaning, I pray you be so just and impartial as
to accept of the proof which I shall give you of infants Churchmembership
before Abraham's days, if I make it appear to be as strong as this call of
Abraham from Ur.

Answ. I shall.

7. Says he, If you should mean that some one of these comprehended acts
should of it self make any infants Churchmembers, then it must be any one; for
you no more assign it to one of them then to another, (only say [chiefly the
bringing them from Egypt:] But surely some of these acts particularly cannot
do it, As the leading to Padan Aram, the removal to Canaan, to Egypt, placing,
preserving ther^, settling their Army, etc. Did any one of these make infants to
become Churchmembers?

Answ. No: But I did assign it to one of them more then to another, to wit, the
beginning to Abrams call, the accomplishing to the bringing of them out of
Egypt to God, Exodus 19.4

8. Says he, Nay, suppose you mean that all these acts must concur to make
them members, (and so that they were no members till many hundred years after
the institution of Circumcision,) yet could not your Doctrine hold good: For
some of these acts are of an alien nature, and no more apt to cause infant
Churchmembership, then a bull to generate a bird* What aptitude has the
settling of an Army to be any part of the causation of infants Churchmembership?
None, I think; at least if it be such an Army as ours: For surely the settling
of ours caused no such thing, as you well know. What aptitude has the leading
to Padan Aram, or removal to Egypt, to make infants Churchmembers? Nay, how
strange is it, that the removing of Churchmembers, and such as had been infant
Churchmembers, as Ishmael, Keturahs children, Esau, must cause infant
Churchmembership? Sure it was no cause of their own. Keturahs children were
Churchmembers in infancy: I enquire of you by what act they were made such? You
say [by Gods fact of taking the whole people of the Jews for his people]
whereof the act of removing Keturahs children was a part. Very good. It seems
then that removing from the Congregation of Israel a people of the Jews, is a
taking of the removed to be of that people: or else it is not only the taking
that people, but also the removal from that people that makes Churchmembers,
even the removed as well as the taken, both which are alike absurd.

Answ. 1. I mean not as Mr. B. supposes I might. 2. The settling of the Army
had remotely causation of infants Churchmembership, for by it the Israelites
were a well formed Congregation, Church, or Commonwealth, and by which the
infants were a part, which is their Churchmembership. 3. I know that our Army
has done so much for the settling of the Church, as that the Antiprelatists
congregations had been either none, or much oppressed, i^ they had not broken
the force of the opposite party. Nor dare I be so unthankful to God, or them,
as not to acknowledge the great mercy and benefit we at this day enjoy thereby,
however Mr. B. fret at our liberty, and jibe at the instruments. 4. The leading
to Padan Aram, removal to Egypt, were acts of providence whereby Jacobs house
were increased and preserved, which I conceive were some of those acts whereby
he made them a people to himself. 5. Ishmaels, Keturahs children's, Esau's
removal, were some acts whereby the congregation of Israel became Gods severed,
or a peculiar people. 6. Keturahs children were visible Churchmembers while
they were part of Abraham's house, called after the people of the Jews, by Gods
taking of the people of the Jews, and consequently them as a part; and yet the
removal of them was after one act whereby the people of the Jews were made to
God a severed people from them; and consequently their infants Churchmembers.
Distinguish the times and the different state of things and intentions of God
in his providence, and these seeming incoherences will be found consistent.

9. Says he, And I pray you tell me yet a little better, how an act can make a
man a Churchmember that was one long before that was done? You cannot here say,
that it was before in esse morali, and had a moral causation. How then could
your chiefest act* the bringing out of Egypt, make those infants Churchmembers
that were born in Egypt, and were Churchmembers before? Or how could it be any
part of the cause? Did the bringing out of Egypt concur to make Moses a
Churchmember when he was in the basket on the waters? And when you answer this,
you may do well to go a little f^r^her, and tell me, how such an act concurreth
to make him an infant Churchmember that was dead an hunded or two hundred years
before that act was done. For example, how did the settling of the Israelites
Army, or inheritance, or the Covenant on Mount Sinai, make Ishmael, or Esau, or
Isaac, or Jacob Churchmembers?

Answ. The infants of Israel were Churchmembers in that they were a part of the
congregation or people af Israel, which was a fluent body, and was taken to be
Gods Church by a succession of acts, whereof some were causes which began, some
continued, some completed, and the several acts made the Churchmembers of that
age, yet all by virtue of the first call of Abraham, whereby God declared his
intention to make his house a Nation, and his Church, first more obscurely,
then more clearly. The bringing out of Egypt tended to make the Israelites a
severed people, and consequently all that were Churchmembers were by that act
such; the settling of the Army, inheritance, Covenant at Mount Sinai, tended to
make them a well formed people, and to the accomplishment of the taking the
Jews to be Gods people, and consequently the infan^s to be Churchmembers which
came after them. Which if so understood, there is nothing in my conceit which
infers the making that a cause which is after the effect.

10. Says Mr. B. I desire you also to tell me by the next, what be the nerves
and ligaments that tie all these acts of 430 years at least together, so as to
make them one fact? And whether I may not as groundedly make a fact sufficient
for this purpose of the acts of an hundred or two hundred years only? and
whether you may not as well make all the acts from Abraham's call till Christ to
be one fact, and assign it to this office?

Answ. 1. These acts are knit together into one fact by the unity of end
designed and work accomplished, as the many acts of several ages did make one
fact, of which the Poet speaks, Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem, to
raise the Roman Empire. 2. You might, if God had so contrived it, and brought
the thing to pass in that time which he did in a longer. 3. I may make all the
acts from Abraham's call till Christ's toward the Hebrews, one fact of making
the Jews his people, and assign it to this office rightly, only using the word
fact or making, as it comprehends not only the beginning, and increasing, and
completing of that people; but also the continuation, recovery from captivity,
and preservation of that people.

11. Says Mr. B. You say that you call this fact [transeunt] because it is
[past,] (and so till it is [past] it seems Isaac and Jacob that were dead
before; are no Churchmembers;) I would then fain know whether it be this same
transeunt fact, or some other, that makes infants Churchmembers five hundred
years after it is past? If it be this same, then how comes a mere transeunt
fact to work effectually so many hundred years after it is past? unless it made
a Law or Covenant which does the deed? If it be a new transeunt fact that must
make infants Churchmembers after the completing of this (the settling their
inheritances;) then I pray you let me know, whether it be one fact exercised on
the whole nation in gross, or must it be a fact upon every infant member
individually? If on the nation, remember to tell us what it was; and do not
only tell us the cause of the membership of former infants. And seeing it must
be such as the membership of every infant till Christ's time at least must be
caused by, I pray you remember to make your work s^uare and full, and be sure
to assign us no other kind of fact, then what you will prove to have been so
frequently repeated in every age, and so fully extensive to every infant among
the Jews, as that it have no gaps but may make all members that were so in each
age. And remember, that it is no law, precept, promise, or covenant that you
must assign for the cause; for that is it you are engaged against: but a
constant succession of transeunt facts extending to each individual member. O
what work have you made your self? and what a sort of new political Doctrine
shall we have from you, when these things are accomplished according to the
frame you have begun? Such as I believe the Sun never saw, nor the wisest
Lawyer in England ever read before? Which makes me the less marvel that so many
of your opinion are so much against the Lawyers; for I dare say they will be
but few of them for you, if these be your grounds, or at least not for these
your grounds.

Answ. I call the whole transeunt fact past, because it consists of many
transeunt acts, which are past being done: But I do not limit the being of
Churchmembers to the entire transeunt fact, as if none were Churchmembers till
each act was past which I set down; but the accomplishing or completing the
Congregation of Israel to either all or the chief of the later acts. That which
made Isaac and Jacob Churchmembers, was the transeunt fact or acts of Gods
providence in their age, whereby they became to be part of Abraham's house,
which God by his call of Abram, setting up his worship in it, and other ways
had made his Church. The same transeunt fact in kind, though not individual,
which made Isaac and Jacob Churchmembers in their age, made infants visible
Churchmembers in the several ages till Christ's time; to wit, the continuance of
the Jews to be Gods people, in the continuing his ordinances, laws, worship,
etc. among them: And each infant was made a visible Churchmember by such
transeunt fact in each age renewed and repeated, by which the infant was made
and known to be a part of that people, which what it is has been often before
said, and showed not to be by such Covenant and precept as Mr. B. asserts. All
which was plainly expressed in my Letter, (and is such work as I need not be
ashamed of,) without any new political Doctrine or Law, as Mr. B. imagines, it
being cleared by the History of the Bible, and other Histories which set down
this fact of God: And if Mr. B. or any Lawyer gainsay this, they gainsay the
plain narration of the Bible. His foolish exclamations I let pass, as showing
nothing but his own inconsiderateness and vanity. That many of my opinion are
against the Lawyers, is more then I know; they know well that I honor their
profession and study, though I do no whit flatter them in their injurious and
covetous practices: Nor do I doubt but conscionable and understanding Lawyers
will be for me upon my grounds, as soon as other men, if they peruse my
writings with love to the truth; and so would all godly learned Divines also,
if it were not for prejudice, and some other partial affection. But I must
attend on Mr. B.

12. Says he, But all this yet is but a light velitation: The principal thing
that I would enquire into, is, what your great comprehensive fact is in the
true nature of it, which you call [Gods taking the whole people of the Jews to
be his people.] Does the word [taking] signify a mere physical taking or fact;
or a moral; such as among men we call, a civil action? If it be a mere physical
taking, then 1. it cannot produce a moral effect, such as that in question is.
2. And then it must have an answerable object, which must be individual
existent persons. 3. And then you cannot call it one fact, but many thousand:
even as many as there were persons taken in to the Jews in above four hundred
years. 4. And then what was the physical act which is called Gods taking? was
it such a taking as the Angel used to Lot, that carried him out of Sodom; or
as the Apocryphal Author mentions of Habakkuk, that was taken by the hair of
the head, and carried by the Angel into another country, to bring Daniel a
mess of pottage? If God must by a physical apprehension take hold of them that
he makes Churchmembers, we shall be at a loss for our proof of their
Churchmembership. But I cannot imagine that this is your sense. But what is it
then? Is it a physical action though a moral causation of some physical effect?
That it cannot be: For it is a political or moral effect that we enquire a^^er.
It necessarily remains therefore that this be a political-moral taking that you
here speak of. And if so, then the transeunt fact you speak of must needs be a
civil or political action. And what that can be, which is no Law, Promise, or
Covenant in this case, I pray you bestow some more diligence to inform us, and
not put us off with the raw name of a transeunt fact opposed to these*
Certainly, if it be a civil or legal action, the product or effect of it is jus
or debitum, some due or right: And that is either 1. a dueness of somewhat from
us, (which is either somewhat to be done, or somewhat to be given;) 2. or a
dueness of something to us, which is either of good or evil: If good, it is
either by contract or donation (whether by a Testament praemiant Law, or the
like:) if evil, it is either by some penal Law, or voluntary agreement: Now
which of these is it that your transeunt fact produces? To be a member of the
Church, is to be a member of a society taking God in Christ to be their God,
and taken by him for his special people. The act which makes each member, is of
the same nature with that which makes the society. The relation then
essentially containe^h 1. a right to the great benefits of Gods sovereignty
over men, Christ's headship, and that favor, protection, provision, and other
blessings, which are due from such a powerful and gracious Sovereign to such
Subjects, and from such a Head to his Members: As also a right to to my station
in the Body, and to the inseparable benefits thereof. 2. It contains my debt
of obedience to God in Christ, acknowledged and promised actually or virtually,
really or reputatively. Now for the first, how can God be related to me as my
God, or Christ as my Savior, and I to him as one that have such right to him
and his blessings, by any other way then his own free gift? This gift must be
some signification of his will: For his secret will is not a gift, but a
purpose of giving. This way of giving therefore is by a civil or moral action,
which is a signifying of the Donors will; and can be by no way, but either pure
donation, contract, testament, or law. In our case it must needs partake of the
nature all these. It is not from one in any equality, nor capable of any
obliging compensation or retribution from us. Being therefore from an absolute
dis-engaged Benefactor, it must needs be by pure donation, or it cannot be
ours. Yet as he is pleased as it were to oblige himself by promise, or by his
word, and also to call us to a voluntary acceptance, and engagement to certain
fidelity, gratitude and duty, and so is the stipulator, and we the promisers in
the latter part of the action: it is therefore justly called a contract or
Covenant, though indeed the word [Covenant] frequently signifies Gods own
promise alone. As it proceeds from the death of the testator (in natural
moral-reputative being,) so it is called a testament. And as it is an act of a
ruling Benefactor* giving this benefit to the governed, to promote the ends of
government, and obliging to duty thereby, so it partaketh of the nature of a
law. The commonest Scripture name for this act, is Gods Covenant or Promise,
and sometimes his Gift; which all signify the same thing here. It follows
therefore, that either by Gods [taking Israel to be his people] you mean some
civil political action, as a Covenant, promise, or the like collation of the
benefit, (and then you assert the thing which you deny,) or else you know not
what you mean, nor can make another know it, without the discovery of the
grossest absurdity. And as for the other thing which is contained in
Churchmembership, the professed duty of man to God, it is most certain 1. That
Gods law obliges us to that duty: 2. And obliges all according to their
capacities to consent to the obligation, and so to re-engage themselves: 3.
That this actual consent professed does therefore double the obligation. And
thus by a mutual contract, Covenant or consent (whereof our part is first
required by a law,) is the relation of Churchmembership contracted. Now to lay
by and deny all this, and give us the general naked name of [taking for Gods
people,] is merely delusory, seeing that [taking] means this which you exclude,
or it means nothing that is true and reasonable. And therefore tell us better
what it means.

Answ. All before being but a velitation or light skirmish, I looked here for
some great battle: But I find it nothing but a rallying together the forces
scattered before, there being not one thing I know of in this passage, but what
was set down before, and is answered. I have distinctly showed how moral and
physical acts concur to the visible Churchmembership of the people, of which
infants are a part, and natural to that visible Churchmembership which the Jews
infants had, and what they were, both in my Letter, and in this answer. What M.
B. replies, is vain. 1. It is not true that the effect in question is a moral,
it is at least in infants merely a physical effect; their Churchmembership is
not by any act which reaches not to the effect. 2. The taking is of individual
persons existent. 3. By many particular acts, yet in a good sense before given,
summed up into one transeunt fact. 4. The physical acts are none of those M. B.
frivolously imagines, but such as are mentioned in the Scripture, and declared
in my Letter 5. It is not true that a mere physical taking cannot produce a
moral effect: For supposing the Spirit should inspire faith immediately without
any preaching, the effect would be moral, though produced by a mere physical
taking or act. 6. The transeunt fact I set down does not exclude, but did
expressly include in my Letter both Covenants single and mutual, and laws, and
precepts; yet (as I have said before) it does exclude that promise of Mr. Bs.
of Gods being a God to believers and their seed, and a precept of believing or
accepting this for their children, which confer the benefit of visible
Churchmembership. Yea, it is fully proved before, that if there were such a
promise and precept, yet these would not actually make infants visible
Churchmembers. 7. It is not true that the relation of visible Churchmembership
essentially contains a right to the great benefit of Gods sovereignty over
men, Christ's headship, and that favor, protection, provision, and other
blessings, which are due from such a powerful and gracious Sovereign to such
subjects, and from such a head to his members. For (to omit the unfi^ness of
the expression of [right to the great benefits of Gods sovereignty over men]
which contains these two fond conceits. 1. That great benefits are included in
Gods sovereignty over men, whereas the sovereignty of God includes not any
benefit but his own greatness, he is sovereign over the reprobate men and
Angels as well as the elect, and yet they have no benefit, yea his sovereignty
is showed in their reprobation as well as the election of the other. 2. That
visible Churchmembers have a right to the great benefit of Gods sovereignty
over men, whereas what benefit soever it be yet right is not to us by visible
Churchmembership) it is most false that that relation either constitutive or
consecutive, does essentially contain that right. For neither does the term
formally import any right at all, but a manner of being or state with relation
as I have before distinctly declared; nor does that right inseparably accrue to
such visible Churchmembers. There are and may be visible Churchmembers, who
have not that right; and there are who have that right, and are not visible
Churchmembers. 8. Nor is it true that the relation essentially includes a
right to the members station, and to the inseparable benefits thereof. For
though the station in the body be included, yet not a right to it, yea the
actual station is often times without right, which I think is sufficiently proved
by Mr. B. himself in his dispute against Mr. Blake Sect. 39. asserting a
dogmatical faith entitling to baptism. 9. That though visible membership be by
Gods gift, and this is to be by signification of Gods will, yet it is not
necessary it should be by any promise or declaration which may be termed moral
or political, since the event it self is a signification of Gods will and of his
gift. 10. That if Churchmembership be contracted by a mutual consent and
covenant as Mr. B. sets down, 1. only the elect can be visible Churchmembers,
for to them only God has covenanted to be their God, or Christ their Savior.
2. Infants are not visible Churchmembers, for they neither Covenant, nor by any
intimation in Scripture is it showed or can be, that the parents or others
obedience to God in Christ acknowledged or promised, is virtually or
reputatively by any law of God taken for the infants Covenant or consent.
Lastly, this law which Mr. B. here sets down concerning the duty of the
parents, is not that law or ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership,
which Mr. B. asserts to be unrepealed For the law and ordinance of infants
visible Churchmembership is not a precept of what another shall do, but what
they shall have, not of what in duty a person is bound to, but of what God does
give and grant. And therefore all this tedious discourse of Mr. B. is but
delusory, since instead of a law and ordinance determining that infants shall be
visible Churchmembers, he assigns another thing a precept of a duty, and
thinks if I prove not it repealed* I prove not the law and ordinance of another
thing repealed.

Mr B. adds. As for the texts you cite, Deuteronomy. 4.34. and Levit. 20.24, 26. 1
King. 8.53. Isai. 43.1. In Deuteronomy. 4. is mentioned not the moral act of God by
which he made them his people or took them for his own, and founded the
relation: but the natural a^^ions whereby he rescued them from the Egyptian
bondage and took them to himself or for his use, service, and honor out of
that land. But I think sure they were his people, and all their infants were
Churchmembers before that taking by virtue of a former Covenant-taking.

Answ. The text expresses that act of God whereby he took the Jews for his
people, and consequently whereby he founded the relation of Churchmembers, and
if this act were a natural act, then it follows (contrary to Mr. Bs. conceits)
that a natural act may be it by which God takes a people to him, which is the
Scripture phrase whereby is signified his making them his Church. If they were
his people before, and all their infants Churchmembers, yet they might be made
his people by repeated, continued, or new acts making or taking, noting a
beginning or continuance or completing of the estate they had formerly. If they
were by virtue of a former Covenant-taking, yet I think Mr. B. cannot show
before that time a mutual Covenant-taking, such as he said before the relation
of Churchmembership is contracted by.

He adds. As to Levit. 20. God did perform a twofold work of separation for
Israel. 1. By his Covenant and their entering Covenant with him. 2. By local
separation of their bodies from others. It was the first that made them his
people, and Churchmembers, and not the last: the last was only a favorable
dealing with them as his beloved. The same I say to the other two texts. Sure
you cannot think that corporal separation makes a Churchmember. What if an
Egyptian that had no part in the Covenant had past out with the Israelites, and
got with them through the Red Sea, do you think he had been therefore a
Churchmember? Suppose God had made no promise or Covenant with Abraham or his
seed, but only taken them out of Chaldea into Canaan, and thence into Egypt,
and thence into the Wilderness, and thence into Canaan again: Do you think this
much had made them Church Members? Then if the Turks conquer Greece, or the
Tartarians conquer China, they are become Churchmembers, because this seems as
great a temporal prosperity at least. And I think it^s past doubt, that Lot was
a Churchmember in the midst of Sodom, and the Israelites in Egypt before they
were brought out, as truly as after.

Answ. I grant that they were, though not so completed, when they had not
liberty to sacrifice to God, nor to keep any feast, and perform other worship
to God as when they were brought out, unto which the texts refer the severing
of the Israelites from other people that they should be Gods, although I did
not in my Letter restrain it to that local separation (which yet the Scripture
with me chiefly refers it to) but also to the bringing them into the bond of
the Covenant at Mount Sinai, giving them Laws, settling their Priesthood,
Tabernacle, Army, Government, inheritance. If the Turks or Tartars had such a
local separation as I describe, they had been Churchmembers. The Egyptians that
came out of Egypt with the Israelites, were Churchmembers with the Israelites
they becoming Proselytes. If God had made no promise or Covenant with Abraham
or his seed, but only taken them out of Chaldea into Canaan, and withal made
known his will concerning his grace in Christ, given them Laws, and set up his
worship among them, they had been Churchmembers. According to Mr. Bs. own
arguings, the promise or Covenant with Abraham and his seed made them not
Churchmembers, for they were Churchmembers before. The Covenant Genesis 17. was
not a mutual Covenant, which is that by which according to Mr. B. visible
Churchmembership is contracted. The texts that I allege, do sufficiently prove
the people of Israel were taken to be Gods people by such a transeunt fact as I
describe, and consequently the infants visible Church Members, as part of that
people, without the promise to believers and their seed to be their God, on
condition of the parents accepting the mercy offered, and re-engaging them to
God, which Mr. B makes the sole efficient of their holiness or visible
Churchmembership, as is showed before. He proceeds.

As to Genesis 12.1. Acts 7.2. Nehem. 9.7. which you also cite, as there is not
one of them that gives the least intimation that Infant-Churchmembership then
began, so I shall farther enquire anon, whether they contain any Covenant or
promise.

Answ. They do each of them plainly show the beginning of the taking of the
Hebrews for Gods people, by severing them from Idolaters, and forming them into
a Chruch, and consequently of the Churchmembership which infants had in that
people or nation. For the texts do all expressly tell how God severed Abram from
the Chaldees, how he made his house his Church, promising to increase and to
settle it, and neither Moses, nor the Levites, nor Stephan, do go higher in the
narration of Gods calling of the Hebrews to be his people And I think it safest
to go no higher then the Scripture. What Mr. B. adds after, shall have answer
in its place.

He adds. So Exodus 19.4, 5. has no word that gives the least intimation that
God by that act of taking them out of Egypt, did make Israel a Church, or the
infants or any others, members of it: But only that by fulfilling a former
promise in the deliverance of a people formerly his own, he lays further
obligations to duty on them by redoubling his mercies. The same I say of Levit.
11.45. Nehem. 1.10. I will not believe yet, but that you believe your self,
that the Israelites and their infants were as truly Churchmembers before, as
after their deliverance out of Egypt. And me thinks the texts you cite might
put it out of doubt. What if God say, Hos. 11.1. [When Israel was a child I
loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt.] Is it easy hence to prove, that
calling him out of Egypt did make him his son that was none before: or to prove
that Israel was Gods son before he called him out of Egypt. If you should
maintain the former, I might expect that you should say the like of Christ
himself, to whom the Evangelist applies this text, and so you may prove as
fairly, That Christ was none of Gods son till he was called out of Egypt, but
was made his son by that call. Certainly the Text terms him Gods son that was
called, as being so before that call. By this time I am well content that any
waking man do compare your doctrine and mine, and try whether it be a Transeunt
fact, or a Law and Covenant, that made infants and all others Churchmembers:
and if they do not admire, that ever a learned man should harbor such a
conceit as yours, and that ever a godly man should build such a weight on it,
and go so far on such a ground, yea and that ever ordinary godly people should
be so blinded with such palpable non sense or absurdities, then let them still
follow you in the dark; for I expect not that reason should recover them.

Answ. My conceits were and are still, that infants were only visible
Churchmembers in the Church of the Hebrews or Congregation of Israel, and that
they were such not apart by themselves, but as they were a part of that people
which God took for his Church, which made a peculiar Commonwealth and Chureh to
God consisting of the same persons. This God did not by a promise to be God to
the faithful and their seed as the sole efficient, and a precept of the parents
to accept of this offered mercy, and to dedicate them, and re-engage them to
God, as Mr. B. conceives, but by a transeunt fact containing many acts of Gods
providence whereby they were severed from other people, and appropriate to God.
The prime act of Gods providence whereby God brought this to pass, was Gods
calling of Abram out of U^, whereby he severed them from idolaters, and by
degrees establ^shed his worship in Abraham's house, upon which followed a long
tract of providence, which I mentioned as tending to the same end: And this
calling of Abram I refer the beginning of that people and Church to, and I
think I follow therein the Scriptures. The other chief act of providence was
Gods calling of Israel out of Egypt, wherein I comprehend all the acts
mentioned by me in my Letter which followed, by which I said it was completed,
and to that end I alleged many (as I conc^i^e) express texts, not to prove that
they then began to be Gods people (as Mr. B. contrary to my plain words
insinuates) but to prove that then they were completed, that is, completely
severed from other people* and formed into a Church or Commonwealth, with
Laws, distribution of Offices, order, and other things requisite thereunto,
which they had not before. And thus I interpret their bringing to God, Exodus
19.4. the bringing them up out of the land of Egypt to be their God Levit.
11.45. their redeeming to be his people Nehem. 1.10. their calling out of
Egypt Hos. 11.1. That is, from a miserable state among idolatrous oppressors,
to be a people of themselves in a complete state of liberty under Gods rule,
which I conceive described by Ezech. chapter 16. under the similitude of a child
cast out, relieved and educated. If Mr. B. can show any nonsense, or absurdity
herein, it is surely that which the plain Scripture affords, or else I am in a
dream; and if Mr. B. be awake, I think he may epsy nonsense and absurdity
manifold in his conceit of visible Churchmembership as a right to a benefit, of
such a Covenant, and Condition, and Precept, which he imagines to confer it. I
am willing Mr. Bs. Doctrine and mine be compared, though I lay so little
weight on this point, that I think if I be mistaken, neither is Mr. Bs. cause
gained, nor mine lost. I would have none follow me in the dark, nor would I
have men befooled by Mr. Bs. misrepresentations of me, and others, much less by
his frivolous Rhetoric, in which he discovers a great deal of prejudice,
rashness, confidence, and intemperate zeal, with which I think him so drunken,
that I doubt whether reason will recover him, till some providence of God bring
him to see his folly; which I think will much appear in that which follows, on
which nevertheless I conceive he builds the main or whole of his Cause of
Infants visible Churchmembership.

SECT. LVII. Mr. Bs. Law of Infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, is not
proved from Genesis 1.26, 27, 28. or Genesis 3.15.
I Come now, says Mr. B. to the 8 th. Qu. that is to speak to the point which
you propounded. You urge me to cite to you the particular texts that contain
this Law, Ordinance, Precept, or Covenant. To which I answer thus. 1. There are
two sorts of Laws; one which fir^^ make a duty; the other which suppose it so
made, and do only call for obedience* and excite thereto, or prescribe
somewhat as a means in order thereunto. If I could she^ you no written law or
promise as first constituting the duty, or granting the privilege of
Churchmembership, it were no^ the least disparagement to my cause, as long as I
can show you those following laws which presuppose this. You know the Church of
God did live about 2000. years without any written law that we know of: Where
then was Gods will manif^sted about such things as this, but in tradition and
nature? If Moses then at the end of this 2000. years did find this tradition
and find all the infants of Church Members in possession of this benefit, then
what need he make a new law about it? or why should God pr^^ise it as a new
thing? I confess if I should find by any new law or promise that it did begin
but in Moses days, I should think it some abatement of the strength of my cause
(though yet I think there would enough remain.) 2. There are (yet higher) two
sorts of laws: the one for the constitution of the Commonwealth it self, the
other for the administration or government of it when it is so constituted. The
former are called by some, Fundamental Laws as laying the frame and form of the
Commonwealth, and the quality of the materials, etc. I think indeed, that as
constitutive of the form of the Commonwealth, these are scarce preperly called
Laws; though as they look forward, obliging to duty, and prohibiting
alteration, they may. But if they be not laws, they are somewhat higher, and
lay the ground of all laws and obedience, and so are laws eminenter and
vi^^ualiter, though not actually and formally: And in our case, as this
constitution did subject us to God, making it our duty ever after to obey him;
so does it oblige us to acknowledge that subjection. And the very constitution
of the Church is an act of high beneficence, and performed by the fundamental
grant or Covenant* Now if this Covenant and constitution could not expressly be
showed in writing, it were no diminution of the authority of it, seeing among
men Fundamentals are seldom written, and when they are, it is only as laws
obliging the subject to maintain and adhere to the first constitution. As long
therefore as we can prove that it is Gods will that successively infants should
be Churchmembers, it no whit invalidates the cause if we could not show the
original constitution in writing. Yet somewhat we shall attempt. 3. We have
full proof of infants Churchmembership by laws and Covenants concerning it,
ever since the time that there was a written word of God: and that is
sufficient, if we could fetch it no higher. Having premised this, I come nearer
to the Question.

Answ. Had Mr. B. meant fairly, and not either to prepossess the Reader with
prejudice against me, or weary him before he should come to the point, he had
begun with this question: In the entrance to which he tediously sets down some
postulata, which do show, that we are not to expect any plain Scripture proof
of a Law or Ordinance of Infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, which he
so cracks of as to entitle his Book as if he would bring such. But I shall let
pass his postulata, and attend to his proofs.

The first institution, says Mr. B. of infants Churchmembership de jure upon
supposition of their existence, was in Gods first constitution of the Republic
of the World, when he became man's governor, and determined of his subjects,
and members of the Commonwealth: Which Republic being sacred, and devoted to
Gods worship and service, was truly a Church of which God was head. This was
performed by the first Law and Covenant made either in or upon man's creation,
That such a Covenant or promise of felicity was made by God to innocent man,
almost all Divines agree: But because it is rather implied then expressed in
Moses brief History, some few cavillers do therefore contradict us. But 1. the
threatening of death for sin, seems to imply a promise of life if he sinned not.
2. And the New Testament affords us diverse passages that yet plainlier prove
it, which to you I need not recite. But whether this promise of life were
natural (as the threatening of death was,) or only positive and more arbitrary,
Divines are not agreed among themselves, Those that say it was free and
positive, give this reason, That God could not naturally be obliged to bless or
felicitate the most innocent or perfect creature, nor any creature merit of
God. Those that think it natural as the threatening was, say, It Is true that God
could not be properly be obliged, because he is under no law, no more is he
obliged to punish* but only man obliged to suffer if he inflict it: And it is
true that man cannot strictly merit of God. But yet, say they, as man may have
a natural aptitude for such felicity, so God has a natural propensity to do
good according to the capacity of the subject, and his works do oblige him
(improperly) in point of fidelity and immutability as well as his word. So that
their reasons are these following. 1. Because God is as naturally prone to do
good to the good, as to do evil to the evil, that is, to reward as to
punishment, as his name proclaimed to Moses, Exodus 34. shows. 2. Because God
making man capable of a higher felicity, and principling him with inclinations
thereto, and giving him desires, love, and other affections for that blessed
end, even the everlasting fruition of God, therefore they say, God did in this
frame of his nature give him ground to expect such a felicity; if he sinned
not. For else all these inclinations and affections should have been in vain:
But God made not so noble a creature with vain inclinations and affections to
act fallaciously and falsely. Also Gods works would not be harmonical: So that
as Gods promise is but a sign of his will obliging him improperly in point of
fidelity and immutability, so, say they, the nature of man was a sign of Gods
will so far engaging him: So that as he could not let sin go unpunished without
some breach in the harmony of his sapiential frame of administration, no more
could he deny to perfect man the object of those desires which he formed in
him. So that although he might have made man such a creature as should not
necessary be punished for evil, or rewarded for good, that is, he might have
made him not a man; yet having so made him, it is necessary that he be governed
as a man in regard of felicity as well as penalty. 3. Our Philosophers and
Divines do commonly prove the immortality of the soul from it is natural
inclinations to God and eternal felicity. And if the immortality may be so
proved from it^s nature, then also it is felicity in case of righteousness. I
interpose not my self as a Judge in this controversy of Divines, but I have
mentioned it to the end which I shall now express. 1. It is most certain,
whether the reward or promise be natural or positive, that such a state of
felicity man was either in or in the way to, or in part and the way to more.
And i^'s most certain, that man was made holy, devoted to God, and fit for his
service, and that in this estate according to the law of his creation, he was
to increase and multiply: It Is most certain therefore, that accor- to the first
law of nature, infants should have been Churchmembers. 2. But if their opinion
hold, that make the reward grounded on the law of nature, and not on a mere
positive law, (and you see the reasons are not contemptible,) then the argument
would be yet more advantageous. 3. But how ever it be of the title to glory or
eternity, it is most certain, that according to the very law of nature infants
were to have been Churchmembers if man had stood. The first text therefore that
I cite for infants Churchmembership, as expressing its original de jure, is
Genesis 1.26, 27, 28. [ So God created man in his own image -- And God blessed
them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the
earth.] Here you see by the law of nature infants were to have been born in
Gods image and in innocence, and so Churchmembers. And note, that the first
blessing that God pronounces on mankind, is, that they propagate children in
their own estate, to be as the parents were, even in Gods image.

Answ. 1. If this prove their Churchmembership, it proves not their visible
Churchmembership, of which only is the question. 2. If it prove a law or
ordinance, yet it proves not such a law or ordinance as is in question, which
is not a law or ordinance de jure, but de eventu, that so it shall be, or they
shall be so accounted. For such a law or ordinance of their visible
Churchmembership only can infer their admission as visible Churchmembers, they
being to be actually visible Churchmembers before admission, according to Mr.
Bs. own dictates, and therefore not de jure only* such. 3. If it did prove
such a law or ordinance, yet it proves it not to be by such a promise and
precept as Mr. B* asserts. 4. If it did, yet it only proves it of the Church
by nature, which has a great difference from the Church by grace, this being
only by election and calling, not by birth. 5. If this law or ordinance be
unrepealed, then it is in force, and according to the law of nature invariable
that man be born without sin. For man is born according to the law of
procreation, Genesis 1.28. and if this were the law of nature, that the first
blessing that God pronounces on mankind, is, that they propagate children in
their own estate to be as the parents were, even in Gods image; then still the
law of nature continues, and so there is no original sin; or it is repealed,
and so it is not such a law as Mr. B. asserts. 6. The words [ God created,
blessed,] do note only a transeunt fact; and therefore, what ever Divines
imagine about Gods Covenant with man, this passage only tells what God did,
but mentions no such law or ordinance by promise or precept as Mr. B.
conceives, and therefore it is manifestly impertinent to his purpose. Let Us
view the next and main Text.

The next institution, says Mr. B. of infants Churchmembership, was at the
first proclamation of grace to fallen man, or in the first promise of redemption
to sinners, in Genesis 3.15. [ And I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel.] I will prove that this fundamental Covenant of grace or
promise does declare it to be the will of God that infants should be
Churchmembers: And to this end, let us first consider what the words expressly
contain, and then what light may be fetched from other Texts to illustrate them.
It being a known rule, that an Expositor must not turn universals into
singulars or particulars, nor restrain and limit the Scripture generals, where
the word it self or the nature of the subject does not limit them. I may well
conclude that these things following are comprehended in this fundamental
promise. 1. That the Devil having played the enemy to mankind, and brought them
into this sin and misery, God would not leave them remediless, nor to that
total voluntary subjection to him as he ^^ght have done: But in grace (...)
undeserved mercy would engage them in a war against him, in which they that
con^uered should bruise his head. 2. That in this war the Lord Jesus Christ,
the principal seed, is promised to be our General, whose perfect nature should
contain, and his perfect life express a perfect enmity against Satan, and who
should make a perfect conquest over him. 3. The Lord Jesus is promised to do
this work as the wom^ns seed, and so as conceived of her, and born by her, and
so as an infant first, before he comes to ripeness of age. So that here an
infant of the woman is promised to be the General of this Army, and Head of the
Church. This is most evident: By which God does sanctify the humane birth, and
the infant state, and assure us that he does not exclude now that age from the
redeemed Church, which he admitted into the Church by the laws of creation. For
the first promise is of an infant born of the woman to be the Head of the
Church, and growing up to maturity, to do the works of a Head. Had God excluded
the infant state from the visible Church, he would not have made the Head first
an infant. Where note, 1. That Christ is the great exemplar of his Church; and
in things which he was capable o^, he did that first in his own body, which he
would after do in theirs. 2. That the Head is a Member, even the principal
Member, one of the two parts which constitute the whole. As the pars imp^rans
and pars subdita do constitute each Commonwealth. So that it an infant must be
a member eminently so called, then infants are not excluded from membership,
but are hereby clearly warranted to be members of a lower nature. If an infant
may be Sovereign, no doubt he may be a Subject. If an infant may be the chief
Prophet of the Church, then no doubt but infants may be Disciples. If you still
harp on the old str^ng, and say, They are no Disciples that learn not; you may
as well say, He is no Prophet that teaches not. And if you will openly deny
Christ in infancy to have been the Prophet of the Church, I will undertake to
prove the falsehood and vileness of that opinion, as soon as I know you own it.
The promise then of an infant Head, does declare Gods mind that he will have
infants members, because the head is the principal member.

Answ. The thing to be proved by Mr. B. is that there is a law or ordinance of
God unrepealed, that not only in the Church Jewish, but in the Christian
properly so called, the infants of believers, by virtue of Gods promise to be
the God of the faithful and their seed, and a precept to parents to accept of
the mercy offered and re-engage them to God, should be, and be taken to be
visible members. But that he takes upon him to prove, is, that it is the will
of God that infants should be Churchmembers, that he does not exclude now that
age from the redeemed Church, that he excluded not the infant state from the
visible Church, that it is his mind that he will have infant members; all which
we might grant, and yet Mr. Bs. law and ordinance not thereby proved. For
infants may be Churchmembers of the redeemed Church, and yet not of the visible
Church; and the infant state may be not excluded from the visible Church, and
yet there may be no law or ordinance for the inclusion of them; yea, there may
be a law or ordinance for inclusion of them, and yet none for including them in
the visible Church Christian. Nor is his proof of any validity: For the
conse^uence holds not, Christ was by Gods promise Head of the Church in
infancy, therefore infants were by Gods will to be Churchmembers, or the infant
state is not excluded from the visible Church. It must rest upon some such
positions as these* In what age God promised Christ to be Head of the Church,
in that age his will was that persons should be visible Churchmembers; the
ordering of Christ's age is an exemplar to the Church, or rather rule for the
being and accounting of visible Churchmembers. Which are manifestly false, 1.
Because there is no such thing declared in Scripture, and therefore it is to be
taken as a mere fancy. 2. Because if these positions were true, 1. then an
infant in the mothers womb should be a visible Churchmember, because then
Christ was head of the Church* and as Mr* B. says, The Lord Jesus is promised
to do this work as the woman's seed, and so as conceived of her: 2. Then an old
man should not be a member of the visible Church, because Christ in the days of
his flesh was not an old man; which are both absurd. And for the antecedent of
Mr. Bs. enthymeme, though I deny not that Christ in infancy was Head of the
Church, nor that he was the Prophet of his Church in infancy, understanding it
of his being the Prophet habitually and by designation, nor that he in some
respect, to wit, of rule and protection, the Head of the visible Church, even
of that part which is not elect: Yet 1. I deny that in respect of that union
which makes any members of his body in the Scripture acception, which is by his
spirit, he is head of that part of the visible Church which is not elect; nor
can he be said in this respect and after the Scripture speech to be Head of the
visible Church as visible, but only in respect of that part which is
invisible, to wit, the true believers* or elect persons, who alone are
univocally members of Christ the Head, as the Doctrine of Protestant writers a
voweth. Dr. Rainold, these. 4.. 26. Mali nulla corporis Christi pars sunt. Dr.
Field, of the Church, book 1. ch 2. The wicked are neither parts nor members of
the mystical body of Christ. Bellarmin himself de Eccl milit. c. 9. makes them
members not living, nor true according to the essence of members, but dead, and
as ill humors in the body, and in respect of some outward use Christ makes of
them. 2. Nor do I well know how to make a construction of this speech of Mr. B.
[that the Lord Jesus is promised, Gen 3.15. to do this work of bruising the
Serpents head, or conquering the Devil as the woman's seed, and so as conceived
of her, and born by her, and so as an infant first before he comes to ripeness
of age;] according to which it may be true. For though I grant the man Christ
Jesus who did this work to have been an infant first, yet I do not think it
true that he did it as the woman's seed, according to humane nature only, but
also according to his Divine, Heb 9.14. nor what he did was done in infancy,
but at ripe age: For he bruised the Serpents head and conquered the Devil by
his death, Heb. 2.14 which was not in infancy, but at ripe age. 3. Nor do I
understand how it is true that [ by Christ's birth and infancy God does
sanctify the humane birth and the infant state:] For though I grant children
born and infants are sanctified by God through Christ, who was born and an
infant; yet that the humane birth and the infant state should be sanctified
thereby, seems not true* for then humane birth and infancy should be holy in
any infants o^ persons born, and so the birth of a bastard should be holy, and
his infancy holy, which I need not show how absurd it is. 4. Nor do I conceive
any truth, but gross falsehood in that speech, [ Had God excluded the infant
state from the visible Church, he would not have made the head first an
infant:] For this does suppose, that either this was the only end or chief end
without which God had not made Christ an infant, and consequently this was more
in Gods eye then the saving of sinners for which Christ came into the world, or
the fulfilling of his promise, that a child should be born, a son should be
given to us; and would infer, that they which hold infants not visible
Churchmembers, must deny Christ to have been an infant. 5. Nor do I know that
to be true, [ that in things which Christ was capable of, he did that first in
his own body, which he would after do in the bodies of his Church:] For he
would and did innumerable things in the bodies of his Church, as to marry,
beget children, etc. which he did not in his own body first, though he was
capable of them. 6. I deny that Christ as man was in infancy the Prophet of his
Church visibly, and in actu exercito. Let Mr. B. when he will assault it, there
will appear in his contradiction vileness and manifold falsehood, none in this
opinion. And for his inference, if an infant may be the chief Prophet of the
Church then no doubt but infants may be Disciples, I grant both, and yet deny
that Christ was visibly, audibly, in actu exercito in his infancy in his humane
nature the Prophet of his Church, or that any infants are actually Disciples
visibly, till they hear the Gospel and profess the faith; nor am I ashamed to
aver, that he is no Prophet that prophesies not, that they are no Disciples
that learn not. But Mr. B. proceeds.

4. Says he, As the war is here proclaimed, and the General or chief Commander
constituted, so next here is a natural enmity put into the whole seed of the
woman, or humane race, against the whole seed of the serpent that then was, or
the Diabolical nature. This is plain both in the text, and in the experience of
the fulfilling of it As in the instrumental serpent, it is the whole serpentine
nature, that has an enmity to the humane nature, and the whole humane nature
to the serpentine nature; they being venomous to us, and we abhorring them as
venomous, and as such as our lives are in danger of: so is it the whole humane
nature that is at enmity to the Diabolical nature* Vide Muscul. Calvin. Luther.
in locum. All men have naturally as great an abhorrence of the Devil, as of a
serpent, they apprehend him to be their enemy, they abhor the very name and
remembrance of him: If they do but dream of him it terrifieth them, they are
afraid of seeing him in any apparition. If they know any temptation to be from
him, so far they dislike it and abhor it, though for the thing presented they
may cherish it. This is not special saving grace, but this is a great advantage
to the work of special grace, and to our more effectual resisting of
temptations, and entertaining the help that is offered us against them, when
our very natures have an enmity to the diabolical nature: we now look on him as
having the power of death as Gods executioner and our destroyer and malicious
adversary. And if there be any Witch or other wicked person that has
contracted such familiarity and amity with him, as that this natural enmity is
thereby overcome, that proves not that it was not naturally there, but that
they by greater wickedness are grown so far unnatural. 5. As this enmity is
established in the nature of mankind against the diabolical nature, so is
there a further enmity legally proclaimed against the diabolical pravity,
malignity, and works. Vide Pareum in locum. God will put an enmity by his Laws
(both natural and positive) making it the duty of mankind to take Satan for
their enemy; to resist, and use him as an enemy, and fight against him and
abhor his works, and so to list themselves under the General that fights
against him, to take his colors, and to be of his Army: And this being spoken
of the common world of mankind, and not only of the elect (for it is not they
only that are obliged to this hostility and warfare) belongs to each one
according to their capacities: and therefore infants being at the parents
dis^ose, it is they that are to list them in this army against the enemy of
mankind, of which more anon. 6. A third and hig^er enmity is yet here
comprehended, and that is an habitual or dispositive enmity against the
diabolical malignity pravity and works, which may be called [natural] as it is
the bent or bias of our new nature. This God gives only to his chosen, and
not to all. And it contains not only their consent to list themselves in his
army against satan, but specially and properly a hatred to him as the Prince of
unrighteousness, and a cordial resolution to fight against him and his wor^s
universally, to the death, with a complacency in God and his service and
soldiers. H^re take a short prospect of the mysterious blessed Trinity. As God
is one in three, and in his entity has unity, verity, and goodness, and in his
blessed nature has posse, scire, velle, power, wisdom, and love, so as from
these is he related both to his created and redeemed rational creatures, as
absolute proprietary, as sovereign ruler, and as most gracious benefactour: As
Lord of our nature he has put the foresaid enmity between the humane nature
and the Diabolical: As sovereign Ruler, he has by legislation imposed on us a
further enmity as our duty, that we should be listed in his army, profess open
hostility against satan, and fight against him to the death. As Benefactor, he
gives special grace to do this, to his chosen. As he is Lord of all, so the
first is done on the natures of all: As he is Rector of all, but not by the
same Laws (as to positives) so he obliges all to this hostility, but not all
as he does those that hear the Gospel. As he is Benefactor he does with his own
as he list, and makes a difference. If any say that it is the same enmity that
is here said to be put in all, and therefore the same persons in which it is
put. I answer 1. there is no proof of either. A general command or promise to a
community, may signify a difference of duties or gifts to that community,
though that difference be not expressed: For the nature of the subject may
prove it. And 2. experience of the fulfilling of this promise or covenant,
proves the difference before mentioned. And it is well known, 1. That Moses is
so concise in the History of these matters. 2. And that the mystery of grace
was to be opened by degrees, and so but darkly at the first, that it is no
wonder if we find the whole sum of the Gospel here coucht-up in so narrow a
room, and if each particular be not largely laid open before our eyes. 7. That
we may certainly know that this promise speaks not only of the enmity that
Christ himself should have to satan, and does not engage a General without an
army, God does here expressly mention the woman her self, saying [ I will put
enmity between thee and the woman*] so that as she stood in a threefold
respect; she is here her self possessed with this threefold enmity. 1. As she
is the root of humane nature, from whence all mankind must spring, she is
possessed with the natural enmity to the diabolical nature, and this to be
naturally convayed or propagated* 2. As she was the root of the great Republic
of the world, or that rational society which God as Rector would sapientially
govern, and her self with her husband (who no doubt was also included in the
promise) were the whole then existent race of mankind, so did she receive a
legal enmity of obligation, which she was traditionally to deliver down to all
her posterity, being her self hereby obliged to list her self and all her
infant progeny in the Redeemers army, against the proclaimed enemy, and to
teach her posterity to do the like: For thus obligatory precepts must be
brought down. 3. As she was one of the chosen favorites of God, she received
the habitual enmity of sanctification: And this is not in her power to
propagate, though sh^e may use some means that are appointed thereto, and
whether a promise of any such thing be made to her seed on the use of such
means, I will not now stand to discuss. 8. It is not all that are possessed
with the nat^ra^ enmity against the Devil himself that are the Church of
Christ: For this is but a common preparative which is in all: Nor is it all
that are obliged to the further enmity against the works of satan: But all that
on that obligation are duly listed in Christ's army against satan (by the
obliged person) are visible members: and all that are by sanctification at a
hearty enmity (habitual or actual) with the Kingdom of satan, are members of
the Church called mystical or invisible. This I put as granted. 9. Those that
violate this fundamental obligation, and to their natural pravity shall add a
fighting against Christ and his Kingdom for Satan and his Kingdom, are become
themselves the seed of the Serpent. And though they had the natural enmity with
the rest of mankind in general against Satan, yet have they therewithal the
habitual enmity against Christ. This much I suppose as out of controversy. But
whether also the first original corrupted nature it self (before any sin
against recovering grace) did contain an habitual enmity against the Kingdom
of the Redeemer? or whether the sins of later parents may propaga^e this as an
addi^ional corruption in our nature, I will not now stand to discuss. Only as
to our present business, it*s certain that the general natural enmity to Satan,
may consist with an habitual friendship* to his ways and cause. And though as
men they may have the first common advantage of nature, and as subjects de jure
may be under the common obligation, yea, and as listed in Christ's Army may have
man of its privileges; yet for the enmity of disposition to Christ, they may
be under a greater curse. 10. As it is certain, that it is not only Christ
himself that is here made the object of this promise, and is here called [ the
seed of the woman,] (as is before proved, and may be more, and is commonly
granted;) so it is to be noted, that those others in whom this enmity are put,
are called here [ the seed of the woman,] and not the seed of Christ (though
the chief of them are his seed.) And so though the promise is made to none but
the the woman's seed, and no exception put in against infants, or any age of all
her seed: Till you can prove that infants are none of her seed, we must take
this fundamental promise to extend to infants, and that very plainly, without
using any violence with the Text.

Answ. This tedious discourse of Mr. B. is indeed serpenti^e with winding in
and out, wrigling and wresting the Text; one while it is a promise, another
while a precept; sometimes meant of one sort of enmity, sometimes of another;
sometimes the woman under one consideration, sometimes under another; sometimes
the seed of the woman comprehend* all the natural seed, sometime only one
kind: with so many ambiguous speeches, and unproved dictates, and inconsequent
inferences, that I know not what better to term it then the way of a serpent on
a rock, which the Wise man said was too wonderful for him, and one of the
things he knew not, Prove. 30.20, 21. And sure when I yield to acknowledge this
discourse as a convincing proof of the law and ordinance of infants visible
Churchmembership unrepealed, which Mr. B. asserts, I shall deliver my self as a
Pupil to him, take him for an infallible Oracle, and profess blind obedience.
But let me see what I can make of this Ridd^e. The sum of it, so far as I can
collect, is this: Here is an enmity proclaimed legally, against the Devils
pravity, malignity, and works; h^reby all the seed natural of the woman are
obliged to list themselves in Christ's Army, or the woman as a believer is to
list all her infant progeny in the Redeemers Army; infants being part of her
seed, and no exception put in against infants, or any age of all her seed, this
fundamental promise extends to them, and all duly listed are visible
Churchmembers: Ergo, here is the fundamental law or ordinance for infants
visible Churchmembership by promise and precept unrepealed. To discern how
silly and insipid these arguings are (if I may use ^r. Bs. own phrase) let us
grant him here is a promise and precept implied, and inquire what listing is
here enjoined, of whom, by whom, and how far this makes the listed visible
Churchmembers. The listing is not here expressed, but in his book of Baptism, p.
14. he says, They are first made Disciples, and then solemnly admitted,
e^tred, or listed by baptism. P. 24 As every one that must be admitted solemnly
into the Army, must be admitted by listing, as the solemn engaging s^gne; so
every one that has right to be solemly admitted into the visible Church, must
ordinarily be admitted by baptism, Christ's listing engaging sign. The persons
to be listed, are according to Mr. B. mankind, the woman and her seed, even
infants, no exception being put in against infants, or any age of her seed. The
persons that are to list are each man, for he says, It is the duty of mankind
to list themselves, infants being at the parents dispose it is they that are to
list them in Christ's army, and this listing (which he counts duly done) makes
infants visible Churchmembers. Concerning which, I grant that God does proclaim
here an enmity against the Diabolical pravi^y, malignity and works, and that it
is the duty of mankind to fight against satan, to join with Christ: For this
is no more but that God forbids sin, and it is our duty to resist ^t, and to
believe and follow Christ, and here is a fundamen^al promise, that they who do
so shall bruise the serpents head, or prevail against satan. Nor do I deny that
it is the duty of parents, yea of all men to do what lies in them to engage
persons, even i^fants to this war, provided they do it by ways allowed and
appointed, as by their prayers, vows to God, or the like. But it is utterly
false, 1. that there is any precept of listing by baptism here, for baptism is
a mere positive rite of the New Testament, not enjoined here. 2. That it is the
duty of all mankind to list themselves* For then it is their duty to baptize
themselves. 3. That it is the duty of the woman to list her self and all her
seed, For then she had been bound to baptize her self, and the children of
unbelievers as well as believers, Cains seed as well as Abels, and if it were
supposed that she had lived to this day, she had been bound to list all the
infants at least of the professed Infidels at this day; For if it were a
precept unrepealed, it must have bound her still. 4. That such a listing as Mr.
Bs. words import, is either duly done, or that the listed in that manner are
all visible Churchmembers. 5. That here is any fundamental promise made to
persons so listed. 6. That as listed in Christ's army in the manner Mr. B
conceives, infants have the privilege of Christ's soldiers. None of these
things denied by me, have a word of proof in all this p^olix discourse, nor do
I imagine any proof for them can be from this text, and therefore conceive his
discourse without proof, and like the dream of a sick man, or the dotage of a
fantastic. He adds.

11. Some learned men do use contemptible arguments to prove further, That the
sanctifying enmity is here promised* to the seed of the woman as her seed (I
mean those that go the way of Dr. Ward, Mr. Bedford, etc.) that is, that as the
two former sorts of enmity are put into all the seed of the woman (as is
explained) so the spiritual holy enmity promised to her seed as she is a
believer. 12. And some learned men do accordingly conclude, That the impiety of
parents may do much to hinder their children from that blessing more then by
original sin they were hindered, and therefore their faith may further them. Of
which though much may be said, I shall say no more, because I will not stand on
things so much questioned.

Answ. I might then well have omitted this as of no validity, but to show the
multiplicity of Paedobaptists errors.

He g^es on thus. I come next to prove from other parts of Scripture, That the
fundamental promise of Grace is thus to ^e interpreted as including infants. 1.
If the same Covenant of grace when it is more fully and clearly opened, do
expressly comprehend infants as to be Churchmembers, then is this fundamental
promise so to be understood (or then does this also comprehend them.) But the
antecedent is certain, therefore so is the consequent. The antecedent I prove
from the Covenant of grace made to Abraham the father of the faithful, which
comprehended infants for Churchmembers: The Covenant made with Abraham
comprehending infants, was the same with this in Genesis 3. but in some things
clearlier opened. Which is proved thus: Both these were the Covenant of grace
and free justification by faith in the Redeemer, therefore they were the same.
For there is but one such. If Abraham had some special promises additional to
the main Covenant, that makes not the Covenant of free justification by faith
to be diverse. That this in Genesis 3. is the promise or Covenant of grace and free
justification is not denied, that I know of. That the promise to Abraham was
the same, is evident from Romans 4.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 1. It is there expressly
manifest, that the Covenant whereof Circumcision was to Abraham the seal, was
the Covenant of free justification by faith; Circumcision it self being a seal
of the righteousness of Faith which Abraham had, yet being uncircumcised, that
he might be the Father of believers, etc. 2. Yea the promise that he should be
heir of the world was not made to Abraham or to his seed through the Law, bu^
through the righteousness of faith. Now it is certain that this Covenant sealed
by Circumcision and made to Abraham and his seed* did comprehend infants* The
consequence of the m^jor then i^ evident, that the same promise expressed more
concisely, is to be expounded by the same expressed more fully: And it is
acknowledged that the Gospel light and grace was to be manifest by certain
degrees.

Answ. That the fundamental promise of grace, Genesis 3.15. did include infants,
was never denied by me, and therefore Mr. B. does but waste paper, and abuse me
and his Readers by going about to prove it. This I deny, that it includes all
infants, or all infants of believers, and that any infant is made a visible
Churchmember by that promise as the next cause, or the sole efficient, which is
Mr. Bs. term: neither of these is proved by him. I grant that the Covenant to
Abraham was the Covenant of Evangelical grace, though mixed, as I have often
showed, and that it did include infants, and that they were Churchmembers, to
wit, of the invisible Church of the elect, I mean so many as the Covenant of
Evangelical grace was made to. I grant also that Abraham's infants in his house
were visible Churchmembers, but not by virtue of the Covenant barely as
Evangelical* but by virtue of the transeunt fact before asserted by me; and if
in any respect by virtue of the Covenant* it was by it as containing household
or civil promises, rather th^n Evangelical. So that although I deny that from
Romans 4.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. it is proved that Circumcision was a seal of the
Covenant, Gen 17. and that the promises, Genesis 17.4.5, 6, 8. were additional to
the main Covenant, and not as well the main Covenant as v. 7 yet I grant Mr.
Bs. conclusions which he here infers, that the promises, Genesis 3.15. and 17.7.
did comprehend infants, that there is but one Covenant of free justification by
faith in both places, that the one may explain the other that infants were from
the beginning Churchmembers, that is, members of the invisible Church of the
^lect* But this I deny, that this is true of all, or perha^s only of the
infants of believers, or that because they are of the invisible therefore they
are members of the visible Church, there being more required to make visible
Churchmembers, then election, the Covenant of grace, and parents faith. But Mr.
B. adds.

^. That the first fundamental promise is thus to be interpreted, I further
prove by Gods constant administration in the performance of it. Concerning
which I do make this challenge to you (with modesty and submission,) to prove
if you can, that there was ever one Churchmember that had infants born to him
while he was in that estate, from the beginning of the world to this day, whose
infants also were not Churchmembers? Except only the Anabaptists, who refuse
or deny the mercy, and so refuse to dedicate their infants in Baptism unto
Christ. And whether their infants be Churchmembers, I will not determine
affirmatively or negatively at this time. I do again urge you to it, that you
may not forget it; to prove to me, that ever there was one infant of a
Churchmember in the world, since the creation to this day, that was not a
Churchmember, (except the Anabaptists that refuse the mercy or deny it.)

Answ. Mr. B. undertakes to prove Gods constant administration, but instead of
proving sends me a challenge, and ho^ly urges me to answer it; which course
indeed is ridiculous to the intelligent, yet subdolous, as taking much with
shallow heads who know not the laws of Dispute, as if he got the better of me
if I did not answer it. But let such know, 1 That it is Mr. Bs. part now to
prove, mine only to answer. 2. That if I could not answer, either through
def^ct of reading, memory, histories in such matters, or such like cause; yet
this is no proof of Mr. Bs. assertion. 3. That I have no reason to answer Mr.
Bs. questions and challenges, but his arguments: 1. Because I find a mere
captious spirit in him, seeking advantage to himself from my words (which he
very seldom does rightly represent to the Reader) when he wants proof of his
assertions; as appears most evidently in this his answer to my Letter, in which
he has gathered almost half his answer (besides the business propounded) from
my writing to him. 2. That the understandings of men, even of Scholiers and
Learned men are so superficial, or so partial, that without ever examining, yea
or reading my writings, upon Mr. Bs. exclamations, and vile suggestions of me
and mine answers, they do most unrighteously, and like men that seek not the
truth, conclude on his side, scorn and speak evil of me and the cause I assert
(which is indeed the cause of Christ) of which I have much experience. 4.
Nevertheless I answer his challenge categorically thus* 1. No infant born of a
Churchmember was a visible Churchmember in the Christian Church, or any other
besides that of the Nation of the Hebrews, as I have proved before: And if we
must needs take up a fashion of disputing by challenges, I challenge Mr. B. to
show me one infant who was a visible Churchmember out of the Nation of the
Hebrews. ^. I conceive from Acts. 16.1. 2 Timothy 1.5. that Timothy was born of a
Churchmember, yet no Churchmember visible in infancy. Anabaptists refuse not
the mercy of visible Churchmembership, if God had offered it to their infants;
nor would they refuse to dedicate their infants in Baptism, if God had
commanded it: But they dare not challenge what God has not granted, nor
profane the Ordinance of Christ, by their altering it into that which he has
not appointed. Mr. B. goes on thus.

SECT. LVIII. Infants visible Churchmembership is not proved by the Law of
Nature
BEfore I proceed to any more Texts of Scripture, I will a little enquire into
the light or Law of Nature it self, and see what that ^aith to the point in
hand. And first we shall consider of the duty of dedicating infants to God in
Christ, and next of Gods acceptance of them, and entertaining them into that
estate. And the first is most evidently contained in the Law of Nature it self
(at least upon supposition that there be any hopes of Gods entertaining them;)
which I prove thus. 1. The law of Nature binds us to give to every one his
own due: But infants are Gods own due; Ergo, the law of Nature binds parents
to give them up to God. By [giving] here I mean not an alienation of propriety,
to make that to be Gods that was not so before; but an acknowledgement of his
right, with a free res^gnation and dedication of the infant to God, as his own;
for his use and service, when he is capable there^f. If you say, infants being
not capable of doing service, should not be devoted to it till they can do it;
I answer, they are capable at present of a legal obligation to future duty, and
also of the relation which follows that obligation, together with the honor
of a Churchmember (as the child of a Noble man is of his honors and title to
his inheritance) and many other mercies of the Covenant. And though Christ
according to his humanity was not capable of doing the works of a Mediator or
head of the Church in his infancy, yet for all that he must be head of the
Church then, and not (according to this arguing) stay till he were capable of
doing those works. And so is it with his members.

Answ. It is a bold attempt to undertake to prove a law or ordinance of infants
visible Churchmembership unrepealed from the law of Nature, when Churches are
only instituted, not by any law of Nature, and consequently there can be no
direction in the law of Nature who shall be visible Churchmembers, who not. Nor
could both those things Mr. B. considers be proved, to wit, the duty of
dedicating infants to God in Christ, and Gods acceptance of them, and
entertaining of them into that estate, i. e. of dedicated persons, prove them
visible Churchmembers: there is more required thereto, to wit, something
discernable by sense, by which they may be said to be part of Gods people. Yet
I shall examine his proofs The conclusion may be understood of giving up,
devoting, dedicating to God by prayer or vow; or else by an outward sign, such
as Circumcision or Baptism. This latter is not of the law of nature, being mere
instituted worship; the former may be granted, without any hurt to my cause.
Nevertheless I shall say something to the argument: Which has at least four
terms, and so is faulty in the form; and for the matter of it, the major is not
true without limitation. For the law of nature does not bind every man to give
to every one his own due, except it be that due which is due from the giver, or
it belongs to him to give. A private man is bound to pay his own debt, not to
pay every other man's debt to him to whom it is due. Now infants may be said to
be Gods due, either in respect of their persons, or their service. Infants in
infancy can do no service, nor does God require any service of them, and
therefore there is none due, and therefore no parents do or are bound by any
act of theirs for their infants service to give God his due of their infants
service. And for their persons, they are Gods due in that he may of right
dispose of them as he will, in life and death, health or sickness; and in this
respect parents have no way of giving God his due, but by acknowledging his
Sovereignty, and submitting to his will. Dedication to God for the future i^ ^o
giving of God his due from infants; it is neither the giving of God the due of
their persons, or their service: they are bound themselves when they come to
understanding to do it by themselves; and if they do it not, the parents
dedication cannot do it. I object not, that infants should not be devoted to to
God till they can do service; but that what ever it be, it is not the giving
God his own due from infants, nor does make them visible Churchmakers.

Mr. B. adds. 2. The law of nature binds all parents to do their best to
secure Gods right, and their childrens good, and to prevent their sin and
misery: But to engage them betimes to God by such a dedication, does tend to
secure Gods right, and their childrens good, and to prevent their sin and
misery: For they are under a double obligation, which they may be minded of
betimes, and which may hold them the more strongly to their duty, and
disadvantage the tempter that would draw them off from God.

Answ. To dedicate them by prayer, and thanksgiving, and vows to God, may tend
to these end^: But to do it by Baptism not required of God, secures not Gods
right, but abuses his name; nor does it tend to the childrens good, or prevent
their sin and misery. For neither is there promise of God that the parents
dedicating the child by Baptism shall have these effects, nor do these effects
follow ex opere operato, nor is there any obligation real put by infant baptism
on the person, though there may be a putative obligation thereby: But really
infant baptism is a disadvantage, 1. In that it is the occasion whereby they
take themselves to be Christians before they know what Christianity is, by which
means they are kept in vain presumption of their safe condition; and this
constant experience, and the acknowledgement of observing men does witness. 2.
They are kept back thereby from the true Baptism of Christ, which has had, and
would have a strong tie on men's consciences, if it were solemnly and in a right
manner performed as it should be. Surely a man's own engagement by himself, in
all probability must have a stronger operation then an engagement by another
for him, notwithstanding the fond conceits of Mr. Simon Ford, and Mr. John
Goodwin, of edification by infant baptism. He is a very rare bird that makes
any fruitful use of infant baptism, which neither has institution from God,
nor promise of blessing, and was never known by the infant, nor perhaps any
person living can tell him there was any such thing. Nor is there in this
respect the same reason of it and Circumcision, for Circumcision makes such an
impression on the body as keeps the memory of it, but by Baptism there is no
print on the body by which it and the obligation by it may be remembered.

3. Says he, The law of nature binds parents in love to their children to
enter them into the most honorable and profitable society, if they have but
leave so to do: But here parents have leave to enter them into the Church,
which i^ the most honorable and profitable society* Ergo. That they have
leave, is proved, 1. God never forbad any man in the world to do this
sincerely, (the wicked and unbelievers cannot do it sincerely*) and a not
forbidding is to be interpreted as leave in case of such partic^pation of
benefits: As all laws of men in doubtful cases are to be interpreted (...), in
the most favorable sense. So has Christ taught us to interpret his own: when
they speak of duty to God, they m^st be interpreted in the strictest sense:
When they speak of benefits to man, they must be interpreted in the most
favorable sense that they will hear.

Answ. Entering into the Church invisible is Gods only wo^k: Entering into the
Church visible Christian is by Bapti^m, Plain Scripture proof, etc. page 24. ^e
have neither precept nor example in Scripture, since Christ ordained Baptism,
of any other way of admitting visible members, but only by Baptism. Mr. Bs.
minor then here is this, that parents have leave to enter (which is all one
with admission) their children into the visible Church by Baptism, that is, to
baptize them. But this is false. For God has forbidden parents to bring their
infants to baptism, in that he has not appointed baptism for them (as is
proved at large in the 2d. part of this Review) much more to baptize them in
their own persons, according to Mr. Bs. hypotheses, plain Scrip proof, etc.
page 2^1. except they be Ministers. A not forbidding is not to be interpreted
as leave in this case: but a not commanding is a plain forbidding. Mr.
Collings, provoc. prove. chapter 5. No thing is lawful in the worship of God, but
what we have precept or president for; which who so denies, opens a door to all
Idolatry, and superstition, and will worship in the world. If the law of nature
bind parents to enter their children into the Church, then it is a law that
speaks of duty to God, not of benefit to man; for such laws contain grants of
something from God, not of what man is to do: Now if it be a law of duty, it
must according to Mr. Bs. own rule be interpreted in the strictest sense, which
is the right sense; they are bound to it as God appoints, and no otherwise. So
Mr. B. against Mr. Bl. page 80. I take Gods precept to be the ground of
Baptism, as it is officium, a duty, both as to the baptizer; and the baptized.
Mr. Ball reply ab^ut nine positions, p. 68. The Sacraments are of God, and we
must learn of God for what end and use they were ordained. But by the
institution of, Baptism recorded in Scripture, we have learned it belongs to
the faithful, to Disciples, to them that are called. Mr. B. mistakes when he
conceives of baptism as a benefit to which a man has right by promise or
Covenant grant: For though a benefit do follow to them that rightly do it, yet
it self is only a duty; and such a one as is only by institution, not by the
law of nature, nor belongs to pa^ents for children, but to each person for
himself. But Mr. B. goes on.

2. It is the more evident, that a not forbidding in such cases is to be taken
for leave, because God has put the principle of sell preservation, and
desiring our own welfare, and the welfare of our children so deeply in humane
nature, that he can no more lay it by then he can cease to be a reasonable
creature. And therefore he may lawfully actuate or exercise this natural
necessary principle of seeking his own or childrens real happiness, wherever
God does not restrain or prohibit him. We need no positive command to seek our
own or childrens happiness, but what is in the law of nature it self, and to
use this where God forbids not, if good be then to be found, cannot be
unlawful.

Answ. 1. Infant baptism tends not to the preservation, good, welfare, real
happiness of them; but to their hurt. 2. It requires a positive command, since
it is not of the law of nature. 3. It is forbidden, in that it is not
commanded. 4. There can be expected no blessing of God on it, since he has
promised none to it.

3. Says he, It is evident from what is said before (and elsewhere) that it is
more then a silent leave of infants Churchmembership that God has vouchsafed
us. For in the forementioned fundamental promise, explained more fully in after
times, God signified his will that so it should be. It cannot be denied, but
there is some hope at least given to them in the first promise, and that in the
general promise to the seed of the woman they are not excluded, there be no
excluding term. Upon so much encouragement and h^pe then it is the duty of
parents by the law of nature to enter their infants into the Covenant, and into
that society that partake of these hopes, and to list them into the Army of
Christ.

Answ. The point to be proved was, that parents have leave to enter their
children into the Church; but a leave of infa^ts Churchmembership vouchsafed of
God (if there be good sense in the expression) is another thing. Infants
Churchmembership is the infants state, not the parents act, and leave of it
intimates a willingness in the infant to be a Churchmember, to which God
vouchsafes leave. But whether there be sense or not in the expression, it is
not true that in the forementioned fundamental promise, explained more fully in
after times, God signified his will that infants should be visible
Churchmembers; nor is it true, that upon hope given in the first promise that
they are not excluded, is it the duty of parents (without a positive command)
by the law of nature to enter their infants into the Covenant, and into that
society that partake of those hopes, and to list them (by baptism) into the
Army of Christ. Hopes of what may be, is not a sufficient reason of baptizing a
person. Nor by these hopes is any more duty put on the parent, then an other,
who has the same hopes and may do it, as viz. a Midwife: Yea, by this argument
Midwives should be bound to baptize not only believe^s infants, but also all
infants, if it be so much for their good, welfare, preservation, real
happiness, and the law of nature ties them as well as parents to do what lies
in them to do them good upon such hopes and encouragement; and since they are in
their power as well as parents, yea before them, and they may list them into
Christ's army, enter them into Covenant and the Church, they are bound to do it.
Yea, considering that Mr. B. of Baptism part 2. ch 8. holds, that by Christ's
commission, Mat. 28.19. Disciples should immediately without delay be baptized
as soon as they are Disciples, and believers infants are Disciples as soon as
they are born, and none can do it so soon as Midwives, they ought to do it,
according to Mr. Bs. hypotheses, immediately upon their birth. Which will go
very far in justifying the Papists about their hasty baptism by Midwives.

Yet again says Mr. B. 4. It is the duty of Parents by the Law of Nature, to
accept of any allowed or offered benefit for their children. But the relation
of a member of Christ's Church or Army, is an allowed or offered benefit to
them, Ergo, etc. For the major, these principles in the law of nature do
contain it. 1. That the infant is not sui juris, but is at his parents dispose
in all things that are for his good. That the parents have power to oblige
their children to any future duty or suffering, that is certainly to their own
good: and so may enter them into covenants accordingly: And so far the will of
the Father is as it were the will of the child. 2. That it is unnaturally
sinful for a parent to refuse to do such a thing, when it is to the great
benefit of his own child. As if a Prince would offer Honors, and Lordships,
and Immunities to him and his heirs: if he will not accept this for his heirs,
but only for himself it is unnatural. Yea, if he will not oblige his heirs to
some small and reasonable conditions for the enjoying such benefits. For the
minor, that this relation is an allowed or offered benefit to infants is
manifested already, and more shall be.

Answ. I meant of visible members in the Christian Church properly so called,
this last speech is denied.

He goes on thus. And this leads me up to the second point, which I propounded
to consider of; whether by the light or law of nature we can prove that infants
should have the benefit of being Churchmembers, supposing it first known by
supernatural revelation, that parents are of that society, and how general the
promise is, and how gracious God is. And 1. it is certain to us by nature that
infants are capable of this benefit, if God deny it not, but will give it them
as well as the aged. 2. It is certain that they are actually members of all the
Commonwealths in the world ( perfect sed imperfecta membra) being secured from
violence by the laws, and capable of honors and right to inheritances, and of
being real subjects under obligations to future duties, if they survive. And
this shows that they are also capable of being Churchmembers, and that nature
reveals to us, that the infants case much follows the case of the parents,
especially in benefits. 3. Nature has actually taught most people on earth, so
far as I can learn, to repute their infants in the same religious society with
themselves, as well as in the same civil society. 4. Under the Covenant of
works (commonly so called) or the perfect rigorous law that God made with man
in his pure nature, the infants should have been in the Church, and a people
holy to God, if the parents had so continued themselves. And consider 1. that
holiness and righteousness were then the same things as now, and that in the
establishing of the way of propagation, God was no more obliged to order it so,
that the children of righteous parents should have been born with all the
perfections of their parents and enjoyed the same privileges, then he was
obliged in making the Covenant of grace to grant that infants should be of the
same society with their parents, and have the immun^ties of that society. 2. We
have no reason when the design of redemption is the magnifying of love and
grace, to think that love and grace are so much les^ under the Gospel to the
members of Christ, then under the Law to the members or seed of Adam, as that
then all the seed should have partaked with the same blessings with the
righteous parents, and now they shall all be turned out of the society, whereof
the parents were members. 5. God gives us himself the reasons of his gracious
dealing with the children of the just from his gracious nature, proclaiming
even pardoning mercy to flow thence, Exodus 34. and in the 2d. Com. 6. God does
yet show us that in many great and weighty respects he deals well or ill with
children for their parents sakes: as many tex^s of Scripture show (and I have
lately proved at large in one of our private disputes, that the sins of nearer
parents are imputed as part of our original or natur^l guilt.) So much of that.

Answ. 1. All these considerations, if they were yielded to be true, would as
well prove that by the light of Nature infants should be invisible
Churchmembers as visible (which would contradict the Scripture, Rom 9.6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 12, 13.) yea rather, since the 4th. consideration upon which the
inference rests chiefly, is from the state in which persons were put by
creation and redemption, which is into the invisible rather then the visible.
Now then if these considerations are not sufficient to assure parents who are
in the invisible Church that their infants are in the same society, neither are
they sufficient to assure them they are visible Churchmembers. 2. It is a
calumny of Mr. B. which is insinuated as if I held that all the seed of
believers shall be turned out of the society whereof the parents were members.
3. It is a gross conceit, and contrary to the plain doctrine of the Scripture,
concerning election and reprobation of Jacob and Esau, which is intimated, as
if the design of redemption under the Gospel to the members of Christ should
be, that as the members or seed of Adam, so all the seed should partake of the
same blessings with the righteous parents. 4. What he says he has largely
proved in one of the private disputes at Kederminster among the associate
Ministers in Worcestershire (as I conjecture) I do not contradict peremptorily,
as not knowing how he stated the question, nor what his proofs were, Yet it
seems to me to be an error, nor am I very apt to give assent to Mr. Bs.
determinations, however the associate Ministers may perhaps take him for a
Pythagoras, whose ipse dixit must not be gainsaid.

Once more says he, Yet before I cite any more particular texts, I will add
this one argument from the tenor of the Covenant of grace as expressed in many
texts of Scripture. According to the tenor of the Covenant of grace, God will
not refuse to be their God and take them for his people, that are (in a natural
or law sense) willing to be his people, and to take him for their God. But the
infants of believing parents are thus willing, Ergo. The major is
unquestionable. The minor is proved from the very law of nature before
expressed* Infants cannot be actually willing themselves in natural sense,
ergo, the reason and will of another must be theirs in law sense, and that is
of the parents, who have the full dispose of them, and are warranted by the law
of nature to choose for them (for their good) ^ill they come to use of reason
themselves. The parents therefore by the light and law o^ nature choosing the
better part for their children, and offering and devoting them to God, by the
obligation of his own natural law, he cannot in consistency with the ^^ee grace
revealed in the Gospel, refuse those that are so offered And those that thus
come to him in the way that nature it self prescribes, he will in no wise cast
out, Joh... And he will be offended with those that would keep them from him,
that are offered by those that have the power to do it, though they cannot
offer themselves. For legally this act is taken for their own. Thus I have
showed you ^ome of the fundamental title that infants of believers have to
Churchmembership, and our obligation to dedicate them to God.

Answ. They are (as I conceive Mr. B.) willing to be Gods people in a natural
sense, who do in their own persons actually will this; in a law sense, who
having not use of reason themselves, do will by another who has the dispose of
them, as v. g. a parent. That some acts of a parent are legally taken for the
child's, it is not denied. But in this argument of Mr. B. I deny the major. And
whereas Mr. B. says, it is unquestionable, I say, it is manifestly false,
there is no such thing in the tenor of the Covenant of grace; yea, God did
refuse Ishmael, and Esau, though Abraham and Isaac prayed for them, and
dedicated them (in Mr. Bs. sense) to God. What Mr. B. dictates by way of proof,
whether of the major or minor (which I think he did not well heed) is not true*
Infants cannot will of themselves, therefore the reason and will of another
must be theirs in law sense. For it follows not, unless the Lawgiver do ordain
it so. Nor does it follow, that if the infants cannot will, and another will
must be theirs in law sense, it must in Church matters be the will of the
natural parents. For in such things it may be as well conceived that the will
of the mother the Church (as it is termed,) the Church Governors, or as some
will the Gossips should be their will in the law sense, and that they have the
power to dispose of them, and are warranted by the law of nature to choose for
them (for their good) as the natural parents. The speeches [ the parents by the
^ight and law of nature choosing the better part for their children, and
offering them, and devoting them to God by the obligation of his own natural
law, he cannot in consistency with the free grace revealed in the Gospel,
refuse those that are so offered,] is false, the Gospel no where ^ssuring grace
to those that are offered by another will, but to those who repent and believe
themselves. The speech [ And those that thus come to him in the way that nature
it self prescribes, he will in no wise cast out, Joh...] is false, it being
certain God has cast out many so coming, as Esau, Ishmael, etc. and has a
tincture of P^^agianism; and the Text, Joh. 6.37. to which Mr. B. alludes, is
grossly abused by him, since it speaks only of th^se that come to Christ by
their own faith, and of not casting out from the invisible Church, and
everlasting life, as v. 39, 40. show, not merely from the visible Church. And
the speech [ and he will be offended with those that would keep them from him
that are offered by those who have the power to do it, though they cannot offer
themselves,] being meant of not baptizing them, is also false; and the contrary
is true, that he will be offended with those who baptize infants which he never
appointed, but profane the ordinance, being appointed only for them who are
themselves disciples and believers. And thus Mr. Bs. fundamental title to
infants visible Churchmembership is blown up.

Mr. B. adds. You must now in reason expect, that infants Churchmembership
being thus established, partly in the law of nature, and partly in the
fundamental promise, what is after this spoken of it should not be any new
establishment, but confirmations and intimations of what was before done,
rather giving us the proof that such a law and promise there is that did so
establish it, then being such first establishing laws or promises themselves.
And from hence I may well add this further argument. If there be certain proof
in Scripture of infants Churchmembership, but none except this before alleged
that makes any mention of the beginning of it, but all speaking of it as no new
thing, then we have great reason upon the forementioned evidence, to assign
this beginning which from Genesis 3. we have expressed. But the former is true, ergo
the later. You confess that infant^s were Churchmembers once. You only
conceive it began when Abraham was called out of Ur. Your con^^t has not a
word to support it in the Text. The right to such a blessing was then new to
Abraham's seed, when Ab^aham first believed: But when it began to belong to
infants of believers in general, no Text except this before cited does mention.
Nor does that promise to Abraham intimate any inception then as to the
Churchmembership of infants, but only an application of a privilege to him
that in the general was no new thing.

Answ. Mr. B. mistakes in conceiving visible Churchmembership to belong to
infants of believers in general, and therefore it must be derived from Genesis
3.15. I retort his argument. If there be certain proof in Scripture of infants
Churchmembership, but none except in the nation of the Hebrews, and that had
its beginning at the call of Abraham out of Ur, and ended at the rejection of
the Jews, then infants visible Churchmembership began with Abraham's call, and
now cease. But the antecedent is true. Ergo, also the consequent. The
consequence is in effect Mr. Bs. In the minor the first and third propositions
are proved by the dispute before: For the second [that the nation of the
Hebrews began with Abraham,] besides the allegation before of Nehem 9.6. Acts
7.2. where he is called their Father, and the story of the Hebrews begun from
Abraham's call, the words of the Prophet, Isa. 51.1, 2. are express to this
purpose; calling Abraham and Sarah the rock whence they were hewn, and the
hole of the pit whence they were dug, Abraham their father and Sarah that
bare them, and mentioning Gods calling him alone, blessing him and increasing
him as the cause of it (which does prove that it was by the transeunt fact
which I described, not by Mr. Bs promise and precept that they were
Churchmembers) and this as a new thing, God having chosen no other people of
the earth as he did the Jews, Deuteronomy. 7.6. And therefore I deny Mr. Bs. minor,
and conclude, that visible Churchmembership of infants was only in the nation
of the Hebrews; not by a promise to be a God to believers and their seed, and a
precept to parents to dedicate them to God, and list them in Christ's Army; but
by the transeunt fact of calling Abraham, blessing, multiplying him, bringing
them out of Egypt to himself, which was to be demonstrated. L^t^s yet view Mr
Bs. confirmations, whether they be any better then his primitive establishments.

SECT. LIX. The sayings of Adam, Eve, Noah, concerning Cain, Seth, Shem, the
term sons of God, Genesis 6.2. prove not Mr. Bs. law of infants visible
Churchmembership unrepealed.
NOw for the Texts, says he, that further intimate such a foregoing
establishment. 1. There seems to be some believing intimation of this in Adams
naming his wife the mother of the living: For it is to be noted what Bp, Usher
says, Annal vol. 1. p. 2. Unde tum primum (post semen promissum) mulieri Evae
nomen a marito est impositum, Genesis 3.20. quod matter esset omnium viventium non
naturalem tantum vitam, sed illud quoque quod est per fidem in semen ipsius,
Messiam promissum: quomodo and post eam Sara fidelium matter est habita. 1 Pet.
3.6. Gal. 4.31.] He put this name on her after the promise, because she was to
be the mother of all the living, not only that live the life of nature, but
that which is by faith in the Messiah her seed. So that as she was the root of
our nature, we are her natural seed; and as she was a believer, and we the seed
of her a believer, so is she the mother of a holy seed, and we that are her
seed are holy, as a people visibly dedicated to God.

Answ. Though the exposition were allowed, and the inference thereon, that we
that are her seed, that is by faith in the Messiah, are holy; yet it follows
not that we are so as a people visibly dedicated to God, much less that our
infants are so without their own faith by virtue of their parents dedication:
And therefore this Text, according to Mr. Bs. exposition (which yet may be
questioned) yields no confirmation of infants visible Churchmembership
unrepealed.

2. Says he, When Cain was born, his mother called him [possession] because
she had obtained a man of the Lord, that is, says Ainsworth, [with his favor,
and of his good will,] and so a son of promise, and of the Church. And
therefore it is to be noted, that when Cain had sinned by killing his brother,
God did curse him, and cast him out of his presence, Genesis 4.14, 16. So that he
was excommunicate and separated from the Church of God, says Ainsworth, [that
is, from the place of Gods word and worship which in likelihood was held by
Adam the father, who being a prophet, had taught his children how to sacrifice
and serve the Lord. So on the contrary, to come into Gods presence or before
him, 1 Chronicles. 16.29. is explained in Psalm. 96 8. to be the coming into his
Courts.] Very many learned men give the same exposi^ion of it. Now if Cain were
now excommunicate, then was he before of the Church: nay it is certain by his
sacrificing, and other proof, however this Text be interpreted: But no man can
give the least reason from Scripture to make it so probable (...) he entered
into the Church at any other time, as we give of his entrance at his nativity.

Answ. Eve does not say, that she possessed a son of God, member of the Church
from the Lord, but a man, by virtue of the power given to the parents for
procreation, Genesis 1.28. notwithstanding the curse, Genesis 3.16. which was from
the Lord, Psalm 127.3. Genesis 30.2. that is, by his providence, and in some
respect with his favor and good will, considering her desert, and danger it
was that she possessed him when both their lives were in so great hazard. That
Cain was a Churchmember visible from his infancy has no probability, there
being no hint of it in that Text, or any other. The proofs that infant visible
Churchmembership was only in the Hebrew Nation, have been showed before.

Also, says Mr. B. When Eve bare Seth, she so named him as a son of mercy in
faith, as appointed her by the Lord to be in Abels room, faithful as Abel, and
the father of our Lord afte^ the flesh, as Ainsworth on Genesis 4.25. And is there
no intimation in this that Seth was an infant member of the visible Church? I
confess he that shall excommunicate this appointed seed, or says, that Seth
was without the Church in his infancy, does speak in my ears so improbably, and
so unlike the Scripture, that I am very confident I shall never believe him.

Answ. Nor should I, meaning as Mr. Ainsworth, seed] that is another son: that
as Abraham's seed was called in Isaac (Ishmael being excluded) Genesis 21.12. so
Eves seed should be in Seth, tha^ is the elect seed, and so he a member of the
invisible Church in infancy; and yet there is no in^imation that ^e was an
infant member of the visible Church, from which Ishmael was not excluded. In
which though I p^ace not Seth, yet I do not thereby excommunicate Seth, or say
that he was without the Church in his infancy.

Mr. B. adds. Note also, that as God had thus cast out Cain, and supplied Abels
room by Seth and had given each of them posterity; so we find him in a special
manner registring the successors of the righteous, and putting two titles on
these two distinct generations, calling some the sons of God, and others the
daughters of men, Genesis 6.2. Supposing that you reject the old conceits that
these sons of God were Angels that fell in love with women, the current
ordinary exposition I think will stand, that these were the progeny of Seth,
and other members of the Church, who are called the sons of God; and that it
was the progeny of Cain, and other wicked ones, that are called the daughters
of men. Where note that they are not themselves denominated wicked, but the
children of men, as being a generation separated from the Church from the
birth. And the other are not themselves affirmed to be truly godly ones, but
son^ of God, as being the seed of the Saints not cast out, but members of the
Church, or the sons of those who were devoted to God* and so devo^ed to him
themselves: a separated generation belonging to God as his visible Church.
Where note, that these that are called the sons of God, even the line of Seth
and other godly parents, were yet so wicked that God repented that he made
them, and destroyed them in the flood, sparing only Noah and his family. So
that it was not their own godliness that made them called the sons of God, but
their relation, Churchstate, and visible separation from open unchurched
Idolaters. Compare this phrase with the like, Deuteronomy. 14.1. 2 Cor. 6.18. In the
former it is said [ ye are the children of the Lord your God, ye shall not cut
your selves, etc.] where the whole people, infants and all are called Gods
children, as being a people separated to him from the Idolatrous world; and so
in the next v. called a holy people unto God, peculiar to him, etc. And 2 Cor.
6.18. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, etc. and I will be a father
to you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty.] So
that Gods sons and daughters are that society that are separated from Idolaters
unto the worship of God as the visible Church is. And then it appears that the
generation of the righteous, even from the womb, were ennumerated to the rest,
in that they are not mentioned as a people called out here and there, and
initiated at age (here is no mention of any such thing:) but as a stock or
generation opposed to the daughters of men, or of the unchurched, who were such
from their infancy as all will grant. For it was not the same men that were the
parents of those here called the daughters of men and the sons of Go^ (though
some of the later might be excommunicate when they fell:) But it plainly
intimates, that it was another sort of men that these were the daughters of,
then those that were parents to the sons of God. So Ainsworth in loc. [The sons
of God, i. e. the men of the Church of God, for to such Moses says, Deuteronomy.
14.1. etc. 1 John 3.1. Daughters of men, meaning of Cains posterity that were
out of Gods Church, Genesis 4.14.] So our Annotations, and many more.

Answ. 1. There is not sufficient evidence in the text to prove it, that the
sons of God were of Seths, and the daughters of men of Cains posterity: they
might be some of the daughters of men of Seths, and some of the sons of God of
Cains progeny, notwithstanding what is in the text. And there is this reason
against it, that since Genesis 4.16. it is said, that Cain went out from the
presence of the Lord, and dwel^ in the land of Nod on the East of Eden, and
that he built a City called Enoch, that the posterity of Cain and Seth dwelt so
far one from another, that they had not occasion to see one another so as to
fall in love with their beauty. And whereas it is clear that Adam after he
begat Seth begat sons and daughters Genesis 5 4. living 800 years, and that the
great change in religion was about the time of Enos birth Genesis 4.26. the sons
of God and daughters of men might be of other races then Cain and Seth. But I
shall not contend about this. 2. Nor is it manifest that either sort of persons
are called so from their descent, or Church State by birth. For the one are not
called the sons of God from their birth, but practice or profession, (...),
says Chrysostom hom 22. on Genes. Because until then they did imitate their
progenitors virtue, Piscat. analys. Genesis 6 Per filios Dei intelligendi sunt i^
qui re^igionem puram profitebantur, praesertim ex Sethi and Enoskhi posteris*
Gatak. adv. p^ochen. c. 13. Apud quos religionis verae professio hactenus
perstiterat. Usher Annal. Vol. 1. p. 3. ad an. M. 235. Sethus annos 105 natus
filium genuit cui Enoshi nomen imposuit: quod conditionis humanae deplorandam
denotat miseriam, Tunc enim a Camitis cultus Divinus misere corruptus fuit:
unde ea inter homines distinctio fa^^a; ut qui in vero Dei cultu permanserunt
fil^i Dei; qui autem ab eo desciverunt filii hominum sint appellati. Gen, 4.26.
cum 6.1, 2. Christoph. Cartwright annot* ad Genesis 6.2. At ex textu apparet hosce
Dei filios professione po^ius quam reipsa s^nctos fuisse. The new Annot. on
Genesis 6.2. Sons of God] rational creatures and of humane kind; yet in this
place distinguished from the daughters of men, not only by their sex, but by
their qualities or relati^ns; by their qualities, as persons of some eminent
endowments or estimation above others as (what is excellent is in the Scripture
phrase especially entitled unto God, as the Garden of Eden, Ezekiel. 28.13. and
chapter 31. v. 8, 9. the hill of God, Ps. 68.15.) or by their relations, as such as
descending from Seth and Enosh professed the true worship of the true God, and
so became capable of the title of the sons of God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. 2 Cor. 6.18.
Whence I infer, that in the judgment of these Authors they are termed the sons
of God not from their Churchmembership by bi^th, but their profession and
practice. On the other side, the parents of the daughters are termed men not
from their descent by birth, or exclusion out of the Church by birth, but as
the term [ man] is taken for corrupt unregenerate men as Ainsworth, so Paul 1
Cor. 3.3. Piscat. sch. in Genesis 6.2. Nisi potius est ut nomine (...) Adam hic
intelligatur primus ille generis humani parens: ut significetur illas ge^^isse
imaginem illam secundum quam Adamus genuit liberos, non autem ^uisse
regineratos spiritu Dei. Which exposition is very likely that they are termed
daughters of Adam, not daughters of men, because they were corrupt as Adam, a^
Genesis 5.3. Adam is said to beget a son in his own image corruptus corruptum, as
Pisc. sch. in locum, in opposition to Gods image. v. 1. So Hos. 6.7. and then
daughters of Adam does not note their descent but qualities and practice, as
daughters of Sara 1 Pet. 3.7. that is, that they revolted from the true worship
of God, as Adam from God. Which things premised, I deny 1. that it is true that
the women are not themselves denominated wicked, but the children of men, as
being a generation separated from the Church from the birth. For there is
nothing in the text that proves the men were the posterity of Cain, nor that
all the posterity of Cain were out of the Church, nor that these men were out
of the Church, though they were corrupt persons or degenerate members, and
therefore nothing to prove they were excluded from the Church from the birth,
by reason of their descent. And it may be well conceived that the term [
daughters of Adam] does note their wickedness as treacherously departing from
God as he did 2. I deny they are termed [ sons of God] who chose the daughters
of Adam for their beauty, as being the seed of the Saints, etc. but as being at
least in appearance holy and true worshippers and chosen by God, they are so
denominated no^ from their descent from the godly, for then they had been
called the sons of the Saints rather then of God, but from their profession and
pract^se, if the interpretation of Aben Ezra that they were the sons Elohim of
the Judges or mighty or that other that they were eminent persons, hold not. 3.
I deny that it can be proved that these sons of ^od were not truly godly, or
that that they were so wicked that God repen^ed that he made them, and
destroyed them in the flood. For neither does their love of women prove they
were not truly godly, Solomon is judged truly godly Nehem. 13.26. though he
fell perhaps more deeply into the same sin. Sampson was a believer Heb. 11.32.
yet sinned this way. Nor does that which is said Genesis 6.11, 12, 13. prove it,
for that is rather to be understood of the Nephilim or Giants, or the posterity
of the the sons of God mentioned v. 4. rather then of the sons of God
themse^ves* v. 2. And therefore it is not proved that it was not their own
godliness that made them called the sons of God, but their Church state. Nor is
the^e any thing Deuteronomy. 14.1. that proves the sons of God Genesis 6.2. were such
from their infancy as born of Churchmembers For they are the sons of Gods there
either by profession or special choice v. ^. not from their parentage. Much
less is there any thing 2 Cor. 6.18. to that purpose, for the promise of
sonship there is not from birth but obedience v. 17. And as Genesis 6.2. their
being made sons of God is not expressed to be by calling, so neither is it said
to be by humane generation, nor does it follow if the daughters of men were
such from their birth, the sons of God must be so from their birth, no not
though sons of God noted a generation or stock, as it does not follow that
because that which is born of the flesh is flesh from the birth, that that
which is born of the spirit is spirit from the birth, Joh. ^.6.

Also, says Mr. B. an intimation of this privilege, and that they were sons
of mercy and of the promise, appears in the very names of many of the
children of the righteous, both before and after the flood, which I will not
stand on particularly.

Answ. This is granted, but proves not their visible Churchmembership from
their birth.

He adds* And when all the world had so defiled themselves, that God was
resolved to cut them off* he spared Noah and his family or sons. Though Cham
was to be cursed, yet was he of the Church which worshipped the true God, and
spared as a son of Noah, and one of that society. And if God so far spared him
then for his fathers sake as to house him in the Ark (the type of the Church)
he sure took him to be of the same society in his infancy, and then bare him
the same favor on the same account.

Answ That the Ark was a type of the Church is not said in Scripture, it is
rather made a type of Baptism 1 Pet. 3.21. But let it be granted the Ark was a
type of the Church, and that Cham was in the Ark for his fathers sake and a
memb^r of the Church, yet it follows not he was so in infancy, he might be so
as a worshipper of the true God, though himself in other things corrupt.

Again says Mr. B. As soon as Noah came out of the Ark God blessed himself in
his issue* as he did Adam, with an [increase and multiply] and made a Covenant
with him and his seed after him. Which Covenant though the expressed part of it
be that the earth should be drowned no more, and so it was made with the
wickedst of Noah's seed, and even with the beasts of the field, yet does it
import a special favor to Noah and his seed, as one whom God would show a more
special respect to, as he had done in his deliverance, and upon this special
favor to him the creatures fare the better. For though the word [Covenant] be
the same to man and beast, yet the diversity of the promissary and his capacity
may put a different sense on the same word, as applied to each. And indeed it
should seem but a sad blessing to Noah to hear an [increase and multiply] if
all his infant posterity must be cast or left out of the visible Church, and so
left as common or unclean. This were to increase and multiply the Kingdom of
the Devil. If he that was so mercifully housed in the Ark with all his
children, must now be so blessed as to have all their issue to be out of the
Church, it were a strange change in God, and a strange blessing on Noah! And an
uncomfortable stablishing of a Covenant with his seed, if all that seed must
be so thrust from God and dealt with as the seed of cursed Cain.

Answ. Though the Covenant Genesis 9.9. should import a special favor to Noah and
his seed more then to the beasts (which yet the text expresses not) yet that
this should be infants visible Churchmembership follows not, nor is it likely,
since then all the infant posterity* yea all the seed of Noah, and consequently
all the men of the world since then should be visible Churchmembers. Nor was
the blessing of multiplying sad to Noah, reduced to such a paucity, though his
infant posterity were not of the visible Church, nor were they any more common
and unclean thereby, then they should have been if so taken, nor had this been
to increase and multiply the Kingdom of the Devil, they that are not visible
Churchmembers may be of the Kingdom of Christ and not of the Kingdom of the
Devil. I say not all Noah's issue was out of the Church, yet the leaving out
infants from the visible Church, showed no change in God from what he was to
them when he housed the sons of Noah in the Ark, nor does it any whit lessen
the blessing expressed Genesis 9.1. nor does it infer that all that seed must be
thrust from God and dealt with as the seed of cursed Cain. These are but
frivolous inferences fit only to scare weak heads.

Moreover, says he, it is certain that Noah did prophetically, or at least
truly pronounce the blessing on Sem and Japhet. And in Shems blessing he
blesses the Lord his God, showing that God was his God and so in Covenant with
him. And it is plain that it is not only the persons, but the posterities of
his three sons that Noah here intended. It was not Cham himself so much as
Canaan and his succeeding posterity that were to be servants to Shem and
Japhet, that is to their posterity. And the blessing must be to the issue of
Shem, as well as the curse to the issue of Cham. And indeed a Hebrew Doctor
would take it ill at that Expositor or Divine whatsoever that should presume to
exclude the infant seed of them out of Gods Church. And well they may, if in the
blessing God be pronounced to be their God. Says Ainsworth in loc. [under this
Sem also himself receives a blessing: for blessed is the people, whose God
Jehovah is, Psalm. 144.15. and eternal life is implied herein, for God has
prepared for them a City of whom he is not ashamed to be called their God, Heb.
11.16. and Sem is the first man in Scripture that has expressly this honor.

Answ. I grant that not only the person of Shem, but his posterity were
blessed; nor do I deny God was their God, nor that their infant seed was in
Gods Church: But this does not prove their visible Churchmembership in infancy,
but rather their invisible Churchmemship, for that is imported by the phrase of
being their God, as Mr. Ainsworths exposition intimates. God was God to Jacob
in his mothers womb, yet he was not then a visible, but an invisible
Churchmember.

Moreover ( says Mr. B.) in Genesis 9.27. in Japhets blessing there is much,
though in few words, to this purpose intimat^^. First, note that the Jewish
Church is called [the tents of Sem.] From whence it appears, that the Church
privileges of that people begun not with or from Abraham, but were before: And
that it is the same Church that was of Shem and of Abraham, and after all the
additional promises to Abraham, the Jewish Church is still denominated [the
tents of Sem:] now they were the tents of Sem before Abraham's days. And
therefore it is clear, that it being the same Church, must be supposed to have
the same sort of members or materials: and therefore infants must be members
before Abraham's days as well as after. That Church which was Sems tents had
infant Churchmembers (for the Jews Church is so called, into which Japhet was
to pass:) But the Church both before and after Abraham was Sems tents. Ergo.

Answ. That the tents of Sem note the Jewish people, is not improbable: But
then it is as certain that they are so called, not from what they were in Sems
days, at least not what they were when Noah prophesied, but what they were to
be afterward when they were formed to be a peculiar people; and they are Sems
tents, because they descended from him. And this is clear even from what Mr. B.
and all grant, that what is here said was accomplished in the posterity of Sem,
Japhet and Cham. And therefore it follows not that if the Jewish people had
infants Churchmembers visible, it must be so in Sems days, because they are
termed Sems tents, since they are so termed from their descent, not from the
state of the Church in Sems time. Nevertheless if it be granted that Sems
tents are the Church of God in Sems family in his days, it will rather prove it
to note the invisible Church then the visible. For the dwelling in the tents of
Sem in Mr. Bs. and their sense whom he follows, is by faith, and so the tents
of Sem must note the invisible Church of true believers, of whom God is God as
he was of Sem, the Israel of God, as they are termed Gal. 6.16. not the Jewish
Church visible, and they were joined by persuasion, and therefore not infants,
who were to dwell in Sems tents, and consequently infants visible
Churchmembership is not hence proved. And to Mr. Bs. argument I answer by
granting the conclusion, if by Sems tents be meant the invisible Church, if the
Jewish people, the minor is denied. He goes on thus.

Yet further let it here be noted, that it is into Shems tents that Japhet
must pass. I suppose that the evidence is better here for that exposition that
applies the word [dwell] to Japhet then to God, and so that this is spoken of
the conversion of the Gentiles, as many Expositors have cleared at large. And
so, as Ainsworth says, the sense is that Japhet shall be [united with the
Churches of the Jews, the posterity of Sem, which was fulfilled when the
Gentiles became joint heyr^, and of the same body, and joint partakers of Gods
promise in Christ, the stop of the partition wall being broken down, etc. Ephesians.
3.6. and 2.14, 19. Although it may further imply the graffing of Japhets
children into the stock of the Church, when Sems posterity should be cut off,
etc.] vid. ult. Now if it be Sems tents even the same Church that Japhets
children must dwell in, then as Sems infants were Church Members, so must
Japhets, and not all his infant seed be cast or left out. So that here is a
promise of infant Churchmembership unto the Gentiles in these words.

Answ. For my part, for ought I yet discern, Mr. Nicholas Fuller his exposition
in his ^d. Book of his Miscellanies Theological chapter 4. seems more right then
that which Mr. B. and many other Expositors follow, to wit thus, God shall
enla^ge the coasts of the posterity of Japhet in Asia, Europe, and America, and
God shall dwell in the tents of Sem, that is, Christ or God manifested in the
flesh, shall dwell in the tents of Sem; that is among the Jews, being of their
stock, as it is John 1.14. and Canaan shall be servant to the Israelites, and
the posterity of Japhet, as the Canaanites, Egyptians, Carthaginians and other
people of Cham have been, being conquered by Joshua, Alexander the great, the
Romans, and other people. Nor do I see how Mr. Bs. interpretation can be right,
since when Japhet was persuaded to dwell in Sems tents, Chams posterity also
were persuaded, and Canaan was no more a servant in a spiritual sense, no nor
so much as Sems tents the Jewish people; nor were the Gentiles persuaded to
dwell in Sems tents, that is, in the Jewish Church visible; but it was quite
dissolved, and they a separate Church from them. And therefore it is most
manifestly false, that the children of Japhet must dwell in Sems tents, that
is, the same visible Church Jewish, and therefore the inference is wrong, there
are infant visible members in the Gentile Church Christian: yea since according
to Mr. Bs. own exposition, the Gentiles were by the persuasion of the Gospel,
as it is Ephesians. 3.6. of the same body, none of the Gentiles were of the same
body but those who were persuaded by the Gospel, which cannot be said of
infants, and therefore the contrary follow, from Mr. Bs. own exposition, that
infants were not to be visible Christian Churchmembers.

SECT. LX. Mr. Bs. Law of Infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, is not
proved from Genesis 12. or 17. or 22.
WE come next, says Mr. B. to the promise made to Abraham, which I shall say
the less to, because you confess it. But again note, that whereas your self
make the beginning of Gods taking the Jews to be his people, and so of infants
to be members of the Church, to be at Abraham's ^all from Ur. 1. There is no one
word of that in the text. 2. Lot came out of Ur with Abraham, yea and from
Haran, and lived with him: were not Lot and his infants Churchmembers then?

Answ. 1. I confess a promise to Abraham, but not that Abraham or his infants
were visible Churchmembers by it, as the so^e or next efficient cause. 2. What
word is in the text for the beginning of the Jewish people to be Gods Church at
Abraham's call out of Ur, is showed above, from Isai 51.1, 2. Nehem. 9.7. Acts
7.1, 2. 3. Lot came along with Abram to Canaan, but was there parted from him,
and all along they were severed, and therefore Lot though a righteous man, yet
was not of the same Church with Abrams house, nor his infants if he had any,
visible Churchmembers, because God intended not to make his house and posterity
his Church visible.

3. Says Mr. B. The chief note I intend is this, that there is no more said
then to prove infants Churchmembers, then what we have showed was said long
before, and is said after the Gentiles infants, no nor so much. If therefore
the passage of Abraham out of Ur, yea or the promise made to him in Haran, Genesis
12.2, 3. will prove infants Churchmembership, then have we as good proof of it
to the Gentile Church as to the Jews.

Answ. I neither make Abraham's passage out of Ur, nor the promise in Haran (or
rather in Ur. Genesis 12.2, 3.) to be that which made infants visible
Churchmembers in the Hebrew nation, but Gods special call, or taking the house
of Abraham entirely to be his people, which Mr. B has not nor can show to
have been done to any other people.

And here, says he, I note further, that in the beginning before the command
for Circumcision, you plainly yield that infants Churchmembership is a thing
separable from Circumcision, and begun not with it, but before. And indeed I
think I have evinced that to you in my Book of Baptism. Abraham himself was not
made a member by Circumcision, but circumcised because a member of Christ's
Church by faith* Ishmael was a member before, and so was Isaac, and the infants
born in Abraham's house.

Answ. I grant visible Churchmembership was before Circumcision in Abraham's
house, but not that Abraham was circumcised under this formal consideration, as
a member of Christ's Church by faith, but as one to whom it was commanded by God.

Mr. B. goes on. Whether there were any promise or precept of this (but a mere
transeunt fact) let the text last mentioned, and the following bear witness.
Genesis 12.2, 3. [In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed] and Genesis
17.7, 9, 10. [And I will establish my Covenant between me and thee and thy seed
after thee -- and I will be their God. And God said to Abraham: Thou shall keep
my Covenant therefore, thou and thy seed after thee in their genera^ions. This
is my Covenant which you shall keep between me and you, etc.] to verse. 15. In
all this let these things be noted. 1. That here is an expres promise or
Covenant to Abraham and his seed after him. 2. That it is not only de
praesenti, but for the future, called an everlasting Covenant. 3. That this
promise or Covenant does manifestly imply and include infants Churchmembership
(as you confess.) 4. That yet here is not the least word that intimates an
institution of it de novo, but rather the contrary plainly intimated. The
promises before Genesis 17. are mainly about the multiplication of Abraham's seed.
What is that to Churchmembership? (except what Intimates the promised seed, of
which anon.) Hagar has a promise also of the multiplication of Ishmaels seed.
And the very precept of Circumcision is only one part of the infant members,
viz. the males, and therefore it cannot be foundation of their
Churchmembership, which leaves out half the members. 5. Note that the promise
that God will be their God, does expressly contain the Churchmembership of the
seed. 6. Note that this is more then a transeunt fact, Ergo being an
everlasting Covenant. Had it been a natural transeunt fact, that had left no
permanent title behind it in the obligation of the Covenant, then it had been
null and void as soon as spoken: then the word of God is but a bare sound and
of no further force. 7. Note that the Apostle (as is said) Romans 4.10, 11, 12,
13. does fully manifest to us, that this promise was made to Abraham as a
believer, and that Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith which
he had, yet being uncircumcised: and therefore that the chief part of the
Covenant of having God for our God, and his taking us as his peculiar people,
belongs to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. 8. And he often shows that the
faithful are Abraham's seed, and therefore the chief blessings of the promise
belong to all the faithful. But one of the blessings was, that their infants
should be comprehended in the same Church and Covenant, Ergo, the infants of
the faithful who are the heirs of the same promise, must be comprehended in it
too.

Answ. 1. I deny not the promise Genesis 17.7. to include infants
Churchmembership, but that I confess that it does manifestly imply and include
infants visible Churchmembership Mr. B. cannot show. 2. The promise that God
will be their God, does not expressly contain the visible Churchmembership of
infants. For God may be God to them who are not visible Churchmembers, and he
may not be God to them who are. 3. If in the promises Genesis 12.2, 3. Genesis 17.7.
and the precept Genesis 17.9, 10. there be no institution de novo, nor foundation
of infants Churchmembership, then in ants Churchmembership visible (which was
not before Abraham's days) has not foundation in the promises and precept, but
the transeunt fact I have mentioned. 4. Though I conceive that a transeunt fact
may create a permanent title, as a gift, a delivery into our hands without a
promise for future, may create a permanent title, nor do I deny that the
Covenant Genesis 17.7. did leave a permanent title behind it; yet I deny that the
visible Churchmembership of infants in Abraham's house was by a title to be
legally claimed, or by the Covenant Genesis 17.7. as the causa procreans of it,
though it might be the causa conservans of it, in that it assured some of
those acts whereby it was continued. 5. I deny that the Apostle Romans 4.10, 11,
12, 13. does at all, much less fully manifest to us, that the promise Genesis
17.7. was made to Abraham as a believer, though I grant what Mr. B. infers from
it in his 7th. note. The Apostle does plainly manifest, that in the Gospel
sense it was made to Abraham as father of believers. 6. It is denied as most
certainly false, that one of the blessings of the promise Genesis 17.7. to the
faithful Gentiles was, that their infants should be comprehended in the same
Church and Covenant, yea the Apostle concludes, and proves Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12, 13. That all the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were not
comprehended in that promise, and therefore the visible Churchmembership
Christian of infants of Gentile believers, c^n have no show of proof from the
promise Genesis 17.7. and precept v. 9.10.

9. Says Mr. B. I think it is not to be made light of as to this ma^ter, that
in the great promise Genesis 12.3. the blessing from Abraham in Christ is promised
to all the families or tribes on earth [all the families of the earth shall be
blessed] as the Heb. Samar. Arabic. or [all the kindreds] as the vulgar Lat.
and Chald. paraph. or [all the tribes] as the Sept. (...). And doubtless it is
by Christ that this blessing is promised, and so a Gospel blessing ( Ergo the
Syriac. adds [and in thy seed] and the Arab. has [by thee.]) And the Apostle
fully testifies that. So that as tribes, kindreds, families, do most certainly
comprehend the infants, and as it was to such families that the promise was
made before Christ as to the Jewish Church, so is it expressly to such families
or tribes that the promise is made as to the Gentiles since Christ.

Answ. The blessing Genesis 12.3. is not visible Churchmembership (which may be
without justification) but justification, as the Apostle expressly expounds it,
Gal. 3.8. (which may be without visible Churchmembership:) Nations there does
not comprehend every member of a nation, nor every one of a tribe or kindred,
as it is Acts 3.25. but the elect, and believers of each nation, tribe, or
kindred, as the Apostle does both v. 7. and 9. show, terming them that are
blessed those that are of faith. Therefore though the Scripture be not to be
made light of, yet Mr. Bs. inference from thence is most vain, the promise
being not of visible Churchmembership, nor to nations, families, kindreds
entirely, nor to infants of unbelievers or believers as such; but to so many of
all nations, kindreds, and families, as are believers or elect. Whereby Mr. B.
may see how infants can be excluded these families, and this promise, without
apparent violence to the Text.

10. Says he, Note that as infant Churchmembership is here clearly implied in
infant Circumcision, so they are two distinct things; and as the sign is here
commanded de novo, so the thing signified (I mean the duty of engaging and
devoting to God as their God in Covenant) is commanded with it, though not de
novo, as a thing now beginning as the sign did. So that here is in Circumcision
not only a command to do the circumcising outward act, but also to do it as a
sign of the Covenant, and so withal for the parents to engage their children to
God in Covenant as their God, and devote them to him as his separated peculiar
people. So that here are two distinct duties concurrent. ^he one external newly
instituted, the other internal not newly instituted. And therefore the former
may cease, and yet the later stand: and it is no proof that the later (Covenant
engagement of infants to God) is ceased, because the sign of Circumcision is
ceased; no more then it proves that such Covenant engagement did then begin
when Circumcision did begin; or that women were not Churchmembers separated,
engaged, dedicated to God in infancy, because they were not circumcised. And no
more then you can prove that all Israel was unchurched in the wilderness when
they were uncircumcised for 40 years. So that here you have a a command for
entering infants as Churchmembers. And so you see both promise and precept in
Genesis 12.3 and Genesis 17.

Answ. I do indeed, but not such as Mr. B. should produce, a promise of infants
visible Churchmembership, and a precept of their entering unrepealed; there
being no such promise of believers infants visible Churchmembership, or precept
of admission as visible Churchmembers besides Circumcision, which Mr. B. will
not sure say is unrepealed. As for his discourse of a duty of engaging,
separating to God, and dedicating, which is internal, and not instituted de
novo, it is neither in Genesis 12. nor Genesis 17. nor if it were, is it any thing to
the purpose. For neither does such an internal duty make or admit or enter an
infant into the visible Church, either Jewish or Christian. According to Mr. B.
himself, infants are visible Churchmembers before it, yea without it; nor is the
admission or entering into the Church visible by it, but by an outward sign, as
he himself determines, part. 1. chapter 4. of Baptism: And this sure is now
Baptism, which Mr. B. I presume will not now allow to parents, for then they
should be Ministers of the Seals, which he counts one of my six errors. I
never denied an internal duty of faith, prayer, vowing, etc. for the engaging
and dedicating infants to God, prayer for them is practiced by me in public,
but I deny that this makes them visible Churchmembers, or admissable by Baptism.

He adds. And when I consider the parents, breeding, and manners of Rebe^kah, I
think it far more probable that she was a Churchmember from her infancy, then
that she was entered afterward at age, or that she was a heathen or infidel
when Isaac married her.

Answ. What in the parents; breeding, and manners of Rebe^kah Mr. B. observes,
which should make it in any degree probable that she was a Churchmember from
her infancy, I know not: There are such things related Genesis 31. of Laban her
brother, and Rachel his daughters Idols, as me thinks should move Mr. B. to
conceive, that either in that house there was no Church of God, or at best a
very impure one, though it is likely their idolatry and wickedness was not so
great as that of the the Canaanites, which made them more desirable and
eligible wives for Isaac and Jacob, then the daughters of the Canaanites, whom
Esau chose.

Mr. B. adds. And as here are before mentioned standing Covenants, so it is to
be noted how God intimates the extent of the main blessing of them to be
further then to Abraham's natural seed, not only in the express promise of the
blessing to all the nations or families on earth (of which before) but in the
assigned reason of the blessing which is common to Abraham with other true
believers. For Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. it is thus alleged [because thou have done
this thing, etc. And in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
because thou have obeyed my voice.] And Genesis 26.3, 4, 5. the Covenant is
renewed with Isaac, and the same reason assigned, [because that Abraham obeyed
my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes and my laws.] How
man's obedience is said to be a cause of Gods blessing, I am not determining;
but taking the words as I find them in general, I may conclude, that they are
here given as a cause or reason of it some way or other. And though a special
mercy may be given on a common ground or reason, yet where there is no apparent
proof of the restriction, we are to judge the blessing common where the reason
is common: At least, if a special blessing be superadded to Abraham's seed (upon
the freeness of Gods grace, or the eminency of Abraham's obedience,) yet there
goes with it a mercy common to all where the reason of the mercy is found It
being therefore the case of every true believer to be faithful and obedient,
yea, to prefer that before his own life, and not a son only, it may be hence
gathered, that God who blessed Abraham's seed on that account, will bless theirs
on the same, with the same blessings in the main (as to his favor and
acceptance of them) though not with the same in the variable superadditionals
or overplus of external things.

Answ. Mr. B. like another Procrustes (though in vain) would fain rack the
Texts Gen 22.16, 17, 18. and 26.3, 4, 5. to his purpose. Though I deny not but
a common mercy may be granted on a special reas^n, and a special mercy on a
common reason, God being a free agent; yet in this business, the reason of
Abraham's mercy and the mercy it self are both so special and proper, that it is
extreme violence to the Texts, to apply Abraham's singular obedience in offering
his son, so signally eminent, Heb 11.17. Jam. 2.21. to every believers
obedience; and the blessing granted to his seed, that it should be as the stars
of heaven, as the sand on the sea shore, that in it all nations should bless
themselves or be blessed, to every believers natural seed, and their visible
Churchmembership. This kind of arguing is too ridiculous to deserve a serious
refutation. Yet he has not done.

In Exodus 12.48. says he, there is a law for the circumcising of all the males
of strangers that sojourn in the land, that will keep the passover: which
comprehends their Churchmembership, as is showed.

Answ. I grant there is, but not a law unrepealed.

SECT. LXI. Covenants, promises, and speeches in the Old Testament, of Israel,
the righteous, prove not Mr. Bs. law of infants visible Churchmembership
unrepealed.
THe promise ( says Mr. B.) to the whole people of Israel, infants and all,
that they should be [a peculiar people, a Kingdom of Priests, and a holy
Nation,] Exodus 19.5, 6. you cannot deny. This is a promise, and not a transeunt
fact which made no promise. And the people are called to keep Gods Covenant,
that they might have this promise fulfilled to them* Yea, if you had said, that
it was a mere transeunt Covenant or promise, reaching but to the persons then
existent, and dying with them, though you had spoken more sense, yet no more
truth then when you denied the law and promise, and substituted a transeunt
fact. For 1. it is expressly a promise de futuro to a nation. 2. Yea, and the
Apostle Peter gives the same titles to believers under the Gospel, intimating
the fulfilling of the promise even to them, as the promise to Abraham was to
the faithful who were his uncircumcised seed. However, here is a Covenant
granting by way of confirmation the blessing of Churchmembership to infants
with the rest of Israel: For certainly, this peculiarity, and holiness, and
priesthood here mentioned, contains their Churchmembership: It is undeniable
therefore, that such Churchmembership is here granted by promise or Covenant,
not as a thing then beginning, but by way of confirmation of the like former
grants. And it is to be noted, that though this promise is made to all Israel,
yet not to be fulfilled to any of them, but on condition that they [obey Gods
voice, and keep his Covenant,] ver. 5. on which conditions also any other might
have then enjoyed the same blessing, and therefore so may do now,

Answ. I never denied promises to be to the whole people of Israel; but deny
that they were by a promise, as the sole efficient cause, Gods visible Church,
and their infants members. The promise Exodus 19.5, 6. presupposed their
Churchmembership, and promises continuance of it in an eminent manner. The
Israelites were Churchmembers without the condition of obedience before the Law
was given; yea, Ahaz, Manasseh, etc. were visible Churchmembers though they
were Idolaters, but they lost that peculiarity, holiness, priesthood, upon
their disobedience, which was there promised; and so did the people, they lost
the dominion, temple, priesthood, Urim, and Thummim, and other privileges
which are meant thereby, and should have been continued if they had not broken
Gods Covenant by Idolatry. Yet no other nation could have had that state though
they had been obedient and kept the Laws, God having given those laws
peculiarly to that nation, and confined that honor to that people till the
Messiah came. And though Peter, 1 Pet. 2.5, 9. apply these to believers, yet
not in the same manner as they are meant Exodus 19.5, 6. nor is any infant now
of a believer a visible Churchmember by virtue of that promise.

In Deuteronomy. 14.1, 2. The infants ( says Mr. B.) with the rest are called the
children of God, and a holy and peculiar people to the Lord their God.

Answ. Be it so, yet this is not ascribed to a promise or precept, but to Gods
choice of them.

And ( says Mr. B.) Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. the Covenant is expressed [thou have
avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and keep his
statutes, and his commandments, and his judgments, and to hearken to his
voice. And the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as
he has promised thee, etc. [and that thou may be an holy people, etc.] Is
here no promise when the promise is expressed? and is here no Covenant, where the
mutual Covenant is described? And I think you grant that infants are included.

Answ. There is a promise of God to them, but that did not make their infants
visible Churchmembers, though I deny not their avouching the Lord for their God
(which was a transeunt fact) did show them to be visible Churchmembers, nor do
I any where deny that our Covenant or promise to God does make us visible
Churchmembers, but Gods Covenant or promise to infants upon the parents faith,
as Mr. B. asserts.

Mr. B. adds. So Deuteronomy. 28.4, 9. where the promise to the nation is, that if
they hearken to Gods voice and observe his Commandments, they shall be blessed
in the fruit of their bodies, and the Lord will establish them a holy people to
himself, as he had sworn unto them.] Here is not only a Covenant and promise
for the future, but also an oath confirming it, as annexed to the same before.
Is this establishing Covenant or promise but a transeunt fact? or does not this
confirm their right to the benefit promised, which was received before by the
same means?

Answ. It does, but the benefit promised v. 4. is not infants visible
Churchmembership, but increase, health, strength, such a blessing as they had
in their cattle as well as their children, as Psalm. 127.3, 4, 5. and 144.12,
13, 14, 15. and many more places is expressed. And v. 9. though their
Churchmembership was established according to Gods Covenant and oath, yet the
establishing was not the Covenant, oath, or promise of God, but a transeunt
fact of providence in preserving, teaching them, continuing his worship among
them, and such like acts.

And, says Mr. B. Ezra 9.2. They are called the holy seed.

Answ. Not all the seed of Israel are called the holy seed, but those only who
were legitimate, that is, begotten by lawful marriage according to Moses law:
the rest were termed the mixed multitude, Neh. 13.3. whom they separated from
the rest, Ezra 10.3. as being no Churchmembers, that is, part of the
congregation of Israel according to the law, Neh. 13.1. Deuteronomy. 23.3. and 7.3.
Exodus 23.32. of which more is to be seen in the first Part of this Review,
sect. 25. So that those Ezr. 9.2. are termed the holy seed, not barely by
Covenant upon the parents faith, nor as all visible professors, as Dr. Hammond,
in his Defense of Infant Baptism, page 78. but as begotten by an ^sraelite on
an allowed wife by the law of Moses.

Mr. B. proceeds* Of that in Deuteronomy. 29. I have formerly spoke enough. It is
called a Covenant. All Israel with their little ones did enter the Covenant and
the oath with God, and which he made to them. It was a Covenant [to establish
them for a people to himself, and that he may be to them a God, as he had
before said and sworn.] It is a Covenant made even with them that stood not
there, whether it be meant only of the successive Israelites (and then it is
not a transeunt Covenant) or of all people whoever that will accept of the same
terms (and then it is not proper to Israel.) It Is a Covenant not made to them as
mere Israelites: but as obedient to the Covenant terms, and Covenant breaking
would cut them off, v. 19, 20, 21, 23, 25, 26. Is not Churchmembership
contained in [Gods being their God, and taking them for his people thus in
Covenant?] Does not the promise give them an established right in this
blessing? Is all this then no promise, but a transeunt fact?

Answ. What has been spoken of Deuteronomy. 29. by Mr. B. in the Dispute at Bewdley,
and in his Book of Baptism, part 1. chapter 14 and 17. and his Corrective, sect. 5.
will be examined in that which follows. For present, 1. it is sufficient to
show the impertinency of this Text, to prove that there the Covenant or promise
of God upon condition of parents faith is the sole efficient of infants visible
Churchmembership, in that the Covenant being then put, even with the children
unborn, v. 15. yea and the parents then believing, yet the children unborn
could not be then visible Churchmembers, as Mr. B. himself grants of Baptism,
page 250. They that were not, could not be members visible or invisible. For
the sole efficient cause being actually put (as the Covenant and the parents
believing are, Deuteronomy. 29. even according to Mr. B.) the effect must be in act:
but it is not so in the unborn, therefore the Covenant and parents faith are
not the sole efficient. 2. The Oath or Covenant of God is a distinct act from
his establishing them for a people unto himself, and being a God to them, which
are the consequent upon it, and are by transeunt acts consequent upon the
Covenant. So that though the Covenant give a right to a blessing, yet it does
not make actually visible Churchmembers without some other transeunt fact
consequent upon it. The Covenant assures a future existence, but suppposeth a
present absence of the thing covenanted, and consequently without a further act
consequent on it makes not any in present being visible Church Members. So that
as yet I find no Text of Scripture setting down the law and ordinance of
infants visible Churchmembership by Gods promise upon parents faith or
dedication commanded as the sole efficient unrepealed. L^t's view the rest.

Deuteronomy. 30.19. says he, there is a law and promise [choose life, that thou and
thy seed may live.] This is the same Covenant which Asa caused the people to
enter, 2 Chronicles. 15. and if there had been no law for it, there would have been
no penalty, and then he would not have made it death to withdraw. It is the
same Covenant which Josiah caused the people to enter, 2 Kin. 23.2, 3. 2 Chronicles.
34.31, 32. Of Levit. 25.41, 54, 55. I have spoken elsewhere, and of some other
Texts.

Answ. 1. There is a law and promise Deuteronomy. 30 19. but not such as Mr. B.
asserts as the sole efficient of infants visible Churchmembership. The life
there is not visible Churchmembership, but a prosperous being in Canaan, v. 20.
And the distinction between [ thou and thy seed] proves that Deuteronomy. 29.12. [
thou] notes the Captains, Elders, Officers, men of Israel, v. 10. distinct from
the little ones, wives, strangers, v. 11. though represented by them, and that
my speech so much exagitated by Mr. B. of Baptism, p. 57, 249. was justifiable.
2. The Covenants, 2 Chronicles. 15. and 34.31, 32. 2 Kin. 23.2, 3. of Asa and Josiah
were Covenants of Israel to God, there is no mention of Gods promise or Covenant
to them as then made, and therefore it is not that whereby infants are made
visible Churchmembers according to Mr. B. and so is impertinent to the point in
hand. 3. The futility of Mr. Bs. argument from Levit. 25.41, 54, 55. is showed
in the 2d. part of this Review, sect 14. It follows in Mr. B.

The second Commandment, Exodus 20.5, 6. Deuteronomy. 5.9, 10. I think is a law, and
contains a promise or praemiant part, wherein he promises to show mercy to
the generations or children of them that love him and keep his Commandments: of
which I have also spoken elsewhere, to which I refer you. I see no reason to
doubt but here is a standing promise, and discovery of Gods resolution,
concerning the children of all that love him, whether Jews or Gentiles, to whom
this Commandment belongs: nor to doubt whether this mercy imply
Churchmembership: And that this is fetched from the very gracious nature of God,
I find in his proclaiming his Name to Moses, Exodus 34.6, 7.

Answ. If this mercy here imply Churchmembership to the infants of them that
love him to a thousand generations, then it implies it to all the infants in
the world, which cannot be true without such limitations as take away the
certainty of any infants Churchmembership existent. But there is nothing to
prove that this mercy must be Churchmembership, or that it must be to all the
children of them that love God, and are obedient, or that it must be to them in
infancy, since it may be true of other mercies, as preservation, provision, etc.
to some only, since the speech is indefinite in a matter not necessary, and
those persons at age, and loving God as their ancestors, without which the
promise is not made good; and therefore Mr. B. had occasion enough to doubt
whether this mercy implies visible Churchmembership of all infants of visible
professors or true believers, yea, he had cause to assure himself that it does
not, since then it were not true in thousands of Noah's, Abraham's, and other holy
men's posterity. Wherefore all things considered, I incline to conceive this a
promise of temporal blessings, chiefly to the Israelites, to whom God intailed
mercies more then to other people; and if it be extended to higher mercies, and
to other people, yet with reservation to himself of his free election, not
without conditions and limitations as the event and other Scriptures make
necessary to be included, which will make it unserviceable for Mr. Bs. purpose.

He adds. In Psalm. 102.28. It is a general promise [the children of thy
servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee*] Its
usual in the Old Testament to express Gods favor by temporal blessings, more
then in the Gospel; but yet still they secure us of his favor. As [I will not
sail thee, nor forsake thee,] might secure Joshua more then us of temporal
successes, and yet not more of Gods never failing favor.

Answ. The words are not a promise of God, for they are directed to God, as the
expressions [ thy servants, before thee,] besides what is said before, v. 24,
25, 26, 27. show, and therefore are not of the same rank with Gods words to
Joshua, Josh. 1.5. yet they express such assurance as came either from a
promise or a prophe^ical instinct. But whether the promise were general, or
particular to some; whether of temporal, or eternal blessings, is uncertain.
The occasion seems to intimate this sense, From thy continuance, though we be
now very low, yet we assure our selves that thou will not utterly cut off our
children, but that thou will raise them up, notwithstanding our present
desolations and captivity, or thou will re-ingraff them (if meant of the
conversion of the Jews to Christ, as has been conceived) and they shall
continue either here as thy people a long time, or be thine for ever upon their
calling again. Either way, though they may intimate Gods favor, yet not
general to all his servants children, but to the Jews; nor to them do they
intimate infant visible Churchmembership, or to any other, but such a stability
of their posterity in Gods favor, and their obedience as is quite different
from mere infant visible Churchmembership, and may be without it.

Yet again says Mr. B. There is a stable promise to all Gods people in general
that have children, Psalm. 103.17. [ But the mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto
childrens children.] And to be secured by promise of Gods mercy and
righteousness is the state of none without the Church.

Answ. The promise must be understood of so many and such mercy and
righteousness as that it may be true. But it is not true of all the children of
them that fears God, that they are visible Churchmembers, surely not of
abortives and still-born children; nor that they are partakers of saving mercy
and righteousness, for Ishmael, Esau, etc. were not so: And therefore it must
be understood of such temporal mercies, and so indefinitely as may agree to
some out of the Church, to whom God often shows mercy and righteousness of
performing promises of preservation, increase, etc. which he shows not to
others for their parents sake.

And, says Mr. B. if they were all to be kept out of the Church, I scarce
think that [children would be called an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of
the womb his reward,] Psalm. 127.3. nor the man happy that has his quiver full
of them. Nor would the sucking children be called as part of the solemn
assembly to the humiliation, Joel 2.16. 2 Chronicles. 20.13.

Answ. Children may be an heritage of the Lord, and his reward, though they be
not visible Churchmembers, as the land of Canaan was an heritage, Psalm. 135.12.
and he may be happy that has many of them, with that happiness which is
mentioned in the forepart of the 15th. v. of Psalm. 144. though they be no
Churchmembers: And yet the infants of the Israelites I acknowledge were members
of that Church or people, and that the Psalmist speaks of them. And so do the
Texts, Joel 2.16. 2 Chronicles. 20.13. though the assembling of them do no more
prove them visible Churchmembers, then the clothing of beasts with sackcloth,
Jonah 3.7, 8. does prove the beasts Churchmembers, it being usual in such
national fears and humiliations to have all whatsoever to be among the
mourners, whether Churchmembers or not; as the men of Tire were forced by
Nehemiah, chapter 13.19. to rest on the Sabbath.

Mr. B. adds. There is a standing promise to all the just, Prove. 20.7. [ The
just man walks in his integrity, his children are blessed after him.] There
is no sort of men without the Church that is pronounced blessed in Scripture. A
blessed people are Gods people, and those are the Church separated from the
cursed world. One lower blessing will not denominate a man or society, a
blessed man or society.

Answ. It is a standing promise or observation: But that all his children are
blessed, or that they are visible Churchmembers, much less that there is a
promise or law that all visible Churchmembers infants should be visible
Churchmembers cannot be thence inferred. That without the Church a person is
pronounced blessed is apparent from Ishmaels blessing, Genesis 17.20, 21. when he
was excluded the Covenant and cast out.

Yet more says Mr. B. If it were a good argument then, Deuteronomy. 4.37. [ because
he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them,] then it is
good still as to favor in general. So Deuteronomy. 10.15. Psalm. 69.36. Prove. 11.21.
The seed of the righteous shall be delivered.

Answ. It is no good argument, Because God loving the fathers of the Israelites
chose their seed after them, therefore he chooses the seed of every righteous
man to be his people, or that he shows favor to them. The contrary is
manifest in Lot, Job, and others, whose posterity God showed not favor as he
did to the posterity of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, whereof the former is termed
Gods friend, James 2.23. and it is certain from Romans 9.4, 5. and 11.28. that
God did and will show them that favor that he never did nor will show to the
posterity of any the most godly persons of other nations. What is said, Psalm.
69.36. is said only of the obedient Israelites; and if it be extended to
others, it can be meant only of those tha^ love the Name of God, and therefore
makes nothing for the visible Churchmembership of infants of believers either
by profession or real. Whether it be read, delivers himself, as Junius, or
shall be delivered, it is neither universally true, as is manifest in the
posterity of David, Josiah, and others; nor is any whit to the point of infants
visible Churchmembership, which may be without it, and that may be without it.
Nor is Mr. Bs. inference good, In Psalm. 37.26. there is a general promise to,
or declaration of the righteous, that [his seed is blessed,] and then they are
Churchmembers: For the Text neither speaks generally of any righteous man, but
of him that is merciful and lends, and the v. before shows it plainly to
be meant of outward blessing, as in freedom from extreme want of bread, and
the like, which must have its limitations that it may be true; there is not a
word of their infant visible Churchmembership.

There Is yet a reserve of Mr. B. which he thus marshals. In Isa. 61.8, 9. it is
promised I think of Gospel times [I will make an everlasting Covenant with
them, and their seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and their off^spring
among the people: all that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the
seed which the Lord has blessed. And cap. 62.12. They shall call them the holy
people, the redeemed of the Lord: and thou shall be called, sought out, a city
not forsaken.] Gospel promises then extend to [people and cities,] whereof
infants are a part. Isa. 65.23. [they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord,
and their offspring with them.] This is plain, and full, and durable.

Answ. Be it so, yet is it all impertinent to Mr. Bs. purpose. If Isai 61.8, 9.
be a promise of a thing to be fulfilled in Gospel times, yet it cannot be meant
of infants, since it is affirmed that the seed shall be known among the
Gentiles, that is, says Mr. Gattaker in his Annot. They shall so grow and
multiply, thrive and prosper, that they shall become very conspicuous, Matthew.
5.14, 16. and that it shall evidently appear to all that see them, that there
goes a blessing of God along with them, Acts 5.13. Which are spoken of the
Apostles and their preaching, not of infants and their Churchmembership, Isai
62.12. is said of Zion and Jerusalem, v. 1.11. and is thus by Mr. Gattaker in
his Annot. paraphrased. And men shall call them (to wit Sions sons or those
that belong to her, and shall now again people her, verse. 5.) The holy people,
the redeemed of the Lord] Such as God by rescuing and delivering them out of
the hands of so powerful adversaries, in so strange a manner, has showed that
he owneth for his. Sought out] or, sought unto, or sought after, as one had in
high estimation and regard; whom out of respect and regard men repair and
resort unto. See Psalm. 111.2. Contrary to that which was formerly said of thee
in the time of thy low and dejected estate, Jer. 30.17. A City not forsaken] as
she seemed to be formerly in the time of her captivity. See v. 4. Which shows
these things are meant of the Jews safety and honor after their return from
captivity, not of infants visible Churchmembership under the Gospel. Yet if it
were a prophecy of the Gospel times, it follows not infants shall be visible
Churchmembers because Cities comprehend infants. For in the Gospel sense,
Nation, House, City, comprehend only believers, and not infants of believers,
as such, as appears from these and other texts. Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 2.18, 19. 1
Pet. 2.5, 9. Isa. 65.23. is a prophecy of the welfare of the Jews after their
return from captivity, as v. 21, 22. before show, and the meaning is as Mr.
Gataker, Diodati and others expound it, they shall not bring forth children as
formerly to be consumed by war, pestilence and such evils, because Gods
blessing, which makes rich, healthy, safe, prosperous, is with them and their
children: which sense is quite wide from Mr. Bs. conceit of a law of infants
visible Churchmembership in the time of the Gospel.

He yet adds, What is necessary to be said in answer to the common objections,
as [that experience tells us all the seed of the righteous are not blessed] with
the like, I suppose already done in my Book of Baptism. All the seed of the
righteous are blessed, though not all with that blessing which cannot be lost
and cast away by themselves when they come to age.

Answ. What is said in his Book of Baptism, will be examined when I come to it.
For present it is but Mr. Bs. dictate that all the seed of the righteous are
blessed, the indefiniteness of the Scripture expressions the matter being
contingent, experience and the Apostles exposition of the promise Genesis 17.7.
Romans 9.6, 7, 8. are against it; yet if it were true, ^t follows not it must be
visible Churchmembership, it might be some other blessing, of which God has
store, yea it is certain it cannon be visible Churchmembership, since abortives
and still born infants, though the seed of the righteous, are never so blessed,
and the children of the holy seed Ezra 9.2. begotten on prohibited women were
to be cast out of the Jewish Church.

Mr: B. adds, If you say that the word [seed] does not necessarily include
infants. I answer, infants are part of the seed of the righteous, yea all their
seed are first infants. If therefore God have made general promises as to age
and person, who is he that dare limit it, without just proof that indeed God
has limited it? Does God say, that the seed of the righteous are not blessed
till they come to age? If he pronounce the seed blessed they must be blessed,
when they are first such a seed: And if any one age might be more included then
another, one would think it must be that wherein they are so merely the seed
of such as that they stand not on any distinct account of their own actual
faith or unbelief. For the seed of the righteous, as such, have a promised
blessing: But the seed of the righteous turning themselves to unrighteousness,
do turn from that blessing, and become accursed.

Answ. Mr. B. not holding children in the womb unborn to be visible
Churchmembers all this may be retorted, they are part of the seed of the
righteous, all their seed are such, how dare then Mr. B. limit the general
promises to infants born? The seed is blessed, and so must be visible
Churchmembers when they are first such a seed, which is as soon as they are
conceived in the womb, then they stand not on any distinct account of their own
actual faith or unbelief. What Mr. B. replies to this will answer himself.
However I deny that without just proof it is to be so limited I limit the
promises, that if God pronounce the seed blessed, they must be blessed when
they are first such a seed, for then if the blessing be justification,
glorification, they must be justified, glorified, before they believe, or are
obedient, which Mr. B. condemns in Antinomians. And if infants stand not on any
distinct account of their own actual faith, they are not Christian visible
Churchmembers, for all such are in their own persons first believers. Nor is it
true that the seed of the righteous as such (taking it reduplicatively) have a
promised blessing. For then all and only such should have it, and at all
times, the contrary is manifest in Cham, Esau, etc. Mr. B. concludes.

I suppose I have already been more tedious then you expected: I will therefore
add no more of these passages of Scripture, having said that which satisfies
me formerly to the same purpose, and having yet seen nothing that leaves me
unsatisfied. And also because one text either containing such a Law or Covenant
as you call for, or declaring to us that God did make such a Law or Covenant,
is as good as a thousand in point of authority.

Answ. It is true Mr. B. has been more tedious then was fit, considering the
impertinencie of his allegations, yet not much more then I expected, knowing it
to be his course especially in this controversy, to heap many texts
impertinently. That he is satisfied with his former writings, especially after
the answering of the chief parts by me and others, shows either his
injudiciousness or his heedlesness, or unwillingness through prejudice to see
his error. That there is not one text for his purpose brought in his Letter to
me, is made manifest by this answer, the rest shall be examined after the
answer to the remainder of his Letter if God permit.

SECT. LXII. M^. Bs. 9th. and 10th. Qu. about the repealableness and repeal of
his imagined Law of infants visible Churchmembership, and his eight additionals
are answered.
THe next Qu. says he, that I should speak to is, whether these Laws, or
Covenants, or promises, are capable of a revocation, or repeal? And I shall
take this for a question that needs no further debate, among men that know what
a Law or Promise is. Gods immutability and perfection may make some ^aws
unrepealable, while the subject remains: but otherwise the thing it self is
capable of it. Only where a promise or law is but for a limited time, when the
time is expired it cease, and the cessation is as to the nulling of it, equal
to a revocation or abrogation. I put in this question, lest you should
hereafter change your mind and say, that indeed it is a law, or promise, or
covenant, by which the right of Churchmembership is conferred, and infants
dedicated to God: but it is but a transeunt law or covenant.] Answ. If so then
it is either immediately or presently transeunt, or at a certain limited time
only, when it will cease. The former is certainly false and intolerable. For
1. they are promises and laws for the future, and therefore cease not
immediately. 2. That were to make God the most unfaithful promiser and mutable
Lawmaker in the world, if his promise and his laws cease as soon as they are
made. Nay it makes them to be no laws or promises. 3. It was one standing law
and promise that belonged to the Nation of the Jews successively. And God did
not make his promise anew to every infant that was made a Churchmember, nor
renew his law to every parent to enter their Children into his Covenant by the
sign of Circumcision. Were not the circumcised Israelites in the Wilderness
made members by the efficacy of the former Covenant of God remaining in force.
And did former Laws oblige to Circumcision till Christ? Else there were but few
members, nor but few that circumcised warrantably, if the promise and precept
did extend but to the person that it was first delivered to, and every one else
must likewise have a personal promise and precept. The mother of Christ cannot
then be proved to have been a Churchmember in infancy. If it be said that these
promises were limited in the making of them, to a certain time when they were
to cease, I say when that is proved we shall believe it, which I have not yet
seen done.

Answ. The occasion of this question I conceive to have been the words in my
second Letter, [Wherefore I still press you that you would show me where that
law, ordinance, statute or decree of God is, that is repealable, that is, which
may in congruous sense be either by a later act said to be repealed or else to
be established as a law for ever.] The reason of my speech was, because I
perceived by his former Letter, Mr. B. made his law unrepealed to be by promise
and precept. Now though I conceived a precept might in congruous sense be said
to be repealed, yet I conceived a promise (which it seems is the law he means)
not in congruous sense repealable. For though a promise be a law to the
promiser, yet I know not how congruously it should be repealed. It Is true, the
act of promising being transeunt cease, but that cannot be repealed; that
which is done, cannot be infectum, not done. The obligation of the promise may
cease, if it were limited to a certain time, and that expired; or if it were
upon condition, and that fails; or to a person not existent, or of a thing not
feasible, or unlawful: The former is not by repeal, but by expiration, which
Mr. Cawdrey does distinguish from re^eal and substitution, Of the Sabbath, part
1. chapter 2. and part 3. chapter 3. The later are not by repeal of the promise (for it
stands in force as much as ever, (but by accident through intervenient
impediments there is for present an intermission of the obligation. Repeal
properly is by an after declaration, which cannot be congruously said of God,
that he did promise indeed such a thing, but now he will not promise it, or
will not stand to his promise, it were to make God fickle, and unfaithful. And
therefore I expected a Law of Precept to make infants visible Churchmembers, to
be assigned by Mr. B. for me to prove repealed, and not a law of promise,
which is not in congruous sense repealable, and therefore a repeal properly so
called not to be expected of me. Which being rightly conceived answers this
question, and saves me the reply to what he says, to prevent an imaginary
change of my mind and assertion not yet delivered.

He adds. And it falls in with the last question, which is, whether these
promises be indeed revoked and ceased, and these laws repealed or ceased. And
here it is that I have long expected your solid proof, together with the
satisfactory answer to my arguments to the contrary. And so I shall leave this
task in your hands. Sure I am that Christ never came to cast out of the Church,
but to gather more in: much less to cast out all the infants, even all of that
age in which himself was head of that Church: But to gather together in one the
children of God that were scattered, Joh 11.52. And therefore he would of^ have
gathered all Jerusalem and Judaea, even the national Church that then was unto
himself, as the true head, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and they would not. It was not because he would not (as intending a new
frame, where infants could have no place) but because they would not, and so
cast out themselves and their infants. Certainly it is the joy of the formerly
desolate Gentiles, that they shall have many more children then she that had an
husband, and not fewer, Gal. 4.25, 26, 27. And we as Isaac are children of the
promise, even that promise which extended to the infants with the parents. Gal.
4.28.

Answ. I have examined all that Mr. B. says in his answer to the 8th.
question, and do profess that I find no promise, no not in Genesis 3.15. of
infants visible Churchmembership, or any precept but that of circumcision, Genesis
17. which Mr. B. confesses to be repealed in respect of the outward act, and
for the dedicating of a child to God by prayer to God to sanctify it, or vow
to bring it up for God if God give life, etc. or adjuration that they should
cleave to God left in writing, or any other way upon record, I still allow it,
and so need prove no repeal. So that in truth I see no reason Mr. B. should
expect that I should perform his task, of proving a repeal of that which is
not, but that he should make good the task I impose on him to prove such a law
or ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership by promise or precept
unrepealed, which I expect to be done at latter Lammas; And to his confident
speeches I reply. Sure I am from Luke 2.34. Joh. 9.39. that Jesus Christ came
that many of the Jewish Church might be left or cast out of his Church, from
Matthew. 28.19. and other places before alleged, that he intended to leave all
infants out of his visible Church since his coming in the flesh, though he
were an infant head of the Church, that though he died to gather together in
one the children of God that were scattered abroad, Joh. 11.52. yet he
intended not to gather them into a visible Church national comprehending
infants, that he preached not to any infants, nor by his Disciples baptized any
of them, that it is false which Mr. B. says, that he would often have gathered
all Jerusalem and Judaea, even the national Church that then was, unto himself
as the true head, as his visible Church, from Matthew. 28.19. Mark ^6.15, 16. and
the course he, John Ba^tist, and the Apostles followed, that he did intend a
new frame of his Church visible, where infants could have no place, that
Jerusalem which is above, the Covenant of the Gospel had more children in the
Gentile Churches then the Covenant of the Law in the Jewish Church, though
infants were not visible members in the Christian Church as they were in the
Jewish; that the promise meant Gal 4.28. is not a pro^ise to a believer and his
natural seed of visible Churchmembership, much less to every visible professor
and his seed, but a promise of righteousness and blessing, and the spirit
through the faith of Jesus Christ upon all them that believe, as is plain from
Gal. 3.7, 8, 9, 11, 14, 16, 18, 21, 22, 29. But Mr. B. has yet more work for
me.

Before I end, says he, I shall be bo^d to put two or three questions to you
out of your last Letter. Qu 1. Whether the circumcised servants of Israel sold
away to another nation, and so separated from the Civil state of Israel* did ^o
nomine cease to be Churchmembers, though they forsook not God? and so of the
infants if they were sold in infancy? If you affirm it, then prove it. If you
deny it, then infants might be Churchmembers that we^e not of the Commonwealth.

Answ. Such servants and infants were members of the Jewish Commonwealth, as
they were of the Church, in right undoubtedly, in fact if they owned the Jews
God and Moses Laws, and submitted to the Senate of Elders, so far as they knew
and could be permitted, if they did not, though they forsook not God, yet they
were neither of the Jewish Church, nor Commonwealth, as Cornelius, Acts 10th,
was not of the Jewish Church or policy. None was of right of the Jewish Church,
who was not of the Commonwealth; even then when they were violently held under
a foreign power (as when they were under the Chaldean Persian, Greek and Roman
Empires) they did submit to both though with much reluctance.

Qu. 2. If (as you say) it was on the Jews rejection of Christ that they were
broken off from being Gods people, were those thousands of Jews that believed
in Christ so broken off, or not, who continued successively a famous Church at
Jerusalem, which came to be a Patriarchal seat. Whether then were not the
children of the Disciples and all believing Jews Churchmembers in infancy? If
no, then it was somewhat else then unbelief that broke them off.

Answ. The believing Jews were not broken off from the people of God, but from
the Jewish people or Church national which rejected Christ: these believing
Jews continued a famous Church after some time of publishing the Gospel and the
Jews presecuting the faith, sepated from the Jewish Church, not having infants
Churchmembers, and they were broken off from the Jewish Church national not by
unbelief, but by faith in Christ to which they did adhere, and could not be
conjoined to the Jewish Church without rejection of Christ. Mr. B. adds.

If yea, then Qu. 3. Whether it be credible that he who came not to cast out
Jews, but to bring in Gentiles, breaking down the partition wall, and making of
two one Church, would have such a Linsey Woolsy Church of party colors, or
several forms: so as that the Church at Jerusalem should have infant members,
and the Church at Rome should have none. Jews infants should be members and not
Gentiles.

Answ. Christ came to cast out the unbelieving Jews, not from the Jewish Church
national, they continued still in it, but from the invisible Church of true
believers which was in that nation, to which was joined the Gentile Church of
true believers, which were all of one sort, whether at Rome or Jerusalem, to
wit, all that had one spirit, one faith, one baptism; not one infant in the
visible Church Christian either at Rome or Jerusalem.

Qu. 4. If unbelief brake them, will not repentance graff them in? And so
should every repenting believing Jews infants be Churchmembers?

Answ. Faith and repentance will ingraff every penitent believer into the
Church invisible, the profession thereof will ingraff them into the visible
Church, but not their infants, though the believer be a Jew.

Qu* 5. Was not Christ's Church before his incarnation spiritual, and gathered
in a spiritual way?

Answ. The invisible was, the visible Jewish national was not.

Qu. 6. How prove you that it was a blemish to the old frame, that infants were
members? or that Christ's Church then and now are of two frames in regard of the
subjects age?

Answ. I say not that it was a blemish, but that it was a more imperfect state
of the Church then in that and other re^ards. The later question is answered
Sect. 50, 51, 52. before.

Qu. 7. In what regard is the new frame better^d by casting out infants which
were in the old?

Answ. By leaving out infants and taking in only believers, the Church is more
spiritual.

Qu. 8. Whether any Jew at age was a member of the old Church without
professing faith (in the Articles necessary to salvation) repentance and
obedience? And wherein the supposed new call and frame does in this differ from
the old; save only that a more full and express revelation of Christ,
requires a more full ex^ress faith?

Answ. The former question is somewhat difficult, it being hard to determine
what Articl^s were necessary to salvation, which is a question so hard, that I
should not be unwilling to learn of Mr. B. This I can only say, that I know
not what profession each Jew did make, or was to make. I find a confession
enjoined Deuteronomy. 26. and imprecation chapter 27. I find idolaters, blasphemers, and
some others adjudged to death, yet I find not in the times of
mal-administration of Moses Laws, that idolaters, and such great sinners were
cast out of the Church, but were members of it. The later is answered before
often enough.

Mr. B. tells me. You may see the words near the end of your Letter that
occasion the 7. last questions, and toward the middle that occasioneth the
first. As for your motion of my fully describing the privileges of
Churchmembers, I shall add no more at this time to what is already elsewhere
said of it.

Answ. I knew Mr. B. so well, that I expected I should have questions enough,
though I desired only a few Texts, its his vain to multiply questions which
might be omitted, and serve to weary the reader and respondent, and for
advantage to himself to insult on his antagonist, though without cause. But how
ill he deals with me in writing so many sheets about questions taken from my
words, when I desired only a line or two about his texts, and how ill he deals
with me and the reader* who will not distinctly show me the privileges of his
visible Churchmembership, the denial of which he makes so heinous, and from
which he argues so much, I leave to the considerable Reader to judge. But Mr.
B. is yet more severe to me, after all my work in answering him, I must be
corrected ere I be dismissed.

SECT. LXIII. Mr. Bs. ten Calumniatory questions, and Conclusion of his Letter,
are answered.
ANd now ( says he) I have gone thus far with you, in an enquiry into the
truth, I entreat you be not too much offended with me, if I conclude with a few
applicatory questions to your self* Q. 1. Is it not an undertaking as palpably
absurd as most ever any learned sober Divine in the world was guilty of, to
maintain that [infants were visible Churchmembers not by any promise or
precept, but by a transeunt fact, and that there was no law or ordinance
determining it should be so, but only a fact of God, which is a transeunt
thing not repealable?]

Answ. I am resolved not to be angry with Mr. Bs. interrogatories he ministers
to me, imagining he does it like an Ordinary in salutem animae, though I pity
him that takes so much on him as thus magisterially to censure what he does
not, or will not understand, presuming perhaps he may take on him to determine
as an irrefragable Doctor, after so much magnifying of his writings by learned
and unlearned ones. But to his question I answer negatively, and return it back
to him: is it not an undertaking palpably absurd, to make visible
Churchmembership to be a right to a benefit by Gods promise as the sole
efficient, and another faith as the condition?

But, says he, either by this fact you mean Legislation and Covenant making,
or not: if you do: what a saying is it that infants were made Churchmembers not
by Covenant, but by a Covenant making, not by a Law, but by a Law making. If
not: either you must say, that God makes duty without any law, and gives right
to the benefit without any promise, or Covenant-grant as the cause; or else,
that it is no benefit to have right to Churchmembership, and no duty to enter
into that relation, and to accept of that benefit, and to be devoted to God.
Which ever of these ways you choose (and one you must choose, or change your
opinion) has the world heard of any more unreasonable and ridiculous, or else
more unbeseeming a Divine, from a learned sober man of that profession? Pardon
the high charge: Let the indifferent ju^ge.

Answ. That I need choose none of the ways he mentions, nor change my opinion,
is amply showed Sect. 55. this high charge would have been le^t out had he more
sobriety and humility. I look upon it and overlook it as ridiculous and
contemptible, and go on.

Qu. 2. Is it not a great disgrace to all your followers, that they will be led
so far into such ways of Schism, and be so confident that they are righter and
wiser then others, and that by such unreasonable arguings and shifts as these,
which one would think any man should laugh at that knows what a law, promise,
or Covenant is? And do you not prove, that it is not because of the evidence of
truth, but by your mere interest or confident words, these people are changed
and held to your opinion? Do they know what [a trans^unt fact is, that without
law or Covenant makes Churchmembers?] I say, do they know this? which no man
that ever breathed till now, ner ever man will know again? And do you not
proclaim them men of d^stempered consciences, that dare go on in such a Schism,
on the encouragement of such fancies as were hatched so long after their
perversion, and never waking man I think did before so solemnly maintain.]

Answ, Ne saevi magne sacerdos. The followers of me in the point of Baptism are
not led by shifts, but the plain word of God, Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.16. Acts
2.38. and 8.37. from which Mr. Bs. dream of a law or ordinance of infants
visible Churchmembership unrepealed, his conceit of infants discipleship
mediate by the faith of the parent, is too silly a conceit to draw an
intelligent man that will examine it, specially when they have so plain
Scripture proof for their warrant, as the institution of Christ and practice of
the Apostles, which they follow without Schism, endeavoring a reformation of
that great corruption of infant Baptism, which has been very pernicious to the
Church of God. If any Schism have been, a great cause has been in Mr. Bs.
virulent charges of the truth, as if it were a damnable error accursed of God,
and his followers violent opposition (of which Bewdley has had sad experience)
of men for doing their duty in being baptized after profession of faith, and
breaking bread together, though convinced by Mt. Bs. own arguing in his Book of
Baptism, page 342. that it should be so. And if in this point they conceive
themselves righter and wiser then others, they are not to be blamed, having the
plain word of God as interpreted even by Paedobaptists themselves, yea almost
all Commentaries, for their warrant. And truly though I delight not in
recriminations, yet I may justly retort Mr. Bs. words. Is it not a great
disgrace to all Mr. Bs. followers, that they will be led so far into such ways
of Schism as Mr. B. leads them into, who would have none to have pastoral
charge with public pay, that will not admit to the Lords Supper the baby
sprinkled, that inveighs against Baptism of believers now used as if it were
murder and adultery, that represents them that deny infant Baptism in the most
odious way he can to the world, and is so confident that he is wiser and
righter then others, and that by such unreasonable arguings and shifts as
these, a law and ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership by promise and
precept unrepealed no where extant, a discipleship by the parents faith
mediately without any learning of their own, which one would think any man
should laugh at that knows what visible Churchmembership, or Discipleship is?
And does he not prove, that it is not because of the evidence of truth, but by
his mere interest or confident word^, the people of Kederminster, Bewdley, and
elsewhere, are changed from the truth of the Scripture made known to them, and
held to his opinion? Do they know wh^t an ordinance or law of infants visible
Churchmembership and mediate Discipleship is, which I find not any man vented
before Mr. B. And does he not proclaim them men of distempered consciences, that
dare go on i^ such a Schism as Mr. B. and with him many persons are brought
into by him from me, and the baptized in Bewdley and elsewhere, on the
encouragement of such fancies as were hatched so lately, and never waking man I
think did before Mr. B. so solemnly maintain?

Qu. 3. Is it not a desperate undertaking, and dare you adventure on it, to
justify all the world before Christ's incarnation except the Jews, from the
guilt of not dedicating their children to God, to take him to be their God, and
themselves to be his people? Yea, to justify all Jews against this charge,
that should neglect or refuse to engage their children to God in Covenant as
members of his Church? And does not he that says there is no law, say there is
no transgression?

Answ. He does: But Mr. B. should remember there is a law against bea^ing false
witness against his neighbor, which he much urges against Mr. Air and
others; but himself is deeply guilty of it in his high charges, and
particularly in this* that I justify all Jews neglecting to engage their
children to God in covenant as members of his Church, and all the world not
dedicating their children to God. Let him prove either, if he can; if not, let
him tremble at his desperate undertaking to uphold his lie of infant
Churchmembership and Baptism by such lies as these, and fear the fate of liars.
What I hold, may be seen in that which goes before.

Qu. 4 Dare you yet justify also at the Bar of God, all the world since
Christ's incarn^tion from the guilt of sin, in not dedicating their children to
Christ and entering them into his Covenant as members of his Church? Dare you
maintain that all the world is sinlesse in this respect?

Answ. I dare justify the non-baptizing them, and am assured Mr. B. cannot
justify the baptizing of infant children.

Qu. 5. Have you well considered of the fruit of your way^ apparent in England
and Ireland at this day? Or have you not seen enough to make you suspect and
fear whether indeed God own your way or not? And is it any wonder if posterity
be left in controversy about the History of former times, when you can
venture, even in these times when the persons are living in our company, to
tell me that [you think I am misinformed that they are Anabaptists, and you
think that there are very few of them that were ever baptized,] when of many
that we know, and multitudes that we hear of, there are so few that were not
before against infant Baptism, and the Se^kers first such, and when the Quakers
themselves commonly cry down infant Baptism; and it is one of the questions
that they send to ^e, and others to answer, [how we can prove it by express
Scripture without consequences, or else confess ou^ selves false Prophets.

Answ. My ways in opposing infant Baptism, and endeavoring to restore
believers Baptism, are such (setting aside my infirmities) as upon
conside^ation I find cause not to be ashamed of, but to rejoice in, and
conceive by many evidenc^s that God own^ them. What fruit of them in England
and Ireland they have had, I do not very well know; if they that are termed
Anabaptists do hold unjustifiable positions or practices, they are not the
fruit of my ways, any more then the Nicola^^ans, Gnostics, and others ways,
were the fruits of the Apostles preaching. My conscience bears me witness,
and so will the people where I have taught, the brethren with whom I have
walked yea, I think some of my Antagonists, with whom I have acted in the
public employment of approving Preachers, and perhaps the most eminent persons
in England, that I have opposed the errors risen, and have sought reformation
without separation, have joined upon all occasions in the common cause with
dissenters; insomuch that I had hoped impudence it self would never have dared
so to belie me, as to make Schism, Quakerism, and such like evils the fruit of
my ways. If many rents and errors have sprung up by accident after my
writings, they are no more to be charged on me, then Antinomianism,
Swenekfieldianism, etc. were to be charged on Luther; or Brownism, Familism,
etc. on the Antiprelatists. What I wrote to Mr. B. I think still, yea, Mr. Bs.
own relations confirm me, they are not Anabaptists, though they be against
infant baptism. Those very persons, or some of that society which sent to Mr.
B. (if my intelligence do not deceive) though they they were against infant
baptism, yet neglected baptism when convinced of it as their duty, and they
might have been baptized; and as it was foretold them they were likely to be
without the opportunity, so it came to pass, for they were after carried away
with the delusion of the quakers. It is not my observation alone, but it is the
Authors conceit who wrote the book against them termed The quakers blazing
star, who was carried away once by them, that the living above ordinances and
as Seekers has been one of the chief ways which has brought it in, God justly
leaving them to be deluded by Satan who would not submit to the way of Gods
ordinances; and he advises persons, as to labor to be well grounded in faith
and repentance, so to join in Church communion (of which he takes the Churches
of the baptized to be most right, and accordingly has himself been joined by
Baptism to them) as the best preservative against it. For my part, I think Mr.
Bs. and other Ministers maintaining infant Baptism do give most advantage and
encouragement to them, both to inveigh against them as men that will not yield
to truth, but teach a manifest error, and therefore not to be heard; and then
Mr. Saltmarsh and others delusions about water baptism as now ceased, living in
the spirit, expectation of it, no true Ministry now without the spirit as the
Apostles had, and such like conceits driving them off from the Churches of the
baptized, they are caught by those emissaries from Rome, and other agents of
Satan, with that Divelish delusion, God justly suffering Satan to delude them
with lies, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved, 2 These. 2.10. So that I have as much cause to think quakerism the fruit
of Mr. Bs. ways as of mine own. Nor will it be any wonder if posterity be left
in controversy about the History of former times, when such a one as Mr. B.
shall continue to load me with false accusations, with which I have many ways
showed my self not chargeable; and not only he, but also Mr. Robert Baillee in
his Dissuasives, Mr. Edwards in his Gangrena's, and others shall in English and
Latin heap so many untruths on godly persons because dissenters, while they
lived to show the falsity of them.

Qu 6. Have you felt the guilt which we too strongly fear you have incurred of
the perverting of so many souls, opening them such a gap to schism, contempt of
the Ministry and Apostasy, destroying a hopeful reformation that cost so dear:
or weakening our hands in the work, and filling the adversaries mouths with
scorn, enticing the Jesuits and Friars to seem your proselytes, and list
themselves among you, as the hopeful party to befriend their cause, hardening
thousands both of the Papists and profane, and settling them again on their
dr^gs, when many once began to shake! O what a Church might we have had, and
were likely to have had? had it not been for the Separatists and you? And what
a lamentable confusion are we now brought into by these? Have these things
touched your heart.

Answ. How far these things have touched my heart, I must give an account to God
my Judge, and not to Mr. B. who with his fraternity I perceive would pass a
heavy doom on me, and scarce award me a place in earth or heaven: And no
marvel, if I were so pernicious an instrument as he describes me. But may I not
require Mr. B. to show me by what actions I have done any of these things? Is
Mr. B. allowed to accuse in generals, and not to instance in particulars? may
he without control accuse and not prove? May he have liberty, as in a Chancery
bill has been wont, to put in all he can imagine, whether true or false? Is
not this the manner of quakers and scolds? Are my answers often made of no
avail to clear my self, but that Mr, B. will still be imputing that to me,
which my writings and courses do absolve me from? No marvel Dr. Owen said of
him, Appendix to his Vindic Evang. page 5. A man that does not know him as I
do, would by his writings take him to be immitis and immisericors, a very
Achilles, that will not pardon a man in his grave, but will take him up and cut
him in a thousand pieces. I tell Mr. B. plainly, it is not my doctrine but Mr.
Bs. which perverts souls, I mean his doctrine of Baptism and Churchmembership,
besides his other errors; that neither my doctrine nor practice open a gap to
Schism, but tend to the contrary, unity of Baptism being one of the bonds of
Christians, Ephesians. 4.4. the restoring of which is the regular way to union* Mr.
B. by his violent opposing it and the assertors of it, does really open a gap
to Schism, I open no gap to contempt of the Ministry, but they themselves do it
by opposing truth, and other ways, Apostasy from Christ or godliness is no
fruit of my doing, but is rather caused by those that urge persons to renounce
the right Baptism and Communion of the baptized, of which I fear Mr. B. is
guilty. A right reformation according to Gods word, cannot be while infant
Baptism continues, in seeking to destroy it I promote reformation, Mr. B. by
maintaining it destroys reformation, and by proposals shows his inclination to
persecution, which if I hinder I rejoice. I weaken not Mr. Bs. hands in
preaching the Gospel, but strengthen them, if I enervate his error I am glad;
he has most unbrotherlike endeavored to weaken my hands, and to stop my
mouth. I fill not adversaries mouths with scorn* of him, but he has thrown as
much dirt as he could on me, in his writings* I entice not Jesuits and
Friars, and if they creep in among those of our judgment, is it any more then
Jude v. 4. speaks of in his time? Can Mr. B. say they are not among his party?
I harden no Papists, but show their bottom error, nor profane persons, but
take the right way to undeceive them; they that maintain their infant Baptism,
settle them on their dregs, I mean their carnal presumption; by which they take
themselves to be Christians without knowledge of Christ. The Church that was
likely to have been Mr. Bs. way, may be discerned by the Elders, by the
Scottish Church, Mr. Bs. Church at Kederminster, the associated Ministers in
Wocestershire and their Churches. Confusion is too great, for want of restoring
Christ's order, more would be if Mr. Bs. way were imposed, and no small
oppression on tender consciences and dissenting brethren. I may say, oh what a
Church might we have had, if it had not been for Mr. B. and other such violent
Paedobaptists as he is, opposing Christ's way.

Qu. 7. Is [a transeunt fact, making infants Churchmembers without Law,
promise, or Covenant] a sufficient medium to encourage you to venture on all
these horrid things, and run such hazards as you have done? or is it possible
that an humble sober man, and a tender conscience, durst make all this havoc,
and stand out in it, so many years considerately as you have done, and this
upon such a palpably unreasonable pretense: When you should prove to us the
revocation of infants Churchmembership, to tell us that they ^ad it only by a
transeunt fact? Is this a safe ground to build so great a weight on? Sir, my
conscience witnesses, that it is not your reproach that is the end of speaking
these unpleasing words to you, but some compassion on you (do not scorn it) and
more on your poor followers; and most on the Church of God which you have so
much injured and troubled.

Answ. I venture on no such horrid things, nor run such hazards as Mr. B.
imagines, nor is the transeunt fact that I build on, but Christ's institution
Matthew. 28.19. though that transeunt fact I assign is sufficient for the
purpose I allege it, and I cross interrogate Mr. B. Is it possible that an
humble sober man, and a tender conscience, should make such foul work as he
has done by his writings, upon such a p^lpably unreasonable pretense, as a Law
of infants visible Churchmembership, by promise and precept unrepealed, no
where extant, and a mediate Discipleship hatched in his brain? My reproach is a
small matter, did it not tend to darken the truth I should neglect it, nor
should I have answered these questions so fully, had not these things been
impar^ed to the Preacher and others at Bewdley, ere they came to my hands.
Though my reproach were not finis operantis, yet must it needs be finis operis.
I thank Mr. B. for his compassion on me and my followers, I have the like on
him and his followers. I do not scorn his compassion, but pity his prejudice
and pertinacy. If I have injured and troubled the Church my Antagonists have
compelled me, the Lord knows I had not a resolution to print, till the
Assembly neglected the matter, and determined against me and the truth unheard.
That I have injured the Church by printing I believe not, it is certain Mr. B.
has extremely injured me and the truth, and troubled the Church of God, by
printing his Book of Baptism. I should not have peace in my conscience did I
not endeavor to detect his and other Paedobaptists fallacies, which I crave
liberty to do, and shall easily pass by personal reproaches.

Qu. 8. Can you prove that ever there was one age, or Church (particular) on
earth since Adam till about 200. years ago, that the Anabaptists rose, wherein
infants were not de facto taken for members of the Church? If you can do it:
Let Us hear your proof

Answ. I can, and for proof look back to Sect. 50, 51, 52, 57. besides
Constantin, Augustine, mentioned by Mr. B. p 329. Nazianzen, Hierom, etc.
unbaptized though of Christian parents till adult.

Qu. 9. Can you bring us proof of any one infant of true Church Members, that
was not rightfully a Churchmember himself from the creation till Christ's days?
or from the creation till this day? except the Anabaptists, who reject the
benefit; whose case (as I said before) I will not presume to determine?

Answ. I can, for proof look back to Sect. 50, 51, 52, 57.

Qu. 10. Seeing that infants have been de facto Churchmembers from the creation
to this day (as far as any records can lead us) is it likely that the Lord, and
head and all-sufficient Governor of his Church, would have permitted his
Church till now to be actually made up of such subjects, as in regard of age he
disallowed? and suffer his Church to be wrong framed till now? Or is it a
reasonable, modest and lawful undertaking, to go about now in the end of the
world to make God a new framed Church, as to the age of the subjects? And is it
not more modest and safe, to live quietly in a Church of that frame as all the
Saints in heaven lived in, till the other day, as a few Anabaptists with vile
and sinful means, and miserable success, did attempt an alteration?

Answ. This question arises from these suppositions, 1. that infants have been
de facto Churchmembers from the creation to this day. 2. That all the Saints in
heaven lived in a Church that had infants visible Churchmembers till less then
200. years ago. 3. That the Anabaptists in Germany in less then 200. years
attempted the alteration first of of leaving infants out of the visible Church.
4. That they did it with vile and sinful means and miserable success. The
first of these is not true, as is showed in the foregoing Sections, chiefly
those in which the 8th. question of this Letter of Mr. B. is answered, the
second is showed to be false Sect. 52. wherein it is proved the Apostles lived
in a Church that had not infants. The third is false, for both Christ altered
it, and when the corruption of infant Baptism had overspread the Western
Churches, many besides the late Anabaptists, as Petrus de Bruis and many other
Saints in heaven did alter it. The fourth is in part false, For I think the
Anabaptists so called, did not alter infant visible Churchmembership with vile
and sinful means, but some of them (not all) did by vile and sinful means seek
to set up a temporal dominion of the Saints (as I fear some now called
Quinto-monarchians do) which is not to be imputed to all that are of the same
way in point of discipline and ordinances, and that though this thing of
erecting a temporal dominion had miserable success, yet the restoring of
Baptism has had success as other reformations, as of the Waldenses, Hussites,
Non-conformists and others, who though by clamours of Preachers, and violence
of Princes, they have been for a time suppressed, yet a remnant have been
preserved, who have in time revived, and we hope notwithstanding all the
clamours, accusations, and practices, used to corrupt and suppress them, will
spread and grow up through the blesing of God. And to Mr. Bs. questions I
answer* my aim is not to erect a new framed Church to God, but to reduce it to
the frame Christ and his Apostles left it in, though it were after some ages
altered by the corruption of infant Baptism, which had its original from the
gross error that by it Gods grace was given, and otherwise the infants should
perish. And though in that Church, who were for infant Baptism many were Saints
now in heaven, yet it is not safe to continue that error, any more then to
continue the error of infant Communion now by Papists and Protestants
rejected, though it were many hundreds of years practiced in the same
Churches. And sure I wonder if he condemn me for seeking reformation of infant
Baptism, how Mr. B. could justify himself for not living quietly in the Church
of England, as it was under the Prelates, though there were among them in that
Church Saints now living in heaven, but seeking the reformation of discipline
and ceremonies of humane invention, though greater troubles followed thereon,
then I think has followed this reformation I endeavor, and then I hope ever
will. Surely if the way I take, and propound, and prosecute were followed, the
reformation would be easy and safe, and that it is not followed, will be laid
to the charge of Mr. B. and other Paedobaptists as their sin, nor can all his
or their wit be able to clear them from it, nor from the guilt of breaking
their solemn Covenant to endeavor the reformation of these Churches according
to Gods word. He concludes,

Sir pardon the weakness, and bear with the plainness and freeness of Your
faithful Brother (though not as is meet) Rich. Baxter. May 14. 1655.

Answ. I pray the Lord to pardon Mr. Bs. violent and clamourou^, though I hope
not wilful opposing of the truth, and I love him not the worse for his plain
dealing, yet cannot patiently bear his falsehoods, wherein he accuses the truth
and servants of the living God, and by showing him his errors, and evil
dealing, have endeavored to acquit my self as his faithful brother, as was
meet, however he has been, or shall be toward me affected.

He adds after, Sir, if you have any thing of moment to say, in reply to these,
which you have not yet in your writings brought forth, I shall be willing to
consider of it: But if you have not, I pray you tell me so in two words, and
spare the rest of your pains (as for me) and trouble me no more with matters
of this nature. For truly I have no sufficient vacancy from greater works. Yea,
I am constrained to forbear much greater then these. R. B. After this, he tells
me, That whereas I preached a Sermon at Bewdley, in which I refuted by many
arguments infants visible Churchmembership, I must be either mutable or
hypocritical, if I deny such a law and ordinance which I took on me then to
refute, and desires a Copy of that Sermon, that he may show the sad mistakes
and vanity of those my arguments.

To which I answer, 1. I refuted Mr. Bs. law of infants visible
Churchmembership, as a thing pretended, not as a thing real, and so am neither
mutable nor hypocritical, in denying such a law. 2. I have no delight in Mr.
Bs. writings of this subject, unless there were more ingenuity and solidity in
them, then I yet find, and therefore am willing to gratify him with no more
of my manuscripts in this kind. 3. As for the Copy of my Sermon he has the
matter of it with enlargement in the 50, 51, and 52. Section of this Book,
which when he answers, fragili querens illidere dentem offendet solido. 4. What
I had more to say then I have printed, he may perceive by my Books, and however
Mr. B. conceives, yet I conceive that the reformation or confirmation of infant
Baptism, is a matter of as great moment as the things Mr. B. is intentive on.
However, he might have answered my Letter without any of this trouble he has
put himself to: But since he chose this way, I have thought it necessary to
make this reply, and so to go on to the examining the rest of his Book, not yet
examined by me at large, though there be little which is not answered in this
and other parts before.

SECT. LXIIII. My Answer in the Dispute and Sermon to the argument of Mr. B. of
Baptism, part 1. chapter 6. about the non-repeal of infants Churchmembership,
because neither in justice nor mercy, is vindicated.
PLain Scripture proof, etc. part 1. chapter 6. Mr B. speaks thus. My first
argument is this. If God have repealed this ordinance, and revoked this
merciful gift of infants Churchmembership, then it is either in mercy, or in
justice; either for their good, or for their hurt. But he has neither repealed
it in mercy for their good, nor in justice for their hurt: therefore he has
not at all repealed it. I will hide nothing from you that Mr. T. has said
against this argument, either in our public Dispute, or in his Sermon. The
sufficiency of the enumeration in the major proposition, he never offered to
deny: nor indeed is there any ground to deny it. It must needs be for the good
or hurt of infants that they are put out; and so must needs be in mercy or
justice, For God makes not such great alterations in his Church and Laws, to
no end, and of no moment, but in mere indifferency.

Answ. In the Dispute at Bewdley, Jan. 1. 1649. and the Sermon shortly after, I
did not understand Mr. Bs. opinion as I do now; nor did before the writing of
his last Letter, conceive of his law and ordinance of visible Churchmembership
what it was, and where it was to be found; nor do I yet conceive clearly what
the benefit and privilege is to infants by their visible Churchmembership
which he asserts. And therefore if I gave not so clear an answer to this
argument as were requisite, it is to be imputed partly to the unacquaintedness
with it at that time, partly to Mr. Bs. artifice, who carried himself close in
the Dispute for indirect advantage, and still is unwilling to show his mind
fully, though desired by me in the Letter before set down. What is his opinion
about the law unrepealed, is considered before; what he imagines are the
privileges and benefit of his infants visible Churchmembers, seems to be
intimated in these passages of his Letter in the 4th. qu. set down here, sect.
55. when he says, I suppose you will not deny that it was a benefit to be the
covenanted people of God, to have the Lord engaged to be their God, and to take
them for his people, to be brought so near him, and to be separated from the
common and unclean, from the world, and from the strangers to the Covenant of
promises, that live as without God in the world, and without hope. In another
passage, set down Sect. 56. To be a member of the Church, is to be a member of
a society taking God in Christ to be their God, and taken by him for his
special people. The act which makes each member is of the same nature with that
which makes the society. The relation then essentially contains 1. a right to
the great benefits of Gods sovereignty over men, Christ's headship, and that
favor, protection, provision, and other blessings which are due from such a
powerful and gracious a Sovereign to such subjects, and from such a head to
his members: As also a right to my station in the body, and to the inseparable
benefits thereof. Which how false they are, is in part showed above. He
likewise expresses the leaving infants out of the visible Church Christian, as
if it were a casting out, excommunicating, by a punitive execution of a curse
or law on them, chapter 5. part 1. of plain Scripture proof, etc. wherein how he is
mistaken is showed above. These things being premised, I say, that if Mr. B.
understand by [ mercy] remunerative mercy, and by [ justice] punitive justice
(as he seems to do,) I deny the major. And to his reasons I answer, 1. Simply,
and of it self, the non^visible Churchmembership of infants imports neither
hurt nor good to them: But by accident, in that their visible Churchmembership
in the Church of the Hebrews obliged them to Circumcision and the yoke of the
Law, so it imports hurt to them. 2. If it did import hurt or good to them, yet
it might be neither by an act of remunerative mercy, nor punitive justice, that
they are left out o^ the Church; but by an act of mere Sovereignty, as it is in
election and reprobation, and in the disposing of the Gospel where God
pl^aseth. 3. God has his ends in this alteration, as to show his freeness, his
intent to have his visible Church more spiritual then the Jewish, etc. though
not to show his remunerative mercy or avenging justice. 4. It is not in mere
indifferency, but of moment to these ends that he does so.

Mr. B. proceeds thus. The minor I prove in both parts 1. That God has not
repealed this to their hurt in justice* I prove thus: If God never revoke his
mercies, nor repeal his ordinances in justice to the parties hurt, till they
first break Covenant with him, and so procure it by their own desert* then he
has not in justice revoked this mercy to the hurt of those that never broke
Covenant with him: But it is certain that God never revoketh a mercy in justice
to the hurt of any that never broke Covenant with him* therefore to such he
has not so revoked it.

Answ. Gods revoking mercies in justice to the parties hurt, is sometimes
without the particular persons breaking Covenant with him, or his desert. Are
not the infants of Adam deprived of life in justice to their hurt, without
their breaking Covenant with God, or their personal desert? Are not many
infants and others deprived of the preaching of the Gospel, who yet are
descended from faithful ancestors who never brake Covenant with God, only for
that the nation of which they are a part, are overrun by barbarous people,
they carried away captive, they and their children made slaves? Do not these
things happen to the most godly Saints? Does not Solomon tell us, Eccles. 9.2.
that all things come alike to all? Does not the Apostle tell us, Romans 9.11, 12.
For the children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that
the purpose of God according to the cle^ion might stand, not of works, but of
him that calls, It was said to Rebecca, the elder shall serve the younger; As
it (...) written, Jacob have I loved, but Esau have I hated: whence v. 18. he
infers, therefore has he mercy on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he
hardens? And again, Romans 11.33. after he had considered the various ways of
Gods dealing with Jews and Gentiles, he thus concludes, O the depth of the
riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his paths past finding out! From whence, and from innumerable
experiments of thousands of godly Greeks whose children are taken from them and
made Turks, and others, I may safely deny the minor of Mr. Bs. argument, which
he says is certain, as being most certainly false, and like the arguing of the
Disciples, John 9 2. which Christ refuted v. 3. concerning the man who was born
blind.

But Mr. B. goes on to prove it thus. That this is a mercy, and of the
Covenant, is plain, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. and frequently past denial.

Answ. That the visible Churchmembership of infants in the Jewish national
Church was a mercy, its not denied; but that it was such a mercy as Mr. B.
makes it above, to contain essentially a right to the great benefits of Gods
sovereignty over men, Christ's headship, and that favor, prote^tion, provision,
and other blessings, which are due from so powerful and gracious a Sovereign
to such subjects, and from such a head to his members, is neither true, nor
proved from Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12, 13. where the being a God to them does not
necessarily include all these benefits; nor if it did, does it ascribe them to
their visible Churchmembership, but to their obedience to his laws, implied in
the phrase that he may establish thee for a people to himself; that is, says
Piscator in his Scholie on the place, That he may require worship from thee by
obedience toward his precepts, and so may bind thee to himself: Which sense
the rest of Moses his speech in that and the following chapter show, and
consequently they presuppose not only their Covenant with God, and their
visible Churchmembership but also their keeping the law so far as the blessings
were legal, and their belief and obedience to the Gospel so far as they are
Evangelical.

2. Says Mr. B. That God does not in justice revoke such to any but Covenant
breakers, I prove briefly thus. 1. From the merciful nature and constant
dealings of God, who never casts off those that cast not off him.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. does most vainly intimate them to be cast off by God who are
not visible Churchmembers, which if true, it would prove that all infants dying
in the womb are cast off by God, with many more, who are not visible
Churchmembers, and yet are blessed persons. 2. For Gods merciful nature, it
does not hinder but that God may cast off them who cast not off him, since his
merciful nature does not act as a natural agent, but as a free agent; and he
has resolved us, Exodus 33.19. Romans 9.15. I will have mercy on whom I will have
mercy, I will have compassion on whom I will have compassion, even then when he
proclaimed his Name to be gracious and merciful. 3. ^t is false, as has been
before proved, that the constant dealing^ of God are such, as that he never
casts off those that cast not him off.

2. Says Mr. B. From his truth and faithfulne^^* For else we should make God
the Covenant breaker, and not man; which is horrid blasphemy.

Answ. This argument indeed were good if God had made this Covenant with men,
That whoever of them believe in Christ, their infant children should be
Churchmembers visible in his Church Jewish or Catholic. But there was never
such a Covenant made by God, and therefore though he alters the frame of the
Church, so as to leave out infants of beleivers from being visible members, he
breaks no Covenant.

3. Says he, From the immutability and constancy of God: His gifts and calling
are without repentance.

Answ. God is indeed immutable and constant in his being and promises, and his
gifts of election, foreknowledge, effectual calling, meant Romans 11.29. as v.
28, 27, 26, 7, 5, 2, show, are without repentance, Romans 8.30. Romans 9.6. But the
gift of visible Churchmembership is not such, even according to Mr. B. Cain was
a visible Churchmember, yet cast off, with many more. Many a believers child is
in infancy taken from him and made a Mohammedan, so as that he never is a
visible Christian, and yet God is unchangeable, and his gifts meant Romans 11.29.
without repentance.

4. Says he, Scripture frequently lays all the cause of all evil of
suffering upon man's sinning, Mic. 1.5. Hos. 13.9.

Answ. 1. He supposes, but proves not, that the non-visible Churchmembership
Christian of infants is an evil of suffering, which I deny. 2. It is false that
the Scripture ever lays all the cause of all the evil of suffering upon the
man's sinning, who suffers; the contrary is manifest in the death of infants
by Adams sin, Romans 5.12. 3. Some sufferings our Lord Christ denies to be from
the special sin of children or parents, John 9.3, 4. The Texts alleged prove
not Mr. Bs. proposition; the former proves only the destruction of Samaria and
Jerusalem to be for their idolatry, the other proves the same to have been the
fate of Israel for the same sin, but neither Mr. Bs. universal proposition. So
that hitherto Mr. B. has proved nothing.

He applies his unproved dictates thus. Now you know there were many Jews that
did believe* and did not forsake the Covenant of God, even most of the Apostles
themselves, and many thousands more: Now how then can th^se or their infants be
put out of the Church in justice to their hurt, who did not first break
Covenant with God?

Answ. 1. God may in justice do it, because he is a Sovereign Lord who is no
debtor to any, Romans 11.34, 35, 36. 2. God may in justice do it for the parents
sins some ages before, or the national sin of the Jews in rejecting Christ
might be a just cause for God to break off all infants Churchmembership, being
only a consequent of the taking the Hebrew nation for his people, though some
parents believed, in common punishments and changes the obedience of some few
not exempting them and theirs from them; as in the Babylonish captivity, it
happened for Manasseh his sin, notwithstanding Josiahs reformation, 2 Kings
23.26.

Mr. B. goes ^n. I am brief in this, because Mr. T. does not deny it. But that
which he answers is, that [It is in mercy for their good.] I prove the
contrary plainly thus. It can be no mercy to take away a mercy, except it be to
give a greater in the stead of it: But here is no greater mercy given to
infants in the stead of Churchmembership; therefore it can be no mercy to them
that it be revoked. The major Mr. T. does not deny, and I will fully tell you
all that he says to the minor. 1. In his Dispute he answered, that
Churchmembership of infants was revoked in mercy for their good; and that they
had a greater mercy in stead of it: And what do you think is that greater
mercy? Why, it is Christ come in the flesh. I confess it amazeth me to see the
power of error, how it can both at once bereave the understanding of ordinary
light, and the conscience of tenderness; or one of these at least. Is it
possible that the judgment of such a man as Mr. T. can take this for a
satisfactory answer, or his conscience give him leave to deny Churchmembership
to all infants in the world, and to raise a Schism in a poor distressed
Church; and to charge their own blood on the heads of his people that yield not
to him, and all upon such lamentable grounds as these?

Answ. 1. I deny that now which I did not deny in the Dispute, neither
understanding whereto Mr. Bs. argument tended, nor what his opinion was in the
matter of his argument, nor having competent time to consider his words. 2. I
was somewhat amazed at first reading at Mr. Bs. dealing with me who had so good
an opinion of his godliness and tenderness of consciences, and his pretenses of
friendliness, that if a man had sworn to me, before he printed, that he would
have thus abused and accused me so falsely, I should not have believed it. But I
see no hopes of any justice from such an intemperate Zelot for his opinion, nor
any right understanding of me, or any thing I say or do, from one so
prejudiced, superficial, in his consideration of things, yet peremptory, and
rash in his determinations, as Mr. B. is. Suppose I had answered them as weakly
as Mr. B. imagines I did, yet a litt^e experience might have told him, that it
might have commen from other causes then the power of error, bereaving at once
my understanding of ordinary light, and my conscience of tenderness. Such
censures, if there were no more, show Mr. B. was carried with intemperate heat
in his writing, a thing which certainly corrupts a man's judgment, and ma^e
verum examinat omnis corruptus Judex. To his accusations I answer, It is false
that I deny Churchmembership to all the infants in the world, that I raise a
Schism in a poor distressed Church, that I thretaen those that yield not to me
and all upon the grounds he mentions, which yet are not lamentable any
otherwise then because they are no better heeded. But to the argument. The
major I shall consider anon; the minor is that which is under present
consideration, which I deny, and avow what I then answered, with this
explication and amplification. Infants visible Churchmembership was only in
the Hebrew nation. The end of God was in taking that nation to be his visible
people, that there might be a fixed nation among whom and from whom Christ
should be born. To that end he would have them distinguished from other people
by Circumcision, by laws* etc. He would have their Tribes distinguished, their
inheritances fixed, their genealogy certain; this was the benefit of that
nation, the honor and mercy to the infants and others, and God took it away
after Christ's coming as being useless, it being to usher it in, I mean the
whole ordering of the Hebrew Churchmembership; and it was a greater mercy to
the Church of God, and thereby to the infants, who had their Churchmembership
only a mercy before by consequence as a part of that people, without any
feeling or enjoyment of it till they came to riper age: And this was a greater
mercy then their former membership, 1. in that they were freed from the yoke of
the Law; 2. Christ who was promised was a known person, and revealed and
accomplished the will of God concerning the salvation of h^s people. Let Us view
Mr. Bs. refutation.

1. Says he. Was it ever heard before from the mouth of man, that Christ
succeeded churchmembership, as a thing that was to give place for him? Does
Christ cast any out of the Church, only that he may succeed them? Can he prove
that their churchmembership was a type of Christ, that must cease when he was
come? Why does he not prove it then from some Scripture or reason? cannot we
have a room in the body without being cast out at the coming of the head? Are
the head and members at such odds, that one must give place, and be gone when
the other comes? Why then is not the churchmembership of men and women to give
place to Christ's coming in the flesh? Sure the nature of churchmembership is
the same in both. Why did the Apostles never speak of this among the types of
Christ that did cease, that all infants are put out of the Church or family of
God, that Christ may succeed as a greater mercy to them then their room in his
Church and family? Is not here comfort (but by a silly comforter) to all the
Jews themselves? though they are broken off from the Church, yet Christ is a
greater mercy to them in stead of it.

Answ. Mr. B. keeps his wont of refuting me by frivolous questions and foolish
scoffs, in stead of solid arguments. To them as they are, I return these
answers. He himself chapter 30. says, The dedication of the first^born was
evidently a type of Christ and the Church under him, and yet he can give no
more Scripture or reason for it, then I can for this, that the Churchmembership
of infants was but to endure till Christ's coming in the flesh. To omit what I
have already argued in the 50, 51, 52. sections before, in my apprehension the
Apostle does plainly teach, Gal. 3.16. to the end, that the Churchmembership
that was by the descent by natural birth from Abraham, continued only till
faith came, that is, till Christ was exhibited, and believed on as already come
in the flesh, that now all are children of God, Abraham's seed by faith, that
there is now no difference between Jew and Gentile, the Jews natural birth
brings not him in the Church, nor the Gentiles uncircumcision excludes him;
that so many as are admitted into the Church by Baptism do put on Christ, and
consequently the Churchmembership by birth into the Jewish Church national now
cease, and there is no Churchmembership, but by faith in Christ. And this I
might further confirm from Gal. 5.6. Col. 2.11, 12. and 3.11. And to these
Scriptures I add this reason, The course that God took in severing the Jewish
nation from other people, circumcising the males, keeping the distinction of
tribes, and the inheritances in the families, and the genealogies so exactly
till Christ came, ordering the tax of Augustus at the time of Christ's birth,
and after his ascension scattering the Jews out of their land, overturning
their Commonwealth, confounding their pedigrees, taking to himself another
Church in another way, by preaching the Gospel, and baptizing believers, and
none else; does plainly evidence to me, that infants Churchmembership was but
an introduction, type, shadow, forerunner to Christ's manifestation in the
flesh, and to cease as John Baptists office did when Christ was exhibited and
fully manifested to the world. And accordingly Mr. Bs. questions are answered;
the first, that it was heard of before, that upon the coming of Christ
believers Churchmembership was to succeed to birth-Churchmembership: To the
second, that though Christ cast not any out of the Church that he may succeed
them, yet by his coming he alters Churchmembership by birth into
Churchmembership by faith: The third and fourth are answered by setting down my
apprehension, and the Scriptures and reason of it. The fifth I answer
affirmatively, the sixth negatively: The seventh, that men and women are not
Churchmembers now by birth any more then infants, and in that respect the
nature of Churchmembership is the same in both: To the eighth, the Apostle did
speak of it, in the places before cited: To the ninth, the silly comforter
knows no reason why the Jews broken off should be comforted; but thinks it was
matter of comfort to the believing Jews, that in stead of infants visible
Churchmembership and their own standing in the national Church Jewish, they had
Christ manifested in the flesh as a greater mercy, the body in stead of the
shadow, the Sun risen in stead of the Day Star.

Mr. B. goes on thus. But let us consider a little what is the Church? Is it
not the body of Christ? Even all the Church since Adams fall, and the making of
a new Covenant is one body of Christ: Even the visible Church is his visible
body, as 1 Cor. 12. and many Scriptures fully show; therefore even the branches
not bearing fruit are said to be in him, that is, in his visible body, Joh.
14.1, 2, 3. Now does Christ break off all infants from his body, that he may
come in the flesh to be a greater mercy to them? What Is that, but to be a
greater mercy then himself, who is the life, and welfare of the body?

Answ. The invisible Church is all one body of Christ; the visible has had
such differences, that one part, to wit, those who feared God, and prayed
continually, Acts 10 2. yet had no communion with the other, but were counted
unclean, and shunned because uncircumcised, Acts 11* 2, 3. The Church of the
circumcised, which was by natural birth, is now broken off upon Christ's
coming; and another Church by faith of all nations is raised; Acts 10.34, 35.
in which infants are not till they believe; who though they are of the
invisible Church or body of Christ by election, and invisible operation of the
spirit, yet are not of the visible till they profess faith in Christ as already
come in the flesh, who was the great mercy promised to Abraham, Joh. 8.56. in
which he rejoiced although a great part of his natural seed were broken off*
and this was a greater mercy then was before exhibited, although then Christ
was the life and welfare of the body.

Again, says Mr. B* it seems by this, Mr. T. thinks that excommunication is a
great mercy: If all the Jews infants had been excommunicate or cast out of the
Church by God himself, it were no more then Christ did in mercy, never bringing
them into any other Church in stead.

Answ. Nothing said by me gives any occasion to this imputation:
Excommunication, if just, I count a curse; but the non taking of infants into
the visible Church Christian has nothing of a curse in it, it being only an
act of God according to his Sovereignty, who had liberty to appoint who should
be of his Church, who not.

Against this strange fiction, says Mr. B. I argued thus: If ordinarily God
show not so great mercy to those out of the Church as to those in it, then it
is not a greater mercy, or for the parties greater good to be put out, then to
be in: But ordinarily God shows not so great mercy to those out of the Church
as to those in it: Therefore it is not for their greater good, nor in greater
mercy* to be put out. To this Mr. T. answered nothing.

Answ. What need I, when I grant the conclusion? Mr. B. makes a strange fiction
of his own, as if I thought excommunication, to be cast out or put out of the
Church, a great mercy; and held infants were excommunicated, cast or put out of
the Church: Which is far from me, or any thing I say, who do not* assert them
put out by any judicial sentence, but by a free act of Gods sovereignty left
out, for reasons best known to himself, but in part revealed to us.

Mr. B. adds. I argued also thus: ^f those that are out of the Church since
Christ, have no such promise or assurance of mercy from him, as those in the
Church had before Christ, then it is not to them a great mercy to be out of the
Church: But those out of the Church since Christ, have no such promise or
assurance of mercy from him, as those in the Church had before Christ:
therefore it cannot be to them a greater mercy. To this Mr. T. answered, that
it is a greater mercy to infants since Christ to be out of the Church, then
before to be in it; and that they have as much assurance of mercy from Christ
now, as then, (he should say more.)

Answ. This answer was right; infants now are in a better case, though not
visible Christian churchmembers, then they were when in the Jewish Church, in
which they were circumcised and obliged to Moses law; and they have as much
assurance of mercy from Christ, to wit, righteousness and life as then; yea,
more (though I need not say so in contradiction to Mr. Bs. minor) then before,
since Christ's exhibition in the flesh is a greater assurance of saving mercy
then was before.

To which, says Mr. B. I replied thus, If those infants which were in the
Church before Christ, had God engaged in an oath and Covenant to be their God,
and to take them for his peculiar people, and those infants out of the Church
since Christ have no such thing; then they before Christ in the Church had more
assurance of mercy then those out of the Church since Christ: But the former is
true, as I proved out of Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. upon which text, what vain
altercations there were, and what words were used against the express Letter of
the text, you shall see in the relation of the Dispute, if ^ be called to
publish it.

Answ. For my part I shall not consent that Mr. B. publish the relation of the
Dispute* having found his dealing so injurious to me in that which he has
already done, and his partiality toward his opinion and party. I have looked
over two such relations of the Dispute as I could get, and I find in them that
I did deny the minor, and when Mr. B. alleged Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. to prove
it, I did distinguish of being God in respect of saving benefits, and thus God
is engaged in Covenant to be God to infants now no visible Churchmembers as he
was then, to wit to the elect only, or in respect of outward advantages, such
as were peculiar to the nation of the Jews, as that they should possess Canaan,
have Gods worship and presence with them in a more special manner then other
people, Christ to come out of that people, etc. as Romans 9.4, 5. the Apostle
reckons them, and in this respect it was granted that infants in the Church
before Christ had God so engaged, and that neither infants out of the Church
Christian, no nor believers in it, no nor all believers before Christ, such as
Cornelius had God so engaged, and that in this respect the oath of God was
meant, appeared from v. 13. which says thus, that he may establish thee to day
for a people unto himself, and that he may be unto thee a God as he has said
unto thee, and as he has sworn unto thy Fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to
Jacob, which appears to be meant of their settling in Canaan and their
prosperous state there, as many places evince, where it is mentioned
particularly Genesis 12.7. and 13.15. and 15.8. and 17.8. and 22.17. and 26.3. and
28.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 34.5, etc. besides many other passages in the same speech of
Moses, Deuteronomy. 29.16, 21, 23, 24, 27. Deuteronomy. 30.2, 5.9, 10, 16, 18. and most
evidently the conclusion of it Deuteronomy. 30.20. From which passages it is as
evident as the light, that the meaning Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. was this, that God
did bring into Covenant by Moses (the chief standing for the rest) the whole
nation of Israel, that they might for themselves and their posterity unborn
bind them to observe the laws of Moses given in Horeb, and thereby be
established a people to God, and he might be a God to them in settling, keeping
and prospering them in Canaan, if they did obey. Now Mr. B. asserted that God
did covenant with all the little ones and others there present, to be their
God, and that in respect of spiritual benefits, and to that end, urged Deuteronomy.
30.6. which he made conditional, and to other then the elect. Against which I
urged, that [ to circumcise the heart] is the same with writing Gods laws in
the heart Heb. 8.10. which Dr. Twiss* rightly concludes to be absolute and to
the ^lect only, and that to assert it to be conditional is Pelagianism, and I
desired the Auditors to take notice of Mr. Bs. assertion in that thing: I
confess I had not time to collect and to produce the texts here mentioned
(which was one reason why I was still averse from extemporary verbal disputes)
but this was the substance of that ^^^rcation which Mr. B. calls vain, and
says, words were used against the express letter of the text. Concerning
which, although I will not undertake to justify all I then said, yet the
answer I then gave I still avouch as right, and conceive Mr. Bs. assertion of
circumcising the heart, to love the Lord, to belong to other then the elect,
and to be conditional to be very erroneous, and refer the reader to Mr. Bs. own
words in answer to Mr. Bedford in the Friendly accommodation page 361, 362. to
discern the error of it.

Mr. B. says, I further add out of Ephesians. 2.12. Those that were aliens to the
Commonwealth of Israel, were strangers to the Covenant of promises, and without
hope, and without God: and there is no Scripture speaks of delivering any
from this sad state but Churchmembers; therefore sure it can be no mercy to be
put out of the Church.

Answ. Though the conclusion were granted it hurts not me, who do not asserr
the putting infants out of the Church, who were in, but the not taking of them
into the visible Church Christian. However the text speaks of the Ephesians who
were uncircumcised in the flesh v. 11. but does not say that all that were
uncircumcised, or aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel, were without God in
the world. For it is certain that Cornelius and many other Proselytes
uncircumcised, were not without God in the world, and therefore persons might
then have Christ, though not be visible Churchmembers; and if Mr. B. say, that
none but visible members in the Christian Church have Christ, God, hope, he
must damn all abortives and still born children of believers, and all those
that are converted, (and show it not as dumb persons) on their deathbed, or
any other way, in articulo mortis.

Again, says he, God added to the Church such as should be saved: therefore
to be cast or put out of the Church is no known way of mercy.

Answ. The conclusion is granted, and yet the text proves not that all who are
added to the Church shall be saved, or that all that shall be saved, are or
shall be added to the Church visible.

Again, says he, the Church is the family of Christ (even the visible Church
is called the house of God 1 Timothy 3.15.) But it is no known way of mercy to be
out of Gods house and family.

Answ. I grant it, and yet a person may be in Christ's house, and a temple to
him* and not a visible Churchmember.

Again, says he, the Church is the pillar and ground of Truth; therefore no
mercy to be taken off it.

Answ. I grant it, yet doubt whether the Church be termed so, 1 Timothy 3.15. and
not rather either the mystery of Godliness v. 16. as Cameron de Eccles. c. de
Eccles. durati, and de Eccl. Constable. or Timothy as Gataker Cinni lib. 2. c. 20.

Again, says Mr. B. the Church visible, is the visible body of Christ; but it
is no mercy to be separated from Christ's body.

Answ. True, yet it may be a mercy in respect of the yoke of the law not to be
in the visible Church Jewish, yea by accident it may be a mercy to be separated
from a visible Church Christian as when the Church is tyrannous in its rule, or
unsound in the doctrine taught to it.

Again, says he, the Church visible is Christ's visible Kingdom: But it is no
mercy to be out of Christ's Kingdom; therefore it is no mercy to be out of the
Church.

Answ. The same which was made to the former objection is to this.

Lastly, says Mr. B. Do but read all those hundred glorious things that are
spoken of the City of God, all those high praises that are given to the Jewish
Church, in Deuteronomy. and the Psalms, and all the Scriptures (who is like unto thee
O Israel, etc.) And then read all the far more glorious things, that are spoken
of the Gospel Church since Christ: And if after this you can still believe,
that God did in mercy cast infants out of one Church and never take them into
the other, and that Christ came in the flesh to put them out of the Church in
mercy, as if he could fi^lier save them out of his Church then in it; I say, if
after reading the foresaid passages* you can believe this, for my part I give
you up as forlorn, and look upon your understandings in this as forsaken by
God, and not only void of spiritual illumination, but common reason: and pray
the Lord to save the understandings of all his people from such a plague, and
to rescue yours before you go further.

Answ. I say not that God did in mercy cast infants out of one Church, nor that
Christ came in the flesh to put them out of the Church in mercy, as if he could
fitlier save them out of his Church then in it; but that God never took them
into his visible Church Christian, and that Christ's coming in the flesh is a
mercy recompensing the visible Churchmembership Jewish by birth, when God bra^e
off that people from the olive for their unbelief, and that Christ can and does
as fitly save infants, though not in the visible Church Christian, as he did
when they were in the visible Church Jewish, and yet fear not Mr. Bs. direful
omen and sad despair of my understanding, but have as good hopes of mine and my
followers understandings in this thing, as of Mr. Bs. and his followers, and
leave it to the intelligent to judge, whether we are void not only of
spiritual illumination, but common reason. I have read what is said of Israel,
and yet think it a mercy now not to be a vi^^ble Churchmember in it, no not
though it were now as it was in the best state under David, Solomon, etc. And I
conceive Mr. B. has read many hundreds of as glorious things spoken of Moses
Law as of the Church, and yet I think Mr. B. counts it a mercy now not to be
under it. I find the glorious things spoken of the Gospel Church since Christ,
meant all or most of it, as it contains that part which is the invisible Church
of true believers or elect persons. And I judge God has dealt mercifully with
infants, if he put them into the invisible Church, though he put them not into
the visible, if not, either their being in the visible benefits them not or
aggravates their condemnation.

Mr. B. proceeds thus. But let us see what Mr. T. answers to this in his
Sermon, which upon deliberation he afterward preached to confute my arguments,
and therefore ^anno^ lay the blame upon his unpreparedness. And truly in my
judgment he does here plainly throw down his weapons, and give up the whole
cause (though not directly confessing his error: he is not yet so happy:) I
were best give you his own words, lest I be thought to wrong him: they are
these; [ As for those petty reasons, if it be done, it must be in mercy or
judgment, I say in mercy in respect of the whole Catholic Church now Christ
being come, and we ha^ing a more spiritual churchstate then they had; their
churchstate was more carnal and fleshly, and agreeable to their time of
minority: It is in mercy that it is taken away. And as for that exception, It
cannot be taken away in mercy, unless some privilege be to them in stead of
it* We answer, It is in mercy to the whole Church, though no privilege be to
them] So far Mr. Ts. words. I confess I never heard a cause more plainly
forsaken, except a man should say flatly, I have erred, or I recant* 1. He much
alters the terms of my argument, as you may see by it before. The argument is
thus; It can be no mercy to any to have a mercy taken away from them, except it
be to give a greater in its stead. But here is no greater mercy given to
infants in stead of Churchmembership; therefore it can be no mercy to them,
that it be revoked, or taken away. To call these [petty reasons] is the only
strength of Mr. T. his answer. For I pray you mark. 1. He never den^ed the
major proposition [that it can be no mercy to any to have a mercy taken from
them, except they may have a greater in stead:] He could not deny this with any
show of reason: For otherwise, if it be a mercy merely to deprive the creature
of mercy, then we shall turn hell into heaven, and make it the greatest place
of mercies, because none are deprived of mercy so much as they, no nor of this
particular mercy: for none are further removed from being members of the Church
then the damned.

Answ. It is true finding the boastings concerning Mr. Bs. dispute Janu. 1.
1649. to be many, after my return from Leimster (to which place I was then
designed and where I was Janu. 6.) I did though without any copy of the
disputation or arguments in writing (which I could not obtain from Mr. B.) as
well as my memory could bear them away, in the close of my Afternoons Sermon,
Jan. 13. at Bewdley, recite and refute his arguments in the disputation.
Wherein it is true I was somewhat more deliberate then in the dispute, yet for
want of the arguments in writing, I could not then give so full and exact an
answer to his arguments as had been requisite, nor perhaps shall now to this,
because Mr. B. does not plainly set down though requested by me, what that
benefit, privilege, or mercy is, which he conceives annexed to infants visible
Churchmembership unrepealed. But that either I throw down my weapons or forsake
my cause by my answer then to this argument, is but Mr. Bs. dream. Of what
alteration there was of the terms of his argument he must bear the blame, who
would not give me his arguments in writing under his own hand; nor am I to be
blamed for drawing it so short, being fearful to wrong him by a fuller
reciting, And I perceive I had great cause so to do, when I find Mr. B.
himself altering the terms of his own major in a few lines, in the former it is
[ except it be to give a greater in its stead] in the later [ except that they
may have a greater in stead] which are not the same. And for my answer* if my
terming his arguments [petty reasonings] had been mine only answer, yet it had
been a good and sufficient answer, if this be granted (which I conceive an
evident truth) that of Divine institution, (and such is this of visible
Churchmembership) there is no reason can be right but what is from Gods own
appointment, though it may seem right to us it should be so. Papists argue that
if God did not make one ecumenical Bishop (as there was one High Priest among
the Jews) to preserve unity, non satis discretu^ esset, he should not be
discreet enough. Now this seems to our reason plausible, and yet we justly say,
that in things positive our reason is deceivable, and Gods appointment only is
to be attended. And so it is in this; though this reason of Mr. B. seem
plausible, yet it were no forsaking the cause though I could not answer it any
otherwise then thus, It is Mr. Bs. petty reasoning from his own conceits of
what he imagines fi^ in a matter of mere institution, concerning which it is
nevertheless manifest from the History of the New Testament, that God has
appointed otherwise then is Gods way according to his reason; which indeed is
but arrogant presumption, when it prescribes to God. But I shall answer his
argument more amply: And though I did not deny his major i^ the Dispute or
Sermon, I say, if it be understood o^ a greater mercy in the same kind, and to
the same persons, it is not true; the believing Jews were deprived of their
possessions in Judea in mercy, yet had not a greater me^cy in the same kind but
another in the gifts of the spirit; it was in mercy that the Priests converted
to the faith were deprived of their office in the Temple, and their children of
the portion of the offerings there, which were mercies to them, and yet no such
office or portion provided for them and their children, but the benefit
redound^d to the Gentiles converted, whose conversion was prayed for by David,
Isaiah etc. and was a mercy to them, though their posterity might be broken
off, and the national Church dissolved. I conceive that Gods ways are so free
and various in this kind, that Mr Bs. ma^or cannot be universally true, not is
Mr. Bs. reason cogent. For suppose God annihilate in mercy, there is no greater
mercy given, yet Hell is not turned into Heaven, and made the greatest place of
mercies, in this case there is a mere deprivation of mercy in mercy: But the
thing is more apparent in deprivations of some temporal benefits. God may
deprive in mercy, that is, not in judgment of some temporal benefit merely
because he will, out of his freedom to dispose of his own, yet give no greater
mercy in stead of it then he should have had if that had not been taken away;
and that God does not do so, who can say? me thinks the Apostles determination,
Romans 11.34. should satisfy that he does. And yet Hell should not be the
greatest place of mercies, for there is not only a privation of temporal, but
also of spiritual and eternal mercies, and that too with accumulation of
torments, which is otherwise in the case proposed. And for the particular mercy
of Churchmembership, the infant visible Jewish Churchmembership was but a
temporal mercy, and a comparative mercy in respect of the nations, it neither
certainly assured their eternal, nor present welfare; yea, when Christ came,
considering how the nation of the Jews was against Christ, it was then rather
their danger then their mercy, and was a recompensed sufficiently in being out
of that Church, which consisted of a rebellious and gainsaying people* and
being, though not visible Churchmembers in the Christian society, yet in the
families where the spirit of God was given, and Christ known.

Mr. B. adds. 2. And observe next, that as Mr T. denies not the major, so here
be plainly grants the minor, and so yields the whole cause. For the minor was,
[that here is no greater mercy given to infants in stead of Churchmembership:]
Does not Mr. T. acknowledge this? when be says twice over: 1. That it is a
mercy to the whole catholic Church (to have their infants put out of the
Church:) And so if the mercy be only to the catholic Church, that they be
none of the Church (visible,) then it is not to them a mercy: So that he takes
it to be a mercy only to others, but none to them, according to this answer.
2. Yea, he says it more plainly the second time, that it is in mercy to the
whole Church, though no privilege (much less a greater mercy) be to them (to
the infants themselves:) So that for my part, I think I may well break off
here, and take the whole cause as yielded. For if it be no mercy to any to be
deprived of mercy, except that they may have a greater: And if infants have no
greater in stead of this, but only their parents have a greater: and both
these be confessed: then it must follow, that it is no mercy to infants to be
deprived of this mercy of their Churchmembership; and consequently, God has
not taken it from them in mercy for their good (which is the thing I am
proving:) And Mr. T. yields that it is not taken from them in justice to
their hurt: and therefore it is not taken from them at all. And thus you see
what is become of the cause that has been driven on with such confidence.

Answ. However I only denied the minor in the Dispute and Sermon, yet Mr. B.
may see by the answer before, that here I deny his major in the first argument
in this chapter, yea, and that he can prove that it is not in justice that the
Churchmembership visible Jewish ceased, though I still adhere to it, that it was
in mercy; and of this argument I have here denied the major, though I did not
so before, and am ready to show that I have not yielded the minor, nor any whit
of the cause, and therefore suppose Mr. B. has need to manage his weapons
better ere he gain this cause; yea* though he should have this argument
yielded, yet the cause is not gained, for the reason before given. But let us
view his minor, and my answer. His minor is [ that here is no greater mercy
given to infants in stead of Churchmembership,] my answer was, That in mercy to
the whole catholic Church the Jewish infant Churchmembership ceased, and
therefore the infant visible Churchmembership Jewish in mercy ceased. To
understand his minor, it is to be observed that Mr. B. asserts 1. a law or
ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership antecedent to that of
Circumcision. 2. That this is by promise and precept. 3. That this infant
visible Churchmembership essentially contains a right to Gods sovereignty,
Christ's headship, favor, protection, provision, and other blessings due from
such a Sovereign and head to his members. 4. That this belonged not only to
the infants of the Jewish nation, but also of believers in all ages. 5. That
this mercy belonged to the infants of the believers of the Jewish nation when
they were made Christians, and so could not be in justice taken from them,
though the nation of the Jews were broken off for unbelief. 6. That in mercy it
cannot be said to be taken away, without a greater mercy to the infants of
believrs in stead of it. 7. That the coming of Christ in the flesh, the extent
of the Church over the world through faith, the changing of Churchmembership by
birth into that by faith, and so making the Church more spiritual, is not a
greater mercy to the infants of Jew believers in stead of that visible
Churchmembership. 8. That without visible Churchmembership in the Christian
Church catholic, the infants of Jew believers are in worse case then they were
in the Jewish Church national. On the contrary, I deny 1. such a law or
ordinance. 2. That the Hebrew infant visible Churchmembership was by promise
and precept. 3. That this visible Churchmembership contained essentially such a
right as Mr. B. asserts; though it was a mercy in comparison of the state of
other nations, yet thereto was annexed a heavy yoke of legal impositions, the
deliverance from which was a mercy, and in this respect it was in mercy not
continued to believers infants of the Jewish nation. 4. That it belonged to any
other infants then of the Hebrew people. 5. I assert that when the Jewish
nation or Hebrew people were broken off for unbelief in Christ; visible
Churchmembership of infants was in justice taken away from the whole people,
and consequently from the infants of Jew believers, who were only visible
Churchmembers as a part of that nation, yet in mercy to them since their visible
Churchmembership in that nation was dangerous to them, yea inconsistent with
Christianity, the Jewish nation being a rebellious and gainsaying people: as it
was a mercy for Lot to be in Sodom, and he was in justice to the place outed;
and yet in mercy to himself, when it was to be destroyed. 6. I assert, that it
might be truly said that the infant Jewish visible Churchmembership may be said
to be taken away in mercy from the infants of believers of that nation, though
no greater mercy were given to those particular infants of the same kind barely
in stead of it. 7. I assert, that it cannot be said to be taken away in justice
from infants of believing Gentiles, since it was never granted to any Gentile
nation to be Gods visible Church, nor were their infants visible Churchmembers,
except by proselytism they were incorporated into the Jewish people. 8. I
assert, that the not taking in of believing Gentiles infants into the visible
Church Christian was not an act judiciary of God as a Judge, but Gods free act
of sovereignty changing Churchmembership by birth into Churchmembership by
faith. 9. I assert, that the coming of Christ in the flesh, and the
consequents thereof, the breaking down the partition wall, taking in the
Gentiles by faith, etc. without taking in infants into the visible Church
Christian, were greater me^cies then the Jewish infant Churchmembership (which
was clogged with legal burdens, and was an imperfect state) and did abundantly
countervail the Jewish infant visible Churchmembership in the best state of
that, and did bring as much benefit to infants as that relation did. 10. That
the infants of believing Gentiles no members of the visible Church Christian
are not in worse but be^ter condition, in respect of any real Evangelical
blessing, then the Hebrew infants were with their Churchmembership. 1. Because
the spiritual blessings of regeneration, in dwelling of the spirit*
justification, remission of sins, adoption, Gods favor, protection, provision,
eternal life, are as much assured to them in infancy without visible
Churchmembership, as they were with it. 2. They do actually enjoy sooner these
mercies, if in the invisible Church (without which none ever enjoyed them) and
in more ample m^nner without Jewish visible Churchmembership, then they did
with it, the spirit being now more powered out, the G^spel cleared, the Church
enl^rged, only legal ceremonies, and rest in Canaan wit^ prosperity therein
being taken away. Mr. B. and the reader hereby may fully understand what I
deny, and what I grant, and how I answer this his petty reasoning without
yielding the cause, and when he has refuted these ass^rtions, le^ him sing his
triumph, and not as he vainly and insolently does before the victory.

He adds. But yet let us follow it further. And 1. what means Mr. T. to talk of
mercy to others, when our question is, Whether it be a mercy to themselves to
be unchurched? 2. ^y this arguing be may prove any thing almost in the world a
mercy: For all shall work together for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28.
And therefore if I should ask him, whether it be in mercy to wicked men, that
God gives them over to themselves, and at last damneth them* Mr. T. may thus
answer that it is* for it is a mercy to the whole catholic Church, that is, to
other men: but what is this to the damned? So Mr. T. says, It is a mercy to
the whole catholic Church: But what is that to infants who are unchurched?

Answ. 1. What I mean, he may if he please discern by what is here said, and in
what sense infants may be said to be unchurched, and how it may be a mercy to
them and others. 2. The damnation of themselves cannot be a mercy to wicked men
when it is a benefit to the elect, because it never produces them good: But
the mercy to the catholic Church is a mercy to believers infants, 1. in that
it frees them from legal burdens; 2. in that there is a near capacity and
probability of the best good for them remaining in their parents or others
godly families.

He adds. And what a strange reason is that of Mr. T. to say, It is a mercy,
because their Churchstate was carnal* fleshly and agreeable to their minority;
but ours is spiritual.] What is this to them that are put out of that carnal
Churchstate, and kept out of this spiritual Churchstate too? If they had been
admitted into this better state (as no doubt they are) then he had said
somewhat. Else is not this as great a mercy to the poor off cast Jews? They are
put out of the carnal Churchstate too. But did God give so many admirable
Elogies of the Jews Church; and can Mr. T. yet think that it is better to be of
no visible Church, then to be of theirs?

Answ. I allege the more spiritual Churchstate as one reason of Gods changing
of churchmembership by birth into churchmembership by faith, and as a mercy to
the catholic Church; For thereby they are free from the bondage they were in
under carnal ordinances, which infants are partakers of in actual possession,
and capable of the spirit, though they be not actually visible churchmembers;
and therefore it is not true that by my doctrine they are kept out of the
spiritual churchstate. And Mr. B. does much mistake, as if the carnal
churchstate the Jew had when Christ was come was a privilege or benefit: For
though many admirable Elogies were given by God of the Jews Church, yet none of
them were given of it in Christ's time, they were a rebebellious and gainsaying
people, a generation of vipers, denied the holy one, and the just, and desired
a murderer, made the temple a den of thieves, etc. And therefore I verily
think it was better then to be of no visible Church, then to be of theirs. As
for the Jews who believed not, they were justly put out of Gods favor, their
temple was destroyed, and they cast out of their land for denying Christ: Yet
they were not put out of their carnal churchstate actually; for they adhere to
it unto this day, and it is their curse.

4. Says Mr. B. And where did Mr. T. learn in Scripture to call the Jews
churchstate carnal?

Answ. From 1 Cor. 10.18. where the nation of the Jews are called Israel after
the flesh, in contradistinct^on to the Israel of God or in the Spirit, Romans
9.6. Gal. 6.16. From Romans 2.28, 29. where there is distinction of the Jew
outwardly from the Jew inwardly, of Circumcision, which is outward in the
flesh, from Circumcision that is of the heart in the spirit, not in the letter.
From Gal. 4.25, 26, 23, 29. where Jerusalem that then was is contradistingued
to Jerusalem above, and the former is in bondage with her children, the later
free, the children of the former born after the flesh, the later after the
spirit. From Gal. 3.3. where to be of faith is to begin in the spirit, to be of
the works of the law is to be perfect by the flesh. From Ephesians. 2.11. where
their circumcision is termed circumcision in the flesh made by hands. From
Philip. 3.3, 4, 5. where Hebrew descent, and churchmembership thereby are
termed the flesh. From Heb. 9.10. where their ordinances are termed carnal
ordinances. I had thought this had been so well known to Mr. B. that it needed
not proof.

But he further demands, Or what does he mean by churchstate? whether the
essential nature of the Church it self? or any carnal ordinances of worship
which were accidental to it? Is not this word [ churchstate] like his former of
[ church call] devised terms to darken the matter with ambiguities, and
signifying what pleases the speaker.

Answ. Neither the term [Church state] nor [Church call] were devised by me,
but are terms ordinary in the writings of Divines. I have showed the use of the
later before, and proved that the Church has its denomination and definition
from it, and that according to Mr. B. himself: And for the former, me thinks
Mr. B. should not be ignorant of it, who its likely knows a Book of learned Dr.
Usher, entitled, De visibilis Ecclesiae successient and statu. And to imagine
it to be devised to darken the matter with ambiguities is one of Mr. Bs. evil
surmises, when the word is as apposite for its use as any term I think Mr. B.
can give in stead of it; and if it signify what pleases the speaker, it is so
much the better, for that is the use of words; and this later accusation
acquits it from darkening the matter with ambiguities, if it signify; for that
which signifies the speakers mind does give light, and not darken with
ambiguities: So ridiculous is Mr. Bs. accusation, that his later words cross
his former. And to help Mr. Bs. understanding if I can, I tell him I mean by it
neither the essential nature of the Church it self, nor any carnal ordinances
of worship which were accidental to it; but the manner of being or
qualification incident to it from providence, whereby it is denominated
flourishing or decaying, numerous or small, rich in knowledge or poor, carnal
or spiritual by reason of the way of entry into it as natural descent or faith,
more or less of the spirit, the promises, ministry, rites, etc. it has. Which
term [state] comprehends innumerable terms, such as are rich and poor, noble or
ignoble, fat or lean, and many more; which whether they are to be reduced to
the predicaments of quality, relation, or passion, or to be called modi entis I
leave it to Logicians to determine, I hope this will serve to indoctrinate Mr.
B. in the meaning of my speech. But Mr. B. is resolved to follow me with more
questions, which he must not expect I will answer, as I have done, after this
bout.

5. Says he, And how long might I wait before Mr. T. would prove from
Scripture, that it is a mercy to the whole catholic Church to have all infants
put out or unchurched? These are the men that make their followers believe that
we have no Scripture for our cause, when themselves give us but their
magiste^ial dictates. But I wonder whence he should fetch such a Dream. What?
are infants such ^^ads or Vipers in comparison of men of years, that it is a
mercy to the whole catholic Church to have them cast out? Are not the aged
worse then they? And were we not once all infants?

Answ. I say not that all infants are put out of the catholic Church, and so
need not prove it; nor had I asserted it was it either in the Dispute or Sermon
my work to prove what I said by way of answer, but for Mr. B. to disprove it.
Yet what I assert is distinctly before set down, not without some proof from
Scripture; and I may wait long before either I shall find his pretended
ordinance of infant visible Churchmembership unrepealed proved from Scripture,
or my assertions disproved by any solid arguments without idle questions, and
vain exclamations, which I resolve to neglect. And of the former sort are the
questions here, which insinuate as if I conceived it were a mercy to the
catholic Church that infants are not in the visible Church Christian as
members, because they are Toads, Vipers, worse then the aged; whereas I only
say, that the dissolving of the Jewish Church national (in which and by reason
of which infants were visible Churchmembers, and no otherwise) was in mercy to
the catholic Church: Which is the very doctrine of the Apostle, Romans 11.11,
12. that through their fall salvation is come to the Gentiles, the fall of them
is the riches of the world, the diminishing, decay or loss of them the riches
of the Gentiles. Which happened not through the wickedness of infants above
other men; but partly through the wickedness of the Jewish people (of which the
infants were a part, and only Churchmembers there, and while that nation were
Gods Church;) partly through Gods contrivance, which was, that the Gentiles
should have their course of mercy while the Jews were broken off, and at last
both have mercy in their season.

Mr. B. goes on in his cavilling vein. If this doctrine be true, why may we not
expect to be taught, that infants must also be cast out of heaven, in mercy to
the whole catholic Church?

Answ. Beca^se we find no such taught by the Apostle as the other doctrine of
mine concerning the mercy to the catholic Church is by breaking off ^he Jewish
Church.

If i^ be (says he) no carnal Churchstate to have infants in heaven, why is it
a carnal Churchstate which contains infants in it on earth?

Answ. That any are infants in heaven its not likely. 2. If there should be,
yet being fully sanctified, they should not be carnal, but spiritual, and the
Church there only consist of spiritual persons by spiritual regeneration;
whereas if the Church Christian should consist of infant visible Churchmembers
by carnal generation, the state of it would be carnal as the Jewish was, and
not spiritual by faith, as the Scripture makes it, Joh. 1.12, 13. and 3.5, 6.
Gal. 3.26, 27.

Again, says Mr. B. And if it be no benefit to the Catholic Church to have
infants kept out of heaven, nor no hurt to the Church to see them there; why
should it be a benefit to the whole Church to have them kept on earth? or any
hurt to the Church to see them here members?

Answ. It were no hurt if God had so ordered it; their non-visible Christian
Churchmembership is a benefit to the Catholic Church in the manner before
said, because God has so ordered it.

But yet (says Mr. B.) let us come a little nearer; what ever it may be to
enemies or to man-haters (of which sort the Church has none) yet me thinks to
those that are love as God is love, and that are merciful as their heavenly
father is merciful, and who are bound to receive little children in Christ's
name, and who are become as children themselves; to such it should seem no such
mercy to have all infants unchurched. But such are all true members of the
Church; and therefore to the Church it can be no such mercy.

Answ. I wish it were true that the visible Church (of which we are speaking)
has no enemies or man-haters. It is not true that we are bound to receive
little children in Christ's name; nor do I say that it is a mercy to have all
infants unchurched* or that they are all unchurched; nor do I think it true
that all true members of the Church visible, are such as Mr. B. describes. But
this I say, the non-visible Churchmembership Christian of infants is such a
mercy as I describe, however it seem to the Church.

But yet nearer; says Mr. B. Whatsoever it may be to strangers, yet me thinks
to the parents it should seem no such mercy to have their children put out of
the Church: Has God naturally planted such tender affections in parents to
their children? and does grace increase it? and the Scripture encourage it? and
yet must they take it for a mercy, that their children are put out? when Mr. T.
will not say it is a mercy to the children.

Answ. To the parents notwithstanding their natural affection, it is a mercy,
and ought to seem a mercy, that God has dissolved the Jewish National visible
Churchmembership, and by consequent their infant visible Churchmembership, and
has freed them and their infants from the legal bondage, and has out of all
nations gathered his Church by preaching the Gospel, without admission of
infants into the visible Church Christian. And surely if this reason were good,
parents might complain that their children are not admitted to the Lords supper
as the Jews children were to the Passover.

Yet further, says he, why then has God made such promises to the parents for
their seed? as if much of the parents comfort lay in the welfare of the
children; if it be a mercy to them that they are kept out of the Church* may
not this doctrine teach parents to give their children such a blessing as the
Jews did? His blood be on us and our children. For their curse is to be broken
off from the Church; and if that be a mercy, the Jews are then happier then I
take them to be: And how can we then pray, that they may be graffed in again?

Answ. I find no promises in all the New Testament, much less Evangelical
promises, made to believing parents for their seed, nor any whit of the
comforts of parents in the New Testament in the welfare of their children, but
in Christ and in the fellowship of the spirit, Phil. 2.1. Yea, whereas in the
Old Testament most of the promises were of increase of children, their
prosper^^y, rest and peace in their dwellings, etc. in the New Testament an
unmarried estate, if without sin, is rather preferred as more happy, 1 Cor
7.14. and the poor and persecuted rather adj^dged blessed then the rich and
those that live in p^ace, Matthew 5.4, 10. However parents have as much comfort
by my doctrine rightly understood, as they can have by Mr. Bs. Nor does it
teach parents to curse their children as the Jews did. The curse of the Jews
was not in being broken off from the Jewish Church national, but in being not
in the Olive, that is the Church of true believers, but in the national Church
Jewish; and that they were not broken off from it, was their unhappiness: and
we are to pray, not that they may be graffed in again into the national Church
Jewish, but into the invisible Church of true believers and elect persons.

6. Says Mr. B. But what if all this were true? Suppose it were a mercy to the
whole Church to have infants put out; yet it does not follow that God would do
it. He is the God of infants, as well as of the aged; and is merciful to them
as well as others; all souls are his: He can show mercy to the whole Church in
an easier way then by casting out all their infants: And his mercy is over all
his works.

Answ. God is the God of the spirits of all flesh, yet he has not mercy on all
flesh; all souls are his, yet he did not take any one nation for his people
besides the Jewish; his mercy is over all his works, yet he has broken off the
Jews from being his people; he is naturally merciful, yet shows mercy freely
as he will. I say not, he casts out all infants of the Church out of the
Church; yet sure if it were supposed a mercy to the whole Church to have
infants put out, it seems to follow that God would do it, since all things work
for their good, and with his son he gives them all things, Romans 8.28, 32. 1
Cor. 3.22, 23.

I will tell you, says Mr. B. how Mr. T. follows this with examples. He
says, [that the release of the Jews servants, and the consecration of the
Nazarites and first born, and the land of Canaan, were all privileges, and yet
these are taken away.] To which I answer: There are abundance far greater given
in their stead: And what is that then to those that have nothing in their
stead? Besides, if Mr. T. think that the mercy of Churchmembership is of as low
a nature as to be Nazarites, or to have Canaan, he is much mistaken.

Answ. Not only these, but other examples, as namely of the Priests and
Levites children, who were by inheritance to attend at the Tabernacle, and to
be nourished by the offerings, and to be Priests; instead of which, Ministers
infants have now no particular mercy, they are not visibly in the order of
Priests, as the infants of Aarons house were: Of the poor, who had tithes and
corners of fields, and sheaves fallen, and other provision, and so had the
stranger; do show, that a mercy was taken aw^y from infants of Israel, and no
particular mercy in the same or the like kind given to infants of Christian
people or Ministers in their stead. When Mr. B. sh^ws what those abundance for
greater mercies are, which are given in the stead of the release of the Hebrew
servants even infants, the restoring their inheritances at the year of Jubilee,
the consecration of Nazarites and first born even infants, the reckoning the
children of the Priests as heirs to the priesthood, provision for them* the
poor, the strangers; it is likely the same he alleges will serve to show how
infants visible Churchmembership is recompensed by the mercies now given to the
whole Church and them. Nor do I think I am mistaken in counting the mercy of
infants visible Churchmembership to be of as low a nature as to be consecrated
as Nazarites, or ^he first born male which was to be presented to God, or to be
reck^ned by descent Priests; but am sure Mr. B. does overvalue the Jew^sh
infant visible Churchmembership, and thereby misleads himself and others: And
therefore I desired him in my Letter to set down distinctly what was the
benefit and privilege of infant visible Churchmembership which he asserted;
the refusal whereof (when he desired to have a copy of my Sermon, that he might
(as his fashion is) cavil, rather then answer it) shows his unwillingness to
have his tenet examined, that truth might appear.

He adds. But he says [that it was a privilege to the Jews to be owned as
Gods people distinct from the rest of the world, while others were passed by,
yet this is repealed in mercy to us Gentiles.] Answ. In my distinctions before
you may find this answered. 1. Then it was no mercy to the Jews you think, but
to us Gentiles: But our question is, whether it be a mercy to the unchurched
infants? 2. The Jews being a Church and people of God, was a mercy; and this
God took not from any of them, but those that cast it away: But the restraction
of this to them, and the exclu^^on of the Gentiles, was no mercy to them, and
this only (with the ceremonial accidents) did God take away by the charge of
his Laws. It would have been rather an ad^i^ion to the happiness of the
believing Jews, to have the Gentiles taken in, by taking down the partition
wall: And so it will be when the Jews are graffed in again, and both made one
body. Why else does the Jewish Church pray for her little sister that had no
breasts? And Noah pray, that God would persuade Japhet to dwell in the tents of
Sem? Though the restriction therefore and the exclusion (which are no mercies
to the Jews) be taken away, yet no mercy i^ taken from them, but what is
supplied with a far grea^er in Christ: And though they partake not of these,
yet that is because of their o^n unbelief, who reject it, and not because the
new law does exclude them: For God has in his new law or Covenant made a deed
of gift of Christ and all his benefits, to all that will receive him, whether
Jew or Gentile, without excluding or excepting any. And for his denying to
particular persons the grace of conversion, that is nothing to our present
business, as belonging to decree, and not to any change in the laws: And it was
denied to many before Christ, and granted to many thousands Jews since Christ;
and shall be at last to far more.

Answ. The vanity of his distinctions is showed before; the repeal of the
privilege of the Jews mentioned was in mercy to the Jew believer, though
chiefly to the Gentiles, and the infants of both, but in justice to the Jewish
nation. The Jews being a Church and people of God, was a mercy, an^ to be the
only nation that were Gods people, was an agravation of it: and this God took
away from believers, they were put out of the Jewish Church national, Joh.
9.22. It was a mercy that the Jews were the only nation God took for his
people, and this God did take away, not by change of his laws, though that
followed, but by his severity, R^m. 11.22. breaking off that nation from the
Olive. It would have been a happiness to the believing Jews, to have had the
Gentiles taken in without dissolving the national Church Jewish, if God had
thought it good; but he otherwise determining, it was a mercy to the catholic
Church, that they were dissolved. If no mercy be taken from them, but what is
supplied with a far greater in Christ; then Christ in the flesh is, instead of
the Jewish Church national, and consequently of the infants visible
Churchmembership therein, a far greater mercy, which I said before, and Mr. B.
gainsaid. That in Gods new Covenant there is no deed of gift of Christ but to
the elect, is proved before.

Mr. B. ends thus. And thus you have heard all that Mr. T. upon deliberation
has said to this argument. And yet (would any man think it?) he concludes
that [that this abundant clear answer to all alleged from the visible
Churchmembership of the children of the Jews.] O never let my soul be tainted
with this error, which so strangely bereaves men of common ingenuity!

Answ. Let my answer and Mr. Bs. argument be compared, and the Reader judge of
our ingenuity. I for my part hope and pray that God will never leave me to be
carried away with such frivolous reasonings as these of Mr. B. are.

SECT. LXV. Mr. Bs. Argum. from Matthew. 23.37. Revel. 11.15. for infants visible
Churchmembership Chapter 12, 13. are answered.
I Have answered Mr. Bs. 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th, 11th. Chapters of the first part
of his Book of Baptism in this Review, Part. 1. Sect. 6, 7, 8, 9. I think it
not needful as yet to make reply to the exceptions against my answers, and
therefore go on to answer Mr. Bs. 12th. Chapt. which begins thus.

My 7th. Arg. shall be drawn from Matthew. 23.37, 38, 39. From whence I argue
thus; If Christ were so tender over Jerusalem that he would have gathered them
as a Hen gathers her Chickens, then surely he would not have put them or
their infants out of the Church (or repealed the merciful gift and ordinance of
their Churchmembership. But Christ was so tender of them, that he would have so
gathered Jerusalem, etc. Therefore sure he would not have unchurched their
infants. The antecedent is the words of the Lord Jesus: The reason and strength
of the consequence lies here. 1. It is not some particular Jews that Christ
would have gathered to himself (and so into his Church as accomplished with
higher privileges then before:) but it was Jerusalem, whole Jerusalem (which
is usually put for all Judea and the Jewish Nation) now if Jerusalem were
gathered, then infants must needs be gathered. I know nothing of any moment
that can be said against this; but leave it to any tender conscience to judge,
whether it be likely that Christ should have unchurched all their infants, when
he would have gathered to himself the whole nation, or whole Jerusalem. If that
contemptible answer should here be again returned [that Christ would have
gathered them only into the invisible Church] I have answered it before; they
that are visibly or apparently gathered into the invisible Church, are gathered
also thereby into the visible: And if all Jerusalem had been gathered, it had
been doubtless a visible gathering: O that I could see as clear evidence for
many other controverted truths, as I see in these words of the Lord Jesus, to
convince me, that he would have gathered all Jerusalem into his visible
Church, and cons^quently not have unchurched all their infants: I should
tremble to think of resisting so plain testimonies of God. If Christ's own words
will not serve, I know not what will. If any say, that by Jerusalem is meant
only the aged of Jerusalem; I answer: It is vain to call for Scripture if they
dare contradict it at pleasure; or so make it speak only what they list. It is
not fully a nation or City without the infants. Besides, Jerusalem had
inchurched infants when Christ so spoke; therefore how could his words be
otherwise understood by them, unless he had excepted infants. 2. Yet further,
Christ does not in vain use the similitude of a Hen gathering her Chickens; The
Hen gathers the youngest most tenderly: Yea how long will she sit the very
Eggs? Now who dare expound thi^ thus? As a Hen gathers her young ones under
her wings, so I would have gathered the aged of you, but none of your young
ones visibly. 3. And does not their leaving of their house desolate, mean the
Temple, and so the unchurching them, till they say, Blessed i^ he that comes
in the Name of the Lord: and ^he^ Jerusalem (and therefore infants) shall be
inchurched again? So CHRIST JESUS himself has made me believe that he would
have gathered all Jerusalem, but unchurched none of them.

Answ. It is not CHRIST JESUS, but Mr. Bs. own shall^wness or prejudice that
makes him believe that here is a^y thing for infants visible Churchmembership.
That Jerusalem is usually put for all Judea and the Jewish nation, is more then
I find. But that by Jerusalem and her children are not meant infants, is
apparent from the text. 1. They are meant by Jerusalem who killed and stoned
them that were sent, but they were not infants, Ergo. 2. Because the way
whereby Christ would have gathered Jerusalem was by preaching the Gospel to
them, as is manifest 1. in that he used no other way. 2. This was the way
which he often attempted, which is implied in the phrase, how often would I? 3.
This is the way they refused, implied in the phrase [ and ye would not] that
is, ye would not obey my admonitions of repentance nor believe the Gospel; and
so Piscator annal* loci saepissime and benignissime a me admoniti, non tamen
obtemporare voluistis. 4. From verse. 34.35. where the way by which he would
have gathered them, seems to be by sending Prophets, and Wise men, and Scribes
or Apostles Luke 11.49. to them, which were not sent to infants. How often would
I have g^thered? That is (say some) by the external ministry of the Prophets
sent unto thee, verse. 34, 35. Trap^ on Matthew. 23.37. 5. The often attempt of
gathering here, is the same with the visitation, or over sight Luke 19.44. as
the agreement of the expressions and matter in both places compared e^idently
shows, now that was by teaching, Luke 1.78, 79. And thus the New Annot. Of thy
visitation] as if he had said in thy visitation, in which God manifested
himself in my person offering thee mercy. 6. Thus Protestant Divines often
expound it, answering Arminians and others, inferring hence resistability of
converting grace by man's free^will; as Diodati in his annot. on Matthew. 23.37.
expresses their mind, We must of necessity understand this to be meant of
the dispensation of outward means by the word* exhortations, commandments, etc.
Now it cannot be said that Christ would have this way gathered the infants of
Jerusalem, for he had said he often by his own, and Prophets and Apostles
preaching would or attempted to do it. But this he would nor nor attempted to
do to infants, Ergo, they are not meant under the term [ Jerusalem.] 3. This is
proved also from the end of his gathering, which was, that they might be his
Disciples, but he never would or did gather any infants to him as his
Disciples, Ergo. 4. It is proved also thus. Those only are meant by Jerusalem,
whom Christ would have gathered but they would not: But this cannot be said of
infants, that they would not, there was no nilling of Conversion in them, Ergo.
5. They are mea^t by Jerusalem who are meant by the City Luke 19.41. and there
they are meant, who v. 42. might have known in that their day the things
belonging to their peace, but then they were hid from their eyes. Who knew not
the time of their visitation, v. 44. But this is not meant of infants, Ergo.

In answer therefore to Mr. Bs. argument altering the terms [ put out,
unchurch, which my doctrine does not assert] into [ repeal the ordinance of
infants visible Churchmembership* or leave out of his visible Church] I deny
the consequence of his major, and deny that which he alleges for proof of it,
that by Jerusalem is mean^ all the people of Jerusalem, even the infants. And
to his wish, I return a wish* O that I could see as clear evidence for many
other controverted tru^hs, as I see in these words to convince me that Christ
means no^ infants by those he would have gathered unto him, and though I would
not have Mr. B. of any man to turn Quaker, yet I think he should rather tremble
at the allegation of this text so impertinent to his purpose, and not
understand by [ Jerusalem] Synecdochically the persons of years. Nor would this
be any more to contradict the Scripture at pleasure, or to make it speak only
what we list, then for him to understand by [Jerusalem] Synecdochically (as he
does) the Jewish nation, or by [Jerusalem] to understand metonymically the
people, even the infants of the City. To make the interpreting of speeches by
tropes a contradicting them, or making them speak what they list is such a
^oolery, as I should rather have imagined to have come from some woman or
Lay-preacher, then from a man of such magnified learning as Mr. B. is, had I
not found it printed in his Book. As for what he says, it is not fully a
nation or city without infants, though it were true (as it is not) yet that
proves not that infants are meant in every speech of a nation or city, any more
then Math. 24.7. infants shall rise against infants, because nation shall rise
against nation, or Matt. 21.10. infants were moved saying, who is this? because
the whole city was moved, saying, who is this? And hereby it may he seen how
easily Christ might be understood without including infants, and so much the
more easily, because though infants were in the Jewish Church, yet Christ who
spa^e not of gathering into the Jews Church, but to himself (in whose visible
Church were no infants) might be the more readily conceived to except infant^,
yea if he had meant infants could not be well understood by them. And for his
challenge, I answer, I dare thus expound his gathering, of gathering only the
aged into his visible Church, if Mr. B. imagine (as he does) the similitude of
a Hen to be used in vain if infants be not meant, because the Hen gathers the
youngest, by this reason Christ should use the similitude in vain if he would
gather any other then infants, since the hen gathers not hens and old cocks
under her wings, but only little chickens. Me thinks by leaving their house
desolate, Mr. B. should not mean the unchurching them. For then it will follow,
that all the Jewish nation were unchurched (for so he will have meant by
Jerusalem) which will overthrow many of his conceits about making Jewish and
Gentile Churches one body, the same* the Church not broken off, etc. and prove
before he is aware the repeal of his pretended ordinance of infants visible
Churchmembership. But enough of the silly insipid arguings (if I may use his
language) of this Chapter, let us see whether the next have any better.

Chapter 13. My 8th. arg. says Mr. B. is from Rev. 11.15. If the Kingdoms of this
world, either are or shall be the Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ; then
infants also must be members of his Kingdom: (and consequently the gift and
ordinance for their churchmembership is not repealed.) But the antecedent is
the words of the text. What can be said against this that is sense or reason?
If they say, that by [Kingdoms] is meant [some part of the Kingdoms] excluding
all infants: I say such men need not look into the Scripture for their faith:
They may make their own Creed on these terms, let Scripture say what it will: I
know some places of Scripture may be produced, where the word Kingdom and
Jerusalem, etc. is taken for a part: but if we must take words always
improperly, because they are so taken sometime, then we shall not know how to
unde^stand any Scripture, and humane language will become useless; and by this
any man may put by any Testimony of Scripture, though it were to prove the most
fundamental truth: As the Arrians put off all testimonies for the Godhead of
Christ, because Magistrates are called Gods. But the circumstances of this text
do evince to us, that Christ speaks properly of whole Jerusalem and whole
Kingdoms, and not improperly of any part only.

2. If they say, that [by Kingdom of Christ] is not meant the Church of Christ,
they then speak against the constant phrase of the Scripture; which calls
Christ's Kingdom his Church and Conversim: Christ is King and Savior of the
same society. What is Christ's Kingdom but his Church? I know the Kingdom of
Christ is more large and more special: but here it cannot be meant of his
Kingdom in the larger sense, as he is de jure, only King (in regard of
voluntary obedient subjects) nor as he over rules common societies and
things: For so the Kingdoms of the world were ever the Kingdoms of the Lord and
his Christ, and it could not be said that now they are become so. So that for
any thing I can see, this text alone were sufficient to decide the
controversy, whether infants must b^e Church Members.

Answ. 1. I think this may be said with sense and reason, yea and clear
evidence out of the text, that by [Kingdoms of the world, Kingdoms of our Lord
and his Christ, or as some copies have it, the Kingdom of the world is become]
is not meant the men or members of either Kingdoms, and so neither infant, nor
adult persons, but the dominion, power, rule it self which the men of the world
had usurped, chiefly Antichrist, which was Christ's before of right, but not
till then become his by actual* full, and peaceable possession, his enemies or
the chief of them being no^ till then subdued, but tyranizing over his
subjects. And though I confess the term connotes men over whom Christ should
have rule, yet the persons ov^r whom Christ should rule then, were not only
the Church, but also his enemies, whom he should subdue, and keep under, and
judge, Revel* 2 26, 27. That by [Kingdome] is meant Rule, is manifest from many
places, M^tth. 6.10, 13. John 18.36. Heb. 1.8. so Revel. 17.17, 18. And that
this is the meaning here, seems to me to be manifest, 1. from that which is
added, and he shall reign for ever and ever; which being the consequent of the
Kingdom or Kingdoms of the world becoming our Lords and his Christ, it
shows, that the Kingdoms note the rule or dominion whereby he reigns, not the
persons over whom he reigns. 2. The same is confirmed from v. 17. where the
same thing is expressed in those words, We give thee thanks, O Lord God
almighty, which art, and wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee
thy great power, and have reigned: And wh^rein that is, is expressed v. 18, in
judging all, rewarding his servants, destroying the corrupters of the earth. 3.
From chapter 12.10. where again the same or like thing is expressed thus, Now is
come salvation and strength or power and the Kingdom of our God, and the power
or authority of his Christ; for the accuser of our brethren is cast down: Where
Kingdom and power are put together, to show, that by the Kingdom is not meant
the persons over whom the rule is, but the rule it self. 4. It is so to be
understood where it is mentioned as I conceive in the sense meant Revel. ^1.15.
as namely 1 Cor. 15.24. 2 Timothy 4.1. and other places. 5. Thus Diodati in his
Annot. on Revel. 11.15. The Kingdomes] that is to say, Now God reigns with
his son, and that absolutely having subdued all his enemies. 1 Cor. 15.24. that
I omit others. 6. This sense is the more confirmed, if it be read as some
copies have it, the Kingdom of this world is become. On the other side Mr. Bs.
interpretation seems to me either not sense, or not true. For then it should be
thus, All the Kingdoms of the world, that is every person in the world, should
be Christ's Church, that is, a society of persons separated from the world to
God, or called out of the world, etc. as he defines the Church, of Baptism,
page 82. Now can this be good sense to be all the world, the Kingdoms of the
world, and to be called or separated from or out of the world? Can all the
world be separated from the world! And there is no truth in this
interpretation, since it never was nor shall be, that the kingdoms of the
world, that is, every person old and young in all the kingdoms of the world,
shall become Christ's Church. For then Christ should have no enemies to remove
out of his Kingdom, contrary to the Parable, Matthew. 13.30. expounded v. 38.39,
40, 41, 42. Now if this be the sense, then it makes nothing for infants visible
Churchmembership, nor by [kingdomes] is all the members of a kingdom meant,
and so infants, but both the consequence of Mr. Bs. major is justly denied, and
the inference from the consequent of it. For if it be meant of Christ's rule (as
the texts show) though it connote the persons over whom the rule is, yet they
are not thereby proved Churchmembers; for in the sense there meant, the rule or
reign is over enemies as well as subjects: Yea, if the reign were over
subjects, and infants comprehended, yet since the reign over them is only
invisible, this cannot prove infants visible Churchmembers.

Nor are Mr. Bs. reasons of any force to prove that Revel. 11.15. by the
kingdom of Christ must be meant the Church. For it is not true, that the
constant phrase of Scripture calls Christ's Kingdom his Church and Conversim.
For though I deny not that ^he Church is termed the kingdom of Christ, yet I
deny this is the constant phrase of Scripture to call the kingdom of Christ
the Church, much less Conversim. ^he places alleged before, with many more, do
evince the contrary; yea, there appear to me but few places wherein the Church
is termed the kingdom of Christ. I am not yet fully resolved, that it is any
where so meant, except in that Matthew. 13.41. though I deny not the fitness of
the expression.

Nor does his reason hold, that here it cannot be meant of Christ's Kingdom in
the largest sense, as he over-ruleth common soci^ties and things; For though it
be true, that in some sort so the Kingdoms of the world were ever his, that
is, he did always so order them, that they passively did his will; yet it is
certain, that in the reign of Antichrist the kingdoms of the world, that is,
the rule which was exercised was not actively for God or Christ, but as it is
expressly said, Revel 13.4. ^hey worshipped the Dragon who gave power to the
beast, blasphemed God, made war with the saints, overcame them; the beast had
power over all kindreds and tongues and nations, so that all that dwelt on the
earth should worship him, whose names were not written in the Lambs book of
life: and so they gave their Kingdom to the beast, Revel. 17.12, 13, 14, 17.
though they did Gods will But after the Lamb overcame them, v. 14. and the
Kingdoms of the world were his, when the Kings did bate the whore, and make
her des^lite, etc. So that this may well be expounded thus, the Kingdoms of
the world, that is, the rule which the Kings of the world have exercised for
the Whore shall be so changed, that whether out of revenge of the mischiefs the
Whore has done them, or out of love to Christ, they shall hate her, and
execute Christ's doom upon her, which was not always done. And it seems a piece
of inconstancy in Mr. B. who would not have the kingdoms of the world taken
for a part in the forepart of this chapter, and yet denies it to be taken in
the largest sense in the later part. And how the infant Churchmembership of
Christians can be gathered from the term, Kingdoms of the world becoming
Christ's, more then any others, I see not. But I proceed.

2. Suppose it were granted, that by the Kingdoms of Christ were meant men,
and the Church of Christ, Revel. 11.15. yet sure it is far more likely that by
the Kingdom of Christ should be meant the invisible, then the visible Church.
For the invisible Church either solely or chiefly is called the kingdom of
Christ, and he is styled the King of Saints, Rev. 15.3. and Mr. B. says here,
Christ is King and Savior of the same society. But in this sense I should
grant the conclusion, that infants must be members of Christ's Kingdom. And
sure^y the visible Church Members who are not true believers, have not Christ
to rule over them, but are enemies to Christ, and Satan's subjects, and
therefore not truly but putatively only in Christ's kingdom, nor they any part
of it. They are not children of the kingdom, Matthew. 13.38.

3. But were it granted that Revel. 11.15. is meant the visible Church, yet
that therefore infants must be a part of it, because they are a part of a
Kingdom follows not, for Mr. B. says, I know some places of Scripture may be
produced where the word Kingdom and Jerusalem, etc. is taken for a part. Which
is enough to show that the argument is not good which he uses, For it must
rest on this proposition, where Jerusalem is mentioned there all Jerusalem is
meant, where Kingdoms are mea^t whole Kingdoms are meant, and therefore
infants: which propositions are co^tradicted by Mr. B. himself, and therefore
it the whole controversy were referred to these two texts Matthew. 23.37. Rev.
11.15. to decide, Mr. Bs. cause would be lost for want of proof, even from his
own confession. Nor does Mr. B. produce any thing to prove that by [Kingdoms
Revel. 11.15.) is meant the whole o^ a Kingdom even the infants, but only
prattles that which me thinks a learned man should be a^^amed of. For there is
no color of reason to charge them who expound [ Kingdom] by a Synecdoche of
the whole for a part, with making their own Creed without Scripture, taking
words always in an improper sense, making humane language useless, putting by
any Scripture such as are produced for Christ's Godhead, when he himself says
it is sometimes in Scripture so taken, and gives no proof of its being taken
otherwise here. Yea, by rejecting such exposition without reason Mr. B. may be
m^re truly said to make his own Creed without Scripture, to make the Scripture
unintelligible, humane language useless, to fortify Biddle and other
deceivers, in their gross opinions of the Anthropomorphites, and others,
insomuch that I think if the Arians were refuted no better then Mr. B. does
here the expounding of Kingdoms and Jerusalem synecdochically, Arianism would
quickly prevail, and errors easily take, especially with Scholars.

4. Lastly, were it granted that by [ Kingdoms] were meant the visible Church;
and that infants were a part of the Kingdom thus meant, yet this very text, and
that according to Mr Bs. own reasoning* would prove the repeal o^ their
Churchmembership till the accomplishment of the thing meant Rev. 11.15. which
whether it be yet, or shall be till the day of judg^ment is very uncertain, For
Mr. B. here reasons thus, it cannot be meant of Christ's kingdom in the larger
sense* for so the kingdoms of the world were ever the kin^doms of the Lord and
his Christ, and it could not be said that now they are become so In like ^anner
I may say, if the visible Churchmembership of infants were meant Rev. 11.15.
then it was not so before the 7th. trumpet sounded; for it is said, then the
kingdoms of the world were become the kingdoms of Christ, if they were then
become they were not before, and consequently infants visible churchmembership
not before. Now when the 7th. trumpet sounded is uncertain; Mr. Brightman makes
it to begin at Qu. Elizabeth's reign, the New Annotations when Antichrist is
weakened, Mr. Mede at the imperial reign of Christ in the great day of
judgment, which v. 17, 18. do favor. And if infants be not visible
Churchmembers till then, when perhaps there shall be no infants at all, Mr. B.
will have but a very cold suit of it, if the deciding of the whole
controversy, whethe^ infants must be Churchmembers, be referred to this text
alone. But enough, if not too much of these ridiculous though confident
allegations of Mr. B.

SECT. LXVI. Mr. Bs. 9th, 10th, 11. Arg. concerning infants better condition in
the N. T. in his 14th, 15th, 16th, Chapters part. 1. of Bapt. to prove their
visible Churchmembership, are answered.
CHap. 14. says Mr. B. my 9th. arg. is this: If the beli^ving Jews children
(and cons^quently the parents in point of comfort) be not in a worse condition
since Christ, then they were before, then their children ought still to be
Churchmembers. (And consequently the gift and ordinance is not repealed.) But
certainly the believing Jews children (and consequently the parents in point
of comfort) are not in a worse condition since Christ then they were before:
Therefore their children ought still to be Churchmembers. The antecedent I
scarce take him for a Christian that will deny. Christ did not come to make
believers or their children miserable, or to undo them, or to bring them into a
worse condition. This were to make Christ a destroyer, and not a Savior. He
that came not to destroy men's lives but to save them, came not destroy men's
happiness but to recover them. He that would not accuse the adulterous woman,
will not cast out all infants without accusation. 2. The consequence a man
would think should be out of doubt: If it be not, I prove it thus: it is a far
worse condition to be out of the visible Church then to be in it: therefore if
the believing Jews children be cast out of the Church then they are in a far
worse condition then they were before: (and so Christ and faith should do them
a mischief, which were blasphemy to imagine.)

Answ. If Mr. B. had set down, as I desired him in my Letter, what the benefit,
or privilege is of infant visible Churchmembership which he asserts
unrepealed, and what infants lose by not being in the Christian Church visible,
the Reader with my self might have considered this argument more exactly: But
till that be done, no man can exactly tell how to compare their former and
later conditions wherein they are better or worse, nor how from the equal
goodness of their condition their Churchmembership is inferred. And for my
part, I think such kind of arguings as these, to infer things that only are by
Divine institution, are mere devices of men's wit, and Mr. B. in using them (as
indeed they are his only strength he has in this point, for all the texts he
brings are quite from the matter, and some so manifestly impertinent, that a
good text man would be ashamed ever to produce them as he does) does but show
that he rests more on popular arguments which moves men's affections then
Scripture proofs, though most deceitfully like an Impostor he entitle his Book,
Plain Scripture proof of infants Churchmembership and Baptism, when there is
not a text that is plain for it, scarce any that has any show of it. But lest
this argument be thought unanswerable, I shall examine it. A worse or a better
condition are comparative terms, and as Aristotle says in his Categ. (...)
nothing is said to be great or small by it self, but as compared with another,
so nothing is better or worse by it self, but as compared with another. It is
necessary then that we examine the estate of b^lieving Jews children before
and since Christ's coming: The estate of the believing Jews children before
Christ, may be conceived to be either in actual possessions or in promises. In
actual possessions they had this privilege, that they were a part of that
nation which was then Gods people, separated from other people by circumcision,
laws, temple, inheritance in Canaan, priesthood, and the children of the
priests had this privilege, that the males were to succeed in the priesthood,
and their children to be nourished of the tithes, offerings, first fruits, the
poor by a tithe and other ways. The promises were either of special
privilege, as that Christ should come out of that nation, or of temporal
blessings, as that while they kept Gods laws they should dwell in Canaan and
prosper there, or of saving blessings. These did belong only to some believing
Hebrews children, not to all, to Isaac not to Ishmael, to Jacob not to Esau,
the rest were only temporal benefits, and were accompanied with a yoke of
laws and rites intolerable. The children of believing Jews condition since
Christ, is either in respect of saving blessings, and so it is either the same
which was before, or better in respect of the easier way of coming to the
knowledge of Christ, in respect of the temporals. So it is in some respect
worse, they are liable more to persecution with their parents, in some respects
better, in that they with their parents a^e exempt from the legal bon^age,
which they and their parents as pa^^ of that nation o^ visible Church were
obnoxious to. So that in some sense the antecedent or minor is granted, in some
sense denied, without fear of forfeiting my Christianity.

And to Mr. Bs. proofs I answer, Christ did come to make Jew believers children
in some respect, that is, of their temporal enjoyments in Canaan miserable, or
under persecution, and so in a worse condition, and yet he is thereby no
destroyer of man's happiness, but a Savior of them, this worse condition
working for their eternal good. Nor is it any absurdity to say, he that would
not accuse the adulterous woman, would leave out of his visible Church
Christian all infants without accusation, since this leaving out was only an
act of Sovereignty as a Rector, not of punitive justice as a Judge.

But the consequence is that which I denied before and now also, and to his
proof I give the same answer, which he thus exagitates.

Can you imagine what shift is left against this plain truth? I will tell you
all that Mr. T. could say (before many thousand witnesses I think) and that is
this, He says plainly, That it is a better condition to infants to be out of
the Church now, then in it then. Which ^ thought a Christian could scarce have
believed. 1. Are all those glorious things spoken of the City of God, and is it
now better to be out of any Church then in it?

Answ. It is no shift but a plain truth, which if there had been many more
witnesses, I should sti^l avouch as part of my faith, and me thinks if Mr. B.
be a Chri^^ian, and not a Jew, he should believe it too. For were not the Jews
infan^s by their visible Churchmembership bound to be circumcised, and to keep
Moses Law? was not thi^ an heavy and intolerable yoke? I^ it not a mercy to
be freed from it? What real Evangelical promise or blessing do infan^s of
believing Jews now lose, by not being Christian visible Churchmembers? I
challenge Mr. B. to show me any one particular real Evangelical blessing, which
does not a^ well come to an infant of a believer unbaptiz^d, or non-admitted to
visible Churchmembership as to the baptized, or admitted, or any true cause of
discomfort to parents by my doctrine, which is not by his own. Dare he say,
that the promises of savi^g grace, or protection, or other blessings, are not
belonging to them because unbaptized, not admitted visible Churchmembers? If he
dare not, let him forbear to calumniate my doctrine as unchristian, and
tragically to represent it as cruel, and uncomfortable to parents, and so not
like a solid disputant or judicious Divine clear truth, but like an Orator
raise passion without judgment, and end^avour to make me and that which is a
plain truth odious, which course will at last redound to his shame, if it do
not pierce his conscience. I said not as Mr. Bs. question intimates, that it is
now better to be out of any Church then it, but that it is a better condition
to infants to be out of the Church now, then to be in it then, meaning that
nonvisible Churchmembership to infants now is a better condition then visible
Churchmembership was to them then. And for that passage, that glorious things
are spoken of the City of God, to prove the contrary it is ridiculously
alleged; For that speech is meant of Jerusalem, or Sion preferred before all
the dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. 87.1, 2, 3. not of all the Jewish Church, and to
it may be well opposed that of the Apostle Gal. 4.25. Jerusalem which is now
in bondage with her children, which proves my position.

Mr. B. adds. 2. Then the Gentiles, Pagans infants now, are happier then the
Jews were then; for the Pagans and their infants are out of the Church?

Answ. It follows not from my position, which was of Christian believers
infants with those promises and probabilities they have, and from thence
follows not that Pagans infants out of the Church without those promises and
probabilities Christian believers infants have, are happier then the Jews were
then.

But, says he, I were best to argue it a little further. 3. If it be a better
condition to be in that Covenant with God wherein he binds himself to be
their God, and takes them to be his peculiar people, then to be out of that
Covenant, then it is a better condition to be in the Church as it was then,
then to be out of that and this too: But it is a better condition to be in the
aforesaid Covenant with God, then out of it: Therefore it is better to be in
the Church as then to be in neither. The antecedent is undeniable* The
consequence is clear in these two conclusions; 1. That the inchurched Jews were
then all in such a Covenant with God: This I proved, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. What Mr.
T. vainly says against the plain words of this Text, you may see in the end.
2. There is to those that are now out of the Church no such covenant assurance,
or mercy answerable. If there be, let some body show it: which I could never
get Mr. T. to do Nay he seems to confess in his Sermon, that infants now have
no privilege at all in stead of their churchmembership.

Answ. If the Covenant be meant (as I have proved before, sect. 64. it is) of
the Covenant of the Law concerning settling them in Canaan if they kept the law
of Moses, then the antecedent is not undeniable; but it is most true, that the
condition of believers and their children now with the exhibition of Christ,
the promises and probabilities they have of saving knowledge of Christ and
salvation by him, is better out of the aforesaid Covenant with God then in it.
But the consequence was also denied, because Mr. B. means the Covenant of
grace: And if it be meant of the Covenant of Evangelical grace, neither of his
conclusions are true; nor is the former proved from Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. For if it
were true, that all that did stand there before the Lord did enter into
covenant, yet they were not therefore in the covenant wherein God binds
himself to be their God. Their entering into covenant was by their promise to
obey God, which they might do, and yet not be in the covenant wherein God
binds himself to be their God, si^h Gods promise is not to them that enter
into covenant, but to them that keep it; yea, if it were that they were in that
covenant, yet that covenant did not put any into a happy condition but those
that kept Gods laws, it being made conditionally, and so not all the inchurched
Jews were in that covenant wherein God binds himself to be their God. Yea, if
it were as Mr. B. would have it, that the promise of being their God were meant
of Evangelical grace; yet according to his Doctrine it is upon condition of
faith, and so it is either universal to all in or out of the Church, or to none
but those who are believers, who were not all the inchurched Jews. Nor is the
second conclusion true; there is the same covenant of Evangelical grace made to
infants who are now no visible churchmembers as was then, to the elect now as
was then, to whom alone it was made then and now. And as for mercy answerable
to visible churchmembership of infants, enough is said here, Sect. 64.

Mr. B. adds. 4. I argue from Romans 3.1. What advantage has the Jew, and what
profit the circumcision? much every way, etc. If the Jew circumcised inchurched
infants had much advantage every way, and thos^ without the Church have none;
then it is better be in their Church then without the Church: But the former is
plain in the Text; therefore the later is certain.

Answ. The advantage the Jew had, was when they were the people of God above
them who were heathen infidels, not above Christian believers: Now it is true,
that it was better to be in their Church, then to be without the Church, as
heathen infidels and their children were, But this does not prove what is to be
proved, that the condition of Jews infants in their Church visible, is better
then of Christian believers infants now no visible Churchmembers. Nevertheless
the speech of the Apostle is not meant of Jew infants; for the instance he
gives of committing to them the Oracles of God, is not true of the infants; and
therefore it is denied, that Mr. Bs. antecedent is plain in the text in respect
of the forepart of it: And it is false also, that the infants of Christians,
though not Christian visible churchmembership, have no such advantage as the
Jews had; For in this thing the advantage of the Christians infant is more then
of the Jews, since the Scriptures being now more common and better cleared, they
may sooner know them then the Jews infants could

5. Says he, Again from Romans 9.4. I argue thus: If then to the Jews pertained
the adoption, the covenants, the promises, etc. but no such thing to them
without the Church; then it is worse to be out of the Church, then to be in it
as they were: But the former is the words of the Holy Ghost; therefore the
consequent is certain.

Answ. The consequence is denied. For if this were true, it would as well prove
it to have been a better condition to be in the visible Church Jewish then,
then to be in the Christian Church visible now. For now those things expressed
Romans 9.4, 5. belong not to them who are in the visible Church Christian; yea,
it is now Christ is come the benefit of the Church to be freed from them, I
mean some of them, as the services which were in sacrifices, etc. the glory
which was the Ark, the Covenant, to wit, the Tables of stone, the adoption
which excluded the Gentiles from being Gods people; and concerning the other
three, the giving of the Law, descent from the Fathers, Christ's consanguinity,
they are such as cannot be to any other, and are all recompensed abundantly by
the coming of Christ, the gift of the Spirit, preaching of the Gospel, without
infants visible churchmembership. And therefore though there be no such thing
as those things mentioned, Romans 9.4, 5. to them that are out or in the visible
Church Christian, yet there are better things to Christians, which make their
condition, and the^r infants not actually visible churchmembers, better then
the Jewish churchstate at the best.

6. Says he, If it be better to be in Gods house and family then out, and in
his visible Kingdom then out; then it is better to be in the Church (though
but as the Jews were) then out: But the former is evident; therefore the later.

Answ. It is true, it is better to be in Gods house and family then out, and so
infants may be though they be not in the Christian Church visible; and though
they be not in Christ's visible Kingdom, yet they may be in his invisible,
which is most truly his Kingdom and house, and this estate is better then to
be in the Jewish Church visible. But it was not better with infants by virtue
of their visible churchmembership, then it is with believers infants without
it, since they are freed from the yoke of bondage the Jews were under, and have
equal portion, if not more of Evangelical grace then they had, and therefore
the consequence is denied.

7. Says Mr. B. If it be better to be a sanctified peculiar people of God,
then to be none such (but an excluded common unclean people;) then it is better
to be in the Church (though but as the Jews were) then out of the Church: But
the former is most certain; therefore the l^ter. The consequence is plain, in
that all the Church, both Jews and Gentiles are properly a peculiar people
separated or sanctified to God; and so are they still called in the Old
Testament and New: And therefore those without the Church must needs be an
excluded people (even as election of some implies passing by or rejecting of
others;) and therefore are called common and unclean frequently.

Answ. This being understood of the visible Church, it is false that those
without the Church visible must needs be an excluded people from God; for then
all abortives, and still-born children, persons dying without signs sensible of
faith and repentance though before God believers, excommunicate persons should
b^ excluded from God. And as for Mr. Bs. proof, that the Church are properly a
peculiar people separated or sanctified to God, this cannot be true in reality
(which must make their condition better) but only of those who are of the
invisible also, of which infants may be, though not of the visible; of the rest
it is true only in appearance, which makes their condition not better in the
Church, but worse then of those without, since the odiousness of their
hypocrisy provokes God against them the more, though cloaked from men by their
fair profession.

8. Says he* If God do not usually bestow so many or greater mercies out of
his Church, as he does in it; then it is worse to be out of the Church, then to
be in it (though but as the Jews were:) But certainly God uses not to bestow
so many or greater mercies out of the Church, as in it; therefore it is worse
to be out then in (though but as the Jews.)

Answ. Mr. B. should prove the minor (which I deny) that God does not bestow
usually so many or greater mercies to infants now not visible Christian
churchmembers, as he did to infants in the Jewish Church visible; (For so must
his minor be, if his conclusion oppose my position:) which since he proves not,
my denial is sufficient answer.

9. Says he, If Christ have made larger promises to his Church visible, then
to any in the world that are not of the Church, (nay, if there be no special
promise at all, nor scarce common, to any without the Church, but the
conditional, upon their coming in,) then is it worse to be out of the Church
then to be so in it: But the former is true, therefore the later.

Answ. Mr. B. brings no proof for his minor, and therefore it is enough for me
to deny it, as being false concerning abortives, still-born, infant children
elect, and others.

10. Says he, If Christ have promised his presence to his Church to the end of
the world, and to walk among his golden can^lesticks, and take pleasure in her;
but not so to those without the Church: then it is better being with^n (though
but as the Jews) then without. But the former is true; therefore the latter.
Did I not resolve on brevi^y, it were easier to cite multitudes of texts for
all these.

Answ. Mr. B. should prove his minor, that Christ has promised these things to
infants in the visible Church Jewish, and not to infants of believers, who are
not visible churchmembers Christian; for which, though he talk of multitudes of
texts, yet I shall not believe he has any till he produce them.

He adds. But upon this much I say to the contrary minded as Joshua in another
case, choose you of what society you will be of; but as for me and my household,
we will be of the Church of God.

Answ. And so say I, if I can prevail with them, or for them.

Mr. B. adds, And had I children, I should be loath God should shut them out.
Answ. So s^y I.

Again Mr. B. For without are dogs, extortioners, liars, etc. Even Christ calls
the woman of Canaan that was without, a dog; though when he had admitted her
into his Church, she became a daughter.

Answ. The words, Revel. 22.15. without are dogs, the verse foregoing shows to
be meant of being without the city where the blessed enter; and it being
compared with Rev. 21.8. thence appears, that they that are without are cast
into the lake burning with fire and brimstone, which is the second death: which
if he say (as his words intimate) of all that are not visible churchmembers, he
pronounces a bloody sentence against millions that are in heaven, and must be
a hundred times more uncomfortable to parents concerning their abortive
still-born children, then any thing I ever held. And his abuse of Christ's
words, Matthew. 15.26. Mark 7 27. is yet more gross, in alleging them after
that, Rev 22.15. as if dogs, Matthew. 15.26. were of the same sense with dogs in
the other, whereas Rev. 12.15. it is (...), and does note such as rend them
that give holy things to them, Matthew. 7.6. but Matthew. 15.26. Mark 7.27. it is
(...), little dogs and does not note persons so called from their profane,
^ischievous, impious behavior, but in opposition to children, that is Jews,
such as were of G^^tile descent, and therefore accounted unclean And the
application of them is as bad, as if the not ma^ing infants Christian visible
churchmembers, made them dogs in either sense: Whereas to make the^ dogs, as
Rev. 22.15. is meant, is not only to make them non-visible churchmembers, but
also of most wicked manners and damned wretches; and the term dogs, as used
Matthew. 15 26. might be applied as well to visible churchmembers not Jewish,
such as Cornelius, Acts 10.2. as to those out of it. Nor does it appear that
our Lord Christ either admitted the woman of Canaan into his Church or termed
her daughter (as Mr. Bs. words intimate) but woman after her manifestation of
faith. So that Mr. B. as his wont is, does profanely abuse the Scripture, to
make his adversaries tene^ appear odious without cause. What he adds, I say
therefore as Peter whither shall we go, if we forsake the Church? It is good
for us to be here: those that will needs think it better to be out of the
Church then in it, let them go; they need no Anathema, nor excommunication,
seeing they think it such a mercy to be without the Church, I will not say of
it as Paul of his ship, except ye abide in it, ye cannot ^ee saved, and so I
conclude, Christ did not come to believers hurt, by unchurching their children,
does but show his malignant disposition to spit as much venom as he can
against his antagonists and their doctrine, calumniating it as tending to
forsaking the Church, thinking it better to be out of the Church then in it,
thinking it a mercy to be without the Church, Christ did come to believers
hurt by unchurching their children, none of which follows from my tenet, but
the charging of them on it showing Mr. Bs. spightfulness toward me, and the
truth, which the Lord forgive him.

In the same vein of scribbling, Mr. B. proceeds thus chapter 15. My 10th. arg is
this from Heb. 8.6. [ Jesus is the mediator of a better Covenant established on
better promises. Heb. 7.22. And the Author of a better testament. Romans 5.14,
15, 20. Where sin abounded grace much more abounded Ephesians. 3.19, 20. That ye
may comprehend the height, and breadth, and length, and depth, and know the
love of Christ which passes knowledg] with a hundred the like places; from
whence I argue thus, If the Church of Christ be not in a worse state now (in
regard of their childrens happiness and their parents comfort therein) then it
was before Christ's coming, then our children ought to be Churchmembers: (and
consequently that ordinance and merciful gift is not repealed.) But all the
said texts and many more show that the Church of Christ is not in a worse
condition now then it was then (but unconceivably better:) therefore our
children ought to be Churchmembers, as well as theirs was then. I have before
proved that it is worse to be out of ehe Church then in it; and then nothing
else can be said against this argument that I know of.

Answ. That Mr. B. has not proved any thing he should have proved in
contradiction to my tenet is before showed. To the argument here made I answer,
1. by denying the syllog^sm to be right in form for want of putting in the
minor, those words ( in regard of their childrens happiness and their parents
comfort therein) and adding in the minor those words ( but unconceivably
better) which were not in the major, whereby the syllogis^ is monstrous
consisting of ^our or five terms. 2. Letting that pass I deny the consequence
of the major, and aver that though our infants be not visible Churchmembers
now, yet the Church of Christ is not in a worse state now (in regard of their
childrens happiness and their parents comforts therein) then it was before
Christ's com^ing, but unconceivably better, in regard of the coming of Christ
in the flesh, the gift of the spirit, the preaching of the gospel, etc. 3. That
none of the texts speak any thing for Mr. Bs. purpose, but rather against it.
In the first it is said the Covenant of which Christ is mediator is better then
that of which Moses or Aaron were mediators, and that it is established on
better promises, the former containing for the most part promises of ear^hly
blessings in Canaan, and that promise which was of righteousness, was upon the
condition of keeping the Law, without promise of the spirit; now the new
Covenant promises righteousness, forgiveness of all sins through faith in
Christ, with a promise of the spirit. But these promises belong not to the
Church as it is visible, but as it contains the elect, of which sort infants
may be though they be not visible Churchmembers, there is not a word of promise
that the visible Church shall consist of a whole nation, of all sorts of people
in a nation infants and elder, much less shall consist of more sorts of people
then were in the Jewish Church, but of more ample mercies spiritual to the
elect, who were all of the invisible Church though not of the visible, and
among them infants, abortives, still born chi^dren, which could not be of the
visible; and therefore to speak truth, parents have more comfort by this
Covenant both for themselves and children, in that it assures more ample grace,
and that to more then visible members under the New Testament. The same answer
is to be given to Heb. 7.22. though ^he word be not as Mr. B. here reads it
[author] but [surety.] The next text speaks of the abounding of grace by Christ
beyond the evil of sin by Adams transgression, nothing at all of the
enlargement of the visible Church since Christ's coming in respect of the sorts
of members, over that which the visible Church Jewish had. Yea such a position
as it has not the least footing in the text, so would it not stand with Mr.
Bs. and other Paedobap^ists doctrine, that the visible churchmembership is a
privilege of believers children: but in respect of extent of persons, it was
better with the visible Church then, since it comprehended servants, and the
bought children of strangers. And for the last text, to imagine that the love
of Christ is every whit the less if infants be not visible churchmembers, is
such a conceit as I judge a mere dotage. But there is more of it in that which
follows.

Further, says Mr. B. I might prove it out of Ephesians. 2.12. They that are out
of the Church are said to be strangers to the Covenant, and without hope, and
without God in the world, in comparison with those within the Church. O how
little then do they apprehend that height and depth! etc. or know that love of
Christ that passes knowledge, who think that Christ will unchurch all the
infants of believers now, that took them in so tenderly in the time of Moses?
How insensible do they appear to be of the glorious riches of the Gospel, and
the free abundant grace of Christ, who have such unworthy thoughts of him, as
if he would put all our children out of his Church? How little know they the
difference between Christ and Moses, that think they might then be
churchmembers and not now? And yet (oh the blindness*) these men do this under
pretense of magnifying the sperituality of the Gospel privileges* As if to he
a member of Christ's Church were a carnal things; or as if the visible Church
were not the object and recipient of spiritual as well as common mercies!

Answ. The Apostle does not say they that are out of the Church any more then
they that are uncircumcised are without hope, without God, nor does he speak
comparatively but absolutely. Nor does he speak universally of all without the
Church, but particularly of the Ephesians, nor of them as out of the Church
universal but Jewish, nor this as they were merely negatively or privatively
out for want of not taking on them the yoke of Moses Law, but as they walked
after the course of the world v. 2, 3. So that these things are not said of
them barely as nonvisible churchmembers then in the Jewish Church as infants
are now in the Christian (for then these things might have bin said of
Cornelius and his house as well as of them, who were uncircumcised, not in the
Commonwealth of Israel) but as they were idolaters, alienated from the life of
God, and so were neither members of the Church visible, nor invisible of true
believers at that time. Therefore to charge us with making the estate of
infants of believers by our doctrine as the estate of those mentioned Ephesians.
2.12. is a mere calumny tending to nothing else but indirectly to create
prejudice in men against the truth. And of the same kind is that which
follows, which insinuates as if by denying infants visible churchmembership,
we lessened Christ's love, were insensible of it, and the glorious riches of the
Gospel, made Christ less tender now of infants of believers then in Moses time,
and had such unworthy thoughts of Christ, as if he would put all our children
out of his Church, and knew not the difference between Christ and Moses, all
which are mere flams and frivolous false accusations, fit to take with shallow
Paedobaptists, who are caught with flourishes of Rhetoric rather then solid
reason. And for that which he censures as my blindness, I may rather admire
his in not discerning it. For however to be a member of Christ's Church may be
more then a carnal thing, yet to be a visible Churchmember by natural descent
without faith is but a carnal thing, and in this respect the Church Jewish was
more carnal then the Christian Church, as the Scriptures intimate, though they
were the object and recipient of spiritual as well as common mercies. The rest
that follows is in the same calumniating vein, for we say as the Apostle Gal.
4.27. that is, that the new Covenant or Gentile Church has more children then
the Jewish, in that there were more believers in the world on the preaching of
the Gospel as is said Revel. 5.9. th^n in the national Church Jewish, nor do
we, as Mr. B. belies us, make all or any of the children of the new Covenant
or Gentile Church cast out, for they only are those who are by promise, born
after the spirit, that is, true believers v. 28, 29. and not as ignorantly and
fondly Mr. B. imagines all the infant children of Gentile believers. Nor do we
by our doctrine contradict the Apostles words Heb. 12.40. which are
ridiculously applied to infants visible Churchmembership. For the better thing
provided for us in that which the believers before Christ received not, which is
by some conceived to be heaven, but generally Protestant Divines understand it
of the exhibition of Christ in the flesh, and the clear knowledge of him, which
if true, proves what I av^r* that* Christ's exhibition in the flesh, the gift of
the spirit, and the revelation of the Gospel, and the taking in of the
Gentiles, are in stead of that visible Churchmembership the Jews had, and all
the privileges annexed. However it cannot be infants visible Churchmembership
as Mr. B. makes it, for that they had as Mr. B. asserts, and therefore the
denying of it by me, makes not us in so much worse a condition then they. Nor
do we by denying infants visible Churchmembership aver the partition wall
taken down Ephesians. 2.14. by Christ to be in part standing, For the partition
wa^l ^s clearly meant of the body of Ceremonies, and necessity of repairing to
the Temple and taking the yoke of Moses Law on them, which kept the Gentiles
from joining with the Jews in the worship of the same God, which I keep not up
in any sort, much less pluck up the wall of the Church or vineyard it self, and
as for our children to lay all waste to the wilderness, but Mr. B. by
maintaining a national Church or visible Churchmembership by natural descent,
does keep up the partition wall in true construction, since the way of pulling
down the parti^ion wall by God, ha^h been by making all one body through faith,
the succession of which in the place of Circumcision and the Jewish
Churchmembership, is the doctrine of the Apostle Gal. 3. and elsewhere, as is
showed before.

Mr. B. continues the same prattle Chapter 15. thus. My 11. arg. is this, If the
children of believers be now put out of the Church, then they are in a worse
condition then the very children of the Gentiles were before the coming of
Christ: But that were most absurd and false; therefore so is the antecedent.
The consequent would plainly follow, if the antecedent were true, as is evident
thus: Before Christ's coming any Gentile in the world without exception, if he
would might have his children to be members of the visible Church: But now
(according to Mr. T.) no Gentile may have his child a member of the Church;
therefore according to this doctrine, the very Gentiles as well as the Jews,
are in a worse condition now: and Christ should come to be a destroyer, and do
hurt to all the world, (which is most vile doctrine.) That the Gentiles might
have their children Church Members before, if they would come in themselves, is
not denied nor indeed can be: For it is the express letter of Gods law, that
any stranger that would come in might bring his children, and all be
circumcised and admitted members of the Jews Church: This was the case of any
that would be full proselytes; God in providence did deny to give the knowledge
of his laws to the Gentiles, as he did to the Jews, but he excepted no man out
of the mercy of his Covenant, that would come in and take it (except some few
that were destinated to wrath for the height of their wickedness, whom he
commanded them presently utterly to destroy.) If any say that the Gentiles were
admitted with their infants into no Church, but the particular Church of the
Jews, I shall answer him 1. That it is false; for they were admitted into the
visible universal Church, as I shall show more fully afterward. 2. If it were
so, yet the Church of the Jews was a happy Church of God, in a thousand fold
better state, then those without. So that he that will be of the faith of our
opposers, you see, must believe that Christ has come to deny the very Gentiles
that privilege which for their children they had before. Yea, that you may see
it was not tied to the Jews only, or the seed of Abraham, even when Abraham's
own family was circumcised, (and as Mr. T. thinks, then first admitted all into
the Church:) there was but one of the seed of Abraham circumcised at that time
(for he had no one but Ishmael) but of servants that were not of his seed,
there were admitted or circumcised 318. trained menservants that fought for
him* Genesis 14.14. and how many hundred women and children and all he had, you
may conjecture. And all these were then of the Church, and but one of Abraham's
seed, and that one Ishmael Therefore certainly though the greatest privileges
were reserved for Isaac and his seed, of whom Christ was to come, yet not the
privilege of sole churchmembership; for the very children of Abraham's servants
were churchmembers* And so I think this is plain enough.

Answ. It is most vile doctrine, to say, Christ came to be a destroyer, and to
do hurt to all the world; and it is most vile doctrine which Mr. B. insinuates,
as if the denying of infants visible churchmembership did infer their
destruction: which is most palpably false, since neither were all churchmembers
visible saved, as v. g. Ishmael, Esau; nor all non-visible churchmembers
damned, as v. g. abortives, still-borns. And therefore Mr. B. by these
insinuations discovers nothing but his own vitulency, and I can justly deny the
consequence of his argument till he show me what benefit the infants of
believers now do lose by not being Christian visible churchmembers which tends
to their destruction, and what is the benefit of infant visible Christian
churchmembership which is for their salvation, which they have not though they
be not visible churchmembers, I mean real and not mere putative benefit. For my
part, 1. I think still that infants were not admitted into any visible Church
but the Jews, and their being of the universal was only in that they were of
the Jewish. 2. I think it is a benefit not to be of the Church Jewish, in which
men were entered by circumcision, and bound to keep the law; and that Cornelius,
and such other as were not full proselytes, were in as good a case as the full
proselytes; and that it is but vain talk of Mr. B. that the Church of the Jews
was a happy Church of God, in a thousand fold better estate then those without
only as proselytes of the gate. 3. That though there were in the Jewish Church
other then Abraham's seed, yet they were all of the Hebrew Commonwealth. 4. That
many of those churchmembers had no part in any of the promises made to Abraham.
And I think this argument of Mr. B. takes only with them who superficially
look into the thing, as Mr. B. has done.

SECT. LXVII. Mr. Bs. 12th. arg. chapter 17. part 1. of Baptism, from Deuteronomy. 29.10,
11, 12. is answered, and my answers vindicated.
CHAPTER 17. he proceeds thus. My 12th. Arg. is from the forementioned Text, Deuteronomy.
29.10, 11, 12. where all the Jews, with all their little ones were entered into
Covenant with God. From whence I argue thus. If the Covenant which those
infants who were then church members were entered into with God was a Covenant
of grace (or a Gospel Covenant) then it is not repealed, (and consequently
their churchmembership is not repealed, as being built on the Covenant, or
inseparably conjunct:) But the said Covenant which the infants who were then
churchmembers did pass into, was a Covenant of grace, (as distinct from the
law, which was repealed;) therefore neither it nor their churchmembership is
repealed. Here I shall prove, 1. That all the infants did pass into this
Covenant. 2. That they were churchmembers that did so. 3. That it was such a
Covenant of grace. 4. And then it will follow that it is not repealed.

Answ. The argument from this Text was urged very hotly by Mr. B. in the
Dispute at Bewdley, Jan. 1. 1649. but in another manner, as I gather from two
copies of the Dispute, which though imperfect, yet both agree, that the
argument then was ^his, They who solemnly entered into Covenant with God were
visible churchmembers: But the infants of the Jews in the wilderness
uncircumcis^d did so, Ergo. Mr. B. himself in his Corrective, sect. 5. The Text
in Deuteronomy. 29. was brought to prove that God entered into Covenant with infants to
take them for his people, and to be their God, and consequently made them
churchmembers. The form here used does vary the conclusion, and the medium and
particularly the term [ who solemnly entered into Covenant with God] into this [
were entered into Covenant with God] and in his Correct. sect. 5. into this [
God entered into Covenant with infants to take them for his people, and to be
their God] between which there is so great a difference, that as the argument
was framed in the Dispute, I should not deny the major; but as there it is
framed, I should deny the consequence, it being certain God may enter into
Covenant with some to take them for his people, and to be their God, who
neither are nor ever shall be visible churchmembers; as elect persons dying
with deathbed repentance not manifested* etc. But I shall keep to the form as
it is here used. And 1. I grant that the churchmembership of the infants which
did pass into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. is not repealed: For it being an
individual accident can neither in congruous sense be said to be repealed, nor
it being non^ens now is it capable of repeal if the speech were right. 2. I
grant also that Gods Covenant of grace, or his Gospel covenant is not repealed,
that is, changed into another Covenant. 3. I grant also that invisible
churchmembership is built on the Covenant of grace, or the Gospel covenant, or
is inseparably conjunct with it. But this I deny 1. that any law of infants
visible churchmembership unrepealed is contained in Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11, 12. 2.
That the mutual Covenant entered into there was the Gospel covenant of grace. 3.
I say, that if it were, yet it follows not that infant visible churchmembership
is not ceased, or in Mr. Bs. dialect repealed. But let us view Mr. Bs. proof.

1. Says he, Mr. T. denied long together in the face of many thousand people,
that the infants were entered into any such Covenant, against the plain letter
of the Text: Yet he persisted to deny it without any reason (as you may see in
the Dispute, if out.) If plain Scripture will not satisfy these men, why then
do they call for Scripture? The words are, Ye stand this day all of you before
the Lord your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Officers, Elders, and all
the men of Israel, your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in
thy camp, from the hewer of thy wood unto the drawer of thy water, that thou
should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, and into his Oath which
the Lord thy God makes with thee this day, that he may establish thee to day
for a people unto himself, and that he may be to thee a God, etc. He that says
infants did not pass into this Covenant, I question whether he believe this to
be the word of God: For how should it be spoken plainer?

Answ. The thing which I denied was, that infants did visibly and solemnly
enter into Covenant, which Mr. B. affirmed, and I gave the reason, because they
did by no visible sign declare their assent to the Covenant: And when Mr. B.
replied, that the parents did it for them, I answered, the parents act for them
might bind them, but yet it is not their act, nor that which makes a visible
churchmember; and sure had I conceived his minor so meant [ that the infants
did by their parents visibly and solemnly enter into Covenant] I should have
granted it, and denied his major [They who visibly and solemnly entered into
Covenant with God by their parents act for them, were visible churchmembers]
Now this answering of mine he endeavored then and since to represent with as
much disparagement as might b^ to me, though what ever imperfection there were
in my answer (which I do not deprehend to have been such as Mr. B. has made
it) it was in a great part from Mr. Bs. ambiguous use of words, and his
captious taking advantage from my words, and not explaining his own, which made
me answer somewhat perplexedly. But the matter being now in print, let us view
the Dispute as i^ stands in the Books. I had said in my Sermon, and after in my
Antidote, sect. 5. that [ thou] v. 12. does not necessa^ily comprehend the
little ones* To this Mr. B. in his Correct. page 249. replies, 1. that he
either sets a low value on my conscience, or judgment; which is not worth
answering, 2. Do you not know, says he, that [thou] is a collective term,
usually through the Books of Moses spoken of all the people, except any be
particularly excepted? Answ. I do know it is a collective term, ye^ often used
with exception of infants by the matter of the speech, though not p^rticularly.
And for this I need go no further then Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 30.1, 2, 6,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. And in some of these, v.
2. thou and thy children, v. 6. thine heart and the heart of thy seed, v. 19.
thou and thy seed, Deuteronomy. 29.29. us and our children, are so expressly
distinguished, that I am much confirmed that [thou] Deuteronomy. 29.12. does not
comprehe^d the little ones, v. 11.

3. Says he, Are not little ones here named? and yet are they excluded?

Answ. They are named, v. 11. yet not meant by [ thou] v. 12.

4. Says he, Why should Moses say, here stand your children and wives, that
not they but you might enter into Covenant?

Answ. 1. Why should the strangers stand there, v. 11. and yet Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob not their fathers? v. 13. 2. I conceive God would have a general
appearance for the more sol^mnity of the thing, but that some should act in the
name of the whole people, and therefore men^ion of all, v. 11. yet the act of
covenanting which was personal, v. 12. restrained only to the representatives.

5. Does not Mr. T. confess that the Jews infants were in Covenant? why else
were they circumcised, which is the seal of the Covenant?

Answ. 1. Circumcision is no where called in Scripture the Seal of the
Covenant, and how far I allow it, may be seen sect. 31. 2. Infants were
circumcised, not because they were in Covenant, those who were not in Covenant
were to be circumcised. 3. The Jews infants were in the political or domestical
Covenant made to Abraham, all of them upon condition of their obedience to the
law, some of them in the Covenant or promise of saving grace made to the elect,
none of them in the Covenant by their own personal act of covenanting or
promising, which is that alone which I deny, and which makes visible
churchmembers in the Christian Church.

6. Says Mr. B. I desire no means to convince any man of your strange abuse of
the Text, but only that he will read it. [Ye stand this day all of you, etc.
and that he may be to thee a God] He that can considerately believe Mr. T. that
the word [thou] v. 12. does not necessari^y comprehend the little ones, if I
knew him, I would tell him, that I will not undertake by Scripture to convince
him of any thing at all. And I say again in sobriety, that if the Papists had
as plain Scripture for their Religion as it differs from ours, I would not
delay a week, but would turn Papist, etc.

Answ. Mr. Bs. words only express his confidence in his conceit, which in this
and many more things I conceive to come from his hasty determinations, without
weighing all objections to the contrary. But I desire both him and the Reader
to let me know what that entering into Covenant is which may be termed the
infants act, before he censure my interpretation of [ thou] as not comprehending
little ones necessarily, but as noting some instead of the rest, as a strange
abuse of the Text; sure it was no act of words or sign showing any consent or
assent to the Covenant or Oath of God: And if, as Piscator conceives in his
scholie, it were by passing through (as the word in the Hebrew is) the ^arts of
the divided living creatures in testimony of the covenant, I say again, surely
neither little ones, nor all the rest did pass between the parts of the the
beasts divided, but some in stead of the rest. I think they will not say, it
was their bare presence which was the entering into Covenant; for their standing
there was before it, and the entering into Covenant a consequent of it. I do not
accuse him, as he knows who has done, of being a Papist; nor dare I absolve
Mr. B. from yielding too much in some of his writings for Papists, Arminians,
and Socinians advantage, in s^eking to avoid Antinomianism and Anabaptism. But
I hope both Mr. B. and his Reader will be more sober and wise then to go over
to the Papists upon this declaration of Mr. B. who if he did not suggest to the
people as if it were my impudence to deny it at the Dispu^e, I was mistaken,
and so were others, and I entreat him to pardon my mistake. But Mr. B. adds.

Where he says, that [you] v. 14. is distinguished from [them that stand,
etc.] I answer: 1. I think not; but from them that were absent: q. d. not with
you only, but (both) with him that is here (that is you) and him that is not
here.

Answ. I find no interpreter who does not render ^^ v. 15. by the adve^sative,
and the Tigurine Divines render it sed et but also, which sh^ws a plain
distinction of [ you, v. 14.] from him that stands here with us this day
before the Lord our God; and if I understand any thing in this kind, Mr. Bs.
exposition is not good sense, to expound not with you only, but with him that
is here with us that is you. For v. ^5. him that stands here is opposed to
you, v. 14. and you only being an exclusive term, must exclude the rest, and
when it is said [ with us] meaning himself, and [ you] v. 14. it is mere
nonsense to expound it thus, him that stands with us, if us comprehend him
that standet^ there, as it does according to Mr. Bs. exposition. Besides, the
different numbers of [ him that stands here with us] and [ you] do show that
they are not the same. And I think I may say as Mr. B. I desire no means to
convince any man of Mr. Bs. strange exposition, but only that he will read
the Text.

But he says. 2. Were it otherwise, yet it were only from the people of other
nations that stood among them.

Answ. 1. If Mr. B. mean thy stranger which is in thy Camp, v. 11. I expect
some reason why [you onely] v. 14. should exclude them more then the little
ones and wives; rather me think^ [you onely] should include those men^ioned v.
10. and him that stands with us here this day should mean those v. 11. And
the plain sense seems to be this, that though the Captains, Elders, Officers,
men of Israel who were to enter into Co^enant, did by themselves only
covenant, yet Moses in Gods stead did make that Covenant and Oath not only
with them, to whom his speech was directed, but also with the rest, v. 1^.2. If
he mean the strangers not of that congregation or Church of Israel, surely the
Covenant was not made with them, as here Moses says it was with him that
stands here with us this day.

Mr. B. adds of me. Where he says [some entered into Covenant in behalf of the
rest] I answer: 1. God entered into Covenant on his part immediately, or by
Moses the Mediator with them all, and not with some only.

Answ. Be it so, yet on the other part some entered into Covenant in behalf of
the rest, and so [ thou] v. 12. comprehends not little ones, v. 11. for sure if
in behalf of any some entered into Covenant, and [ thou] comprehend not them,
them they were the little ones.

2. Says he, I doubt not but the parents entered their children into Covenant,
and not the infants themselves, which shows, that God has given parents this
interest and authority.

Answ. 1. This is a confession of what I aver, and of which Mr. B. and his
followers have made such exclamations against me. For if [ thou v. 12.] entered
themselves into Covenant, and infants entered not themselves into Covenant, then
infants are not comprehended under [ thou, v. 12.] But so it is. Ergo. The
consequence is plain of it self, the minor is for the first part the words of
the Text, unless Mr. B. will say, that thou should enter into Covenant is
not, that ^hou should enter into Covenant thy self, which is a gross
absurdity; and the other part is Mr. Bs. own: and thus Mr. B. has justified me
in that which he counted so strange an abuse of the Text. 2. For my part, I
doubt whether the parents entered the children into Covenant, and do rather
conceive that the Captains, Elders, Officers, v. 10. did enter into Covenant by
some solemn act of passing between the parts of a beast divided, or otherwise
in stead of the children, wives, and servants, v. 11. and not the parents for
the infants, 1. because the distinct mention of those, v. 10. under the titles
there used, do intimate that they were representatives of those v. 11. now v.
10 persons are not expressed under the ti^le of parents, but under other
relations: 2. Because it being a national covenanting, it seems most suitable
to the end of it, that it was done by national Officers: 3. If there were any
other then those persons, the solemnity could not be likely done with decency,
the number being so great as could not hear Moses, nor do such acts as might
signify the covenanting: 4. Because it was so at other times, Exodus 19.7.
Josh. 9.15, 19. which if true, this place proves not that God had given parents
the interest and authority to covenant for their children: 5. The wives were
parents as well as the husbands, but it is not probable that the wives did
covenant for the children, therefore not the parents as parents, but under some
other consideration.

3. Says Mr. B. But that any other that had the use of reason should not enter
their own consent is a fiction not to be admitted: And yet Mr. T. in his
confutation Sermon, excludes the wives from a personal covenanting, as well as
the infants; but barely on his own authority: Nay, he says, it was only the
captains and Officers, though the Covenant is made with the rest.

Answ. I have given my reasons for what I conceive, I impose them not on
others, it is sufficient for present that I have vindicated my assertion so
much inveighed against by Mr. B. that [thou] v. 12. does not necessarily
comprehend infants.

2. Says Mr. B. Mr. T. denied in our Dispute, that these infants were visible
churchmembers; for when he had maintained that [none were churchmembers but
those that were circumcised] and that [churchmembership was not then without
circumcision] I told him, that the infants for 40. years in the wilderness were
not circumcised, and yet were churchmembers, and proved it from this Covenant;
yet did he resolutely deny it, that the infants were church- members: Whereupon
seeing he wasted time in wrangling, I was bold to say, I did verily believe
that (contrary to our first agreement) he disputed against his own conscience,
seeing he could not believe himself, that the infants then were no
churchmembers, and that none but the circumcised were churchmembers: But he
took it ill, that I should so charge him to go against conscience; and yet when
I told him, that women were churchmembers, though not ^ircumcised, he confessed
all, and yielded that the infants were so too. And indeed else God had no
Church, or almost none in the wilderness, when all but Cal^b and Joshua were
dead of the old stock; and all of forty years old were uncircumcised; yet
Steven calls it the Church in the wilderness, Acts 7.38. But I think it vain to
prove that those were churchmembers that entered such a Covenant. He that will
deny this, is scarce to be disputed with.

Answ. I do confess there was much time wasted in the Dispute, and that my
answers were varied according to my several apprehensions of Mr. Bs. meaning,
which by reason of his ambiguities and uncertain expressions I could not be
assured of, nor would he be brought to explain any thing to me, but what I
could force him to by distinction, which yet he shifted off, that I might be
still at a loss what to determine. First he asserted a law of admitting
infants visible churchmembers unrepealed, which I conceived was that of
circumcision, and thereupon denied infants in the wilderness to have been
visible churchmembers, meaning solemnly admitted, in which sense I meant that
churchmembership was not then without Circumcision. But when he denied, he
meant Circ^mcision, I pressed him to tell what other law there was, which he
then did not, but went to prove them churchmembers, which I confessed, if not
understood as so admitted, but as part of that people as the women were.
Secondly, when I found he used not the term visible churchmembers as it is
taken by Protestant writers for those that professed the Christian faith, I
denied infants were churchmembers visible by the way which made them such in
the Christian Church, though they were visible churchmembers according to the
way of constitution of the Jewish Church, which was a Commonwealth, of which
all that were members were churchmembers. This is the true sum of what past
between us in that time Mr. B. speaks of, in which nothing was spoken against
my conscience (as he unbrother like charged me,) and such altercation as was,
was necessitated on my part by his averseness from explaining his meaning,
which I instantly pressed him to, but still he put by with one flirt or
another at me, that he might drive me to speak something, which he might
represent (as he still did) in the most odious manner he could to the
auditors, which injurious way has been that which has confirmed his party,
though thereby they are abused by him. For present I grant the infants Deuteronomy.
29.11. were then visible churchmembers, but not by that Covenant.

Against this Mr. B. in his Correct. sect. 5. says thus. 2. He says, Moses
made that Covenant with him that wa^ not there that day, that is, their
posterity not yet born; shall it therefore be sai^, that they were visible
members? etc.] I answer, 1. it is evident the Covenant spoke de praesenti to
those that were: bu^ de futuro only of those that were not in being, but
future: They that were not, could not be members visible or invisible. As they
had a being, so they had a membership; that is in posse, and in futuritione,
non i^ esse. By virtue of this deed of gift they should be born churchmembers.
If a Landlord do by lease make over any land to you, and your childrens
children, paying so much rent; does it follow that your children (who are born)
are none of this man's tenants, because your childrens children (who are unborn)
are not his tenants actually, but potentially? Or, if a King be set over us,
and out children, and childrens children (by compact,) does it follow, that our
children in being are not his subjects in being because our childrens children
in posse are not subjects in esse but in posse only? Ah here is good arguing!

Answ. I find Moses speaking of Gods Covenant, but not the Covenant speaking,
nor is that expression good sense; nor was the speech to any other then were
there, though it was of what should be after, and that as well what should be
after to them that were present, as to them that were to be after, v. 13. and I
think it true, that they which were not could not be members visible, though if
the invisible Church be so from election, a^ most Protestant Divines say, they
might be members invisible. And it is true, that as they had a being so they
had membership (visible) not in being but possibility and futuri^ion. But this
is no answer to my reason but a strengthening of it. For whereas the the reason
was this, That Covenant does not make actually visible churchmembers, which is
made with them who are not actually visible churchmembers: But that Covenant
was made with them that were not actually visible churchmembers, for it was
made with the unborn, who are confessed not to be actually visible
churchmembers by Mr. B. himself; Ergo. The major is plain from the rule in
Logic, The same as the same does always the same. And for Mr. Bs. instances,
it is true, that it follows not, the children born are not tenants or subjects
actually because the unborn are not; but it follows, the lease and compact of
themselves do not make actually tenants or subjects, because if they did they
would do so the unborn as well as the born; so in this point, though the
arguing be not good, the unborn are not actually visible churchmembers,
therefore the born are not; yet this (which was my arguing) was good, By the
Covenant which was made with the unborn they were not actually visible
churchmembers, therefore by the same Covenant of it self, without any other
cause, neither were the born infants actually visible churchmembers; and
consequently Mr. B. cannot from the making of this Covenant prove the Jewish
infants actually visible churchmembers.

To my saying, that an entering into Covenant by parents does not make a visible
member in the Christian Church however (not as Mr. B prints it though) it did
in the Jewish, he says much in the compass of a few lines, all which is
answered before in several sections, chiefly 50, 51, 52, 57. But he says, 3.
That this was a Covenant of grace is all the question. To which I say, though
it be a question between us, yet it is not all the question. For both in the
Dispute, and in all my writings, I denied that the Covenant of grace does make
visible churchmembers; and therefore Mr. B. if he would have made good his
argument, he should have proved that visible churchmembership and the Covenant
of grace are inseparably conjunct, which Mr. B. failing to do, fails in proving
the chief point of his argument. But let us view what he says, Correct. page
251.

You add, says he, [this proves not the Covenant a pure Gospel Covenant, not
including peculiar benefits to the Jewish nation.] I answer, if by [pure] you
mean that it is not only a Gospel covenant, but that and more, it yields as
much as I need; for if it be a Gospel covenant, no matter though there be more.
But if you mean, that it is not essentially a Covenant of grace, I could heap
up abund^nce of arguments against you; you may find many in Mr. Ba^^ of the
Covenant. I add: That Covenant wherein God takes them to be his people, and
engages himself to be their God, is a Covenant of grace: (for since the fall
God enters himself into no such Covenant with any but in Christ, and upon
terms of grace.) But such is this Covenant made with the Israelites and their
little ones; therefore this was a Covenant of grace.

Answ. I mean by pure Gospel Covenant, that Gospel Covenant which was without
mixture of domestic or political benefits proper to Abraham's seed inheriting,
which is set down Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. out of J^r. 31.33. and I say, that though
there is perhaps an Evangelical promise or two intermixed in the enlargement of
Moses his discourse, yet Deuteronomy. 29.13, 14, 15. the Oath or Covenant there made
was no^ purely Evangelical* or essentially a Gospel Covenant, but a political,
legal, national Covenant, such as God does not enter into now with all those to
whom he vouchsafes Gospel grace. And I prove it thus. 1. That Covenant which
contains promises of the land of Canaan, the inheritance of it, and prosperity
therein, is not essentially a Gospel Covenant, or a pure Gospel Covenant. But
so does that, Deuteronomy. 29.13, 14, 15. Ergo. The major is manifest: For the Gospel
Covenant does no^ promise those things. The minor is plain from the words [ as
he has sworn unto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.] But that was a
promise of Canaan, as appears from Genesis 12.7. and 13.15. and 15.8. and 17.8.
and 22.17. and 26.3. and 28.13, 14. Deuteronomy. 34.5. and many passages in Moses his
speech, Deuteronomy. 29.16, 21, 23, 24, 27. Deuteronomy. 30.2, 5, 9, 10, 16.18. and most
evidently the conclusion of it, Deuteronomy. 30*20. and 28.11. 2. The Covenant and
Oath made then, was the same which was said to them before; Deuteronomy. 29.13. But
that was the Covenant of the law in Horeb, Deuteronomy. 29.1. Now that was not
essentially the Covenant of grace, as is proved before, sect. 43. 3. That Oath
and Covenant which was of being God to them upon condition of their obedience
to his laws given by Moses, that is not a pure Gospel covenant, but a legal,
Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.12. But such is this, Deuteronomy. 29.8, 29. and 30.2, 8, 10, 11,
14, 16. where the judicial and ^eremonial are meant as well as the moral. 4.
That Oath and Cov^nant which had the legal threatenings annexed to it, was not a
pure Gospel covenant, or essenti^lly the Covenant of grace, Gal. 3.10. Bu^ such
was this, as appears from Deuteronomy. 29.20, 21, 25. and 30.18, 19. Ergo. What Mr.
Ball has written to prove Mr. Bs. position, I omit, 1. Because Mr. B. has not
set down the place. 2. Because I conceive Mr. B. has produ^ed the chief. To
the first, I answer by denying the major, and the proof of it; and aver, that
since the fall God did enter into a Covenant with the Jews which was not in
Christ upon terms of Gospel grace. The minor is true, but God covenanted to be
their God upon condition of their obedience to the law of Moses, as the words
Deuteronomy. ^9.13. imply, that he may establish thee to day for a people to himself
by keeping the laws according to the Covenant they entered into.

He adds. 2. That Covenant wherein the Lord promises to circumcise their
hearts, and the hearts of their seed to love the Lord their God with all their
heart, and with all their soul, that they may live, was a Covenant of grace;
(for the Apostle to the Hebrews, chapter ^0.16, 17. so describes it:) But this was
such a Covenant, as is written Deuteronomy. 30.6. Therefore this was a Covenant of
grace.

Answ. Besides the exceptions following, it should be proved, that the promise,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. was the Oath or Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29.13, 14. and not rather
an interlocutory promise on a special occasion, to erect their hearts in
expectation of mercy upon their return from captivity.

3. Says Mr. B. That which St. Paul makes the words of the righteousness of
faith, was the Covenant of grace: But this is such, as is evident by comparing
Romans 10.6, 7, 8. with Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14. But to this you give two sorry
answers, being resolved to say somewhat. 1. [ It is s^oken of the command.]
Answ. 1. And is it not also of the promise foregoing? 2. And is not this from
as great a mistake as the other, to think that Gods command is no part of his
Covenant? That [he will be their God] is his promise: but is that all the
Covenant? That [they shall be his people, and so take him for their God, and
resign themselves to him] this is both commanded by him, and covenanted by them.

Answ. The answer was right that the speech of Moses, Deuteronomy. 30.12, 13, 14.
however accommodated by Paul to another purpose, is meant of the word of the
law, the commandments, and statu^es which were written in that very book of the
law, v. 10. which Moses delivered, and it was nigh to them that they might hear
it and do it: Which cannot be meant thus, Who shall ascend into heaven to bring
Christ from above, or who shall descend into the deep, that is to bring Christ
again from the dead, that we may hear Christ thus brought down and up, and do
it, it were not good sense, nor any way congruous to the speech of Moses. And
to Mr. Bs. reply, 1. I say it is not spoken of the promise, for that is not a
thing for us to hear and do, but for God. 2. Though the command may be a part
of the Covenant in a large sense, as it includes all that pertains to a
Covenant, yet in strict and exact sense, a Covenan^ being an aggregate of
promises, the command is not part of the Covenant. 3. However it is no part of
the Covenant and Oath which God sw^re Deuteronomy. 29.13. For what God swear was that
which he would do, not what he appointed them to do, and consequently no part
of the Covenant of grace, for that is of what God will do for us; our faith,
though it be the condition of the thing promised, yet i^ it not the Covenant o^
grace. 4. The word, Deuteronomy. 30.14. cannot be meant of the Covenant of grace, since
the condition is the hearing and doing of all the law of Moses, that they might
keep Gods commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments, (which reach to
judicial, and c^remonial precepts, as well as moral) that thou may live and
multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land, whither thou go
to possess it. Locus ille indubitante^ de obedien^ia totius legis loquitur.
David Pareus castig. Bellarm. tom. 4. degrat. and lib. arb. l. 5. c. 6.

2. Says Mr. B. You answer [it is frequent with the Apostle to accommodate
words to his purpose that have a different sense in the places whence they were
taken, from that to which the Apostle applies them, as Romans 10.18.] Answ. A
man would think here you plainly mean, that it is frequent with the Apostle to
wrest and pervert the Scripture to his own ends from its true sense; and you
can mean no better, except you mean that he alludeth to the words, making use
of the mere phrase without the sense; and indeed that is usual in common
speech: and such is that, Romans 10.18. But that he does not barely allude to
this in Deuteronomy. 30. is left undeniable. ^. He brings it in, v 6. as Gods
description of the righteousness of faith, etc. having before said, Moses
describes the righteousness which is of the law, etc. 2. He adds the very
exposition to every sentence: [who shall ascend into heaven] that is, says he,
to bring Christ down from above? And who shall descend into the deep] that is
to bring Christ again from the dead? 3. He fully expresses it v. 8. But what
says it? The word is nigh thee, etc. that is, the word of faith which we
preach, that if thou confess with thy mouth, etc. Is not here a full discovery,
that the Apostle expounds, and not only alludeth to these words? Name me
one place in the New Testament, that more evidently speaks in an expository way
of any Text in the Old?

Answ. As much is said by the most godly and learned Protestant interpreters of
this place as by me, and therefore if I be chargeable with accusing the Apostle
of wresting and perverting the Scripture to his own ends from its true sense,
they are likewise so chargeable. Beza annot. ad Romans 10.8. By this term [the
word] Moses understands the law which God by his voice published, all his
people bearing, so that they might pretend no ignorance, when they had the
tables of it described, and so might every one recite it out of their mouth,
and might have it within as it were engraven in their knowledge and mind. But
what Moses spoke of the law, all that Paul accommodates to the Goppel by
allusion: that at length by the Gospel he may teach us to enjoy that indeed
which the law promises, and be f^eed from that which it threatens. Diodati
anno^. on Romans 10.6. St. Paul makes use of this passage though spoken in
another sense. The new Annot. on Romans 10.8. ^y the word, Deuteronomy. 30.14, Moses
understood the law which the Lord published with his own voice, and Paul
applies it to the preaching of the Gospel, which was the perfection of the Law.
On v. 18. This place is taken out of Psalm. 19.4. and is properly meant of that
knowledge of God, which all men may have by contemplation of the heavens, and
the c^eatures therein; yet it is by the Apostle very fitly applied to the sound
of the word preached by the Apostles. ^rapp on Romans 10.8. Moses meant it of the
Law, but it more fitly agrees to the Gospel Piscater analys. Paulus alludi^ ad
verba Mosis, Deuteronomy. 30.14. Willet on Romans 10. qu. 10. Some think that Moses in
that place, Deuteronomy. 30.12. directly speaks of the law according to the literal
sense; and St Paul by a certain allusion applies that unto faith, which Moses
utters of the law. So Theodoret, Chrysostom, Occumenius. Likewise Tostatus
upon the place, Paul by a certain agree^ent has translated this place, and
applied it unto faith. Vatablus also says, that Paul follows not Moses
sense, but some words. Yet Pareus inclines to think St. Paul here uses but an
allusion to that place of Moses, dub. 6. Daniel Heinsius, Exercit. sacr. in Rom
10.6, 7. E Romans 10.18 patet rerum esse quod non semel alibi ^^nuimus, sed and a
magnis observatum Theologis, in epistolam praesertim ad Hebraos, meninimus;
novi faderis scriptores verba veteris and eleganter and venust non semel alio
tran^ferre. Quod tam usitatum est (...), ut vi^ ullus fi^ Homeri versus cu^us
verba non mutato sensu usurpentur. In his autem quod Matthaeus, c. 2. v. 18. ^
Jerem. 31.15. ( quod and B. Hieronymus vult) usurpavit, neque pauca sunt in
psalmis quae pro instituto suo Paulus maxima cum venustate usurpat. Qu^d nec
mirum est, cum utrobique idem spiritus, qui tanquam propria ac sua, ante dicta
usurpavit. And yet none of these Authors did conceive Paul to have wrested and
perverted the Scripture to his own ends from its true sense; nor does my speech
infer any such accusation. Nor do I mean that Paul alludeth to the words,
making use of the mere phrase without the sense; but that he accommodates words
to his purpose, that have a different sense in the places whence they are
taken, from that to which the Apostle applies them, which is no wresting of
them. To the reason of Mr. B. I answer. To the first, that I do not find that
the Apostle v. 6. brings it in as Gods description of the righteousness of
faith, but by a prosopopeia the righteousness of faith is brought in as
directing the believer. To the second, it is true Paul adds the very
exposition to every sentence, bu^ not an exposition of the Text in Deuteronomy. 30.12,
13, 14. but an exposition of the words of the righteousness of faith as they
are applied thence by the Apostle to his purpose. And yet plain Texts which are
not so accomodated I cannot ^o put off as I will.

Your last answer, says Mr. B. is the worst of all. You say, if the Covenant
did contain promises purely Evangelical, yet the Covenant in respect of them
cannot be meant of all and every of the Israelites, that God would be a God
to them, that is, sanctify, justify, adopt them to be heirs of eternal
life.] Answ. 1. God says you stand all here, etc. to enter into the Covenant,
and oath, etc. And you say, it cannot be all, whom shall we believe God or you?

Answ. Both, for we say in this point the same, that some in the name of all
did enter into Covenant, and his oath to be a God in them, and yet he not be a
God to them all that entered into the Covenant, but to to them only that kept
the Covenant*

2. Says he, You foully mis-interpret the promise, to be to them a God, as
if it were such as could be verified to none but the elect. God has p^omised
to others to be their God, who are not elect, as is undeniable in the text.
Therefore in a larger sense, as I have before in due place fully explained it.

Answ. It is sure foul language to tell me I foully mis interpret the promis^
to be to them a God, when I interpret not at all the promise Deuteronomy. 29.13. but
only infer from Mr. ^s. interpretation of it as purely Evangelical (which I
count false) that then it in respect of promises purely Evangelical should be
meant only of the elect, which I agree with him to be absurd. Nor is the
matter salved by telling me that God has promsed to others to be their God who
are not elect, For however he has not promised to be a God in respect of
promises purely Evangelical to be a God by sanctifying, justifying, adopting to
eternal life, to any but the elect. Yet Mr. B. asks me.

And why may not God promise justification, adoption (and sanctification in the
sense as Divines, and Scripture most use it, for the work following faith) and
eternal life, and all on the condition of faith, and this to more then the
elect? and has he not done so? But of this and of infants condition before

Answ. 1. By sanctifying I meant the sanctifying by which faith is produced,
which is the same with regeneration, writing the laws in the heart, Heb.
10.16. and is used so 1 Cor. 1.30. and 6.11, etc. and thus he sanctifies only
the elect, Ephesians. 1 4. 2 These. 2.13. and I supposed Mr. B. had meant the same
by circumcision of the heart, to love the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30.6. and that he
included it in the promise of being a God to them, Deuteronomy. 29.13. and this sure
is proper to the elect, if Mr. B. say true, Friendly accommod. p. 362* Cor
novum is given to the elect only. And sure if Mr. B. did not mean this, he did
not mean the Covenant of grace, or the Gospel covenant, in which this is the
first promise, Heb. 10.16. 2. But let after-sanctification be only meant, and
justification condition of faith, yet I think the promise is made of these to
none but the elect, ^ith none are believers but they. An offer may be made to
others by men, but no promise by which God is bound, and will perform it to
any other. 3 If the Covenant be on condition of faith, then it is not made to
infants, for they believe not. Nor is the promise made to infants on condition
of parents faith, for though Mr. B. dream so, yet the Scripture says not so,
nor is it true. For 1. the promise should then be made to Esau as well as to
Jacob in infancy, which the Apostle refutes Romans 9, 11, 12, 13* 2. If the
promise were made to infants upon their parents faith, then God is engaged to
sanctify them in infancy, and if so he does it, and if he do, either holiness
by sanctification of the spirit may be lost, or else they must all go to
heaven, for all holy ones go thither, 3. The promise to the father is upon
condition of his own faith, therefore so is the promise to the child, for there
is not a different promise to the father and the child upon different
conditions. But I hasten.

He adds. You would sain say somewhat too to that Deuteronomy. 30.6. but like the
rest, 1. You confess it is a promise of spiritual grace, but to the Jews after
their captivity, 2. and upon condition of obedience, 3. And not performed to
all their seed, but only to the elect.] Answ. 1. But did God promise spiritual
grace to the Jews after the captivity and not before?

Repl. The promise Deuteronomy. 30.6. is to the Israelites to do it for them only
after their captivity, I said not after the captivity as Mr. B. speaks.

Was not the promise, says he, made to them that then were?

Repl. It was.

Were not they, says he; captivated often in the time of the Judges, and so it
might at least be made good then?

Repl. I grant it.

If God, says he would do as much for them before they forsook him, and brake
the Covenant by rebellion, as he would do afterward when they repented, then he
would circumcise their hearts before as well as after: But the former is true,
therefore the later.

Repl. I grant it, yet this proves not the promise as it is there Deuteronomy. 30.6.
to be made to them of what God would do for them before their captivity.

2. Says he, And if it be on condition of obedience, then you confess there
are conditional promises, and then it was made to more then the elect.

Answ. I deny the consequence.

3. Says he, If it were not performed to any but the elect, no wonder, when
it was a conditional promise, and the rest performed not the condition: which
God will cause the elect to perform.

Answ. Sure it was not promised to any but to whom God performs it. For though
it were on a condition of theirs, yet it was such a condition as was to be
wrought and was promised by him, which he did only to the elect. And thus Mr.
B. may see my vindication or my descant on this text, and the Reader perhaps
will wonder at the vanity and wilfulness of Mr. Bs. exceptions against it.

SECT. LXVIII. Neither from Romans 4.11. nor by other reason has Mr. B. proved,
chapter 18, 19. part. 1. of Baptism, That Infant Churchmembership was partly
natural, partly grounded on the Law of Grace and Faith.
CHAPTER 18. Mr. B. writes thus. My 13th. arg. is from Romans 4. almost all the
Chapter, wherein the Apostle fully shows, that the promise (upon which his
privileges were grounded) was not made to Abraham upon legal grounds, but upon
the ground of faith: From whence I might draw many ar^^ments, but for brevity,
I desire you to peruse the Chapter; only from the eleventh verse: And he
received, etc. From whence I thus argue. If infants then usually were entered
and engaged Churchmembers by that Circumcision which was a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and was not given on legal grounds; then that
Churchmembership of infants is not repealed: (as being built on grounds of
Gospel, and not Law, and sealed with a durab^e seal, that is, the seal of the
righteousness of faith.) But the antecedent is plain in the text.

Answ It is true Romans 4.13, 14, 16, 20, 21. there is mention of Gods promise to
Abraham, and in particular two speeches are cited v. 17. Genesis 17.5. I have made
thee a father of many nations (which implies a promise) and v. 18. Genesis 5.5. So
shall thy seed be, and it is true the privile^ges of justification by faith, of
the father of believers, of heir of the world, (...) by faith, and the promise
but that his visible Churchmemhership (...) infants was by promise is not said,
nor is there a word in that Chapter or elsewhere, ^o prove that Churcmembership
of infants was built on grounds of Gospel and not Law, or that it was sealed,
or that the seal was durable which was termed the seal of the righteousness of
faith, or that the Circumcising of any person besides Abraham was a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and therefore I deny the minor, which he terms the
antecedent, and the consequence of the major also. For if his reason were good,
I might by the same medium thus argue, If that Circumcision by which infants
were usually then entered and engaged Churchmembers was a seal of the
righteousness of faith, and was not given on legal grounds then that
Circumcision of infants is not repealed, But the antecedent is plain in the
Text, Ergo. What answer Mr. B. gives to this argument will also answer his own,
and I presume he will not hold Circumcision unrepealed, which he must if his
argument be good.

Mr. B. adds, I urged this on Mr. T. many years ago, and all his answer was,
that Abraham's Circumcision was a seal to others that should come after, of the
unrighteousness of Abraham's faith but no otherwise. A strange answer, and very
bold! I hear that since he answers, that it was only such a seal of Abraham's
righteousness by faith, but not of others afterward.

Answ. I am sure Mr. B. in this (as he does almost in every thing I have
spoken, written or done, which he has had occasion to mention) does mis-report
me, my an^wer to him and others was not as he and they represent it. This is my
answer, 1. That Romans 4.11. no other persons Circumcision but Abraham's is termed
the seal of the righteousness of faith* 2. That to Abraham his Circumcision was
a seal of that righteousness by faith, which he had before be was circumcised.
3. That Abraham's personal Circumcision is a seal of the righteousness of faith
to all that believe as he did, and to no other. 4. That the usu^l Ci^cu^cision
of infants, was not a seal of the righteousness of faith, or of the Covenant of
grace to every circumcised person.

But, says Mr. B. 1. The Text seems to speak of the nature and use of
Circumcision, and the end of its institution: as being ordained at first of God
to seal only a Gospel righteousness of faith, and not a legal righ^eousness of
works or ceremonies.

Answ. 1. If Circumcision were at first ordained of God to seal a Gospel
righteousness of faith, then it did not seal visible Churchmembership of
infants (for that is not a Gospel righteousness of faith, since it may be
without Gospel righ^eousness or faith, and these may be without it) as Mr. B.
says in this Chapter. 2. The nature, use and end of Circumcision in others, is
not at all expressed Romans 4.^^. but only of Abraham's. 3. The use and end of
Circumcision was at first to signify that Covenant God entered into with
Abraham, Genesis 17. after to bind the circumcised to observe the law of Moses,
as the Apostle conceived it Gal. 5.3.

2. Says he, Does God institute a standing ordinance to endure till Christ, to
have one end for him to whom it was first given (...) another to all others? Is
not the nature, end, and use of Sacram^^ts or holy engaging signs and seals,
the same to all? though the fruit be not always the same. These are poor shifts
against a manifest truth, which deserve not answer.

Answ. 1. Does not Mr. B. of baptism p. 2. chapter 2. himself answer, that baptism,
which he terms a Sacrament or holy engaging sign and seal, has more ends and
uses then one, and that the infant is capable of some, though not of others:
yea though he make the end to be in the definition of Sacraments that it is of
their nature to be signs, and so no Sacraments but what do signify; yet he
will have baptism to be a Sacrament to an infant to whom it never is any sign
or signifies any thing, for the baptized infant either never saw it, or never
saw it as a sign of the engagem^nt Mr. B. speaks of, and so it is never a
sign to the baptized, the Baptism leaving no visible impression on the body as
Circumcision did, to signify to the infant when he comes to age. Whence I
infer, 1. That according to Mr. Bs. own doctrine, the Sacrament of Baptism has
one end to those to whom it was first given to wit, to signify their owning of
Christ as their Lord, and another end to almost all others, to wit, infants, to
seal them Gods promise without their personal owning of Christ. 2. That
according to him, the nature, end, and use of Sacraments, or holy engaging
signs and seals is not the same to all; for Baptism is no holy engaging sign to
an infant, who does neither signify by it, nor has any thing signified to it
by it, no nor is naturally capable of it, and consequently it is no Sacrament
to it, since it is not either actually or potentially a sign to the infant, no
not when grown up of any thing signified by it. 2. Does not Mr. B. acknowledge,
that Abraham's Circumcision did seal the righteousness of says which he had
being yet uncircumcised? sure he will not deny this, which the Apostle expressly
teaches. But sure it had not that end in all others, therefore he must
acknowledge one end of Circumcision for Abraham which to all others it had not
3. About the nature, end, and use of Sacraments, I have expressed in part my
mind before, sect 31. Nor either there or here do I use any shifts against a
manifest truth, but Mr. B. ha^h levied a company of poor feeble arguments,
which but for the shallowness or prejudice of Paedobaptists, deserved not an
answer.

Chapter 19. he says thus. My 14 th. arg. is this: If the law of infants
churchmembership were no part of the ceremonial or merely judicial law, nor yet
of the law of works, then it is not repealed. But it was no part of the
ceremonial law, nor merely judicial, nor part of the law of works (as such.)
therefore it is not repealed. The consequence is evident, seeing no other laws
are repealed. The antecedent I prove in its parts. 1. None will say it was part
of the law of works; for that knows no mercy to those who have once offended:
But churchmembership was a mercy.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. should have first proved any such law at all (which he has
not proved yet) distinct from the law of Circumcision; and this is my answer to
this argument, that there is no such law at all, and this is enough. Yet I add,
2. If his pre^ended law of infants visible churchmembership be no part of the
law of works, then it is not of the law of nature, which before and after he
asserts; for the law and Covenant of nature, is the law and Covenant of works,
which I think Mr. B. will not deny, surely it is not of grace in Christ; Ergo.
That is not of grace in Christ which was before the fall; but such is the law of
nature, Ergo. 3. That the law of works knows no mercy to those who have once
offended, is a dictate of Divines, which needs proof. That the law at mount
Sinai was a law of works, is proved before, sect. 43. But that yielded some
mercy, Levit. 4.2, 20, 26, 31, 35. Numb. 15.22, 23, 24, 28. Ergo. 4. How far,
and in what manner visible churchmembership of infants was a mercy, and how it
is otherwise now, is showed before, sect. 64, 66.

2. Says Mr. B. If it were part of the ceremonial law, then 1. let them show
what it was a type of, and what is the antitype that has succeeded it, and
prove it to be so, if they can.

Answ. 1. I do not take every thing typical to have been ceremonial; nor every
ceremonial thing to be typical: Or if it be so, yet I am sure, of every thing
ceremonial which was typical, Mr. B. cannot show what was the antitype in
particular, at least he cannot prove it. When Mr. B. has showed and proved
what was the antitype to all the dishes, bowls, snuffers, and other utensils
about the tabernacle, and of every thing appointed concerning them, their
color, fashion, metal, etc. and of every rite prescribed Israel by Moses,
there may be some equity in Mr. Bs. task. But till then it is enough to tell
him, that to it with other things typified, Christ, Col. 2.17. succeeded. The
churchmembership by birth has had churchmembership by faith to succeed it, as
is before proved from Gal 3. and if that be not enough, let Mr. B. answer, and
not slight what Mr. Samuel Fisher writes in his Baby baptism mere Babism, about
the ceremonial holiness of the Jews infants, page 112.113, 114, 115, 116, etc.

2. Says he, If the very materials of the Church were a ceremony, then the
Church it self should be but a ceremony. And so the Church in Abraham^ family
should be more vile then the Church in the family of Noah, Melchizedech, Sem,
Job, Lot, etc. which were more then ceremonies.

Answ. The Levitical priesthood was ceremonial, and yet not the materials, that
is the men, a ceremony; so churchmembership might be a ceremony, yet not the
churchmembers. But I do not term either the one or the other a ce^emony, it is
sufficient that it was a mere positive thing alterable and that it was altered.

3. Says he, And that it was no part of the merely judicial law, appears thus.
1. As was last said, then also the Church in Abraham's family should be more
vile then the aforesaid* for their churchmembership was not a piece of mere
policy, as we call the judicials.

Answ. I^ it we^e by any law that infants were Churchmembers, it is more likely
to be (...) judicial law then any other of the ^hree sorts of the Mosaical
laws, which Divines do so distinguish. And to the argument I say, 1. By making
infants Churchmembership to be by a mixed or mere judicial law in Abraham's
family, it is not made a piece of mere civil policy not Eccl^siastical, for the
Jew^ Commonwealth was a holy policy, and the members of the State were members
of the Church and consequently, it is rather made more excellent by referring
it to the mere judicial laws, as the constitution of the Sanhed^in and other
things are, and the admitting of the proselytes and their children was by the
Elders of the Jews. 2. How to say concerning the families of Noah, etc. we
cannot resolve, since we find little or nothing of them, no mention of Noah's
infants, or Melchizedecs, Sems, Jobs, or Lots except Amm^n and Moab, nothing
said of their Churchmembership, or of the government of the families, what it
was, or by what law.

2. Says he, It cannot be shown that it has any thing of the nature of a mere
judicial law in it (except we may call the moral laws or Gospel promises
judicial, upon which mere judicials are built:) why is it not as much of the
judicial law to have women Churchmembers as children? yet who dare say that
this is merely judicial?

Answ. It can be shown, that if there be such a law, it is a mere judicial law,
because it belonged to the ordering of the Commonwealth or policy of Israel, as
it is termed, Ephesians. 2.12. and the entering of proselytes was to be done by the
eldership of the people, and not by the priests. And this we da^e say of the
women's visible Churchmembership as well as the infants, and that neither of
them were by a moral law o^ Gospel promise as Mr. B. fancies.

3. Says he, It is of the very law of nature to have infants to be part of a
Kingdom, and the Kings subjects. And Mr. T. has told me his judgment; that
the Jews Church and Commonwealth was all one: therefore according to Mr. T. his
grounds, it must needs be requisite even naturally that infants should then be
Churchmembers. I think this is past denial.

Answ. Kingdoms themselves are not of the law of nature, no nor of the law of
nations, if they were, all other government then of Kings were against these
laws, much less can it be o^ the law of nature to have infants to be part of a
Kingdom, and the Kings subjects. According to my judgment, the Jews Church and
Commonwealth were not all one naturally, but by institution; and therefore,
according to my grounds, it is not requisite even naturally that infants should
then be Churchmembers. So that I find none o^ these things past denial.

4. Says he, The promise that took them in, and the seal were both grounded on
the righteousness of ^aith, as is proved before; therefore not a mere judicial.

Answ. Neither were they taken in by a promise, nor was the promise or the seal
grounded, that is, made or given by reason of the righteousness of faith, to or
in those to whom they were made or given. Nor is any such thing before proved
by Mr. B.

5. Says he, In^ants were Churchmembers long before the time of Moses, when
the Jews were formed into a Commonwealth, and the ^udicial laws given them. And
as the Apostle argues, the law which was many hundred years after, could not
make void the promise, and so it could not be that this was part of the merely
judicial law.

Answ. The Jews were formed into a Commonmealth, and judicial laws given, as
may appear by the appointment of Onan and Sh^lah to take their brothers wife,
Genesis 38 8. and the sentence of Judah concerning Tamar, v. 24. before Moses
time, though then both were completed. Though the law makes not void the
promise, yet the law of infants visible Churchmembership, if there were any
such, might be merely judicial.

6. Says he, That it is neither a mere judicial, nor proper to the Jews*
appears thus. That which was proper to the Jews, was given to them only;
that is, only to Isaac and his seed, on whom the Jewish privileges were
intailed. But many hundreds were circumcised as Churchmembers (among them many
infants) in Abraham's family, before ever Isaac was born; and all the proselytes
with their infants afterward that would come in. The children of Keturah and
their children, and the children of Ishmael, etc. were once all Churchmembers;
let any show when they were unchurched, except when they unchurched themselves
by their wickedness; or let any show that the same sons of Keturah, who must
circumcise their sons as Churchmembers while they were in Abraham's family, must
leave them uncircumcised and unchurched when they were removed from that
family. Did God change laws, and revoke such mercies and privileges to the
seed of Abraham, merely because of their removing from his house, and change of
place? Who dare believe such fancies, without one word of Scripture? Remember
therefore, that it is here plainly proved, that infants Churchmembership was
not proper to the Jews.

Answ. That which wa^ proper to the Jews was not proper to Isaac only and his
seed, but common to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacobs family, or the people that
either by birth or proselytism were Hebrews: When Ishmael was cast out, and the
sons of Keturah sent away from Isaac, Genesis 25.6. they were not Churchmembers,
nor their children, no more then the circumcised children of the Jews by
strange wives when they were separated from the holy seed, Ezra 10. and Nehem
13. which the Lord did for that reason which he judged fit, however it seem to
us. Nor is this conceit a fancy, but plain from those Scriptures named and
others, which still reckon the Ishmaeli^es, Edomites, Ketureans, and posterity
of Jews by prohibited women and separated from the congregation of Israel, as a
profane people, and so not Churchmembers. Nor do I think they were bound to
circumcise their infants as Churchmembers, or did it when separated from the
Hebrew people. So that Mr. B. has not yet proved, that infants
Churchmembership was not proper to the Jews, but that it is partly natural, and
partly grounded on the law of grace and faith, as he speaks.

SECT. LXIX. Mr. B. chapter 20. by his 15th. arg. from infants being once members
in the universal visible Church, has not proved their visible Churchmembership
unreapealed.
CHAPTER 20. My 15th. arg says he, is this: If all infants who were members of any
particular Church, were also members of the universal visible Church (which was
never taken down;) then certainly their Churchmembership is not repealed: But
all infants, that were members of any particular Church, were also members of
the universal visible Church; therefore their Churchmembership is not repealed.
The consequence is beyond dispute, because the universal Church never cease
here. And in my judgment, the whole argument is so clear, that were there no
more it were sufficient.

Answ. The very conclusion, is so palpably false, that no man that understands
it but will wonder that Mr. B. should show himself so besotted, as to prove so
in^ustriously a thing contrary to sense, that the visible Churchmembership of
no infants who were members of any particular Church is repealed, that is,
cease. For who knows not that Isaac, Jacob, Moses, David, with million^ more
are dead, and are now no members in any visible Church? If it be said, that Mr.
B. means the species of infants, I reply, then he speaks nonsense and false.
For the species is but one, and therefore to ^erm the species which is but one
[ all infants] in the plural number is nonsense And false for the species was
never a member of any particular Church, for members are individuals, nor is
the universal visible Church totum universale, which may be thus divided into
adult and infants as into two sorts of Churches, but totum integrale, an
integral whole consisting of parts existing, and when the parts ceased to exist
then they were not members visible, and the whole Church visible must needs
cease when all the members existent are deceased. It is false also that the
species an be termed visible: For that is visible which may be discerned by
sense, but sense discerns not species, but individuals. If it be said that
Mr. B. means that the universal visible Church is as a fluent body, as a river
which con^inues the same from a succession of either water in the same channel,
neither will this ^ee for his purpose. For 1. in that sense the infants that
were members cease, and other infants succeed; 2. it is manifest that the
visible Church is not now among those people, to wit the Jews, w^o had
heretofore infants visible churchmembers, they are broken off from being Gods
visible Church, and so the succession of churchmembers in that people cease,
and it is that which is denied that in the other channel, to wit the visible
Christian Church, infants do or ought to be taken to succeed in the place of
the deceased Jewish infants, and if the sense be thus, the whole argument is
this; If infants visible churchmembership be and ^ught to be taken to be in the
Christian visible Church as in the Jewish, then it is not repealed. But infants
visible churchmembership is and ought to be taken to be in the christian
visible Church as in the Jewish, ergo. of which I should deny the minor. But
this has no likelihood to be Mr. Bs. meaning, whose words import plainly that
which I count nonsense and false. And therefore I answer to his argument, if
the parenthesis ( which was never taken down) be a part of the antecedent in
the major, and the sense be this [and the universal visible Church existent in
the age wherein infants were members of a particular Church was never taken
down or ceased not] and this be supplied in the minor, I d^ny the minor, if it
be not supplied I deny the syllogism to be good, as not having the whole medium
in the minor which was in the major, if it be understood in another sense
(which I count nonsense) that the species of infants in the Jewish particular
Church were members of the universal visible Church Christian, the minor is to
be proved. As for what Mr. B. says, the universal Church never cease here,
if it be meant of the universal visible Church definite of that age (in which
alone infants visible members of a particular Church are members) it is false,
if of an universal Church visible indefinite, so as that the sense be, some or
other universal Church visible never cease, or an universal visible Church in
some age or other cease not infant members in the particular Church are not
members in such an universal, but in the definite of one age, and the minor of
Mr. Bs. argument in that sense is false; Or if the sense be (as it seems by
what follows) That the nature of the universal visible Church cease not
^heere, I deny the consequence of the major in Mr. Bs. syllogism; And say, That
it is nonsense to term the nature of the universal visible Church the
universal visible Church, as it is to term humanity or manhood a man, or Peter
humanity or the humane nature. All know that understand the Metaphysics, that
whatever the difference be whether formal or modal or some other, yet the one
is not rightly predicated or said of the other: no man says the essence of a
thing (which is all one with the nature) is the thing, but that by which it is.
In like manner it is nonsense to say infants were members of the nature of the
universal Church visible. For membership has relation to an integral whole not
to an essential, no man makes infants a part of the definition of the universal
visible Church, but of the compleatness of it. But let us view Mr. Bs. proof.

1. Says he, That there is a universal visible Church, Mr. Rutherford and
others have largely proved: They of New England indeed deny a unive^sal visible
governing or political Church; but not this that I speak of (as you may see in
Mr. Shepherd and Mr. Allens answer to Mr. Ball) But lest any should deny it, I
will bring one proof or rather many in one, 1 Cor. 12, 13. We are all baptized
by one spirit into one body, whether Jews or Gentiles. Here you see it is one
and the same body that all are baptized into: Now that this is the visible
Church I prove thus. 1. That one body that has distinct visible members with
variety of gifts is the visible body: But this is such. 2. That one body which
is visible in suffering and rejoicing is the visible body. But this is such v.
25, 26. 3. That body which is capable of schism, and must be admonished not to
admit of it, is the visible body; But this is such v. 25. 4. That body which
had the visible seals of Baptism and the Lords Supper was the visible body; But
this was such v. 13. 5. That one body which had visible universal officers was
the visible universal Church or body; But this was such: Therefore, etc.

Answ. I list not to interpose my judgment in the controversies between Mr.
Ball and Mr. Rutherford, and Mr. Hudson on the one side, and Mr. Allen, Mr.
Shepherd, and Mr. Hooker on the other side, which rest much on the meaning of
the term [Church] in such passages as these 1 Cor. 12, 28. and 10.32. Acts 8.^.
Gal. 1.13, etc. and some Logic notions of an universal and integral whole, of
a similar and dissimilar whole, the distinction of a Church entitive and
organical, and the like. Nevertheless because it concerns the present point
that I should say somewhat in this thing, I shall thus far express my conceits.
1. I think by the word Church in none of the places alleged by Mr. Hudson
vindic. chapter 2. a particular fixed congregation organized is meant except the
last, 3. Joh. 10. where I conceive the casting out could be only out of that
particular Church where Diotrephes did Lord it, and where alone he did and
could forbid those that would receive the brethren, though perhaps the effect
might extend further. Nor do I think on the other side, that in any one of them
by [ the Church] is meant the universal visible organical political Church
collectively taken, which Mr. Hudson asserts not Acts. 8.3. Gal. 1.1^. For Saul
did not make havoc, persecuted or destroy the whole Church so taken, nor only
the particular Church of Jerusalem, but the word [ Church] there is taken
without quantity, an^ so neither notes the universal nor particular, all nor
some, but indefinitely in genere confuso, the disciples of Christ, or any of
that way, Acts 9.1 2. them that believed on Christ, Acts 22.19. them that
called on his name, Acts 9.14. the Saints, Acts 26.10. wheresoever he could
reach them. And in the same sense it is taken Acts 2.47. 1 Cor. 10.32. 1 Timothy
3.15. and I think the sense is the same Ephesians. 3.10. whether [by the Church] be
meant of what was done to or on the Church, that is the believers called out of
the Gentiles, to whom he gave his spirit manifestly as on Cornelius, or by the
teachers in the Church, especially of the wonderful mysteries which were
revealed in the exercise of gifts then given. Matthew 16.18. It is true, is meant
the visible Church, but not the universal organical collectively taken, nor any
particular Congregation organized, but the visible in respect of the part which
is invisible, against which the gates of the grave or death shall not prevail,
to keep them in, but they shall be raised up again to everlasting life at the
last day. Nor is it said that the keys should be given to the Church but to
Peter, the use of which was to be in the calling of the Church effectually.
The other text 1 Cor. 12.28. cannot be meant of the Church visible universal
organical collective, nor of a particular Congregation, not this latter for
reasons given by Mr. Hudson, nor the former, for the Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, are distinct from the Church there taken: but they are not so from
the Church universal visible organical collective, Ergo. Therefore I conceive
Apostles, etc. are not said to be set in the Church collectively taken as a
totum integrale organicum, but in the Church distributively taken, that is, in
the several Churches where they were employed, as Peter among those of the
Circumcision, Paul among the Gentiles. To which the term (...). has set, gives
me occasion to incline, which I conceive to b^e the same with (...) gave, Ephesians.
4.12. and it notes not a setting, by way of law constituting such to be in the
Church, but a setting or disposing by way of providence in several Churches for
their profit, as he saw good. 2. I conceive the term Catholic or universal
Church (between which Mr. Bl. Coven sealed page 155. says Divines distinguish)
is sometimes taken in contradistinction to the Jewish National Church,
sometimes as comprehending both the believers before and since the incarnation
of Christ, and in both senses I conceive it notes the invisible Church, or the
Church of the first born which are written in heaven, Heb. 12.23. who are
fellow heirs of the same body and partakers together of the promise of Christ
through the Gospel, Ephesians. 3.6* and this is the Catholic Church in the
Apostles Creed, which we believe though we see it not. 3. I acknowledge a
Catholic visible Church both before and after Christ's incarnation entitive,
though I think not organical since Christ's ascension and the Apostles decease,
and that this Catholic visible Church consists of all the visible
Church Members and Churches particular visible in all the world and that this
is visible only in the several parts, which exist, and because these parts are
in flux as a City, Army, Commonwealth, there are sometimes more sometimes
fewer, sometimes the same persons may be visible Church Members and sometimes
not, some parts may be formed after one manner some after another, the same
sort of persons may be (as infants) in a Church v^sible of one constitution and
not in another, he may be a member (as Cornelius) in one Church that is not in
another. So that the Church universal visible which I acknowledge is not
uniform, and is only as in numbering a total sum of many particulars cast up.
4. I conceive the text Mr. B. alleges serves not his purpose. For though I
think it is meant of the Church visible, yet not in respect of all the parts of
the Church visible, but those that are so visible as that they are also of the
invisible Church, to wit, true believers. 1. Because it is said that they are
by one spirit baptized into one body, and made to drink into one spirit, now
this must be understood of that unity of spirit which unites to Christ, not
barely in respect of common gifts to the sanctified and unsanctified. But this
cannot be said of all the vi^ble members of the visible Church, therefore it
is not meant of them. 2. Because the many members* termed one body are termed
Christ, v. 12. which can be meant of Christ mystical only, for those that are
only Christ by profession are not termed Christ, but those who are spiritually
uni^ed to him* now those are one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. new creatures, 2 Cor.
5.17. to whom there is no condemnation, Romans 8.1. of his flesh and of his
bones, Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32. And to his reasons I answer, that though they prove
the body meant 1 Cor 12.13. was visible, yet they prove not that all parts of
the visible Church are comprehended in that body, but only such as were also
of the invisible.

2. Says Mr. B. That the Jews infants were members of this universal visible
Church, I prove thus: There is but one visible universal Church or body:
therefore they must needs be of this one, or be unchurched. See Gal. 3.16.
Ephesians. 4 4, 1 Cor. 1^.12.

Answ. The unity there ascribed is not visible but invisible, to wit, by the
union of the same spirit, and the body though visible in respect of some parts,
yet is not said to be one in resp^ct of any but those who are invisibly also
joined to that body, or for their sake, as Mr. B. page 340 If Christ Gal. 3.16.
be not meant of Christ personal, it is certain it is meant of no more then
Christ mystical, or the Church invisible, and so 1 Cor. 12.12. the like is to
be said. And that it is so Ephesians. 4.^. appears from the words where these are
joined one body and one spirit. Therefore I deny that those texts are meant of
the universal visible Church as visible, but only of that part of the
universal visible Church of that time which was also of the invisible, which is
one by unity of the same spirit. As for the universal visible Church it cannot
be said to be one in several ages numerically, for it is but the total of all
the members then existent (for if they be not existent among the living they
are not visible) and they are sometimes the same, sometimes others (he that is
now of the visible Church may cease by death or apostasy to be so to morrow)
sometimes more sometime fewer, but they are one in respect of profession of the
same faith, or in some other visible appearance to be of Gods people. Now the
infants of the Jews might be members of the visible Church universal of a
former age, but were not of the universal visible Church of that age, which was
not one numerically with the universal visible Church of a former age, nor
meant to be so, 1 Cor. 12.13.

2. Says he, Every one that is a mamber of the particular, must needs be a
member of the universal; else one might be a part of the part, and yet not a
part of the whole.

Answ. It is true of the universal made up of those parts, but he may be a
member of the particular Church of uncircumcised, as Cornelius, who is not a
member of the particular Church of the circumcised; and he may be a member of
the universal visible of one time, who is not a member of the universal visible
of another time. A Jew before the offer of Christ might be a member of the
Jewish Church national, as the Pharisees, to whom John Baptist, Christ, and his
Apostles preached; yet were not members of the universal Church visible when
they rejected the offer of Christ. Infants were members of the visible
universal Jewish Church, who were not so of the universal visible Christian in
another ^ge. Mr. Bs mistake is I conceive in this, that he thinks the universal
visible Church is one and the same in every age, which is a gross mistake.

But he says, This is all beyond dispute; and Mr. T. denied none of it, when I
urged it on him, he confesses, 1. There is a universal Church visible. 2. That
the Jews Church was not the whole universal. 3. That every one that is a member
of a particular Church, is also a member of the universal. 4. And that the Jews
infants were members of the universal. 5. And this universal Church is not
dissolved.

Answ. I have made some search whether ever I confessed that this universal
Church visible of which the Jews infants were members is not dissolved, and do
not remember or find that ever I did so; if I sholud, I do revoke it, as being
most false: and I rather think (if I did yield any thing that seemed like it)
that what I confessed was, that the nature or essentials of the Church are not
dissolved, in stead of which (as I ghess by what follows) Mr. B. put this as my
confession. He adds.

What then remains to be denied? Why this is all that he says to the whole
[that their membership in the universal Church was only by reason of their
membership in the particular; and therefore ceased with it.] And how is this
proved? Why Mr. T. says it is so, and that is the best proof, and all that I
could get.

Answ. It was enough when I was a respondent that I said so, it had been Mr.
Bs. part to have disproved it: But I did then think, and do still think it so
plain, that it needed not proof; and (as very a wrangler as Mr. B. is) I think
Mr. B. grants as much when he says, that every one that is a member of a part
is a member of the whole, and that the individual Church that then was, was
broken off for unbelief; and I know no visible Church but an individual.
Methinks it is all one as if I had said, the finger is only a member of the
whole body in that it is a part of the hand, and when the hand cease to be a
part of the body, the finger cease to be a member. But yet M. B. will try
whether he can disprove this any better.

1. Says he, I think I have sufficiently proved, that even the nature of the
Jews Church was not repealed, but only the accidental ceremonies; and the
individual Church that then was, is broken off for unbelief; but the Olive
still remained.

Answ. The visible Church Jewish could be no other then the individual Church
Jewish, which if broken off, though the nature of the Jews Church was not
repealed, and the Olive still remained, yet the infant Churchmembership which
came only in with the Jewish national Church, might and did cease.

2. Says he. If the Jews Church were repealed, yet he that will affirm that
the whole species of infants are cast out of the universal visible Church, must
prove it well: For if I find that they were once in it, I need no more proof
that they remain in, till some one show me where it is revoked, which is not
yet done by any that I know of.

Answ. The repealing of the nature of the Jews Church, and of the Jews Church
(which intimate that the nature of the Jews Church and the Jews Church were a
law capable of repeal) is a piece of Baxterian nonsense, which I use not. That
the Jewish Church national is broken off, and that churchmembership by birth is
altered into churchmembership by faith, is so fully proved before, sect. 50,
51, 52. besides what elsewhere is said by me, that I count it superfluous to
add any more. If it satisfy not Mr. B. it is to be ascribed to his pertinacy in
his opinion, which to be his proper temper I was told long ago, and much
experience of him by my self and others find to be true.

3. Says he, The universal Church is more excellent far then any particular,
and so our standing in the universal Church is a far higher privilege then our
standing or membership in any particular: Therefore it will not follow, that
infants lose the greater, because they lose the lesser; and that they are cast
out of the universal, because they are cast out of the particular.

Answ. The universal may be more excellent then any particular extensively,
because the universal comprehend the most excellent part, and the rest also;
but not intensively, since all the excellency may be from one part. Christ the
head is not the universal body, and yet the whole body is not more excellent
intensively then Christ, that is, has not more perfection then Christ; for all
the excellency in all the members is Christ's, and from Christ. Yet the standing
in the universal is not a higher privilege then in the particular Church; yea,
if there be a standing in the universal besides the standing in the particular,
yet the standing in the particular is a higher privilege. Else why do
Ministers exhort men to join with some particular Church, and to submit to
their Pastors? is it not for their advantage? Sure Mr. B. who condemns Seekers,
and those that are separ^tists from a particular Church, and those that live
out of communion with any particular Church as Christians at large, and are so
members of the universal Church, should not think they have a higher privilege
then members of a particular Church. If he do, he does wrong them in condemning
them, and dissuading them from that state which is a higher privilege. Much
less is it true concerning infants, who are not visible Churchmembers, but as
they stand in the particular Church. For they are not by their own profession
visible Churchmembers, but merely in that they are part of that nation which
God takes for his people, as God did the Hebrew nation, and no other before nor
since. This is clear, if we suppose the whole Hebrew nation destroyed except
one male infant, this male infant would be no visible Churchmember, there being
nothing by which he is discernable to sense to be more one of Gods people then
another infant, though there we^e many Churches of Gentiles ^n other places:
Whereas on the other side, if a Christian by profession were in no particular
Church, but stood alone in an Island of unbelievers, remote from any particular
Churches, I presume Mr. B. would say he were a visible member of the universal,
though of no particular. Whence it follows, that if infants lose their standing
in the particular Church Jewish, they lose their standing in the universal.

4. Says he, Persons are first (in order of nature, or time, or both,) members
of the universal Church, before they are members of any particular* So was
Noah, Lo^, Abraham, and all men before Christ, and so are all since Christ. The
Eunuch in Acts 8. was baptized into the universal visible Church, and not into
any particular. It is so with all others: It is the general use and nature of
Baptism; they are baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
and so into the catholic Church; but not into any particular Church: If any
such thing be, it is secondary, and accidental and additional, and no proper
end of Baptism. So that it being first in order, that we are entered into the
visible universal Church, it is likely to be of more durable continuance.

Answ. Avoiding unnecessary disceptations with Mr. B. about the general use and
nature of Baptism, and about the priority in order, or time, or both, according
to which persons are members of the universal visible Church before they are of
the particular, I do agree, that persons who were visible Churchmembers by
their sensible profession of the true God, were members of the universal before
they were of the particular: But deny this concerning infants, for the reason
before given.

5. Says he, It is no good consequence that is fetched from the removal of a
particular Church, or of the Jews particular Church, to breaking off from the
universal; therefore this will not prove infants are broke off. If a Jew had
been forced into a strange country, yet there, both he and his children had
been Churchmembers of the universal Church. When all the Jews were scattered
abroad in captivity, so that they had neither temple, nor altar, nor priest,
but perhaps one live in one Town, and another in another, as they do at this
day; you could not say, that these were of the visible particular Church of the
Jews, though you might say still that they were Abraham's seed, and they and
their children were members of the visible universal Church.

Answ. The consequence is good as I frame it, Their churchmembership visible
cease, who were visible Churchmembers only in that they were part of that
visible Church which now cease; But so it was concerning infants visible
churchmembership, ergo, it cease: Which is different from that which Mr. B.
imposes on me. To his suppositions I say, that they were in that case members
of the visible particular Church of the Jews, which was a particular Church,
and so accounted even in their captivity, though not in a flourishing estate as
in their own country. And for the instance of Keturahs children when they left
the Church of Abraham's family, if their infants were visible Churchmembers
(which I conceive they were not) then it was because they joined themselves as
proselytes to the Hebrew people, which I think is not true, and therefore
conceive if any of Keturahs children who left the Church of Abraham's family,
professed the God of Abraham, they were members of the universal, but not their
infants. And ^or what Mr. B. adds, ^f a Jew then, or a Christian now, were cast
upon the coasts of America, where he should never be a member of a particular
Church more, yet he should be a member of the universal still; I grant it,
while they profess God in Christ. And for what he adds, Neither Joseph, Mary,
nor Jesus in his infancy were unchurched, because they lived in Egypt (though
I confess it is disputable whether Christ were ever a Churchmember property;
but I pass by that) I grant it, for they remained members of the Jewish Church
then when they were in Egypt* as I presume Mr. B. counts those of his Church
of Kederminster members still, who may by imprisonment, traffic, service of
the State in war, sickness, or otherwise be absent thence in England, or
foreign parts against their will.

6. Says he, Again, to lose their standing in the visible universal Church, is
to lose their place in the visible body (1 Cor. 12.13.) and in the house o^ the
living God, 1 Timothy 3.15. the pillar and ground of truth: But to be removed from
one particular Church, or from every particular Church, is no casting out of
Christ's body, or Gods house: therefore it will not follow upon the removal from
a particular Church, that they are removed from the universal; especially when
we are not speaking of individual infants, but of the whole species. So that I
think this argument is unanswerable: Infants were members of the universal
visible Church (as Mr. T. confesses) This is the Church that we are now
baptized into; and this Church constitution is not altered or taken down:
therefore infants membership of this Church is not taken down, what ever it be
of the Jews particular Church.

Answ. The consequence is good as I framed it in the paragraph next before, yea
though Mr. Bs. two propositions here be granted: Nor can Mr. B. overthrow it,
^^ll he prove that the Jews infants had a standing in the universal visible
Church, severed from their standing in the Jewish particular, for which he has
yet brought no proof. His saying that he spoke of the whole species, not of
individual infants, makes his speeches to appear ridiculous nonsense. For the
whole species has no standing in the visible Church universal or particular,
nor can be said to be admitted in, or cast out, or removed from one or every
particular Church. These things cannot be said of a species, but of
individuals, since a species is conceived abstractively from all
individuificating circumstances of time, place, etc. which must be conceived in
visible Churchmembership and removal or casting out. And that we are baptized
now into that universal visible Church in which infants were members, is
utterly false, and that the Church constitution is altered in that the Jewish
particular Church cease i^ proved before, therefore there is not^ing in this
argument unanswerable. As for what Mr. B. adds to this Chapter p. 339. I find
not that ^e brings any more strength in it which needs further answer. He
refers me to Mr. Hudsons vindic. but tells me not what part he would have me
answer, perhaps there is not any thing in the book that opposes me besides
what is already answered, and I am not yet so obsequious to Mr. B. as to go
ov^r a whole book to find an adversary to fight with; if Mr. B. kn^w any
strength in it to oppose me with, he should have himself produced it or
referred me to the particular place where I might find it. As for the texts
which he cites out of Mr. Hudson, an answer is fu^ly made to what he brings
them for in the 2d. part of this Rev^ew, ^ect 9. in which Mr. B. and others may
see how shamefully they abuse Scripture, to prove a church national
comprehending infants like the Jewish in the time of the Go^pel. And I add,
that if Mr. B. weigh Mr. Hudsons words in his vindic. chapter 4 sect. 5. p. 93, 94.
I acknowledge the Jews to be a national Church. But my description of the
Church Catholic was of the Church as it is now, since the partitition wall is
broken down, f^r then it became Catholic. I conceive there were believers of
the sons of Keturah that d^d not partake of all the privileges of the Jewish
Church except they became proselytes. It is the Evangelical Catholic Church
which my question is about; into which the Jews themselves being converted
were admitted by a new initial seal, viz. baptism, and did not stand in it by
their former national membership, but received a Catholic membership by
baptism, I conceive that a man of any nation, converted to be a visible
believer is a member of the Church Catholic en^itive, and hereby has right to
all Church privileges that belong to the whole Church, Gods method us^d in the
national Church of the Jews, b^ing in populo Israelitico, m^st ^eeds differ
from the method in populo Catholico; he will find that learned man speaking
as much for my purpose as his own. They tha^ boldly affirm that Christ's
Covenant, his sati^faction, his Church, his sealing, extend to any more then
elect, join with the Arminians against the Scripture and the most approved
Protestants, and the contrary contains no desperate expressions, as Mr. B b^ing
m^slea^ speaks* Mr. Hudsons words page 220. are not right. If any hold that the
believing Jews children are still Churchmembers, and yet deny that the Gentiles
children are so he may hold it still notwithstanding the assault made by Mr.
B. here. For by the taking down the partition wall, Ephesians. 2.14. and the
removing the enmity v. 16. Jews and Gentiles are not made one visible Church
after the Jewish frame, but one by faith, and by it the Gentiles are cl^ansed,
A^^s 15.9. not a whole nation parents and children as the Jewish Church, but
believers repenting, Acts 11.17, 18. one body, one Lord, one faith, one
baptism, etc. Ephesians. 4.5 6. proves not the Gentile and Jewish Church visible to
be the same, but the invisible of both. Gal. 6.15. has not a word tending to
prove that there is the same reason of Jews and Gentiles infant visible
churchmembership, but of the equal interest in Christ of Gentiles who are new
c^eatures, as of the Jews. It is no part of Paul's Epistles, and therefore not
much of their substance to prove the taking in of the Gentiles, and graffing
them into the Olive which the Jews were of, if by it were meant the visible
Church Jewish, but it is most palpably false. The discipling nations, the
Kingdoms of the world becoming Christ's, Rev. 11.15. prove not infant^
discipleship, or churchmembership. All hitherto brought by Mr. B. has yielded
no sufficient proof, let us view the rest.

SECT. LXX. Mr. Bs. 16th, and 17th. arg from the promise of mercy, Exodus 20.6.
and of blessing, Psalm. 37.26. are answered.
CHAPTER 21. says Mr. B. The 16th. arg. then is this: Exodus 20.5, 6. From hence I
argue thus: If God have made over this mercy (of Churchmembership) in the moral
law, to the children of all that love and obey him, then it is not proper to
the Jews children, nor is it ceased: But God has made over this mercy in his
moral law to the children of all that love and obey him; therefore it is not
proper to the Jews children, nor is it ceased. Nothing but the antecedent here
needs proof. Every man I think among us will confess, that the moral law was
not proper to the Jews, and that it is not ceased. Even the most of the
Antinomians confess the ten Commandments are in force as the law of Christ,
though not as the law of Moses. However, if they be against the preceptive part
of the law, yet sure they will not be against the promissary part. Though
there be some clauses that were suited to the Jews peculiarly, yet I never yet
met with man that would say this was so. If the ten Commandments be not current
proof, there is no disputing with them out of Scripture.

Answ. There is need of proof of more then the antecedent to make this argument
good. For 1. the conclusion is not that which Mr. B. should prove,
Churchmembership and visible Churchmembership, children and infant children
being not all one. God may show the mercy of Churchmembership to infants, and
yet not make over to them visible Churchmembership, and he may make over
visible Churchmembership to the children of them that love him, and yet not to
them in infancy. So that the conclusion may be granted as it stands, without
any impeachment to my tenet. But if it be meant of visible Churchmembership of
infant children, the minor is to be denied. And to the proof, 1. I except that
this promise was proper to the Jews made to back the legal Covenant, and though
it be a promise annexed to the observing a moral precept, yet as in the fifth
Commandment termed the first Commandment with promise, Ephesians. 6.2. So in this,
the promise has special reference to their prosperous and safe estate in
Canaan, in which they were continued while they kept themselves from idolatry,
and on the other side expelled, captivated, enslaved, when they served idols,
unto the third and fourth generation, upon which considering the time of making
this promise, the usual tenor of promises in the Books of Moses, as Deuteronomy. 7.9,
12. to the same purpose, the place where this promise is put, the event which
does best expound it, and that no where under the Gospel promises are made to
believers children, but only to believers themselves of Evangelical mercy, yea
the Apostle concludes that notwithstanding the promise to Abraham and his seed
Genesis 17.7. and to Israel, yet God has mercy on whom he will have mercy, and
whom he will he hardens, Romans 9.18. I do determine (without fear of Mr. Bs.
censure) that this promise was suited to the Jews peculiarly. 2. I hence infer
that if this mercy be meant of Churchmembership, yet it might be, yea was
proper to the Jews children. 3. The mercy here cannot be proved to be visible
Churchmembership. 4. That it is only to those men's children who love him and
keep his Commandments, which is an invisible thing, and so whose infants are
visible Churchmembers by this promise cannot be known. 5. That this promise is
made good though it be not performed to all those that love him, nor to all
their children, nor to any in infancy. 6. That this promise is not true without
the exception of election, and the expounding of it as conditional and not
absolute since it must then follow that God exempts none yet from mercy, there
being not a thousand generations from Noah to this day* So that till Mr. B.
have proved the contrary to these (which he can never do) his proof from hence
will appear to be of no force. But let us examine what he says.

Let me try therefore whether this 2d. Commandment in the words cited do not
prove the minor: to which end I argue thus. If God have assured his mercy by
promise to the children of all them that love and obey him, then he would have
them be taken for members of his Church. But he has here assured his mercy by
promise to the children of them that love and obey him: therefore he would have
them be taken for Churchmembers: The minor is plain in the text. The
consequence of the major I prove thus: ( viz. that all those must be taken for
Churchmembers on whom God has thus stated or assured his mercy by promise)
(the word [ mercy] I shall explain anon:) If God have estated and assured his
mercy by promise to no other society of men in the world but the Church, then
all those are members of the Church on whom his mercy is thus estated and
assured: But God has estated and assured his mercy on no other society:
Therefore, etc.

Here let me a little explain my meaning. Sometime when God promises mercy, it
is first to some particular person or family: Sometime to a whole species or
sort of persons. 2. Sometimes it is some particular named mercy, and sometime
in the general naming no sort or individual mercy. 3. Sometimes it is upon a
special ground proper to some one person or to few; and sometimes it is upon a
common ground. 4. When the mercy is specified* it is sometime merely corporal
and sometime spiritual. 5. And of spiritual mercies, sometime it is common to
others besides the saved; and sometime special and proper to the saved. 6.
Sometime it is mercy limi^ed to a short or certain time; and sometime estated
and assur^d for con^inuance while the law stands. Now you mu^t understand
first, that God may bestow on some particular person or family, on the ground
of some special service, which they or their fathers have done, or of mere
mercy some special corporal blessing, especially limited to some short or
certain time: And that his common preservi^g sustaining mercies are over all
his works; and and yet none of this will prove men Churchmembers. 2. But when
God does not name any particular person or family for his mercies, but estates
them on a species or sort of persons; and when it is not a m^er corporal mercy
that is so stated, but either a spiritual mercy (common o^ special) or else
mercy in the general without specification, and when this is not on any ground
of any partic^lar action or service done by any particular man, but upon a
ground (or condition) common to others not named; and all this not li^ited to
any short or certain time, but stated to continuance, and that by a legal
promise assuring it, and not only a mere offer of it, in this case it will
certainly prove them members of the Church.

Answ. 1 Mr. B. leav^ out in the minor the term [ all] which was in the major
of the first syllogism: which if it had been put in the minor (as it was
necessary he should do to prove the conclusion he should prove) it would not
have been proved out of the text; which does not assure mercy to all the
children of all that love him, but to thousan^s, that is, multitudes of the^;
and to those mercy is not assured absolutely without condition of their love of
God, nor is mercy in the text promised perpetually, but as Andr. Rivet. on
Exodus 20.6. God does not so extend the bounds of his mercy, that he may not
also deny it to the posterity of some godly men. For these things are said of
those things which for the most part happen, Gods liberty being always
reserved in his judgments and the distribution of good things. So we read
the sons of Godly parents to have been forsaken of God and grievously
punished. 2. The consequence of his major is denied, and to his dictates (for
proof he brings none but his own sayings) I answer first, by denying that all
those must be taken for visible Churchmembers on whom God has stated or
assured his mercy by promise, Exodus 20.6. no not though it were stated as Mr.
B. would have it, no promise, no not of sanctifying grace making of it self a
person a visible Churchmember, as I have showed often before. 2. I deny that
the mercy, Exodus 20 6. is stated as Mr. B. imagines; but say, 1. That the mercy
there meant, is stated on the Israelites specially. 2. That it is not meant of
spiritual but outward mercies, not now promised to the most holy Saint on
earth. 3. That it was declared on a particular ground of Gods peculiar respect
to Israel, whom he brought out of Egppt. 4. That it is limited to a certain
time, while they continued to be his people, which was not to be perpetually.
3. I deny that the words, Exodus 20.6. Deuteronomy. 5.10. do expressly contain a
promise, but only a declaration of Gods frequent dealing, which I confess,
does imply a promise, as his declaration, Exodus ^.5. Deuteronomy. 5.9. does imply a
threatening; yet I think it not fit to call it a promise, since the Apostle
Ephesians. 6.2. terms the fifth commandment, the first commandment with promise.
But Mr. B. adds.

Now that it is the privilege of the Church only to have God thus engaged to
be merciful to them, (and that in a way of distinction from others, as it is
in this commandment promise,) is to me a truth beyond dispute* And if any do
doubt of it, I argue with them thus. 1. If no such promise of such mercy to any
sort of men out of the Church can be shown in the Scripture, then we must take
it as proved that there is none: But no such promise can be shown estating such
mercy on any others; therefore, etc. They that can show any such promise, let
them produce it.

Answ. The assertion is not a truth beyond dispute, but may be questioned, nor
is the consequence good, there being no such declaration of God that he has
made no such promise of such mercy to any sort of men but what can be shown in
the Scripture; and if it were, yet till Mr. B. has showed that the mercy Exodus
20.6. is greater then God vouchsafes to persons out of the Church visible, it
may be held (notwithstanding any thing Mr. B, produces) that such mercy is
promised to persons out of the Church. However, it is most false that God has
assured his mercy on no other society then the Church. If the promise, Genesis
3.15. be understood of all mankind as meant by the woman's seed (as he before in
his third Letter to me, and after here, chapter 23. expounds it) then there is a
promise of mercy stated on othe^s then the Church; and the same may be said of
Genesis 9.12, 15, 16. besides what is implied in the speeches, Psalm. 36.6. Psalm*
145.9. 1 Timothy 4.10. Till Mr. B. show a greater mercy is stated on the children
of all that love God then is on Cyrus, Isa. 45.1, etc. there is a promise shown
in Scripture of such mercy to one out of the Church. The like to
Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 27.6. And the promises of calling the Gentiles, of
re-ingraffing the Jews, Romans 11.26, 27. are promises to persons out of the
Church, and yet of mercy, yea the chiefest mercy; and therefore Mr. Bs.
dictates are but vain. Yet he goes on thus.

2. Briefly consider to the contrary: 1. Those without the Church are said to
be without hope, without God, strangers to the Covenant of promises, Ephesians.
2.12.

Answ. It is said of the Ephesians, that they were once without hope, etc. and
it is said also that they were Gentiles uncircumcised; but it does noth not
follow therefore that all Gentiles uncircumcised were without Christ not having
hope, without God in the world: Nor does it follow, that all Gentiles were out
of any visible Church who were uncircumcised; nor does it follow, they had no
promises of mercy who were strangers from the Covenants of promise there meant.
It is true, this Text proves that the estate of the Gentiles before the Gospel
was preached to them, was as Paul describes it: Yet this neither proves that
there were none who were out of the Commonwealth of Israel, and were strangers
from the Covenants of promises made to Israel, had no mercy assured to them
equal to that, Exodus ^0.6.

2. Says Mr. B. The promises are all Yea and Amen in Christ, 1 Cor. 1.20. And
Christ is the head over all (indeed but only) to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. To
his called he gives the precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Answ. The promises, 2 Cor. 1.20. are such as were in Christ, and must be
understood of saving promises, which are not made to the visible Church as
visible, much less to the children of visible churchmembers as such, but only
to those that are of the invisible, and therefore this Text proves not that no
mercy such as is meant, Exodus 20.6. is assured to any society or persons but
those of the visible Church. The same also may be said of 2 Pet. 1.4. where the
promises are given to the effectually called, and that by them they are
partakers of the Divine nature. And for the other Text, though there be no
mention of promises in it at all, yet if any be implied, the speech is meant
only of the Church of Gods elect (not the mere visible Church) which alone is
his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all; and therefore if these
Texts prove no mercy promised but to the Church, they prove no mercy promised
but to the invisible Church, which is contrary to Mr. Bs. purpose here.

3. Says he, By faith it is that promises were obtained, Heb. 11.33*

Answ. It is said, by faith they subdued Kingdoms, in the same v. and
therefore after the rate of Mr. Bs. reasoning, none should subdue Kingdoms but
the Church. The faith there is such a faith as the just lived by, chapter 10.38.
therefore if Mr. Bs. arguing be good, promises of mercy should be made to none,
but those who believe with such a faith, and consequently it is not the mere
visible Church but the invisible only to whom such mercy is assured. The
answer is by denying the consequence, that because promises were obtained by
faith, therefore mercy is not assured to any by promise but the Church.

4. He adds. To Abraham and his seed were the promises made, Gal. 3.16. both
common and special: The children of the promise are accounted for the seed,
Romans 9.8. Therefore if those without the Church were children of the promise,
then they should be the seed. The promise is sure to all the seed, Romans 4.16.
The promise is to you and your children, and as many as the Lord shall call,
Acts 2.39. The seed are heirs of the promise.

Answ. Mr. Bs. needlesness still appears. He should prove, that such mercy as
he conceives promised Exodus 20.6. (which he will not avouch to be saving mercy)
is assured to none but the Church, and he means the visible Church: but here he
brings promises of saving mercy, which he dare not say to be made to the
children of all that love him, Exodus 20.6. and are indeed made only to those
who are of the invisible Church, and therefore impertinently alleged, The
promises, Gal. 3.16. are such as are made to Christ either personal for his
body mystical, or to Christ mystical, and the promises are those by which is
the inheritance, v. 18. righteousness by faith, v. 21, 22* which can be true
only of the elect, and so that, v. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to the promise. So Romans 4.16. is meant only of true
believers, and Romans 9.8. of the elect only. Now it is not denied, that the
promises of righteousness and life belong only to the Church invisible; but
these promises are far different from the promise to the children of them that
love God, Exodus 20.6. which Mr. B. will have only meant of the visible Church,
and of things much below saving benefits. The Text, Acts 2.39. it as
impertinently alleged, as has been proved at large before, the promise there
being not meant of any visible privilege, nor the fathers there considered as
believers, or lovers of God, but as crucifiers of Christ, and the promise not
said to be to any of either sort, but those who were called by God.

5. Says Mr. B. The Church is the house and family of God, and the promises
are his treasure, and Christ's legacies, and the word of promise is his
Testament; therefore not for these without. The Church is the pillar and ground
of truth, and the word is the truth. In the midst of the Church are Gods
praises, Heb. 2.12. therefore in the Church are his mercies and promises. It is
by the Church that the man^fold wisdom of God is known, Ephesians. 3.1^. The Church
only is that body whereof the Lord of the promises is head, Col. 1.18.

Answ. The promises of saving benefits are Gods treasure, and belong only to
the invisible Church; but it follows not therefore that God makes no promise,
or the mercy Exodus 20.6. belongs to none out of the visible Church. Let it be
yielded, the Church is the pillar of truth, and the word is the truth; yet that
God makes no promises to Cyrus, Nebuchadnezzar, and others out of the Church,
or that his promise to them is not true, or that he vouchsafes no mercy to
them, follows not. God is praised in the Church, and his counsel made known,
and Christ the head of the Church only, and yet all praise, promise, and mercy
not appropriate to the Church.

6. Yet again. They that are not in covenant, are not under the promises of
this mercy, or have not this mercy stated on them by promise: But those that
are without the Church are not in covenant. This argument is past
contradiction. No man dare say but these are covenant mercies in this promise
mentioned. Wicked men in the Church are within the covenant, as I have proved
in the Appendix of my Aphorisms; but those without are not in covenant, though
they may have some conditional promises offered. The covenant and such promises
as those go together: Therefore it is called the covenant of promises, Ephesians.
2.12. Romans 9.1, 2. So is mercy only assured by the covenant* Deuteronomy. 7.9, 12.
and that to the Church only, 1 Kings 8.23. Neh. 1.5. and 9.32. Mic. 7.20. Luke
1.50, 72. 1 Pet. 2.10. Many more Scriptures show the conjunction between Gods
mercy and covenant; and most certainly they are all out of covenant that are
out of the visible Church.

Answ. If Paedobaptists had not a mind to mock rather then to teach people by
their writings, me thinks being so often called upon to speak distinctly what
covenant they mean, when they say infants and visible churchmembers are in
covenant, and in what manner they are in covenant by Gods act, their own, or
the baptizers, they would still when they speak of being in covenant clear
their meaning. There are diverse Covenants of God; that with Noah, Genesis 9. that
with Abraham, Genesis 17. that with the Jews, Exodus 19. the new Covenant, Heb.
8.9, 10, 11, 12. Being in Covenant must needs come from their own act of
covenanting, and then the sense is, Wicked men in the Church are within the
Covenant, that is, they promise to God: But in this sense no infant is in
Covenant with God; for no infant promises to God. Or being in Covenant is from
Gods act of promising, and thus it is most certainly false that they are all
out of Covenant that are out of the visible Church: For all men and beasts are
in the Covenant with Noah, Genesis 9.11, 12. Mr. B. himself says thus in his
Appendix to his Aphorisms, answ to the 8 th. object. p. 48. There is a Covenant
betwixt God and every living creature. If I should instance in all the promises
made to Ahab, Nebuchadnezzar, Cyrus, Darius, etc. it would be tedious. The Jews
not yet re-ingraffed, nor of the visible Church, are certainly in Covenant in
this sense, Romans 11.26, 27. Isaac, Jacob, before they were born were in
Covenant, and so all elect infants in their mothers womb, and men of years yet
in infidelity a^e within the Covenant of Evangelical grace, even the new
Covenant, Heb. 8. though not in the visible Church. The minor therefore of Mr.
Bs. argument is so far from being p^st contradiction, that it is in my
apprehension manifestly false. I grant all mercies mentioned in any promise are
Covenant mercies; but for the mercy, Exodus 20.6. it seems Mr. B cannot tell
what it is, though he tell us on his word it is more then corporal, if not
special. Now he says, Appendix, p. ^8* 1 Samuel 10.4, 5, 6, 7. The spirit of God
and other f^vours are promised to Saul. And sure as much is promised to Cyrus,
Isa. 44 28. and 45.1, etc. as was to Saul. Wicked men in the visible Church,
continuing so to the end, neither are, nor ever were in the Covenant of
Evangelical grace, or new Covenant, though they have been in the Covenants with
Noah, and some other Covenants, in some of which also wicked men without the
visible Church have been. The Covenants of promise (not as Mr. B. reads it, the
Covenant of promises, Ephesians. 2.12.) were as it is most likely the Covenants
Genesis 17. Exodus 19. and the meaning of the Apostle in saying the Ephesians were
strangers from them, seems to be, that they were not acquainted with them, and
therefore in appearance further from God, as in like manner their
uncircumcision and alienation from the policy of Israel, are alleged to the
same purpose. And yet when they were made believers, and were in the visible
Church, they were in neither Covenant as there is meant, I mean, they were not
in the Covenant made to Abraham, Genesis 17. as it did contain special promises
made to his natural seed, nor in the Covenant made at Horeb any more then they
were circumcised or in the policy of Israel. Romans 9.1, 2. has nothing of
Covenants or promises, but what is v. 4. is often before showed to be meant of
the Covenants and promises peculiar to the Israelites; and therefore, though
the Covenant and such promises go together, yet therein is nothing which
pertains to the visible churchmembership of our children, those who are now in
the Church being not in those Covenants which were peculiar to the Israelites.
It Is true the mercy meant Deuteronomy. 7.9. was assured by Covenant, but that Covenant
was v. 12. it which God swear to the fathers, which so far as it was
Evangelical, belongs only to the elect whether of Jews or Gentiles, so far as
political to the Hebrews only. The same I say of 1 Kings 8.23. Nehem. 1.5. and
9.32. Mic. 7.^0. The texts Luke 1.50.72. 1 Pet. 2.10. are plainly meant of
saving mercy, and of the elect or invisible Church only. So that though I
grant a conjunction between Gods mercy and Covenant, and that saving mercy is
assured only by the Covenant to the Church invisible only, yet I deny that
God is in Covenant with none but those of the visible Church, that God has not
promised such mercy as is meant Exodus 20.6. to any but in the visible Church,
that what continuance of mercy is assured Exodus 20.6. to posterity is assured
to believers children now as it was to the Israelites, that they are all
visible Churchmembers to whom that mercy is assured, and therefore infer that
the pretended ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership has no footing in
that text.

Mr. B takes upon him to answer some objections, but very lamely. If any
ob^ect, says he, that this promise is to the children of them only that love
him and keep his Commandments; and we know not who those be; I answer, it is
true, but though God make the promise only to such, yet quoad nos, it
belongs to others; that is, we are bound to deal with all those that profess
love and obedience by a serious probable profession, as if they were truly what
they profess: This I shall prove afterward. He that has the face to say that
God estateth here his mercy on the children of those that love, and obey him,
and yet takes them not for so much as members of the visible Church, has too
hard a forehead for me to dis^ute it with any further.

Answ. Though we are to take such professors by a judgment of charity to
have such love, and title to the promise, and are to exhibit all such offices
of love as we are bound to by such a love as is due to them that truly love
God, yet we are not bound to take them for visible churchmembers by that
judgment of charity, but by a judgment of certainty sensibly perceiving their
profession; nor are we to take their children as visible Churchmembers no not
by Paedobaptists own grounds, for they are not so but upon their parents real
love, they being not visible Churchmembers but by the Covenant which belongs
not to them except they do truly love God, and not in show only, which is to
be known by a judgment of certainty not of charity only, and that being not
attainable it is not by Mr. Bs. own grounds knowable that any infant is a
visible Churchmember. What he says he shall prove afterward has been
examined already in the first part of this Review sect. 35. I am not moved by
Mr. Bs. censure, but take it for a speech of a man who loves to talk
confidently when he disputes weakly, like those who set out weak members with
much bumbast.

He adds. Some may object, 1. That they know not what mercy it is that is here
promised, whether common or special: To which I answer: what if they know not?
yet it is mercy* and more then corporal if not special; what if God promise
only in general to be to them a merciful God? sure it affords us ground of
confidence and comfort: As it would do to a poor man to have a Prince promise
to be merciful to him and his children.

Answ. That the mercy Exodus 20.6. is more then corporal, if not special is
said, but not proved by Mr. B. that he dare so confidently assert infants
visible Churchmembership from a promise of mercy which he cannot certainly
resolve of what mercy it is, shows he has a bo^d face not fit for a man that
seeks for truth. Especially if it be considered that no promise of it self does
make a man actually a visible Churchmember, no not of faith or profession, or
visible Churchmembership. For a promise assures a futurity, put's not a thing
in present being. It Is true a promise gives ground of confidence and comfort,
that the thing shall be in its due time which is promised, but a promise of any
mercy in general cannot assure the futurity of visible Churchmembership, no not
though it were of more then corporal or special mercy, and therefore this
argument his own words do sufficiently evince to be only added to make a
number without strength.

2. Says he, They may object, that it is uncertain, what is meant by a
thousand generations: whether it be the remote or the nearest progeny. To which
I answer: 1. I judge it to be only to the immediate children of godly or
ungodly parents, that the promise and threat in this Commandment is made to;
else there would be a contradiction between them. For if the third generation
of a wicked man should have godly parents between, then the promise would
belong to them, and consequently not the threat; and so on the other side. The
meaning seems plainly to me to be this, that God will increase the punishment
of the children of ungodly parents according as they succeed their parents,
remembering the sins of the grandfathers in punishing their children (they
being still the children only of the wicked.) And that he will multiply
mercies on the posterity of the righteous, the more still because they had
righteous progenitors, supposing still that they are the children of such.

Answ. To interpret a thousand generations or the third and fourth by one
only, is such a piece of Arithmetic as I should conceive none but an Idiot or
natural fool would use. The imagined contradiction is easily avoided by
conceiving, that it is not a plain promise or threat of what God will
constantly do, but a declaration of what he does often, or in some cases;
which exposition is confirmed from hence, in that we see so much variation in
Gods dealings, as necessitates us so to limit it. Though Josiah were a godly
Prince, yet God would not show mercy to his sons, and though Manasseh repented,
yet for his sins wrath fell on his posterity and the whole people. But let Mr.
Bs. interpretation, or mine* or any others be righter, yet the speech must
needs have such limitations as will disable it from yiedling a certain rule,
whereby the children of all visible professors visible Churchmembership may be
proved, and therefore it is frivolously alleged by Mr. B. to that end.

2. Says he, But I further answer: What if this were not understood? must we
therefore reject that which may be understood? There is somewhat doubtful in
the text, viz. what mercy it is particularly? and to how many generations? if
ungodly progenitors intervene? And there is somewhat beyond doubt in the text,
that is* that God estateth his mercy on the immediate offspring of his people.
Now must I throw away that which is past doubt because of that which is
doubtful? So we may throw away all the Scriptures.

Answ. We must not reject that which may be understood, nor must we wrest the
Scripture to infer from it that which cannot be inferred, but omit the
allegation of doubtful texts, and urge that which is certain. That which he
conceives undoubted is I conceive uncertain, That God estateth his mercy on the
immediate off spring of his people. The instance of Josiah^s children is
sufficient to show it not to be universally true. That which he acknowledges
doubtful is enough to show, that nothing can be from this text certainly
inferd for Mr. Bs. purpose, and therefore in the close of this Chapter Mr. B.
confesses that which is sucifficient to show, that the visible
Churchmembership of all infants of godly parents much less of mere professors,
cannot be gathered from Exodus 20.6. I pass on to the next.

Chapter 22. he says thus. The 17th. arg. is drawn from Psalm. 37.26. [His seed is
blessed] that is the righteous man's seed; whence I argue as before: If God by
his unchanged law and promise, have pronounced the seed of the righteous
blessed, then certainly they are members of his visible Church. But he here
pronounces them blessed; therefore, etc. 1. I have proved before that he has
so done by no society out of the Church: They that say he ha^h pronounced any
other society blessed, let them show it. But it is absurd once to imagine that
God should pronounce a society blessed, and yet take them for none of his
visible Church. 2. That this promise is an unchangeable promise, I take for
past doubt, till Mr. T. show me where it is repealed a little better then he
has showed me the repeal of infants Churchmembership. It is made to the
righteous and their seed in general, and not to the Jews only: it is writ^en
in the Book of Psalms from whence Christ and his Apostles fetch many texts for
confirmation of their doctrine. And if it had been spoken but to the Jews, yea
or to one particular person, yet if it cannot be proved to be restrained to
them as being from a reason proper to them, the Scripture teaches us to apply
it to all the people of God, Heb. 12.5. The Apostle applies that to all
believers, which was spoken only to Joshua, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. So Heb. 13.6. from Psalm. 118. Heb. 10.16, 17. Romans 10.6.

Answ. 1. That the speech Psalm. 37.26. compared with v. 25. seems rather to be
a narration of what the Psalmist found by experience, then a promise of God.
Nevertheless since there are promises to like purpose elsewhere, as Psalm. 112.2.
Prove. 20.7. I will not deny the speech Psalm. 27.36* to imply a promise, nor
will I say God has revoked (or as Mr. Bs. language is) repealed it. 2. Nor
will I say that this promise was proper to the Jews, though I conceive that the
promises to posterity have more reference to the Israelites then other people
by virtue of the national and legal Covenants made to that people, and I think
Mr. Bs. reason of no force, that it is not made to the Jews only, because it
is written in the book of the Psalms; for promises proper to them are there, as
Psalm. 89.4, 21, etc. Psalm. 132.11, etc. 3. I deny not promises to one
particular person may be safely applied often times to others. 4. I deny that
when Psalm. 37.26. it is said his seed is blessed, and Psalm. 112.2. the
generati^n of the righteous shall be blessed, this must be understood of every
one of their seed, or at all times, as in their infancy, the speech being true
only of that which happens often, though not always. Mr. B. himself, p. 149.
says, Even as when he says [the seed of the righteous are blessed] he does
not tie himself to make every one blessed with his special blessing, though he
do it ordinarily. And therefore it is most frivolously alleged to prove an
ordinance of every infants visible churchmembership unrepealed, though the
parent be no righteous person, but a visible professor, and very vicious, even
an enemy to godliness. 5. There Is not a word that intimates any society here
pronounced blessed, much less the society of the Church. Nor does the term [
blessed] prove it must be meant of the Church. For others then the Church and
churchmembers are sometimes blessed, as Psalm. 137.9. Psalm. 144 15. Mr. B. here
chapter 24. They that dash the children of Babylon against the stones are blessed,
Psalm. 137.9. Luke 23.29. 6. Mr. B. himself tells us, p. 330. That he affirms
only a certa^nty of churchmembership, and a strong probability of the
justification of the infants of the righteous. But if we urge the word
strictly, they only are blessed whose sins are forgiven, Psalm. 32.1. Romans 4.6,
7. and therefore this Text may as soon prove justification of every righteous
man's seed (which Mr. B. asserts not) as visible churchmembership. Yea, no where
is any termed blessed by reason of his visible churchmembership, but many times
for their outward prosperity, as Psalm. 144.15. Deuteronomy. 28.2, etc. Genesis 17.20. and
27.38, 39. And that in this respect the blessing is meant, Psalm. 37.26. may be
gathered 1. from the constant tenor of the promises made to the righteous and
their seed, which either are altogether or for the most part in blessings of
this life, and accordingly the performance: 2. Because in the New Testament in
which spiritual blessings are assured, there i^ no promise of them to a
believer and his seed, but to believers only: 3. The occasion and series of
the Text, Psalm. 37.25, 26. leads plainly to this sense, that the righteous is
not so forsaken, nor his seed, as to be destitute of bread, that though he be
merciful and lends, yet his seed is blessed with sufficient provision of
outward things: 4. The Texts, Psalm. 112.2. Psalm. 128.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 144.15.
lead us to this sense. From all which I answer by denying the consequence of
the major in Mr. Bs. argument, and to his proof say, that it is no absurdity to
pronounce persons blessed, and yet ^^ne of Gods visible Church.

SECT. LXXI. Mr. Bs. 18th. arg. from the priority of infants churchmembership
before Circumcision. His 19th. from Gods proneness to mercy: His 20th. from
blessing and cursing, Deuteronomy. 28. are answered.
MR. B. proceeds thus, chapter 23. The 18th. arg. is this: If infants were
churchmembers before ever Circumcision was instituted, then certainly it was
not proper to the Jews, and consequently not ceased according to Mr. T. his own
Doctrine: But infants were churchmembers before Circumcision was instituted;
therefore it was not proper to the Jews, nor is ceased. Here at our Dispute Mr.
T. seemed to yield all, if I would prove infants were churchmembers before
Circumcision.

Ans. So far as I can discern by my memory and such notes I have of the
Dispute, this was my concession, That if Mr. B. would prove admission of
infants as churchmembers before Circumcision, I should yield to what he
averred, that the law and ordinance of infants as visible churchmembers was not
repealed* Yet I confess, by reason of Mr. Bs. quickness of speech, his unheeded
altering terms, using often [visible churchmembers] for [admission as visible
churchmembers] which in that time in the conflict of Dispute I did not always
take notice of, or through weariness mention, it not to be unlikely I did say
as Mr. B. says I did. However by my writings it app^ars this is and was my
constant judgment, that infants were visible members of no Church but that of
the Hebrews, nor such till by Gods call of Abraham and his house they were
taken to be his separated people; and that infants were not admitted visible
churchmenbers, nor any law of admission till that of Circumcision, Genesis 17.

Mr. B. adds. But in his Sermon since among much of the same stuff, he made the
poor deluded people believe (I mean those that will believe him) that by
infants being churchmembers, I mean nothing else but that they suck of the
breasts of godly parents, and are brought up in the family of godly parents;
just as in our Dispute he would have faced me down, before thousands of people,
that by churchmembership I meant nothing but Circumcision; I told him I did
not, and he told the people still that I did. Is it any intemperance or
harshness upon such dealings to say, that it is sad that (I will not say
eminent holiness, but) a very little tenderness of conscience, and fear of God,
and love of truth or charity to a brother, yea or common modesty should not
restrain this! but that Mr. T. durst, first, take on him to search the heart,
and know a man's thoughts to be contrary to his pr^fession; secondly, and
contrary to the plain sense of his terms of speech; thirdly, and persuades
multitudes of people that it is so. What hope can I have that ever Mr. T.
should be brought to the truth, when he has not ability enough to understand
what is the meaning of [a member of the visible Church] and that after I had so
fully told him! I was long before I could get him to confess, that Circumcision
and Churchmembership were two things, and separable, till I gave him instance
in women.

Answ. 1. In the Dispute I confess I did conceive that Mr. B. could mean
nothing but the command of Circumcision by his ordinance of infants visible
churchmembership, not imagining that he should magnify such a toy, as he has
in his Letter to me devised from Genesis 1.26, 27. and 3.15. etc. which, and not
defect of truth, tenderness of conscience, modesty, or charity (in all which
whether of us be defective the Lord will judge) made me so confident he did
mean as I then said. 2. But that I ever said in my Sermon, that by infants
being churchmembers he meant nothing else but that they suck the breasts of
godly parents, and are brought in the family of godly parents, I do not yet
believe. This I might, and I think did say, and do say it again, That I knew no
sign whereby infants are visible churchmembers, except those be signs which are
mentioned. 3. That I was long in yielding the separation of Circumcision and
visible churchmembership, it was because I conceived that he meant infants of
other people besides the circumcised, were visible churchmembers* but when I
found he meant that they were distinct and separable in the people of the Jews,
I yielded it.

He proceeds thus. And now must I be fain to show, that churchmembership is
neither sucking the breast of a godly woman, nor being brought in the family?
What a hard word is this [Churchmember?] when I know not possibly how to speak
it plainer. Why, Sir, where is the difficulty? Is it in the word Church? I
suppose we are agreed what a Church visible is? at least you understand it? Or
is it in the term [member?] why, do you not know what a [member] is? How
understand you Paul's discourse about the members and body? Do you understand
what is totum aggregatum and pars totius? Do yo^ understand what it is to be a
member of a City, or of a family? and why not of a Church? If I say children
are members of this Kingdom (or (to please you) Commonwealth) or if I say
children are members of every City in the land, and of every family where they
are, this is all true; and me thinks a man of your parts should understand it*
And why not when I say, that infants are members of the Church? But if you will
not understand, there is no remedy.

Answ. That Mr. B. and I are not agreed what a visible Church is, has appeared
before in the 2d. part of this Review, sect. 17. I think I understand others
when they speak of a visible churchmember and I think I now understand Mr. B.
But in the Dispute I confess I did not understand Mr. B. when he termed infants
visible churchmembers, not because of the difficulty of the thing, but because
Mr. B. had a language (as I then imagined, and now find) of his own, of a
mediate Disciple and a visible Churchmember by another faith, without any note
in their persons whereby they are discernable sensibly to be Christians more
then infidels children: Nor did he in the Dispute or since clear it to me, that
another faith could be a form o^ note whereby an infant might be denominated
or discerned sensibly to be a visible Christian churchmember, or a Disciple of
Christ. This if he shall yet do, I shall not trouble him to show that
churchmembership is neither sucking of the breast, nor being brought up in a
godly family, but shall (passing by his jeer at the Parliaments altering the
term Kingdom into Commonwealth) confess infants members of the visible Church
as of civil Kingdoms and Cities. Till then, I take Mr. Bs. language of infants
discipleship and visible churchmembership by a promise and parents faith to be
frivolous gibberish and false doctrine.

But Mr. B. attempts to prove his minor, 1. from Mal. 2.15. where he would have
[ a seed of God] to be visible churchmembers. But 1. he no where shows this to
be the sense: 2. this is not the sense: For here the proper end of marriage is
expressed, which is common to believers and infidels. But it is not the end of
the marriage of infidels to seek a seed which should be churchmembers visible
or invisible, neither their nor any others marriage is to propagate godliness
or the profession of it, but to propagate a legitimate posterity, who are
called, a seed of God, because according to his institution. But of this
interpretation I need say no more then what is said in answer to Mr. M. in the
first part of this Review, sect. 13. and to Mr. Bs. exception against my
interpretation here, in the 17th. section. 2. Because infants in Abraham's
family were churchmembers before Circumcision. Which I grant after the time of
Abraham's call, and Gods separating his house to be his people; and therefore if
limited to the space of time between Abraham's call, Genesis 12. and the
institution of Circumcision, Genesis 17. I should grant the minor in Mr. Bs.
argument, and deny the consequence of the major. Nevertheless in the proof of
his minor there are sundry things, which I think not meet to pass by without
animadversion. 1. That which he says Circumcision did not not make infants
churchmembers, I grant it; yet it made them visible churchmembers, though not
of it self alone, yet with other signs: So that although I deny not other signs
also to have concurred, yet this sign in part made them visible members of that
Church. 2. When he says the Covenant makes churchmembers, how far it is true
is showed above at large, and withal how Mr. B. is mistaken in making it the
sole efficient cause. 3. If it be true that Circumcision is but a sign of the
Covenant (as he says) how is it a seal (as is commonly asserted and by Mr. B.
himself) as somewhat more then a bare sign? 4. If it be not a sign chiefly of
that Covenant which makes churchmembers, but which promised Abraham the
extraordinary privileges after his believing, then it is some other Covenant
which Circumcision was chiefly a sign of, then the Covenant which makes
churchmembers; which being as I conceive the Covenant of grace in Christ, it
follows, 1. That the Covenant, Genesis 17. according to Mr. B. was not the
Covenant of grace. 2: That it promised extraordinary privileges to Abraham. 3.
That Circumcision was chiefly a sign of this promise, and consequently the use
of circumcising infants was not out of a reason common to believers infants,
but peculiar to Abraham and his seed, which cross sundry of Paedobaptists prime
hypotheses. 4. Neither does the Apostle say, Romans 4. that the promise went
before Circumcision; nor does it follow, if he did, that churchmembership then
went before it. 5. It may be, and by learned men is questioned, whether the
infants or the parents be termed the breakers of Gods Covenant, Genesis 17.14. and
if they were, it follows not they were of that people and in the Covenant
before, the breaking the Covenant being not a breaking off from being in
Covenant, but a breaking of Gods command in that Covenant; and their cu^ting
off from Gods people, might be by preventing from being Gods people, as well as
by making them not his people who were. 6. Though the Scripture do not
intimate, that Abraham's family was then first made a Church, yet in calling
that Church the Circumcision, it intimates, that then when they were
circumcised they were solemnly declared to be Gods people: And if the Scripture
do not intimate, that then infants were first admitted members, as Mr. B. says
here, it will concern him to show where the Scripture intimates their admission
before, and how. I did conceive by Mr. Bs. words, p. 24. and elsewhere, that as
he now avoucheth no other way by precept or example of admission but by
Baptism, so he avouched formerly no other way but by Circumcision* I wish he
had in the beginning told us his mind plainly, the concealing of which in the
Dis^ute, and since, has occasioned the misleading of many, and a great part of
my trouble.

3. Mr. B. argues thus. That infants were churchmembers before Circumcision, I
prove most likely thus: If God had before the same tender love to the faithful
and their seed as he had after, and there be no mention in Scripture when the
churchmembership of infants did begin (since the first infants) then we are to
judge that it did not begin at the institution of Circumcision (but rather with
the first infant of faithful Adam, though he after fell off) because Gods love
to the faithful and their seed, was as great before as after: But the
antecedent is true* therefore the consequent. He that will prove a beginning of
infants churchmembership since the first infants, let him bring any Scripture
or good reason for it, and I will believe him (which I never ex^ect to be done)

Answ. 1. This reason, if it were good, might as well prove the invisible as
well as visible churchmembership of all infants of believers, and the visible
churchmembership of the seed unborn as well as born, and of the most open
profane children of believers, as well a^ the youngest children born into the
world. 2. The love of God was never to the faithful and their seed
universally, I mean the special distinguishing love of God, nor to any of them
but according to his election of grace. 3. God might and did love the faithful
and their seed, and yet the infant seed were not visible churchmembers before
Abraham's time. 4. The reason of that regard God had to Abraham's inheriting
posterity to take their infants for visible churchmembers, was from his
peculiar d^sign he had on that people to make them the people from whom his
sons coming should be expected, which he vouchsafed not to believers of other
people, whom yet he loved and their seed in respect of Gospel mercies. 5. The
beginning of infants visible churchmembership is sufficiently showed before, in
that it is not showed to have been any where but in the Hebrew nation. 6. If
Adams infants, he standing in integrity, had been visible churchmembers, yet
they had been such only in the Church by nature, which is nothing to the
present point of visible churchmembership in the Church instituted by electing
some to be of the Church, and some not. From hence I answer to the argument, 1.
by denying the antecedent, that there is no mention in the Scripture when the
churchmembership visible of infants did begin. 2. The consequence of the major,
if it did not, it proves not the visible churchmembership of infants before
Abraham's time, much less from Adams crea^ion, since then there was no such
Church to be as now we enquire ^f, and Gods love might be to believers seed,
and yet they no visible churchmembers.

The last argument, whereby Mr. B. would evince infants visible
churchmembership before Abraham's time, which he says here he had not leisure
to improve largely, he has, in his Letter to me before recited, I think to the
utmost he could, urged it, and the answer thereto is fully made here, sect. 54,
55, 56, 57, 58, 59. and thereby it may appear, not only to a man of common
sense, but of acute sense, that there is likelihood that infants should be
visible churchmembers in Abraham^ family, and yet not in the foregoing
Patriarchs, and that from the Scripture, and yet Gods love as great to Noah,
Sem, and their seed as to others. Nor is it true that all these Churchmercies
are bestowed upon the standing Gospel grounds of the Covenant of grace entered
wi^^ our first parents presently upon the fall, but visible Churchmembership of
infants was upon the special transeunt fact of God in taking the Hebrew nation
to be his people. And though the promise Genesis 3.15. comprehend infants, yet
not all infants; and I wonder how Mr. B. being a man of common sense, should
not discern that if he will have the whole seed of the woman comprised in the
promise Genesis 3.15* and that they are thereby Churchmembers, he must baptize
all the posterity of Eve, which he makes a thing to be avoided p. 120. and
gives cautions against it. And it is to me a sign of his palpable
inconsiderateness in this his hasty scribbling, that he cites Revel. 12.17. to
prove Satan's enmity against the whole seed of the woman, against our infants no
doubt* when the woman, Revel. 12.17. is not Eve, as Genesis 3.15. but the woman
clothed with the Sun* commonly conceived to represent the Chr^stian Church,
and the seed are said to keep the Commandments of God, and to have the
testimony of JESUS CHRIST, which cannot be said of infants. But I leave him to
the Lord to give him either repentance for his abuse of Scripture and
perverting the truth, or to let him fill up the measure of his iniquity, and
proceed to the next.

Chapter 24. arg. 19th. If God be not more prone to severity then to mercy, then
he will admit of infants to be members of the visible Church. But God is not
more prone to severity then to mercy: Therefore he will admit of infants to be
visible Churchmembers. All that needs proof here is the consequence of the
major proposition, which is made evident thus: God has cut off multitudes of
infants of wicked men, both from the Church and from life (for the sins of
their progenitors) therefore if he should not admit some infants of faithful
men, so much as into the visible Church, then he should be more prone to
severity then to mercy: (except it be proved that God gives some greater
mercy out of the Church, which is not yet proved:) All the children of Dathan
and Abiram and their accomplices, were swallowed up with them for their
rebellion, and so cut off both from the Church and life. Achans sons and
daughters were all stoned and burned for his sin, and so cut off both from the
Church and life, Jos. 7.25, ^^* Yea it was the stablished law of God concerning
any City that should serve other Gods (by the sed^cement of whomsoever) that
is, if they should break the Covenant (for the Covenant is that they take God
only for their God) then that City should wholly be destroyed, and not so much
as the infants spared, Deuteronomy. 13.12, 13, 14. etc. And God concludes it in his
moral Law, that he will visit the iniquity of the fathers on the children to
the third and fourth generation of them that hate him. All the infants of
Amalek are slain with the parents by Gods command, Number. 31.17. they that dash
the children of Babylon against the stones are blessed, Psalm. 137.9. The
children of Daniels accusers are cast unto the Lions, Dan. 6.24. Yea God
commanded Israel to save the life of no one infant of all the nations that were
given them for inheritance; the Hittites, Amorites, Canaanites, Perezites, the
Hivites and Jebusites, Deuteronomy. 20.16, 17. (How all this is reconciled with that
of Eze. [the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father] is showed by our
Divines that write on the 2d. Com.) And if God will not admit the infants of
believers so much as to be members of his visible Church, or Kingdom, then he
should not only show more severity to the seed of the wicked, then mercy to
the seed of the faithful; but should even cast out all infants in the world
from being in any visible state of Church mercies. And how that will stand with
the tenderness of his compassions to the godly and their seed, and the many
promises to them, and the enlargement of grace in Gospel times I know not.

Answ. 1. The speech of Gods proneness to mercy more then severity, is
according to my apprehension of Gods attributes not right, nor however it may
pass among the vulgar is it true in exact speech, such as should be used in
Disputes* For though I acknowledge justice vindicative to be natural in God,
and goodness; yet the term of proneness to severity, intimates an inclination
or desire to it, which is stopped by a contrary inclination; whereas Gods
attributes are all equally in him, nor has he any propensity of desires to
exercise one more then another, but he does work all things according to the
counsel of his own will. 2. It is falsely supposed, as if visible
Churchmembership were an act of remunerative mercy and not the taking of
infants into visible Churchmembership, were an act of severity against the
infant for the parents sin, whereas the taking or not taking into visible
Churchmembership i^ as election to eternal life, or reprobation an act of
sovereignty and liberty, which God uses as he pleases without respect to any
persons or parents good or bad actions. 3. It is also as falsely supposed that
by not taking infants into visible Churchmembership they are cast out from
being in any visible state of Churchmercies. For their being in the families of
the godly though not visible Churchmembers, puts them into a visible state of
Churchmercies, even as well as if they were taken to be visible Churchmembers
and baptized. 4. That God gives some greater mercy then visible
Churchmembership, to wit, eternal life, out of the Church visible is easily
proved in that he saves elect infants which die in the womb, are abortives, or
still born. And if Mr. B. do deny it he must hold a tenet like the Papists,
that without his visible Churchmembersh^p infants are damned. 5. The grace of
God in Gospel times is enlarged in the extent of it to all nations, in the
doctrine of the Gospel concerning the Messiah comen already, freedom from the
bondage of the law, in the pouring out of the spirit, in the new Covenant* etc.
although infants be not visible Churchmembers. 6. Gods tenderness of
compassions to the godly and their seed may and does stand with the non-visible
membership of their infants in the Christian Church, it being not out of any
defect of mercy in God, or deprivation of mercy to them, which they may not
have without it, but because it is his good pleasure that the Church Christian
should not be by natural descent, but by faith, not national but of believers
of all Nations. 7. How God is said to admit into visible Churchmembership
infants needs explication, admission, as I have hitherto conceived it, being
the act of the administratour of baptism, according to Mr. Bs. doctrine page
24. and therefore his conclusion seems to have this sense, that God will
baptize some infants with water, which is a fri^olous conceit. 8. If Mr. Bs.
suppositions on which his argument rests should be granted him, the conclusion
should be rather, that God will not permit the infants of the godly to be put
to death, but will keep them alive from the hands of persecutors, for otherwise
he should be more prone to severity to the wicked, then to mercy to the godly
and their seed. For all the instances he gives of Gods severity to the
children of wicked men is in the taking away of their natural lives; and
therefore his inference if there were any force in it, would conc^ude not the
visible churchmembership of the infants of the godly, but the preservation of
their liv^s in common calamities and persecutions; which it is certain he does
not, but as the Wiseman says All things happen alike to alike to all, Eccles.
9.2. Which things being premised, thoug^ the minor of M. ^s. first syllogism
may be well questioned, yet waving it, I de^y the consequences of the major in
both the syllogisms, which rest on such futile dictates as he has not proved,
except by saying he knows not how it should be otherwise, which seems to
intimate this fond conceit of himself, as if none could know what he does not.

He goes on in his frivolous arguings thus. Ch 25. The 20th. arg. I draw from
Deuteronomy. 28.4, 18, 3. Those that keep the Covenant are [blessed in the fruit of
their body;] and of Covenant-breakers it is said [cursed sh^lt thou be in the
fruit of thy body; thy sons and thy daughters shall be given to another people,
and thy ey^ shall look, and ^a^l with longing for them, etc. Thou shall beget
sons and daughters, but thou shall not enjoy them, for they shall go into
captivity. The argument that I fetch hence is this. That doctrine which makes
the children of the faithful to be in a worse condition (or as bad) then the
curse in Deuteronomy. 28. does make the children of Covenant*breakers to be in is
false doctrine: But that doctrine which denies the infants of the faithful to
be visible Churchmembers, does make them to be in as bad or a worse condition
then is threatened by that curse Deuteronomy. 28. Therefore it is false doctrine. The
major is undeniable. The minor I prove thus: The curse on the children Deuteronomy.
28. is, that they go into captivity: Now to be put out of the whole visible
Church of Christ is a sorer curse then to go into captivity: therefore that
doctrine which puts infants out of the Church, does make them in a more
accursed state then those in Deuteronomy. 28. They might be Churchmembers in
captivity as their parents were; or if they were not, yet it was no worse then
this; To be in captivity is but a bodily judgment directly; but to be out of
the Church is directly a spiritual judgment: Therefore to be out of the
Church, is a greater judgment (which I must take for granted, having before
proved that it is far better to be in the visible Church then out.)

Answ The minor of the first and sec^nd syllogism are both denied. For though
to be put out of the whole visible Church of Christ, either by just
excommunication or voluntary desertion is a heavy curse, yet to be put out
doctrinally, that is, to teach that infants are not visible Christian
churchmembers is not to put them under any curse at all, neither is it to be
so, any judgment spiritual or bodily, nor are they in any better case by their
being accounted visible Churchmembers and baptized then they are without both,
nor has Mr. B. proved any such thing before, but what he has scribled to that
purpose is before showed to be vain.

Another argument, says he, this text would afford in that the judgment on
the children is part of the curse on the parents (cursed shall thou be in the
fruit of thy body) now GOD does not curse the faithful; but has taken off the
curse by CHRIST (though corporal afflictions are left.) But I must haste.

Answ. That non-visible Churchmembership of infants now is any part of
judgment or curse for the parents sin has not the least color of proof from
this text or any other. The purport of the whole chapter is quite besides the
present business, it being to assure the Israelites of prosperity in Canaan,
while they kept Gods Commandments and adhered to him, and curses on them and
theirs, if they fell off from God; the curses are for the most part corporal
and on the Israelites, and therefore the thing belongs not to the present
point, nor is it true that always the judgment on the children is part of the
curse on the parents neither in corporal nor spiritual evils.

And though the truly faithful are not cursed with the great curse of
condemnation, yet those that are only so visibly may be so, yea and the
faithful themselves are not altogether free from some curses both on
themselves and their children, as on the other side, wicked men may have some
blessings on them and their children. Mr. B. himself said in the next chapter 24.
before, They that dash the children of Babylon against the stones are blessed,
Psalm. 137.9 yet were they Idolaters. Christ has taken off the curse opposite
to the blessing of righteousness, Gal. 3.9, 10, 13. not every curse from the
faithful. Out of all which I infer, that were it granted that the non-visible
churchmembership of infants were a judgment for the parents sin, and that
Christ has taken off the curse from the faithful, yet it would not follow,
that believing* parents infants must be Christian visible churchmembers, since
some curses still stay on the children for the parents sin: Yea, Mr. B. before
in his Letter tells me, that it was determined in one of their private Disputes
(by himself no doubt, the Dr. of the Chair in the College of Worcestershire
Ministers at Kidderminster) that the sins of nearer parents are imputed as part
of our original or natural guilt. I have after Mr. B.

SECT. LXXII. Mr. Bs. 21th. Arg. ch 26. from the absurdity of my Doctrine
making all infants to be members of the visible Kingdom of the Devil, is
answered.
CHAPTER 26. says he, The 21th. arg. That doctrine which makes all infants to be
members of the visible Kingdom of the Devil, is false doctrine: But that
doctrine which denies any infants to be members of the visible Church, does
make them all members of the visible Kingdom of the ^evil: Therefore it is
false doctrine. Mr. T. takes the like reasoning hainously from Mr. M. as if
were injurious so to charge him: And he says, 1. Consequences remote must not
be fastened on men when they deny them* 2. Many unbaptized are not in the
visible Kingdom of the Devil; and asks, whether children be in or out of
that Kingdom before Baptism: If out, then by not baptizing he leaves them not
in it, etc* To this I answer, 1. He that says, infants are all shut out of
heaven, may well be charged for teaching that they go to (...) because the
consequence is not remote, but direct, among th^se that acknowledge not a third
place. 2. I will only lay a true charge on the doctrine and not the persons:
The doctrine sure may be charged with the consequences, though the person may
not. 3. It is not your denial of Baptism directly, that leaves infants in the
visible Kingdom of the Devil; but your denial of their churchmembership:
Therefore to those vain passages I answer, That it is true, that many unbaptized
are in the Kingdom of Christ, and so many infants also; and so not in the
visible Kingdom of the Devil: But that no man who is known to be out of
Christ's visible Church, ordinarily can be out of Satan's visible Kingdom, I
shall now prove; and so that your doctrine is guilty of making (I mean not
really but doctrinally making) all infants to be members of Satan's visible
Kingdom, in that you deny any infants to be members of the visible Church.

Answ. 1. That which I said about remote consequences not to be charged on men
as their sentence, was spoken not from his charge of leaving all the infants to
have their actual standing in the visible Kingdom of the Devil, but of putting
them all out of the Covenant of grace; and this was made the bloody sentence of
the Anabaptists, though no such thing can be proved of them by any of their
sayings. And therefore the two answers here of Mr. B. are impertinent, my
speeches being about another point, though perhaps somewhat like it, and
charged on us with it. And to Mr. Bs. answers I reply, 1. Mr. B. seems to me to
oppose ineptly a direct consequence to a remote, whereas a near consequence is
opposed to a remote, not a direct; for a remote consequence may be direct* as
well as a near. But it is frequent with Mr. B. to abuse words. 2. If a person
acknowledge a third place they that shut infants out of heaven may not be
charged with it as their sentence, that they go to hell, which Mr. Bs.
limitation intimates he acknowledges. And then by like reason this is not to
be charged on me, for that I deny infants visible churchmembership, that I
leave them in the visible Kingdom of the Devil, since I leave them in a neutral
state, of which more anon. 3. I shall examine the charge on my Doctrine, which
I deny by denying the minor of Mr. Bs. syllogism. 4. Though Mr. B. call the
passages in my Apology, p. 64. vain, yet it will appear there is no vanity in
any of them. 5. The argument by which I proved that unbaptized persons may be
in Christ's visible Kingdom, which (Mr. B. confesses) did fitly oppose Mr. Ms.
imputation of leaving them all in the Devils visible Kingdom to whom we denied
Baptism, I think will serve against Mr. Bs. opinion. For if it be true that
infants are admitted into the visible Church by Baptism (which is his position,
p. 24, 25.) then they are out of it before they are baptized, (for before
admission none is in, but without,) and if so, according to Mr. Bs. doctrine,
infants are in the visible Kingdom of the Devil, since he denies a third
estate, and the horrid consequence is to be charged on Mr. Bs. doctrine, not on
mine. 6. Mr. Bs. way of charging my doctrine is at vain as Mr. Ms. Thus it
proceeds.

For if it be certain (as you say) that no infants are members of the vis^ble
Church, they are out of it: And then I argue thus. If there be no third estate
on earth, but all are either in the visible Church of Christ, or in the visible
Kingdom of the Devil; then that doctrine which puts them out of the visible
Church of Christ, does leave them in the visible Kingdom of the Devil. But
that there is no third state, but that all the world is in one of the two
Kingdoms, I prove thus. The common definition of the Church affirms them to
be a people called out of the world, and Christ faith, he has chosen them out
of the world, and that they are not of the world, and in the same place diverse
times call's the Devil [the Prince of this world,] Joh. 12.31. and 14.30. and
16.11. and 15.19. and 18.36. and 17.6, 16. And the Apostle calls him the God
of the world, 2 Cor. 4.4. So then, if the Devil be the Prince and God of the
world as it is distinct from the Church, and out of which the Church is taken:
then all those that are not taken out of the world with the Church, are still
of the world where Satan is Prince: But the antecedent is before proved,
therefore the consequent is true. The world and the Church contain all mankind
according to the ordinary Scripture distribution.

Answ. 1. The world and the Church are not in all the places cited
contradistinct. For Joh. 18.36. this world comprehends the Church as well as
them without, Christ's Kingdom was not from the Church by their weapons, or
other procurement; but this world is opposed to heavenly power, and gift, from
whence Christ had his Kingdom. 2. Nor in the rest of the places where the
Devil is termed the God of this world, or the Prince of this world, or the
Disciples are said not to be of the world, can the speech be meant of infants;
for of them of whom it is said that the Devil is the God of this world, by the
world are meant, 2 Cor. 4.4. those that believe not, in whom he has blinded
their minds, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ should not
shine unto them; and so must the rest be understood, where he is said to be the
Prince of this world, according to what is said Ephesians. 2.2. which is not to be
said of infants; and in other places, as John 15.19. John 17.14.16. they are
said to hate the Apostles, which is not to be said of infants: And therefore
from hence they are not proved to be in the Devils Kingdom, though they were
reprobates. 3. The world is not in these places opposed to the visible Church,
so that who ever are in the visible Church are not of the world, and they who
are of the world are not of the visible Church. For 1. the world out of whom
the Apostles were called, were the Jewish Church, which if Mr. B. do not (as I
conceive he does) make the visible Church of God when the Apostles were called,
sure Mr. Bl. Mr. Cobbet, and others do, as I have showed before, and therefore
the world is not put as contradistinct to the visible Church. 2. The world is
in the places cited so described by their actions of hating the Apostles, by
their exclusion out of Christ's prayer, Joh. 17.9. by their Prince Satan, by the
Apostles calling and choosing out of them, that the world cannot be construed
only to note non-visible churchmembers, but a party that are obstinate enemies
to Christ, and so reprobates, whether in the visible Church, or out of it; and
if it stand in direct contradistinction to the Church (which I find not in any
of the places cited) it is to the invisible, not to the mere visible Church: so
that they who are without the visible Church, may be no part of the world
therein meant; and they that are within the visible Church, may be part of the
world. 4. The definition, that the Church are a people called out of the world,
being expounded of the visible Church, is meant of outward call, which infants
are not capable of, and so the definition excludes infants from being a part of
the Church there meant, and yet they are not in the world in the sense in which
it is taken in the Texts mentioned (except Joh. 18.36.) For they are not haters
of Christ or his Apostles, nor recusant unbelievers, nor such as obey Satan as
their Prince. But if it be expounded of the invisible Church, and the calling
meant of invisible operation of the spirit, I deny not but elect infants may be
so called out of the world, and be part of the invisible Church.

These things premised, I answer 1. The conclusion is not in the latter
syllogism the same with the minor in the former syllogism which should have
been proved. 2. The antecedent or minor in the later syllogism, which is this,
[ the Devil is the Prince and God of the world as it is distinct from the
Church, and out of which the Church is taken.] if it be meant of the visible
Church I deny. For neither is the world in any of the Texts distinct from the
visible Church, but the visible Church or some members of it are the world
there meant, and the Devil the Prince of them, and the visible Church in
respect at least of many perhaps most of their members not taken out of the
world, but in it still; nor is the Devil the Prince of them that yet are
uncalled by an outward call from the world, if as infants they be not by their
choice and actions conjoined to the world, but of them that voluntarily adhere
to and act with the wicked world. Infants are neither in the world as it is
there taken, nor without, that is, they are neither with them nor against them
in their present state; but (as they say in Logic) a whelp till the 9th. day
is neither blind nor seeing, so an infant till it act is neither within nor
without the world visibly, in which Satan is Prince. Nor are those dictates of
Mr. B. true, or proved by the Scriptures cited, that no man who is known to be
out of Christ's visible Church ordinarily can be out of Satan's visible Kingdom,
that the world and the Church visible contain all mankind according to the
ordinary Scripture distribution. But if [ the world] be taken for reprobates,
and the Church be taken for the invisible Church of the elect, I grant it is
true that infants are in one part, and that Satan or God is Prince of them: But
this is nothing for Mr. Bs. purpose, though it be most agreeable to some
passages, as Joh. 17.9, etc. about the world and the Church.

Mr. B. proceeds thus. If it be said, that yet they are not visibly in Satan's
Kingdom: I answer, If no infants be of Christ's visible Church, and this be a
known thing, then they are visibly out of it; and if they be visibly out of
that Church, then they are visibly of the world which is Satan's Kingdom,
seeing the world and the Church contain all.

Answ. Neither is it true, that if it be a known thing that infants be not of
Christ's visible Church, then they are visibly out of it* except it be so known
from their sensible action; nor do the world, taken in the sense opposite to
Gods people, and the visible Church contain all, as Mr. B. dictates. Mr. B.
adds.

If it be said, they may be of the invisible Church, and yet not of the
visible, nor of Satan's Kingdom; I answer, 1. it is visibly and not invisibly
that the aforesaid distribution is to be understood. 2. I shall anon prove,
that the visible Church is wider then the invisible, and that ordinarily we may
not judge any to be of the invisible Church, who are not of the visible.

Answ. 1. How far the former speech is true or false, is showed before. 2. As
for the later, though we may not judge ord^narily these or those particular
persons to be of the invisible Church who are not of the visible, yet we may
judge some infants at least are so, though non^ be of the visible Church.

Again ( says Mr. B.) it appears that infants generally were of Satan's
kingdom visibly till Christ fetches them out: Therefore those that are not
fetched out are in it still: And no man can say they are fetched out except by
some means or other it be visible or discernable, Heb. 2.14^ Christ destroyed
by death him that had the power of death, that is the Devil. Satan had this
power of death visibly over infants as well as others. Therefore seeing Mr. T.
builds so much on this Apol. p. 66. That infants are neither in the kingdom
of Christ, nor Satan, visibly till profession, either be must prove that God
has left it wholly in the dark, and not revealed that any infants are of
Satan's v^sible kingdom, or of Christ's (the contrary whereof is abundantly
proved) or he must find out some 3d. kingdom or society, and so find out some
3d. King besides the King of the Church, and the Prince of this world; and it is
like he will be put to find out a third place for them hereafter, besides
heaven and hell.

Answ. It is a weariness to the flesh to write books, it is much more when a
man is to answer such scriblings as this of Mr. B. which being so magnified as
it has been, and written with so much confidence and insolent provocations, is
a monument of the boldness and shallowness of readers and writers in this age.
What frivolous arguing are here, Christ destroyed him that had the power of
death, Satan had this power of death visibly over infants as well as others,
Ergo they were of Satan's kingdom as it is contradistinct to Christ's visible
Church till Christ by death fetched them out? If Satan's power of death visibly
over infants, show them to be in Satan's visible kingdom as contradistinct to
the visible Church, does not the same prove all the infants of believers to be
in Satan's visible kingdom, as well as the infants of unbelievers? yea does it
not prove the visible Church to be in Satan's visible kingdom? For over them
Satan had this power of death as visibly as over the infants of unbelievers.
Yea wherein does the power of death visibly show a persons being in the visible
kingdom of Satan more then Jobs smiting in his body by Satan, or the woman's
who was a daughter of Abraham and bound by Satan 18. years, showed them to have
been then in the visible kingdom of the Devil as contradistinct to the visible
Churth? Besides those that Christ is said to have fetched out or delivered are
those who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage,
Heb. 2*^4. Does Mr. B. interpret this of infants? Besides if it appear that
infants generally were of Satan's kingdom visibly till Christ fetches them
out, therefore those that are not fetched out are in still: And no man can say
they are fetched out, except by some means or other it be visible or
discernable, How can Mr. B. say any infants of believers are fetched out o^
Satan's kingdom visibly? By what means is it visible or discernable that a
believers infant is fetched out of Satan's visible kingdom and (...) an
unbelievers? Christ's death was visible it is true, but that either Christ's death
did destroy visibly Satan, or visibly delivered those who were subject to
bondage, or that by it is visible or discernable that a believers infant and
not an unbelievers is fetched out of Satan's visible kingdom, is unknown to me.
The ordinary means whereby it is visible that a person is fetched out of Satan's
visible kingdom is in that he hears, obeys, and professes the Gospel. Surely
by this means or any other it is not visible or discernable, that any infant of
the most sincere believer is fetched out of Satan's visible kingdom, therefore
by Mr. Bs. own suppositions he cannot say that any believers infant is fetched
out of the visible kingdom of the Devil, and so his argument is retorted on
him: That doctrine which leaves all infants in the visible kingdom of the
Devil is false: But such is Mr. Bs. according to his own suppositions. Ergo. As
for what he would impose on me, it is false, that God has left it in the
dark, it is clear as light at noon, that infants are neither in Christ's nor
Satan's visible kingdom, and yet they have Christ or Satan for their ^ing, and
are to be in heaven or hell, as they are elect or reprobate; And therefore his
talk of what I must find out is but his prattle, and of what he has
abundantly proved, is but his idle vapouring of himself.

3. Says he, Sure the Apostle calls the world [them that are without] as
distinct from the Church visible, who are within, Col. 4.5. 1 These. 4.12. And
he speaks it as the dreadful misery of them, those that are without God
judges, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. Now infants are either within or without, and to be
without is to be of the world which the Devil is by Christ said to be Prince
of.

Answ. To be without Mark 4.11. is to be without, not within Gods election;
to be without Revel. 22.15. is to be without the gates of the city the new
Jerusalem, which I take to be all one as to be cast into outer darkness as
Christ terms it. Either of these ways all infants are within or without, but [
those without] in the places cited by Mr. B. cannot be said of infants, for
they are not persons toward whom we are to walk in wisdom, Col. 4.5. or
honesty, 1 These. 4.12. this being required that our example may not harden
them, but it were ridiculous to require this in respect of infants. The Apostle
does not speak it as the dreadful misery of them that are without that God
judges them 1 Cor. 5.12. but only mentions it as an intimation why they
belonged not to his judgment, nor does he in any of the places term them the
world, who are without the visible Church, or Christ say that Satan is Prince
of all that are not visible Churchmembers, but of the world of reprobates, and
such as are contrary to Christ and in whom he rules nor is the term [ those
that are without] in any of those places taken for them that are without
privatively for want of capacity to understand, profess, and act for Christ,
but for those who are positively without by the acts of their own will, not
receiving Christ, nor embracing the profession of him, such as were
unbelievers, fornicators, idolaters, etc. 1 Cor. 5.10, 11, 12. Such as could
observe and did stumble at the evil practices of the Christians, Col. 4.5. 1
These. 4.12. in which sense it is not true that infants are without, though they
be privatively or negatively without the visible Church.

SECT. LXXIII. Mr. Bs. 22. arg. Chapter 27. that my doctrine leaves no ground of
hope of salvation of infants dying, is answered.
CHAPTER 27. Mr. B. goes on thus. The 22th. arg. That doctrine which leaves us no
sound grounded hope of the justification or salvation of any dying infants in
the world, is certainly false doctrine. But that doctrine which denies any
infants to be members of the visible Church, does leave us no sound grounded
hope of the justification or salvation of any dying infants in the world;
therefore it is certainly false doctrine. No reasonable temperate Christian
will deny the major, I think. The minor I know will be passionately denied. Mr.
T. takes it hainously at Mr. M. and Mr. Bl. that they pinch him a little in
this point, as if it were but to raise an odium upon him: And yet when he has
done all for the mitigation of the odium (which he says was his end Apol.
page 62.) yet he does so little toward the vindication of his doctrine, that
he confesses [it suspendeth any judgment of infants, we can neither s^y
they are in (the Covenant of grace) nor out, Apol. page 62.] He labors to
prove that there is no such promise or Covenant in Scripture as assures
salvation to the infants of believers; but that God would have us to suspend
our judgment of this matter, and rest on the Apostles determination Romans 9.18.
yet that there is a hope, though not certain, yet probable and comfortable,
taken from some general indefinite promises of the favor of God to the parents,
and experience that in all ages hoth been had of his merciful dealing with the
children of his servants, Apol. p. 112.]

Answ. What I took hainously at Mr. M. and Mr. Bl. I did justly; what I said
that there is no such covenant or promise in Scripture as assures salvation to
the infants of believers, I meant it of them as such, or universally what I
said that God would have us to suspend our judgment of this matter, I meant
whether this or that particular infant be in the Covenant of grace. To Mr. Bs.
arg. I say if his major be meant of such a grounded hope as is certain from
faith, believing a particular promise of God concerning believers infants dying
in infancy (as Mr. B. seems to understand it) I deny the major, if very
probable and likely from such declarations and promises and experiments as we
have, I deny the minor, and shall follow Mr. B.

I will first, says he, prosecute my argument and then consider of these
words* understand therefore that 1. I do not charge their doctrine with a
positive affirmation, that all infants do certainly perish; but with the taking
away of all positive Christian well grounded hope of their salvation.

Answ. Yet by your charging us with this, that by our doctrine they are not so
much as seemingly in a state of salvation, you do charge our doctrine with a
positive affirmation that they all certainly perish. And it will appear by that
which follows that with you no hope of their salvation is Christian and well
grounded, but what is cer^ain upon a promise of God apprehended by faith, in
which is the chief difference between us.

You add, That the question now is not of particular infants of believers, but
of the species or whole sort that so die; not whether this or that infant be
certainly saved, or we have any such hope of it but the question is, whether
there be a certainty or any such hope that God will just^fie and save any
infants in the world or any infants of helievers at all?

Answ Between whom the question is, as Mr. B here says, I do not understand:
the question between me and my Antagonists is not as Mr. B. here sets it down.
I have always asserted that there is a certainty and hope that God will
justify and save some infants in the world, some infants of believers, and
have often acknowledged those that Christ prayed for, laying on his hands were
elect ones, but the question is whether there be any such promise to a believer
and his natural seed which assures salvation to them as the seed of believers,
and consequently whether there be a certain hope of the^ all dying in their
infancy that they shall be saved. This I have denied because I know no such
promise in Scripture, and if there were it would prove the salvation of those
at age though profane as Esau: For if the promise belong to the seed as such,
and it includes salvation, then it assures (...) all the seed of belie^ers,
whether dying at age profanely or in infancy. So that it is not true, that the
question is not whether this or that infant be certainly saved, or we have any
such hope of it, nor is it true that the question is of the species or whole
sort that so die, or whether there be a certainty or any such hope that God
will justify and save any infants in the world, or any infants of believers at
all, yea Mr. B. in the words next before would not charge our doctrine with a
positive affirmation that all infants do certainly perish. But the question is
whether there be a certainty from a promise that he will save them all dying in
infancy, nor is the question of the species or whole sort of infants, but of
the particular infants of believers.

Now, says he, I affirm* 1. that there is a ground of Christian hope left us
in this, that God does save some infants (yea and that particular ones, though
that be not now the question.

Answ. Now this I affirm too, though I assert not such a certainty by promise
to infants of believers, as Paedobaptists do.

2. Says he, That they that put them all out of the visible Church leave us no
such hope. I will begin with the later, which is the minor in the argument. And
1. I take it for granted, that to be a visible member of of the Church, and to
be a member of the visible Church, is all one. He that denies that, will but
show his vanity; And that the invisible Church, or the sincere part is most
properly and primarily called the Church, and the body of Christ; and the
Church as visible containing also the unsincere part, is called the Church;
secondarily and for the sake of the invisible, and so it is called the body,
because men seem to be of the invisible Church, therefore they truly are of the
visible: If we were fully certain by his own external discoveries, that any man
were not of the invisible Church, that man should not be taken to be of the
visible. Therefore the properties and privileges of the invisible Church are
usually given to the visible (as to be Saints, holy, all the children of God by
faith, Gal. 3.26. to be Christ's body, 1 Cor. 12.13. to be branches in Christ,
Joh 15.2, etc. because as the sincere are among them, so all visible members
seem in the essentials of Christianity to be sincere; therefore if any
converted Jew or Pagan were to be taken into the Church upon his pr^fession, we
ought not to admit him except his profession seem to be serious and so sincers;
for who durst admit him, if we knew he came but in jest, or to make a scorn of
Christ and Baptism? So that to be a member of the visible Church, or of the
Church as visible, or a visible member of the Church are all one, and is no
more but to seem to be a true member of the Church of Christ (commonly called
invisible) or of the true mystical body of Christ. Therefore even Cardinal
Cusanus calls the visible Church, Ecclesia conjecturalis, as receiving its
members on conjectural signs. And our Divines generally make the unsound
hypocrites to be but to the Church as a wooden leg to the body* or at the best
as the hair and nails, etc. and as the straw and chaff to the corn: And so does
Bellarmine himself, and even many other whom he cites of the Papists (Aquinas,
Petr. a soto, Joh. de Turrecremata, Hugo, Alex* Alensis, Canus.) And when
Bellarmine feigneth Calvin and others to make two militant Churches, our
Divines reject it as a calumny and manifest fiction; and say, that the Church
is not divided into two sorts, but it is a two fold respect of one and the same
Church; one as to the internal essence, the other a^ to the external manner of
existing as Ames. speaks.

Answ. Though much of this passage be yielded by me, yet I reject those
speeches [ because men seem to be of the invisible Church, therefore they truly
are of the visible; to be a visible member of the Church is no more but to seem
to be a true member of the Church of Christ (commonly called the invisible) of
the true mystical body of Christ] For to be a visible member of the Christian
Church is not all one as to seem to be of the invisible Church. For, 1. a
person may be of the visible Church, according to Mr. B. who lives alone in
America, and therefore seems to no man to be of the invisible Church, no man
knows or judges probably or certainly him to be of Christ's mystical body. 2.
A person may seem to be of the invisible Church, and yet not be of the visible,
as an Indian while a Christian preaches, who yet professes not Christ, yet
seems by his gestures to be affected with it, and sundry others. Therefore it
is necessary to be a visible Churchmember, that his profession be visible, that
is, be discernable to men's understanding through the sensibility of it. 3. To
some a person may seem to be of the invisible Church, to others not, is he of
the visible Church or not? or are both true? and if no^, how shall we know
which is true, which not? 4. To seem to be of (...) invisible Church is but
accidental to the visibility of a Churchmember, though he should seem to none
to be of the invisible Church, yea though through men's ignorance or
uncharitableness the person should seem to be a reprobate or hypocrite, yet he
might be nevertheleless a visible Christian, and so a churchmember of the
catholic visible, which Mr. B. avoucheth. Mr. Bs. reasons here go upon a gross
mistake, as if it were all one to be a visible churchmember, and to be received
or admitted as a visible churchmember: and that a person were denominated
visible from what men apprehend or what seems to them, whereas the denomination
is, as Ames says truly in the place meant by Mr. B. from the external form or
manner of existing. Though a person be not to be received as a visible member
of the Church because he seems not to be found, yet he may be a visible
churchmember: Nor is he such because they pass a judgment on him, but because
his profession is such as might show him to be a Christian, if any did observe
it, or would heartily interpret it. But how far Mr. B. errs from the true
understanding of the main point of his book, what it is to be a visible
churchmember, sometimes making it the same with a seeming to be of the mystical
body of Christ, sometimes a right to a benefit, and how indistinctly he speaks
of this thing (which if he had minded any exact disquisition of truth, he
should in the beginning of his Dispute have first cleared) is showed in the
second part of this Review, sect. 17. at large page 228, etc. In this part,
sect. 55, etc. And for want of observing this his mistake, I judge many learned
men and others have been misled by him.

He says, Again, you must understand, that to be a member of the visible
Church is not to be a member of any particular or political body or society, as
Rome would have it. And to be a visible member, does not necessarily import
that he is actually known to be a member; for he may live among the blind
that cannot see that which is visible. But that he is one so qualified, as that
he ought to be esteemed in the judgment of men to belong to the Church of
Christ: therefore a man living alone in America, may yet be a member of the
visible Church. For he has that which constituteth him a visible member,
though there be none to discern it.

Answ. 1. This passage does overthrow Mr. Bs. definition of a visible
Churchmember, which is, that he is one that seems to the judgment of man to be
of the invisible Church: Now he that seems such, is actually known or discerned
to be such; that seems so, which is thought to be so; Videtur quod sic, videtur
quod non, in the Schools are express^ons of a man's opinion; but according to
Mr. B. to be a visible churchmember does not necessarily import he is actually
known or discerned, therefore he may be a visible churchmember who does not
seem to the judgment of man to be of the invisible Church, and then the
definition is not right, as not agreeing to every thing defined. 2. His
speeches He may live among the blind who cannot see that which is visible, that
he is one qualified so as that he ought to be esteemed in the judgment of men
to belong to the Church of Christ, a man living alone in America has that
which constituteth him a visible member though there be none to discern it, do
plainly intimate that visible churchmembership is constituted by some
qualification which is visible, so that he ought thereupon to be esteemed in
the judgment of men to belong to the Church of Christ therefore visible
churchmembership is from some qualification sensible, and is before the esteem
in the judgment of men to belong to the Church of Christ; and though such
esteem should not follow, yet the person is a visible churchmember: and
therefore Mr. B. does most unskilfully define a visible churchmember to be one
that seems, or is esteemed to be of the invisible Church. For though this be,
and ought to be a consequent upon the other, yet it is not the same; but as I
have showed, even according to Mr. B. they may be severed. And if that which
constituteth a visible churchmember be a qualification visible, so as that he
ought to be esteemed in the judgment of men to belong to the Church of Christ
(which can be no other then his serious, sober, free, and intelligent
profession of the faith of Christ) then my description of a visible
churchmember is right, and infants that have no such qualification are not
visible churchmembers. To say that their parents are visible professors, is
insufficient: For there is no Scripture that makes the profession of the parent
the child's qualification, nor any Scripture that for it makes it our duty to
esteem him in our judgment to belong to the Church of Christ; nor is the
pa^ents profession any qualification of the child visible, neither is the
relation of the child visible or sensible. (For relations, say Logicians, incur
not into the sense) nor is the Fathers profession any more his own childs
profession then any other man's childs profession. So that Mr. Bs. own words
being well heeded, overthrow his tenet and confirm mine. I go after him in the
rest.

These things, says he, explained, I proceed, and prove my minor thus. They
that are not so much as seemingly (or visibly) in a state of salvation, of them
so dying we can have no true ground of Christian hope that they shall be saved:
But they that are not so much as seemingly or visibly of the Church, they are
not so much as seemingly or visibly in a state of salvation: Therefore of them
so dying, we can have no true ground of Christian hope that they shall be
saved.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. makes here seemingly and visibly in a state of salvation, of
the Church to be all one, whereas there is a great difference, seemingly being
in order to the understanding, visibly to the sense, he may be seemingly in the
state of salvation, and of the Church, who is not so visibly, there being many
arguments which may make a thing seem to the understanding, besides that which
is discernable by the outward sense. Therefore if Mr. B. mean by seemingly all
one with visibly (as his words import) I deny his major as false; and to the
contrary assert, that we may have true ground of Christian hope that they shall
be saved, who yet die not visibly in a state of salvation, that is, do not any
thing incurrent into the sense which may show they are in a state of salvation,
as infants born, abortives, still-born, children dying in the womb, natural
fools, phrenetiques: Yea we conceive hopes of the salvation of persons dying
raving, cursing by reason of their disease, destroying themselves, dying
excommunicate justly from the Church, though visibly they are in a state of
damnation* The minor is also false, they that are not visibly of the Church,
may yet be visibly in a state of salvation, as an Indian yet not professing
Christ, nor baptized, being affected with the preaching of Christ's love to man,
so as to lift up his eyes to heaven, knock his breast, listen to the preacher,
weep, kiss the preacher, follow him, keep company with him, etc. this man is
not yet visibly of the Church, yet he is visibly in a state of salvation, and
so dying we have ground of Christian hope that he shall be saved.

But Mr. B. tells us, The major is evident; and confirmed thus: 1. Sound Hope is
guided by judgment, and that judgment must have some evidence to proceed on:
But where there is not so much as a seeming or visibility, there is no
evidence; and therefore there can be no right judgment, and so no grounded
hope.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. does still unskilfully put seeming for seemingness, and
confound it and visibility. 2. Where there is no seeming, there may be
evidence; he should rather have said, Where there is no seeming, there is no
judgment; for where nothing seems to a person, he passes no judgment or
opinion. 3. I presume Mr. B. takes evidence largely for any argument which
shows a thing and not in that strict sense in which it is denied by learned men
that faith has evidence, and in the large sense there may be and is in
innumerable things evidence in which is no visibility, as that corn will be
sown and reaped though we see it not* etc. And in this present argument, Mr. B.
himself a little after reckons up many reasons besides visibility of the state
of salvation, and of the Church, which he makes evidence for a judgment upon
which there is a grounded hope of infants salvation, p^g. 77, 78. as Gods
declarations, promises, etc. And therefore I deny that speech* where there is
not so much as visibility there is no evidence.

2. Says he, Again, to judge a thing to be what it does not any way seem or
appear to be, is (likely actually, but always) virtually and interpretatively a
false judgment: But such a judgment can be no ground for sound hope.

Answ. Yet a man may truly judge that to be which does not visibly appear to be.

2. Says he, The minor is as evident, viz. [that they that are not seemingly
or visibly of the Church, are not seemingly or visibly in a state of
salvation.] For 1. if they that are not of the true Church are not in a state
of salvation, then they that seem not to be of that Church do not so much as
seem to be in a state of salvation: But the antecedent is true; therefore the
consequent The antecedent might be proved from a hundred Texts of Scripture. It
is the body that Christ is the Savior of, and his people that he redeemeth
from their sins, and his sheep to whom he gives eternal life, and those that
sleep in Jesus that God shall bring with him, and the dead in Christ that shall
rise to salvation, and those that die in the Lord that rest from their labors,
and the Church that Christ will preserve pure and unspotted, etc. He that
denies this, is scarce to be disputed with as a Christian: Even they that
thought all should at last be brought out of hell and saved, did think they
should become the Church, and so be saved. The consequence is beyond
questioning.

Answ. 1. Seemingly and visibly are still mis confounded by Mr. B. 2. If the
antecedent be meant of the visible Church (of which alone the conclusion is to
be) then it is denied, and the proofs are all impertinent since they speak not
of the visible Church as visible, but of the invisible.

2. Says he, I next argue thus: If there be no sure ground for faith
concerning the salvation of any out of the Church, then there ^ no sure ground
of hope (for faith and hope are conjunct; we may not hope with a Christian
hope for that we may not believe) But there is no sure ground for such faith:
(they that say there is let them show it if they can) Therefore there is no
sure ground of hope.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. does ill to change the term [ well grounded hope] in his first
syllogism, into [ a sure ground of hope.] For there may be a well grounded
hope of many things, as that God will deliver from death in a battle, provide
in a siege bread, etc. though there be no sure ground of hope cui f^ls^m
subesse non potest, that God will do these things. 2. We have sure ground for
faith concerning the salvation of some out of the visible Church, though not of
all infants of believers. And this we have from Gods declaration of the
election of some not visible churchmembers and consequently of their salvation,
as Isaac and Jacob. Romans 9.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. which is urged by Mr. B. himself
page 78.

3. Says he, Again, if there be no promise in Gods word for the salvation of
any without the visible Church, then there is no ground of our Christian hope
that they shall be saved: But there is no such promise (as I think they will
confess) Therefore there is no ground for any such hope. That Christian hope
must rest upon a word of promise, me thinks should not be denied: It is plain
Romans 15.4, 13. Ephesians. 1.18. and 4.4. Col. 1.5, 23, 27. 2 These. 2.16. 1 Timothy
1.1* Heb. 6.18, 19. Heb. 7.19. 1 Pet. 1.3, 21. and 3.15. Romans 4.18. and 5.2.
Tit. 1.1, 2. Heb 11.1, etc. Ps. 119.43, 74, 147, etc. In natural things we may
have a common natural hope upon natural grounds* But in supernatural things, as
are justification and salvation, we must have the ground of a Divine revelation
to support all true Christian theological hope.

Answ. 1. I deny the consequence of the major, and to Mr. Bs. proofs I answer:
1. There is not one of all the texts that says there is no ground of true
Christian hope but a promise in Gods word, though there are that prove the
promise of God to be a ground of Christian hope: It would be too tedious to
show the impertinency of each of them, it is sufficient to acquaint the Reader
wherein the defect of proof is. 2. We may have the ground of a Divine
revelation to support our hope, as of what God has done, of his attributes and
other declarations, although we have not a promise, which Mr. B. seems too
unskilfully to confound with a Divine revelation which may be the ground of
Christian hope. 2. The minor is not confessed by me to Isaac and Jacob God
promised salvation before they were born, therefore to them without the visible
Church, the like to the Gentiles, to the Jews, Romans 11.26. before they are
called, or in being: to all the elect there is a Covenant or promise in Christ
of salvation, whether they be of the visible Church or not.

4. Says he, Again, if God do add to the Church such as shall be saved, then
we can have no true ground of Christian hope of the salvation of any that are
not added to the Church: But that God does add to the Church such as shall be
saved, is the plain words of Scripture, Acts 2. last. Therefore we have no true
ground of such hope of the salvation of those that are not so added to it. If
any say that the text speaks of the invisible Church. I answer: 1. Then it
would hold of the visible much more for the visible Church is far larger then
the invisible, and contain the invi^^ble in it. 2. But the Text expressly speaks
of the visible Church: For it was such a Church. 1. As were baptized. 2. And as
the 3000. souls were in one day added to; 3. And as continued in the Apostles
doctrine, fellowship, breaking of bread, and prayers; 4. And were together and
had all things common; 5. And sold their possessions and goods, and parted them
to them that needed; 6. And continued daily in the Temple, and breaking bread
from house to house did eat with gladness, etc. 7. And as did praise God and
had favor with all the people. And doubtless this was the visible Church: to
this such as should be saved were added; yet not only such: for many false
teachers and others did after go out from them; and such as Simon Magus were
baptized; and false brethren was one cause of their sufferings. So that I doubt
not but it is clear, that they that deny any infants to be members of the
visible Church, do leave us no true ground for any Christian hope of their
salvation.

Answ. The consequence of the major is denied, and the reason of the denial is
because the speech is not simply convertible, he added to the Church such as
should be saved, therefore all that shall be saved are added to the visible
Church. Yea Mr. B. by confessing that they were not only the saved that were
added to the Church acknowledges the proposition to be particular, some were
added to the Church which should be saved, and this is convertible only thus;
Ergo some that shall be saved were added to the Church, not universal, all
that were added to the Church should be saved. So that we need not betake our
selves to the answer of understanding it of the invisible Church. Nor is there
a necessity to understand it of eternal salvation. For the word being (...) in
the present tense may be translated the saved, that is as v. 40. by
relinquishing of that crooked or perverse generation, and if Beza's conjecture
hold that (...) is put for (...), the reading is to be, and some he daily
added to the Church to be saved. Let the reading be either way, it proves not
that there are none to be saved who are not added to the Church visible. And
indeed such a proposition were false, since it is otherwise in the case of
infants dying in the womb, still born, etc. Mr. Bs. inference, if Acts 2.47.
be meant of the Church invisible then the speech, they that are to be saved
are added to the Church holds much more of the visible, is vain. And the reason
is as vain. For it is uncertain whether the visible Church be far larger then
the invisible, considering the number of dying infants and the uncertainty how
far their election and salvation extends, and though there be many of the
visible Church who are not of the invisible, yet the visible does not contain
the invisible in it, there being many of the invisible Church who are not in
the visible, and therefore it proves not that if they that are saved are of the
invisible then they are much more of the visible. So that however it be that
Mr. B. doubt not of the contrary, I am assured that the denying infants visible
Churchmembership, leaves sufficient ground for Christian hope of their
salvation.

Next, says he, let us consider how far their own arguments will exclude all
hope of the salvation of any infan^. If it were true which Mr. T. so much
stands on, That the only way now appointed by Christ to make Churchmembers,
is by teaching the persons themselves; and that none else may be members of
the visible Church, but those that have learnt: then 1. it will much more
follow that they are not of the invisible, as I have showed; or at least we
are not to judge them to be of the invisible Church at all. 2. And if from
Matthew. 28.20. they may argue, that none but those that are taught are Disciples
and are to be baptized; why may they not as well argue from Mar. 16.16.
[Whosoever believes not shall be damned] that all infants are certainly
damned? wherein lies the difference in these two arguments? Sure the later
seems to me to have more show from Scripture though but little: I dare invite
Mr. T. to prove to me from Scripture that any infants in the world are
justified and sanctified, and try if I shall not in the same way prove that
some infants are members of the visible Church? Or let him answer the argument
from Mar. 16.16. that is brought for their damnation, and see if it will not
afford him also an answer to that from Matt. 28. against their being disciples
and to be baptized.

Answ. 1. He has no where made good this consequence, if infants be not of the
visible Church, it will follow much more they are not of the invisible, or at
least that we are not to judge them to be of the inv^sible Church at all. 2.
It does not follow whosoever believes not shall be damned therefore infants,
because the text it self shows the speech to be limited only to those
unbelievers to whom the Gospel is preached, v. 15. yet it follows none are
disciples and to be baptized but the taught, Matthew. 18.19, ^0. because Christ
first appointed persons to be taught by preaching the Gospel, whom he
appointed to be baptized and ^ccounted disciples. 3. Let Mr. B. take these
arguments and try whether he can prove infants visible Churchmembership from
them. They of whom is the kingdom of heaven are justified and sanctified. But
of some infants is the kingdom of heaven, Ergo. They who are elected to life,
for whom Christ died, are justified and sanctified are they die. But so some
are infants, Ergo. 4. The argument is answered from Mark 16.16. Let M. B. try
how he can answer mine from Matthew. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15, 16. etc. as it is in
the second part of this Review, sect. 5, etc. or as it is in my Praecursor,
sect. 16. page 66. out of his words, which is showed in the 2 d. part of the
Review, sect. 4. page 66, 67. not to be answered by him in his Praefestinantis
morator. He that nullifi^s that argument must make reformation of humane
additions to the worship of God as part of it void.

Mr. B. adds, But why do I expect th^^ when he suspendeth his judgment? If
he mean it of particular infants, it is not home to the question; for so he
must sus^end his judgment concerning the salvation of every particular person,
as certain, seeing he is uncertain of the sincerity of any: And yet I hope he
will not conclude it uncertain whether any man he saved? But if he mean it of
all the species of infants, then I must say he suspendeth much of his faith,
hope and charity; and that doctrine which suspendeth our belief of God and
charity to our own children, shall be none of my Creed.

Answ. The suspension of judgment which in my postscript sect. 4. I said God
would we should have, was concerning the certainty of salvation of all infants
of believers dying in infancy, which was meant of particular infants, to wit
the infants of believers, and it was home to the question between me, and Mr.
M. and Mr. Bl. whether there were such a certainty of salvation of every
believers infant dying so, by virtue of the promise I will be thy God and the
God of thy seed Gen 17.7? There was no such question as Mr. B. would impose on
me, as if I doubted whether any infant should be saved? But this I did and do
still conceive, that there is no promise of salvation to every believers
infants, and therefore we are to suspend our judgment concerning this or that
particular infant, not of all the species of infants as he speaks. And though
I am certain of every believers salvation, yet I am not certain of this or that
professor that he is a sincere believer, and therefore concerning this I am to
suspend any peremptory judgment of science, yet I am not to suspend my judgment
of charity, which yet I am to suspend toward infants, there being no actions
of theirs which may occasion such a judgment. Nor hereby do I suspend any act
of faith, hope or charity which I ought to have toward God or my own children;
and if what I hold be no part of Mr. Bs. Creed, yet it may be part of the Creed
of as holy and learned a man as he is.

He adds, And where he thinks we must take up with that Romans 9.18. He will
have mercy on whom he will have mercy. I answer: 1. This is no other ground of
hope, then of any heathen in America we may entertain. 2. It is no ground of
hope for infants at all: For it neither directly nor indirectly promises any
mercy to them, nor says any more of merry then of hardening: and rather would
afford such disputers an argument against mercy to any infants, because it is
mercy put in opposition to hardening, which infants in that sense are not
capable of.

Answ. I said God would have us to rest on the Apostles determination Romans
9.18. to wit concerning the salvation of all believers infants, and to this I
was induced by the Apostles arguing, v. 11, 12, 13. concerning Jacob and Esau.
But this was not alleged by me as a ground of hope, and therefore though Mr.
Bs. consequences be granted, there is nothing against what I said: which I
think very agreeable with the words of Wickliff, cited as an approved speech by
Mr. B. himself, p. 291. which if he like, he cannot gainsay my speech.

But he says, Yet Mr. T. tells us [there is hope for all this, though not
certain, yet probable and comfortable] and he shows us three grounds for it:
If this be spoken of the species of infants, as if there were no certainty, but
a probability that any of them shall be saved, then I will prove it false and
vile anon: If it be spoken of particular individual infants, then 1. it is as
much as can be said of any men at age; for no other man has any certain, but a
probable hope of their salvation.

Answ. I have often said, I mean it not of the species, but the individual
infants of believers, and I appeal to Mr. B. himself whether he do not say as I
say, Plain Scripture, etc. page 316. in those words: Though yet for my own
opinion, I have resolved no further then this, that we are to judge the
remission, justification, and salvation of particular infants of true believers
mo^^ probable, till the contrary appear by them; and for the full certainty, I
leave it as to me uncertain. If we have but a probable hope of the salvation of
men at age, it is no absurdity, in my apprehension, to say we have but probable
hope of their salvation; yet we have a greater degree of probability in our
hopes of the salvation of such as have in appearance spent their lives in a
holy course, then of infants so dying.

2. Says he, It is as much as I desire; for if their salvation be probable,
then they are visibly or seemingly, or to our judgment in a state of
salvation, and so must needs be visible members of the Church. How dare Mr. T.
refuse to take those for visible Churchmembers, whose salvation is probable,
when he has no more but probability of the salvation of the best man in the
world.

Answ. 1. I have often told Mr. B. that to be seemingly, or to our judgment in
a state of salvation, is not all one as to be such visibly, and that such may
be no visible Churchmembers whose salvation is seeming or probable to our
judgment. 2. Though I have but probability of the salvation of the best man in
the world, yet I have a certainty of his profession, by which I take him to be
a visible Churchmember, and not by the probability of his salvation; and this I
dare do, and I wonder how Mr. B. against the current of all the N. T. dare do
otherwise.

3. But, says he, does not this contradict what went before? And I wish he do
not contradict it again in his proofs. His first proof of the probability, is
from some general indefinite promises; but what these promises are, he tells us,
Apol. page 64. By general and indefinite promises be means such as determine
not the kind of good promised, nor the particular person; and therefore are
true, if performed to any person in any sort of good; and conditional upon
condition of faith and obedience. Answ. 1. If it determine not the kind of good
formally nor virtually, nor contain it generically; then how does it make it
probable? 2. And if it neither determine the person, nor give (...) ground to
determine, how then does it become probable to that person? 3. And how then can
that promise give hopes to the faithful of the salvation of their infants,
which is verified, if performed to any person in any sort of good? as if it
were but to one infant in a nation in reprieving him a day from damnation? If
it intend more then this, then it is not verified or fulfilled in this much; if
it intend no more, then how does it make their salvation probable? 4. And sure
the conditional promises which he mentions, requiring faith and repentance,
are little to the benefit of infants, if these conditions are required of
themselves in their infancy. And for his other two grounds of hope, viz. the
favor of God to the parents, and experience, they are comfortable helps to
second the promise; but of themselves without a word, would give us no ground
of Christian hope in such matters as justification and salvation are.

Answ. I perceive no contradiction in my words. 1. By putting in those words [
nor contain it generically] he intimates as if I had denied the promises I
mention to contain generically the good of justification and salvation; whereas
I termed the promises expressly general, and cited Psalm. 103.17, 18. Psalm.
112.^, etc. which mention Gods righteousness and blessedness, and so may
comprehend eternal righteousness and blessedness, and thereby the justification
and salvation of infants becomes probable, though it be not certain, since Gods
righteousness and blessedness may be conferred in another kind. As if a rich
King promise money to a man's children, it is probable he will give them gold,
thou^h it be not certain. 2. Though the particular person be not determined,
yet since the qualification of the person is expressed to be the generation of
the righteous, it is probable that it is meant of each* till the contrary
appears; as if a man promise to make such a man's children heirs, this is
probable of every one till it appear otherwise, and yet not certain. 3. I have
showed how, especially if we consider that favors are wont to be amplified to
the most. Though Gods intentions are not fulfilled perhaps with so little, yet
the words may be verified if no more but temporal blessedness be given. 4. The
conditional promises I confess give us but slender hope of infants by
themselves; yet with general indefinite promises, declarations of Gods favor
to his people, and experience, they yield a strong ground of hope of the
justification and salvation of infants of believers, though not certain and
sure, as Mr. B. would have, but how short he is in proof will appear in that
which follows.

SECT. LXXIIII. Mr. Bs. allegations, p. 76, 77, 78. show not a stronger ground
of hope of infants salvation, so dying, then mine: His 23d. Arg. chapter 28. his
25th. chapter 30. are answered.
HE tells us, That he has a stronger probabilty then I mention, of the
salvation of all the infants of the faithful, so dying, and a certainty of the
salvation of some, in that God admitted them visible members of his Church. For
Christ is the Savior of his body, and he present his Church cleansed and
unspotted to the Father: And if God will have them to be visible members of his
Church, then he would have us take or judge them to be members of it: And
withal, there is less danger of mistake in them, then in men at years; because
they do not dissemble, nor hide any hypocritical intents under the vizor of
profession, as they may do. And it is certain also, that if God would have some
and many to be of the true body of Christ, and so be saved, then he would not
have all to be visibly out of that body. That he would have have them
churchmembers is proved, and shall be, God willing, yet more. If God add to the
Church such as shall be saved, then there is a strong probability of their
salvation whom he adds to the Church.

Answ. Mr. B. here, p. 74. in his arguments 2d. and 3d. intimated that he
asserted a sure ground for faith concerning the salvation of believers infants
so dying, and that to be a promise in the word of the salvation of those within
the visible Church; and here he asserts a stronger probability then I mention
of the salvation of all the infants of the faithful so dying, and a certainty
of the salvation of some, in that God admits them visible members of his
Church. Yet page 78. he dares not say there is a full certainty of the salvation
of all believers infants so dying: Yea, page 110. he says, Romans 9.8. the
Apostle pleads that salvation is not by the Covenant tied to all Abraham's
seed. Out of which I infer, 1. That Mr. B. has no sure ground for faith, to
wit, a promise in the word concerning the salvation of all the infants of
believers so dying. For the Apostle pleads, that salvation is not by Covenant
tied to all Abraham's seed, and if not to Abraham's, then to none else; and the
certainty of the salvation of some is acknowledged by me as well as by him. And
sure if the Covenant assure not salvation to all, and neither it nor any other
revelation of God tell us salvation belongs to this infant of such a believer
or to that, there is no certainty concerning the salvation of this or that
particular infant of a believer dying, nor is there a sure ground for faith
concerning it, nor is the hope of it certain, and we are to suspend our
judgment concerning it, which Mr. B. carp^ at so much in me to make me and the
truth I hold odious, which is almost all the work he does (for he proves
nothing he says in opposition to what I hold) and though his speeches are
inconsistent, yet when he sets down his opinion he agrees with me, that he
dares not say there is a full certainty of the salvation of all believers
infants; nor dare he I think say, that he is certain of any one believer on
earth his infant dying, that he is saved. 2. That he has a stronger
probability then I mention of the salvation of all the infants of believers so
dying, in that God admits them visible members of his Church, is said by
him: But 1. he shows not what degree of probability I deny which he asserts: 2.
I never opposed the strongest probability Mr. B. asserts, only I declared my
self unsatisfied concerning the certainty, which Mr. B. dares not assert: 3.
That God has admi^ted them visible members of his Church Christian, is not yet
proved by Mr. B. nor ever will be: 4. If he had, yet this proves the certainty
of the salvation of none now existent; for the speeches, Ephesians. 5.23, 27. must
be understood of the Church which is so visible, that it be also the invisible.
Now though it be certain, that some visible Churchmembers are saved* yet it is
neither certain that all, or any visible Churchmembers or Churches now existent
shall be saved, and therefore no more then a probability of the salvation of
all or some infants of believers now existent can be inferred, though their
visible Churchmembership were granted. As for the strength of the probability,
I stick not to grant it as strong as he would have it, so that he assert not a
certainty. And therefore, did not Mr. B. mind to pick a quarrel with me, and to
affright people from my doctrine, this Chapter of Mr. B. might have been spared.

Yet Mr. B. adds. And the promises to them are fuller then Mr. T. expresses,
and give us stronger ground of hope. 1. God has, as I have proved, assured
that he will be merciful to them in the general, and that in opposition to the
seed of the wicked, on whom he will visit their Fathers sins: Now this gives a
strong ground of hope that he will save them. For if the Judge or King say, I
will hang such a traitor, but I will be merciful to such a one, it is an
intimation that he means not to hang him. If your friend promise to be good
to you and merciful, you dare confidently hope he means not to destroy you.

Answ. This proves not Gods promises any fuller then I express, for those I
allege not excluding but including in an etc. this, are as full as this, Exodus
20.6. Nor does this give a stronger ground of hope then I do, who yield as much
as Mr. B. infers, though I like not Mr. Bs. instance, which intimates that God
should say, I will damn the children of the wicked to the 3d. and 4th.
generation, v. 5. and save the children of them that love me to a thousand
generations.

He adds. 2. God says (as I have showed) that the seed of the righteous is
blessed. Now is not that a strong ground of hope, that so dying, they shall not
be damned? It is not likely that God would call them blessed whom he will damn
eternally, after a few days or hours life in a state of infancy, which is
capable of little sense of blessedness here.

Answ. What mercy is meant, Exodus 20.6. and what blessedness, Psalm 37.26. has
been considered before, and thence it may appear, that a certainty of salvation
to all infants of believers, or to any definitely now existent cannot be
inferred. Yet I oppose not the inferring thence a strong ground of hope.
Nevertheless that God should call them blessed in a sort and yet damn them, is
no inconsistency, nor does it appear much less likely then that he should
reprobate Esau before he was born or had done good or evil, Romans 9.11, 12, 13.

3. God ( says Mr. B.) enters Covenant to be their God, and to take them for
a peculiar people to himself, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12, 13. And this gives strong hope
of their salvation. For as if the ^ing promise to be your King, and to take
you for his s^bject, it is likely he intends all the benefits of Kingly
government to you: or if a man promise a woman to be her husband, it is likely
that he intends to do the office of a husband: And so when God promises to
be their God.

Answ. Though I yield that there is ground for a strong hope o^ the salvation
of infants of Christian believers so dying, yet in the text cited there is
nothing to that purpose. For 1. that Covenant was made only with the people of
Israel, and was a peculiar Covenant with that nation. 2. For the Covenant was
of Gods being God to them while they owned him, and kept his Commandments and
so was conditional. So that thi^ Covenant is not a Covenant with every believer
and his issue, nor did Gods promise to be their God assure the salvation of
all the Israelites infants so dying, much less the salvation of infants of
Christian believers, to whom all the promises in the new Covenant are personal,
none that I remember national or domestical as were to the Jews.

4. Says he, And Paul 1 These. 4.13. would not have the faithful mourn for
the dead as those that are without hope: now what dead are these? And what hope
is it? 1. He says the dead in general, which will not stand with the
exclusion of the whole species of infants. 2. He speaks of those dead for whom
they were apt to mourn. And will not parents mourn for their children? And for
hope, it is evidently the hope of resurrection to life. For resurrection to
damnation is not a thing to be hoped for. This seems plain to me.

Answ. though I oppose not a strong hope of the salvation of believers infants
so dying, yet to show how vainly he talks of his showing more for it then I do,
the reader may take notice, that if the Apostle be interpreted of the hope of
the resurrection to life of the dead in general and those they were apt to
mourn for, as Mr. Bs. arguing intimates his mind to be, then the Apostle would
have them hope for the resurrection to life not only of the infants of
believers so dying, but also of their ripe aged children though infidels and
profane, yea for their wives, kindred, neighbors, servants; whereas the
Apostles speech is plainly meant only of them that are believers, who as they
are said v. 1^. to sleep so v. 14. to sleep in Jesus, whom God will bring with
Jesus, v. 16. dead in Christ, that is for Christ* ^. M. Mede conceivs, applying
at peculiarly to the martyrs, or as most (...) faith of Christ, such as shall
be for ever with the Lord, v. 17. From (...) with many other instances in his
writings it may appear how (...) superficially Mr. B. opens and infers from
texts of Scrip^u^

5. Says Mr. B. David comfort himself concerning his dead child, because
he should go to the child, but the child should not return to him. To say that
this was only that he should be buried with it, is to make David too like a
Pagan rather then a Christian: However it seems he was confident that he
should not be damned: or else he would not say, I shall go to him. And to say
David knew his salvation as a Prophet, is a groundless fiction that cannot be
proved: Prophets knew not all things, not ordinarily things of another world by
such revelation. Therefore what ever ground of hope David had, other faithful
parents have the like.

Answ 2. That David in those words 2 Samuel 12.22, 23. did express any ground of
hope of the salvation of his child, and that thereby he comforted himself
concerning his dead child, is more then I think can be evinced from the text.
Rendering a reason of his not fasting any longer, he does not allege any
thing concerning the happiness of the child, but the bootlesness of h^s
praying and fasting since the childs life could not be recovered. And the
whole speech considered, the words import no more then this, can I bring him
back again to life? I shall go to him, that is to the state of the dead, as
counterfeit Samuel is brought in, saying 1 Samuel 28.19. To morrow thou shall be
with me, that is dead as I am, and as Jacob said Genesis 37.35. He should go
down to his son into the grave, or state of the dead. And in these speeches
though no more were meant, yet there is nothing that relisheth of Paganism, not
so much as other speeches seem to do, Psalm. 6.5. Psalm. 30.9. Isai. 38.18, 19.
Job 14, 7, 8, 9, 10, 14. For though they the express not the expectation of the
resurrection or the present estate of happiness, yet it was not because they
believed it not, but because it was sufficient to give a reason of his present
action, in which he gives first an account of what he did before, he fasted
and wept while the child was alive, for he said, who can tell whether God
will be gracious to me that the child may live? In which words if we may
argue after Mr. Bs. mode, we may as well say he was too like a Pagan rather
then a Christian, since he mentions no prayer for his childs happiness, but
his natural life. 2. An account of his not fasting, because God had frustrated
the end of his prayer and fasting. And yet in both he showed* faith in GOD, in
his prayer acknowledging GOD the author of life and death, and in the other
the sentence of death passed on himself, and his acquiescence in Gods will
concerning both. All which he understood as one acquainted with GOD and his
word. So that we need not assert that David knew the happiness of his child
by special revelation, since he expresses not any thing of it. And if he did,
yet he might speak this not as an assured thing, but as probably hoped for,
and yet not upon common grounds to all believers, but out of special favor to
him (of which he had more then common experience) and Gods wont of hearing his
prayers. So that yet Mr. B. has brought no stronger grounds of probability of
the salvation of all believers infants so dying, then I have done
notwithstanding his cracks. Let Us view the rest.

6. Says he, Again, if there were not far more hope of their salvation,
then fear of their damnation; it would never be said, That children are an
heritage of the Lord* and the fruit of the womb is his reward; And the man
blessed that has his quiver full of them, Psalm. 127.3, 4, 5.

Answ. 1. Mr. B. pretended to show a stronger probability of the salvation of
the infants of believers then I have done, but wherein does he exceed me in
his assertion in this place or his proof? Did I ever say there is less hope of
their salvation, then fear of their damnation? If I did not, why does he
suggest as if in this conclusion he asserted more then I do? If I have said
so, let him show it, or else let him be taken for what he is, a calumniator.
2. For his proof, would any man allege this text to prove more hope of
salvation of infants of believers then their damnation, if he had any heed to
what he writes? when the text expressly makes the blessedness of the man has
many children to be not at all in this place, in reference to hope of the
salvation of the children* but in reference to his own safety and protection by
his children, who may oppose enemies, and be as arrows or weapons to drive
them back, or as helps to right his wrongs, and to embolden him to contend with
them in the gate, which was counted a great blessing then, and agreeable to the
promises of the legal Covenant, as Deuteronomy. 28. Psalm. 144.12, 15, etc. may be
seen. But this is not meant of infants but of such as were grown up and able to
defend their parents, and chiefly if not only of males, nor is the man said to
be blessed by reason of the goodliness of them, but the multitude of them, and
they are said to be an heritage as the land of Canaan, Psalm. 1^6.21, 22. and
his reward whether for their observing his law, or for other reason, such as
for which Nebuchadnezzar was rewarded with Egypt, Ezekiel. 29.18, 19, 20. or as
Psalm. 137.8, 9. or as reward taken Catachrestically for any gift. Be it meant
of true believers (though no words in the text evince it) yet the children are
said to be their heritage and reward not Gods heritage, nor is there any
intimation of happiness to the child, and therefore not a word intimating more
hope o^ their salvation then fear of their damnation, but of outward benefit to
the parent such as may be common to infidels with believers, and consequently
not a word for a strong ground of hope of the salvation of believers infants so
dying, much l^ss more then I bring to that purpose.

7. Says Mr. B. And why should children be joined in standing Church
ordinances, as prayer, fasting, etc. if there were not strong hope of the
blessing of these ordinances to them? 2 Chronicles. 20.13. The children that suck
the breast were to be gathered to the solemn fast, Joel 2, 16. (this will
prove them also standing Churchmembers, seeing they must join in standing
ordinances;) so why received they circumcision* a seal of the righteousness of
faith, if there were not strong probability that they had the thing sealed and
signified? God will not fail his own ordinance where men fail not.

Answ. There Is nothing here endeavored to be proved but what I have also
granted, that there is a strong probability that infants of believers so dying
are justified and saved, and yet I see no strength in these allegations to
prove it. For though the little ones and sucking children were to be present
to show an universal humiliation, as did the beasts also, Jonah 3.8. yet the
infants did not join in prayer, nor was the end of their presence any special
blessing of the Ordinance to them, but the moving GOD to spare the whole
people, invaded or in danger of perishing by fami^e, nor were the prayer and
fasting standing Church-ordinances, any more then the Covenanting Deuteronomy. ^9.
Nehem. 9. but occasional, nor does this presenting of infants prove them
standing Churchmembers any more then the like Jonah 3.8 proves those infants,
or the Ninivites beasts standing Churchmembers. As for Cir^umcision, that
infants received Circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of faith, is no
where in Scripture affirmed; and how much Paedobaptists are mistaken in their
inference of the nature of Sacraments in general, or Circumc^si^n in special,
from Rom: 4.11. has been often showed before Sect. 31, etc. The ends of
Circumcising of infants, was to distinguish the Hebrews from other people, and
to fore-signifie from what people CHRIST was to come, and to engage them to
observe the Law of Moses which they were to receive by reason of Gods command
whether they hoped for their childrens salvation, or not, Abraham was to
circumcise Ishmael, though he knew he was not a child of the promise, and
Isaac Esau, though he were rejected by God. The speech God will not fail his
own ordinance where men fail not, is like the Popish Schoolmens conceit, that
Sacraments confer grace where no bar is put, and intimates that Circumcision
was Gods o^dinance to assure at least rigteousness of faith to each infant
circumcised, which is a false conceit.

8. Says Mr. B. Why else does God so often compare his love to that of a mother
or father to the child? 1 These. 2.7. Number. 11, 12. Isa. 49.15. Psalm. 103.13.

Answ. Though I grant a strong probality of the salvation of believers infants
so dying, yet to show the vanity of Mr. Bs. scriblings, as if he brought more
for it then I do, I cannot but observe the slighty dealing of Mr. B. in this
point. For first, whereas he alleges these texts as if GOD did therein
compare his love to that of a mother or father to the child, in the first Paul
(not God) compares himself to a nurse; in the second, Moses speaks of himself
as if God had put an impossible burden on him, as if he could as a nursing
father bears his sucking child, carry all that people to the promised land. In
the third, God says he, would not forget Sion, who had said he had forgotten
them, though a mother should forget her sucking child; and Psalm. 103.13. the
love of God as a father is spoken of them that fear him. So that the two first
texts were through heedlesness mis-alledged grossly by him, the other two
express Gods love only to his obedient and seeking people, mention nothing of
his love to their infants. 2. God does compare his love to a Fathers or Mothers
not because he is engaged to believers infants to save them, nor because he
has natural affection as they have, but to show his gracious care and dealing
toward his elect children. 3. Gods love is no more comp^red to a believing
parents love, then to an unbelievers; and therefore if this prove a strong
probability of the salvation of a believers infant so dying, it does prove the
salvation of an unbelievers as prob^ble. 4. Gods love and care is compared to
an Eagles in carrying her young ones, Deuteronomy. 32.11, 12. Christ's to an He^,
Matthew. 23.37. According to Mr. Bs. reasoning, thi^ should prove then the strong
probability of the salvation of Chickens. But I am ashamed that the world
should see the nakedness of these magnified reasonings, though I be
necessitated to uncover it.

The 9th. from Matthew. 19.14. is no more then I have alleged often for those
infants; and what Mr. B. here alleges to prove this a right of other infants,
is answered at large in the second part of this Review, sect. 17.

10. Says he, We read of some that have been sanctified from the womb, and
therefore were in a state of salvation; and Jacob was loved before he was born,
and therefore before he had done good or evil was in the like state of
salvation.

Answ. Have not I also granted this thing, and that upon the same reasons? Why
then does Mr. B. suggest, to draw part is hearts from me to him, as if he said
more in this then my self? Yet I cannot be very confident of the reason from
Jerem 1.15. to which Gal. 1.^5. is parallel, since the sanctification was to the
office of a Prophet, which is appliable to infants so dying.

11. We find promises of salvation to whole households, where it is probable
there were infants, Act. 16.34.

Answ. 1. Acts 16.31. is no probability that infants should be meant, since in
the next v. it is said, he spoke the word to all that were in his house, which
is not to be said of infants; and v. 34. he rejoiced with all his house,
believing God. 2. If they should, yet this can be no more then a particular
promise to him, unless this were true, that God will save every believer and
his house* And Mr. B. over l^sheth in saying, we find promises of salvation
made to whole households* when there is no more but this one.

The 12th. is from 1 Cor. 7.14. and it is built on Mr. Bs. interpretation of [
holy] as if it noted a separation to God as a peculiar people. But I have fully
answered Mr* Bs. 29th* chapter and have showed his mistake in the first part of
this Review, sect. 22, etc. and need to answer no more in this place.

Mr. B. goes on thus. It cannot be said, that these promises are verified
according to their sense, if any mercy be given to any infant: Here the persons
are determined, that is, all the seed of the faithful; and we have large
ground given probably to conclude, that it is eternal mercy that is intended to
all that living to age do not again reject it, but that either at age keep
Covenant, or die in infancy before they break it. And we have certain ground to
conclude, that this salvation belongs to some infants, and visible
Churchmembership to all the seed of the faithful. And I think this is more
then Mr. T. does acknowledge them.

Answ. It is indeed, finding the argumen^s frivolous which Mr. B. has brought
for the visible Churchmembership of infants, though I acknowledge salvation
belongs to some infants. It is before showed how the promises may be verified
according to the sense of the words if any sort of mercy be given to any
children of the faithful: Nor is it true, that in the promises brought by Mr.
B. the persons are determined to be all the seed of the faithful, and how the
contrary is determined by the Apostle, Romans 9.7, 8. according to Mr. B.
himself, is showed before, and what reason there is to understand Exodus 20.6.
of temporal mercies, is showed above; so that here is nothing new to be
answered.

He adds, If that Matthew. 18.10. be well considered, it may make another
argument full to the point. If little ones have their Angels beholding the face
of God in heaven, they shall be saved: For that is a mercy proper to the people
of God. And that the Text speaks of infants, others have fully proved.

Answ. I grant the conclusion and argument, but deny that it is at all to the
point in question between us, and that any one has proved that by little ones,
Matthew. 18.10. are meant infants. Though the contrary be proved concerning
Matthew. 18.5, 6. in the second part of this Review, sect. 15. where Mr. Bl. and
Mr. C. are answered: Yet to show the frovolousness of Mr. Bs. talk, I add 1.
that Matthew. 18.10. cannot be expounded one of these little infants; for such a
speech would show that then there were more little infants before them: But it
appears from v. 2, 4. there was but one set before them. 2. From v. 14, 11. the
little ones were such as Christ came to save, and that it was Gods will none
should perish: But this is true only of the elect and true believers, not
simply of infants as such. 3. The words following, v. 15, etc. show they are
meant of a sinning brother, ergo, not of infants.

Mr. B. adds. That though he dare not say there is a full certainty of the
savation of all believers infants so dying, yet he professes to think it
better grounded then mine, who (he says) shut them out of the Church. But this
I take to be and effect of that antipathy he has against me, who still
chooses that opinion which is most opposite to me, and prefers it; as p. 141.
the opinion of the old and new Socinians, who take away an ordinance, and whom
he censures page 24. as above obedience, and so Gods; and the opinion of
baptizers in infancy and at age too, page 143. and professes he would have
nothing to do with me when I offered assistancce to him in another point, as if
he were like Maldovat the Jesuit that could have liked an interpretation had
it not been Calvin's. But I leave him to the Lord to judge him and me, and do
not despair but that he may yet live to see his error, and perhaps wish he had
been better advised then so disdainfully to have rejected a friends offer.

He says, He would urge another argument here from the universality of
redemption, Christ dying for all, for every man, for the sins of the whole
world, as the Scripture speaks; but that it would require more time to
explain himself in it then he could then spare. However he thinks no man should
deny that Christ died for every sort of men, and every age, and so for some
infants. To which I reply, Did he ever hear me deny it? And if he did not, why
does he talk of proving it here where he disputes against me? But he is willing
to pick what quarrels he can with me. However when he intends to urge this
argument, I hope I shall be provided to answer it, if it oppose my thesis. That
the Scripture says Christ died for every man, for the sins of the whole world,
is more then I find: If I mistake him not, his Universal redemption he holds is
conditional only, which I think to be a fiction, redemption and election in
Scripture being absolute in respect of persons, and commensurate, redemption
being as well from impenitency and unbelief as damnation: Yet were it granted
him, that he should thence infer, not the salvation of all, but of believers
infants so dying and never performing the condition, is yet a Riddle to me; and
I cannot yet imagine it to be any better then a sick-mans dream in Mr. B.

Chapter 28. He urges his 23d. arg. from Christ's being head of the visible Church
in infancy, that infants may be members; which I deny not: Nor is it the thing
in question what they may be, but what they are. But this argument is answered
before, sect. 57. And what he says here out of Irenaeus, proves not what he
would infer, That Irenaeus took them for visible Churchmembers, because he
says, Christ by the example of his age sanctifies them. For every one
sanctified by Christ is not a visible Churchmember: Mr. B. says before, page
78. we read of some that have been sanctified from the womb, were they visible
Churchmembers in the womb? I know no absurdity in it to assert that Christ was
head of the Church when an infant, and worshipped as such, and yet no infants
should be visible Churchmembers. Mr. Bs. persuasion that they know not Gods
will that think otherwise then he does, is but an effect of his fond affection
to his own brats. And yet when he himself says, page 62. I confess it is
disputable whether Christ were ever a Churchmember properly, he should not be
very confident in asserting Christ in infancy to have been head of the visible
Church. And for Irenaeus his speech, it is so false, that were not Mr. B.
willing to catch at any shadow for his purpose, he would have concealed it.

Mr. Bs. 29th. chapter and 24th. argument, is answered at large in the first part
of this Review, sect. 22, etc.

Chapter 30. He tells us, that his 25 th. arg. is probable at least, that the
Scripture does frequently and plainly tell us of the ceasing of Circumcision;
but never speaks one word of the ceasing of infants visible Churchmembership,
therefore we are not to judge that it is ceased. That the antecedent or minor
in this argument is false, is proved at large, sect. 50, 51, 52. The
consequence is showed to be invalid, in that other things of which the
cessation is certain, as the freeing of servants, the dedication of the first
born, are ceased, and yet not expressed so much in Scripture as that of
Churchmembership. To this says Mr. B. The year of Jubilee was one of their
Sabbaths, and so a type, Col. 2.17. But I reply, Though the year of Jubilee were
a Sabbath, yet this proves not that freeing servants then is any more said to
be ceased then infants visible Churchmembership. 2. Says he, The dedication of
the firstborn was evidently a type of Christ, and the Church under him: Of
both these many Scriptures are plain But let it be proved, that the admitting
of infants into the visible Church is a mere type, or a mere judicial law
proper to the Jewish Commonwealth, any more then the admitting of men or women
into the Church. I reply, 1. Admitting of infants into the visible Church, was
no other then by their circumcising or presenting at the Temple; and these are
ceased, as proper to the Jewish Church or Commonwealth. 2. A thing may cease
though we cannot prove it a mere type, nor a mere judicial law, as the
receiving tithes, and paying them; and things may remain though they were
t^pes, as mount Sion, the land of Canaan, the people of Israel, which were
types, Heb. 12.22. Gal. 6.6. etc. 3. That the Jewish infant Churchmembership
was not by a law, but by a fact of providence which took in the whole people of
the Jews into the Church visible Jewish, and consequently the infants as part
of that people; which by the breaking off that people, and taking into the
Church only believers, is now ceased, as is showed before, sect 50, 51, 52, 64.

What Mr. B. adds, If all Nations should have become Churchmembers they should
have been circumcised, and then it had not been peculiar to the Jews; and that
Sichemites being circumcised would not have been subje^t to Jacob, and that
when in Esthers time the people of the land became Jews, they were not of the
Jewish Commonwealth, and under their Civil government; is answered before,
sect. 54.

That which he says, p. 108. That he has sufficiently proved that infants
ought to be admitted visible Churchmembers, has so little truth, that if the
Reader observe it, he shall find sca^ce any of his arguments so much as to
conclude the admission of infants into the visible Church, much less to prove
it, but that they are visible Churchmembers. Whereby it is evident now (which I
could not observe in the Dispute) that Mr. B. did leave the point to be proved,
that infants ought to be admitted visible Churchmembers; and prosecuted another
point instead of it, that they are visible Churchmembers. But enough is done in
answer to that also, which I pray the Lord to bless for the undeceiving of the
people of these nations who have been so shamefully misled by Mr. Bs. toy of an
ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed, no where extant, that
were they not either willing to be deceived, o^ left to error by God for their
want of love to the truth, they could hardly have been deluded by such vain
arguing as he has vented.

SECT. LXXV. My Arguments to prove the ingraffing Romans 11.17. to be into the
invisible Church by giving faith, are vindicated from Mr. Bls. exceptions Vind.
^aed. chap. 38. and Mr. Sidenham's Exercit. chap. 8, 9.
ALthough Mr. Bls. manner of disputing has been showed to be such as requires
not any full answer, and would learned men compare, as men that sought truth,
mine and his writings together, they would perceive the insufficiency of his
reply, yet because I perceive some learned men do yet value his writings
(without good reason) which oppose mine, I shall add somewhat more to show how
short his writings are of weakening any thing of mine.

Vindic. ^aed. chapter ^8. sect. 1. Having made an analasis of part of Romans 11.
from v. 16. he takes on him to ground several undeniable positions. The third
is the root of this tree (viz. the first supreme universal root) is Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob, not Abraham alone so Ishmaelites would be of the body. Nor
Abraham with Isaac alone, so the Edomites from Esau would have been taken in.
But the Apostle in this Chapter (from Old Testament authority) excludes both of
these, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob are therefore jointly the root.

Answ. 1. That Abraham only is the root meant Romans 11.16, 17, 18. I prove from
Romans 4.11, 12, 16. where Abraham only and no other of the Patriarchs is termed
the Father of believers. But to be the root Romans 11.16, 17, 18. is all one
with the Father of believers. That the root notes a Father Mr. Bl yields, that
it notes not barely a natural father, is proved in that the Gentiles should not
be in that root, if it not^d barely a natural father, and that believers only
are branches of that root is proved from the text. 1. In that their standing is
by faith. 2. That by unbelief some were broken off, verse. 20. which do plainly
prove that they who were branches were believers, who were unbelievers were not
branches. 3. That the partaking of the root could be no otherwise then by
faith, nor any other way ingraffing can be meant is manifest* in that the
Gentiles (who had no other relation to Abraham as a father then by believing as
he did) partake of the root and are ingraffed into the Olive. Secondly, To
Master Bls. Argument, I answer by denying that the Apostle does in that Chapter
or any other exclude the Ismaelites or Edomites from the body. Job, and other
believing Edomites were in the root and Olive. Yea if it were meant of the
visible Church and natural descent, Ishmael and Esau must be of the body who
were of Abraham by natural descent and circumcised, and so visible
Churchmembers. If Mr. Bl. deny they were in the body, because they were not of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, by this reason Isaac and Jacob should be excluded.
For they were not from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: they were not from themselves
and yet were branches, and consequently they were not the root, but Abraham
alone, the root noting such a Father as from whom all branches have descent.

His fifth position is, the fatness of this tree is the glory of ordinances, of
which the whole Church partakes. Answ. By ordinances he means outward
ordinances, as Baptism, the Lords Supper, preaching the word, etc. By the whole
Church he means the Church visible. For that is his tenet all along, that the
olive tree is the Church visible, not the inv^sible. This is then Mr. Bls.
position, that when it is said Romans 11.17. and wast partaker together of the
root and fatness of the olive tree, the meaning is, thou Gentile Church or
believer art made partaker of outward ordinances of which the whole Church
partakes. Now under the whole visible Church he undoubtedly comprehends
infants, and sure there is no ordinance of which infants are partakers
according to Mr. Bls. tenet but Baptism, so that then the Apostle according to
Mr. Bls. exposition, should mean no more by the fatness of the tree, of which
the whole Church partakes, but Baptism. Which is of it self so manifestly
frivolous an exposition, as that I shall not need of set purpose to refute it.
Though, it is true, there is a glory and beauty in the ordinances of the new
Testament: Yet first some of them, as the preaching of the Gospel (which is the
most glorious) those that are out of the visible Church may partake of, and
those which Mr. Bl. counts within may not partake of, I mean infants and some
others. Secondly, that fatness which is meant Romans 11.17. passes from the root
to the tree, and thence to the branches, and therefore he that is said to be
partaker of the fatness of the olive tree, is first said to be partaker of the
root, but be the root Abraham or as Mr. Bl. would have it Isaac and Jacob with
him ordinances pass not from them. It is true Circumcision was first begun in
Abraham, but all the rest of the Jewish ordinances are according to Scripture
rather derived from Moses then Abraham, and to say they were partakers of the
root, that is of Circumcision (which was the only ordinance Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob did partake of) is both false, for they were not circumcised; and being
so empty a thing as that it is termed with all the Jewish ordinances, a shadow
Col. 2.17. Heb. 10.1. it had no glory then at all. And for Baptism, the Lords
Supper, etc. they passed not from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; nor were they
partakers of them, but were instituted by Christ in the New Testament. Thirdly,
the partaking of the root and fatness of the olive tree was by the ingraffing
and consequent of it. But the ingraffing according to Mr. Bl. does not make
them partakers of outward ordinances. For the chief of ordinances, to wit, the
preaching of the Gospel, was the instrument of their ingraffing, as his own
allegation shows page 278. from Acts 11.21. and so was antecedent to the
ingraffing, nor by the ingraffing were they partakers of the other outward
ordinances. For though the heart were wrought to a professed subjection to the
way of God in ordinances (which is Mr. Bls. ingraffing) and so ingraffed. Yet
they might be never partakers of outward ordinances such as Baptism and the
Lords Supper, if either sickness or death prevented the administration or want
of an administratour, or the elements, etc. hindered. Fourthly, the fatness of
the olive tree makes the partakers fresh and fruitful. But that is not outward
ordinances, but the spirit of God, righteousness by faith, etc. of which I
shall speak more in vindicating my fourth argument.

Mr. Bl. says farther, That the holiness Romans 11.16. is such as is
communicable from parent to child, that is, necessarily communicated, as a
root communicates to branches. This is so plain, that if it be denied all the
Apostles dispute falls.

Answ. It is true, that if the holiness be not communicated from Abraham to
all his children by faith, who are believers as he was, the Apostles dispute
falls, but the Apostles dispute holds though it be not communicated to every
child of every believing father, which is Mr. Bls. conceit, as his following
words show. Yea hence is a good argument to prove the holiness not to be meant
of mere visible Churchmembership, nor the root of every parent professing
faith, because many of their children are never Christian visible
Churchmembers, as experience abundantly proves, and so have not this holiness
communicated to them. Yea, Mr. Bl. says, who knows not that holy fathers have
unholy children? regenerate parents have issue unregenerate? I may add,
abortives, natural fools, still-born, bred up in Mahometanism, renegado's,
unbaptised, excommunicated, and consequently not visible Churchmembers or
federally holy. And it is most false in this holiness of visible
Churchmembership, or as Mr. Bl. calls it federal that the proposition holds, as
is the Father so is the child, the Father being without the child is without;
the Father being within the child is within in regard of Church estate,
Covenant holiness, eo nomine, because a branch of such a root, a child of such
a Father; which Mr. Bl. dictates here, but proves not, and has been often
refuted by me, nor is there any thing in Romans 11.16. for it. Yea Mr. Bls. own
interpretation overthrowes this position. For if the root be (as his position
is) Abraham, Isaac and Jacob] then it is not every believing Father, and if the
root be every believing Father then all the branches of the tree are natural,
and they derive their holiness by descent of nature, whereas it is plain from
the text (and Mr. Bls. fourth position is to the same purpose) that the Jews
only are natural branches, the Gentiles are all ingraffed branches.

Mr. Cuthbert Sidenham in his exercit. chapter 8. takes upon him to demonstrate
holiness and Churchmembership of the children of believing Gentiles from Romans
11.15, 16, 17. and to answer my arguments chapter 9. Against my opinion of the
ingraffing into the invisible Church he urges, then persons may be broken off
from the invisible Church, and takes notice of my answer in my Examen p. 64.
but says nothing to my answer in my Apology p. 76. though he could not but
know of it, taking on him to answer my arguments in the next pages before. The
rest he brings is from Mr. B. and is answered by me in my Review part. 1. sect.
6. etc. I agree with him in the position, that Abraham is the root meant Rom
11.16. and that he is a root exemplary only, nor do I deny that the Apostles
arguing is from a special prerogative to Abraham to whom the promise was given
Genesis 17.7. and that the promise did comprehend the elect of his natural seed,
and that God had a more special regard to his natural seed in that promise then
to other men^ natural seed: yet not universally to his seed, nor is it true
that the Apostle makes the branches holy Romans 11.16. by a prerogative of grace
grounded on the promise of God made to believing Fathers and their seed* which
is the same in the New Testament and the Old, as he urges out of Dr Willet.
For there is not that promise in the New Testament, or old. And therefore the
Argument upon this conceit can have no strength in it.

Page 71. he lays down this position, We believing Gentiles are ingraffed
into Abraham's Covenant in the room of the natural branches which were broken
off.

Concerning which I say, that though I deny not the believing Gentiles to have
interest in Abraham's Covenant Genesis 17.7. that is, God is their God, and they
have righteousness by faith as Abraham had: yet the Apostle does not speak of
their ingraffing into Abraham's Covenant, that ^s Mr. Sidenhams mistake, but
into the olive tree, that is as Mr. Bl. the whole body of the Church, which he
would have meant of the visible, I of the invisible. Now to Mr. Sidenhams
arguments to that position; I yield the conclusion of the first, that believing
Gentiles and their children are graffed in, but not all, or any as their
children, and that the ingraffing is suitable to the breaking off, that is, that
as the Jews and their children were broken off from the invisible Church, in
which the elect Jews and their children who were elect in former ages were for
the greatest part, so the Gentiles believers and their children are graffed in.
Yet Mr. Sidenham himself page 75. confesses a very great disproportion, taking
it as he does for ingraffing into the visible Church.

For, says he, there is this difference between the conveyance of privileges
of the Jews as natural branches, and the engraffed Gentiles; That the whole
body of the Jews good and bad, were called branches; now only believers of
the Gentiles, who are called by the Gospel, with their children, are ingraffed
into that root. Which is enough to show that the Gentiles were not ingraffed
into the root or tree, as the Jews by natural descent, but by calling of the
Gospel, and that the body of the Gentiles or any nation of the Gentiles is not
ingraffed, but so many as are called. The ingraffing of the infant children
with their parents into the visible Church by an outward ordinance is but his
own dream, and is overthrown by this, that the Church Christian visible is not
by descent but calling; not national but Congregational, by voluntary Covenant;
nor can the Churches called Independent hold this, which Master Sidenham, and
Master Cobbet, and others of their way hold, that the ingraffing of the
Gentiles into the visible Church is suitable to that of the Jews as being in
their stead, but they must hold a national Church, which quite overturns the
frame of their Churches, and the Reformation they contend for. To his second
argument, the some that were broken off might be parents and children, or
parents and not children, or children and not parents; and of these there might
be infants broken off without their own sin, or their parents, according to
Gods good pleasure only. But of this I have said enough in answer to Mr. Geree
and Mr. Baxter, in the first part of this Review, sect. 4, 6. The conclusion of
the third argument is granted, understood of ingraffing into the Church
invisible, not into the visible. To the fourth, that [ the fatness of the
Olive] should note privileges and outward advantages such as this, that the
child should be visible Churchmember with the father in the Christian Church,
or that any other parent then Abraham should have a seminal virtue to convey
such Church privilege or fatness as the root mentioned Romans 11.17. is a mere
fancy; nor is there any thing Ephesians. 3.6. or any where else in Scripture for it.

To the objection, That now believers are only branches, Abraham only the
root, and therefore the argument holds not, If the parent be holy so is the
child, being understood of other then Abraham and his seed; he answers, That
yet the branches well ingraffed become natural branches, and receive as much
from the root as those which grew naturally on it, so Gentile believers must
have the same privilege, and that there are sprigges which grow out of
branches which may be termed immediate roots. But he does not show that the
Apostle or any wise man ever termed greater boughs of trees roots to lesser;
neither dare he say, the Apostle meant every believing Father by the root,
Romans 11.16. and therefore all this is impertinent to answer the objection,
which was to invalidate the inference concerning the holiness of every
believers infant, because the Apostle says, if the root be holy so are the
branches, because Abraham only is the root there. As for Mr. Bls. saying, I
value it not, it being without Scripture. It Is sufficient for present to show
the insufficiency of Mr Bls. and Mr. Ss. proofs. I pass on to vindicate my
arguments from their pretended answers.

How the Dispute concerning the proof from Romans 11.16, 17. for infants of
believing Gentiles visible Churchmembership and Baptism, was brought to this
issue, Whether the ingraffing Romans 11.17. into the Olive tree, be meant of
joining a person to the invisible Church of the elect by giving faith according
to electon, so that none are ingraffed but true believers or elect persons as I
assert, is showed in the first part of this Review* sect. 1. Mr. Bl. and Mr.
Sydenham take on them to answer my arguments.

The first is, That act of ingraffing to the Church which is made Gods act by
his sole power with such an Emphasis as implies it hopeless and impossible
without the intervention of his omipotency, is, and can be no other ingraffing
then into the invisible Church by giving of faith according to election. But
such is the ingraffing Romans 11.17. as appears from v. 23. Ergo.

Mr. Sydenham answers, that to argue from Gods power to his will, or to
election, or from his power in general to the putting it forth absolutely in
such a determinate act, is strange, unsound in Divinity, and reason. But this
is no answer. For there is no such arguing made by me. My arguing is none of
those ways he mentions, but from the ascribing the act to God as done by his
sole power, without which it were hopeless and impossible, to prove that it is
more then man by his ordinary power can do, which can in this business be no
other then the working of faith in the heart. And this the Contraremonstrants
thought sound arguing in the conference at the Hague, and so do generally
pleaders for irresistible conversion. And Mr. Sydenham makes it like to the
resurrection of the dead, from v. ^5. which sure no act of man can perform. But
admission to the visible Church may be performed by men, therefore the
ingraffing cannot be admission into the visible Church, but an higher act of
giving faith according to election.

But says he, It is a work of mighty power to take away the prejudice against
Christ, in Jews and Gentiles, to bring to outward confession. To which I reply,
it is no such work but may be done by moral suasion of Orators or Preachers,
specially backed with the encouragement and commands of Kings and Emperors, as
experience has often showed, therefore this cannot be all which is meant by
the ingraffing.

But says he, It will require an act of power to gather them but visibly once
again, and bring them into one entire body to make a visible Church, when they
are so scattered up and down all nations. To which I reply, 1. The gathering
them together into one place, is not ingraffing them into the visible Church;
for ingraffing them imports joining them to others, but this gathering is a
making them a distinct body of themselves; the gathering into one place is
accidental to their ingraffing i^to their own Olive, he ingraffing may be
without it; and if they go together, it is likely the ingraffing will be before
that gathering, and therefore that gathering and this ingraffing cannot be the
same. 2. That gathering may be by the power and favor of Emperors and Kings,
as it was by Cyrus his Proclamation heretofore in their return to Jerusalem,
and therefore is not this act of ingraffing which is ascribed to God by his
sole power with such an Emphasis as implies it un^easable but by his
omnipotency.

Mr. Bl. says, that I do vainly make this engraffing to be in their sense* no
more then baptizing. But 1. whether I wrong my Antagonists, may be perceived
from Mr. Ms. words in his Def^nce, p. 135. To what I said, the Jews infants
were graffed in by Circumcision; therefore ours are to be ingraffed by Baptism.
You answer, by demanding whether in good sadness I do think the Apostle here
means by graffing in, baptizing, or circumcision, or insition by outward
ordinances; for if that were the meaning, then breaking off must be meant of
uncircumcising, or unbaptizing. To which I reply, that in good sober sadness I
do think that graffing in is admission into visible membership, or visible
communion with the Church of Christ; and that the external seal of their
visible graffing in was Circumcision, and of ours Baptism. And he disputes
against the ingraffing into the invisible Church, therefore he can understand
it of no more then baptizing. 2. Nor can Mr. Bl. conformably to his tenet. For
if the ingraffing be such a^ is common to infants and parents, and it be
admission into the visible Church of both, and infants are no way else admitted
then by baptizing, the ingraffing is no other.

But, says he, We understand a discipling of Gentile nations, working the
heart to a professed subjection to the way of God in ordinances tendered, and
assent of heart unto all that is there promised, and acknowledge it a work
above the power of man, and confess it to be solely in the hand of God, as Genesis
9.27. Acts. 1.21. We do not speak of the bare admission of one that stands
entitled, but the working of them to such a title; and if an outward
profession be in the power of man's will, yet to bring men or nations to such a
profession cordially to embrace the Gospel so far as to assent to the truth
of it, is above man, and a work of no such ease.

I reply, 1. If it be not bare admission, but such a work as he says, then
infants are none of the branches ingraffed, nor does the ingraffing belong to
them, since they have only bare admission into the visible Church by Baptism.
2. If the profession be only from fear, or carnal hopes, this may be wrought
by Teachers, Orators, especially the favor and power of Princes concurring,
and then it is no act above man's power to ingraff. But if the heart be brought
to assent cordially, and so to profess Christ in sincerity (as some of Mr. Bls.
words seem to mean) then it is by giving faith according to election, and the
ingraffing into the invisible Church: And so Mr. Bl. while he seems to answer
my argument, does unawares confirm it, through the irrefragable force of the
truth. Which might have been further cleared from the Text, Romans 11.23. where
it is said, they also if they abide not in unbelief shall be graffed in, for
God is able to graff them in again. Whence it follows, while they abide in
unbelief they are not graffed in, when they believe they are; Ergo, God
ingraffs by giving faith according to election.

My second argument was from v. 15, 16, 17. where the ingraffing is termed
reconciliation opposite to casting away.

To this Mr. Sydenham answers, 1. If I mean reconciliation in the strictest
sense, as it denotes pardon of sins, and being made friends with God by Christ's
atonement and mediatorship, then many absurdities may follow: 1. That the Jews
and their rejection was the ground of the Gentiles? reconciliation unto God. 2.
That no reconciliation was obtained for the Gentiles before the Jews were
broken off. 3. That those which are reconciled and their sins pardoned, may be
cast off; for so were the Jews and the Gentiles threatened with the same misery
on the same ground.

Answ. 1. If by [ ground] be meant [ cause,] I deny that to follow on the
exposition of reconciliation in the strictest sense; if by [ ground] be meant
only [ occasion] I grant it follows, but count it no absurdity, it being the
plain d^claration of the Apostle. 2. I grant the second, (...) understood of
the fullness or body of the Gentiles, and count it no absurdity; after the time
of Gods separating of Israel to be his people, there were only some proselytes
reconciled to God, but no full and ample number, so as to make any numerous
Church of themselves. 3. The third I yield as no absurdity, understanding the
casting off of the same people, not the same persons, from what their ancestors
were, not themselves.

But Mr. S. answers 2 ly. by distinction of reconciliation into ou^ward and
inward, and he would have it meant of outward reconciliation, by bringing them
in under the means of the Gospel and the outward dispensation, of the Church,
which is Gods common way to salvation, and is to some effectual to inward
grace, unto others only to outward privil^dges.

Answ. 1. This reconciliation would exclude infants, for they are not so
reconciled and consequently not ingraffed, and so the argument for their
ingraffing hence is evacuated, if the reconciliation (which is confessed to be
the same with the ingraffing) be such as agrees not to infants. 2. He does noth
not so much as offer to produce one place of Scripture in which reconciliation
is so taken, nor one approved writer so expounding it. 3. Nor can it be
expounded so. For it is no reconciliation at all which he describes. In
reconciliation there is still taking away enmity, but in the bringing under the
means of the Gospel there may be no taking away of enmity, either from them to
God, for they may hate him as much, yea more then before; or from God to them,
for he may have them as much or more then before. 4. Nor in this place can it
be the meaning. For the reconciliation of the world, v. 15. is v. 1^. the
riches of the world, of the Gentiles. But their riches imports something
opposite to their fall, diminishing, or detriment; and their fall must be to
damnation, for it is v. 11. opposed to salvation, their riches must needs
therefore be to salvation, so termed verse. 11.

But, says he, The body of the Gentile world (which I mean) are not so
reconciled as by election and saving grace, though the sound of the Gospel has
gone through all the world.

Answ. The body of the Gentiles, that is a full ample part of them incomparably
greater then the number of the proselytes to the Jewish Church is reconciled,
and has been for many ages to God by election and saving grace.

Mr. Bl. also answers by distinction of reconciliation gradual, either to take
in, or hold a people in visible communion; or total, to receive them with an
everlasting delight in them. The former he exemplifies out of Exodus 32.10, 11,
12, 13, 14. And thus applies it. Reconcilia^ion is opposite to casting away.
The Jews then by reconciliation are brought into that state, out of which they
were once cast; but they were not cast out of the Church invisible; not out of
election and justification, but out of a visible Churchstate and fellowship.
Breaking off, as Mr. T. well says, is the same as casting away, and
reconciliation the same as ingraffing. Their reconciliation or ingraffing is
then into that condition from which they were broken, out of which they were
cast; now they were cast out of the Church visible, not out of the Church
invisible; when they were in a Churchstate they were nigh unto God, Deuteronomy. 4.7.
Psalm. 148.14. Ephesians. 2.17. Their reconciliation brings them into the same
Churchstate, which is a reconciliation gradual not total.

Answ. The casting away v. 15. is the same with the casting away v. 1, 2. which
is opposite to Gods foreknowledge v. 2. to the election of grace v. 5. which
obtained, and the castaway were hardened or blinded v. 7, 8, 9, 10. which he
that understands of any other casting away then from the grace of election, and
effectual calling, and the invisible Church seems to me to pervert the Apostles
meaning very grossly. Nor do I conceive it any absurdity to say that the Jewish
people in Paul's time were broken off or cast away from that election, and state
in the invisible Church which they never had in their own persons, but their
ancestors had, and they in course had obtained but for their unbelief. As for
the reconciliation in all places where he mentions it in his Epistles, he
means it of that reconciliation which is by effectual conversion, and
justification, through Christ's death, on which follows salvation, Romans 5.10,
11. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. Col. 1.22. and not of Mr. Bls. gradual reconciliation,
of which he has not brought one instance for the use of the word in his
sense, nor is his example any thing like to the business in hand: For it was
not a reconciliation so as to bring them to the privileges of a visible
Churchstate, but so to pardon the sin of worshipping the golden Calf, as not
utterly to destroy that people, though the sinners fell in the Wilderness:
which was only an abatement of punishment, not an estating in privileges as
Mr. B. would have it.

But Mr. Bl. to my urging any one to show me in Scripture or any approved
Protestant Writer, such use of the word reconciliation as his is, and my
alleging Protestant approved Writers for my exposition, thus says.

1. When Mr. T. pleases, he can heap up phrases which are only once used in
a select sense in Scripture, and that to uphold his interpretation of holy and
unclean, 1 Cor. 7.14. when the context clearly evinces the contrary. But that
this is false, and that the text clearly evinceth my interpretation is fully
proved in the first part of this Review. Section 22, etc.

Secondly, says he, Master T when he pleases, dare undertake the defense of
an opinion held unanimously by all Papists, and as unanimously opposed by
Protestants, as in that of Covenant holiness.

But this also is another of Master Bls. calumnies and unbrotherly taunts which
he frequently uses instead of answers, and if there had been in him any
candor of mind toward me he had been satisfied with my answer in my
postscript, Sect. 13. But since he writes against me in a Cynical humor, I
pass by his snarlings, and leave the cause to the Lord.

Thirdly, says he, Gomarus, T^m. 1. p. 111. observes that world is taken in
tha^ sense, in Romans 11.12, 15. as in no other Scripture. But I think this is
not true, it is taken in the same sense 1 Timothy 3.16. and I think 2 Cor. 5.18,
19. 1 John 2.2.

Fourthly, says he, if recontiliation in no other place be so used, yet little
is gained; seeing as we have seen there are parallel phrases that hold out the
same thing to us.

Answ. 1. Those parallel phrases were never yet seen by me. 2. The thing is
gained which is here contended for, if reconciliation still signify total
reconciliation in the Scripture when it speaks of Gospel reconciliation, and
there is no cogent reason to move us to recede from that sense here, and
reconciliation be the same with ingraffing, surely ingraffing is by giving
faith according to election, and the Church into which the ingraffing is, is
the invisible.

Mr. Bl. produces a speech of Ravanelius (which I have not) for his sense. But
the words as he produces them seem not to me to have that sense which Mr.
Bl. alleges them for, but rather my sense, and a passage in the Annotations,
and another in Dr. Featley the Author of them on those Epistles. But in neither
does Dr. Featley say by the reconciliation to God Romans 11.15. is meant bare
vouchsafing a visible Churchstate; and by c^sting away, and breaking off a loss
of visible privileges, nor do Peter Martyr or Euc^r say so. And however I
find Protestant Writers do expound the ingraffing and breaking off in many of
their writings of the visible Church, yet those speeches which I alleged out
of Mr. Ball and Dr. Ames are full to prove the reconciliation Romans 11.15. to be
saving, and they that understand by breaking off there, more then the loss of
visible privileges, may notwithstanding Mr. Bls. censure without any shift in
that point be acquitted from Arminianism.

My third arg. was from v. 20. ingraffing must be by giving faith, because it
is by faith that the branch stands in the tree. To this Mr. S. and Bl. both
answer by granting the conclusion, that it is by giving faith. But this faith
Mr. S. makes profession of faith, Mr. Bl. a faith of profession.

To which I reply. 1. If it were faith professed by which the branches stand in
the tree, yet infants are excluded from being of the branches, for they stand
not by faith professed. 2. That it is not profession of faith, or faith barely
dogmatical which is meant Romans 11.20. I prove 1. thus. That standing which is a
perseverance unto salvation is not by bare profession of faith, but true
justifying faith. But the standing Romans 11.20. is that stand^ng which is a
perseverance unto salvation, ergo. The major is manifest; for it is not a bare
profession of faith whereby a man perseveres to salvation, but that which is
justifying. The minor is plain from the text. The standing which is opposed to
falling in which God shows his severity, is standing by perseverance unto
salvation. This I presume will be yielded, direct opposite terms being
according to Logic rules to be understood in a direct opposite sense. But the
standing Romans 1^.20. is opposed to falling in which God shows his severity
verse. 2^. Ergo. 2. The standing which was to be prevented by being not high
minded but fearing, and the losing of which was to be feared, is not a bare
standing in the visible Church, nor by bare profession of faith, But the loss
of the standing was to be feared, and to be prevented by not being high minded
but fearing, v. 20. For the loss of standing in the visible Church needs not
be so much feared, and a less care would serve turn to prevent it. 3. That
standing which would not prevent Gods not sparing, is not the standing meant
Romans 11.20. For that would prevent Gods not sparing, v. 21. But the standing
only in the visible Church by profession of faith, would not prevent Gods not
sparing, Matt. 7.23. Ergo. 4. That faith and standing are meant here, which in
other places in that and other Epistles are meant by the Apostle, when he
speaks of the same thing. But in those places standing so as to persevere to
salvation, and justifying faith are meant, as Romans 5.2. and 14.4. 2 Cor. 1.24.
Ergo. 5. That standing and that faith is not meant of which it may be said the
root bears them not, verse 18. But of them who only stand in the visible
Church by a profession of faith, it may be said the root bears them not. For
the roo^ is Abraham, and he is a root or father to none but those who have
justifying faith, Romans 4.11, 12. Ergo. 6. By that faith the branches stand
which is directly opposite to the unbelief by which others were broken off,
verse. 20. But that was unbelief of heart, and not of mouth only, ergo, the
faith is in the heart, and not in the mouth only by which the branches stand.
7. That ^aith the branches stand by v. 20. by which they are partakers of the
root and fatness of the Olive. But that is justifying faith, as shall be showed
in the vindication of the next argument, Ergo.

Mr. S. takes upon him to prove it meant of the visible Church by profession of
faith by some of Master ^s. arguments, which because they are answered already
in the first Part of this Review, Sect. 6, etc. I let pass: only whereas he
says, Can any man conceive that they should boast because the branches the
Jews were broken from election and true faith, that they might be graffed in
by a new act of God^ election, and by true and saving faith?

I answer, though they might not thus boast, yet they might boast that God
having broken off the Jews, had in their stead ingraffed them, by giving saving
faith according to his eternal election.

And to what he says from v. 20, 21, 22, 23. What, are they exhort^d to look
least they be cut off from Gods election, etc? Will M. T. turn a downright
Arminian, that he may have any plea against the baptising of poor infants?

I answer, 1. that I scarce think that scribler did well know what Arminianism
was, and that I have sufficiently acquit^ed my self from that which is indeed
Arminianism, and better then his magnified Aurthor Mr. B. 2. That ^e might with
as good reason impeach the Apostle of downright Arminianism, in that he exhorts
us to give all diligence that we make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet.
1.10.

Mr. Bl. when he cannot untie this knot, endeavors to cut it asunder by this
assertion, after many words which need no answer; That there is no such thing
in all Scripture as ingraffing into the Church invisible by faith; all
ingraffing is into the body visible, and therefore by a faith of profession.
And yet his three first arguments whereby he would prove this proposi^ion, do
conclude no ingraffing but into Christ, and consequently neither into the
invisible nor visible, which is directly to contradict his own saying, All
ingraffing is into the body visible. But let us view his proofs about this
position con^erning which it pleases Mr. Bl. to enter into the lists with me.

1. Says he, All ingraffing is into that subject, which immediately receives
what is ingraffed, as the stock receives the syens, but it is CHRIST, and not
the Church invisible that receives the elect believer; Christ dwells in us by
faith, so we in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17.

Answ. ^his argument is made by Mr. Bl as if he on purpose meant to refute
himself. For 1. he wou^d prove there is no ingraffing of elect believers into
the invisible Church but into Christ, because he only receives the elect
believers; which if true it would follow; First, that elect believers are not
ingraffed into the visible Church, but only non-elect professors of faith who
are hypocrites, and so the visible Church should have no elect ones in it, but
all reprobates. Secondly, i^ the reason were good there should be no
ingraffing of prof^ssors of faith into the visible Church contrary to his
assertion, that all ingraffing is into the body visible. For it is Christ that
immediately receives, that is owns or acknowledges bare professors of faith
as visible Churchmembers, as well as he receives, that is owns and
acknowledges as his invisible members, them who are ingraffed into his
invisible body. 3. If we be ingraffed by that faith by which Christ dwells in
us and we in Christ, Ephesians. 3.17. then we are ingraffed into the olive by that
^aith which is justifying (for by no other ^aith does Christ dwell in us nor
we in him, nor is any other meant Ephesians. 3.17. as is apparent from the text,
the prayer of the Apostle being not for a bare dogmatical faith, which they had
already, but justifying, persevering, whereby Christ might dwell in their
hearts by his spirit, etc.) and the ingraffing is into Christ, and consequently
into the invisible Church. But so it is by Mr. Bls. argument, ergo.

2. I answer ingraffing is a metaphor and it notes uniting or joining, and this
joining is not natural but spiritual or moral, and may be at a remote bodily
distance, and without the knowledge of those to whom the person is ingraffed,
and may be to Christ, and to his invisible body or visible, without any act of
the Church visible or invisible which may be termed receiving; yea if Mr. Bs.
position be right, Plain Script. proof, etc. part. 1. chapter 27. that a man
living alone in America may yet be a member of the visible Church. For he
has that which constituteth him a visible member though there be none to
discern it, a man may be ingraffed into the Church visible though neither he
know any other Churchmember, nor any other know him, and therefore I deny Mr.
Bls. major proposition in his argumen^, if understood (as it must be if it be
to the purpose) of that metaphorical ingraffing which is Romans 11.17, etc.

2 Says he, All ingraffin^ is into that which gives sap and juice to the
ingraffed, as the stock from the root to the syens; now Christ gives sap to the
elect believing, not the Church; and therefore it is not into the Church, but
into Christ.

Answ. 1. This argument also gainsays Mr. Bls. proposition* that all ingraffing
is into the body visible; for it is not the body visible that gives sap to the
elect believing, or professors of faith, but Christ; and therefore by this
argument there is no ingraffing into the body visible. 2. Christ only gives
sap and juice effectively, Abraham exemplarily; the Church does it only as a
vessel receiving it, as the stock receives it first, then the branch; the veins
receive the blood, then the other parts of the body: And if Mr. Bls. major be
understoood of any other giving juice, it is denied; if of this, the minor.

3. Says he, If saving faith ingraff the branch into the Church invisible,
then the Church invisible is the proper object of such faith; but the Church is
no such object of faith, but Christ.

Answ. 1. The same argument holds thus, If profession of faith ingraff into the
Church visible then the Church visible is the proper object of such profession:
But the Church visible is no such object, but Christ; therefore there is no
ingraffing by profession of faith into the Church visible, contrary to Mr. Bls.
tenet. 2. To say the Church invisible is the object of faith, is no more then
to say, to believe the Holy Catholic Church is an Article of the Creed, and
this I think Mr. Bl. counts no absurdity. 3. The consequence of the major
proposition is denied. Faith that saves has the object Christ, and as it
respects Christ does unite or ingraff us to him as to our head, and to the
invisible Church as his body.

4. Says he, That supposed ingraffing into the invisible Church, is either
known to the body invisible, or unwitting; if known, then it is not invisible.
They have no light to discern an invisible work if unknown, then there could
not be such a dispute about the new ingraffing of Gentiles, nor complaint of
breaking off of the Jews, all being done by an invisible translation, and so
the subject of the question is taken away.

Answ. It was known to some of the invisible, to others not; though it were
known yet it might be invisible, they had light to discern an invisible work:
Though the work were unknown to some, yet there might be a dispute about the
new ingraffing of Gentiles, and complaint of breaking off the Jews, as there
was Acts 11. though all were done by an invisible translation: So that there is
no truth or strength in this rope of sand Mr. Bl. makes, and the subject of the
question still remains. There is as much futility in the rest of his dictates.
Scheibler says in his Topics, A not-being cannot be a part dividing; yet he
says, in case any defend that to be which yet is not, in controversies such a
division is to be supposed. But how vainly Mr. Bl. has disputed against an
ingraffing into the invisible Church, may be discerned and thereby how
frivolously (...) compares it to a mountain of air. And what he says, that the
access of the Gentiles in the Acts was an ingraffing into the Church visible,
may be granted, and it may be true that it was into the invisible Church also*
One new man, Ephesians. 2.15. is true only of the invisible Church; for the
Gentiles were never one visible Church with the Jews, except some few
proselytes of them. That the visible Church communicates sap and juice which is
the fatness of the Olive in ordinances, and that says dogmatical looks upon
the Church (meaning the visible) as the partial object, are di^tates, which I
need not refute, since there is no proof brought for them. As I concei^e he
means them, they are false; so much for the vindication of my third argument.

My fourth argument is from v. 17. thus, That ingraffing is meant v. 17.
whereby the wild Olive is co-partaker of the root and ^atness of the Olive
tree: But such is only by giving faith according to election; Ergo. I proved
the minor by showing that Abraham is there the root as the Father of the
faithful, and the fatness of the Olive not privileges of outward ordinances,
but righteousness.

Mr. Sydenham answers it by referring to Mr. Bl. and censuring my answer to him
as a poor evasion, which I shall free from this censure in my reply to Mr. Bl.
Yet Mr. S. scribles somewhat besides, which I shall reply to. He begins with
questions, 1. ^ere not the natural branches which were broken off partakers of
the fatness of the root? Answ. No. And were they all elected and partakers of
saving graces, or outward privileges only? Answ. None of the branches broken
off were elected or partakers of saving graces, though some were of outward
privileges. And why then should it be thought absurd for the Gentiles by
ingraffing to p^rtake of the fatness of the root only in outward privileges,
seeing it was so with the natural branches, and they all grow on the same root?
Answ. The natural branches as natural did not grow on the same root with the
ingraffed; Abraham was not a natural Father to the ingraffed branches, they
descended not from him by natural generation, nor did the natural branches
which were broken off grow on the same spiritual root with the ingraffed.
Abraham was indeed the Father of the faithful Gentiles, and they his seed
spiritually; but so he was not ^o the Jews broken off* nor they ever in their
own persons in the Olive tree, as it notes the Church of true believers, or in
Abraham the root as is meant Romans 11.17. nor were ever partakers of the fatness
of it, but the Gentiles were; nor did the Jews fall from election and saving
graces which they had in their own persons, but which they had in course been
partakers of if they had believed, which I have cleared more fully in my answer
to Mr. Cobbet, in the first part of this Review, sect. 10.

He tells me further, It Is improper to call a root an exemplary cause; there is
no harmony between them; and example conveyed nothing; here is a conveyance of
fatness.

Answ. It is improper to term an exemplary cause a root, for it is a metaphor;
but it is no more improper then to term an exemplary cause a Father, as the
Apostle does Abraham the Father of believers, Romans 4.11, 12. when yet the Text
makes him only such by his exemplary believing; and if there were harmony
between a Father and ^n exemplary cause, though Abraham conveyed not faith or
righteousness, but as an example; there is harmony between a root and an
exemplary cause, though it convey nothing but as an example: Nor is it
unsuitable to good language to say, the ingraffed branches are partakers of the
fatness or fullness of Abraham as an example. That fatness the Jews had from
Abraham which is meant Romans 11.17. they had not from him as a natural father,
nor did God make the Evangelical Covenant with him and his natural seed, nor do
the ingraffed branches ever become natu^al branches, though they partake of
Evangelical benefits as well as the believing Jews, who were natural branches.
What Mr. S. adds in answer to my objection, that if it were meant of outward
privileges it were false; for the Gentiles were not partakers of the outward
privileges of Abraham, that Abraham is a root in the New Testament as well as
in the Old, I grant; but deny what he adds, and still stands by virtue of the
Covenant to believers and their children: For neither is there such a Covenant,
and if there were, yet Abraham could be a root only to his natural seed, not
to Gentiles by virtue of that Covenant. And what he adds, that though old
Testament ordinances were taken away with the Jews and that Church State, yet
the root is not taken away; but the New Testament privileges grow on the same
root; and our ingraffing in gives us to be partakers of the fatness of them, as
well as it gave to the Jews the participation of former privileges until they
were broken off; letting pass the vanity of the speeches, that our ingraffing
gave to the Jews the participation of former privileges, which they had not by
our ingraffing, but their own propagation from the root, and that the Jews had
the privileges till they were broken off, whereas the persons broken off never
had the fatness meant Romans 11.17. all this answer avoids not the objection, but
plai^ly grants the argument. For if the Old Testament ordinances and the Jewish
Churchstate were taken away (which all that are against a national Church-frame
must aver) then if by fatness be meant outward ordinances and Churchstate, the
Gentiles cannot be said to partake of them, nor they be meant by the fatness,
Romans 11.17. Let Us examine what Mr. Bl. says to this argument.

1. He denies that he ever said every believing parent is the root, a root he
makes them, not the root. But by his leave I charge him with nothing but what
does plainly follow from his words. For that is the root according to him which
communicates Covenant holiness and Churchstate, and of whom it is verified if
the root be holy so are the branches. But this is said by him in his Vindic.
Faed. p. 277. and elsewhere, of every believing parent; therefore if Mr. Bl.
avouch his own arguings, he makes every believing parent the root, Romans 11.16,
17.

What Mr. Bl. speaks, that other parents are roots to their posterity, is
granted, and needed not to be proved by Mr. Bl ^ut that they being holy persons
are holy roots communicating Covenant holiness to their children, is not pr^ved
by Mr. Bl. That the Covenant or promise of God made to Abraham, Genesis 15.5. and
17 4, 7. did assure and ^o constitute Abraham to be the root of the Church of
true believers, is not denied, nor that Circumcision did seal to him the
righteousness of faith as a believer and the father of believers, Romans 4.11,
12. But the form denominating him Father of believers, or root of the Olive, is
propagating them by his exemplary faith: Nor was David by his Covenant, or
Jesse, or any other believing parent a root or father in the sense Romans 4.11.
and 11.16, 17. Though they were natural roots to their posterity, and builders
of the house of Israel, and the Fathers 1 Cor. 10.1. by natural generation; yet
none are said to build as Abraham, from whom the fatness, Romans 11.17. is
derived, and not from any other intermediate father. For Abraham had been
father though he had had no child by natural generation, Mat. 3.9. descending
from him: Nor can it be true, that he is termed the root by reason of natural
generation; For then the Gentiles had not been bran^hes and children, and ^ll
the branches had been natural, contrary to v. 21, 24.

To this says Mr. Bl. He makes them wild only at their first ingraffing, and
so was all Terahs race wild likewise, till that change of faith wrought in
Abraham's call, and the Covenant God entered with him; we now are natural as they
were, and cannot be called wild, but in our first original.

Answ. They that were ingraffed were still branches of the wild Olive, and so
are we that are believers of the Gentiles, for that title is by nature and
natural descent, Romans 11.24. which is not changed by grace, though the fruit
and sap be changed that is the qualities and actions by ingraffing: We that are
believers of the Gentiles are not the branches according to nature, for that is
plainly meant of the Jews only, Romans 11.24. when it is said, they that are
according to nature shall be graffed in their own Olive. Which shows that the
term they that are according to nature i^ proper to the Jews: But if every
believing parent should be the root, Romans 11.16, 17. then every Gentile
believers child should be a natural branch, contrary to v. 24. for they are all
besides nature, and no believing Gentile nor his child is now or has been a
natural branch in the sense the Apostle means, Romans 11.24.

But Mr. Bls. chief objection is this, If the ingraffing be by a saving faith
only, to derive saving graces personal^y inherent, as a fruit of election from
Abraham, then it must needs be that we are elect in Abraham* Abraham may say,
without me ye can do nothing, and he that believes in me, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water: And we may say, the life that we live in the
flesh, we live by faith in the son of Terah. This must necessarily follow, if
Abraham be the root, no^ only respective to a conditional Covenant, but to the
graces under condition covenanted.

Answ. 1. This objection may be thus retorted, If the ingraffing be by a faith
of profession only, to derive only outward ordinances, outward privileges,
Covenant holiness, visible Churchmembership, as a fruit of the Covenant from
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob the root, then we are i^ Covenant in Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob: They may say without us ye cannot be visible Churchmembers, etc. he
that professes faith in us, shall have outward Church privileges; the
privileges we have in the visible Church, we have by profession of faith in
the son of Terah. This must necessarily follow, if Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob be
the root respective to the Covenant and Covenant holiness, as Mr. Bl. asserts.
when Mr. Bl. has freed himself from these absurdities, I shall have somewhat
more to answer him. 2. In the mean time my answer in my Apology is, that the
absurdities follow not on my opinion, who make not Abraham a roo^ as
communicating faith by infusion or impetration mediatory as Christ, but as an
exemplary cause of believing, in which sense he is styled the father of
believers, Romans 4 11, 12.

To this Mr. Bl. in his flirting fashion replies thus, A root not by
communication, but example; an ingraffing not to have any thing communicated
from the root, but to imitate it, is such a Catachresis as may well make all
Rhetoric ^shamed of it; and if the Sun ever saw a more notable piece of non
sense, I am to seek what sense is. A root is too low in the earth to have its
examples followed, and a syens sucks in juice, but knows not how to imitate.

Answ. 1. Mr. Bl. grossly abuses me by insinuating as if I mentioned a root not
by communication, but example: and ingraffing not to have any thing from the
roo^, but to imitate it: But this I said, that Abraham is not termed the root
as communicating faith by infusion, or impe^ration mediatory as Christ, but as
an exemplary cause of believing, and the ingraffing I make to be Gods act of
giving faith after Abraham's example, whereby righ^eousness is communicated from
Abraham as the precedent or pattern, according to which God gives both, though
the branches do not themselves imitate Abraham. Now this is no more nonsense
then to term him a father without any other begetting or communicating then as
an exemplary cause, which the Apostle does, Romans 4.11, 12. and (as I show in
the first part of this Review, Sect. 2. page 1^.) Dr. Willet, Diodati, Pareus,
do so expound the root and father of the faithful; so that if there be
nonsense, these learned men with the Apostle are to be charged with it, as
well as my self, which may redound more to Mr. Bls. then to the shame of
Rhetoric. And if a root be too low in the earth to be as an example, so is a
fathers begetting too hidden a thing to be our example, yet Abraham's believing
and justification may be Gods example according to which he gives faith and
righteousness. 2. When Mr. Bl. makes Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the root as
communicating Ordinances, visible Churchmembership, etc. I would know how he
makes them communicating roots of these to believing Gentiles infants. Sure not
by natural generation, for neither mediately nor immediately are they roots to
them that way: not by teaching or example, for they are not things imitable,
nor are they to them teachers, or visible examples: not by communicating to
them the Covenant, that is, Gods act. What way soever he make them the root
according to his opinion there will be as much nonsense and shame to
Rhetoric, and less truth in his explication then in mine. What he adds, that
whatsoever kind of root I make it, yet it is a communicative root, verse. 17. I
grant it in the sense expressed, not of communication by infusion or mediatory
impetration, but as an ^dea.

And what he says further, that the term Father and root are not full
synonyma's, yet in the main they agree; is as much as I need to show that it is
no more nonsense to term him a root who communicates sap only as a pattern,
then it is to term him a Father who begets only as an example.

And whereas he says, both metaphors aptly set forth what the branches as
from a root, the children as from a Father receive, namely their title to the
Covenant from him; and therefore as to Abraham, so to all Israel pertained the
Covenants and the Adoption, Rom, 9.4, 5. And so to all that are become children
and branches with them. I grant the metaphors set forth what the branches and
children receive from the root and father: But that the thing received is title
to the Covenant in Mr. Bls. sense, that is to be partakers of outward
ordinances (which is more truly nonsense then my expression of a root by
exemplarity, or that to Abraham and so to all Israel pertained the Covenants
and adoption, Romans 9.4, 5. or that to the ingraffed branches or Gentile
children of Abraham, belonged the Covenants and adoption and other p^iviledges
which are there appropriated to Israel after the flesh, though not imparted to
all) there alleged, is denied. Title to the Covenant of grace is not
communicated to Gentile believers any otherwise, then in that they are made
Abraham's seed by faith, and this is communicated to them no otherwise from
Abraham then as an example, and therefore he is a root no other way ^hen I
assign, if there be any other way it is more then yet Mr. Bl. has showed.

Yet he adds, the title Father is yet extended to a greater Latitude, as he
does impart to his issue (as before) so he is a pat^ern and example as even
natural parents are likewise according as Romans 4.^2. ( quoted by Mr. T.) is set
forth, yet that place is too palpably abused.

Answ. Though Fathers be examples and patterns to their children in their
actions, yet not all nor only parents are such, nor is Abraham called a Father
there because he was a good pattern only, but because he as the A^chtype or
primitive pattern begat Jews and Gentile believers as his seed to faith, nor in
this or any thing have I abused the Apostle.

Mr. Bl. tells me. The steps of the faith of the Father Abraham is the doctrine
of faith which Abraham believed, or the profession of faith which he made. All
that were professedly Jews, and all that were professedly Christians, w^lk in
the steps of that faith: All circumcised believers had not that faith that
just^fies, nor yet all the uncircumcised; and Abraham is a father of both. He
could be exemplary as a pattern to be followed, only in that which is
external; his faith qua justifying could not be seen to be imitated.

Answ. I abhor it to abuse the Apostle so palpably as Mr. Bl. does here. For it
appears not only from the main drift of the Apostle in the whole Chapter
precedent, specially v. 9, 10. but also from the very words v. 11. that
righteousness might be imputed ^o them also, that the Apostle speaks of that
faith only which is justifying, which is believing with the heart, Romans 10 10.
And therefore those speeches are palpably false, that the steps of the faith of
the Father Abraham is the doctrine of faith which Abraham believed (which may
be by a Teacher that neither believes nor professes) or the profession of
faith which he made (which a Judas or Simon Magus might have, and so should
have righteousness imputed to them as Abraham had) that all professed Jews or
Christians walk in the steps of that faith, that Abraham is Father of those
uncircumcised believers who had not that faith that justifies. As for Mr. Bls.
reason, it is against himself; for Abraham's profession could no more be seen
to be imitated in the Apostles days then his faith as justifying: both might
be known by Gods word, and be followed as a pattern, though I conceive the
Apostle makes those to walk in the steps of Abraham's faith, who do believe as
he did, though they never saw or heard of Abraham's b^lieving, as he may be
said to write after a Copy who writes the same, though he never saw the Copy.

He adds, And the like he has page 78. I make Abraham only the root, as he is
only the ^ather of believers exemplarily; and that which made him the Father
of believers, was not the Covenant, but his exemplary faith, as I gather from
the words of the Apostle, Romans 9.16, 17, 18, 19, 21. Did none but Abraham give
an example unto others of believing? The Apostle to the Hebrews sets him out,
chap. 11. as one example among many* we find many that went before him, Abel,
Enoch, Noah; and more that followed after him. And I should rather think that
the Text by him produced, proves without any contradiction, that the Covenant
made Abraham the father of believers; he is the called three Father of us all,
and a Text quoted for it, which is Genesis 17.5. A Father of many nations I have
made thee: And whether that be not by virtue of Covenant, let the context be
consulted, together with the Apostles words, Romans 4.11. He closed with God in
Covenant, and accepted the seal of the Covenant, that according to Covenant he
might be the Father of all them that believe.

Answ. 1. If Abel, Enoch, Noah, be set out as examples of believing with a
faith justifying, Heb. 11.4, 5, 6, 7. by which Noah became heir of the
righteousness which is by faith, then it is not true which Mr. Bl. ^aith a
little before, that Abraham could be exemplary as a pattern to be followed
only in that which is external. 2. Many before and after did believe as
Abraham, and they are examples to us, Pleb. 6.12. Yet we find not any whose
faith was remarkably tried and approved as Abraham's, and therefore none
deno^inated the Fat^er of believers besides him. 3. It is granted the promise
or Covenant was the object of Abraham's faith, and that it did assure that he
should be the Father of believers both of Jews and Gentiles; yet the reason of
the denomination of Father of believers is made only his eminent faith, and
the form denominating him is (...) relation to them, the foundation of which
was his begetting believers exemplarily* 4. Romans 4.11. It is neither said
Abraham closed with God in Covenant, nor that he accepted the seal of the
Covenant, nor is there in that v. any mention of the Covenant, or of the seal
of the Covenant, but ^. 16* the Apostles having termed Abraham the Father of us
all, v. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. he sets out his faith as most eminent, and that as
the reason of his Fatherhood.

Mr. Bl. to what I said, the fatness of the Olive tree, Diodati said truly, is
the blessing and promise made to Abraham and to his seed, and so the Apostle
expresses, Gal. 3.14. says. This we grant, and privilege of ordinances
contained this blessing and this promise; we know the Gospel to be the power of
God to salvation. To which I reply, The blessing, Gal. 3.14. is j^stification,
v. 8, 9. and the promise is of the spirit through faith, which a man may be
without, though he have the outward ^riviledge of ordinances, and therefore are
not contained in it: Nor is the Gospel the power of God to salvation without
faith; and therefore if the ingraffing be only into the visible Church* and a
person have only the privilege of ordinances, he may be without the blessing
and promise made to Abraham and to his seed, Gal. 3.14. which is granted by Mr.
Bl. to be the fatness meant Romans 11.17. and therefore the fatness is more then
outward privileges and ordinances, and I said truly it is too washy and frigid
an exposition which does so expound it, and this washes away the dust Mr. Bl.
casts on Romans 11.17.

But he argues thus. That wherein the Jews exceeded the Gentiles, is the
fatness whereof the Gentiles partake, when they are ingraffed instead of the
Jews; this none can deny, for this makes them their equals and co partners: But
it is privileges of ordinances (how frigid and washy things soever Mr. T.
little better then profanely makes it) is the privilege wherein Jews exceeded
Gentiles, Romans 3.1. Deuteronomy. ^.7, 8. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Therefore this is the
fatness of the Olive.

Answ. The major is not true, if universal: and Mr. Bls. reason proves it. For
the Gentiles when ingraffed, were not made equals and co partners in many
things wherein the Jews before exceeded the Gentiles. All those things
mentioned Rom 9.4, 5. were prerogatives of the Jews never imparted to the
Gentile believers, yea that privilege mentioned Romans 3.1. the committing the
Oracles of God, the Christian Gentiles were never made equals and co partners
with the Jews in, God did never give oracles and answers to the Christian
Gentiles, nor the Tables of the Covenant, and the Book of the Law to be kept,
as he did to the Jews. But that wherein the Jews and Gentiles were made equals
and co partners, was justification by faith, and union with Christ by his
spirit, as Ephesians. 3.6. Gal. 3.28, 29, etc. and therefore this argument is
rightly retorted thus on Mr. Bl. That wherein the Gentiles ingraffed were
equals and copartners with the Jews is the fatness meant Romans 11.17. But this
is not the privileges of Ordinances, but justification and oneness in Christ,
ergo that is the fatness meant Romans 11.17.

To what I said, that the Gentiles were not partakers of the outward
privileges and ordinances of Abraham and the Jews, they being tak^ away, he
says, if that of the Apostle be true, that the Gospel was preached to
Abraham, Gal. 3.8. then this cannot be false. If the Rock and Manna in the
Wilderness be the same, as that on which w^ seed, 1 Cor. 10.2. the outward
privileges of that people may well the (...) the same with ours.

Answ. 1. If the outward privileges and ordinances of Abraham and the Jews be
the same with ours, then not only the preaching the Gospel, but also
Circumcision, the Passover, the Temple, High Priest, sacrifices, etc. must be
the same to us as to them. 2. Though the Gospel be preached to us which was
preached to them, yet not in the same manner; it was preached to them ^s
future, to us as accomplished; nor by the same ordinances, not by the slaying
the Paschal Lamb, the High Priests going into the most Holy place with blood
once a year, etc. 3. No^ is it true that the Rock and Manna in the wilderness
is the same as that on which we seed, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. though it be true the
same Christ or spiritual meat and drink was signified by the Manna they ate,
and the water out of the Rock which they drank, which is signified by the
Bread and Wine we receive in the Lords Supper: But this does not show the same
outward privileges of the Jews and us, but the same spiritual benefits
signified to them which are to us.

He next tells me, I have taken pains for my own full refutation; for if Abraham
be the root, then the natural posterity of Abraham must of necessity be the
natural branches which were cut off: which he endeavors to prove from Romans
9.2, 3. and 11.1, 14. though the conclusion be not denied, but often asserted by
me; and then brings in Paul thus disputing, Paul's kinsmen after the flesh were
the Church visible, not invisible: But Paul's kindred according to the flesh
were the branches cut off; Ergo, the Church visible not invisible was cut off:
Which conclusion does not contradict any thing I assert, who never made the
Church invisible cut off, but some branches broken off from the Church
invisible which was formerly in that people. So that Mr. Bl. hitherto has m^de
no answer to my arguments, but talk^d at random quite besides the matter urged
in them.

My 5th. argument was* If the breaking off the Jews were by blinding, then the
ingraffing was by giving faith; but the former is true, v. 25. Ergo, the later.

To this Mr. S. says, There is not the some reason, seeing ^e takes i^ of
giving saving faith; their blinding was judicial, a punishment for their
unbelieving rejecting of the Gospel, though they had not saving faith to
embrace the Gospel; the giving of faith is not on such terms; neither is saving
faith so absolutely antecedent to make a man a member of the visible Church, as
blinding to Gods final rejection.

Answ. He says there is not the same reason, but shows not why if the breaking
off be by blinding, the ingraffing should not be by giving a saving faith. Sure
according to all the Logic I ever learned it is as clear an a^gument as can be
in this case, that where opposite effects are put, the one effect being from
one cause, the other should be from the opposite cause It Is true, I take the
inlightning opposite to blinding to be the giving saving faith: yet do not
think the blinding v. 25. to have bin judicial a punishment for their
unbelieving, rejecting of the Gospel, but as it is v. 32. the vety shutting up
in unbelief, the antecedent to unbelief* consequent on reprobation opposite to
election, as v. 7, 8, 9, 10. do plainly show, not consequent to unbelief. What
he means by the giving of faith is not on such terms, I cannot readily divine;
the speech seems to me to be either nonsense, there being no terms
forementioned that I can perceive to which it may be referred, or else it is
impertinent to the answering the objection, and so as that which follows. For
though the giving of saving faith be not on such terms as Mr. S. means, or that
it be not so absolutely antecedent to make a man a member of the visible Church
as blinding is to Gods final rejection, does it follow, that if the breaking
off be by blinding, v. 25. the ingraffing is not by giving faith, v. 24? But
Mr. S. adds.

2. Blindness came but in part on Israel; it fell only on the mere visible
members, not the invisible and elect: therefore the ingraffi^g must be only of
visible members into the visible Church, v. 7. The election has obtained it,
but the rest were blinded.

Answ. There is no show of consequence that I know in it, that if blindness
fall not on the elect, therefore ingraffing is not of the elect only; the
argument is plain on the contrary even from verse. 7. alleged by him, the rest
to wit the non-elect were blinded, therefore the ingraffed who obtained were
only the elect, and their obtaining the ingraffing was by such enlightening as
wrought saving faith in them.

Mr. Bl grants the conclusion, that the ingraffing is by giving faith, but a
faith of profession into a Churchstate, as he answered to the 3 d. arg. To
which I reply, 1. If it were giving of such a faith, yet infants would be
excluded, since they are not so ingraffed. 2. The ingraffing notes more then
admission by an outward ordinance. 3. I proved from the Text v. 7, 8, 10. that
the blinding was of those who are not elect; and therefore the inlightening by
which the election obtains, or the Gentiles are ingraffed is that, as Dr. Ames
says Antisynod. animadv. in art. 1. c. 16. whereby they obtain faith and
salvation from election. And I used these words, If the blinding be the effect
of reprobation, and the breaking off be by blinding, then the ingraffing is by
inli^htening, and that inlightening is according to election, and so is all one
with giving of faith, by which I mean justifying or saving faith.

At this passage Mr. Bl. lays about him thus, Here is Divinity which calls for
patience in a degree above all that is Christian; which one of the
Contraremonstants, worthy the name of an adversary of the Arminians, has
taught this Doctrine? It is that which their adversaries indeed charge upon
them, but that which they unanimously do disclaim. I have heard that
reprobation is the antecedent of sin, but never that it was the cause; and that
sin is a consequent of it, but never an effect. Reprobation is the act of God;
and in case it be the cause of blindness, then God is the cause: So that the
Contraremonstran^s have got a sweet Advocate to cast that upon them, that none
of their adversaries (though they have turned every stone to it) could never
prove by them.

Answ. 1. I did only use this expression [if the blinding be the effect of
reprobation] which causes all this insulting, which does not positively assert
it, only Mr. Bl. gathers it from the assumption which he supposes I would
have put, which is not very candid dealing. 2. The assumption he sets down
thus, then his assumption can be no other, but that blindness is the effect of
reprobation: But herein he does grossly abuse me. For I did not say, if
blindness be the effect of reprobation, but if blinding be the effect of
reprobation, between which there is a great difference. For blindness is man's
sin, but blinding is Gods act, ascribed to God v. 8. when it is said, God has
given them a spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see. And Job. 12.40.
He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart. And this act being no
other then the certain permission of sin, is commonly made by Protestants an
effect and means executing the decree of reprobation, which is no other then
blinding. Potav. synt. l. 4. c. 10. Reprobation is effectus est permissio
lapsus. Ames. med. Theol. l. 1. c. 25.. Tertius reprobationis actus est
intentio dirigendi media illa, quibus justitia possit in reprobas manifestari.
Media hujus generis maxim propria sunt permissio peccati, derelictio in
peccato, Romans 9 18. 2 These. 2.11, 12. Calvin Instit. l. 3. c. 23.. 1. unde
(from Romans 9.18.) sequitur absconditum Dei consilium obdu ationis esse causam.
Yea, 4. he says, Cujus rei (defectionis Angelorum) causa non potest alia
adduci quam reprobatio, quae in arcano Dei consilio abscondita est* Vide Andr.
Rivet. sum. contro. tr^ct. 4. q. 6, 7. And Piscat* observe. 9. e Romans 9.10, 11,
12, 13. Erram igitur qui putant praedestinationem pendere a praevisis operibus,
vel a praevisa fide, vel incredulitate. Imo haec omnia praedestinationis
effecta sunt: quomodo igitur possunt statui praedestinationis causae? So that
if I had taught (as Mr. Bl. misreports me) that Gods reprobation causes
blindness; yet I had Authors worthy the name of adversaries to the Arminians
so saying: Nor have I done any such high dis service to the anti-Arminians as
in the Table at the and of his Book he charge me with. 3. If Mr. Bl. had not
minded to pick a quarrel, he might have interpreted (as indeed I meant) the
term effect not strictly or rigourously, as Scheibler speaks, but in the sense
in which Logicians call the Eclipse of the Moon, the effect of the inter
position of the Earth between it and the Sun, though it be rather a consequent,
then an effect; after which manner I explained the term cause in the same Book;
Review, part 1. sect. 35. p. 238. 4. Let the word [ effect] be left out, and
let the word [ consequent] be put in, my argumen has the same force; and
therefore this was in Mr. Bl. a mere wrangling exception.

Let Us view what he says in answer thereto. He says, Mr. T. lays all upon
God, Gods reprobation causes blindness, and their breaking off is by blinding;
here is no hand but Gods in their destruction. And now the blasphemy of the
consequence being denied, so that blindness is no effect of reprobation,
breaking off being not by blinding; what becomes of the rule of opposites here
produced? And Mr. T. should not be ignorant, that election and reprobation in
the work of salvation and damnation do not per omnia quadrare, otherwise as
election leads to salvation without any merit of works, so reprobation should
lead to destruction without any merit of sin; which Contraremonstrants
unanimously deny, though Mr. T. here will have them to affirm, having before
quoted v. 8. and 10. of this chapter, he says from which Anti-Arminians gather
absolute reprobation, and then explains himself what this absolute reprobation
in his sense is in the words spoken to. And then in opposition to me cites
Gomarus denying absolute reprobation in my sense, that God absolutely
reprobates any man to destruction without subordinate means, to wit, sin; that
God does not effect sin, or decree to effect it: And Dr. Prideaux, that sin
follows not on reprobation as an efficient, but deficient; is a consequent, not
effect of reprobation: And Mr. Ball, that Gods decree is not the cause of man's
sin.

Answ. In all this there is not a word that takes away the force of the
argument; if that word [ effect] had been left out, as it was left out in the
first framing of it, and [ consequent] had been put in, though the argument had
been as strong if that word had been used, or, as it was in the first framing,
neither used. He accuses me of blasphemy* here as asserting blindness to be
the effect of reprobation, that I lay all upon God, no hand but Gods in men's
destruction; that I make Contraremonstrants to affirm an absolute reprobation
without any merit of sin; and that I explain absolute reprobation gathered by
them from Romans 11.8, 10. in this sense, of all which charges there is not one
true; so that here is nothing but a fardel o^ manifest calumnies. And as for
what he alleges, that breaking off is not by blinding, because blindness was
their guilt, and casting off their just sentence, and the guilt and punishment
are not one, it does no whit infringe my argument. For these may well stand
together, that Gods reprobation is executed by blinding, and yet blindness
their guilt, and upon their unbelief or blindness God breaks them off by a just
sentence; as on the other side, election is the cause of Gods enlightening,
whereby the ingraffed branches believe, and through faith they are by Gods act
of grace ingraffed into the invisible Church of true believers: And in this
manner the rule of opposites holds evidently, although election and reprobation
in the work of salvation and damnation do not per omnia quadrare, nor there be
any such absolute reprobation as leads to destruction without any merit of sin.
Which kind of absolute rep^obation I never asserted, nor ascribed to
Contraremonstrants, who only make reprobation absolute, in that the reason why
God in his eternal decree or purpose did choose one to life and not another, is
not the foreseen belief and obedience of one, or the foreseen unbelief or
disobedience of the other, but his own will, Romans 9.11, 12, 13, 18. Nor do I
make sin in proper or strict acception the effect of Gods act; I never said,
blindness is the effect of Gods reprobation, as Mr. Bl. misreports me, nor that
God does by any positive influx work it in man as an efficient; but I said,
blinding was the effect of reprobation in a larger sense, as effect is taken
for a consequent, and that it was by blinding, which does not at all gainsay
the sayings of those learned Writers alleged by Mr. Bl. And if Gods severity
in not sparing the natural branches were explicitly no more then what Christ
threatened, Matthew. 21.43. yet my argument holds good. For the taking away of
Gods Kingdom is not only the taking away of the preaching of the Gospel, but
also the being of the Church of true believers among them as heretofore; and so
the breaking off was by blinding, and the ingraffing into the invisible Church
of true believers by giving of faith according to election, which was to be
proved.

My 6th. arg. was, If reingraffing of the Jews produces salvation, is by
turning them from iniquity, taking away their sins according to Gods Covenant,
then it is into the invisible Church by giving faith; But the former is true v.
26, 27. Ergo, the later.

Mr. S. says, To which I give a fair answer, that doubtless according to those
promises, when the Jews shall be called in to be a visible Church again, there
shall be abundance of more glory brought in with them, then ever yet the world
saw; and the new heavens, and the new earth, the coming down of the new
Jerusalem and all those glorious things are fitted to fall in with that time.
And from these considerations many do interpret v. 26. literally, And so shall
all Israel be saved. But get 1. they shall be ingraffed in as a visible
Church, else Abraham and the Fathers would never be mentioned as roots. 2. They
shall be ingraffed as they were broken off: now they were broken off as a
visible Church. 3. All that can be gathered is this, that the fullness of
salvation, and the virtues of the promises shall more fully and universally
take effect on the Jews, even to the salvation of all of them; and so the
invisible and visible Church be more pure and as one in the earth; but this
fullness shall be to them as a visible Church and on the earth.

Answ. It Is a fair answer, but such as has nothing to weaken the argument,
there being neither of the premises denied, but the minor granted expressly,
that the virtues of the promises shall take effect on the Jews even to the
salvation of all of them, which if true, then none are ingraffed but elect
persons, and their ingraffing into the invisible Church, now the ingraffing of
the Gentiles, was the same with the re-ingraffing of the Jews, if then the Jews
re ingraffing were into the invisible Church according to election, so is the
ingraffing of the Gentiles. What he says, yet they shall be ingraffed as a
visible Church, and this fullness shall be to them as a visible Church, taking [
as] reduplicatively cannot be true, for then every visible Church should have
all in it saved, and for the reasons he brings to prove, they are answered
before, the fathers are nor mentioned as roots, but Abraham, who is a root not
of the visible Church a^ such, but of the invisible of true believers, and they
are ingraffed as the other were broken off from the invisible Church.

Mr. Bl. says, This arg. well husbanded, might have made three; to the first I
say, that a Churchstate in Scripture phrase is salvation, Job. 4.22. seeing
Churchmembers are partakers of saving ordinances; And the fruition of
ordinances under Gospel dispensations is a great salvation, Heb. 2.3. And so
that text Rom 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved, must be understood as I
told Mr. T. p. 67. of my answer out of the last annotations, and so Diodate.

Answ. This then is the meaning of Romans 11.26. All Israel shall be saved, that
is, they shall be in a visible Churchstate partakers of saving (outward)
ordinances under Gospel dispensations. But can Mr. Bl. or any sober man think
this to be the meaning, they shall be saved, that is, they shall be in such an
estate in which they may be damned, and in which many are damned? or that God
where he mentions the effect of his his great Covenant of the Gospel, means no
more but such an estate? Is this all or any part of the new Covenant Heb. 8 10,
etc. Heb. 10.16, 17. to have a mere visible Churchstate? I did always think
the Covenant of Grace had promised the spirit of Christ, that the Ministry
thereof was of the spirit, 2 Cor 3.6, 8. of righteousness, v. 9. not of a mere
visible Churchstate. And sure if we look to the place whence these words are
quoted (as Mr. ^l says) Isai. 59.20. Jerem. 31.34. there is an express promise
of the spirits continuance upon them, which is sure much beyond a visible
Churchstate. As for what he brings out of Scripture, it is shamefully wrested.
For Joh. 4.22. a mere visible Churchstate is not termed salvation, but whether
by it be meant by a metonymy, the doctrine of salvation* or the author of
salvation Christ himself, it is certainly another thing then a mere visible
Churchstate, yea in that sense the speech were absurd to term a mere visible
Churchstate salvation, and false to say tha^ the visible Churchstate was of the
Jews. And for the other text ^eb 2.3. it does not term the fruition of outward
Ordinances under Gospel d^spensations great salvation, but the great benefit
purchased by Christ termed eternal salvation, Heb. 5.9. declared and offered in
the Gospel. Diodati annot. on Heb. 2.^. So great] namely everlasting
redemption, revealed and communicated by the Gospel, and impl^citely opposed by
the Apostle to the temporal deliverance out of Egypt, for the contemning of
which the Israelites were punished in the wilderness. And though the new Annot.
and Diodati paraphrase Romans 11.26. by [ put into the way of salvation] yet they
do not restrain this to a mere visible Churchstate; yea both add, that by [ all
Israel] may be understood the Israel of God, Gal. 6.16. of Jews and Gentiles,
which is the invisible Church. And Di^son thus parap^raseth the words, And so
all Israel, that is, the multitude of Jews comprehending the body of the people
dispersed shall be converted. And Piscator in his Scholie, The fullness of
Israel shall be saved, to wit being effectually called by the preaching of the
Gospel, and justified by faith in Christ. But what is said of all Israel, is
not to be extended to each, but to be understood of the greatest part, from
which the denomination is wont to be made.

Mr. Bl adds, And such men brought into a Churchstate are turned from iniquity
partially, from their former way of iniquity, their contradicting and
blasp^eming; having escaped the pollution of the world, 2 Pet. 2.6. of the
world that remains out of the Church of God.

Answ. 1* Were this the meaning, yet infants should be excluded, who are not
thus turned. 2. That such a partial turning cannot be meant, is manifest, in
that the term is (...), ungodlinesses, that is, all sorts of ungodliness from
Jacob, that is, as Piscator in his scholie, by pardoning or remitting and
justifying by faith, and this to be done by the redeemer which shall come out
of Sion who so turns from iniquity as to bless them whom he turns, Acts. 3.26.
which does not agree to Mr. Bls. partial turning. More rightly Di^son thus
paraphraseth the words. He foretells that so it should be, that the true
redeemer should free his nation from the guilt and servitude of sin, the
iniquities of that people being pardoned; and that it should be, that he would
receive them into the Covenant of grace to the full abolishing of sin.

But, says Mr. Bl. Their sin is pardoned quoad hoc: and when Moses, prayed for
the pardon of the sin of Israel, Exodus 32. and God promises it, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.
it is so to be understood of a national pardon.

Answ. A partial pardon quoad hoc of some particular sin, and releasing only
of some particular evil, cannot be meant Romans 11.26, 27. since it is a taking
away of their sins, by the agency of the redeemer that comes out of Sion, and
according to Gods Covenant to them; which 1. the same with that, Jer. 31 33.
Heb. 8.12. and 10.16, 17. in which eternal redemp^ion and inheritance are
assured, Heb. 9.12* 15. I grant it shall be a nationa^ pardon, understanding by
nation the greatest or chiefest part of the nation, but different from the
pardon obtained by Moses, Exodus 32. or prom^sed, 2 Chronicles. 7.14.

To what I said in answer to Mr. Geree, that I thought at the Jews restoration
there shall be some of them formalists and hypocrites, but none of the
re-ingraffed, Mr. Bl. replies, The re-ingraffing here is in their stead that
fell away by multitudes, and therefore were hypocri^es and formalists, and the
ingraffed such as might fall, which is not spiritual Israel, but carnal. But
the Text does not say, the Jews shall be re-ingraffed in their shead that sell
away by multitudes* but only that the Gentiles be graffed into the Olive in
stead of the Jews broken off, v. 17. and the Jews shall be re-ingraffed when
the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, and both be ingraffed together, not
the one broken off to make room for the other, as in the calling of the
Gentiles, v. 19. Yet were it so as Mr. Bl. says, how does it follow, the
re-ingraffing here is in their stead that fell away by multitudes, Ergo the
re-ingraffed were some of them formalists and hypocrites? I conceive it follows
rather on the contrary, those that fell away were hypocrites, therefore they
that are ingraffed in their stead are living branches, or sincere believers. As
for what he said before about the falling away of the ingraffed, is answered
before.

But Mr. Bl. yet adds, There is a national pardon, and a personal: pardon i^
o^t applied to a national return, as 2 Chronicles. 7.14. and Jerem. 18.7, 8. there
it is the removal of drought, locusts, pestilence; here their judgment was the
vail of blindness, not assenting to the Gospel light; and they shall be saved
from this blindness, as the Text expressly has it, v. 25, 26.

Answ. This blindness is no way removed but by giving of faith, as is proved
before; and therefore this proves for me, the ingraffing to be giving faith
according to election, and all the ingraffed to be elect.

Yet once more says Mr. Bl. The words quoted out of v. 26, 27. are partly from
Isa. 59.20. and partly from Jerem. 31.34. as I conceive, which in the Prophets
are directly spoken of a national return, and national pardon, as Mr. B. of one
of them has well observed: but in New Testament Scriptures variously applied,
as all know that text of Habakkuk is, chapter 2.4. That of Jeremy is applied
personally: but here, as the context is clear, it, must be applied nationally
to Israel according to the flesh. The vail shall be taken from them on whom it
lies; it lies on Israel according to the flesh: what mystery had the Apostle
revealed in case he had only showed that all elect b^lievers should be saved?

Answ. Though that were no mystery, yet it was a mystery, that God should
contrive it so that Israel Gods people formerly should now be blind, and the
Gentiles see, and when their fullness is come in, then all Israel should be
saved, who were then broken off. And this salvation is to be national, and yet
spiritual, there being a national effectual conversion to God, although all of
the nation be not converted, as well as there is a national return from
captivity, and yet not all return. The words being quoted from ^sai. 59.20.
Jer. 31.34. there being no reason to the contrary they should be applied
personally here, as ^hey are Heb. 8.12. and 10.^6, 17. I shall close up the
vindication of this argument with the words of Dr. Owen of perseverance Chapter 7..
24. The force then of this promise, Isa. 59.^0. and the influence it has into
the establishment of the truth we have in hand, the perpetual abiding of the
spirit with the Saints, will not be evaded and turned aside, by affirming, that
it is made to the whole people of Israel. For bes^des, that the spirit of the
Lord could not be said to be in the ungodly rejected part of them, nor his
word in their mouth, there is not the least in text and context, to intimate
such an extent of this promise as to the object of it, and it is very weakly
attempted to be proved from Paul's accommodation, and interpretation of the v*
fore going in Romans 11.26. For it is most evident, and indisputable to any one,
who shall but once cast an eye upon that place, that the Apostle accommodates
and applies these words to none, but only those who shall be saved, being
turned away from ungodliness to Christ, which are only the seed before
described. And those he calls all Israel; either in the spiritual sense of the
word, as taken for the chosen Israel of God, or else indefini^ely for that
nation, upon the account of those plentiful fruits, which the Gospel shall
find amongst them, when they shall fear the Lord and his goodness in the
latter days.

My seventh argument was, If the re-ingraffing be by virtue of Gods election
and love, his gifts of calling* then it is into the invisible Church, by
election and giving of faith; But the former is true v. 28, 2^ Ergo, the
latter. Mr. S. answers, 1. It Is said, that as touching election the Jews are
beloved for their fathers sake; hence it follows, God has a love of election
to believers and their natural seed; for so the Jews were the natural seed of
Abraham.

Answ. It follows not of believing Gentiles and their natural seed, for this
is spoken peculiarly of the Jews. Nor does it follow of all the natural seed of
Abraham, the contrary is determined Romans 9.6; 7, 8. nor of any at all times, as
in the time of their great Apostasy. Much less does it hence follow, as it
has been pleaded for Paedobaptism, that because God loved the Jews for the
fathers sake, therefore we are to take in the parcels, all the infants of
inchurched believers, to be elect and in the Covenant of Grace, and thereupon
to baptize them, this to my apprehension has not a shadow of consequence.

But says Mr. S. 2. It Is granted that the calling of the Jews shall be
according to Gods election and first love; and that Gods election shall more
fully take hold of the Jews at their recalling, then of any nation: but yet
still the argument is of no force to prove that their re-ingraffing and so ours
is only or firstly into the invisible Church; for they are elected as well to
be a visible Church, as to be partakers of inward graces; and their
re-ingraffing must be specially and firstly into the visible Church from which
they were broken off, or else there will be no correspondence between their
rejection and re-ingraffing.

Answ. Yet the arg. is of force to prove it is into the invisible Church, so as
none are re-ingraffed but the elect and partakers of inward graces, though it
were granted that their re-ingraffing be specially and firstly into the visible
Church: Yea, Mr. Ss reason is against himself, for if their re-ingraffing be
not firstly and specially into the invisible Church by faith, there will be no
correspondence between their re-ingraffing and rejection, which was firstly and
specially from the invisible Church by unbelief.

Mr. Bl. answers thus. His election, love, and gifts of calling, did at the
first put them into a visible Churchstate and condition, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. And the
same love, election, and gifts of calling, now they are broken off, does
re-ingraff them; if this argument hold, it was an invisible Church that was
brought out of the land of Egypt.

Answ. According to Mr. Bl. the Apostle should mean that the election and love,
Romans 11.28. are meant of such election and love as may be to them that perish,
and such a calling and gifts as may be lost, for such the election into a mere
visible Churchstate and condition, and calling, and love, and gifts are, which
Mr. Bl. p. 302. will have to be the meaning of the Apostle here. But this is
not meant here, 1. because that election, love, gifts and calling are here
meant, as are from the Covenant of the Redeemer, v 26, 27. and whereby all
Israel shall be saved; this is manifest from the connection, the words v. 28,
29. being a confirmation of the proposition all Israel shall be saved, v. 26.
from the Covenant to turn away impieties from Jacob, and to take away their
sins, for this reason, because they are beloved according to the election and
calling of God* which are unchangeable. But such salvation, election, love,
gifts and calling never happen to them that perish, the Covenant, turning away
from impieties, and taking away sins, belong only to them who are eternally
saved; therefore they are not an election, love, gifts, and calling which put
into a mere visible Churchstate and condition.

2. Such gifts and calling of God are not here meant which are revocable, or of
which God repents; for to be without repentance is to be without revocation, or
change: But the gifts and calling which are into a mee^ visible Churchstate,
are revocable and with repentance, as both the Scripture and experience shows,
therefore they are not here meant.

3. That calling and election are meant here which are ascribed to God in the
passages where there is speech of Gods election and calling of persons before
in the 8th. 9th. and 11th. chapters; for it is manifest* that the dispute about
election and calling of the Jews and Gentiles, chapter 9, 10, 11. arose from the
words of the Apostle, Romans 8.28, 29, etc. But the election and calling in all
the passages signifies such an election and calling as is to eternal life and
righteousness, as is manifest from Romans 8.28, 30, 33. Romans 9.7, 11, 24, 25, 26.
Romans 11.5, 7. Therefore not an election or calling into a mere visible
Churchstate.

4. That calling and election is meant here, which is usually, if not always,
meant by the Apostles in their writings. For it is likely Paul would speak here
in the sense in which the word is commonly used, there being no cogent reason
to the contrary. But the words election and calling in the Apostles writings
are taken usually, it not always, for election and calling to righteousness and
eternal life, as may appear by these places, 1 Cor. 1.2, 9, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29.
and 7.15, 18, 20. Ephesians. 1.4, 18. and 4.1, 4. Gal. 1.6, 15. and 5.8, 13. Phil.
3.14. Col. 3.12, 15. 1 These. 1.4 and 2.12. and 5.24. 2 These. 1.11. and 2.11,
14. 1 Timothy 5.21. and 6.12. 2 Timothy 1.9. and 2.10. Tit. 1.1. Heb. 3.1. and 9.15.
James 2.5. 1 Pet. 1.1, 15. and 2.9 and 5.10. 2 Pet. 1.3, 10. Jude ^^ Revel.
17.14. Therefore the meaning is in like manner, Romans 11.28, 29.

That which Mr. Bl. alleges from Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. does not weaken this. For
though it prove that which is not denied, that there is an election of a people
to a visible Churchstate; yet it proves not such an election and love to be
meant Romans 11.28. nor by my argument does it with any color of reason follow,
that the Church brought out of Egypt was the invisible Church, because they
are said to be chosen, Deuteronomy. 7.6, 7. any more then because Judas is said to be
chosen by Christ, John 6.70. therefore election, Romans 11.28. is into a mere
visible Churchstate or Apostleship.

But Mr. Bl. after his calumny of my dis service to the Anti Arminians* wiped
away before, tells us that the Apostle there delivers an universal proposition,
and ap^lies it to such election, love, and gifts that belongs to bodies or
nations* yet it is a truth that equally holds, when it is applied to election
to salvation, and with just warranty is applied by Divines to that purpose.

Answ. It is not true that the Apostle delivers, Romans 11.29. an universal
proposition concerning any election, love, calling* gifts, for then It would be
false, there be many gifts and callings of God which are not without repentance
in the Apostles sense; but a proposition of the gifts and calling which are to
salvation, according to that love and election which are to everlasting
salvation according to the Covenant mentioned v. 26.27. and therefore those
Divines who understand it of election, love, gifts and calling to a mere
visible Churchstate and condition, have no warranty to apply it to prove that
election and perseverance which the Text, if they speak true, speaks not of;
and the argmuent from thence for that purpose is utterly enervated by that
interpretation, since the assumption is by it made confessedly false, if the
argument be thus framed, That decree is immutable, and that gift and calling of
God do certainly continue which the Apostle says are without repentance. But
the Apostle says the decree of election to eternal life, and the gift of
taking away sins* and the calling which is inward are without repentance. Ergo.
As for Pareus his forming it as from the less to the greater, it is, as for the
most part such arguments are, liable to many exceptions; and in this matter
has no strength; for then it would follow, that if Gods gift and calling to
visible Churchstate is without repentance, calling to the office of a
Presbyter, which is more, is without repentance. I deny not but Commentators do
speak some of them as Mr. Bl. alleges, and some doubtfully of which election
and calling to understand it, and some speak disjunctively as if it were meant
of either; and some one while means it of the one, and another while of the
other. But it is not worth while to search into or set down their words. It is
sufficient that I have demonstrated that i^ must be meant of such election,
love, gifts and cal^ing as are to saving holiness, and righteousness, and
eternal life. Yet those which I alleged as writing against the Arminians, and
understanding it of the decree of election un^o life and perseverance in saving
grace, Mr. Bl. denies not that I have ^ightly cited them, only he will not
have Ames so peremptory as I am, by reason of some words of his, from which Mr.
Bl. does most falsely infer thus, [ so that it appears according to him that
they spoke truth in the denial of this to be meant of the unchangeable decree
of eternal election,] which they who read Ames his words in his Coronis, art.
5. cap. 4. may easily discern. I add to those I cited in the first part of this
Review, sect. 2. page ^5. Dr. Owen, of perseverance, c. 2.. 7. etc. Dr. Kendal,
of redemption, chapter 8. page ^20, etc. The reason why some will not have it meant
of election and effectual calli^g to salvation is their mistake, that
particular persons may not be said to fall away from such ele^^ion and cal^ing.
For though it be true, that the particular persons never fall away from their
personal election and calling, yet they may fall away from that election and
calling to eternal life which they in their ancestor^ had; which sense I have
showed to be agreeable to the Apostles meaning, in the first part of this
Review, sect. 3. And Dr. Twiss in his Vind. Great. l. 3. err. 8. sect. 3.
acknowledges that when the Apostle says, Romans 11.23. they shall be graffed
in, he means it not of those individuals in their persons, but their posterity.

But Mr. Bl. argues thus. The Fathers for whose sake they are beloved are the
ancient Fathers from whom after the flesh they did proceed, specially Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, the word is for the Fathers: Then election must needs be
understood of an external grace of the Covenant, whereby God chose this nation
to himself, according to that of Moses, Deuteronomy. 7.6. unless we are elect in
Abraham to salvation and not in Christ. And Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are our
mediators of reconciliation: and when the Apostle says, We are ^ccepted in the
beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. it is to be understood of acceptance in Abraham: and we
are to conclude our prayers, not in and through Christ but Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; we are not for their sakes beloved to salvation.

Answ. 1. That the election, Deuteronomy. 7.6. must be understood of an external grace
of the Covenant, needs bettr proof then Mr. Bl. brings. For God may be said to
choose a nation, and yet not choose every one of the nation, it being usual, as
Mr Cobbet observes, Just. vindic. part 2. chapter 2. that things said of a people
collectively are meant of the greater or better part distributively. 2. The
absurdities will press Mr. Bl. as well as me. For if, as Mr. Bl. says, the
election and love be to a mere visible Churchstate and condition, we may say by
the same reason which he uses, We are elected in Abraham to Churchstate, and
not in Christ; he is our mediator of reconciliation; we are accepted in Abraham
the beloved; we are to conclude our prayers not in and through Christ, but
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, which are absurd: We are not beloved for their sakes
in the sense in which we are beloved in Christ, to visible Churchstate, any
more then to salvation. 3. Though we are not for their sakes or for them
beloved to salvation, yet the Jews are. 4. We are elect in Christ as the
firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8.29. as the head of many members, as the
mediator, the second Adam, by whom the life we are elected to is conveyed, in
which sense we are said to be accepted or favored, he is the mediator of
reconciliation by his blood, we conclude our prayers in and through him as the
High Priest of our profession: But they that say, the Jews are beloved to
salvation for the fathers sakes, or for Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, need not,
nor do mean it in these senses; but thus, they are beloved to salvation by
reason of Gods Covenant to them, Exodus 32.13. Levit. 26.42. their fidelity to
him, Nehem. 9.8. so that Abraham was called the friend of God, James 2.23.
which are no whit derogatory to the prerogative of Christ, in whom alone we are
elected, reconciled, favored, heard, as the only begotten son of God, and the
alone mediator between God and man.

What Mr. Bl. desires me to consider that Moses interceded for the whole body
of Israel, Exodus 32.13. and that God promises to remember the whole nation
under suffering, Levit. 26.42. is nothing for Mr. Bls. purpose. For if it were
granted, that Moses interceded for the whole nation, yet it follows not, that
Gods promise was to every individual of that nation, Levit. 26.42. And if it
were, yet it follows not that it must be so Romans 11.26, 27, 28, 29. Nor if it
were granted (though the contrary is to me more probable) does it follow, that
the election, love, gifts, calling, cannot be to salvation, but must be into a
mere visible Churchstate and condition, or, as Mr. Bl. terms it, external grace
of the Covenant, since there is no absurdity, that I know of to conceive, that
at the calling of the Jews every individual Jew shall be a true believer, and
saved. Nor does my opinion impute any error to Moses or Paul, but Mr. Bl. does
in this as in other things, egregiously triffle as one that writes without heed
of what he says.

My 8th. argument is this. If the ingraffing both of Jews and Gentiles be the
fruit of Gods mercy, the breaking off by shutting up in unbelief, then the
ingraffing is into the invisible Church by election and giving faith: But the
former is true, verse. 30, 31, 32. Ergo, the later.

Mr. S. rather flights then answers this argument. For he takes no notice of
that part of the medium, [the breaking off by shutting up in unbelief,] which
shows what mercy it was by which they were ingraffed, to wit, converting and
reconciling mercy proper to the elect, as the very opposition of the terms
shows. v. 32. they were before shut up in unbelief by severity, now by mercy
they are brought to faith and favor, but tells me, this proposition is unsound
on which the argument is built, what ever is a fruit of Gods mercy is from
election and ingraffing into the invisible Church, because that health, etc.
are fruits of Gods mercy. But ^t is not true, the proposition on which the
argument is built is as he ^^ith, but thus; That mercy which does take away
the shutting up in unbelief, is converting reconciling mercy from election,
whose effect is the ingraffing into the visible Church by giving saving faith,
ergo, if the ingraffing, etc. And this Mr. S. has not disproved, nor do I
think can be disproved.

Mr. Bl. says, He has answered this before, and only desires me to give him
a Comment on Hos, 1.6, 9.

But first if he have answered this before, then his answer is also refelled,
and it is showed that the mercy here is more then the privilege of a visible
Churchstate. 2. Mr. Bls. desire I shall not re^use to yield to, when I find
any argument drawn by him from Hos. 1.6, 9. to make void my argument from Romans
11.30, 31, 32.

But to my additional confirmation of my arguments in my Apology p. 73. that
the whole scope and series of the Chapter and the frequent mention from v. 1.
to 13. of terms importing election, reprobation and their consequents, with
the Apostles exclamation v. 33. do fully show the ingraffing to be into the
invisible Church, by election and giving faith; Mr. Bl. replies thus.

Mr. T. might do well to tell us what ingraffing is by election: I take that to
be an immanent act in God, which is terminated in himself, and not on the
creature; such expressions do not suit with Mr. T. his high pretendings to
scholastical learning.

Answ. Where and when I made high pretendings to scholastical learning, if Mr.
Bl. had informed me it might have done me good to humble me for such folly,
but this dealing of Mr. Bl. by ^uips to mis-represent me as an arrogant man,
has no better appearance then a show of a malevolent mind in him toward me.
I hope I have so much scholastical learning as to vindicate my own writings,
from his and others Cavils, and sure I am that what ^ver my learning be,
Master Bl. has showed more of a surcostical bitter spirit in his writings
against me, then of scholastical learning, in which how much he is defective,
I had rather Mr. B and such birds as are of the same feather should tell him
then my self. As for this exception it is so frivolous, as that it deserves not
a reply.

I did not say the ingraffing is by election alone but by election and giving
faith, which sometimes I do express sutably to Ephesians. 1.4. thus [by giving
faith according to election] and even in the first part of this Review, page
14. where I repeat this very thing, and do often tell what the ingraffing is
which is by election, to wit effectual calling, converting, reconciling, giving
saving faith, so that Mr. Bl. were he not disposed to quarrel, might have
omitted this exception. As for that he takes election to be an immanent act
in GOD, so do I, and conceive that the will or counsel of God Acts 13.36. is an
immanent act in God, and yet it is said that David having served his generation
by the will or counsel of God fell asleep, and though election as the will of
God be not in another subject then himself, yet it is terminated on the
creature as the object, it being one of those acts of God that are ad extra
though not extra, which me thinks Mr. Bl. should understand, if age and disuse
have not worn out his Logic and Theologick notions.

Mr. Blake says of me, To have made up his argument he should have taken in by
way of assumption; The Jews in their fall from Church Fellowship, cannot be
said to be rejected, hardened, given to a spirit of slumber, or that their eyes
are darkened, or that they have stumbled; And that for their call into
Church Fellowship, neither election or grace shall have any hand in it: This
must be his reasoning if there be any show of reason in his heap of words,
and then all men will admire Mr. ^. while he is in his admiration of Mr. M. I
shall say no more but that he is very weak both in Divinity and Logic, that
cannot presently upon the first ^ight discover the weakness, and return a
satisfying answer to this flourish of words.

Answ. The words were as few as the matter would bear, without any flourish at
all. The assumption would not have been as Mr. Bl. makes it, but thus, that the
Jews by bare fall from visible Church fellowship, cannot be said to be
rejected, hardened, given to a spirit of slumber, or that their eyes are
darkened, or that they have stumbled. (For a person may fall from visible
Churchfellowship only by excommunication, putting out of the Synagogue, and
yet be neither rejected by God, nor hardened, nor given to a spirit of
slumber, or his eyes darkened, or he stumble, as in the case of the man born
blind, Joh. 9.34, 35.) and that the election and grace mentioned Romans 11.5, 7.
are meant there or in any part of the Apostles discourse of these things, Romans
8, 9, 11. chapter of election into mere visible Churchfellowship, or grace that
extends to no more then outward privileges of Churchstate is not likely. And
if any do take this reasoning to be weak, I must needs say that I or he are
stark blind in Divinity and Logic, and omitting my admiration of Mr. M. who I
think after his edition of his Defense gave over the dispute, I admire not that
Mr. Bl. (who^e superficialness I perceive plainly enough) but that any man that
accurately studies Romans 11. should interpret the ingraffing there meant of the
bringing of persons into a mere visible Churchstate by a dogmatical faith, or
outward ordinance without giving saving faith according to Gods election.

Mr. Bl. proceeding to vindicate Mr G. recites the words of the first part of
this Review page 14. and then says, It is well that Mr. T. yields so much, and
being n^w imbarqued in this business, if he did not not plus consulere ^amae
quam conscientiae, he would yield more, and freely confess that the mercy here
is no other, nor no more then that which is general, and that the faith here is
historical and not saving; I am sure there is enough to convince but it is God
alone that must persuade.

Answ. If Mr Bl. had never known me, this censure might have been the more
excusable, but his many criminations and censures, and misreports of me in his
preface to his Book of the Covenant and throughout his Book do fully assure me
he has an evil eye toward me, and that he is indisposed to put any fair
construction on what I do or write. Of which malignity in him I know no reason,
but my opposing his da^ling of infant perfusion, for sprinkling it seems he
ownes not, and baptism he uses not. As for what he here says o^ me, if this
reply of mine acquit me not, I have no remedy but to appeal to my witness in
heaven. I do again protest, that I see no reason to convince me of that Mr. Bl.
here says, but abundant reason to the contrary, if Mr. Bl. or any other shall
detect my error, I am willing to be convinced and persuaded; but such
fli^ting, quipping answers as Mr. Bl. makes, I shall hereafter pass by as the
froth and some of an angry satyrist, not the dispute of a scholastique.

He says of me, His reason to assert it to be meant of saving faith, is
worthy of consideration, being opposed to their former hardening, etc. And is
there not a hardening that reaches so high to hold men from so much as faith
historical (...) dogmatical, as well as there is an hardening to hold men from
that which is saving?

Answ. There is, but no hardening meant Romans 9. or 11. which does not deprive of
saving faith together with historical, and consequently the showing mercy
opposite must be not a giving an historical faith only, but also a saving
faith.

Mr. Bl. adds, The va^l is (as the Apostle tells us) on the heart of the Jews to
this day, when Moses is read 2 Cor. 13.15. And does not this vail so far blind
their eyes that they see not so much as with faith historical? That which the
Jews to this time want, is that from which they fell, let Mr. T. take that into
consideration; But to this day they want even a faith historical, had they kept
faith in Christ so far as an assent in their whole nation, so that they had
past in name and dignity for Christians, and had yet wanted among them that
faith that was saving, then there had been color for what Mr. T. says. But
their being as it is, and as it is here affirmed, I cannot but wonder at the
vail before Mr. T. his eyes, that what is thus clear, should be thus held from
him.

Answ. I shall forbear wondering hereafter, forasmuch as I discern the reason
of Mr. Bls. wrangling, prejudice out of his affection to his brat termed
Birth-priviledge, makes him imagine a vail over mine eyes, which is indeed over
his own. What color or proof rather is for my saying is showed before. My
argument is no whit infringed though the state of the Jews were such as that
they wanted both historical and saving faith, hardening being opposed to giving
saving faith, and no person said to be hardened but he that wants saving faith,
and he that wants being hardened though he should have historical, so that if
hardening be a privation of both, yet it has its denomination only from the
privation of saving faith. And for Mr Bls. reason he would have me consider,
first the conclusion of it is not to the present point. For if the Jews might
not be said to fall from a saving faith, yet their unbelief mentioned Romans
11.30. might be and was a privation not only of historical faith but also a
saving (else Mr. Bl. must say they had a saving faith though not historical,
which is a palpable absurdity, for then a person may have a saving faith and
not an historical, and the unbelieving Jews had a saving faith) and
consequently the showing mercy must be not only a conferring an historical
faith, but also a saving. 2. The ma^or is not true universally taken. All that
which the Jews to this time want is that from which they fell; For they want
their Temple, sac^ifi^es, Priesthood, etc. and yet they fell not from them.
Third the argument is thus retorted, That which the Jews to this time want, is
that from which they fell, let Mr. Bl. take that into considera^ion. But to
this day they want even a saving faith, Ergo, they fell from a saving faith.
Such ill hap has Mr. Bls. arguing: yet as one whose fingers did itch to be
dealing with me he scribbles further.

Whereas I alleged Ephesians. 2.12. to prove the unbelief of the Gentiles in times
past mentioned Rom 11.30. was not only a privation of historical, but also of
saving faith, Mr. Bl. puts these frivolous questions to me, Were they not
without a dogmatical ^aith? Were they not aliens and strangers so much as from
the Commonwealth of Israel?

To which I answer, they were; and ask him, Whether they were not without a
saving faith? And if so the showing mercy is opposed to the no^ giving a saving
faith, and Mr. Bls. position most absurd, that the faith here (to wit Rom 11.20
where alone the word faith is used in that Chapter) is historical and not
saving.

Mr. Bl. adds, And though in some sense every regenerate professing Christian
is without CHRIST, without God, without hope, respective to saving fruition,
and acceptable communion with him, yet that text is manifestly abused when it
is applied to any of Christian profession. The whole must be carried on in a
due application of it, Gentiles in the flesh, aliens from the Commonwealth of
Israel.

Answ. Though I find no emendation of it in Mr. Bls. Table of Errata, yet I do
conceive [regenerate] is printed for [unregenerate] otherwise the speech were
more grossly false then I shall imagine Mr. Bl. would thus deliver. And it
being so, I conceive no abuse of it to have applied it to mere visible
professors of Christianity among the Gentiles, if the words were added to it
which Mr. Bl. would have joined. For they were Gentiles in the flesh, aliens
from the Commonwealth of Israel, without Christ, without God, without hope.
Nevertheless I know not what this makes to infringe my inference from Ephesians.
2.12. to prove the unbelief Romans 11.30. to have been a privation of saving
faith.

Master Bl. denies not this sense of the words, that the Ephesians in their
infidelity were without Christ, without God, without hope, respective to saving
fruition and acceptable communion with him, and sure they that were thus were
without saving faith, except Mr. Bl. imagine they had a saving faith, who had
not so much as an historical: Nor is it denied the same state to be described
Romans 11.30. which is described Ephesians. 2.12. and therefore my inference stands
notwithstanding this passage of Mr. Bl.

He further says, And for his observation, that it occasioned the Apostles
exclamation, O altitudo! O the depth, etc. v. 33. Sure the goodness of God
bringing the Gentiles who were dogs, Matthew. 15.26. unto the glory of children,
and the severity of God in casting out the children of the Kingdom, Matthew.
8.12. might well occasion this exclamation in the Apostle, as he had called to
behold the goodness and severity of God, on them which fell severity, but
toward the Gentiles goodness He might well cry out upon the greatest turn of
providence that ever the world saw (which in ages past had been hid, and the
Angels desired to look into) O the depth! etc.

Answ. True: but was this goodness or severity in respect of a mere visible
Churchstate? or was it not also in respect of their state in the invisible
Church? Sure the thing had not been so admirable, if it had not been in respect
of the later as well as the former; and Writers and Preachers usually apply it
to silence the objection against absolute election and reprobation concerning
their everlasting state, as if it imported unmercifulness and injustice
incompetent to God; and it seems so like the passage, Romans 9.19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24. that me thinks if Mr. Bl. did compare them, he should judge both places
meant of the same thing: and which i^ an irrefragable argument, it is clear
Romans 11.33. has reference to what he said before, v. 11, 12. which is
manifestly meant of their estate of salvation and reprobation, and therefore
must be so meant v. 33.

What Mr. Bl. adds concerning my speech about Mr. G. and the Assembly, is
through mistake, as if I had censured Mr. G. as like Plautus his miles
gloriosus in his disposition; whereas I censured him only in respect of those
words there used, which was right however in other things he were without gall,
from which nevertheless that in his writings against me he was not altogether
free, is showed in my Apology, sect. 6. And for Mr. Bls. conceit, that where
one degree of boasting is ascribed to Mr. G. one hundred will be ascribed to me
by them that read our writings* it is not unlikely, if they see through Mr.
Bls. spectacles, which make things seem black that are white, and make small
^illocks seem hills: But I find cause to make it part of my Letany, From the
unrighteous and hard censures of Mr. Bl. Mr. B. and others of my Antagonists,
good Lord deliver me.

What I said of the Assembly showed no more boldness then was mere, It is too
apparent by the dealing with Mr. Coleman, my self, and others, that the stream
of voices in the Assembly went to establish all after the Scottish mode,
without a through examination of what was alleged to the contrary, except what
was objected were backed by a very considerable party in Parliament, or Army,
or City of London. It is no more boldness in me to assault such an Assembly,
then it was in a particular dissenting brother. My weapons I ass^ult them with*
are such as the Holy Scriptures yield, and my interpretations such as my
adversaries themselves give, and my arguments and answers are the very same
which they use in other disputes against Prelates and Arminians; and with th^se
weapons which M. Bl. disdainfully like a Goliath, terms reeds or bulrushes, I
am no more afraid to assault the Assembly of Divine at Westminster, then to
assault Bakewel, Hussy, and such like scriblers.

To my 9th argument from parallel places, Mr. Bl. tells me, Mr. Hudson, page
132. has not only affirmed, but proved, that the Text 1 Cor. 12.13. is meant
of the Church as visible.

Answ. I have viewed the place, and find Mr. Hudson speaking thus in answer to
the objection: But this is meant of the invisible company of believers he
says, it is true, but it is spoken of them as visible. So that Mr. Hudson
affirms the same with me, that 1 Cor. 12.13. must be understood of the
invisible Church, yet in respect of that which is there said of them, something
is spoken of them as visible.

To my allegation of Ephesians. 3.6. that the Gentiles were made fellow-heirs of
the same body, and co-partakers of the promise of God in the Gospel; not by an
outward ordinance, but by giving of faith according to election: Ergo, the
ingraffing Romans 11.17. parallel to it, is not by an outward ordinance, b^t by
giving faith according to election: Mr. Bl. thus in his flirting fashion
answers, Oh that Mr. T. spoke truth; then (as the Apostle says of Israel at
their restoration, all Israel shall be saved, Romans 11.26.) All England in
statu quo, should be saved in the sense that Mr. T. would understand salvation,
whether we be by descent Britains, Saxons, or Normans, we are Gentiles, and
consequently by his Divinity partakers of the Gospel by faith according to
election.

Answ. Not so, unless by Gentiles were meant every Gentile, which a fre^h man
in the University would correct Mr. Bl. in, who knows an indefinite proposition
not to be equipollent to an universal incontingent matter. It is said, Acts
11.18. th^n has God given to the Gentiles repentance unto life; yet it follows
nor, he has done so to every Gentile. Mr. Bl. adds. Sure I am this Text is
meant of Gospel glory in ordinance dispensed by the Apostles ministry. Answ.
Sure I am, that to be fellow heirs, and of the same body, and partakers
together of his promise in Christ by the Gospel, imports more then a mere
visible Churchstate, even an estate of righteousness, union with Christ, and
inheritance of eternal life: And I doubt not but many of his Auditors would
correct Mr. Bl. if he taught otherwise at any Lecture of Christians of ordinary
understanding.

Yet he he says further, And as to the Jews appertained the glory and the
promises, Romans 9.4, 5. so now the glory and promises belong to the Gentiles:
And as many Jews as fell not off, still enjoy this glory with the Gentiles, and
so both make one new man, Ephesians. 2.15. The visible state of the Jews was a
distinct body from the Gentiles: Now upon this glorious call they are one new
man, or new body.

Answ. The glory and promises meant Romans 9 4, 5. did never belong to the
Gentile believers in the Christian Church, nor do the believing Jews still
enjoy that glory with the Gentiles, though both make one new man, yet not the
mere visible Church is that one man, or body, but the Church invisible
reconciled to God by Christ's death, as the Text it self shows, Ephesians. 2.15, 16,
17, 18, 19.

Mr. Bl* tells me, The ingraffing is not by giving faith of election, nor is it
an act of admission into the visible Church by an outward ordinance; but it is
by Gods giving of faith in and by Gospel ordinances, to give assent to Gospel
mysteries, and make profession of them.

Answ. I have proved before it is more then the giving of an historical faith,
however this concession in the close serves my purpose. For if this be the
ingraffing, then they only that thus do assent and make profession, are
ingraffed: But infants do not thus assent and make profession; Ergo, they are
not ingraffed, and consequently the Text Romans 11.16, 17. alleged by the
Assembly, Mr. G. Mr. M. etc. for admission of infants with parents as with the
Jews, is brought obtorto collo plainly against the meaning of it.

What Mr. Bl. adds, that Gal. 3.14, 26, 28, 29. there is an ingraffing into
Christ mentioned, but none into the Church, is as vain as the rest, there being
no ingraffing into Christ by faith, but it is also into the Church invisible,
who is Christ mystical, 1 Cor. 12.12 The Scriptures I have produced are proved
to be meant of the Church invisible, because the things said in those
Scriptures are such as agree to none other; and they appear to be parallel by
the indentity of the matter, all expressing the state of Gentile believers upon
their effectual cal^ing. It is Mr. Bls. false charge, that the Reader will
hereafter find me reasoning with my full strength against the force of all
arguments a pari: This calumny is re^elled in the 2d. part of this Review,
sect. 3.

As for my 10th. argument, whether the faith in the testimonies cited be meant
of justifying, and the election to eternal life, needs no other decision then
the very words, which I took from Marlorat without searching into the Authors
own books because I had them not of my own, and I saw it needless to look
further. If the words be ambiguous, the Authors intended to deceive; if
elsewhere they speak against me, they gainsay themselves: neither of which Mr.
Bl. should charge them with, if he regarded their credit.

In Mr. Bls. arguments, sect. 3. the first is answered before in vindicating my
4th. argument. I deny the major of the 2d. which is answered in the 2d. part of
this Review, sect. 6. page 66, 67. In the 3d. the minor is false, that the
privilege of ingraffing is the privilege of every member of the visible
Church: in that which is added to prove it to be the privilege of ordinances,
if the major be universal, it is false; besides, the argument may be retorted.
In the 4th. I deny the major, and have often answered the inference [that then
I must maintain falling away from true faith] that by my exposition the falling
away of particular persons from the true justifying faith they had in their own
persons, is not maintained; but the falling away of the people of one age from
that which their predecessors in a former age had. In the 5th. if the minor be
meant of a casting only out of a visible Churchstate, it is denied; nor is it
proved, Matthew 21 43. For the Kingdom of God not only notes the outward
Churchstate, but also the rule of Christ in their hearts, and protection of
them by his spirit. In the 6th. the conclusion is granted. That which Mr. Bl.
says, that the body of believing Jews and Christian Gentiles, called by the
Apostle one new man, Ephesians. 2.15. are capable of no other ingraffing then that
which is visible, and the body of them entitled new, as the Jews before, only
to privileges of ordinances, is not true. Nor is it true, that in my speech
recited by him page 312. is taken for granted, 1. that the whole visible body
of Christian nations are truly ingraffed into the Church invisible, i^ by whole
body be meant all the parts, o^ every part. 2. Nor is it true, that it is taken
for granted by me, that in after ages the same body, though not the same
persons, may be cast off, and yet no particular person rejected, without this
explication, that no particular person who was an elect person or true
believer, is rejected.

But against this 2d. imagined grant of mine, Mr. Bl. thus argues. The 2d. must
be examined; this Church thus cut off, either continues in the invisible body
as before, or else is degenerate by the death of those numerical persons, that
made up a body invisible, and succession of others that are no more then
v^sible members. If it continue in the invisible body till the time of breaking
off, then Mr. T. is not helped with his distinction of a consistent and a
fluent being, nor with hi^ similitude of Euphrates; for so a Church invisible
is still broken off and rejected, and falling away is maintained. If it be
degenerate, then 1. they fall off themselves, and are not broken off by God;
their own sin th^n should be noted, nor Gods act as their punishment: But their
breaking off, or rejection is the act of God laying waste his Vineyard, Isa 5.
taking away his Kingdom, Matthew. 21 43. removing the Candlestick, Ephesians. 2.5.
(it should be Revel. 2.5.) All noting the act of God punishing upon the peoples
act of sinning, which is of the Church, not invisible, but visible. 2. For the
similitude of Cyrus his turning of Euphrates, that he turned the same River
that God created, this will not serve Mr. T. his purpose; for Euphrates
continues a River of the same kind and nature as it was at the first creation,
and the Church in his expression is changed from the invisible body of Christ,
to a visible company of bare professors. The Church had changed her own
channel. 3. Mr. T. indeed grants the question, for he confesses that the Church
is visible that God breaks off; and whatsoever it had been, now it has no more
then a visible interest; so that a visible Church falls off, and Gentiles are
ingraffed into that which is visible. Sect. 4. M Bl. adds these words That wild
assertion page 19. That the branches were broken off from election and true
faith, and the invisible Church in which they were, with this limitation;
understanding it not of the same singular persons, but the same people or
nation, is a thread that runs through almost the whole, and enough I suppose is
spoken to it: And when he shall show me an invisible nation (of which he
speaks) from which there may be a breach; I will either yield ^p all, or he
shall hear more. Till then I shall look on his words as such a -- unworthy the
pen of such a Writer; an invisible nation it must be, a visible nation cannot
be cut off from the Church invisible.

Answ. Speak out man, let me know the worst you can say, I expect no favor
from you having found neither charity nor equity in your writings against me.
The assertion is such as will endure your strongest battery, what you say here
is merre wrangling, like a Sophister perverting my words when they are truly
repeated, though thy are very plain. The Argument is quite from the matter. The
Conclusion is, that the Church cut off is not the invis^ble Church but visible,
which is not contradictory to my asserti^n; who never asserted that the Church
cut of^ was the invisible Church, but often asserted the contrary, always
making the Olive tree the invisible Church to abide the same, though some
branches were broken off, others were ingraffed, as in the first part of this
Review Section 9. page 83. with this explication page 66. yet not as a rock
that abides the same, but as a river which is in flux, and I often deny in
express terms, as page 22, 74. that my meaning was that the Church of God is
broken off from the invisible Church; but this I say, that the Nation of the
Jews, of which the body or most part in some ages were in the invisible Church
as branches in the Olive in a continued succession, in the time of the Apostle
that people, to wit the most part of that nation were broken off from the
invisible Church or Olive tree, in which that people in the individual persons
of a former age did stand. Which thing having been so often and so plainly
expressed by me in that book which Mr. Bl. takes on him to answer, it is an
extremely shameful abuse he offers me in going about to refute that as my
assertion which is disclaimed by me. Now this being premised and the term [
this Church] (as it should be) being changed into [this people or nation] that
is a great or the greatest part of them, I answer they are broken off from the
invisible Church, in that the numerical persons that made up the invisible
Church in a former age being dead, the successors degenerated from their faith,
and were neither visible professors nor invisible believers in Christ: which
not believing was their own act from their own will, yet consequent on Gods act
of rep^obation, and the breaking off, to wit the deprivation of them from the
membership and privileges of his invisible Church, was Gods act of punitive
justice for their unbelieving. And thus the similitude of Cyrus his turning
Euphrates, serves my purpose, to show how I am free from holding Arminian
Apostasy, the same people like that river being turned from their old
channel, though not the same persons; not as Mr. Bl. falsely charge me, that
in my expression the Church is changed from the invisible body of Christ, to a
visible company of bare professors, or that the Church had changed her own
channel. Nor do I grant the question, or confess that the Church is visible
that God breaks off, and whatsoever it had been, now it has no more then a
visible interest; so that a visible Church falls off, and Gentiles are
ingraffed into that which is visible; but what I say is of the Jewish people,
who had not so much as a visible interest when God brake them off, or they fell
off, and the Gentiles are ingraffed into the invisible Church in their stead.
Nor need I show an invisible nation broken off, it being neither true that I
spoke of an invisible nation, nor that a visible nation cannot be cut off from
the Church invisible, but these are Mr. Bls. dotages for want of heeding mine
and his own words (as I conceive) through have to insert some thing against me
in that book ere it was printed. Which is so far from being enough to answer
me, that a^ Solomon said of him that answered a matter before he heard it, so it
may be said o^ Mr. Bl. answering me before he had studied my writings, he has
said enough to show his folly and to work his shame. My candor p. 23. is
ordinary where there is the like cause: I conceive the election of bodies,
societies, or nations, in the sense I have often given, may be as well into
the invisible Church of true believers, as into the visible Church of true
professors, and that the election of the Gentiles, by which they were
ingraffed, was into the invisible Church of true believers. Of Calvin's and
B^cers words I shall say no more having not ^he books. Mr. Bl. p. 314. adds.

Mr. G. syllogistically concluding that the seed of Christians by a pure Gospel
Covenant should enjoy outward Church privileges, Mr. T. sect. 4. replies, that
it is not either formally or equivalently the thing to be proved, which is,
that the Christian Jews and their seed were in infancy to be baptized. But by
his favor, he that concludes the whole; concludes the parts of the whole.
Outward Church Priviledges is the whole, baptism is a part of the whole;
concluding Church privileges he concludes baptism, as he that can conclude
Mr. T. is at Lempster or Sudbury, concludes also that his head and shoulders
are. And if any privilege be concluded, then baptism is concluded, which is
the leading one among Church Priviledges.

Answ. Omitting Mr. Bls. snarling at my dwellings in Lemster and Ledbury (for
so he means) I observe how well he pleads for Mr. G. who would have him
conclude, that the seed of Christians by a pure Gospel Covenant should enjoy in
infancy outward Church Priviledges as a whole, and consequently Baptism as a
part. Which if it were Mr. Gs. arguing, he should by the same reason have
concluded their enjoying the Lords Supper, and Church office. Nor is the other
plea much better: For some privilege may be concluded, as laying on hands for
a sign of prayer as Christ did, and yet not baptism. For though baptism be the
leading privilege after a person is brought to the faith, yet before a person
is a believer, if there be any leading Church-priviledg competent to infants,
it must be laying on of hands, the Scripture giving no hint of any other.

The distinction I give in the first part of my Review, sect. 4. p. 28. is
handsome, being set down as it is by me there, though Mr. Bl. carp at it, for
those privileges which Mr. G. terms Gospel privileges, and I term so in
answer to him as keeping his term, I may say of them (if they may be so called,
and not rather legal.)

Mr. Bs. words, the breaking off from the Church is an unavoidable consequence
of the revoking of the gift of Churchmembership, and the repealing of the
ordinance: therefore where there is no breaking off from the Church, there is no
such revoking or repealing; do justify the title of the 6th. sect. of the
first part of my Review. That the breaking off Romans 11.17. was not by repeal of
an ordinance concerning infants visible Churchmembership as Mr. B. conceive,
which Mr. Bl. opposes with me. And his first reason, the deserving cause of
that breaking off is unbelief* now unbelief is not in infants, much less proper
to infants, serves to prove that the infants of unbelievers are not broken off,
for unbelief is not in them, and that infants of believers are not graffed in.
For as the deserving cause of breaking off i^ unbelief which is not in infants,
so the means of graffing in by the rule of opposites is faith, which is not in
infants. And when in his 2d. reason he says, this breaking off was of the
general body of the Church of the Jews, that is the major part. Now infants
were not the generality, they made not up the major part of that body, this
serves to answer what Mr. Bl. before p. 307. and elsewhere would infer, that if
the Gentiles or the body of them be elect then all must be so, whereas the body
according to himself may stand for the major part or generality, which he
denies infants to be, and therefore the body and gen^rality may be ingraffed
and not infants.

Mr. Bls. exceptions against my distinctions of breaking off because breaking
off implied a former union are vain, for there may be a breaking off from that
union which they had not in their own persons, specially when the breaking off
is of a people, nor is it usual to term th^se acts privations of habits which
take not away habits that were, but might have been, as when we are said to be
redeemed, delivered from hell, to be cast out into outer darkness, Matthew. 8.12.
though never in heaven. But were not this right but nonsense, yet Mr. ^ls
exceptions against the distinctions is frivolous. For in those distinctions I
do not set down the ways of breaking off that were actually, but such as are
imaginable, which is necessary when we go about to argue by a disjunctive
syllogism, as all Logicians know.

Yet what Mr. Bl. says, excommunication is not the breaking off meant Romans
11.17, 20. For that is the act of the Church on some particular member; But
this here is the act of God, which is by taking away the Kingdom, by removing
their Candlestick, departing with his presence, is right, if understood of the
subtracting of the presence of his spirit, as well as his word. Which is to be
conceived, for the word was offered and preached to them when they were broken
off, and therefore they were not broken off barely by subtracting that. Besides
the ingraffing is not by bare outward ordinances, for they were vouchsafed even
to the broken off, and consequently the f^tness of the Olive is not the bare
privilege of outward Ordinances. And if it be not the Churches act, but Gods
by which there is ingraffing, then infants are not ingraffed, who have no act
of God to ingraff them, but only that of the Church or administratour of
Baptism.

Mr. Bls. talk of the Ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership, begun in
the great Charter of heaven, and continued, is but vapouring; Mr. Bl. mis
recites Mr. Bs antecedent which was not as he repeats it, That the Jews were
cast off for unbelief, but that none of the Jews were broken off but for
unbelief, which I denied, and Mr. Bls. exceptions is frivolous. But the text
assigns unbelief, Mr. T. assigns no other cause, then that must stand. To
which I reply, and so it does by my answer, and yet I do assign another cause,
Gods act of executing his decree of reprobation.

To what I said, that the unbelief being positive Romans 10.21. if none were
broken off but unbelievers here meant, no infants no not of infidels that never
heard of Christ were broken off, he says we easily yield his conclusion, if he
frame it in a syllogism; that the infants of infidels that never heard of
Christ were never broken off. They could never be broken off that were never
taken in, A branch of a bramble was never broken off from a vine or olive.
Answ. 1. They may be said to be broken off who were never taken in in their own
persons, sure the abortives and stil-born were never taken into the visible
Church of the Jews, and yet if other infants were broken off so were they, and
if they were broken off though they were never taken in in their own persons
but their ancestors, then the infants of infidel Edomites might be said to be
broken off, who were in Esau, Isaac, and Abraham taken in: But they were not
positive unbelievers, therefore other then positive unbelievers are broken off,
which opposes Mr. B. 2. If infants of infidel Edomites be not broken off, then
according to Mr. B. the ordinance of visible Churchmembership is not in respect
of them revoked and repealed, and consequently they are visible Churchmembers
according to the tenor of Mr. Bs. arguing. 3. If God will not punish the
children for the fathers sins (as Mr. B. says) much less for a strangers, then
he would not break off the unbelieving Jews infant children, then they are
visible Churchmembers if Mr. Bs. arg. hold. 4. Mr. Bls. reason is answered
before, by showing how there may be privations of habits not in being; And if
his reason were good, and unbelieving Jews infant could not be broken off, for
that it was never in the visible Church Christian, and is the branch of a
bramble. To my words, that the breaking off is not revoking of an ordinance
about visible churchmembership, but the execution of the decree of reprobation
in excluding them from the invisible Church, M. Bl. replies 1. By demand; Is
there any such decree as to cast out of the Church invisible? I am sure that
chapter has no such thing. Answ. There is a decree of breaking off from the
Church invisible, and that decree is plainly expressed in that chapter, v. 7, 8,
9, 10. For what comes to pass in time that God decrees. But they were broken
off in time from the invisible Church of believers, v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 15, 17, 19,
22. 2 ly. Says he, I demand did they continue in the Church visible, when upon
execution of such a decree they were cast out of the Church invisible? or was
their station in the visible Church lost, and that of the invisible Church
never gained, and therefore they were not broken off from it. Answ. They
continued in the visible Church Jewish in opposition to the visible Church
Christian, which they persecuted when they were cast away and broken off from
the Church invisible of true believers, according to Gods decree of
reprobation, though they never gained a station in the invisible Church in
their own persons. Mr. Bl. adds 3 ly. The Jews adhering to circumcision, etc.
though God changed the rites Moses gave them, refused the way of God, rejected
the counsel of God in not being baptized, doting upon elements beggarly, and so
their eyes are held, that they see nothing into glorious Gospel mysteries; And
this their unbelief is their breaking off from that visible Church station, in
which they sometimes stood, upon which account they are kept out from interest
in the Church invisible. And when this blindness shall be removed, they shall
then be saved.

Answ. Their unbelief was the means of their breaking off, but not of their
breaking off from that visible Church-station in which they sometimes stood;
the visible Church-station in which they stood, is, as Mr. Bl. himself
describes it, their station in the Jewish Church visible in the way of Church
ordinances, Circumcision, Sacrifices, etc. changed by God; yet, as he himself
faith, the Jews stuck thereto, and therefore stood still in their former
visible Church-station. Besides, their unbelief was not their breaking off from
it. For 1. as Mr. Bl. said before the breaking off was Gods act, so was not
their unbelief. 2. According to Mr. Bl. breaking off was Gods act of
punishment, but it was no punishment but a mer^ to be broken off from that
visible Church station. Nor upon the account of their breaking off from that
visible Church station in which they sometimes stood, were they kept out from
interest in the Church invisible, but for their unbelief, and their keeping
that Church station. However, if they were kept out from interest in the Church
invisible, their breaking off is more then depriving of a visible Churchstate,
y^a the same which I assert, a breaking off from the invisible Church.

If there be any mazes in my 8th. and 9th. sections of the first part of my
Review, Mr. B. led me into them, whom I was necessitated to follow: Mr. Bs.
arguments are answered without confusion, and with so much strength, as neither
Mr. Bl. nor Mr. B. are able to refute.

Mr. Bl. asserts contrary to me, that the Christian visible Church and the
Jewish are one and the same, 1. because Japhet dwells in Shems Tents, which are
the Church visible, and this he says needs no proof. But I require proof that
by Shems tents are meant, Genesis 9.27. the visible Church Jewish or Christian.

2. Because they are one sheepfold, Joh. 10.16. and to the objection that it is
meant of the invisible Church, because Christ gives notes of those that were
indeed his sheep, he says, Christ speaks to those that were Disciples only
according to profession, and gives notes, Joh. 8.31. of Disciples indeed; and
it is against all reason, that Christ should in discourse point out the
invisible Church with the demonstrative This, and that to those that were
malignant enough in the Church visible, the Pharisees, as appears in the close
of the former Chapter. And the mention of thieves creeping into it, hirelings
employed in it, does contradict it. The visible Church of the Jews and Gentiles
in which Christ has true sheep for whom he dies, and others that thieves and
hirelings do deceive, makes up one sheepfold.

Answ. The Text rather proves the contrary as Mr. Bl. expounds it* For if the
fold be the visible Church, and the other sheep are not of that visible Church,
then there is not one fold or Church of Jews and Gentiles, but some sheep are
of one fold* or visible Church, and some of another. As for Mr. Bls. arguments,
they are of no force. For Christ might well enough in his discourse point out
the invisible Church with the demonstrative [ this] it being usual to point out
invisible things by it, as Joh. 6.29, etc. This God is our God: And yet I do
not think [ this fold, John 10.16.] notes the invisible Church, but the people
or nation of the Jews, as Piscator, Grotius, etc. expound it, or rather the
place. For the fold, (...), notes not the sheep, and therefore not the Church,
but the place or country where or whence they are* Nor were deceivers,
hirelings, thieves, or wolves, in or of the Church meant Joh. 10.15, 16. though
they might get into the place and company of them. Nor is it truly translated
by our Translatours [ there shall be one fold,] though (which I somewhat marvel
at) they follow therein the vulgar Latin: For the Tigurine Divines note, (...)
in Greek signifies the flock, not the fold. And Beza excepts against the vulgar
for it, and against the Romanists, who would have that one f^ld to be Rome. And
Grotius observes that the speech is proverbial, One flock one shepherd, to
which he makes Ezekiel. 37.24. to be like. Now that the one flock is not the mere
visible Church, but the invisible, it appears from many things in the Text,
that Christ laid down his life for them, that they follow him, hear his voice,
his Father and he knows them distinguishingly from others who do not believe
because they are not of his sheep, that he gives them eternal life, none can
pluck them out of his Fathers hands, v. 14, 15, 16, 26, 27, 28, 29. out of
which many Protestant Divines gather absolute election, particular redemption,
effectual conversion and perseverance, against Arminians. And Diodati in his
annot. on Joh. 10 16. has it thus. Other sheep] namely, the elect among the
Gentiles, who are to be called by the Gospel, and incorporated into the Church
with the elect of the Jewish nation. One body, 1 Cor. 12.13. one new man,
Ephesians. 2.15. are the invisible Church as is showed before. Matthew. 8.11. The
Kingdom of heaven is the Kingdom of glory. Matthew. 21.43. The Kingdom of God
is either the Gospel by a metonymy, or the rule of God in their hearts, which
was taken from them, that is that people, with whose ancestors it was, though
not in those persons from whom it was taken. The visible Church cannot be meant
by the Kingdom, for the fruits of the Kingdom are not the fruits of the mere
visible Church, they are not bare profession, but real faith, holiness, and
obedience, which are fruits of the spirit, not of the Church; or if of any
Church, of the invisible, not the mere visible. And though all invisible
members bring forth fruit, yet that nation which had invisible members bringing
forth fruit in a former age, may in an after age not bring forth fruit, and for
that reason the Church invisible may be taken from them, with whom it was in
respect of their ancestors.

To what I said, If the Christian Gentiles were graffed into the same visible
Church with the Jews, then they should have been circumcised, etc. contrary to
the determination Acts 15. Mr. Bl replies, That is of no force, as though we
may not be in the same Kingdom, and yet under a new way of administration.
Lawgivers on earth are sometimes pleased to change their Laws, and so does the
Lawgiver of Heaven; or if he will limit his instance to Circumcision, taking
in no other Laws. The same house may have a new door or porch. Let Mr. T. then
know that he is in the same visible Kingdom as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
their posterity after the flesh in Israel were.

Answ. That which Mr. Bl. says of the lameness of a Kingdom under a new way
of administration, of Law givers changing their laws, of Gods doing so, the
identity of a house with a new door, is all granted; but does not take away the
force of my reason, unless he could show that any were graffed or to be graffed
into the visible Church Jewish without Circumcision, if he were a male. Does
not Mr. Bl. maintain here in answer to my 4th. argument, that we are partakers
of the same outward privileges and ordinances with the Jews, as he expounds
Romans 11.17. which opposes his speech here of a new way? Does not Scripture
term the Jewish Church or people, the Circumcision, because those that were in
that Church, if male, were circumcised? Was not Cornelius taken for unclean,
and not of that Church, because uncircumcised? or was he ever in the Jewish
Church after his Baptism? God might admit into the Jewish Church another way
then by Circumcision; but Mr. Bl. cannot show he or the Jews did so. We are in
the same invisible Kingdom of true believers, and elect persons, with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: but I do not yet know by any thing Mr. Bl. has hitherto
said, that I am in the same visible Kingdom with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and their posterity after the flesh in Israel. Every one in the visible
Kingdom of Israel after the flesh, did partake of the Passover; the Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 10 18. Behold Israel after the flesh: are not they which eat of
the the sacrifices partakers of the altar? Which intimates that Israel after
the flesh did then when he wrote eat of the sacrifices, which Christians did
not, and therefore were not adjoined to Israel after the flesh, but in that
very place, v 16, 17. distinguished from them. I take Mr. Bls. assertion to
infer Jad^ism: and if he or any other be not satisfied by my answer to Mr.
Cobbet, I have more reason to impute it to their prejudice, then to defect in
my answer.

SECT. LXXVI. My sense of matrimonial holiness* 1 Cor. 7.14. is vindicated from
Mr. Blakes exceptions, Vindic. Faed. chapter 39. and Mr. Sydenhams Exircit. chapter 7.
MR. Bl. chapter 39. avoucheth, still his sense of federal holiness, 1 Cor. 7.14. I
proceed to view what he says. Sect. 1. he sets down the Apostles resolution
and the reason of it rightly, which because it will tend much to the clearing
of the sense which I give, I shall here transcribe it. Let him not put her
away, let her not leave him, unbelief breaks not the marriage bond, ^enders it
not a nullity, Religion being not of the substance of marriage. But what he
says, that their scruple and ground of their fear was the condition of their
issue, lest that they should not be reckoned with the Saints, but of the
fellowship of the unclean Gentiles, is fictitious. For the resolution of it
rightly given before by Mr. Bl. himself, shows that their scruple arose not
from fear of their childrens condition, but the nullity of their marriage, or
unlawfulness of continuing in it by reason of the unbelief of the one party;
else the Apostle had not made his resolution apposite to the removing their
scruple. Yea, Mr. Bls. own speech is against his own conceit, when he says,
Reason is strong for this, for they well knew, as it is with the parent, so it
is with the child for Church state and condition, being a privilege
communicable and descendable from parent to child. If the parent were without,
and of the Gentiles, the child was ever such; and in case they were of the
people of God, their children were reckoned so in like manner: Now parents
being divided, the one holy, the other unclean, they feared that the issue
would follow the worser part, a s^ain would lie upon them, they would be
accounted unclean with the unbelieving parent. In a like case it had been so
determined, Ezra 10.3. For if they well knew as it is with the parent so it is
with the child for Church State, they knew that the believing parent being a
Churchmember, notwithstanding the yokefellows unbelief, their children were
Churchmembers, and so made no scruple of that, nor did Paul, or need he to
resolve that scrup^e about their childrens condition. Yea, the very form of the
Apostles reasoning, else were your children unclean, does plainly import, that
they took the uncleanness of their children as an absurdity deprehended by
them, and the contrary out of doubt; as when, 1 Cor. 15.29. the Apostle says,
Else what shall they do that are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not?
he supposes they took it for an absurdity, and the contrary out of doubt, that
they that are baptized for the dead do it in vain. And though that the parents
being divided they might fear that the issue would follow the worser part, a
slain would lie upon them, yet that this stain should be in respect of their
Churchstate, could not be, if they well knew, as Mr. Bl. says, as it is with
the parent so it is with the child for Churchstate, their own state in the
Church being manifest and certain. That the case of the Corinthians and those,
Ezra 10.3. is not like, is showed in the first part of this Review, sect. 17,
18. and will come into further consideration in that which follows.

What Mr. Bl. adds, That the Apostle tells them, that the unbelieving party does
not (as they fear) defile the issue, but is sanctified as to issue by the
believer, is a mere fiction. For the Apostle only tells them they did not
defile each other, but were sanctified to each other, by reason of their
marriage state, not the faith of one party. And it is as false, that by reason
of the parents faith the Apostle tells them the child is not reckoned with the
unbelieving parent who is a Gentile, or that by unclean is meant a sinner of
the Gentiles, for the child of both parents Gentile believers is still a
Gentile; and if unclean be a sinner of the Gentiles, by holy should be meant a
Jew by nature, which is a ridiculous conceit of Mr. Bls. as if the parent being
a believer, the child were a Jew by nature, and not a sinner of the Gentiles.
What he adds, that by believer in that place, 1 Cor. 7.14. is meant a professor
of the true faith, is vain, when the word believer is not used in that v. or
any v. of that Chapter about that matter, nor in that sense there. If to be
sanctified, 1 Cor. 7.14. be not to be set apart for God, as Mr. Bl. determines,
then the term sanctified is not used in the common if not only use of the word
in Scripture and profane writers, and by him conceived here, as Mr. B. asserts
Plain Script. proof, etc. part. 1. chapter 29. p. 81.

In answer to the 2d. sect. of the 39th. chapter of Mr. Bls. vindic faed. I say
first, that I do not yield that the Corinthians had any scruple at all about
their issue. 2. That my waving the examining of the occasion of the doubt
resolved 1 Cor. 17.12, 13, 14. was not because of any strength I found in Mr.
Bls. allegations, but because I conceived neither of our opinions any other
then a conjecture, and therefore the thing not material, nor in the framing my
postscript had I time enough to do what I did after, not out of a mind to
quarrel, but to show the invalidity of Mr. Marshals 4^h. arg. for his
interpretation from his conceit of the occasion of the doubt, to have been by
reading the fact mentioned Ezr. 10.3. Mr. Bl. here endeavors to confirm his
exceptions against my allegation of 1 Cor. 5.9. as the occasion of the doubt
resolved 1 Cor. 7.12. Yet replies nothing to my answer to the two first, but to
the 3d. says. If their scruple was concerning conversing with their idolatrous
yoke fellows, upon occasion of those words not to keep them company; they must
needs scruple their conversing with covetous, and extortioners, husbands or
wives upon the same account; and the Apostle being silent in his answer, it is
clear they were silent in their letter, and moving no scruple, they had no
scruple; when it is impossible for them to scruple one upon those words and not
scruple all* Here is the wildest of fancies, when he names four evils
respective to civil social converse; they should startle at one (respective to
their marriage society) and question no more. To which I answer, it is neither
impossible nor very unlikely, much less a wild fancy to imagine it of them,
that the Corinthians either did not scruple at using their covetous husbands,
from 1 Cor. 5.9, 10. though they did their idolatrous, if they did not heed the
explanation after added v. 10. but only the precept v. 9. and understood by
fornicators idolaters, which they might easily do; or if they did heed the
explanation, yet did not conceive the like reason of relinquishing covetous
yoke-fellowes as idolatrous, which they might well do, finding precepts against
marriages with idolaters, none against marriages with them that were only
covetous and not idolaters, or they might not put the doubt of any other to the
Apostle then the idolatrous, because there were none that had covetous
yokefellows who were not idolaters, and they would put the case only about
that which was the chief cause of their scruple, or because they could easily
resolve themselves, that coveteousness and extortion from men do not so defile
or are so inconsistent with marriage society as idolatry, and going a whoring
from God, or they might put the case about the covetous as well as the
idolaters, yet the Apostle resolve the one only expressly, because the
resolving the one would resolve the other* for which and for other reasons
which might occur, though not discernable now, they well either startle at one
only, or not seek for resolution of any more, or if they did, yet Paul resolve
no more. And this being understood, the Apostle needs not write to them as Mr.
Bl. imagines he must, if my conjecture hold, and he took in every part of their
scruple, though not what Mr. Bl. conceivs must be their scruple upon my
conjecture.

And hereby Mr. Bls. replies of wonder of my thoughts, of the Apostles need of
resolving both scruples, of the same evident ground of scruple concerning each,
as one are plainly answered without reply to his taunting quips. The rest also
is answered concerning B. Howson, Bunney, my Uncle Whately; for it goes upon
this supposition, that if the Corinthians took occasion to doubt, from 1 Cor.
5.9. then they must doubt whether they must live with fornicating yoke-fellows,
and the Apostle must resolve them, that if any brother have a wife that is a
fornicator let him not put her away, which may not follow it by fornicators
they understood only idolaters and so doubted of them only, or chiefly
doubted of them, or resolving themselves otherwise propounded the doubt only
of them, or the Apostle thought it needful only to resolve concerning them,
knowing that they might from his resolution of them be resolved of the rest,
especially if the words let him not put her away, be not a prohibition
forbidding him to put her away, but as a permission allowing him not to put her
away, which has its likelihood. But of this enough, if not too much about a
conjecture not very material. My words in my Postscript page 111. bare not Mr.
Bl. in hand of any further answer then has been given him, my censure of his
absurd glosses, dictates, fl^rts incoherent, impertinent passages, little solid
nervous disputing is delivered in language meet to express the truth.

If Mr. Calamy and Mr. Vines in their Epistle used not vain crackings of Mr.
Marshal, and Mr. Bls. answer to my Letter besides their misrepresentations of
my Examen, I never met with any. Were their worth far greater then it is, and
mine far less, I shall take liberty however my ingeny be questioned, as freely
to censure Mr. Calamy and Mr. Vines, as I did in this, if they shall hereafter
by their names and big words disparage the truth as they did in this. Who of my
nearest friends have told me to my face, that they have been ashamed of that
which I have written in my Apology, whose honesty and judgment Mr. Bl. has
seeen attested under my own hand, I do not yet know, nor by ghess yet imagine.
I know I have had censures hard enough of persons before this controversy arose
taken for my friends, and have laid them more to heart then I hope I shall do
hereafter, finding upon the Review of this Dispute how unequal they have been,
and if that eminently learned man who observed that I had Donum impudentiae,
were he who wrote the second Epistle to Mr. Baxter printed at the end of his
Confession of his faith, or any other did censure me without well weighing my
writings (as I have many reasons to conceive they do) as they are the more
unrighteous, so they are deservedly the less regarded by me. It was no
impudence in me to publish that men call on me to answer Mr. Bl. or that his
writing was commended when others had done it before. The most frivolous
treatise that is, if it be against me, yet it wants not some to magnify it,
Mr. Hussey's, Mr. Horns, Dr. Savages in Latin and others want not applauders. I
discern the spirit of Paedobaptists even in those, whom I had taken to be
moderate, judicious, friendly, yet in this point many of them show neither
equity to me, nor love to truth, nor judgment in according their opinion of
Paedobaptism with their former and later principles and practices. But I shall
wait till God awake men, and specially those who have been so forward to reform
Discipline and Ceremonies, and have by solemn Covenant vowed to endeavor
reformation according to Gods Word, that they may see from what they are fain.
I go on.

Next Mr. Bl. speaks somewhat of the occasion of the doubt from Ezra 9.10. Let
me premise, says he, this as an undoubted truth, that these Corinthians had
their scruples concerning their issue upon their marriage in this disparity.
That which the Apostle sati^fies in his answer, that the Corinthians scrupled
in their letter; This no man can deny, for he writes to give satisfaction, as
is plain v. 1. to their letter cases: But we see in the text that he satisfies
as scruples concerning themselves, so also concerning their issue.

To which I answer, the contrary is to me an undoubted truth, and so it was to
Dr. Thomas Goodwin, whose reason with mine should have had some answer from Mr.
Bl. As for his syllogism the major is not certain, since the Apostle might give
satisfaction on the by, about other things then the cases which they scrupled
and wrote to him about. But the minor I do directly deny, and since Mr. Bl. has
brought nothing to prove it, I slight it as a vain dictate.

As for Mr. Bls. refusing to determine peremptorily, that the occasion of the
scruple was that, Ezra 9. and 10. it serves my turn to prove that no argument
drawn from thence to conclude federal holiness of infants of believers is
valid. I have often showed how we can imagine the Corinthians hit upon their
scruple, and were affected with it without respect to the fact, Exra 9. and 10.
and therefore need not again answer that question. Mr. Bls. not saying that the
Israelites and the Corinthians case was wholly the same, tends to show Mr.
Marshals mistake, and the defect of his argument.

And for what Mr. Bl. observes that the Christian Corinthians were under the
moral Law of Moses and it was not so easy for them to determine that the
Command Deuteronomy. 7. was judicial, I grant it, and thence infer that
notwithstanding the words 1 Cor. 10.15. yet they might not be so understanding
in gathering consequences, or discerning the meaning of Scriptures, but that
they might conceive otherwise then rational men usually do, contrary to what
Mr. Bl. suggests of them sect. 3. Mr. Bl. having censured rather then refuted
Dr. Goodwins opinion of the childrens real holiness, 1 Cor. 7.14. He tells me my
interpretation is first childish, to tell the Corinthians if their marriage
society were adulterous, then their children were bastards, if their marriage
were null children were illegitimate, this is too low a way of reasoning, such
as every child well knew before the Apostle told them. To which I answer, if
it were so easily understood it was the fitter for the Apostles purpose to
satisfy the tender consciences of doubting Christians, who are best satisfied
with that which is obvious, and easily discernable, especially when the persons
are women, and men of ordinary capacities. And therefore this way of arguing
showed not childishness in the Apostle but fatherly wisdom, and is a very
good reason for my interpretation, not against it, since it is acknowledged that
the Apostles arguing as by me framed is right, and serves his purpose.

Secondly, says Mr. Bl. It is incongruous to bring phrases fully answering the
Churchstate and condition of either parents, believing and unbelieving (which
in the Scripture is holy and unclean) and yet to understand them of holiness
and uncleanness of another kind of l^gitimation and bastardy, if they may be
(as I think they never were) so called is incongruous: That these words fully
answer the Churchstate of parents and the Churchstate and condition which the
children derive from them, is plain in that parallel text Gal. 2.15. Jews by
nature, that is holy by birth from believing parents, not sinners of the
Gentiles, not unclean by birth from unbeleeving ancestors; so Mr. Cartwright
on these words, in his answer to the Rhemists. If you will know what this
holiness of children new born is, the Apostle tells you, it is through the
Covenant to be a Jew by nature, or birth: and if you will f^rther understand
what this uncleanness of children is, the Apostle in the same place tells
you, it is not to be sinners by nature as those which are born of the heathen.

Answ What I said before I say still, without any jeer or disregard to Mr.
Cartwright, that the conceit that 1 Cor. 7.14. and Gal. 2.15. are two full
parallel Scriptures, is but a dream, there being neither agreement in scope,
matter, words or sense between them. Not in scope. For 1 Cor. 7, 12, 13, 14.
the Apostles scope is ^o resolve a doubt about continuance of married persons
in disparity of religion, Gal. 2.15. his scope is to determine by what we are
justified, not in matter, for the one speaks of the sanctifying of husband and
wife to each other, and the holiness or uncleanness of the children; the other
of Jews and Gentiles acding to their different national state, nor is there one
word used Gal. 2.15. which is used 1 Cor, 7.14. nor can the sense be agreeing.
For Jew by nature cannot be as much as holy 1 Cor. 7.14. because then the
children of the Corinthians should be Jews by nature, which was impossible,
they being born of Gentile parents, for such were the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 12.2.
Nor is Mr. Bls. sense Jew by nature, that is holy by birth from believing
parents, any where else found in Scripture; Nor does Jew by nature intimate
their Churchstate, as if he meant it thus; we who are members of the visible
Church, or have this privilege to be in the Covenont of grace by nature, in
that we are born of believing parents. For they are said to be Jews by nature
by reason of their natural descent, without any respect to the faith or
unbelief of their parents, even those whose parents were idolaters, as A^az,
Manasseh, or any other of that line were Jews by nature, and not sinners of the
Gentiles, and the children of the most holy Proselites, yet were not Jews by
nature: nor were they Jews by nature through the Covenant of grace, they were
Jews by nature without respect to the Covenant of grace, for that was alwais to
them who were believers, whether Jews or Gentiles, and the covenant whereby the
Jews had privilege was not the Covenant of Evangelical grace, but the Covenant
of peculiar national blessinigs, but here the opposition to the Gentiles, and
the occasion shows Jews to be taken as a term appropriate to natural Jews by
natural descent from Jacob in contradiinstction to Gentiles from other roots.
If any ask who are meant by [ we,] and why here is mentioned [ Jews by nature,]
and why they are opposed to the Gentiles, and they termed sinners, I answer,
the words seem plainly to be a part of Paul's speech to Peter, and that by we
are meant himself with Peter termed a Jew, v. 14. and other believers of the
Circumcision, mentioned v. 12, 13. and the sense is, We though we are Jews by
nature, or even we who are Jews by natural birth; and this mentioned, because
they had the Law peculiarly given them, as Piscator in his Analysis, Nos
quantumvis Judaei sumus, quibus nimirum lex peculiariter a Deo data est. Or as
the opposite term [ sinners of the Gentiles] intimates, knowers and keepers of
the Law of Moses, and therefore if any, certainly much more then sinners of the
Gentiles* we should seek and expect to be justified by the Law; yet if we know
that a man is not justified by the works of the Law, but by the faith of
Christ, and even we have believed on Christ Jesus, that we might be justified
by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the law, it is not equal that
we should as Peter did at Antioch, dissemble our liberty in Christ, compel the
Gentiles to Judaize or keep the law for righteousness, and so not walk
uprightly or rightfoote it according to the truth of the Gospel. Now the
Gentiles are termed sinners in the sense, in which, in the ordinary acception
among the Jews, it was taken for men that observed not the law, opposed to the
righteous, Matthew. 9.13. Luke 15.1, 2, 7, 10. and 18.9, 13. and many more
places: And in this sense it is taken, v. 17. we our selves also are sound
sinners, that is, we our selves also are deprehended, convinced, or proved to
be profane breakers, or despise^s of the law: which the Gentiles did, and
which I think is meant Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. and that Paul does not any more reckon
himself with them Ephesians. 2.3. then he does with them that are alive at Christ's
coming, opposite to them who are dead in Christ, 1 These. 4.17. though he use
the first person plural in both; for I see not how that could stand with his
speeches of himself, Acts 23, 1. Philip. 3.4* 5, 6. and therefore do conceive a
conception or an enallage of person, Ephesians. 2.3. used often in speeches,
whereby a speaker takes that to himself which is proper to others, whether to
avoid distaste as if he upbraided them, or to insinuate into their affections,
or for such like reason. Out of all which I infer, 1. That [ Jews by nature] is
not put Gal. 2.15. to intimate a birth-priviledge of the children of believers,
whether Jews or Gentiles, concerning their Ecclesiastical state even in infancy
as visible Churchmembers; but it is put to note either the advantage peculiar
to the Jewish nation in that the law of Moses was given to them, or rather the
greater likelihood and meetness or congruity to seek or claim righteousness by
the law then the Gentiles. 2. That he meant not they were Jews by nature
through the Covenant of grace. For that were clean opposite to his intention,
which was to show that their estate of being Jews by nature did not confer to
their justification, which doubtless it would have done if it had been by the
Covenant of grace, but to intimate, that the law was given to them, or rather
they studious of it, and Zelots for it, and therefore if any, they should be
justified by it* as Paul in a like place, Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. So that
whatever advantage or precedence is intimated by it, it is ascribed to the law,
and their observing of it, not to the new Covenant of grace. 3. The deteriority
or worse condition of the Gentiles is ascribed to them, not barely in respect
of their birth from unbelievers, and so agreeing to their infants, much less as
agreeing to infants of unbelieving Jews as well as Gentiles, but in respect of
their manners either only or chiefly, and so not competent to infants. And
therefore notwithstanding Mr. Bl. thought Gal. 2.15. a fit Text for his Sermon,
in which he asserted infants birth-priviledge of believing Gentiles, though Mr.
Calamy and Mr. Vines crack in their Epistle before Mr. Bls. answer to my
Letter, that he has truly stated the the question, set it upon the right
basis, and well fortified it, and Mr. Bl. has produced somewhat from Mr.
Cantwright to color his parallelling 1 Cor. 7.14. with Gal. 2.15. yet I say
still, and have such a gift of impudence as to aver, that both Mr. Cartwright
was mistaken, and Mr. Calamy and Mr. Vines did vainly crack of Mr. Bls. Birth
privilege, and Mr Bl. has grossly abused Gal. 2.15. as he did also Gal 4.29.
and there is no parallelism of 1 Cor. 7.14. and Gal. 2.15. to interpret the one
by the other.

3. Says Mr. Bl. The argument thus understood is untrue: The stress is wholly
laid upon the believing party, as to the holiness of the issue, twice over; the
unbeliever is merely passive in it, when the child has legitimation equally
from both. Against his interpretation, and for mine (which Chamier affirms to
be Calvini and omnium nostrorum) take these arguments. 1. That holiness which
necessarily follows to the issue, from the sanctification of an unbelieving by
a believing yokefellow, is Covenant holiness, and not legitimation: But the
holiness in this place of the Apostle necessarily follows to the issue from the
sanctification of an unbeliever by a believer; Ergo, it is Covenant holiness,
not legitimation. 2. That which is derived from the eminency of one parent
above another, and not equally from both, is not legitimation: But this
holiness is derived from the eminence of one parent ( viz. the believing
parent) above the other; Ergo, it is not legitimation. 3. The result or fruit
which follows from a believers faith is not legitimation: But the holiness in
the Text is a result of the faith of the believing yokefellow. The minor is
evident, seeing faith is twice hinted at in the believer. I know that Mr. T.
denies that the unbelieving husband or wife is sanctified in the believing: It
is (says he) in the husband, not in the believing husband; in the wife, not in
the believing wife, that is not in the Text. The marriage is between a believer
and an unbeliever, the unbeliever is sanctified, whether husband or wife by
their yokefellow, but not by their believing yoke fellow; the Reader that puts
off his reason may matter such denials.

Answ. The Reader that puts on his reason, will easily see good reason for my
denial of each of the minors in each of Mr. Bls. three arguments, and the
vanity of Mr. Bls. arguings, laying the stress wholly upon the believing party,
which is not expressed in the Text, but only hinte^; and upon a translation of
the particle (...) by, which is not denied but may be translated in or to. Will
any man of competent reason conceive, that the Apostle being to give reason of
his resolution of an important point of cons^ienc^, about which he was by
Letter consulted, would so loosely argue as to leave out the chief word from
whence he inferred his conclusion, and conclude holiness as resulting from that
which is not named, yea though he named the opposite term twice; and express a
causality or antecedency by a term that had ordinarily another respect, when
there was a proper and usual particle (...) to express it by? And on the other
side so precisely name the terms of husband and wife twice, and your children
expressly, and yet lay no part of the stress upon the conjugal relation so often
and so plainly mentioned? Yea, do we think that the Apostle giving a reason why
the husband and wife might live together in disparity of Religion, would lay
the whole stress upon that which was merely accidental to their marriage state,
to wit, the ones being a believer, and the f^deral holiness of children,
without which their mrrriage might be good at first, and they lawfully continue
together, and not ascribe it to that conjugal relation, continuing which alone
made their living together lawful as their coming together at first? That
Chamier did overlash in saying the interpretation of federal holiness was
omnium nostrorum, is manifest by the words of Musculus, Melancthon, and
Camerarius, c^ted by me in my Exercitation sect. 5. That it was Calvin's and
many mo^e Protestants opinion, is a prejudice against our opinion, but should
not be with those that determine upon evidence of reason, not the authority of
men. Calvin was an excellent man, but we may say of him, Non videt omnia. I
follow Mr. Bl. in his next section.

Whereas Mr. Bl says, I put the Apostles argument into this form, If the
unbelieving husband were not sanctified by the wife, then were your children
unclean; But they are not unclean, but holy; Ergo, the unbelieving huusband is
sanctified by the wife: Had he dealt fairly with me, he would have rectified
the major, and changed [ by] into [ to,] the conclusion of the syllogism, and
the words next before and all along in that section of my Examen having [to the
wife] which I contend for in that section, and page 14, 15. of my Exercitation,
as the genuine reading, disclaiming [ by the wife,] and of this advertise Mr.
M. p. 97. of the first part of this Review. The rest of the section is spent
about the proposition proving this sequel, [If the unbelieving husband be not
sanctified in or to the wife, your children were unclean,] and so included in
the Apostles consequence. Mr. Bl. would have it to be thus, Answer to my
Letter, p. 38. [ All the children of an unbeliever are unclean, unless for
generation he or she be sanctified by a believer.] I conceive this proposition
to be included in the Apostles consequence, [All the children of those parents
whereof one is not sanctified to the other, are unclean;] or [none of the
children of those parents whereof one is not sanctified to the other are holy.]
The point in difference between us, is, whether it be necessary to insert [ of
an unbeliever, unless for generation he or she be sanctified by a believer.]
This I deny for these reasons. 1. That is not necessary to be inserted, without
which the Apostles conclusion is inferred: But the Apostles conclusion is
inferred without Mr. Bls. addition; Ergo. The major is of it self evident. The
minor is thus proved. The Apostle in his argument does not at all mention
sanctification for generation, there may be and was sanctification without
generation, else no husband and wife could be sanctified one in or to another
except children were begotten, and so the Apostle should not resolve the
lawfulness of their l^ving together who were barren* which is absurd. Nor is it
necessary to add [ by a believer,] since the Apostle has omitted it, and that
as it is very probable of set purpose. Nor is it necessary to add [ unbeliever]
because it is false then even according to Paedobaptists hypotheses. For then
it would fo^low, the children of two believers are unclean, and so Isaac and
Jacob should be unclean, or out of the Covenant; if this were added all the
children of those parents, whereof one is not an unbeliever sanctified for
generation by a believer, are unclean.

2. The second reason I form thus. That is not necessary to be added, which
would make the Apostles proposition false: But Mr. Bls. addition would make the
Apostles proposition false. For it is false, which he makes the Apostles
proposition, All the children of an unbeliever are unclean, unless for
generation he or she be sanctified by a believer. For whether by uncleanness we
understand non-admissibleness into the Church, it is false; for the children of
unbelievers bought with money by Abraham, though infants, yet were in Mr. Bls.
sense federally holy: and me thinks Mr. Bl. who asserts against Mr. Firmin the
baptizability of the infants of the generality of En^lish though the parents be
openly profane, and hate godliness, should not deny it: however, the case is
clear in the Circumcision of professed infidels children bought with money,
Genesis 17.27. And for federal real holiness, I suppose Mr. Bl. will not deny, but
that many of them, as Rahab, etc. were in the Covenant of saving grace.

To the first of these, Mr. Bl. 1. says thus, page 338. I pray leave
generation out, and see whether there can be any sense in it, unless it be
understood; their sanctification will confer no legitimation, without
generation; if I say not believer, I must say husband or wi^e that is a
believer.

Asw. If generation be left out, and believer, it may be good sense according
to my interpretation. An unbelieving husband may be sanctified to his wife,
that is, may lawfully use her though she were an unbeliever as his wife, and
may continue to live with her, and she with him, though they never had or
should have children, else your children which you might beget should be
unclean; but this being put, they are legitimate. But according to Mr. Bls.
interpretation it is not good sense in the case of the barren; for she or he
are not instrumentally sanctified for generation, there being no generation
there is no being an instrument for generation, nor sanctification thereto. And
an instrument is an efficient, and where there is no effect there is no
efficient, nor instrument: And to be sanctified instrumentally must be as an
instrument to a principal agent, which in this thing cannot be any other then
God; now no instrument of God fails to produce its effect, therefore without
actual generation, no wife can be said to be instrumentally sanctified for
generation. And for the leaving out the term [ believer] it is good sense as I
expound it without it, and if the Apostle had not conceived it good sense
without it, he would not, as he did, have left it out. But I confess it is
not good sense according to Mr. Bls. interpretation, who says (though falsely)
p. 334. The stress is wholly laid upon the believing party, as to the holiness
of the issue twice over. I confess their sanctification would confer no
legitimation actual without actual generation; yet their might be legitimation
of issue (which is enough to show the consequence to be good and for the
Apostles purpose) without actual generation, the legitimati^n being only upon
supposition (as it is usual in such arguments) and so the generati^n only
supposed. Doubtless the Apostle resolved the Corinthians of the lawful living
together of the barren as well as they that had or should beget, which will not
agree with Mr. Bls. exposition of instrumental sanctification for that is not
true but of actual generation past or future, as I have proved.

But Mr. Bl. adds, the Apostles major is of an unbelieving huusband and a
believing wife, and I make the propo^^tion universal, according to the capacity
of the subject of all believing wives joined to unbelieving husbands, not with
Mr. T. of all husbands and wives. And this is the Apostles included
proposition, which must be the basis of so many inferences and refutations,
when yet all men's Logic (except what Mr. T. has learnt) will utterly disclaim
it.

Answ. That the Apostles major is not of an unbelieving husband and a believing
wife, is manifest by the words in which the term [ believing] is in both
speeches left out. And sure if the Apostle would have ascribed any thing to the
believer as such, he could as easily have put it in as the term unbeliever, or
the terms brother or sister, used v. 12, 15. And though I deny not that the
wife, or huusband opposite to the infidel yoke fellow were believers, yet I
have l^arned so much Logic and Divinity, that what attributes do agree
materially do not always agree formally in each speech, as though Ishmael was
the son of Abraham, yet what is said of him Gal. 4 13, 24, 25, 29, 30, 3^. is
said of him not as Abraham's son, but as Hagars. And so it is here, though the
husband or wife were a believer, yet they are not there consid^red as
believers, nor the things there spoken of them ascribed to them under that
consideration, but under the consideration of husband and wife: and if any
disclaim this Logic, he will disclaim such Logic as the holy Scripture uses
in these and other places.

I alleged in my Examen part. 3. sect. 8. p. 78. the words of Chamier: tom. 4.
paustr. cath. l. 5. c. 10.. 67. against Augustines interpretation of 1 Cor.
7.14. o^ a ceremonial holiness, as apposite to refute his own of federal. For
says he, that interpretation is ridiculous if these propositions be not
true, that all born of those ^arents whereof one is not sanctified in the
other, are begotten in the time of the woman's monthly courses, Infidel
husbands never use their wives but at such time, for so the Apostle is made to
speak by Augustines interpretation. Now the self same I showed to follow on his
own interpretation, the words being changed which should be changed in such a
retorsion. For then according to it the Apostle should say, All the children
born of those parents of whom one is not san^tified in the other, are out of
the Covenant of grace, infidel parents never beget of their wives children
within the Covenant of grace. Both which are false, and consequently the
interpretation of Chamier, whence it is apparent that Chamier made these
pr^positions in the Apostles arguing to be included, Those children whereof one
parent is not sanc^ified in the other are unclean, none of the children of
those parents whereof one is not sanctified in the other are holy. I said also
in my Antidote page 16. that Mr. Bl. confessed these propositions included in
the Apostles consequence. Against this Mr. Bl. thus rises up.

What can I i^agine but that Mr. T. knowingly fastens this gross untruth upon
me? Seeing he so we I knows that I both deny it and have argued against it
(having made such defense ^s he could in his Apology of it) yet now in his
Antidote says I confess it. I am overmuch honored to be named (if I may say
so) the day that Chamier is mentioned, but as much wronged to have such a
Monster of absurdities (as is contained in that proposition) obtruded upon me;
my thoughts are over-high of Chamier to believe any such weakness in him, when
Mr. T. shows it in him (having yet given his Reader no account where it may
be found) I shall subscribe to that Proverb; Nullum magnum ingenium sine
aliqua mixtura dementiae.

Answ. Chamiers words in the place cited, making the Apostles arguing with
Augustines exposition to include the two propositions before named, do plainly
show, that in his Logic the Apostle asserted these propositions, All the
children whereof one parent is not sanctified in the other are unclean, none of
them are holy; and Mr. Bl. in his answer to my Letter chapter 7. sect. 2. page 36.
to my fourth argument against instrumental sanctification thus made, in this
form of reasoning this proposition is included; Their children could not be
holy without that sanctification, which could not be true of instrumental
sanctification and federal holiness, replies never den^ing the proposition to
be included, but avers i^ true of instrumental sanctification and federal
holiness, yea most true, necessarily and universally true: Now he that says
without that sanctification (of one parent in the other) the children could not
be holy, says none of the children of those parents whereof one is not
sanctified to the other are holy, to which is equipollent all the children of
those parents whereof one is not sanctified in the other are unclean. And thus
it is showed Mr. Bl. where he and Chamier confessed those propositions to be
included, which indeed have no monster of absurdities in them, but are the
genuine medium of the Apostles argument, and Chamier without any mixture of
madness, did acutely discern to be included in the Apostles reasoning, though
he heeded not how this very observation overthrowes his own interpretation as
well as Augustines.

The rest of this section not answered about the reason I gave why the
proposition included in the Apostles sequel is to be conceived without the
terms of believer and unbeliever inserted by Mr. Bl. and the illustration of it
I shall make no further reply to here, but refer the Reader to what is so
largely spoken in vindication of my self in the first part of this Review sect.
21. page 170. sect. 36. page 249, 250. I proceed to examine Mr. Bls. fifth
Sect. of the 29th. Chapter, although there are some things in the sixth Section
which perhaps might be more fitly answered first.

Mr. Bl. Sect. 5. having said that I allege, that the Apostles in this text
brings a formal argument to prove the marriage society of these yoke-fellowes
lawful, which in the two former verses he had determined, he then adds.

And it cannot be denied but the words at the first sight, seem to carry some
color to understand them so far in Mr. T. his sense, as to make them formal,
concluding reasons of his former determination having said v. 12, 13. then he
adds v. 14. But the way of inference will as well bear it, that the Apostle
does first determine in the controversy by revelation (as Mr. T. will have it)
as an Apostle, then takes off their scruples which o^casioned their fears, both
respective to their posterity and themselves; Mr. T. indeed challenges this way
of interpretation to make the Apostle immethodical, but what better method then
to determine a point, and then answer reasons against it; The Apostle meeting
with their fears in respect of their posterity and themselves, it must needs
be that they signified them and he answers them; The Apostles method (it is
true) and manner of inference indifferently favors either interpretation; But
the words themselves clearly evince, that they are a removal of scruples against
their marriage society, and not a formal concluding argument against it.

Answ. It is true it is a bottom I build much on, 1. That the Apostle brings
the media or middle terms of two Syllogisms or formal arguments v. 14. to prove
the lawfulness of the continuance in marriage society of the believing
yoke fellow with the unbeliever, determined by him v. 12, 13. and that they are
not as v. 16. a Rhetorical argument only to move the affe^^ions to embrace
what before their judgments were settled in, but a Logical proof of the
resolution by setting down the medium out of which a syllogism is to be framed
to infer the conclusion. 2. That the Apostle does not at all resol^e any doubt
about their posterity, but takes the state of their posterity as out of doubt
with them, and thence infers that which was doubtful to them concerning their
own marriage state. Now Mr. Bl denies not the words at first sight seem to
carry some calour to understand them so far in my sense as to make them formal,
concluding reasons of the Apostles former determination, and confesses the
Apo^^les method and manner of inference indifferently favors either
interpretation. B^t that the words are to be analyzed and conceived only in
^he form I have resolved them, I prove, first by the particles, for, else, but
now: all these particles are argumentative. [ For] in many places, as Romans
3.20. and 4.15, etc. 1 Corinthians. 7.9, 31, etc. (...) translated else, or
otherwise, or for then are argumentative, as 1 Cor. 5.10. and 15.15, 29. Romans
11.6. in which places it notes an absurdity consequent, if the antecedent be
not granted: (...) but now, is used also frequently as an argumentative
particle, as 1 Corinthians. 12.18, 20. Romans 3.21. Heb. 8.6. and 9.26. there are
both these used, as (...) and (...), so 1 Corinthians. 15.20. And accordingly Pasor
in his Lexicon on the word (...), dici^ur etiam (...), 1 Cor. 15.20. interdum
servit assumptioni syllogismi, 1 Cor* ^. v. 14 and 15. v. 20. Mr. Cobbet Just.
vindic. p^rt. 1. chap. 1. sect. 1. Where the words (...) used in argumentation,
as 1 Cor. 5.10. and the particle (...) in like sort used, 1 Cor. 12.18, 20. So
Romans 3.2^. Heb 8.6, and 9.26. and 11.16. Do declare that that sentence (in the
la^ter part of 1 Cor. 7.14.) is annexed in way of argumentation to the
proposition immediately before. Beza annot. ad 1 Cor. 7.14. particula (...) hoc
in loco non est temporis adverbium, sed est conjunctio quae adhiberi solet in
argumentorum assumptionibus. 2. This is proved from the ma^teer, i^ is agreed
on that the Apostle determines the doubt of he Corinthians v. 12, 13. and it is
apparent that the first part of v. 14. is a reason of his determination. Let us
consider the det^rmination v. 12, 13. let him not put her away, let her not
leave him. Now this determination may be understood either as a plain
prohibition forbi^ding the believer to put away or leave the unbeli^ving
yoke fellow at all, being contented to dwell with the believer. But this sense
seems not to me to be the Apostles intent; 1. Because it might then be a hard
yoke, that a believer must not put away his wife which will dwell with him
though she play the harlot; or it may be understood as a determination of their
liberty, Let him not put her away, let her not leave him, that is, there is no
necessity that he should put her away, that she should leave him, conscience
and duty to God ties them not to do so, and this sense seems most probable to
me, though I reject not the other, if some limitation more be added, as thus,
let him not put her away, nor she leave him, that is, I forbid them to leave
each other barely for the disparity of religion. Now the reasons of this later
explication are these. 1. Because the phrase v. 15. let him depart is not an
absolute command but a permission, as the words following, a brother or sister
is not under bondage in such cases, show, and the like is to be said of the
resolution v. 17. so let him walk, that is, so he may walk, and that it is the
sense, I gather from the instances in the following verses, whereby the Apostle
illustrates his determination v. 17. Is any man called being uncircumcised? v
18. let him not become uncircumcised: Is any called in uncircumcision? let him
not be circumcised. Which speeches do not absolu^ely forbid the drawing up the
foreskin or the cutting it off, there might be cases in which either might be
lawful, but leave it at liberty, and so much the words ^ollowing also intimate
circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing but the keeping the
commandments of God, which expression intimates the i^differency of these, and
the non availing to ingratiate us to God, which is not a fit reason for an
absolute prohibition, but for a determination concerning the liberty of either.

Then the Apostle v. 20. repeats his determination v. 17. Let every man abide
in the same calling wherein he was called; which (though true of it) is not
meant of his ^hristian general calling, as if he had said, Let every man abide
in Christianity wherein he was called, which the words seem at first r^ading to
import; for the words following, v. 21. Art thou called being a servant? do
show, that the term [ calling] v. 20. notes the state of life antecedent to his
being a Christian, which by an elegant ^ntanaclasis is termed by the Apostle
his calling: And this the Apostle does not enjoin so as that he forbids any
servant to be free; but the meaning i^, as Diodati in his Annot. rightly
expounds it, He may abide therein with a safe conscience, and ought not rashly
to change it, neither through superstition, nor by doing another any wrong: but
if he can do it for any just causes, or through any lawful means, it is then
lawful for him to do it. The same is repeated v. 24. and is to be understood,
not (as often preachers do understand it) of a man's trade, or employment only,
and as an absolute command, that a man should not leave his i^ployment, trade,
or function in which he was bred, as of a tradesman to become a preacher* etc.
but the calling is any state of life in which the person was found, who was
called to be a Christian, as to be circumcised or uncircu^cised, a servant or
freeman, married or unmarried, subject or Magistrate, and so proves that
Magistracy or any other state of life is consistent with Christianity. And the
Apostles determination is not of necessity, as if a Christian might not alter
the calling or state of life he was in when he was converted, for then the
servant might not become free, nor the unmarried marry; but of liberty, that
Christians should not think themsel^es bound by their Christian profession, to
forsake these estates, but they might continue in them. And so is the
resolution v. 12, 13. to be expounded. 2. This exposition is agree^ble to the
occasion of the Apostles determination, which was the Corinthian Christians
doubt of the lawfulness of their living together, not of the inconvenience or
convenience (for in that they could have best resolved themselves) and so the
Apostles resolution is of the lawfulness of living together. 3. This is further
confirmed from the reason of his determination, v. 12, 13. in the first part of
v. 14. which is apparently set down to meet with the reason of their doubt:
they thought that they might not live with the unbeliever, because unholy. The
Apostle on the contrary determines though he were unholy in himself, yet he
was to his wife as if he had been holy: and the reason is thus, The wife may
live with him as her husband, who though an unbeliever, is in respe^t of
marriage use as if he were sanctified: But so is the unbelieving husband; Ergo.
Which reason cannot be a mere Rhetorical argument to move the affection, for it
supposes the unbeliever continuing such which was their vexation; but an
argument to satisfy their consciences: Yet not of their duty that they must
live together, for it is heterogeneous to that end, they were not bound to live
together by reason of the sanctifiedness of the unbeliever, bu^ Gods command,
which alone makes duty; but of the lawfulness notwithstanding his infidelity,
by determining against the ground of their doubt, the unlawfulness of living
together with an unsanctified infidel. As for the words following, [ Else were
your children unclean, but now are they holy,] they cannot be the resolution of
another doubt: but 1. the forms of expression [(...), else or otherwise, and
but now,] do plainly show, that those words do confirm what was said next
before, [ the unbelieving wife is sanctified to the husband.] 2. They show that
the thing was certain even to them, that their children were not unclean, and
that it was absurd in their conceits that their children should be unclean. Mr.
Bl. himself says, Vindic. Faed. page 323. Else implies a certainty, that upon
this account of sanctification of the parent, from whom the ground of fear
arose, the children are holy; a like certainty, that were it not that they were
thus sanctified they were unclean. Which words do plainly set down the two
propositions I conceived in the Apostles argument, which Mr. Bl. terms a
monster of absurdity; for [ It is certain that upon this account of
sanctification of the parent from whom the ground of fear arose, the children
are holy,] is equipollent to this, [All the children of those parents whereof
one is sanctified to the other, are holy;] and [ it is certain, that were it
not that they were thus sanctified, they were unclean,] is equipollent to this,
[none of the children of those parents whereof one is not sanctified to the
other, are clean or holy:] and hereby their fear is confessed to have been
about their own living together, and the ground of it the imagined non
sanctifiedness of the parent, and that [ else] does imply a certainty of the
childrens holiness upon this account of sanctification of the parent; which
evidently shows, that the childrens holiness is a consequent of the parents
sanctification, and brought to prove it, and not to resolve another doubt of
them. Yea, it were ridiculous to resolve a doubt by a doubt, to resolve them
their children were holy, because they were holy. Rightly says Piscator in hi^
scholie on the place. The argument is from the effect, to wit a consequent
absurdity, and it is after this form, If the unbelieving husband were not
sanctified in the wife, their children would be unclean: But they are not
unclean, for they are holy; therefore the unbelieving husband is sanctified in
the wife. Whence it is apparent, that the words are not a resolu^^^n of a doubt
of their children, for then the childrens holines^ would have been the
conclusion, whereas it is the assumption, and consequently that the Apostle
uses formal arguments, or gives the middle-terms of them, and that he does not
resolve two doubts, but one of the lawfulness of the living together of
yokefellows in disparity of Relig^on, and that the first argument is taken from
that which obviate^ the ground of their fear, and the later confirms that
argument from a consequent absurdity even in their apprehension, if that were
not granted. T^is to be the t^u^ Analysis o^ the Apostles words, the words of
Chamier, Beza, Zegedin in his tables, and many more do show, which I forbear to
allege as conceiving it needless. What says Mr. Bl. to this?

Let us look first into v. 16. where the [ for] may lay as fair a claim to a
formal reason as this in the ^4th. and M. ^. himself says is a reason, Antip^d
page 110. But I would fain learn how he can make it up into a reason; he must
thus draw it up. Whom a man in marria^e society may have hopes to save from
idolatrous ways, with such a one he may continue in marriage society: But a
believing husband in marri^ge society may have hopes to save his unbelieving
wife from idolatrous ways* Ergo* This proposition as to such a conclusion is 1.
vain; for though there were no such hopes, yet marriage society is to be
continued, Gentilism being not of the substance of marriage, which Mr. T seems
to yield, Examen, page 121. 2. This proposition is false as to this purpose; the
incestuous Corinthian might ^ave had hopes to have converted his fathers wife
(if a heathen) and yet such hopes would not conclude the lawfulness of their
society together. Herod might have had like hopes to have converted his brother
Philips wife, and yet this was not objected against John Baptist, and had it
been obje^^ed, it had be^n frivolous. We have many ^ases put about marriage, if
such an argument would serve the turn, it would salv^ them all.

Answ. Though I say 1 Cor. 7.16. is a reason to persuade to the resolution v.
13. yet I do not say it is a reason to conclude the lawfulness of living
together, but to persuade them the rather to live together from the possibility
or hopefulness of that event, which he urges in a Rhetorical way in an
interrogation, not in a Logic way as he did v. 14. and yet it may be drawn up
Logically thus. They are the rather to live together, it being otherwise
determined lawful, whereof one, if they live together, may save the other: But
so it may be if the brother or sister live with the infidel yokefellow, Ergo.
So that by my maintaining that v. 14. [ for] notes the medium of a formal
argument, and that thereby the lawfulness of the believing and infidel
yokefellows continuing together in marriage society is concluded, and that [
for, v. 16.] notes a reason of the resolution, v 16. yet it follows not the
conclusion inferred v. 16. is the same with that inferred v. 14. nor the reason
to be drawn as Mr. Bl. would, nor is there any need I should retract my
Analysis of v. 12, 13, 14. nor answer Mr. Bls. objections against (...)
argument which I neither ascribe to the Apostle, nor is deducible out of any of
my grants.

Mr. Bl. adds. And for v. 14. though I cannot say, but in case i^ were made up
(into Mr. Ts. his sense) into a reason of the former conclusion, it would
contain a truth, and so far might pass in the way of a reason: Yet I have many
material exceptions against it; 1. from the thing it self, it would be a reason
silly, childish, vain, your married condition is lawful, else your children
were bastards* what child in Corinth but well understood it? 2. From the phrase
in which it is delivered altogether unsuitable to a reason of this doctrine, 1.
being only to tell them, that the legitimation of their issue proved the
lawfulness of their marriage society, he should attribute all (as to either
sex) to the believer, when the child owe^ his legitimation equally to either
parent: 2: That being to give (...) reason of the lawfulness of marriage in
such a special case, he should give his reason of equal concernment to all
marriages* where both are unbelievers, both believers, as well as this between
a believer and an unbeliever: 3. When he is to speak only of legitimation and
bastardy, he should phrase it in such uncouth language, and in words fit it
only suitable to their parents Ecclesiastical capacity, whether title to it,
as in the believer, or want of it, as in the unbeliever. Now on the other hand
interpret the Apostles words (as his method will equally bear) accordingly as
you have heard before, and no such inconvenience follows from the words either
v. 14. or 16.

Answ. Mr. Bls. confession that my analysis and exposition would contain a
truth, and that it might pass in the way of a reason, and therefore is opposite
to the Apostles purpose, and his exceptions though termed by him material, yet
as I shall show, having no weight, and his method and exposition neither agree
with the words nor matter, is a very good evidence for me against him. As for
his exceptions, they are the same which he brought before, sect. 3. and are
answered by me in this section, that it was the fitter for the Apostle to us^
if the reason were so easily understood that the Apostle does not attribute all
to the believer, that no reason was so fit to settle them about their special
case, as that which evinced, that the marriage state was not made void by the
unbelief of the parties, that the Apostles phrases are not uncouth language
after my sense, but very agr^eable to such language he uses in the same
Chapter; as when v. 20 by an Antana^lasis he terms the civil state of the
Christians the calling wherein they are called, and to other expressions, as I
show in the first part of this Review, sect. 12, 23, 24, 25, 26 and that the
phrases are not suitable to the parents Ecclesiastical capacity; and the
Apostles speeches and argument do imply falsehood, and are inconsistent with the
terms and matter of them, if expounded and r^solved as Mr. Bl. would.

Mr. Bl. adds. And now Mr. T. may easily receive answer to that odious
inference, which he makes from our interpretation of Covenant holiness.
According to this interpretation (says he) the medium of the Apostle to prove
the lawfulness of the living of a believing wife with an unbelieving husband,
will as well prove the lawfulness of a believing fornicatrix living with an
unbelieving fornicator, as may appear (says he) by a syllogistical analysis of
the Apostles argument the major whereof is this, That man and woman may live
together, notwithstanding the unbelief of one party, whereof one i^ sanct^fied
to the ^ther for begetting an holy seed. This is manife^^ly the Apostles reason
after our interpretation. But Mr. T. is manifestly mistaken, not to mention the
liberty that ^e will scarce allow another, to leave out husband and wife
expressed in the Text, and instead of it to put man and woman: The Apostle does
not conclud^ the lawfulness of their marriage society by the federation of
their issue, but shows that the supposed and feared non-federation does not
conclude the unlawfulness: And I dare yield that any man an^ woman may live
together, notwithstanding any fear of the unholiness of their issue; where one
is sanctified by the faith of another to the begetting of an holy seed. And if
Mr. T. will apply this, which the Apostle speaks, of a man's living with his
wife ( ad faciendum populum) to the living wi^h his whore, there is no danger
to yield it; Pharez his issue had belonged to the Commonweal of Israel, if
Thamar had been an infidel, as for ought we know, in all probability it was
with Jephtaes mother. If Sampson had issue by the harlot of Gaza Judge. 16.1.
such issue had belonged to Israel, such ^ssue male had right to circumcision.
To gratify Mr. T. I shall put it under my hand, that if a man have no other
reason from Scripture to leave his harlot then the non-federation of his issue,
he may still abide with her.

Answ. There is no mistake in my argument, nor is there any answer at all made
by Mr. Bl. to it, which he either wittingly or unwittingly I judge not,
certain I am he does manifestly mistake. He tells me, The Apostle does not
conclude the lawfulness of their marriage society by the federation of their
issue, whereby he intimates as if I said he did, and that therein was my
mistake: But let my words be viewed Apol. sect. 18. p. 96. Postscript. sect. 7.
p. 122. Review part. 1. sect. 22, 36. and it will appear that I frame not the
argument so according to the Apostle ^ightly onderstood, but as Mr. M. and
others interpret him. I said the Apostle concludes the lawfulness of their
living together by the sanctification of the husband though an unbeliever to or
in the wife, and that the proposition of the Apostle is, They may live together
whereof one is sanctified in the other, the assumption is, But the unbelieving
husband is sanctified in the wife, Ergo. Now the major with Mr. Ms. and Mr.
Bls. exposition has this sense, They may live together whereof one is
sanctified by the faith of the other for the begetting a holy seed, for so they
expound the Apostle. But according to them the unbelieving fornicator is
sanctified by the believing fornicatrix for the begetting a holy seed, which is
confessed by them. By Mr. Bl. here, when he says, The issue of Tamar,
Jephtha's mother, the Harlot at Gaza were holy federally: and for the major
there is no necessity of putting in [ husband and wife] since as Mr. Bl. says
p, 334. The stress is wholly laid upon the believing party, as to the holiness
of the issue, and here, I dare yield, says he, that any man and woman may live
together, notwithstanding any fear of the unholiness of their issue; where one
is sanctified by the faith of another to the begetting of an holy seed. Now put
all these together. The Apostle argues the believer may live with the
unbeliever, because the one is sanctified in the other, and this sanctifying is
according to Mr. Ms. and Mr. Bls. exposition for the begetting a holy seed, and
this begetting of a holy seed according to Mr. Bl. is ascribed wholly to the
faith of the one parent, it is a result or fruit of the parents faith whether
married or unmarried, therefore according to Mr. Bls. exposition of the
Apostle, ^he lawfulness of living together is deduced from that which does as
well ag^ee to fornicators as the married, and consequently ^he lawfulness of
living together in fornication is inferred from the Apostles reason as Mr. Bl.
and Mr. M. and others expound it as well as of husband and wife. It is true I
would not allow another to leave [ husband and wife] expressed in the text out of
the argument framed by me according to my exposition, which is the Apostles
meaning as I conceive, because I lay the whole stress upon those terms, and
still contend that no persons are sanctified one in or to another but the
husband and wife, and that these are so sanctified, whether one or both or
neither are believers. But if I frame the reason according to Mr. Ms. Mr. Bls.
and others interpretation of the Apostle, I am to be allowed to leave them out,
since by them no stress is laid on the husband and wife or conjugal relation,
but the faith of one party. That there was any such fear of non-federation of
issue, or supposition of it in the Corinthians if they livid together cannot be
evinced from the text, but the contrary is manifest by the arguing from the
uncleanness of their children, as an absurdity in their apprehensions, and the
holiness of them as a thing known and certain to them, as the particle [ else]
shows: and therefore that the Apostle shows that the feared and supposed
non-federation does not conclude the unlawfulness, is but a fiction, nor does
the Apostle make any such distinction between concluding the lawfulness, and
the not concluding the unlawfulness, between which if there be any distinction
(which yet I perceive not) yet it is certain that the words v. 12, 13. let him
not put her away, let her not leave him, are a positive resolution of the
lawfulness of their continuing together in marriage society, and the reason
shows v. 14. that the doubt was of the believers conjunction with the
unbeliever, because he was an unsanctified person, and consequently the reason
of the doubt was not the fear of the non-federation of issue but the
unlawfulness of marriage society with an infidel unsanctified: and consequently
it is a monstrous addition which Mr. Bl. seems to put either into the
conclusion thus, let her not leave him if this be all the fear the
non-federation of issue, or in the reason, They may live together whereof one
is sanctified by the faith of the other party, so as that there is no fear of
the non federation of their issue, there being nothing in the text for this
addition. Yet if it were put in it will justify my odious inference as he
terms it. For let the major be thus after Mr. Bls. mind, They may live
together whereof one is sanctified by the faith of the other, so as there is no
fear of non-federation of their issue, the minor is thus expressly after Mr Bls.
mind; But the unbelieving fornicatrix is sanctified by the faith of the
believing fornicator, so as that there is no fear of non-federation of their
issue, Ergo they may live together according to Mr. Bl. and consequently Mr.
Bl. blasphemously by his exposition makes the Apostle justify the living
together of a believer with an unbeliever in fornication; which is enough to
show the falsehood of that exposition, yea and of any other which ascribes the
sanctified^ess v. 14. (which is the reason of their lawful living together, v.
12, 13.) to the faith of the one party, and not to the conjugal relation. The
rest of Mr. Bls. talk of my willingness to have him waste his time, his falling
on my sapless tree, the readiness of his axe, his pains in applying it, is vain
and frivolous talk, since the tree still stands after all his hacking and hewing
at it, and his axe appears to be very blunt, or else he strikes besides the
tree. As for my six years space, Mr. Bl. might have understood that the reason
of my not publishing the first part of my Review till 1652. six years after the
printing of Apology, was (besides my constant labors and extraordinary public
and private employments) from the necessity of my removing my dwelling from the
Temple to Bewdley, from Bewley to Ledbury, thence to Lemster, besides my
frequent flittings by reason of the wars, travels to regain my plundered goods,
difficulty to get my treatise printed, the variety of Antagonists I had to
answer, which is yet the reason of my slowness in publishing this part of the
Review, and comes from the venomous spirit of such as Mr. Bl. Mr. B. and other
Paedobaptists, who would never comply with me in the fair motion in the
Epilogue of my Examen to join together in a brotherly way of ventilating the
point, but what they can bait me with calumnies tending to discredit me as
covetous, arrogant, etc. with multitude of replies, and magnifying them though
frivolous, vilifying my writings that men might not read them, and discern the
truth, nor Booksellers be willing to print or sell them, stirring up
Parliaments and Rulers to remove those of our way, out of all places which have
public salary, that our hands may be weakened; which I may truly call wicked
practices, of which too many of them have been guilty, and for which God will
judge them. I go on.

Mr. Bl. sect. 6. to my argument against his instrumental sanctification, that
barren persons cannot be said to be instrumentally sanctified for producing an
holy seed pressed by me in the 1. part of this Review p. 150, 151. sect. 19:
says thus, And I will appeal to any, yea the meanest Christian, whether
persons that have children born in wedlock bonds, in such disparity may not
have their fears and scruples about them, notwithstanding others in the same
condition of marriage are childless, or unable to bring forth children? Whether
the seed which came of those marriages Ezra. 10. were not unclean,
notwithstanding many so married had no children; Many of the Priests had herein
transgrest, and it was but some of them had wives by whom they had children,
Ezra 10.44. All which I grant, but there is not a jot in all this which answers
my objection* that the barren by accident or nature could not be said to be
sanctified to produce an holy seed, and yet the reason of the Apostle must be
conceived to reach to the proof of the lawfulness of their living together in
disparity of religion as well as the fruitful, and therefore the sanctifying
must be expounded in another sense then Mr. Bls. which agrees not to their case.

But he adds. And because this is the medium for proof of the Apostles
determination, v. 1^. that they might live together, page 152. he will have it
to be from a future contingent; but when this is no medium for proof of the
Apostles determination, as has been sufficiently sh^wn it is not, this false
with the other.

Answ. That it has been sufficiently shown that the first part of v. 14. is
not a medium for proof of the Apostles determination, is said without any
color of truth. All the reason I find given is, v. 16. is not a formal
reason, ergo, neither v. 14. to which answer has been given by denying both
the antecedent and the consequence, it is a formal reason though not ^s Mr. Bl.
frames it, and if it were not, yet the term [ for, else, but now] being
argumentative terms, show there is formal reasoning v. 14. v. 14. and the
producing an holy seed being a contingent event, if the Apostle should, as Mr.
Bls. exposition makes him, prove their lawful living together, because the
unbeliever is sanctified instrumentally to produce an holy seed, he should
argue from an uncertain event, which Chamier tom. 4. paustr. Cath. lib. 5.
chap. 10. sect. 46. disapproved in another case, as I show in my Examen page 7^.

To my argument against instrumental sancti^^cation, that it cannot be meant o^
it, since the barren cannot be said to be Gods instrument, ^or that always
effects, and when God sanctifies he specially designs some, whereas this is
common to all husbands and wives, and the unbeliever is said to be sanctified,
whereas it is the believer according to them who is the instrument of producing
a holy seed.

Mr. Bl. says, I am sure they bring ^orth children unto God, Ezekiel. 16.20. and
this they do not independently of themselves, so Christ would not have warned
Matthew. 23.10. call no man father upon earth, for one is your father who is in
heaven. All natural parents are instruments of God to produce a seed to people
the world, according to that blessing of Genesis 1.28. Genesis 9.1. Be fruitful and
multiply and replenish the earth; All believing parents are instruments of God
for an holy seed, it being of his free grace that the promise is to them and
their seed.

Answ. What is said Ezekiel. 16.20. was said only of Israelites and those
manifest idolaters as well as true believers, and the words do import no more
but this, that the Israelites children were born of right to him, that is, to
be at his disposal for his service, Levit. 25.42. because he brought them out
of Egypt, and therefore it was unjust in them to alienate them from him by
offering them to idols, which is not to be said of the Corinthian believers
children. Matthew. 23.9. is as impertinently alleged, for it speaks not of Gods
being a Father in respect of natural generation, nor forbids calling any man a
father in that respect, but in that manner in which the Jews termed their
teachers fathers and themselv^s their children, in respect of absolute
subjection of their consciences to their dictates, as Diodati rightly in his
annot. This teaches the believers not to yield that absolute reverence, nor
power over their consciences to any living man which belongs to God only, as
ignorant people did use to do to the Pharisees. If a^l natural parents be
instruments of God to people the world, yet Mr. Bl. will not say they are
instruments to produce a holy seed to people the Church for the^ all children
and not believers only should b^e fede^ally holy: so that all this is merely
impertinent. That all believing parents are instruments of God for an holy
seed, is said without proof, there being no such promise to them and their seed
produced, nor if there were did it follow they were all federally holy in Mr.
^ls. sense: But were this g^anted, yet it is nothing to prove the unbelieving
parent to be Gods instrument to produce a holy seed, who is said, and not the
believer to be sanctified, and that signanter considered as an unbeliever,
much less every unbelieving wife though b^rren who has a believing husband,
much less to be specially designed for that end, and therefore the
sanctification instrumental which Master Bl. conceives meant 1 Corinthians. 7.14.
is quite besides the Apostles meaning.

Mr. Bl. goes on thus of me, The 2d. argument he has in his Apol. p. 123.
where he says that the Apostles proposition understood of federal holiness were
most certainly false, giving in his reason, for many children of both
unbelieving parents are federally holy; he says that I answer, they are not so
at their birth. My answer is, if afterward by grace they are changed; this is
no fruit of their birth (of which the question is in this place) but the work
of the Gospel through grace, Mr. T. says, This is nothing to the purpose, since
the proposition has not those words in it, nor the Apostle; the Apostles
reason supposes it cannot be at any time; It seems then that the Apostles
proposition has this in it, that their children so born cannot be clean at
any time, or else Mr. T. his exception is less to purpose, who does not see
that the Apostle speaks of uncleanness or holiness, as as a product of their
birth without consideration of any thing which after by providence (through the
omnipotence and free grace of God) might happen, as a mean woman given in
marriage to a Senator or Peer, she is enobled by her husband, otherwise her
issue were Plebeians* yet so as they are capable of honor by the Princes
munificence, or their own merit; It seems that proposition of Christ's, That
which is born of the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.6. will not hold, unless it must
for ever continue flesh, and no omnipotence of God shall be able to make it
otherwise.

Answ. It is true that it seems to me the Apostles proposition has this in it,
that their children born unclean cannot be clean at any time, and I grant that
the Apostle speaks of uncle^nness or holiness as a product of their birth or
generation, without consideration of any thing which after by providence
(through the omnipotence and free grace of God) might happen and therefore of
illegitimation and legitimation by birth, and not of federal holiness which is
no product of birth, and yet that proposition, That which is born of the flesh
is flesh* Joh* 3.6. will hold, though after the person born after the flesh be
made spirit or spiritual, there being no contradiction in this, that the person
born after the flesh should become spiritual in his qualities, but it is
impossible that that which has been illegitimate in birth, should not be
illegitimate in birth, i^ being a thing past, and therefore cannot by God be
made not a thing past, or not done, for then it should be true that a thing
has been at birth, and has not been, been and not been, which is a
contradiction.

Mr. Bl says, I farther add, And yet it may be certain that the child of two
unbelievers may be federally holy at birth, whether it be understood of
election, inherent holiness or outward holiness, if God please to work and
declare it, I would Mr T would speak, whether there were ever any such a thing
a^ the child of two unbelievers, at the instant of their birth, declared of God
to be of those whom he took ^o be federally holy, and of the number of his
Covenant people, let that proposition stand till God by such a miracle confute
or contradict it.

Answ. 1. Though I could not speak there was such a thing, yet it is enough for
me to show that and how it might be. 2. I doubt not but many a captive woman
gotten with child by an infidel, and she her self an infidel, has been
delivered in Abraham's house, and those children were in Mr. ^ls. sense
federally holy at the instant of their birth, for for they were, if males,
capable of Circumcision on the eighth day, according to the law, Genesis 17.12,
13. and this is to be federally holy according to Mr. Bls. doctrine, who makes
all to be in the Covenant at their birth who are capable by reason of their
birth of the sign of the Covenant.

He yet says. Mr. T. adds, But the issue of them that are not lawfully
conjoined as husband and wife cannot be made legitimate by God, because it is
contrary to the definition of legitimation, which is a state consequent upon
birth by the lawful copulation of lawful husband and wife. This must conclude
for his interpretation and against ours, because God by his omnipotence can
make our unclean ones holy, and to make his unclean ones holy, is without the
verge of omnipotence: If we should put case in Mr. T. his manner, that God
should appear in approbation of a man's enjoying a woman out of marriage
society, then there were a legitimation of the issue, as he did the marriage of
the brothers wife, Deuteronomy. 25.5. otherwise against the moral law, Levit. 18.16.

Answ. It concludes for me if it be true (which Mr. Bl. disproves not) that the
holiness is meant 1 Cor. 7.14. which cannot be without the sanctification there
spoken of, and Mr. Bls. holiness may be without his sanctification, and the
proposition is true of no other holiness but that which I assign. If the
definition of legitimation be a state of birth from parents generating in
lawful marriage, though God should approve of a man's enjoying a woman out of
marriage society, there were no legitimation of the issue, and yet the marriage
Deuteronomy. 25.5. were lawful, and the issue legitimate. I am sorry Mr. Bl. has
tired himself and me with so many impertinent words, which have shaken nothing
of my Fabric: I am glad I am so near an end with him, and pass from him to Mr.
Sydenham, who in the 7th. chapter of his Exercit. thus speaks,

The scope of the Apostle here is to hold forth some special Gospel privilege
annexed to the state: and he frames his argument by no ordinary medium, of the
lawfulness of the marriage according to a natural, moral, or positive rule; but
a majori, from an eminent advantage they had together in the Gospel. For 1. the
unbelieving husband is sanctified in, or to, or by the wife. 2. The children in
such a state are holy, as if they had been both believers.

Answ. The scope of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.12, 13, 14. can be no other then the
resolving of the doubt in the Corinthians, which Mr. Sydenham truly says he
answered, v. 12, 13. and then gives, v. 14. an argument to prove it. Now
therein is no speeial Gospel privilege held forth; For 1. if any privilege be
there assigned it is to the unbeliever remaining an unbeliever, for he is said
to be sanctified* But sure an unbeliever* remaining an unbeliever has no
special Gospel privilege; Ergo. 2. The unbeliever is put there, not to show
any meliority of condition to himself, but to take away the doubt which was
concerning him, as defiling their society: So that the meaning is not, the
unbeliever is a gainer by his wife, but the unbeliever brings no damage to her
in respect of the thing in doubt concerning the lawfulness of continuing
together in marriage use by his unbelief; there is no advantage mentioned to
either of them, but a determination that there is not that disadvantage from
the one as necessitated to leave the other. Nor is there any thing that carries
the show of an argument a majori: The Apostle does no^ say, they have an
eminent advantage together in the Gospel, therefore much more may live
together. Yea, such an argument had been far from being strong, there being no
arguments usually weaker then such, if any disparity may be showed they are
quickly enervated. And in this thing the proposition would have been false upon
which such an argument must turn as its hinge, to wit, They that have an
eminent advantage together in the Gospel may much the rather live together. For
1. it would have been from that which is merely extrinsecal and accidental to
marriage society, Gospel privileges neither establishing nor dissolving
marriage society, which is lawful as well among them who have no Gospel
privilege as those that have. 2. The proposition were false, for then if the
unbelieving whore have Gospel advantage (as I conceive Mr. S. will not deny any
more then other Paedobaptists do) by the believing fornicator, they may live
together; so that if the fornicator being a believer beget a holy child on an
unbelieving whore, or what ever other Gospel privilege it is the unbeliever
has by the believer, imagine to cast out Devils in Christ's name, though she be
not joined to the Church, to prophecy in Christ's name, or to do wonders, by
this Gospel privilege they are allowed to live together in fornication: Which
are monstrous absurdities following Mr. Ss. conceit.

But he tells us. That the Apostle holds out a Gospel privilege, not common to
mere unbelievers in their marriage state is clear; 1. because the Apostle puts
the advantage on the believers side, and there fixes it; the unbelieving
husband is sanctified in the wife, as believing; and so contrarily, the
unbelieving wife in the husband: So ^eza affirms, that in two special Copies he
finds the words thus read, (...): Neither can it hold sense with the former
words, but as thus read: And if it had not been the Apostles proper meaning to
show the special privilege the believing party has notwithstanding the
unbeliever, he would have ^nely said, the husband is sanctified to the wife,
and the wife to the husband; that would have been the plainest and least
ambiguous expression of such a sentence: And the Apost^e would never have made
an argument of four terms* when three could only satisfy; for all know, that
an argument with four terms is most deceitful and false.

Answ. 1 The reason has no strength in it, the Apostle puts the advantage on
the believers side, Ergo the Apostle holds out a Gospel privilege not common
to mere unbelievers in their marriage state. For there may be expr^ssed an
advantage on the believers side, as suppose her liberty, her quiet of
conscience, etc. and yet the thing from whence it is inferred no Gospel
privilege, but a thing common to unbelievers, as in case, a b^liever doubt of
the lawful eating of an infidels meat offered to an Idol, and i^ be resolved
as the Apostle does 1 Cor. 10.25, 26, 27. from the right God has to all
creatures, here is the advantage on the believers side, the quiet of his
conscience, and yet no Gospel privilege held forth but such as is common to
unbelievers, the lawful eating of what was sold in the shamble^. 2. Mr. Ss.
antecedent, that the Apostle puts the advantage on the believers side, and
there fixes it, is contrary to what he said before, that the argument is from
an eminent advanta^e they had together in the Gospel; for if they had the
eminent advantage together, it was no more put or fixed on the believers side
then on the unbelievers. 3. It is so far from being true that the Apostle puts
the advantage on the believers side, that it is true rather on the contrary, if
any advantage be expressed it is put on the unbelievers side, for the unbeliever
is said to be sanctified not the believer. 4. It is not true that the
unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband as believing, and that which Mr.
Sydenham alleges to prove it is of no force. For the reading in two Copies is
not sufficient to countervail the multitude of Copies which have it otherwise,
it being more likely that the addition of (...) and (...) was made by some
Scribe then by the Apostle at first, who v. 13. used (...) without it. And for
the sense it holds ^s good sense without it as it did v. 13. The unbeliever is
mentioned not to show a special privilege to the believer, but because the
occasion of the doubt was from his infidelity, and therefore that could not be
omitted without omitting that in which was the force of the objection, which
could not be distinctly satisfied without mentioning it; and by putting it in
there are not four terms, as unskilfully Mr. S. intimates, but by omitting it
there come to be four terms, the conclusion to be proved being this, The wife
may live with her unbelieving husband, and the premises these, That wife may
live with her husband who is sanctified to her, But so is the unbelieving
husband to his wife, Ergo. But of this the Reader may see more at large the
first part of this Review, sect. 14.

2. Says Mr. S. The Apostle does use higher terms and phrases in this
argument, then is ever used in Scripture to express a mere lawful or common
privilege; as to be sanctified in the wife, and the children to be holy;
expressions of another dialect then to hold forth a civil or natural, or legal
conjunction: being singled out in Scripture, to hold forth the best state of
persons in relation to God and his use.

Answ. 1. Were all this true, as it is not, yet Mr. Ss. conclusion is not
proved thereby. For though the terms should never express a mere lawful or
common privilege, a civil or natural, or legal conjunction, and that they are
singled ^ut in Scripture to hold forth the b^st sta^^ of persons in relation to
God and his use; yet it follows not the Apostle holds out by them a Gospel
privilege, since they may hold out a Jewish privilege, which is not a Gospel,
but r^ther a legal privilege, as the term [ holy seed] does Ezra 9.2. 2. H^w
fi^ly these terms suit to the exposition I give without holding forth a Gospel
privilege, may be seen in my Examen part. 3. sect. 8. in the first part of
t^is Review, sect. 12, 13, 24, 25, 26.

Mr. S. adds, 1. That the term unclean notes the same it does Acts 10.14. where
Cornelius being a Gentile without the pale of the Jewish Church, is called
common and unclean, as all the Gentiles were before they came under the
promise, he was no bastard, he was without the Church just in the same phrase
with the Apostle here* when he says that children are not unclean, he must
needs mean they are not of common use or to be excluded from outward
privileges of the Church. 2. That [unclean] is used for legal pollutions and
uncleanness, which made men to be separated from the Congregation, and
excommunic^ted from the privilege of ordinances until they were washed and
sanctified: Thus in Levit 5.2, 3, 4. chapter 7.19. and 14.7, 8. Isa. ^2.1. Hag
2.13. with many other places, where unclean is opposed to a present suitable
capacity for Church privileges.

Answ. 1 In all those places, Levit. 5.2, 3, 4 and 7.19. and 14.7, 8. Hag.
2.13. Isa. 52.1. the uncleanness is not opposed to a Gosp^l privilege, but a
legal or Jewish, nor were the unclean out of the Covenant or the people of God
even when they were unclean, and therefore if ^ Cor. 7.14. he should tell them
their children were not unclean in that sense, he should not tell them of a
Gospel privilege, but a Judaical Legal Mosaical privilege, which had been
both false for they were uncircumcised Gentiles, and therefore were unclean in
that sense, and vain to tell them of that as a privilege, which was no
privilege, but which he counts nothing of 1 Cor. 7.19. 2. Cornelius is not
termed unclean as wanting a Gospel privilege, he was in Covenant with God and
accepted with him* and in the visible Church, since he with his whole house
feared God, prayed continually, Acts ^0.2. But he is termed unclean as one not
mee^ by reason of his uncircumcision for a Jew to go into, or eat with Acts 11
3. and therefore if the Apostle should 1 Cor. 7.14. mean it just in the same
sense with Acts 10.14. he should tell them their children were not unclean,
that is, were persons with whom they might ea^ and converse which understood of
infants were ridiculous ^f meant in the ^ense God termed Cornelius clean, then
it is as unfitly appl^ed to infants, who are not clean as Cornelius, in that
fearing God and working righteousness he wa^ accepted with him, Acts. 10.34,
35. which is more th^n an ou^wa^d Church privilege and a (...) thing then Mr.
S. and his ^ellow Paedobaptist conceive the Apostle meant 1 Cor. 7.14.

That which Mr. S. brings of the use of the word holy that it ex^resseth the
Heb^ew word (...) and that it ever signif^es that which is appropriated to a
Divine use, and that it is the (...) notion of holiness in the Old and New
Testament, and never taken otherwise: and that for proof of it he has compared
above ^00. places in the Old ^esta^ent according to the Septuagint, and all the
N. T. places where the word is gener^lly taken in Scripture to express a
separation of things to God how false or insufficient it is to his purpose, is
so a^ply showed in the first part of (...) Review sect. 12, ^3, 22, 23, 24, 25,
26. that I conceiv^^ (...) this time to add any more. In which place^ it may be
seen what I grant concerning the word generally taken, and (...) more places
th^n 1 Timothy 4.5. 1 These. 4.3, 4, 7. for another use then Mr. S. asserts* to be
the proper notion of holy in the Old and N. T. that it notes that which is
appropriated to Divine use, and is never taken otherwise, to show it to be
taken otherwise, as 1 Samuel 21.5. Isai. 13.3. Ezra 9.2, etc. But let us view what
he says to my allegation of 1 Timothy 4.5. 1 These. 4.3, 4, 7. for a different
use from his sense.

From 1 Timothy 4.5. says Mr. T. is meant only the lawful use of the creature in
opposition to what is to be refused. It is a wonder, but that God leaves men to
blindness when they leave truth, how any man of common understanding, finding
the word holy and sanctified always used in a religious sense, should fly to
this place to make an exception

Answ. I have so far as I thought needful looked into my former writings, and
do not find any place where I say as Mr. S. here says I do, what I yielded at
the Dispute at Bewdley, and for what reason is showed in the first part of this
Review sect. 27. p. 203. and if Mr. S. took from Mr. B. this which he here so
unbrotherly charge me with, he might have there found an answer, which
should have been taken notice o^, if my answer printed 1652. came to his
knowledge before the publishing his Exercit. 1653. But I never could find in my
Antagonists Mr. B. M. ^l etc. any such candor as to construe any thing that
came from me, since this controversy arose between us, in the better part, but
I think I may say almost in every thing I have done or said that they mention,
they pervert my words and deeds, and aggravate them in the worser sense, when
they might have had a good or at least excusable construction. As for this
thing which Mr. S. here makes an instance of Gods leaving me to blindness when
I left truth, the true state of it is thus. I had said in my Examen part. 3.
sect. 8. p. 73, 74* That this may be the sense, I gather from the like use of
the word (...) used 1 Timothy 4.5. where the creature of God is said to be
sanctified, that is lawfully used in opposition to that which is to be refused;
so here the unbelieving husband is sanctified, that is lawfully enjoyed as a
husband by, or to, or in respect of his wife, whether believer, or unbeliever,
in this case there is no difference, and alleged some words of Mr. M. in his
Sermon p. 24. to the same purpose. Which when Mr. M. in his Defense p. 155.
framed an argument from against me, I showed him his mistake in the first part
of this Review sect. 13. p. 115. denying the sanctification 1 Cor. 7.14. to be
such a sanctification as that place 1 Timothy 4.5. means, but only make them like
thus far, that as 1 Timothy 4.5. it signifies lawfully enjoyed, so here, though in
a different manner, and from a different reason or cause. And for the
concession in the Dispute at Bewdley* my yiedling Mr. Bs. conclusion does prove
that Mr. S. does here falsely charge me to say that 1 Timothy 4.5. is meant only
the lawful use of the creature. Nor is it true that I fled to this place to
make an exception against the taking the word holy in a religious sense. For
neither did I make use of 1 Timothy 4.5. about the sense of the word holy, but the
word sanctified, nor do I conceive the word sanctified used in any other then a
religious sense, yea I have often said that [ sanctified] 1 Cor. 7.14. is taken
for religiously sanctified, as 1 Cor. 6.11. as baptized, 1 Cor. 10.2. mother,
Mark 3.35. dead, Heb. 11.12. made himself Eunuch, Matthew. 19.12. son, Exodus 2.9.
and many more places, the words are taken in their proper notion, only they
are applied in a limited sense, or in some respect by an impropriety or abuse
of speech to those to whom absolutely and in propriety or exactness of speech
they do not belong, and therefore this which Mr. S. here suggests of me is but
his calumny which he was willing to take up that through my sides he might
wound the truth.

But Mr. S. adds. The Apostle says first, Every creature which God has made
is good in it self, and none to be refused: that is, all may be lawfully used
without any legal pollution as formerly: But then he goes higher, speaking of a
religious use of outward things, they are sanctified by the Word and Prayer;
they are all good and lawful in their use to every man; but they are only
sanctified by these holy means, the Word and Prayer. And he might have as well
said, that the Word and Prayer are not holy means, but only lawful to be
used; as that the sanctification which is by the word and prayer, is to make
the creatures only lawful to be used. If a wicked man ea^ his meat without
seeking a blessing on it, or giving thanks, will any one say that he has not a
lawful use of the creature? but any man may say, it is not sanctified to him.
The Apostle in these 2 ver. goes on gradatim by degrees, from a lawful use to
a holy use of the creatures; All is good and may be used, but they are
sanctified by the word and prayer. Thus you see the nature of this privileged
place.

Answ. What word it is which is meant 1 Timothy 4:5. whether the word of Gods
power creating them, which the words v. 3. which God has created for receiving
seem to lead to, or the word of Gods declaration, whether by our Lord Christ,
Mark 7.15. or to Peter, Acts 10.15. or promise of blessing, it is manifest that
the Apostle in that place does not make any distinction between a sanctified
and a lawful use, nor does he say they are created for any to be received but
with thanksgiving of them who believe and know the truth; nor does he make the
creature good or not to be refused but being received with thanksgiving, nor
sanctified but by the word of God and prayer: Nor do I find but that
interpreters take lawful use and sanctified for the same. So Beza in his
Annot. It is made holy, to wit, in respect of us, so as that we may use it with
a good conscience* as duly received from the hand of God. For other men do
enjoy it no otherwise then as thieves and sacriledgious persons goods usurped.
And he lawfully uses goods, who acknowledges and invocat^th the giver of them
after his word. Piscat. anal. He minds which is the lawful and allowed use of
meats, to wit, when we receive them with thanksgiving and prayer proceeding
from faith* Diodati, Dicson, and others speak to like purpose. Nor is there any
thing here that intimates any gradation from a lawful use v. 3, 4. to a
sanctified use v. 5. For v. 3, 4. to the receiving of them thanksgiving is
required of them that believe and know the truth, and the creature is not said
to be good and nothing to be refused but being taken with thanksgiving, which
is the same with sanctified by the word and prayer, v. 5. and v. 5. is a reason
of that which is said v. 4. and therefore no gradation or rising higher, as Mr.
S. imagines* Which I do not produce to show that I conceive no distinction
between a lawful use and a holy use of things (which I do acknowledge in the
first part of this Review p. 114. and elsewhere) but only to show how
insufficiently Mr. S. opposes me, whom he so severely censures, even in that
which I spoke rightly enough, and his own blindness made him to judge hardly of
me, as left by God to blindness.

Mr. S. says further, But the main place Mr. T. alleges for holiness to be
used for what is barely civil or lawful, is that 1 These. 4.3, 4, 7. Here
uncleanness is taken, says he, for fornication, and holiness for chastity. To
which I answer with Mr. M. that chastity among the heathens is never called
sanct^fication, but among believers it is, being a part of the new crea^i^n,
and one branch and part of their sanctification wrought by the spirit of God.
And though Mr. T. says this is but a shift, yet he shall see it demonstrative,
if he observe the phrases in the text, and the nature of sanctification: in the
1 and 2. v. the Apostle beseeches and exhorts them to walk as they had
received from him how to walk and to please God according to the rules of Jesus
Christ; and he urges it in v. 3 with this; It Is the will of God, even your
sanctification, that is, that you should walk in all holiness, suitable to the
blessed rules of the Gospel, and as one part and expression of holiness, to
abstain from sin: And he instanceth specially in fornication, which was the
common and reigning sin among the Gentiles: so that if you view the place you
shall find, that 1. He speaks of sanctification in general, in it is full
latitude v. 3. as suitable to all the will and mind of God; This is the will of
God, even your sanctification; that is, it is Gods command, and Gods delight to
see you sanctified: then he brings in abstinence from fornication (the sin of
the times) as one part of that holiness God requires: For sanctification may be
considered as it lies in vivification, or in mortification, which for
distinctions sake we we may call the two parts of sanctification. Now chastity
in it self, as in the heathens and natural men, is not properly a part of
sanctification; some other Epi^hite becomes it better: would Mr. T. call all
the abstinencies and actings of the heathens by the name of sanctifications,
and speak like a Christian and a Divine? Would it be proper to say in his
Pulpit (when he was speaking of the nature of holiness and chastity) sanctified
Socrates, holy Aristides? And can he think the Apostle would express that which
is common among heathens, in such a high Gospel dialect as sanctification is
appropriated always in Scripture to God, Angels, Saints, and their highest
graces and workings, and to things raised above common use, dedicated to God
and his service, but that he meant it according as the whole tenure of
Scripture defines holiness? How much will the phrase of holiness and
sanctification be debased and made common, if that sense should be admitted,
contrary to the Scripture use of the word? But that is a weak cause that puts
men to such extraordinary shifts to maintain.

Answ. It Is the property of some persons, like Thersites in Homer, to speak
much and to perform little, and so it befalls Mr. S. here. He says, 1. I
allege 1 These. 4.3, 4, 7. as the main place for holiness to be used for what
is barely civil or lawful, whereas I allege it not as Mr. S. says, but to
show that it is not true which Mr. M. said, that holiness is always taken in a
sacred sense, for a separation of persons and things from common to sacred
uses. 2. Though I say, Mr. Ms. answer to be but a shift, yet I shall see it
demonstrative, if I observe the phrases in the Text, and the nature of
sanctification. But if all should be yielded, that 1 These. 4.3, 4*7. holiness
were but a part of the new creation, that chastity in heathens is never called
sanctification; yet this were but a shift to avoid the proof against Mr. Ms.
assertion, that holiness is always taken in a sacred sense for a separation of
persons and things from common to sacred uses; for the chastity of regenerate
persons, confessed to be term^d holiness and a part of sanctification, is not
taken in a sacred sense for separation from common to sacred uses: But of this
more may be seen in the first part of this Review, sect. 12. page 108. And as
for Mr. Ss. reasoning, it is far from demonstrative, it being indeed against
himself. For if v. 1, 2. be an exhortation to please God in general, and v 3.
express one part and expression of holiness to abstain from sin, and no other
sin be named but fornication, he does particularly term abstaining from
fornication holiness; which is more fu^ly confirmed v. 4. where chastity is
termed possessing our vessel in holiness and honor, opposite to possessing our
vessel (that is our body) in the lust of concupiscence as the Gentiles, among
whom fornication was frequent, and this is v. 7. termed uncleanness, and the
opposite to it holiness, that is chastity. And for the other thing, that
chastity in it self as in the heathens and natural men is not properly a part
of sanctification, and that sanctity is ascribed to the highest things, it is
but frivolous. For though it be no part of true sanctification, yet it may be
termed holiness, as there be many called Gods who are not the true and
everliving God, to whom though the term [ God] do properly belong only, yet
Magistrates and Angels are sometimes termed Gods without any debasement, and
though I would not in my pulpit without distinction term Magistrates, Angels
Gods, or call an unlawful assembly of Idolaters a Church, yet who knows not
the term Elohim, and Ecclesia or Church to be applied to them? So that however
Mr. S. prattle of his demonstration and of the weakness of my cause and
extraordinary shifts, yet this is but frivolous talk without any performance.

He adds. But to go on a little further; The same word is used by the Apostle
in all his salutations and inscriptions of his Epistles to all the Churches;
(...) to the Saints or holy ones at Rome, at Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, etc.
which when appropriated to persons, always signifies a visible Saint: So here
when he calls children of believing parents holy, he cannot but mean, they are
to be accounted as visible Saints, until they do profess the contrary: and I
know no reason can be given, why the meaning of the Apostle in his Epistles,
when he writes (...), to the Saints, should not be as well understood written
only to the legitimate, and those that are not bastards a^ Rome, Corinth, etc.
as well as for them to interpret the same word so in this place: For (...) when
applied to grown men, must signify visible and Evangelical holiness, and must
be translated Saints* but when applied to children, it must only signify
legitimacy, that they are not bastards; when all men know, that magis and minus
non variant speciem; and the word is of the same import in every place of the
New Testament.

Answ. It is not true, that the same term is used by the Apostle in all his
salutations and inscriptions of his Epistles to all the Churches, it is not
used in the Epistles to the Galatians and Thessalonians; and in the titles
where it is appropriated to persons, signifies a Saint called, sanctified in
Christ Jesus, faithful, which rather note an invisible then a visible Saint:
and if they do note a visible Saint, they note one by calling, sanctified in
Christ, believer in profession, none of which are to be ascribed to infants of
believers as such, nor can be meant 1 Cor. 7.14. where children are termed holy
by birth, not by calling; and are not said to be holy in Christ, but in respect
of their parents. Whence apparent reason is given, why the term [ holy] in the
titles of the Epistles cannot be translated legitimate in opposition to
bastardy, but Saints, or men who are set apart for God by the love of God, and
therefore termed beloved of God, Romans 1.7. and the sanctification of the spirit
by the Gospel: and on the other side, why [ holy] 1 Cor. 7.14. cannot be
translated Saints, or visible Saints, not for that frivolous conceit of Mr. S.
as if they might not be termed Saints 1 Cor. 7.14. for want of age; whose gross
application of a Logic rule, shows he was but a smatterer therein: For if
visible saintship had been given to elder persons in respect of grown age, and
denied to infants, yet there had been no variation of kind from more or less
growth, saintship being not the species or kind of such persons, but humanity.
And what he says, that the word is of the same import in every place of the
New Testament, it is so false a speech, and so ill beco^ming him that said, p.
53. he had compared all the places in the New Testament where the word is used,
that no other excuse but of heedlesness or forgetfulness can acquit him from
deceit. For besides the places alleged, Luke 2.23. 2 Pet. 1.18. etc. and his
own distinctions of federal and inherent holiness, together with the holiness
intentional meant Romans 11.16. show it to be false.

What he adds, By the same reason we account grown men holy, we may account
infants of believers; for these that make a profession, may have no inward and
inherent holiness; and a bare profession is not holiness; we only account them
holy by a judicious charity; and we are often deceived, and have cause to
repent of our judgments: ^nfants may be inwardly sanctified, and God has
taken them into Covenant with their parents, and would have us look on them as
separated to himself, which is ground enough to build our charity on, as to
esteem them holy, as grown persons. There is no difference but this in it; That
concerning the holiness of persons at age, we trust our own judgments; and in
judging of infants we trust Gods word, who has comprehended them under the
promise with their parents; there has been as many deceits in the event in our
judgment of those of riper years, as in that which is acted through a mixture
of faith on infants. And Gods promise, though never so indefinite, is a surer
ground for hope then my probable judgment; which is the most I can have of the
generality of professors of ripe years, is much of it false, as that God has
taken infants into Covenant with their parents, they are comprehended under the
promise with their parents, God would have us to look on them as separated to
himself, by the same reason we account grown men holy we may account infants of
believers, we only account them holy by a judicious charity, and all
impertinent, forasmuch as professors of faith are accounted visible Saints not
by a judgment of charity, but of certainty from their profession which is
visible, and so are qualified for Baptism, not from hopes of real holiness, or
faith of Covenant holiness, which do not entitle to Baptism without certainty
of profession.

What he adds. That holy is a pure religious word, that in my sense it would be
no considerable medium for argumentation, that else were, etc. has force from
the specialness of the privilege to their issue to be in a peculiar state of
separation to God, visible Churchmembers with the believing parent, contains
nothing but unproved dictates often before refuted. What he adds of cold
comfort in my sense, and of strength and sweetness in his, is alike frovolous.
For the speech of the Apostle was to be no otherwise consolatory, then so far
as it might satisfy their consciences of the lawfulness of their continuing
together, which is clearly done by my Analysis and exposition of the Apostle,
and not done at all by his way. For what is a privilege of the children which
perhaps they shall never have; or if they have, it is nothing to take away the
defilement by the infidel for satisfaction of their consciences concerning
living together in disparity of Religion? I have done with this scribler: I
shall a little examine what some others have said; with as much brevity as the
maintenance of the truth will permit, and hasten to an end.

SECT. LXXVII. Mr. William Carters attempt of proving the Christian Sabbath
from Heb. 4.7, 9, 10. is showed to be succesless, and so useless for proof of
Infant Baptism.
THere is a Treatise entitled, The Covenant of God with Abraham opened by Mr.
William Carter, which pretends to clear the duty of Infant Baptism, and in his
Epistle to the Reader says, the root of this matter is the Covenant of God
with Abraham; which because of the eminency of the Author, and the publishing
it in observance (as is said) of the commands of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Sheriffs of the City of London, rather then for any show of strength in the
discourse, I shall examine, that if this Review come to their hands, they also
may discern their mistakes. Which I think necessary to be done, because he also
(as other Paedobaptists use to do) is not afraid upon his own conjectures (for
they are no better) to charge us who baptize not infants as breaking Abraham's
Covenant, as small friends to Christ's Kingdom, waving and neglecting the right
way of increasing that Kingdom, and of exalting his Throne and power in the
world, taking-up ways unnatural, unsafe and false. Let^s then see what he
writes.

Before he meddles with the point of infant Baptism (which he says is the thing
he especially intended in his discourse) he endeavors to deduce the Christian
Sabbath, as it is termed, from Heb. 4. I omit that he says, p. 3. that Heb.
2.15, 16. the birthright vendible is their privileges in the Church, and
worship of the Gospel, and that p. 6. he expound^ the holding ^ast ^he
confidence or liberty and the rejoicing of the hope, Heb. 3.6. by holding fast
the ordinances and privileges of the Gospel: Which if he mean (as he seems to
do) of the o^twar^ privileges and worship, it appears that he mistakes, since
the birthright not to be sold, and the confidence and rejoicing of hope are
greater matters, which no hypocrite may attain to, and are plainly intimated
Heb. 12.14, 15. to be the seeing of God, the attaining his grace, and the
estate Evangelical mentioned v. 22, 23, 24. which they might sell, though they
never had it, by their Apostasy from their profession of Christ, through whom
they were in expectation of it, at least in appearance. And in like manner the
boldness, liberty, confidence, or r^joycing of their hope, must needs be of
something yet attainable, and not to be attained without holding it to the end,
v. 6, 14. and which no unbelievers could attain to; which are not true of bare
outward Church privileges and Gospel worship, but of that salvation mentioned
Heb. ^^. the grace brought in the revelation of Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 1.13.
whereby we are Gods house, Heb* 3.6. are partakers of Christ, v. 14. But I
shall insist somewhat on that he says p. 8. that by to day if ye will hear his
voice, in that Psalm. 95.7. is meant the Christian Sabbath day, by which he
means the day which in the New Testament is termed the Lords day or first day
in the week, which I conceive not right for these reasons. 1. The day, Heb.
4.7. i^ a limited or definite day, and that must needs imply this meaning;
[This is the day in which if ye hear his voice and harden not your hearts, ye
may enter into ^ods rest; if ye do not this day, ye will come short.] Which if
true, then (as Mr. C. expounds it) though they should hear the voice of Christ,
and not harden their hearts on the week day, yet they should not enter into the
rest promised, which I think will be counted absurd, and evacuate the hopes by
all the week day Lectures. 2. From H^b. 3.13. I thus argue. To day, Heb 3.7. is
the same with the space of time which i^ called ^o day, v. 13. This is so
evident in the Text, that every one that re^ds the ^ext will easily perceive
it, since it is plain, that the calling it to day is meant ^f the calling it i^
that place v. ^. and the words* lest any of you be hardened* show it. But [ to
day, Heb. 2.13*] is meant of any day* o^ every day wherein Christians might
exhort one another, therefore not restrained to the Lords day: but either
extended to the whole space of time they live on earth, or to any opportunity
in any day whatsoever, whether week day or Lords d^y, wherein they might exhort
3. B^ comparing these plac^s with (...) Cor 6 2 where it is said, [ Now is the
accepted time, now (...) the d^y of salvation,] which seem plainly to intimate
the same day with that which is meant Heb. 3.7, 13. and that day being
manifestly meant of the time wherein the Ambassadors for Christ do beseech men
to be reconciled to GOD, 2 Cor. 5.20. it is very probable or rather certain,
that to day, Heb. 3.7, 13. and 4.7. is not meant particularly the Lords day or
first day of the week, but any day of a man's life wherein the Gospel of Christ
is preached, and reconciliation to God offered him; and received by him. Or as
Cameron. quaest. in Epist. ad Heb. 3.7. That time which by the Prophets and
Apostle is called the last days and fullness of time, which is the time of the
Messiah exhibited, not precisely the Lords day or first day of the week. Let us
view Mr. Carters reasons for his conceit.

First, it is evident that it is meant of a day of rest c^ap. 4, 7, 8. for if
Joshuah had given them rest, namely that rest of which David speaks, then he
would not aftewards have spoken of another day, therefore of a day of rest i^
must be meant, else the Apostles argument had not been concluding nor
pertinent, because many other days might have afterward been spoken off,
although Joshuah had given them all the rest that was ever to be expected.

Answ. It is true that he Author of that Epistle does rightly gather from the
word [ to day] that there was another day of rest yet remaining for the people
of God besides the seventh day rest, and the rest in the Land o^ Canaan which
they p^ssessed by Joshuah*s conduct, yet does not imply that the day in which
the word was spoken was the day of rest. But thus he gathers it, These words
were spoken by David many hundreds of years both after God swear in the
Wilderne^s they should not enter into his rest who believed not, and after
Joshuah had settled the posterity of the unbelievers in the land of Canaan, and
therefore the rest in the land of Canaan is not that which is meant in David's
speech, but there is implied a future day of rest to be attained by believing
in JESUS the Messiah. For David if it had been meant of the rest in Canaan
would not have spoken to them not to harden their hearts f^r fear of being
excluded from Gods rest.

Secondly, says Mr C. It is meant of such a rest as GOD can and sometimes does
swear in his wrath against his own people, who are his house, and the people of
his pasture, that they shall not enter into it: this cannot be said of what
they enjoy in their personal in^erest by faith only; but as for the comfort of
his ordinances and Sabbath.

Answ. To omit the unfitness of the expression, since the comfort of Gods
Ordinances and Sabbath is a personal interest enjoyed by faith only, it is not
true, that what is said of the rest cannot be meant of what the people of God
enjoy in their personal interest by faith only, because of Gods oath. For that
oath does not imply that believers shall not enter into the rest, yea the
Apostles inference is to the contrary v 1, 6. since some were not to enter in,
others were to enter in, and since GOD swear some should not, he promised some
should, and chap. 3.18. since some entered not through unbelief, others in whom
the word is mixed with faith, chapter 4.2. do enter in. And this is a good argument
that the rest mentioned is not the Christian Sabbath day which is the first day
of the week, since they that believe not come short of it; it is a consequent
upon the holding the boldness, confidence and rejoicing of our hope firm to the
end; it was then in promise to the Hebrews, and remained to the people of God,
who were to be warned that they came not short of it; where as the Sabbath
days rest was then in p^ssession, not to be expected afterward, but then in
use when this Epistle was written, and yet such as hypocrites, unbelievers, and
Apostats did in some sort enjoy as well as sincere persevering believers.

Thirdly, says Mr. C. That it is meant of a Sabbath days rest, appears by
the manner of the Apostles arguing in this place, in as much as the Apostle
proves it to be another day of rest, besides what was in use in the Church
before. Another in opposition to the 7th. day Sabbath, and that because David
speaks of it as a rest to be entered into a long time after; although the
7th. days rest was entered into from the beginning of the world, in as much as
he spoke as it is Heb. 4.4, 5. implying a promise that some shall, though
others shall not enter into it. Now, says the Apostle, this being spoken by
the Prophet David of a time then to come: and again, as Heb. 4.7, 9. over and
beside the seventh days Sabbath. Now from this his manner of arguing it is
evident, that he supposes this day of which David speaks, saying, To day if
ye will hear his voice, to be a day of the same kind as the seventh days
Sabbath was; because else there had been no such opposition to be made, nor
would there have been place for an although, or a notwithstanding, in the case,
as in v. 31. because any other rest might have also been entered into from the
beginning of the world, as a believers personal rest by faith was; but that
which makes the opposition is, that David speaks of a Sabbath days rest, to
be entered into now a long time after, even in the times of the New Testament,
of which times that Psalm. 95. is a prophecy, as appears by the Apostles
application of it in this place, and thereupon he concludes it to be another
day of rest remaining for us besides the seventh days rest. By this we see
that by to day if ye will hear his voice is not meant only of a Christians
personal rest by faith, which is every days enjoyment, and was entered into from
the beginning of the world, but of another Sabbath days rest besides what was
in use before.

Answ. It is not denied that Psalm 95. is a prophecy, nor that it speaks of a
rest to be a long time after David's time, even in the times of the New
Testament, nor that [ although] does imply a distinct rest from the seventh day
Sabbath rest, and an opposition of that kind which some Logicians call
disparato, though others will not have it called opposition but distinction;
yet the words Heb. 4 3. are not as Mr. C. cites them, [ although the seventh
days rest was entered into from the beginning of the world] but [ although the
works were (...) or finished from the foundation of the world.] Nevertheless,
this does not prove that either the rest is not a believers personal rest by
faith, or that it is of the same kind with a mere weekly Sabbath days rest,
but rather the contrary. It is distinguished from the seventh day Sabbaths
rest, and so it is also from the rest which the Israelites had by Joshuah's
conduct in the land of Canaan, which the Author mentions v. 8. as well as the
seventh days rest v. 4. and therefore the seventh days rest opposed to the
rest v. 7, 9. does no more prove the day of rest to be a day of the same kind,
as the seventh day Sabbath was then the day of rest in Canaan by Joshuahs
leading. Yea, since the seventh days rest mentioned Heb. 4.4. is only Gods
rest, it is apparent the day of rest is of different kind from an ordinary
Sabbath days rest. Neither does the term [ although] impart any such identity
of kind, but that God spoke of another rest of his, athough he had rested
long ago when his works were finished from the foundation of the world. Yea the
words Heb 4.10. He that is entered into his rest has also ceased from his
works as God did from his, (which expresses the rest for the people of God yet
remaining v. 9.) do show that the day of rest is not till a man's works be
ceased, which I know not how to understand of any other works then his works of
labor and sufferings, which are not till the end of this life; and therefore
the sabbatism or day of rest is not here the keeping of a weekly sabbath, but a
day of rest, as is meant Revel. 14.13. which though it be not every days
enjoyment, yet it may be a Christians personal test by faith only, that is
that rest which by faith only is entered into or obtained. And though it were
entered into by all believers from the foundation of the world, yet it was not
so conspicuously as when Christ entered into the heavens; However those Hebrews
and the believers to come after had not then entered into it. That the Sabbath
days rest was in use before, proves against Mr. C. that the rest was not of the
same kind, unless in manner of a type or shadow, as one thing like that is
resembled by another may in a Catachrestique manner be termed of the same kind
with that which resembles.

Mr. C. adds. Fourthly it is meant of a day of rest to be celebrated in Gods
house in his worship. So the Apostle concludes v. 9. There remains therefore
a Sabbatism (...) the celebration of a Sabbath for the people of God: a word
comprehending the Sabbath and worship put together as was before observed. And
the coherence of the words Psalm. 95. implies as much Psalm. 95.6, 7, 8. It
appears also from the Apostles wherefore, chap. 3.7. His house are we;
wherefore, as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice, etc. So
as if the question be what voice? Or what day? The answer from the Psalm and
from the Apostles inference must be this, the day of worshipping the Lord our
Maker, and of resting with him in his house, and his voice, whose house we are,
inviting us to it.

Answ. Sabbatism in the notation of the word imports no more then rest: what it
imports in the use of it I cannot discern but from this place, since I know not
where it is used in the New Testament but here, nor in any other author before
this. Here it appears not to import any more then rest, since it expresses but
what is expressed by (...), v. 8, 10, 11. though I conceive that the matter
shows it to be meant of a holy rest, it being the rest of Gods people. But
that the word comprehends rest and worship put together, I do not conceive. For
the word a^ludes to the Sabbath Genesis 2.2, 3. quo^ed Heb. 4.3, 4. Now Gods ^est
imported not worship, though his appoint^ng us to rest on the Sabbath, and to
sanctify it, does import our worship of him. Nor do I think the coherence of
the words Psalm. 95.6, 7, 8. does imply that S^bbatism H^b. 4.9. comprehends the
S^bbath and worship put together, or tha^ Psalm. 95.7. To day if ye will hear
his voice, is meant of a day of rest to be celebrated in the house of God in
his wo^shi^, since in those words there is not the word Sabbatism, and the
Exhortation, To day if ye will hear his voice, does not app^ar to have been on
the weekly Sabbath da^, the Ps^lm being not (as the 94th. Psalm) entitled* A
Psalm for the Sabbath, and it is more likely that [ to day if you will hear his
voyce] intimates the day at the end of every seven years in the solemnity of
the year of release in the feast of tabernacles, when all Israel was come to
appear before the Lord in the place which he should choose, and the Law was to
be read before all Israel in their hearing, Deuteronomy. 31.10, 11. at which time of
the year every year they had gathered in their Corn and Wine, Deuteronomy. 16.13. and
then they had no harvest, and so it was the fittest time to resem^le the rest
remaining ^o Gods people; yet so far was it from being the weekly Sabbath day,
that as Ainsworth notes on Deuteronomy. 31.11. The Jewish Doctors say that if the day
of the assembling of the people happened to be the Sabbath day, the reading of
the Law was put off till after. Yet were it the Sabbath day, it does not
follow, that it is meant of a day of rest to be celebrated in the house of God
in his worship, for the weekly Sabbath was not celebrated in the house of God,
that is, the Tabernacle or Temple; but in their dwellings, Exodus 16.29. And
therefore if the term [(...) wherefore, Heb. 3.7.] did refer to whose house ye
are, v. 6. (though I conceive the inference is made from the words, if we hold
fast the confidence and re^oycing of the hope firm unto the end) yet it proves
it not to be a weekly Sabbath of rest to be celebrated in the house of God in
his worship. For the weekly sabbath was not celebrated in Gods house, and if it
were, each Christian or the Church were not fit to answer Gods house in which
it was celebrated, since they are not the place where, that made the worship of
God accepted as the Tab^rnacle or Temple that is proper to CHRIST and his body,
John 2.19. Heb. 8 2. but the persons by whom it is celebrated and who worship
God. Lastly, were all this granted, that Heb. 4.7. were meant a day of rest to
be celebrated in the house of God in his worship, yet this might be mean^ of
the rest in heaven often called Gods house, where the Elders cast down their
crowns before God and worship and praise him, and not the weekly Sabbath.

Fifthly, says Mr. C. Because the Apostle understands it of a day to be kept
upon the same ground, in relation unto Christ his ceasing from his works and
entering into his rest, as the 7th. day Sabbath was in relation to God his
ceasing from his works, after his making the first crea^ion, and entering into
his. So i^ follows v. 10. Which to be meant of Christ, and his entrance into
his rest (which he makes to be his passing into heaven, v. 14) inferred from
his entering into his rest v. 10. he endeavors to prove by 5 reasons.

Answ. 1. The coherence be^ween Heb. 4.9* and v. 10. does rather intimate that
[ he that is entered into his rest, v. 10.] is a term common to all the people
of God mentioned v. 9. and the exhortation v. 11. does also import, that the
person that enters into his rest v. 10 is meant every believer. Nor is any one
of Mr. Cs. reasons convincing of the contrary. For 1. let the translation be
mended as Mr. C. would have it, yet it may be true of every believer, that he
also has ceased from his wor^s* as God did from his own works. 2. Seeing then,
v. 14. may point out to what is said, Heb 3.^, 2, 3. 3. If Heb 4 10. cannot be
meant of ceasing from sin, yet it may be from lab^rious works and sufferings as
Revel. 14.13. and such rest may be (...) with refreshing, and looking upon them
as good. 4. That v. 10. should be taken for a proof of v 9. is not necessary;
(...) being not always causal or rati^nal, yet if it were, it might be thus,
The rest of the people of God in heaven shall be a Sabbatism like Gods; for
such of them as shall enter into their rest, shall cease, or have ceased from
their sufferings and painful works, as God did from his in the beginning. 5.
What he says, that Christ were not Lord of the Sabbath, as he says Mark 2.28.
Luke 6.5. unless he had entered into his rest, or as p. 75. he could not be Lord
of the Sabbath, unless he also had a rest which he entered into as God did into
his, i^ without proof, and is false; since Christ speaks of his being Lord of
the Sabbath at that time before he entered into his rest; and does imply that
which some would call blasphemy, that Christ as God had not been Lord of the
Sabbath unless he had entered into his rest as man. But were it granted, that
Christ by reason of his entering into his rest as man, was Lord of the Sabbath,
does that prove that Heb. 4.10. is meant of Christ's entering into his rest? or
is it not rather a baculo ad angulum? But were it granted that Heb. 4.10. were
meant of Christ's entering into heaven, yet the rest before mentioned is rather
thereby confirmed to be meant of rest in heaven with Christ, then rest on earth
on a weekly sabbath, since the argument is strong thus, Christ is passed into
his rest in the heavens, therefore there is a rest remaining for the people of
God there; but has no strength thus, Christ is entered into the heavens to
rest, therefore there remains to the people of God a weekly day of rest on
earth. Lastly, this very reason quite overthrows Mr. Cs. building. For he would
ground the week day Sabbath upon Christ's entering into his rest, and this day he
would have to be the first day of the week, and the reason for inferring a week
day Sabbath upon Christ's entering into his rest is taken from the rest of God
after the first creation, whereby the 7th. day Sabbath was sanctified: Now if
there be the like reason of keeping a week day Sabbath because of Christ's rest,
as there was of keeping the 7th. day Sabbbath because of Gods rest, then it
will not be the first day of the week which must be the Sabbath, for that was
not the day of his entering into his rest, but another day, to wit, the fifth
day of the week, as may be gathered from Acts 1.3. Mr. C. himself, p. 76.
though he say that it is very probable that the ascension day was on the first
day of the week, yet confesses it not to be clear; and the reason of the
probability from Act. 1. by the computation of the forty days from his
resurrection, and the mention of a Sabbath days journey, from Mount Olivet to
Jerusalem, occasioned (as is likely) from their making that journey then upon
that day, v. 12. is so slender, that I know not that ever any learned man did
conceive so with him; and the computation of forty days from his resurrection,
being on the first day of the week (though the day of the resurrection contrary
to the common computation should be excluded) will not fix the Ascension day on
the first day of the week, but two days at least short of it. And for the
mention of a Sabbath days journey, Act. 1.12. it is clear from the words that
it was only to show the distance of the place from Jerusalem, not to show that
day to have been the Sabbath day. I list not to trouble my self about the
reason of using that expression rather then another, it being not material. Yet
were it granted it had been on the Sabbath day, it had not been the first day
of the week, for that is not termed in Scripture, certainly not in the Acts of
the Apostles, the Sabbath day. What Mr. C. adds. But albeit his rest was not
completed till he passed into the heavens, yet he first entered into it at his
resurrection* which being upon the first day of the week, there needs no more
to fix the command of the Sabbath on that day, does overthrow his arguing from
Heb. 4.7, 9, 10, 14. whence he would deduce the Christian Sabbath because of
Christ's entering into his rest at his passing into the heavens. Which hurts not
others, as Mr. Cawdrey, Sabb. Rediv. part 4. sect. 23. who confesses the words
Heb. 4.10. not to be spoken of Christ, though he allude to them. I have
insisted on this point by the way, because Mr. C. makes use of it for infant
Baptism, but to how little purpose the sequel will show.

Mr. C. for proof of infant Baptism, p. 20. lays down this position, that what
the Lord confirmed by oath to Abraham, he confirmed it to us, even to all
believers after Christ to the worlds end; which I grant if understood of
spiritual Evangelical promises which accompany salvation, but not if meant of
those peculiar blessings and privileges which were promised to Abraham's
natural seed. Yet in his proof of that position I conceive sundry things not
right which are vented by him, as p. 28. that the voice of Christ meant Heb.
3.7. is an inviting us to celebrate his day of rest in his house in the worship
of the Gospel, which he means of a weekly Sabbath, and a particular
Congregation, and outward worship, as sundry passages following show; and this
he makes a part of the Gospel, p. 31. and the believer that neglects it comes
short of the promise of entering into Gods rest, and is a departing from the
living God, Heb. ^.12. in tanto, though not in toto. In which speeches as there
is much mistake, and wrong interpretation of the Text, which speaks not of such
a week day rest, or the house of God in the second capacity as he terms it, or
of entrance into his rest as his house in that capacity, so that speech is very
dangerous, Now this entrance into his rest as his house in this second
capacity, is that which the Apostle chiefly speaks to here, when he says,
Take heed brethren of an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living
God. And that in case the people of his pasture, and sheep of his hand, even
his own children, will not hear his voice, but forsake his worship, refusing
his offer in this Gospel rest as they did in Canaan rest, he will also swear
against them as he did against these, that they shall not enter into his rest.
Which if true, then they that are not convinced of the weekly Christian
Sabbath, as many godly and learned Divines in foreign parts, and in these
Nations are not, those who do not on that day join in the public and solemn
worship, as prayer, preaching, breaking bread, and that too in a particular
gathered Congregation, as Se^kers, and many other persons, whereof we cannot
but judge many of them to be godly, these are chiefly meant by the Apostle as
those that have an evil heart of unbelief, depart from the living God, God will
swear they shall not enter into his rest. Nor will the limitation in tanto help
to free his speech from those horrid consequences, which it is liable to, if it
be true* which he says, that the Apostle chiefly speaks to that entrance in
his rest as his house in the second capacity, Heb. 3.12. and to expound Gods
swearing that they should not en^er into his rest in that sense, if they did
not hear his voice inviting to keep the Sabbath, makes the speech inept thus,
If ye will not keep the Sabbath, I swear ye shall not keep the Sabbath. Nor do
I conceive what he says, p. 34. is right, that Christ gave his Saints the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven. Matthew. 16.18. and from that gift to Peter the Saints
do claim their Church power, each according to their place and station in the
Church; for they have it as Peter's, that is, as stones in that building, or if
you will, as confessors, which makes them to be stones in the house of God:
For neither by the Keys is meant all Church power, nor are the Keys given to
the Saints, much less to them as stones or confessors, though such things are
supposed often times, but not proved* But I hasten to the view of what follows,
being the chief thing Mr. C. infers his infant Baptism from.

SECT. LXXVIII. Mr. Carters exposition of Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. as if God
promised to make every believer a blessing, so as to cast ordinarily elect
children on elect parents, is refuted.
THat which is Mr. Cs. basis for his fabric of Infant Baptism, is from the
Covenant of God with Abraham, Gen, 22.16, 17, 18. which he says contains four
things. 1. That God would bless Abraham, and with him all believers, with all
spiritual blessings in Christ, Romans 9.7. Gal. 3.16, 8, 9, 29. and this agrees
with Genesis 3.15.] Which I yield. Secondly ( says he) more particularly in Gods
promise to Abraham is contained something peculiar unto him, and which
believers are to claim particularly from his promise made to Abraham; as
namely, in the second place, that God would not only bless Abraham; and in him
all believers, but also would make them blessings, and that chiefly and in the
first place to their families; and not only so, but also to Nations. Genesis
12.1, 2, 3. So Genesis 18.18. This promise Peter alleges and explaineth to the
Jews, Act. 3 25. The word is all the families of the earth. The same word we
have, Ephesians. 3.15. The Covenant ma^e with Ab^aham therefore, as by this place
we see, that we have it in that of Genesis 12.1. where it was first made and
given, so also that it respects families and posterity; else he had said all
the b^lievers, or all the people of the earth, not all the families of the
earth shall be blessed. And he could not have said to the Jews, ye are the
children of the Covenant, had it not respected the children of the people of
God. Nor is it to be restrained only to the Jews; for the promise is
concerning all the fami^ies of the earth, therefore it follows in the next
words, v. 26. unto you first. And this blessing as it is first laid down, Genesis
12. and here repeated by the Apostle, we see is a blessing both upon the people
of God themselves, and upon their families. Nor is this promise to be
restrained only unto this* that of Abraham and his seed should Christ come,
(although that also be included, because what we receive from Abraham we have
it all in Christ,) for so all those of the line of Christ were blessings to the
world as well as he. And because here is something intended applicable to all
believers, namely, that they also shall be blessings in their generations; and
because a blessing upon families is intended also, for so the words run, thou
shall be a blessing, and in thee shall all the families of the earth be
blessed; therefore I say it must not be so restrained. But the meaning is, that
in his Covenant with Abraham he has thus far limited himself, and discovered
his mind and purpose, that his choice shall not be proportion^bly all over the
world alike, but that it shall be by families and nations; so as he will
ordinarily cast elect children upon elect parents; and the lot of the Saints in
neighbourhoods and places together, and not by eq^al numbers in each part of
the world alike. Had not his election been so limited to families and nations,
neither Abraham nor believers could have been said to be blessings in spiritual
things, either to their families or to any other where they live, as now they
are, because God so blesses only his elect, Ephesians. 1.3, 4.

Answ. The sum of this I conceive to be, that God promising to Abraham he
should be a blessing, Genesis 12, 2. that in him all the families of the earth,
Genesis 12.3. all the nations of the earth, Genesis 18.18. shall be blessed, in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18. did promise
that every believer should be a blessing in his generation in spiritual things
to his family and neighborhood, and thereby God ha^h limited himself to cast
ordinarily elect children on elect parents, and the lot of the Saints in
neighbourhoods and places together, and not by equal numbers in each part of
the world alike. Which exposition is many ways faulty, and the conclusion
inferred from it either false or uncertain, and yet if it were true and
certain, would not yield a sufficient reason for infant baptism, as will be
showed in the sequel.

The first thing I except against this Exposition, that when it is said Genesis
12.2. (...) he takes it for granted, it is to be understood actively, as if
the meaning were that Abraham should be a blessing to others, whereas (as
Pareus in his Com says) it may be an amplification of the things going before,
thou shall be altogether and very blessed: in which sense we use often the
abstract for the contract, as a man very honest is called honesty. Yea the LXX
render it (...), and thou shall be blessed. Piscat. schol. Vel, esto in
benediction^, hoc est benedictus. Diodati annot. Blessed every way: as if all
blessings were gathered together in thee, or a pattern of a complete blessing.

2. That he takes i^ as i^ what is said must be applicable to all believers,
that they shall be blessings in their generations. But this is not proved from
the text, which only speaks of Abraham being a blessing, and though it is true
Heb. 6.14. the promise of bless^ng to Abraham is made a promise of which all
believers are heyrs, v. 17. yet is it plain from many passages in that Chapter
v 9, 11, 12, 15, 18, 19. that it is meant that they are heirs of the promise of
blessing to themselves in enjoying salvation as Abraham did, not of imparting
blessing to others.

3. That he takes it as if it must follow, that if Abraham were a blessing to
others, it must be in that spiritual blessings according to election were in
some proportion entailed to the post^rity and neighborhood of all true
believers. But Pareus thus; Some expound it actively, thou shall be a blessing,
that is, thou shall bless others: my blessing shall not be shut up in thee
alone; but out of thee it shall flow also to others. Blessing shall so stick in
thee wheresoever thou come, that by thy ministry others may also come to a
blessing. Nor do the exposition of some Hebrews seem to be refused, that
Abraham shall be a public example of all sort of blessing in the world, so
that all that wish well to themselves or others, may wish for the happiness of
Abraham: Or as the new annot in Genesis 12.2. shall be a blessing] That is, more
then thou shall have a blessing, for in this blessing is virtually comprised
the happiness of both worlds, and of all that are truly blessed in all ages;
whereof though God be the only Author, Abraham is honored to be a principal
means under him to bring it to pass in being the progenitour of the promised
seed, and setting such an example of belief as might qualify him to be styled
father of the faithful, Romans 4.11, 12. The world shall receive by thy seed,
which is Christ, the blessing which it lost in Adam.

Mr. C. himself denies not to be included in this promise, that of Abraham
and his seed the Lord CHRIST should come, but says, if it be restrained only
to this then it will follow that all those of the Line of CHRIST were blessings
to the World as well as he.

To which I reply, 1. if the sense given be included as he grants, then his
sense is not necessary, nor can any thing be proved by it. 2. Though the speech
in the sense given be restrained, yet the absurdity follows not, since the
being a blessing by begetting Christ is not so invested in any as in Abraham,
who is made the first Trustee as it were, of this blessing by the Covenant, or
Charter granted to him. 4. I except that in the promise, In thee, or in thy
seed shall all the families or Nations of the earth be blessed. Mr. Carter
conceives thee and thy seed to comprehend every believer: Whereas the Apostle
expounds Acts 3.25. [ in thy seed] of Christ only, and [ in thee] Galath. 3.8,
9. of Abraham only, with whom as the pattern o^ believing and being blessed,
they which be of the faith are blessed. I deny not that by Abraham's seed
believers are meant Genesis 17.7. and Genesis 15.5. and that the Apostle Romans 4.18.
Gal. 3.29. and elsewhere so expounds it; But no where do I find the promises
Genesis 1^.3 and 18.18. and 22.18. expounded so as that in thy seed should no^e
every believer, and the sense in which Mr. Carter takes it, as if in every
believer all the families of the earth should be blessed, it is derogatory
from Abraham's peculiar privilege one way understood, another from Christ's, and
not much short of blasphemy. 5. That he makes families and nations of the
earth to be different in the promises mentioned, as appears by his words [ and
that chiefly and in the first place to their families; and not only so, but
also to nations] whereas the holy Ghost makes no such difference. For as the
same promise which is expressed by families, Genesis 12.3. is expressed by
nations, Genesis 18.18. so in the new Testament the promise Genesis 12.3. where the
word is rendered families, is expressed Gal. 3.8. by nations and the term which
is Genesis 22.18. all the nations of the earth is Acts 3.25. all the kindreds or
families of the earth, as Mr. C. would have it. 6. Mr. C. seems by families to
whom believers should be a blessing, children, as when he says, God will
ordinarily cast children elect upon elect parents, and by nations
neighbourhoods, as when he says, the lot of the Saints in neighbourhoods and
places together, whereas families in the Hebrew (...) whether rendered by (...)
as the LXX Genesis 12.3. that is, tribes, or (...) Acts 3.25. notes more then
posterity or households, even whole tribes, and kinreds that draw their line
from one great Ancestour, and (...) notes a whole people of one language,
though in their dwellings so remote as to have no intercourse one with another.
I will not trouble my self to enquire what difference there is between the
words in Hebrew and Greek which are translated families, tribes, kindreds,
nations: This I am sure they contain greater and more ample numbers of men then
those who live together under one roof or one town, and if from thence the
extent of the Covenant be inferred to posterity of believers and their
neighbors, and so the seal of the Covenant (as Mr. C. does) because believers
are promised to be a blessing to posterity and neighbors, it will follow from
the terms families and nations, that they are blessings to whole parishes,
towns, cities and nations, and they are to be baptized and parochial, city,
national Churches to be set up again, against which Mr. C. with his brethren
have so much hitherto contended. 7. By Mr. Cs. exposition whereas the promises
are that all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in a believer, this is
brought to so narrow a compass, as that it is restrained to posterity and
neighborhood. 8. The manner how in believers their posterity is said to be
blessed, and he a blessing to them is expressed to be, in that God casts elect
children upon elect paients, which I know not well how to understand. It seems
to bear a sense if not the same yet very near that in which we are said to be
chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. which Mr. C. alleges to this purpose, and 1
Cor. 1.30. We are of God in him, who is made to us of God wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption, which were near blasphemy.
Which to avoid it concerned Mr. C. to have more clearly and distinctly
expressed himself.

What he says [ that the Covenant made with Abraham Genesis 12.2, 3. respects
families and posterity; else he had said all the believers, or all the people
of the earth, not all the families of the earth shall be blessed] shows his
oversight in not observing that it is Gal. 3.8. all the nations of the earth,
which is equivalent to all the people of the earth, and yet v. 9. by all the
nations of the earth, are meant no more then they that are of faith. And when
he says, that the Apostle Acts 3.25. could not have said to the Jews, ye are
the children of the Covenant, had it not respected the children of the people
of God, he heeded not that they are said as well to be children of the
Prophets, and therefore the sense is not that they were descended from the
Covenant or Prophets by natural generation, but ye are they to whose Ancestors
the Covenant was at first given, and the Prophets sent, which are not common
things to all the children of the people of God or true believers, the Gentile
believers children are not children of the Covenant and Prophets in the sense
there meant, but proper to the Jews.

Nor is the proposition true which Mr. C. would gather from the Covenant to
Abraham. For, 1. God has plainly discovered his mind Romans 9.6, 7, 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 18, 24, 25. that he chooses at his pleasure children of unbelievers
as well as believers, and of the posterity of believers, either none or which
he will, arbitrarily and by no ordinary or certain rule, but as a potter does
with his clay, ac^ording to his sovereignty, not out of special grace to the
children of his elect for the parents sake, and accordingly the saints praise
him for their redemption out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation, Rev. 5.9. without respect to their Ancestors.

2. Our Lord Christ foretold Matt 10.34, 35. that he came to divide a man
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in
law against her mother in law, and a man's enemies should be they of his own
house. And in the families of the most godly, how few were found elect may
appear by the posterity of David, Josiah, Jehoshaphat, ^li, Samuel, Abraham
himself, with many more. As for our own experience in our own times it is so
uncertain, that no good estimate can be made thereupon, concerning Gods
ordinary way. Perhaps in some families it falls out, that the posterity, and
neighbors, and servants are godly, but many complaints of degenerating, of
backsliding, show it as often to be otherwise.

I wish it were true which Mr. C. writes, though I find no proof of it, That in
all ages God has cast it so in his providence, that his people are not to be
found in all places alike: but we find them together in some families and
nations. Now this is not fallen out by chance, but because God has so made his
choice, has been a God to believers and their seed in their generation; and
has made them blessings for the conversion and edification of their children,
neighbors and acquaintance, and that not only by a common providence, as he
blesses the corn and grass of the field, but it is by virtue of a special word
of blessing a creating word of promise, which gives a being to the things
promised, even this promise made to Abraham and in him to all believers, Genesis
12 2, 3. without which, good examples and other means of education and
conversion, had not had such efficacy and power in turning sinners to God. But
I do not believe it, since neither has the Covenant such a sense as Mr. C.
gives it, nor is there such e^perience proved, and it is found that what good
is done among children of believing parents, is done as often by servants,
minister, good company, remarkable providence and other ways, as by parents
endeavors, and if without such a promise as Mr. C. imagines, such means had
not such efficacy, I think not only parents who believe no such promise, but
also ministers, and others who expect a blessing upon their endeavors without
Mr. Cs. promise, would be discouraged in their work.

That which is said Psalm. 105.8. though it prove the perpetuity of Gods
Covenant with Abraham, yet proves not the sense Mr. C. gives of the Covenant.
Nor does that Luke 19.9. yield any clearness to i^, For salvation came to
Zacheus his house in respect of his person, and if it did to others in his
house, yet it is not said by virtue of the Covenant to Abraham as Mr. C.
imagines, and what Mr. C. says about Acts 16.31. that it was spoken because of
this promise to Abraham is his own gloss without any hint from the text, and
would infer this proposition, that by virtue of Gods promise to Abraham upon
the faith of an housekeeper his house should be saved, which is contrary to
constant experience of believing masters, husbands, parents having unbelieving
servants, wives, children.

I grant Abraham to be the holy root, Romans 11.16. and that v. 28. the Jews as
touching the election are beloved for the Fathers sake and that they shall be
graffed in again because the gu^^t once given to them, God will not repent of,
and though I say not the Church brings forth children to Abraham, yet I yield
Jerusalem which is above the Evangelical Covenant does, and that the children
of promise, or of the freewoman are Abraham's seed* all believers even of the
Gentiles, but this is so far from proving the blessing upon families and
kinreds, and Gods ordering in such manner his election, as Mr. C. devised, and
would have perpetual from Psalm. 105.8. that it rather proves the contrary. For
the breaking off the Jews, and the ingraffing the Gentiles, not of the families
or kindred of the root Abraham but a wild Olive by nature, proves the blessing
not to be to families, nor election so ordered, as that to a thousand
generations, to all generations even to the worlds and, God ordinarily casts
elect children upon elect parents. Nor does the citing of Isa. 59.20. which is
Romans 11.26, 27. with the inference thereupon, prove that God entails his
blessing upon families from generation to generation; but that God has such a
special love to the family of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, that after a long
breaking off that nation shall be restored again and re-ingraffed for the
Fathers sake, which is there made the peculiar privilege of Israel after the
flesh. But there is not a word in the Apostle, Romans 11. that shows that
privilege to have been enjoyed by believing Gentiles since their being graffed
into the same root and Olive tree from whence the Jews were broken off. Nor is
it true. For God has removed his Candlestick from many places where there were
famous Churches, and from many kindreds, families, and people, where there were
formerly godly company and society; so that now the progeny are become profane,
and Apostates, and the Churches replenished with plants out of families in
which a little while since Popery, profaneness, and viciousness did abound. No^
do 1 Cor. 7.14. Acts 2.38. make any thing for Mr. Cs. purpose, as shall appear
in the sequel. Nor does the application of Circumcis^on to the child, or
Abraham's title of Father of all them that believe, prove the Covenant with
Abraham in Mr. Cs. sense: Nor is it true, the application of Circumcision to
the child is a necessary and essential part of that Ordinance. For that is not
an essential part of an Ordinance without which it might be: But the Ordinance
of Circumcision might be, and perhaps was at first without application to a
child, if thereby be meant an infant; however, if none but parents were
circumcised, as when the Circumcision was Josh. 5. it had been the Ordinance of
Circumcision nevertheless: when only one proselyte a^ age was circumcised it
was the Ordinance. Ergo.

As for what Mr. C. answers to the objection from experience, it is indeed a
pulling down of what he had spent so much time to build up. For if Gods
blessing do not take effect through men's sin, or defect of using means, then
the promise is not to families and kindreds in that absolute manner Mr. C.
before described it, then the promise is to the quality and diligence of the
persons, not to the relation; then is the promise as well to any other so
qualified and diligent, as to the parent; then is it false which he said
before, page 38. that the success was not from example and other means, but a
special word of blessing the promise to Abraham. Finally, if that be true which
he has page 35. (which is false printed) G 2. that although Gods promise be to
carry his election so, as to cast elect children upon elect parents, yet he
reserveth to himself, and also uses in this a liberty, namely, ever and anon
to be still breaking of (...) graffing in others into this holy root; then what
he said before, p. 7. F 3. that God has thus far limited himself, and
discovered his mind and purpose, that he will ordinarily cast elect children
upon elect parents, is false: For what God reserveth to himself, and uses a
liberty in, he has not limited himself so far; and if he ever and anon uses
this liberty, to be still breaking of^ some, and graffing in others, then he
does not ordinarily cast elect children upon elect parents* for what is
otherwise ever and anon and still, is not so ordinarily, much less still in
being to a thousand generations, to all generations, even to the worlds end, as
he said page 33. G. So that Mr. Cs. discourse from his own words is found
hitherto to contain mistakes, uncertainty, and in the main, inconsistency with
it self. Let Us view whether in the rest there be any thing worthy of a Lord
Mayors imprimatur.

A third thing Mr. C. observes as contained in the Lords promise unto Abraham,
is, That by thus blessing and making believers blessings, God would multiply
his seed, Genesis 22.16. So Genesis 17.2, 5. That this is part of the Gospel, and
contained in the promise made to him and us, is proved from Heb. 6.14. A
further proof we have Genesis 15.5. alleged Romans 4.3, 18, 22. as belonging to
believing Gentiles, the increase of whose number by means of Gods blessing
believers so as to make them blessings as Abraham's seed, was intended in that
promise, and as part of that Gospel, which God preached unto Abraham: There Is a
promise that the Kingdom of Christ shall fill the world, Dan. 2.35, 44. To
this purpose is that of our Savior, Matthew. 13.31, 32, 33. Now the Lords making
believers blessings, and thereby multiplying Abraham's seed, is that which makes
his Kingdom thus to be like leaven, whereby the whole world at last will be
seasoned with the knowledge and love of Christ. Therefore this multiplying of
believers, so as to fill the world, is made by the Apostle, Romans 4.13. to be
part of Abraham's promise; then mark what follows, v. 16, 17, 18. This promise
was made sure to all believers, as well Gentiles as Jews.

Answ. 1. Why Mr. C. makes that the 3d. thing in Gods promise Genesis 22.17, 18.
which is the 2d. and puts that as the 2d. thing which is after the rest v. 18.
and so the 4th. I see no reason, but only that he foresaw that otherwise there
had been no color for this which he here infers, that by thus blessing and
making believers blessings God would multiply his seed, Genesis 22.16. But the
right order of the promises shows this conceit to be only Mr. Cs. fancy. For in
that the promise v. 18. is put last, it is showed thereby that it is a distinct
promise, and that it does not express the manner how God would multiply
Abraham's seed, as Mr. C. conceives. 2. It is true Genesis 15.5. is a Gospel
promise to believing Gentiles, Romans 4.18. but not in Mr. Cs. sense, that the
increase of the number of believing Gentiles, should be by means of Gods
blessing believers so as to make them blessings as Abraham's seed, in that God
would cast ordinarily elect children o^ elect parents, and the lot of the
Saints in neighbourhoods and places together: But in this sense, that Abraham
should have an innumerable company of children, or his seed among the Gentiles
by faith, who should be blessed with faithful ^^raham, Gal. 3.9. in their own
persons, but no mention is there of their being a blessing to others. 3. That
the Church of Christ should fill the world, Dan. 2.35, 44. that the Kingdom of
Heaven as a grain of mustard seed, or leaven, Matthew. 13.31, 32, 33. shall fill
or season the world* is granted; but that it is meant in those places to be
done in Mr. Cs. way, is denied: I do conceive it to have been meant of the
Apostles preaching, as me thinks Christ's words, Matthew. 24.14. do import. 4 That
the promise of being heir of the world was to Abraham and his seed believing
Gentiles, is granted; but that his or their being heir of the world did import
any such blessing as Mr. C. imagines, as if God would ordinarily cast elect
children on elect parents, or that any such thing is intimated by the Apostle
v. 16, 17, 18. is denied: Nor do I yet find any interpreter before Mr. C. who
has so expounded the prom^se.

In the opening of the 4th. promise, that the seed of Abraham should possess
the gates of their enemies, though his exposition be granted, I see not what
advantage it gives him for proof of infant Baptism, and therefore let it pass;
only I take notice, that when p. 43. he makes the multiplying of the seed of
Abraham, and the conquest of the world to be a spiritual work to be effected by
the sword of the spirit the word of God, it follows, that it is to be done by
preachers rather then by parents, and consequently not in that way Mr. C.
imagines, but in the way which Christ took, by sending his Apostles to preach
the Gospel to every creature. What he says p. 45. of the meaning of Genesis 9.26.
has been showed before to be uncertain, and to be proved false by the History
of the Church, in that in Africa the posterity of Cham were in the Church of
Christ as well as Shems and Japhets posterity; and how Abraham's seed shall fill
the world at last and rule over it, is so doubtful, as that I conceive no
certainty can be thence deduced. The conceit of the four Kings Genesis 14. as if
their people became afterward the four Monarchies* is such a fancy, as a
waking man that knows the distance between Rome, Greece, and Canaan, and the
voyage they must take by sea, and other circumstances which the story Genesis 14.
and other Histories suggest, will take only for a dream. Mr. Cs. gloss, p. 50.
on the words of Christ, Mark 10.15. Whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom
of God as a little child* that is, as a child receives it, shall not enter
therein; whether he mean i^ of the visible Church or Kingdom of glory, it
cannot be true. For let the way of entering the Kingdom of God be by birth, or
Baptism, or any other way, yet a true believer by faith and profession may
enter into the Kingdom of God in a way different from that a little child
receives it in who has no understanding of Christ: And though both be passive
in the first work on their souls, yet believers of age are not merely p^ssive
as little children who have no understanding at all of Christ. But for the true
meaning of Christ, I need say no more but refer the Reader to Christ's words,
Matthew. 18.4. whence the meaning appears to be, that no person not endued with
that qualification of self-humbling, of which a little child is a fit emblem,
Psalm. 131.2. shall become an inheritour of glory. Nor is there any proof made
by Mr. C. of his dictate, that because Christ would that little children also
should be members of his Kingdom, therefore has he made it one branch of the
Gospel of this Kingdom, that the families of the righteous shall be blessed.
His reason he gives, p. 51. is no reason; for God might have gone further then
ordinarily* to cast elect children upon elect parents, even to have done so
universally and perpetually, and yet we might no more have been sons of God by
natural generation, and as much by nature born children of wrath as now we are
conceived. Though God had not so far, as Mr. C. imagines, confined his choice
to families, kindreds, and nations, his elect had not been destitute of means
of education, since God could have provided Catechists, Preachers, and others to
that end, in other families, kindreds, and na^ions: Sure in some ages of the
Church there was so little provision made to that end in families, kindreds,
and nations, that it appears that almost all the means of education was from
Monasteries in Scotland and Ireland, by the Histories that remain, as may be
seen by Seldens Epistle before the Histories collected by Twisden, Ushers
relation of the Irish Religion, and elsewhere. If it were the most natural and
ready way to multiply the spiritual seed for the increase of Gods Kingdom, by
making believers a blessing to families and nations, as Mr. C. says p. 52.
sure God by sending Apostles, and not using Kings and Masters of families for
that end, omitted the readiest and most natural way; and I see not why it
should be judged the best way to propagate the Gospel, to gather Churches out
of Parishes, and set Pastors over them, or to send itinerant preachers, but to
reduce all Churches to family and national Churches, and to make Kings and
Masters of families Elders and Rulers over them. Nor do I find that either God
so casts the lot of his Saints together* as Mr. C. imagines, or that by that
means the gifts of Gods people are improved, and light increased; but by
raising up holy Teachers and Pastors, and associating of the Saints from their
several dwellings into a well ordered assembly. If as Mr. C. says p. 55. the
Israelites destroyed the Canaanites not by common rules of righteousness among
men, but by special revelation and command from God; then either they did it
not by the promise Genesis 22.17. or that promise did not assure them of the
possession of Canaan by common rules of justice, as Mr. C. conceives. That the
people of God in the times of the N. T. may not make war against Antichrist or
Babylon and their party as an Anathema, but upon a natural and civil account,
for the just liberties opposed and invaded by them, may be well doubted,
considering sundry passages which are Rev. 17.16, 17. and 18.6, 24. That the
dominion which the Saints shall at last obtain, shall need no force either to
get or maintain it; but it shall naturally fall upon them, as from other
causes, so also by reason of the^r number, according to the law of nature, and
common rules of righteousness, is not proved from Isa. 2.3. and how much it may
tend to denying the lawfulness of Christians fighting in wars, especially if
the chief or only cause be to preserve the Godly from oppressions in Religion,
is to be consid^red. And that power is naturally devolved upon the Saints
because of their numbers, (as p. 60. is intimated,) seems to me an unsafe
speech, as resting on this position, That power is naturally devolved on the
greatest number. It is enough that I have only by the way noted these things,
that what men preach and print may be better considered: I pass on to the
examining of Mr. Cs. application.

SECT. LXXIX. Neither did Circumcision seal Mr. Cs. additional Promise, nor was
Abraham thence termed Father of Believers.
THe first thing Mr. C. observes is, that in the promise to Abraham there is an
addition made to the former promise to Adam, Genesis 3.15. which I grant, but not
such an addition as Mr. C. conceivs.

The next is, that to this promise of making believers blessings to families
and nations, God made an addition of the seal of Circumcision, and the
application of this seal to infants is part of the se^l, thereby signifying and
confirming that promise of such blessing. So Genesis 17.10, 14. Had not the
application of it to the infant been part of the token of the Covenant the
child's not being circumcised had not been a breach of the Covenant; nor could
the Lord have said, this is my Covenant, that the manchild be circumcised, if
the application of that ordinance to the child, had not in it a signification
and confirmation of something in the Covenant.

Answ. There are these things to be proved: 1. That Circumcision was a seal of
the Covenant made to Abraham Genesis 17. 2. That Circumcision was a seal of this
promise of God, of making believers blessings to families and nations in order
to the multiplying the seed, and increase of the Kingdom of Christ. 3. That
the application of this seal to infants is part of the seal. 4. That thereby
was signified and confirmed that promise of such blessing. But the proof is of
other things, 1. that the application of Circumcision to the infant is part of
the token of the Covenant. 2. The application of that ordinance to the child,
had in it a signification and confirmation of something in the Covenant; For
neither is it all one to be a token and to be a seal of the Covenant, there
being other tokens then seals; and sign and token being the same, though
distinguished Romans 4.11. they are unfitly confounded by Mr. C. nor is it all
one to signify something in the Covenant, and to signify this thing in the
Covenant, that God would make believers blessings in Mr. Cs. sense. Not does
either of Mr. Cs. middle terms prove either of his conclusions. For the child's
not being circumcised had been a breach of the Covenant, as being a breach of
the command of God enjoined then, though circumcising the child had been no
part of the token of the Covenant, and the Lord might have said, this is my
Covenant that the man child be circumcised, that is, this is my command in my
Covenant, if the application of that ordinance to the child, had not in it a
signification and confirmation of something in the Covenant. But allowing that
Circumcision is called the Covenant by a metonimy of the thing signified for
the sign, and that it signified something in the Covenant being applied to
infants, yet not one of Mr. Carters propositions is proved thereby; For 1. it
may be a sign and not a seal. 2. It might be a seal of the Covenant Genesis 17.
yet not of that promise Genesis 22.18. which is in another Covenant, not in that
Genesis 17. 3. If it were a seal of that promise Genesis 22.18. yet not in Mr. Cs.
new devised sense. 4. ^o omit the ineptness or non sense of the speech, the
application of this seal to infants is part of the seal. For what does he mean
by the application of this seal to infants but only Circumcision, and he
before called Circumcision the seal which he meant; so that his speech can
have no other construction then this, Circumcision of infants is part of
Circumcision, which is inept or nonsense, I say further that the speech is not
true. For if it be a part it is either essential or integral, I know no other
sort of parts it can be meant of; But it it is not a part essential, for then
without application to infants there should be no seal, and so a Proselyte had
not the seal though he were Circumcised, unless he had an infant manchild and
he circumcised, nor integral, for the Circumcision of a Proselyte was entire
Circumcision or seal (as they speak) without his manchilds Circumcision.

Thence also, says Mr. C. is that in Acts 7.8. that is, he did it according to
that Covenant of Circumcision, so as the application of the seal to the infant
was part of the Covenant to be performed on the part of Abraham and his seed
in their generations, even by his spiritual seed to a thousand generations, in
that which is the same for substance, and equivalent to circumcision, as we
shall see anon.

Answ. That God gave Abraham the Covenant of Circumcision, and so, or
accordingly, or he (according to the Copies that have (...) no^ (...)) begat
Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day is not denied, nor that he did this
according to the Covenant of Circumcision, that is according to the command of
God concerning Circumcision as a sign of his Covenant Genesis 17. in which sense
it is granted that the applica^ion of the seal (meaning circumcision) to the
(male) infant was part of the Covenant to be performed on the part of Abraham
and his seed in their generations, but this proves not what Mr. C. undertook to
prove, that it was part of the seal, or part of the token of the Covenant (it
being not all one to be part of the Covenant and part of the seal or token of
the Covenant) unless Mr. C. confounds them (as he seems to do) nor is there any
word of God for application of any seal to the infant but Circumcision, the
text is express for Circumcision, this is my Covenant which ye shall keep
between me and you and thy seed after thee, every man child shall be
circumcised, which can be understood of no other then Circumcision, without
making God to speak nonsense, and making God command a thing in words which
they signify not, and making God to command a thing indefinite and
indeterminate, which no wise Lawgiver does, and making a pronoun demonstrative
to import not the definite thing expressed, but some other individuum vagum, of
which it is uncertain what it is, contrary to the very exposition of the Holy
Ghost Genesis 17.23. where it is expressly said, that Abraham's Circumcising was as
God had said unto him, contrary to what Abraham, and all interpreters Jewish
and Christian (that I have ever met with before Mr. C.) have conceived, and
which i^ it be granted it will follow that if the male child of Abraham's
posterity had not been circumcised, but had another seal of the Covenant
applied to it, the Covenant or Command Genesis 17.9, 10, 11, 12. had not been
broken, Moses had kept the command if he had baptized his son, though he did
not circumcise him. These and many more absurdi^ies follow on that portentous
opinion, which I guessed long since by some words of Mr. Cawdrey and Palmer in
the first part of their Sabb. Rediv. ch 2.. 32. to have been hatching to
maintain the Judaizing conceit of infant Baptism from infant Circumcision, that
they might not seem therein to run on the rock of holding the Law of
Circumcision yet in force; yet might have some color for a command of infant
Baptism, Genesis 17.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. where infant Circumcision is commanded
and nothing else, but I found it not so expressly vented by any before Mr. C. Now
what says he for it? ^. That this part of the Covenant was to be performed by
Abraham's spiritual seed. But he does not prove that it was to be performed by
Abraham's spiritual seed of the Gentiles after Christ's coming. He urges the
words of the Psalmist Psalm. 105.8. He has remembered his Covenant for ever:
the word which he commanded to a thousand generations. But first, The word is
not meant of the command of a seal to be applied to infants, but of his own
promise, which he will have firm as his Command, Psalm. 133.3. and 42.8. and
44.4. as the New Annotat. and Piscat. on the place, which also appears from the
words following, which term it Gods Covenant he made with Abraham, and his
oath unto Isaac, which is expressed verse. 11. which cannot be understood of his
Command to us what we should do, but his promise of what he himself will do.
Secondly, the word commanded signifies Gods decree within himself; Or as
Diodati in his note on the place, He commanded] which he appointed by his
sovereign and irrevocable decree, as the word commanded is used Psalm. 133.3.
and elsewhere. Thirdly, To a thousand generations, notes not just so many; But
as Piscator in his scholi^ on the place, it is by a synecdoche of the kind, as
if it were said unto many ages. And this must needs be granted, since the
Covenant however it be granted to imply in the latent sense the promise of the
heavenly inheritance, yet in the patent sense must be understood (as v. 11.44.
compared show) of the earthly Canaan: which they had not a thousand
generations, but for many ages; as Exodus 20.6, To thousand generations is meant
not precisely so many and no more, but a long time indefinite, beyond three or
four generations: and thus must also be understood the promise of the land of
Canaan to be for ever, to be an everlasting possession, that is, for a long
time, as frequently it is used Exodus 21.6. Exodus 40.15. 1 Samuel 2.35. Levit.
23.14, 21, 31, 41, etc. What he says of Baptism being the same for substance
and equivalent to Circumcision, unless he mean it, that infant Baptism and
infant Circumcision are one equivalent to the other, and the same for substance
in this sense [they are of no force not obliging Christians nor benefiting
them] it will be found in examining that which follows, to have no truth.

Mr. C. adds, And that this blessing upon families and posterity was signified,
held forth, and sealed by circumcising the child, appears further by that
promise uttered in that phrase, Deuteronomy. 30.6. which kind of expression intimates,
that the promise of the conversion of their children was held forth, and
confirmed in that seal. As when the Apostle says we are baptized into one
body, is signified and sealed in Baptism our union with Christ in one body,
because else those words had been in no capacity to have been so used in that
sense, as they are used both by the Apostle and by Moses.

Answ. 1. The phrase of circumcising the heart, Deuteronomy. 30 6 being used to
express conversion or change of the heart, does show indeed that there is some
resemblance between them, yet that it is so by institution is not proved, no
more then because by breaking up our fallow ground, together with circumcising,
the same thing is si^nified Jer. 4.3, 4. and by washing, Isa. 1.16. therefore
plowing and washing are by institution to be used to that end, 2. But be it
granted that Circumcision was instituted to signify the ch^nge of the heart,
as baptism our union with Christ in one body, yet this proves not that it was
to signify and seal a promise of something future, but rather what was already
done. For if it signify as Baptism, then it signifies conversion already
effected, Baptism being a sign that the person was united to Christ and to all
his members by one spirit, as the very terms 1 Cor. 12.13. (...) we have been
baptized, (...) we have been drencht, show. And though the words Deuteronomy. 30.6.
are a promise, yet the term [ circumcise] of it self, and in like manner the
use of circumcision, according to the institution, may as well note a thing
done, as a thing promised to be done. 3. Nevertheless let it be granted that
circumcision did in the institution of it note conversion of the heart, and
signified a promise of it as being a token of the Covenant in which that was
covertly promised, yet this proves not that it held forth a blessing upon
families and posterity. For there is no mention Deuteronomy. 30.6. of families, though
there be of posterity, and that mention which is of posterity, is of them not
in their infant, but adult estate, and upon condition of the child's returning
to God, and obeying his voice as well as the parents, as Mr. Baxter rightly
observes in his Friendly accommodation with Mr. Bedford p. 361. I may add, that
the promise there is expressed only concerning one case, to wit repentance in
captivity, v. 1, 2.3, 4. and the promise (as appears from v. 5.) is a promise
peculiar to the Israelites. 4. But were this further granted, that thence might
be proved that circumcision by institution signified the promise of conversion
of posterity, and that this were to Gentile believers, yet this is nor that
which Mr. C. would evince, that the application of the seal to infants in that
it was to infants sealed this promise, or that the promise was sealed in Mr.
Cs. sense, so as that God would ordinarily cast elect children on elect
parents, and make parents a blessing, so as that Abraham's seed by faith should
be multiplied in families and nations by them.

What Mr. C. adds, That the sign had not held proportion with the thing
signified; namely, there had been nothing in the sign to signify and seal that
blessing upon posterity, had the application of it to infants been left out, is
but a vain dictate. For 1. if the sign held similitude with the thing
signified, though it held not proportion so as to be applied to all whose
conversion was signified it might serve for the use of a sign, as a conveyance
to a Father may assure the child's interest; and therefore that which Mr. C.
dictates, that for this reason infants were to be circumcised, to seal that
promise of believers being a blessing, added to Adams Covenant, is a vain
conceit without proof, since it might have been as well assured if the parents
had been circumcised only, as well as when the male infants only were
circumcised.

And that which he says further is most false, and vain, Nor indeed had there
been any use of the application of it to the infant, nor that made a part of
the Ordinance, had there not been such a branch in the Covenant as a blessing
upon families and posterity to be thereby signified and sealed. For besides
this, that Mr. C. proves neither that branch in the Covenant, nor that use of
infant Circumcision, it is clear by Stephens speech, Act. 7.5, 6, 7, 8. that
Abraham circumcised Isaac in assurance of the land of Canaan, and that he
received the Covenant of Circumcision to that end: and that the circumcising of
infants had this use, to signify Christ to come, seems plainly to be delivered
by the Apostle, Col. 2.17. and by the general consent of Divines. Much more
vain is that which he adds, So as if that privilege be denied unto infants,
that which was given to us in Abraham's Covenant is rejected, as he says Genesis
17. The uncircumcised man-child shall be cut off from his people, he has
broken my Covenant. For neither if Mr. Cs. sense of the promise Genesis 22.18.
Genesis 12.2, 3. be rejected, is there any thing which was given to us in Abraham's
Covenant rejected, nor had the denying of Circumcision to infants necessarily
inferred the rejecting of that which was given in Abraham's Covenant; nor do the
words Genesis 17.14. import, that by not circumcising the person omitting it had
rejected that which was given in Abraham's Covenant, for so Moses not
circumcising his son had rejected the Covenant; but the breaking the Covenant
was only meant of breaking the command of that which was the token of the
Covenant. Much less is this true of those that deny infant Baptism, that they
reject the spiritual blessings given in Abraham's Covenant, Baptism being not by
Christ's institution a seal of Gods Covenant or promise to us, unless by
consequence, much less the mixed Covenant of Abraham, as it contained domestical
benefits proper to Abraham's house, much more less the new conceited promise of
Mr. C. Nor was infant Baptism ever commanded by God, but invented by men in a
fond imitation of Jewish Circumcision; and as long as we keep close to the
institution Matthew. 28.19. and baptize and are baptized upon believing in
testimony of our union with Christ and his Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. we may
securely flight Mr. Cs. doom of being cut off from Gods people, which after Mr.
Cotton refuted by me in the second part of this Review, sect. 11. he has
vainly here renewed to affright silly people with.

Mr. C. adds, That Abraham was called father of believers, 1. from believing
this additional promise given in order to the increase of his spiritual seed,
which he proves from Romans 4.18. Genesis 15.5. 2. From his receiving the seal of
that promise, Romans 4.11. From which place we may observe, 1. That Circumcision
was a seal of the righteousness of faith. 2. That because it was a seal of that
righteousness, which he had before he was circumcised, he therefore became the
Father of all that believe, whether circumcised or not. Now had not this seal
been given him that he might be the Father of believers, his receiving it at
this or that time, whether before, or after his believing to righteousness, had
made nothing for the universality of his relation as a Father of all believers.

Answ. I grant that Abraham's believing the promise, Genesis 15.5. and his
receiving Circumcision a seal of that righteousness of faith he had in
uncircumcision, was the reason of his title of Father of believers. And I grant
that Abraham's personal Circumcision was a seal of the righteousness of faith to
all believers circumcised or uncircumcised, and therefore he had it before his
Circumcision, that it might not be judged as proper to the circumcised. But 1.
I deny, That the promise was Genesis 15.5. as Mr. Cs. additional promise is, that
Every believer should be a blessing to his family and posterity, so as that God
should ordinarily cast elect children on elect parents; but that Abraham,
though then childless, should have innumerable children by natural generation,
though he were and his wife aged, and more by believing as he did. 2. The
Scripture does not say, that Abraham's Circumcision was a seal of the promise
Genesis 15.5. but a seal of the rightiousness of faith he had, Genesis 15.6. it was
not a seal of a promise of a thing future, but of a benefit obtained many years
before. 3: I find not any ones Circumcision, but the Circumcision which Abraham
had in his own person, styled the seal of the righteousness of faith, nor to
any but him that believes as he did. 4. That his receiving the seal is not made
the reason of Abraham's relation of Father of all believers, but justification
by faith before he received Circumcision. Nor do I find that any of Mr. Cs.
assertions is proved from Romans 4.11, 18. that Circumcision was a seal of the
Covenant, Genesis 17. or of Mr. Cs. additional promise, or that the application to
infants was part of the seal, or that by it Mr. Cs. imagined promise was
confirmed, and therefore this Text is impertinently alleged also

Mr. C. adds* That it was not Abraham's faith only, nor his degree of faith
above others which gave him that title, appears 1. because others were as
eminent believers as he before him. 2. There was something given which
believers had not, at least in such a way had not before, in reference to which
he was so called, therefore it was not for his faith only, nor the eminency
thereof. 3. There is nothing in faith or the eminency thereof, that could
occasion that his name to be given to him; but it was in reference to something
which he was to have as a Father this additional promise and the seal thereof,
he was the first Father that received this blessing which was a blessing upon
parents and their children; and because at least in a great part by virtue
thereof the holy seed was to be propagated and increased. And believers are
said to be his seed, because that promise and Covenant made to Abraham
concerning the Lords blessing and multiplying his seed, is so much a cause of
their being brought forth unto Christ; his ordering his election so as to
bestow his blessing thus by families and nations, being that which makes the
Kingdom of Heaven like leaven, one believer ordinarily being the means of the
conversion of another.

Answ. The title [ Father of believers] is a relative, with which Abraham was
denominated from his Fatherhood as the form denominating, and this form
denominating was from his begetting justified believers as the foundation, this
begetting justified believers I know not how otherwise it should be then by his
exemplary faith, and Gods declaration of his justification by it; which the
Apostle does plainly intimate, Romans 4.11. by expressing Abraham's children in
this phrase, walking in the steps of his faith. The object indeed of this faith
was the promise Genesis 15.5. not Mr. Cs. imagined promise to other believers, and
so the promise was the occasion, and in some sort the cause of the title, as
the object may be said to be the cause of the act in somewhat an abusive
expression. His personal Circumcision was a sign or seal of that whence the
title came, the righteousness of faith; and a token of that Covenant wherein
God declared it, Genesis 17.4, 5* But Circumcision did not make him such, he was
such before Circumcision was instituted, Genesis 17.4, 5. Nor is it said Romans 4.11.
that his receiving Circumcision was that he might be the Father of the
faithful, but his having righteousness by faith before Circumcision made him
the Father of justified believers of all nations. Nor do Mr. Cs. reasons prove
the contrary. For 1. though others faith might be as strong, yet no ones faith
was so ^minently exemplary, the time and other circumstances considered; and
this is apparent from Romans 4.18, 19, 20, 21. 2. Abraham had that exemplary
faith, and promise and declaration of God, which no Saint had before in the
manner I have explained it. 3. This was fit to denominate him Father of
believers, as Sara the Mother of obedient and well doing wives, 1 Pet. 3.6. by
her exemplary obedience to her husband, and we are termed children of God by
following him, Ephesians. 5.1. wicked men children of the Devil by doing his lusts,
Joh. 8.44. It is true, we are to look to other examples, chiefly Christ's, Heb,
12, 1, 2. yet none of mere men so eminently believed as Abraham, and therefore
no mere sinful man is propounded as a Copy or pattern equal to him. As for Mr.
Cs. reason, it is not right. For 1. Mr. Cs. additional promise in his sense is
but a figment. 2. There is not the least hint in Scripture of that as the
reason of the title. 3. If he were the first Father that received this
blessing, then it was two thousand years and more before God ordered his
ele^tion as Mr. C. imagines, then believing parents had not this blessing
before, whereas if there were such a blessing, it was rather before then after
Abraham's time; for we find not any settled Ministry by which the spiritual seed
was multiplied before Abraham's time, therefore it is more likely to have been by
believing parents; but after Abraham's time we read of Prophets and Apostles,
Priests and Teachers appointed to that end. And if Abraham were the first who
received this blessing, then this was not perpetual, and so the application of
the seal to infants not moral, since the foundation of it beg^n but in Abraham.
Sure I am, this directly crosses Mr. Richard Baxters conceit of infants
visible Churchmembership by promise Genesis 3.15. which I leave to them to contend
about. What Mr. C. says of the reason of the title of Abraham's seed given to
believers, is quite besides the Scripture, Romans 4.11, 16. Gal. 3.7 Joh. 8.39.
And what he says of one believers being ordinarily the means of conversion of
another, is true rather of others, specially preachers of the Gospel, then
parents, householders, Princes: and I wish it were better considered by him,
whether by his dictates all along in making the multiplying of the spiritual
seed to be by every believers being a blessing to families and nations, by
ascribing ordinarily conversion hereunto; and that p. 38. not only by common
providence, or so much by good education and example, but by virtue of a
special word of blessing, a creating word of promise to all believers, without
which other means of conversion had not had such efficacy and power in turning
sinners to God, do not cross the Apostles speech, Ephesians. 2.20. be not contrary
to the experience both of the first and continued gathering of the Churches of
Christ, and do not indeed undermine and blow up a select Ministry for
conversion, as being useless, without assurance of Gods blessing, God having
provided another way, and ordinarily working by it according to a special
promise. And how much this tends to justify that disorder of every gifted
brothers pretended prophesying and teaching in the Churches, which is the
occasion of the jangling and schisms by which Churches are torn asunder and
perverted, is easily discernable. But of this only by the way. What Mr. C.
has summed up, p. 70. has been examined, and found to be a fardel of
mistakes: Let Us view the rest.

Those insinuations which are p. 71. as if Antipaedobaptists did easily part
with ancient entailed privileges, wherein the Saints have rejoiced for so many
ages; wanted so much compassion on their children, as not to blot their names
out of Heaven, or thrust them out of the Kingdom of Christ into the Kingdom
of Satan; have been so often discovered to be false and gross abuses, as that
were not men resolved to use any artifices to uphold an ill cause by creating
prejudices against their adversaries, they would leave them. But Mr. C. thinks
to prove infant Baptism from hence, and thus he argues.

SECT. LXXX. Mr. Cs. conceit, as if Genesis 17.9. were a command in force to
Abraham's spiritual seed in the N. T. is showed to be vain.
IF this be granted, that the promise made to Abraham Genesis 17. especially that
part of i^ v. 8. concerning Canaan to be an everlasting possession to his seed
be of such extent, and made also to his spiritual seed of the New Testament,
it will follow that that command of God in those words next following v. 9. is
to be meant also of his spiritual seed even in our days, and as a command
that now lies upon the same spiritual seed in all generations, in as much as
that command is brought in with a therefore, upon the promise made to the same
seed in the words v. 8.

Answ. Hitherto Paedobaptists have been wont to deduce infant Baptism, from the
connection between the promise Genesis 17.7. to be a God to Abraham and his seed,
and the command v. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.14. which it seems Mr. C. dares not rest
on, but takes another way, and yet seems not very certain what to pitch upon.
For whereas p. 70. to clear the duty of infant Baptism, he sums up his
suppositions; That God made to Abraham Genesis 22.17, 18. and 12.2, 3. an
additional promise of believers being a blessing to families and nations, that
for confirmation of this he added a seal, to wit Circumcision, that the
application of it to infants was part of the token of the Covenant, thereby
that additional promise was sealed, in reference to them Abraham was called the
Father of all them that believe; who would not think that he would have
inferred infant Baptism from these suppositions, and the conn^xion between his
additional promise and seal? But in stead thereof, as if all he had before
discoursed had been out of the way he meant to take, whether because there is
a great distance between the command Genesis 17.9. and the promise Genesis 22.17, 18.
or whether he saw his exposition would not stand good, he now goes another way
to work, and thinks to deduce infant Baptism from the connection between the
promise Genesis 17.8 and the precept v. 9. and his inference is thus made; The
promise is concerning Canaan to be an everlasting possession to Abraham's seed,
ergo to his spiritual seed in the N. T if so, then the command lies upon the
spiritual seed still v. 9. and this the word [therefore] v. 9. implies. That
precept ties only to keep the Covenant by seal^ng with the seal of it, their
children, v. ^0. explains what seal should be for that time now another is come
in the room of it, which is for substance the same, and equivalent to it*
parents are bound by the precept Genesis 17.9. the former seal ceasing and another
substituted to baptize their children. This is as near as I well can gather it,
the force of Mr. Cs. discourse. Against which I except, 1. That the term [
everlasting possession, Genesis 17.8.] does not prove it to be meant of another
Canaan then that part of the earth which the Israelites possessed. For besides
places before alleged, wherein the terms everlasting and for ever are used for
a time of some few ages, and shorter, Numb. 25.13. God promises a Covenant of
an everlasting Priesthood to Phinehas and his seed after him; and yet we know
that Priesthood was to cease Heb. 7.12. It is promised Ier. 35.19. that Ionadab
the son of Rechab should not want a man to stand before God for ever, and yet
this could be true only of some ages: Therefore Mr. Cs. reason is of no force
from the term [ everlasting] to infer the extent of that promise to the N. T.
Nor indeed can the reason be good. For if it were, then God should not promise
at all the possession of the earthly Canaan in that place: But that is
manifestly false; for the Text says, Genesis 17.8. that God would give to Abraham
and his seed, the land of Canaan, wherein Abraham was then a stranger: which
can be understood of no other then that part of earth which is elsewhere called
the land of the Canaanites, Per^zites, Jebusites, etc.

I deny not that in the latent sense there may be a promise of eternal life to
Abraham's spiritual seed, though I find no passage in the N. T. so expounding
the promise Genesis 17.8. yet sure it is but bold presumption to build any
doctrine on an allegory not expounded so by the Holy Ghost; and it is in mine
apprehension, a great usurpation of the Divine prerogative, to impose duties on
men consciences by arguments drawn from such devised senses. 2. That Mr. C.
builds his inference upon the conjunction [ therefore, Genesis ^7 9.] which though
it be so in the English translation, yet is it in Hebr. (...) rendered by the
Tigur. And thou; by Pareus, But thou; by Piscator, Thou verily; which is enough
to show there is no strength in Mr. Cs. inference, since there is no firm ground
on which it rests. 3. But were it granted that [ therefore, Genesis 17.9.] were
the only reading, and that the command is to be meant also of Abraham's
spiritual seed even in our days, yet that the inference of the command, v. 9.
should be only from the promise v. 8. or v. 7. and not also from the promises
v. 4, 5, 6 I know no go^d reason i^ or can be given. 4. Were it that there
could be good reason given thereof, yet since the promise v. 8. is mixed,
containing both spiritual promise (if Mr. C. be in the right) and promise
pecu^iar to the natural seed of Abraham, me thinks the precept should be only
to that spiritual seed which is also natural, and not bind the Gentile
believers, since they have no part of the promise as it concerns the p^ssession
of the earthly Canaan, from which the duty is inferred as well, if not only,
as from the promise of the heavenly Canaan, 5. But were all that Mr. C. would
have here granted, that the term [ everlasting possession, v. 8.] proves it
meant of the times of the N. T. that [therefore] v. ^. proves the command
extends to the spiritual seed now, that it is from the promise, v. 7. or 8. not
from the rest v 4, 5, 6. that it is to Gentile believers now, and not peculiar
to Israel after the flesh, yet sure if the promise b^ the reason of the
command, and the command^ belongs to them to whom the promise belongs, it
belongs to no other* and therefore to none but elect persons to whom that
promise is made; no mere professors of faith are bound to keep Gods Covenant
by virtue of the promise, since no promise is made to them. 6. Were this also
granted, that the command is to every professor of faith to keep the Covenant
as is enjoined v. 9. then it remains still as a duty for every professor of
Christian faith to circumcise his males of eight days old (which is contrary to
Christianity;) For there is no other thing commanded there then Circumcision
But to prevent this, Mr. C. says.

It is to be observed, that this command of God is primarily fixed upon the
general duty, namely, the Covenant to be kept, and not upon this or that way of
keeping* either by circumci^^ng or baptizing: so as the circumcising of the
child came under the command only upon this, because it was declared then to
be the token of the Covenant; and by the words it is supposed, that when it
should cease to be the token of the Covenant, it should no longer be a duty;
and what else, by the same authority, should be made the token of the same
Covenant, would be the duty in stead thereof. Mark the words, he does not say,
Thou shall therefore circumcise every man-child among you as a token of the
Covenant between me and you; for so had that been made the token for
perpetuity, to have continued so long as the Covenant it self. But 1. in
general he says, v. 9. that is, they should observe and perform the token of
the Covenant whatever that prove to be; and he adds in the 2 d. place, v. 10,
14. therefore, as I said, as for Circumcision, that was a duty only upon those
words, declaring that to be then the token. Circumcision is now abolished* yet
the command of keeping the token of Abraham's Covenant is still in force, and
binding to Abraham's spiritual seed in their Generations; therefore what is now
the token of that Covenant must be observed in stead thereof.

Answ. No wise and just Lawgiver would ever make such a command of a general
duty concerning ceremonies or rites then undetermined, but to be determined two
thousand years after, Thou shall keep my Covenant, that is, what ceremony I
shall now appoint thee, or what I shall hereafter appoint when I take that
away: such indefinite dis-junctive commands so ambiguous, un-intelligible, to
be understood at one time one way, at another time another way, are so like
Delphick juggling answers, as that I dare not ascribe them to the Almighty. Many
absurdities follow on this conceit of Mr. C. which I have before set down. For
present these arguments from the Text are against it. 1. There is nothing
enjoined Genesis 17.9. but what Abraham was enjoined in his own person to do as
well as his seed after him in their generations; this is proved from the
express words, And God said unto Abraham, thou shall keep my covenant
therefore, and again, thou and thy seed after thee in their generations, twice
is this imposed on Abraham distinctly named, and the term [ therefore]
spectially applied to him, and after with difference, from yet with his seed,
so that to deny this, is to deny it is light when the Sun shines at noon day.
But to Abraham's person was not enjoined to observe and perform the token of the
Covenant whatever that prove to be, for then he had been bound to baptize,
which is absurd, Ergo. 2. This precept is as well to Abraham's natural seed in
their generations, as to his spiritual seed, for the precept belonging to those
to whom the promise belongs, and it cannot be denied the promise v. 8. to
belong to Abraham's natural seed, at least such as Moses, David, before Christ,
it follows they were bound to observe and perform the token of the Covenant
what ever that p^ove to be, and consequently to baptize, which is absurd. 3. If
this precept be to the spiritual seed of the Gentiles, then Gentile believers
are bound to observe and perform the token of the Covenant whatever that prove
to be: But Circumcision the text it self makes the token of the Covenant, Ergo,
Gentile believe^s by this exposition are bound to circumcise. 4. From v. 10.
That Covenant was enjoined v. 9. and no other, which is expressed v. 10. This
is proved from the form of words which do plainly show Gods meaning, this is
the covenant Which ye shall keep, which are as express as words can be that
he meant no other Covenant to be kept then what is set down v. ^0, etc. But
that is only Circumcision, therefore no other is there enjoined v. 9. But what
need I so fully refu^e that which has no proof at all brought for it, but Mr.
Cs. word! It Is enough to tell him that it is his dream, and to let the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of London know that they have been enamoured on a vain
phantasme. And ^et were it grant^d him and them, it will never serve their turn
to prove infant Baptism by.

For 1. The command Genesis 17.9. is not in these words [thou shall keep the token
of my Covenant therefore] but [ thou shall keep my Covenant therefore] and
therefore if according to Mr. Cs. exposition it be a general duty not fixed
upon this or that way of keeping, and there are other ways of keeping the
Covenant then by keeping the token of the Covenant, the words may be meant of
other duties then seals, as he calls them of the Covenant, as particularly what
is required Genesis 17.1. to walk before God and be perfect, upon which God
promises to make his Covenant v. 2. and so the precept Genesis 17.9. may be
observed without any seal at all. 2. But if it be limited to the keeping of the
token of the Covenant, yet it follows not it must be either baptising or
circumcising, there being other tokens of the Covenant besides these, as the
Passover, the Lords Supper, and therefore i^ it command them to observe the
token of the Covenant what ever it prove to be, it ties them to observe the
Lords Supper, and if it must be observed ^y this rule here, then it must be
given to infants as well as Bap^ism. 3. Hence arises a further exception, that
if it were yielded, that a token of the Covenant indefinite ^s commanded, and
Baptism meant after Circumcision, yet sure the command ties not to observe
Baptism after the rule of Circumcision, bu^ after the institution of Baptism in
the ^ew Testament. And the reason is plain, the command v. 9. being only of a
general duty comma^^s not the particular rite, neither Circumcision nor
Baptism* therefore there is no rule how to observe Baptism Genesis 17.9. Then v
10.11, 1^, ^3, 14. is by Mr. Cs. ^wn exposition ^ rule only about
Circumcisi^n, who, and whom, and when ^o circumcise, nor do I think Mr. C.
dares sa^, that the rule about the manner of circumstances of circumcising, is
a rule about the manner of circumstances of ^^ptising, for then the hous^older
should be bound to baptize all his males of eight days old, servants, and
children, and among them himself if unbaptized, none before eight days old, no
female, none but his own house, he should wash not the face, but the privy
member. If Mr. C. to serve his turn yet devise another general law about the
manner of observing the ^ites of the New Testament, besides the particular
institutions and examples of Christ and his Apostles in the New Testament --
erit mihi magnus Apollo, and if Mr. C. or any other, find a^y institution or
example of infant Baptim in the New Testament, I shall believe they can cut a
whetstone with a rasour.

4. Says Mr. C* It is supposed by the words, that when circumcision should
cease to be the token of the covenant, it should no longer be a duty, and that
circumcision is now abolished. But 1. if v 9. be a command still in force, and
bind to observe still the token of the Covenant what ever it proved to be, and
that was Circumcision, then it binds still to observe Circumcision 2. It is
said, v. 13. He that is born in thy house, and he that is bought with thy money
must needs be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an
everlasting covenant. Now if Mr. Cs. reasoning be good, the promise is v. 8. of
an everlasting possession, therefore it extends to the spiritual seed even in
the New Testament; by the same reason, since v. 14. it is said Gods covenant
shall be in their flesh (which is by carnal Circumcision) for an everlasting
covenant, Gods command is in the New Testament to Abraham's spiritual seed, true
believers of the Gentiles, that they be circumcised in their flesh, contrary to
Gal. 5.2. Act. 15 24. 5. It is supposed that Baptism in the New Testament is
the token of Abra^ams covenant, which is not proved, but is m^nifestly false:
For then by it every believer should be assured of the land of Canaan, that
Kings shall come of him, etc. as is promised, Genesis 17. v. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. but
that is false, and a mere Jewish conceit. 6. It is said without any show of
proof, that by the words it is supposed, that what else besides circumcision by
the same authority should be made the token of the same covenant, would be the
duty in stead thereof: But neither do the words say, or suppose, that when
circumcision should cease to be a token of the covenant, it should no longer be
a duty; nor that what else by the same authority should be made the token of
the same covenant, would be the duty in stead thereof; there is not a word that
tends to either supposal, nor can be either true. For the Jews Circumcision was
not abolished by any words Genesis 7. but by the Apostles declaration, Act. 15.
which does not in the least hint any colection of its ceasing from Genesis 17. but
from the calling of the Gentiles: Nor is the reason there or anywhere else of
its ceasing, taken from its ceasing to be the token of Abraham's ^ovenant, but
from the calling the Gentiles, the coming of faith, etc. Yea, the Jewish
^ircumcision still used cease not to be the token of Abraham's Covenant, and
yet the command Gen 17.9, ^0, 1^, 12, 13 4. bind^th not. Nor is the other
speech true. For by the same authority, according to Mr. C. the Passover, the
Lords Supper, were made tokens of the same Coven^^t, and yet ^or duties in
stead of Circumcision. 7. If when circumcision ceased there was (...) be a duty
in stead thereof by virtue of the command. Genesis 17.9. and because of the
promise of an everlasting possession, v. 8. it must extend to the New Testament
to the spiritual seed, and be of a spiritual blessing; by the same reason,
Circumcision being made an everlasting covenant, v. 14. the command Genesis 17.9.
should be of a spiritual keeping of Gods Covenant, and the Circumcision that
comes in the stead of Circumcision in the flesh should be Circumcision of the
heart and obedience, which the New Testament seems to intimate, Romans 2.26, 28,
29. 1 Cor. 7.19. Phil. 3.3. Col. 2.11. 8. It is supposed, but not proved, that
Baptism is in stead of Circumcision* But Mr. C. thinks to prove it, only by
the way he takes in to illustrate his conceit about Genesis 17.9. something about
the Sabba^h, Exodus 20.8, 11. of which he says thus.

The like manner of institution we have concerning the Sabbath; therefore those
who deny infant Baptism, oftentimes deny the Sabbath; and not without cause,
for there is the same reason of both, and we may illustrate the one by the
other. The Lord intended in time to change the day from the 7th. day to the
first of the week, as he intended in time to change the token of Abraham's
Covenant: Therefore in the 4th. Commandment also, the command is not primarily
fixed upon the 7th. or any day to be remembered and kept holy, but upon the
general duty, that the rest day of the Lord be remembered and kept holy, what
ever that day fall to be. Remember the Sabbath day, that is the rest day, to
keep it holy; and the Lord blessed the rest day, and sanctified it. And the
remembrance and keeping of the 7th. day is in the Commandment made a duty for
this reason, because that was declared to be then the day wherein God had
entered into his rest after his making of the world. And upon the same account,
when after the travel of his soul, in the new creation, he entered the second
time into his rest, as is declared that he did, Heb. 4.9, 10. because that was
upon the first day of the week, when he rose from the dead; therefore by virtue
of that command, Remember the rest day to keep it holy; the first day of the
week is now to be remembered and kept holy, in as much as that is now the rest
day of the Lord our God, as formerly the 7th. day.

Answ. That those who deny infant Baptism do not, or need not deny the Sabbath,
is showed in my Examen, part 2. sect. 8. in my Praecursor, sect. 15. in the
second part of my Review, sect. 3. and what Mr. C. ha^h said for his opinion of
inferring the Lords day Sabbath from Heb. 3, and 4. has been examined before,
and showed insufficient for his purpose. That which now he brings from his
conceit of the command, Exodus 20.8, 11. is to me very doubtful, and yet were it
certain, would not answer Mr. Cs. expectation. His conceit is doubtful to me
for these reasons, 1. because if his conceit were right, when it is said
Remember the Sabbath day, and the Lord blessed the Sabath day, the term [
Sabbath day] should be conceived as a genus or species comprehending under it
the rest day of the Jews and the Christians, and such other rest days as God
should appoint to be observed. B^t against this are these things: 1. That I
find not where the term [ Sabbath day] is meant or applied to any other then
the 7th. day of the week. I grant that other days are termed [Sabbaths,
Sabbaths of rest,] Levit. 23, 24, 32, 29. but no where that I yet find, is any
day besides the last of the week termed the Sabbath day. 2. The blessing of the
Sabbath day, Exodus 20.11. was the same with the blessing, Genesis 2.3. For it is a
narration of what God did in the beginning, and that day was the seventh in
order after the six days in which he created his work. 2. Me thinks the
Evangelist Luke 23.56* when he says, they rested on the Sabbath day according
to the commandment (which commandment is that Exodus 20.8, 11.) and that Sabbath
being by the confession of all the last day of the week, does plainly expound
the fourth Commandment of that particular Sabbath which was the seventh day in
order from the creation, and the last day of the week. I confess there are
difficulties from this exposition, concerning the evacuating of the fourth
Commandment, which being besides my present business, I shall not now insist
on, it being sufficient for my present purpose to show why I conceive Mr. Cs.
exposition doubtful.

2. Yet were hi^ interpretation granted, it would not serve his turn here. For
1. keeping Gods Covenant, Genesis 7.9. is without any example or color of reason
re^trained to seals (as they are termed) of the Covenant, and made the genus to
Circumcision and Baptism, as the term [ Sabbath] may be to all Festivals 2. If
it were, yet there is not the same reason of Circumcision and Baptism as of the
Sabbath and the ^orns day, the one being a moral command, and the other merely
ceremonial 3 If the meaning were Genesis 17.9. that a duty were commanded in
general to keep the token sign, or seal of the Covenant, then it is a command
concerning any token of the Covenant, the Passover and Lords Supper, as well
as Circumcision and Baptism; and if so, then they are to be observed according
to the rule there, v. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. and if so, they are to be applied to
male infants of eight days old as well as Baptism, or according to the rules
delivered in the institution of each rite; and if so, the command Genesis 17.9,
10, 11, 12, 13, 14. will make nothing for infant Baptism, unless it can be
proved ou^ of the institution and practice in the N. T. But to prevent this,
Mr. C. says.

SECT. LXXXI. The succession of Baptism to Circumcision and their identity for
substance to us is showed to be unproved by Mr. Carter, Mr. Marshal, Mr.
Church, Dr. Homes, Mr. Cotton, Mr. Fuller, Mr. Cobbet, from Col. 2.11, 12. or
elsewhere.
2ly. FOr answer further, it is to be considered, that Baptism is now in the
room of Circumcision, and is the very same for substance to us, as Circumcision
was to them before Christ, namely, the token and seal of that Covenant made
with Abraham and his seed, as appears Gal 3.27, 29. As many of you as have
been baptixed into Christ, have put on Christ. And if ye be Christ's, then are
ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. By which we see, that
whatever we have as Abraham's seed, we have it all in Christ; and what we have
in Christ, we have it all as Abraham's seed; and that we are baptized into
Christ* that is our initiation into Christ; and what ever we have as Abraham's
seed, is sealed unto us in Baptism. By which it is evident, that as
Circumcision was to them, so Baptism now to us is the token and seal of that
Covenant made with Abraham and his seed.

Answ. If this were granted, yet Mr. Cs. purpose were not obtained, that the
application of the seal to infants were justified by the command Genesis 17.9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14. for the reasons before given. But because I conceive these
assertions contain errors, such as do mislead Pae^obaptists, I shall examine
Mr. Cs. allegations, and together with them Mr. Marshals reply to my Examen
about his third Conclusion, and what I find material in other of my Antagonists
about the point of Baptisms succeeding Circumcision.

Two assertions are laid down here by Mr. C. 1. That Baptism is now in the room
of Circumcision. 2. That it is the very same for substance to us as
circumcision was to Jews before Christ. Neither of which are true, or proved by
any thing brought by Mr. C. or any other, though this be the chief thing they
allege for infant Baptism; and Mr. Church, p. 50. out of Dr. Whitaker, tells
us, all the Anabaptists will not be able to resist this argument from
circumcision. Let Us try the strength of it. The latter position seems to be
this, That as circumcision was to the Jews, so Baptism now to us is the token
and seal of the covenant made with Abraham and his seed. But this is not all
one as to be the very same for substance. To be the very same for substance, is
an expression that is scarce capable of good sense; neither Baptism nor
Circumcision in proper acception being substances, or having substance, except
as the subject of them, as all accidents have. As substance is put for essence,
so it cannot be said they are the same for substance, since cutting is one
thing, washing another; and other Paedobaptists usually term them different
administrations, Circum^ision the old, Baptism the new. I grant Circumcision
was the token of the Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, Genesis 17. but that
it was a seal of that Covenant in the sense usually meant by Paedobaptists, or
that any ones Circumcision was a seal but Abraham's, much less that every ones
Circumcision was a seal of the Covenant of grace to him and his seed is more
then I find in Scripture, and how often I have proved it false, may be seen in
many of my writings, specially the 3d. part of this Review. But that Baptism is
the seal of that Covenant made with Abraham and his seed, is not true. For 1.
Baptism seals not at all the promise of the land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8. nor any
other of the promises made to the natural seed of Abraham. 2. Nor does it seal
the spiritual promises of the coming of Christ the calling of the Gentiles, as
they were made to Abraham, and by Circumcision assured to be accomplished. For
then Baptism, as Circumcision was, should be a shadow and type of Christ to
come, and should cease as it did 3. The Evangelical Covenant, or the promise o^
righ^eousness or eternal life by faith, granted to be in the latent sense
comprised in that Covenant, I find no where in Scripture said to be sealed by
Circumcision, but rather that circumcision did bind persons to the keeping of
the Law for righteousness, Gal. 5.2, 3. nor by baptism but by consequent. The
Scripture rather makes it a seal (if it must be so called) of our promise to
God, then of Gods promise to us. Nor is there any thing Gal. 3.27.29. to prove
either of Mr. Cs. conclusions, that Baptism now is the seal of the Covenant
made to Abraham and his seed; or that it is now in the room of Circumcision.
For neither is it said that what we have as Abraham's seed, is sealed to us in
Baptism; we are said indeed to put on Christ by Baptism, but that, whether the
putting on be meant of spiritual union, or outward profession it is ascribed to
faith, v. ^6. and our Baptism rather is made our seal to Christ, then Gods to
us: nor is there any thing spoken v. 29. of any seed of Abraham but by faith,
and so our Baptism cannot seal that Covenant which was made to Abraham's natural
seed, which was the use of Circumcision, and therefore that Baptism is the seal
of that Covenant, or in the room of Circumcision, is not proved thence. But
let us view what is further said for them or either of them.

That our Baptism succeeds in the room, place, and use of Circumcicision, is
the common speech of Paedobaptists; against it, 1. I argued in my Examen, that
Baptism was a concomitant to circumcision, it was among the Jew long before
Christ came, and it was by Divine appointment, from the Baptism of John till
Christ's death, now that which succeeds comes after, is not concurrent. To this
Mr. M. replied, 1. by concession, and thence would gather an argument for
infant Baptism, which is enervated in the 2d. part of this Review, sect. 24. 2.
Says he, A Lord Major elect succeeds the old, though the old continue after
his election for a time, Defense p. 171.

But this is not true, a Lord Major elect does not succed till he be sworn,
in the interim he is no Lord Major in being, but only in possibility and
probability which may never be. A successor has no place while the
predecessor is present, Jewel. Defense of the Apol. part. 2. c. 3. div. 5.

2. I argued that in no good sense can Baptism be said to be in the room and
place of circumcision; For neither in proper acception have either room or
place, nor taking room and place for the subjects circumcising and ci^cumcised,
baptizing and baptized, is it true; parents though private persons might
circumcise, not so in baptism, women were to be baptized, not so in
circumcision. These things are answered by Mr. M. either with censures of me,
which are but vain, this arg^ing being necessary to clear truth, or by
reference to what he had said before, which is also fully refuted in the third
part of this Review, sect. 18. I further said, If by room and place be meant
the society into which the circumcised and baptized were to be initiated, it is
not true. For Baptism initiated into the Christian, circumcision into the
Jewish church.

To this Mr. M. If you mean only the several administrations, the Church of
the Jews being Christ's Church under one administration, the Christian Church
the same Church of Christ under another administration; you speak truth, but
not to the purpose; my conclusion never said Circumcision and Baptism do
initiate into the same administration of the Covenant: but if you mean, that
the Church of the Jews and we are not one and the same Church, you speak pure
Anabaptism indeed, and contradict the Scripture expressly, which every where
makes the Church of the Jews and the Gentiles one and the same Church, though
under diverse administrations. I count it needless to annex any proofs, because
I think you dare not de^y it.

Answ. I do not mean only the several administrations, if I had so spoken I
might have perhaps been judged to speak nonsense, from which I can hardly
acquit Mr. Ms. speeches, that Circumcision and Baptism do initiate into
different administrations of the Covenant, and yet they are termed the diverse
administrations, and the Church of Jews and Gentiles by reason of them under
diverse administrations, which kind of expressions, though frequently used by
Paedobaptists, yet I can discern little in them but nonsense, or tautologies,
or self-contradictings. My meaning was very obvious. That the Christian Church,
properly so called, contradistinct from the Jewish visible Church is one
society, and that Baptism enters into the visible Church Christian, that the
visible Church Jewish contradistinct to the Christian is another society, and
Circumcision entered into it, not into the Christian. And these things are so
manifest that I thought it needless to bring proofs. Who knows not that
circumcised Proselytes were in the Jewish Church visible, and not in the
Christian, and baptized disciples of Christ cast out of the Jewish church, who
remained among the disciples of Christ and in his Church? that the Jewish
Church visible persecuted the Christian Church visible? Yea this is so apparent
that Mr. M. both in his Sermon p. 27. speaks to the same purpose; None might be
received into the Communion of the Church of the Jews until they were
circumcised* nor in the communion of the Church of the Christians until they be
baptized, our Lord himself was circumcised as a professed member of the Church
of the Jews, and when he set up the new Christian Church, he would be
initiated into it by the Sacrament of Baptism; And in his Des. p. 169. I reply
that the Christian Church was not fully set up and completed with all
ordinances of worship, government, officers, till afterward, is readily
granted, but that it was not in fieri in erecting and framing, and that Baptism
was administered in reference to the Christian Church, and that by Baptism men
were initiated into this new administration or best edition of the Church, I
think no sound Divine did ever question* p. 171. I answer John's Baptism and
Ministry was a praeludium to Christ, and was wholly in reference to the
Christian church, which then began to be molded; and though there was not a
new distinct Church of Christianity set up, yet all this was preparing the
materials of it, and John did not admit them by Baptism as members to the
Jewish Paedagogy, which was then ready to be taken away, but into that new
administration which was then in preparing. So that what Mr. M. terms in me the
speaking of pure Anabaptism indeed, is no other then his own, and is so
manifest as cannot be denied to be true, nor is at all contradicted by the
Scripture, which never makes the Church christian visible and the Jewish to be
one and the same, but the Church invisible by election and believing of Jews
and Gentiles to be one and the same mystical body of Christ, Ephesians. 3.6. Now
this one thing demonstrates that Baptism succeeds not into the place or office
of Circumcision, since they had different institutions; were for Churches, as
Mr. M. speaks, under diverse administrations, whereof the one was national
gathered by natural descent, or Proselytism, the other only by the preaching
of the Gospel and faith. As S^lmatius in his apparatus to his book Of the
primacy of the Pope p. 20, 21. proves the modern Bishops neither to succeed
into the place of the Apostles, nor the first Bishops because of their
different institution, name, function and ordina^ion, so in like manner I prove
that Baptism succeeds not in the place of Circumcision, because of its
different institution, name, office, and state it has from it. Which i^
further proved thus. The command of Circumcision was different from the command
of Baptism, the command of Circumcision not inferring Baptism; to which Mr. M.
replies, Now this follows that therefore Baptism does not succeed in the room
of Circumcis^on ^ cannot guess; the Lords day succeeds the 7th day in being
Gods Sabbath, but certainly the institution of it was long after the other.

Answ This proves that the one is not s^ated on the command of the other,
Baptism on the command of Circumcision, they having d^fferent commands Genesis
17.10, etc. Matthew. 28.19. and consequently no rule for baptizing in the command
of Circumcision, nor the command of circircumcising infants a virtual command
for baptising, the rules of administering each of these being to be taken from
their several commands and approved examples of practice, and no other.

Lastly, that Baptism succeeds Circumcision in the same use and end, is more
untrue. For the uses of Circumcision were so far from being the same with the
use of Baptism, that they are rather contrary. For the uses of Circumcision
were to engage men to the use of the rest of the Jewish ceremonies, to signify
Christ to come out of Abraham's family, to be a partition wall between Jew and
Gentile.

To this Mr. M. answers. These all refer to the manner of administration
peculiar to the Jews; I have often granted there were some legal uses of
Circumcision, it obliging to that manner of administration; and so they were
part of the Jewish Paedagogy, which is wholly vanished, and therein
Circumcision has no succession; but Baptism succeeds it as a seal of the same
Covenant under a better administration, as a set and constant initiating
Ordinance: only I wonder that you say Circumcision did initiate into the
Church of the Jews, or rather the family of Abraham.

Answ. Mr. Ms. grant, that the uses were part of the Jewish Padagogy, and that
it is wholly vanished, and therein circumcision has no succession, does infer
that Circumcision and all its uses are vanished, and have no succession: For it
had no uses but what did belong to the Jewish Paedagogy, the initiating was
into the Jewish Church, or rather the family of Abraham, (which speech I used
as conceiving that term more comprehensive and more proper, in as much as the
family of Abraham was it into which Circumcision did initiate first before the
people of Abraham's house were termed the Church of the Jews,) and that covenant
which circumcision did signify and confirm, was peculiar to the Jews, although
Christ were typified by circumcision and righteousness by faith in the latent
sense, promised in the Covenant, Genesis 17. which yet no more proves Baptism to
succeed circumcision then to the cloud, sea, Manna, water out of the Rock, the
Ark of Noah, the Passover, the sacrifices of the Law, high Priest, washings,
etc. And if then this be all the use that Baptism succeeds circumcision in, to
confirm the Covenant so far as it was spiritual, it succeeds as well to all
these, and so does the Lords Supper to circumcision, and from the comands of
those rites, a rule might be drawn to administer Baptism by, as well as from
circumcision. Piscator in his observat. on Numb. 28, 29. makes Baptism to
succeed circision and the purifyings to be often iterated, but the truth is it
succeeds to neither, Christ is instead of all these Col. 2.17. and succeeds to
them, and to say that Baptism succeeds to the use of circumcision, as it
signified the Gospel promise to Abraham, must make it to signify Christ yet to
come in the flesh; For which reason I say still boldly, though it were (as I
think it is not) against all Divines and Churches since the Apostles time, that
to say Baptism succeeds in the room and place of circision, is a proposition
erroneous and very dangerous.

Mr. M. says to this p. 174. 1. That he had confuted before what I say, that
the covenant with Abraham is not the same with the New Covenant but in part, to
which there is a full reply before, in all the sections of the third part of
this Review, wherein the Covenant with Abraham is defended to be mixed, to wit,
the 4th, 25th, 26th, 27th. 2. That the Cloud, Sea, Manna, water of the Rock
etc. were extraordinary signs, not standing Sacraments to be used in all
generations, and yet so far as God has made them parallel, what hurt is there
in saying Baptism succeeds them? To which I answer, 1. The sacrifices and
purifyings were as much standing Sacraments, and that in more generations then
circumcision and the Passover. 2. That there is this hurt to Mr. Ms. cause,
that if he grant that Baptism succeeds to them as well as circumcision, then a
rule may be taken from the use of those in the administration of Baptism as
well as from circumcision, which is only proved from the succession of the one
to the other, nor is it wildly said by me, if the confirming or signifying the
same covenant, prove Baptism to succeed circumcision, it proves the Lords
Supper to succeed it, which according to Mr. M. has the same general state,
signification and use, from which alone Mr. M. and other Pae^obaptists gather
the succession of Baptism to circumcision, from Col. 2.11, 12. and not from the
particular use of initiating, and if so a rule from circumcision to give the
Lords Supper as succeeding it to infants, as well as Baptism may be drawn,
which were absurd in Mr. Ms. conceit. I have hitherto showed the falsehood of
Paedobaptists assertion about Baptisms succession to circumcision; Let Us review
their proofs of it.

Mr. M. in his defense p. 174. says, From that clear place Col. 2.8. 10 13. I
made it evident, not only that we have the same thing signified by
circumcision, while we are buried with Christ in Baptism, but also that the
Apostle plainly sees Baptism in the same state and makes it of the same use to
us as Circumcision was to the Jews; Christ only to them and us also is the
author of spiritual Circumcision. The Circumcision of the flesh was the
Sacrament of it to them; and now that is abolished, we have Baptism to seal the
same thing.

Answ, Though I deny not that we have the same thing which was signified by
Circumcision, while we are buried with Christ by Baptism; yet I deny that the
Apostle plainly or obscurely sets Baptism in the same state, or makes it of the
same use to us as Circumcision was to the Jews: Nor do I find any thing in the
Apostles words from whence it may be gathered, that the Circumcision of the
flesh was the Sacrament of it to them, except it be meant only of Christ's
personal Circumcision. For it is plain, that what is said v. 11. that they were
circumcised with the circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off the
body of the sins of the flesh, in or through the circumcision of Christ, is
expressly applied to Christ's Circumcision, and not to the Circumcision of any
other person but Christ: nor can be, since of no man's Circumcision besides
Christ's is it true, that we are in or by it circumcised with the circumcision
made without hands, in putting^off the body of the sins of the flesh: Nor are
we thus circumcised by Christ's Circumcision as the sacrament, token, or seal of
spiritual Circumcision, as that only which sacramentally represented it, or as
a seal of the Covenant in which it was promised; but as the effectual pattern,
according to which by Divine predestination we are to be conformed, Romans 8.29.
in whom we are said to be buried, raised, v. 12. quickened, set in heavenly
places, Ephesians. 2 5. concrucified; Gal. 2.20. fellow sufferers, Romans 8.17. Phil.
3.10. Whence I argue, If our Baptism be hence gathered to succeed in the same
state and use with Circumcision, then it succeeds to Christ's Circumcision, for
none other is here meant; and if so, then each believers Baptism is the
effectual pattern by virtue of which we have spiritual Circumcision. But this
is so absurd, that it is not much short of blasphemy, therefore the inference
of Baptisms succession to Circumcision from hence is without any ground, and I
did truly say in my Examen, that it was an ignis fatuus that has misled men
in gathering it hence. Nor is it true, that there is a word in the Text that
intimates, that either our Baptism seals any thing to us, except our union and
conformity to Christ, to which though Circumcision of the heart be antecedent,
concomitant, or consequent, yet it is not the same; and therefore the sealing
of the same thing by Baptism as by Circumcision, is not rightly hence inferred.

As for what Mr. C. says, p. 79, 80. that there is the same spiritual fruit of
Circumcision and Baptism, those only who are in Christ have it, because they
have it by the circumcision of Christ, and the like of Baptism; that the
benefit and fruit of circumcision, which is the circumcision made without
hands, they had by being buried and risen with Christ in Baptism and therefore
that they were complete in Christ, is all granted, and confirms my argument
against the imagined sucession of ordinary Circumcision to ordinary Baptism,
and of their being the same in substance and use. For hereby it is plain, that
what spiritual fruit is ascribed to Circumcision, it is not ascribed to
ordinary Circumcision, no nor to Abraham's, (notwithstanding what Mr. C. would
deduce from Romans 4.11, 12.) but to Christ's: Nor is the spiritual fruit, Col.
2.11, 12. ascribed to Baptism, but to the burial and resurrection of Christ
represented in Baptism. As for what Mr. C. adds as the Apostles meaning, that
they were complete in Christ in the Ordinances of the Gospel, is his own
fiction; for the Apostle is so ^ar from saying we are complete in Christ in the
Ordinances of ^he Gospel, that as I prove, Exam. p. 91, 92. out of the Text,
the words of Beza, Aretius, (whose sayings are by Mr. M. in his Defense, p 175.
owned as true,) and Mr. Ms. own words, that the Apostle asserts our
compleatness in Christ without any outward Ordinance either of Law or Gospel.
And this I think Mr. C. himself dare not deny. For since ^he compleatness is in
spiritual benefits, mortification, renovation, remission of sins, as Mr. C.
acknowledges, if we have our compleatness in Christ by Baptism, we have these
spiritual benefits by it, and we have them not without it. What Mr. M. says,
p. ^75. of my abuse of Aretius, is answered in my Apology sect. 1^. p. 60.
Aretius his testimonies out of the Fathers cited p. 176. prove nothing
concerning the meaning of Col. 2.11, 12. though they show that some of the
Ancients conceived of Baptisms succession to Circumcision as he did. To what I
argued in my Examen, p. 92. that by this doctrine, that Baptism is in stead of
Circumcision, the Apostles argument for the disanulling the Jewish ceremonies,
both here and Heb. 9. and 10.1. and 13. in the Epistle to the Galatians, chapter 3.
and 4. and Ephesians. 2. is quite evacuated, who still uses this argument to prove
the abolition of the ceremonies of the law, because they have their complement
in Christ, not in some new Ordinance added in stead of them; for if there be
need of other Ordinances (besides Christ) in stead of the old, then Christ has
not in himself fullness enough to supply the want of them, and this abolition is
not because of Christ's fullness, but other Ordinances that come in stead of the
abolished; and though our Ordinances may be said to imitate theirs, yet Christ's
only succeeds them.

Mr. M thus says. I answer, it is very true* that whoever should plead (as Mr.
C. does) that we have any of our compleatness in any outward Ordinance would
evacuate the Apostles argument, but yet they by his own appointment help us to
apply this compleatness, they argue not that all our compleatness is not in
Christ, Christ only succeeds all the Jewish Ordinances as the body does the
shadow: We plead not, as the Papists do, that the Jewish Sacraments were types
of ou^s, they were types only of Christ; but yet ours succeed them to be like
signs of the covenant of grace, and so the Apostle does in this place.

To which I reply. 1. If it be contrary to the Apostle to plead that we have
any of our compleatness in any ou^ward Ordinance, then it is contrary to ^he
Apostle to make Baptism and the Lords Supper to succeed Circumcision and the
Passover, since that only Col. 2.10, etc. is made to succeed them wherein we
are complete without them. 2. What Mr. M. means by applying the compleatness of
Christ, and how Baptism and the Lords Supper help us to apply this
compleatness, I do not readily understand. I conceive it applied no otherwise
then by faith, nor they to help any otherwise then by exciting it, which I am
sure they do not to infants, and so Baptism of infants is no help to them to
apply the compleatness of Christ. 3. Though Baptism and the Lords Supper argue
not that all our compleatness is not in Christ, yet the doctrine of Mr. M. that
Baptism is in the same state, and of the same use to us as circumcision was to
the Jews, that it succeeds into its place, does so a^gue as I have showed. 4.
If Christ only succeeds all the Jewish Ordinances, as the body succeeds the
shadow, then Christ only is made Col. 2.11, 12. the successor to
Circumcision: for there is no other succession there spoken of, as appears by
the phrases of compleatness in him as the head, v. 10. circumcised by the
circumcision of Christ, v. 11. buried with him, risen with him, v. 12. quickened
together with him, v. 13. dead with him from the rudiments of the world, v. 20.
so as that by holding him as the head being knit together the whole body
increases with the increase of God, v. 19. and chiefly that which is said v.
17. which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. 5. If the
Jewish Sacraments were not types of ours, then the reason of their ceasing from
the succession of ours is taken away, for that rests only on this, that they
were types, and ours the truth. 6. If ours succeed only in that they are like
signs of the Covenant of grace, then they succeed all the sacrifices, washings,
annointings of the law as well as these: we may conclude succession of Baptism
to Noah's Ark, etc. But in the administration of an Ordinance we are not to be
ruled by bare analogy framed by our selves or delivered by the spirit of God,
but by the institution of God.

To this Mr. M. says, Defense, p. 177. I answer, but when those analogies
framed by the spirit of God, are agreeable to the use and end of Gods
institution, we are to be ruled by them; and the Apostle shows that is our case
here.

Answ. 1. If this were true, then to tie Baptism to the eighth day, to be of
all in the family, etc. should according to Mr. Ms. s^ppositions be right. 2.
There Is not a word in the Apostle Col 2. to show that ours succeed the Jewish
Sacraments to be like signs of the covenant of grace. Yea, I urged that the
Apostle rather resembles burial to Circumcision then Baptism, and makes the
analogy between Circumcision and Christ's burial, and cited the words of
Chrysostom and Theophilact on the place to that purpose, Exam p. 93.

To this Mr. M. Where i^ Circumcision compared to burial, and wherein I pray
you lies the analogy between them?

I reply, 1. I said not Circumcision is compared to burial, but that Col. 2.11,
12. burial rather resembles Circumcision then Bap^ism, and the analogy is
between them. Which is true, since buried with him, v. 12. answers to
circumcised by his circumcision, v. 11. and the analogy is, that as the one so
the other is the effectual pattern of our mortification; and not between our
burial and baptism, as Mr. M. And to this are the words cited by me apposite.
Nor are the words of Chrysostom, that we put off sins in Baptism, for Mr. Ms.
purpose, to prove analogy conceived by the Apostle between the Jewish common
Circumcision, or our burial and our baptism. 2. I said Baptism is named with
faith, Col. 2.12. as the 2 means whereby we have communion with Christ, and are
complete in him. Exam. p. 94.

To this Mr, M. But is not this the same sense with mine? But your syllogism or
mighty consequence I deny, Baptism is named because it is one of the means of
Christians being exempted from the Schoolmaster, and come to be ingraffed into
Christ, and to be complete in him, therefore it does not succeed in the room
and place of Circumcision, nay rather therefore it does.

To this is replied in my Apology, sect. 5. p. 28. that Mr. M. perverts my
words, my arguing being no other then this, Baptism is alleged as one of the
means whereby we come to be complete in Christ, (which Mr. M. denies not, but
avows as his sense,) therefore there was another reason besides the succession
of it into the place of circumcision, why the Apostle there mentions it, which
Mr. M. denied. And this consequence (however Mr. M. in his flout term it) is
good, except it were true, that every means whereby we are complete in Christ
succeeds circumcision, the contrary whereof is confessed by Mr. M. in
acknowledging faith to be one of the means whereby we are complete in Christ,
Col. 2.12. which yet succeeds not circumcision, according to him. Mr. Ms.
censure of my speech, that the misunderstanding Col. 2.11, 12. was an ignis
fatuus, as arrogant, is showed in my Apology, sect. 5. p. 29. to be injurious:
And what he says in his Defense, p. 179. of my position, that circumcision was
not a token of the Covenant to the Jews children, is another injury, in that he
leaves out the words [in sone sense] which was set down a little before in my
Appendix, p. 174. which being added, there is nothing in them contrary to the
Text, Genesis 17. but enough thence to prove my speech true.

What Mr. C. urges p. 81, from 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. of the Lords Supper succeeding
the Passover, That the Apostle could not have expressed by such phrases taken
from the Passover the celebrating the Lords Supper, had not the Passover and
the Supper been the same for substance, is not right. For 1. that by keeping
the feast is meant eating the Lords Supper, is not proved; and Beza, Diodati,
the new Annot. with others, paraphrase the words thus, Let us lead our life. 2.
Our obedience, gifts, doing good, are termed sacrifices, yet these phrases
prove not them to be the same in substance in Mr. Cs. sense. 3. Christ is
expressly in the Text 1 Cor 5.7. termed our Passover, therefore the Text makes
the sacrifice of Christ to suc^eed the Passover; not the Lords Supper.

But Mr. Drew, p. 3^* thinks to prove the succession of Baptism to
Circumcision, because as he says in my Exercit. p. 3. etc. I readily grant
that Baptism is an Ordinance set up by the appointment of Christ to serve for
the same spiritual ends that circumcision did. To which I say, that all I grant
there, is, that Circumcision and Baptism signified and confirmed the promise of
the Gospel, but I added, according to different forms and function, and I
ascribed no more to Circumcision then to the Paschal lamb, the rain of Mannah,
etc. But this is not the same with that which Mr. Drew injuriously imposes on
me. Yet if it were, it would not prove Baptisms succession to Circumcision, as
is before showed, and if it did it would as well prove its succession to the
Passover, Manna, the water out of the Rock, etc. which he will not assert I
think. The rest which he says, about Col. 2.11, 12. is the same with what
others say, and has been answered in my Examen part. 3. sect. 9. in my
Appendix, and in this section and in other parts of this Review.

As for Mr. Cotton, who is one of those to whose writing Mr. Drew refers us for
proof of Baptisms succession to Circumcision, from Col. 2.10, 11, 12. his
conceit is grounded upon this mistake in hi^ book of Baptism p. 128. That the
Apostle pleads our compleatness in Christ, notwithstanding our want of
circumcision, in that we en^oy the like fullness of benefit in our Baptism as
the Jews did in their circumcision, which has been often showed to be false.
For there is no mention of a benefit to the Jews, but to the Colossians, and
this benefit was not bare outward Circumcision, or any outward Church
privilege, but the inward Circumcision in putting off the body of the sins of
the flesh, and this not by the Jews Circumcision, but Christ's circumcision in
his own person, nor is it true that the fullness of benefit there is ascribed to
ordinary Baptism, nor can be rightly so conceived. And what Mr. Cotton says
in the same place against those who say that Baptism being granted to succeed
Circumcision, yet it follows not infants must be baptized, That succession is
the substitution of later things for former things in the same subject, if the
subject be changed, so far as there is a change of the subject there is no
succession, and therefore if infants be not baptized as they were circumcised,
Baptism succeeds not circumcision, is false and against himself. 1. False, for
we know though there were a law made that after infant Kings al should be
adult, and after women Queens, all should be male Kings, yet they should be
true successors, as King James to Queen Elizabeth, Henry the 7th to Edward the
5th or Henry the 6th. 2. Against himself, For thereby is proved Baptism does
not succeed circumcision, since there is a change in the subject, women being
baptized, who were not circumcised, and parents or masters of families being to
circumcise, but preachers of the Gospel only to baptize.

As for what Dr. Homes (to whom Mr. Drew also refers) in his Annimadvers. on my
Exercit. p. 28, 29. brings to prove Baptisms succession to Circumcision, it is
upon alike mistakes. For 1. it is not true that the Apostles scope Col. 2.12.
in mentioning Baptism, is to answer the objection Dr. Homes imagins, and to
show that we are as complete as the Jews, because Christ has appointed another
sign, to wit Baptism, in stead of the Jews Circumcision. 2. Nor does the
Apostle affirm or intimate, that if we have not Baptism in the room of
Circumcision to us Believers and our infants, we are not so complete as the
Jews, by Christ. 3. Nor is it true that the Apostle does call off the
Colossians from circumcision by the consideration of their Baptism as in the
room of circumcision. 4. Nor does the Apostle make such analogy between Baptism
and Circumcision as Dr. Homes says he does. 5. Nor if he did, would this
prove such a succession of Baptism to Circumcision as Paedobaptists would have,
that the command of infant Circumcision must be a command for infant Baptism.

Mr. Thomas Fullers argumentation for the succession of Baptism to Circumcision
in all the essentials of it, as he speaks in his Infants advocate* chapter 7. is
alike vain. For there is no inconvenience that I know, to say no ordinance does
succeed Circumcision; his talk of Sacraments being pillars of the Church, is
but phrasifying instead of disputing, nor do I know how it can be true. Nor do
I know, that all or any graces Evangelical are conferred in baptism or were in
circumcision of the Jews, much less that the conferring of such grace, is
essential to either of them; nor is it true, that Col. 2.11, 12. Christians are
said by Baptism to be spiritually circumcised; and by the same proportion the
believing Jews may be said by Circumcision to be spiritually baptized: For it
is not by Baptism but before it, that regularly persons are spiritually
circumcised, nor were the believing Jews by Circumcision to be spiritually
baptized but before it; Nor is there any such affinity, much less essential
sameness between them, as that a command about the one should be a command to
us about the other. Nor do I find any thing in that Author which needs further
answer, he having added nothing to the cause, but some peculiar words and
expressions without any strength.

What Mr. Cobbet has about this point Just. vindic part. 2. c. 2. sect. 9, 10,
11. I shall further examine. Sect. 9. he sets down eight propositions, which if
they were all granted, yet they do not prove that point, which is in question,
that an a^gument from analogy between mere positive ceremonies, ri^es or
Sacraments is of validity, so as that it may be concluded thus; So it was in a
ceremony of the Old Testament, therefore it must be so in the New, without any
other precept or example therein: Concerning the insufficiency thereof, I have
disputed so largely in the 2d. part of this Review sect. 2, 3. as that I need
to say no more here. Nor does any thing Mr. C. brings concerning the fullness of
the Scripture, Christ or the Apostles arguing, prove such kind of arguing good
in mere positive rites, however matters of faith and manners are determined and
proved by them from the Old Testament. Nor should it be granted (as it is not)
that there is the same main ground of Circumcision and Baptism, yet would it
follow the rule of the one is a rule about the other, without the like
institution. Yet what Mr. C. has set down as the main ground that God would
once have his Covenant of grace (which he means p 201. of the very Covenant of
saving grace, not of any mere outward Covenant) to be to the whole Church and
Church seed; and the rest of his hypotheses, page 195. are so fully showed to
be mistakes in this Review, that I think it needless actum agere. And for the
tenth section in which he makes a tedious paraphrase, and dictates many things
without proof, concerning Col. 2.10, 11, 12. they proceed upon the mistakes
above showed, as if the Apostle answered this objection, If Gentile believers
have not an initiatory seal for them and their children they should not be so
complete as the Jews in outward Ordinances, and that the Apostle answers that
they have Baptism in stead of Circumcision. He^ himself more truly says, page
199. That Baptism is named Col. 2.12. as an outward mean whereby be inchurched
Gentiles especially, come ordinarily to have communion with Christ, and to be
complete in him, and therefore not in outward Ordinances; nor by Baptism can it
be said we are complete in outward ordinances, since himself makes it only
the initiatory seal, but compleatness is not in the enjoyment of the initiatory
only, but of all ordinances.

As for what he says Section eleven, for the succession of Baptism to
Circumcision, that it is sufficient to prove it that they agree in their common
Author, Sacramental nature, and end (which yet is false*) the answer is good
that these things prove it not, since there are the same or more parities of
Baptism and the Passover, and more disparities between Baptism and
Circumcision, which are sufficient to show that the command concerning the one
is not a command concerning the other. For i^ the command bind to baptize
infants, it binds only to baptize males at eight days old, and not before; nor
is it any answer to say, The command of Circumcision binds in the substantials
of it though not in the circumstantials; ^or first, if the command bind it
binds in every point as well as in one. 2. The state of infancy is as much a
circumstance as the eighth day. 3. In the command of Circumcision, I know not
any thing which may be termed substantial, unless he mean the act of cutting
off the foreskin of the flesh, which he will not have us tied ^o, for then
we must not baptize our infants but circumcise them. As for what he speaks of
the command to seal with an initiatory seal of the Covenant indefinite
believers and their children, it is a mere figment, as has been before showed.
There is nothing else that I conceive needful to be added in this place, I go
on to finish the rest.

SECT. LXXXII. Notwithstanding Mr. Cs. allegations of Acts 2.38, 39. 1 Cor.
7.14. Romans 11 16, ^^ Mark. 10.14. Acts 15.10. Matthew. 28.19. the N. T. appear^
to be silent about Mr. Cs. additional promise, and infants Baptism.
HAving more largely noted the unproved dictates and mistakes of Mr. Carter
hitherto. I shall be briefer in the rest ^o what he says page 81, 82, 83, 84.
there needs no more to be said but this, that the blessing upon posterity
which Mr. C imagines, might have been signified, though adult persons only had
been circumcised, we have plain Scriptures which warrant us to alter
circumcision wholly and abolish i^, besides which we know no other command Gen
^7* 9 the texts Acts 8.12. Gal. 3 27 28. do as plainly show that Baptism is to
be of none but believers, and that but adul^ persons are to (...) bap^ized, ^s
that women are to be baptized, i^ Circumcision were a priv^ledge Acts 7.8. we
have abundant warrant to take it away; nor does the text Rom 11 29. hinder it,
which is not meant of outward privileges, which are common to elect and
reprobate (as the privilege of Circumcision was) but of saving grace, to wit
election and effectual calling, and therefore is palpably abused by Mr. C. to
prove that God takes not away the outward privilege from his people now, which
was by circumcision, we justly require a precept or example in the N. T to
warrant infant Baptism, no command of a mere positive right of the Old
Testament, being a rule to us about a mere positive right of the new, as is
fully proved by me in the 2d. part of this Review, Sect. 2, 3.

What Mr. C. says page 85, 86, 87, 88, 89. That the N. T. is not altogether
silent in this matter, because of Peter's words, Acts 2.38, 39. is false. For
neither is there a word Acts 2.38, 39. of Mr. Cs. imagined additional promise
of making every believer a blessing, so as to cast ordinarily elect children on
elect parents, nor that the application of the initial seal is to signify this
promise, nor that the application of it to infants is of the substance of this
Covenant nor that the command Genesis 17.9. is yet a command that lies upon
Abraham's spiritual seed now in the New Testament, nor that Baptism is now in
the room of Circumcision, and is the very same in substance for us, nor if Mr.
Cs. exposi^ion were granted, would any of these follow, but the contrary. For
first, if the promise be the same wi^h that verse. 17. out of Joel, yet sure it
is not the same with Mr. Cs. additional promise, the promise of receiving the
holy Ghost being not all one with this, that the parent believing shall be a
blessing to his posterity as Mr. C. fancies, the promise of receiving the Holy
Ghost being of a thing terminated on the receiver, but Mr. Cs. additional
promise of a thing convayed to posterity, the promise of receiving the Holy
Ghost being as well, if not chiefly to the children, Acts. 2.17, 18. but the
additional promise of Mr. C. is only to the parent. 2. Were the promises the
same, yet this would not serve Mr. Cs. turn, but be against him. For if the
promise Acts 2.39. be the same with that verse. 17, 18. then it is a promise to
children of dreaming dreams, seeing visions, and prophesying, but this cannot
be meant of infant children, it neither was so fulfilled in the Apostles days,
nor in any after time, it would be a prodig^ to hear an infant prophecy, much
less is it true of the ordinary gifts of the spirit, v. 18. 3 The limitation
also is against him, For if it be true which he says p. 88. That Peter makes
the Gentiles case parallel with the Jews, and says that the same promise did
also belong to them yet with the same limitation, namely, to so many of them
only as the Lord our God shall call, implying that it is an effectual call to
faith and repentance, that gave to any such a privilege, either Jew or
Gentile, and p. 87. the words of the Apostle cannot be meant, that the promise
did belong to them and their children only as Jews, Abraham's natural seed, but
as believers, and upon their conversion (which I conceive true) then it is
false that it belongs to infants as the natural seed of their parents, though
believers, and therefore the promise Act. 2.39. is not Mr. Cs. additional
promise, which is of believing parents being a blessing to posterity, nor is
the promise or imagined privilege consequent thereupon, belonging to infants
until they repent and believe. 4. That which he says p. 87. that Act. 2.38.
is an invitation to repenting and believing Jews to be baptized they and their
children, is so far from being for his purpose, that it is manifestly against
it. For if the invitation be of every one to repent first, and then every of
them so repenting to be baptized, then it is not an invitation to infants to be
baptized, nor of parents to baptize them. Yea, this is so apparent in the Text
that the very words are directed expressly to those persons who were pricked in
their hearts, and said Men and brethren what shall we do, that they should be
every of them baptized, v. 38. without so much as mentioning their children in
the invitation. Nor does any thing after done by them, v. 41. etc. show that
they understood that they were directed by Peter to cause their children,
whether infant or adult, to be baptized upon their repentance and believing
only. Yea, if as Mr. C. says, John Baptist had cleared that point, Matthew.
3.8, 9. that to the Jews as Abraham's seed natural Baptism did not belong, it
belongs not now to a believers seed. But the truth is, Mr. Cs. exposition is in
many things false or uncertain. It is uncertain whether the promise Acts 2.39.
be the same with that which is mentioned v. 17, 18. or that v. 30. of which I
have spoken enough before. It is false that the promise Acts 2.17, 18. can be
meant of ordinary gifts. For the Apostle says v. 16. that what was spoken by
the Prophet was the thing they then saw performed, which was speaking with
tongues v. 4, 11. the great things of God, which was extraordinary; and if the
promise v. 17, 18. had included ordinary gifts, it had been impertinently
alleged to show the fulfilling of it then in those miraculous gifts. Nor does
Mr. C. prove it to be so meant. For 1. though the last days in Scripture
signify all that space of time from the coming of Christ in the flesh to the
end of the world, 1 Timothy 4.1. 2 Timothy 3.1. Heb. 1.2. and 9.26. yet it follows
not the promise is yet in fulfilling, it is sufficient to verify the prophecy
that it has been fulfilled in any part of the last days. 2. Nor is there any
thing v. 18. to prove the prophesying there to be a distinct thing from the
prophesying, v. 17. or prophesying in either to be an ordinary gift, or common
to all Gods servants. Nor do Rev. 19.10. compared Rev. 12.17. or Rev. 1.9.
prove that every believer has the spirit of prophecy. For John's suffering for
the testimony of Jesus may be understood, yea being distinct from the word of
God Rev. 1.9. seems to be meant of his giving testimony of Jesus as an Apostle
or Prophet extraordinary; and the having the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12.17.
being distinct from keeping the commandments of God, imports the testimony
there meant to be of that which was testified by extraordinary revelation,
against which the Dragon warred, and a blessing is to the observers, Rev. 1.3
And that Rev. 19.10. is meant of those who had extraordinary revelation, is
manifest, in that Rev. 22.9. where the same thing is expressed, and there what
is Rev. 19.10. thy brethren which have the testimony of Jesus, is, thy brethren
the prophets, and the prophets are distinct from them that keep the words of
that book. Besides, if every believer had the spirit of prophecy, then every
believer should be a prophet, and should be set by God in the Church next after
Apostles, before Teachers; which does expressly gainsay the Apostle, 1 Cor.
12.28, 29. and fully proves the prophesying mentioned 1 Cor. 14. to be no
ordinary gift, which every believer has. Nor does it follow, the testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, therefore every testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophesying, the speech being indefinite, not universal; and the
words being the speech of the Angel, showing wherein he was fellow servants to
John, plainly intimate he meant it of the special testimony of Jesus which he
was fellow servant to John in, as the Title of the Book shows, Rev. 1.1. The
Revelation of Jesus Christ which God gave to him to show to his servants what
things must shortly be, and sending signified them by his Angel to his servant
John. I omit what Piscator conceives in his scholie on the place, that the
words are to be read in an inverted order thus, the spirit of prophecy is the
testimony of Jesus, that is, which is received from him. Nor is it true, that
the promise Ioh. 16.13. is to all believers, however Preachers do so often
misapply it, but to the Apostles. And it may be doubted, whether the words 1
Ioh 2.20, 27. be meant of all believers, or of those that were strong or we^l
instructed by John as his little children, v. 14. and if it be meant of all
believers, yet it must be understood with limitation of all things necessary to
salvation, or of all things needful to withstand the seducers he mentions, not
a word that mentions their prophesying. Nor does Joh. 7.39. prove every
believer a prophet; nor may it be gathered from 1 These. 5.19, 20. that such
preaching, which we must suppose may bring us something that is not good, is
called prophesying, but that something may be termed prophesying which is not;
and therefore the spirits are to be tried whether they be of God, for many
false pro^hets are gone out into the world, as John speaks, 1 Epist. 4.1.

Nor is it true, that Peter exhorts the Jews, Act. 2.38. to repent, that is, to
go on as they had begun. For though they had some horror of conscience, v. 37.
yet not repentance, unto which Peter exhorts, v. 38. nor does any word used by
Peter intimate that they had begun to repent. And what Mr. C. adds to the
clause to as many as the Lord our ^od shall call, not only to them, but also
to their children, is too bold dealing with the Scripture, there being not a
word in the Text which implies that addition, and therefore is not justified
by his allegations of Psalm. 1.6. Prove. 10.24. What other arguments for Mr. Cs.
purpose have been urged from Act. 2.38, 39. have been largely answered already.
I go on.

Mr. C. adds, p. 90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99. a large discourse* in
which 1. there is p. 97. a confession which does invincibly prove infant
Baptism to be will worship, and his speech false which he used p. 8^. that the
New Testam^nt is not altogether silent in this matter; and it is this. Whoever
shall confine himself only to the N. T. to find out the law of Gods worship
and service, he shall never find it, not only as to infant Baptism but also to
all other Ordinances whatsoever For if infant Baptism be not to be found in the
N. T. then the N. ^. is altogether silent about that matter: and if it be not
there, then it is will worship, there being no law about a mere positive rite
or ceremony in force to us Christian Gentiles now, which was giv^n to the Jews
in the Old Testament, as I have proved, Exam. par. 3. sect. 12. page 116, 117.
Review, par. 2. sect. 2, 3. 2. There is in the same p. 97. a false and
dangerous speech, that Christ spoke so little in his N. T. concerning the law
which is the rule which he has set for his service of his house; namely,
because he could look upon that, for the greatest part, to be done already, to
wit, in the Old Testament* Which if true, then the laws about the ceremonies of
the Jews are our rule, we are still under the yoke of bondage, popish,
prelatical ceremonies are still justifiable, a Bishop or Archbishop above
Presbyters and Bishops, appeal to Synods, their power to decide controversies,
to excommunicate, a national Church constitution, are still to be retained, for
these, or that which was proportionable to these, was according to the Rule of
Gods house then. Nor is there a word in any of the Scriptures which Mr. C.
alleges, for this his purpose.

Not Luke 16.16. the meaning whereof is not, as Mr. C. fancies, That in the
times before John was the season to instruct men in the law, since in the
Gospel; but as it is Mat. 11.13. All the prophets and the law until John
prophesied, that is, foretold of Christ's coming as future; but the Kingdom of
God, (...), Luke 16.16. from then is Evangelized, or told as good tidings
already begu^ to be, a^ Diodati annot. on Mat. 11.13. John's prerogative above
the precedent prophets is, that they have only foretold and described things
to come* but he has delivered the present salvation, and in him is begun the
Evangelical Ministry, and the legal and figurative Ministry is ceased. Yet if
Mr. Cs. exposition were allowed, it prov^s not that in the Law or Old Testament
the rule about the service or mere positive worship of God in the N. T. is set,
but rather the contrary; for if that were the season then for it, and now is
the season for another thing, it follows, that it is unseasonable to take a
rule for Gods hou^e in mere positive worship from the Old Testament.

The alleging Psalm. 78.1. by Mat. 13.3, 9, 35. proves not that a rule for
rituals is to be fe^cht from the Old Testament, although it may be useful for
to prove doctrines about the Gospel, Gods providence, moral duties, etc.

Though it be granted which Mr. C. concludes page 96. the general nature of the
Law to be one and the same to the people of God under both Testaments, (which
is easily yielded since the general nature is invariable, and the same to all
for ever) yet it follows not that the Laws about ^eremonies are the same to
the people of God under both Testaments, if so, we are still under the yoke of
Circumcision and the Legal rites, and under the Law. And indeed Mr. C. has in
this thing vented many false and dangerous speeches, that to us in Christ the
Law has been as it were incorporated with the Gospel, as thereby become part
of the covenat of grace the Law given by (...) is called the Testa^ent of
Christ, as well as ^he Law given to us by christ himself* that the Old
Testament, this the New, and both confirmed by his blood; that in the type by
the blood of Bulls and Goat^ th^^ in the answer type by his own blood. And yet
he says, the Apostle R^m. 1^ 6 applies Deuteronomy. 30 ^2, 14 to the Gospel in
opposition to the Law, as in it self considered without the Gospel, or as a
covenant of works; which words are contrary to his former. For if the Gospel be
opposed to the Law by the Apostle, as it is in it self considered is without
the Gospel, is a covenant of works, then the Law is not incorporated with the
Gospel, or thereby become part of the covenant of grace, nor is the Law given
by Moses called the Testament of Christ, nor confirmed by his blood, but the
blood of Bulls and Goats, ill termed Christ's blood, being opposed Heb. 9.12. In
like manner it is a dangerous assertion which he has page 95. In the covenant
of works the Law was, Do this and live; but in the covenant of grace it is, Do
this in the strength of Christ and live: which if right, we live, that is, are
justified (for so his words following explain it) by the doing the works of the
law in the strength of Christ; which (if I do understand it) is the very
doctrine of Bellarmine, Tom. 4. de justific. l. 1. c. 19. and other Papists,
saying the Apostle excludes not works done after grace by faith from
justification, but before faith: Which Protestant Divines commonly refute, as
^areus in his Castigations, Ames in his Bellarm. enerv. Chamier, Tom. 3.
paustr. lib. 22. c. 2. Abbots defense of Perkins, p. 502. Rivet. sum contr*
tract. 4. qu. 10. Pemble vind. Fidei, sect. 2. c. 3. sect. 4. c. 1, 2.
alleging the Apostles words concerning Abraham, who had not to glory before
God, nor was justified by works, Romans 4.1, 2, etc. And me thinks Mr. Carters
next words contradict his former, when he says, Our state and condition as
subjects of his Kingdom, depends not upon our keeping the Law but upon free
grace in Christ by faith. But of this by the way. That which he alleges about
the term Gods house, 1 Timothy 3.15. 2 Cor. 6.16. and separate, Act. 13.2. 2 Cor.
6.17. that we cannot understand them without the Old Testament, though it were
true, yet proves no more but this, that in explaining the meaning of words
allusive to things there described, the Old Testament is necessary; but not
that which is to be proved, that in observing the rites of the N. T. we are to
fetch rules and commands by way of Analogy from the ritual commands of the old.

Mr. C. adds, p 100, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, 109, 110, 111,
112. something more about the Texts 1 Cor. 7.14. Romans 11.24. Mar. 10.14. Acts
15.10. Mat. 28.19. which having been so largely handled in the former parts of
this Review, I need only to refer the Reader thither. Yet I add, it is but
said without any proof, that 1 Cor. 7.14. that children are termed holy,
because they come under the word of blessing from God, in as much as that word
was confirmed not only unto Abraham, but also to all believers, Genesis 22.17,
18. That which God blesses he sanctifies, and separateth from that which is
common or unclean. For 1. there is not a word brought to show that ever any
child is in Scripture termed holy by reason of such an indefinite promise to
believing parents. 2. Nor that the scope, analysis, allusion in the Text* leads
to such an exposition. 3. Nor does it follow, that because God blessed and
sanctified the Sabbath day therefore what God blesses he sanctifies: God
blessed Noah and his sons, Genesis 9.1. yet all of them were not sanctified; yea,
many Texts of Scripture apply blessings to unsanctified persons, Psalm. 107.38.
Ierem. 12.1. much less is it true, that who is termed holy or sanctified is
blessed, the unbeliever is in the text sanctified as the children holy, yet not
blessed. 4. That this exposition is far from the Apostles scope and arguing,
is so largely demonstrated in the first part of this Review and elsewhere, that
I judge it surperfluous to refute further these unprooved dictates here.

I deny not that the Jews Romans 11.24. are termed natural branches by birth
according to the Covenant of God with Abraham, the Gentiles the wild Olive by
nature as neglected by God, yet it is not true that ever the Gentiles ingraffed
are made natural branches, since they never descend from Abraham the root by
natural generation, and though it be true they enjoy saving graces which the
believing Jews had, called v. 17. the fatness of the Olive tree, yet it is not
true that the Gentile believers children enjoy the outward privileges the Jews
had by birth, or are any of them ingraffed and partakers of the Olive tree but
the elect and believers, or that they are to be accounted holy by us, till God
has purified their hearts by faith, Acts. 15.9. And as we cannot say certainly
any infant of a believer is inherently holy, so neither can we say they are any
of them holy as separated to God and to be received into Church relation, till
they profess the faith, such promise and purpose of election as Mr. C. imagins
being no where to be found, and if it were it is not sufficient to make them
relatively holy in Church relation, without profession of faith by each person
so accounted, there being no rule whereby we are to baptize any but disciples,
upon their own profession so judged, no not though God had made such a covenant
to each believer as Mr. C. imagins: But we are to baptize persons who profess
the faith, though we know not them to be inherently holy, or in the Covenant
of grace.

Mr. Cs. other reason page 103. Why such children are by the Apostle called
holy, because they are not only within the Covenant of Abraham, but also are
appointed of God to be a subject recipient of the seal of that Covenant* is
another unproved dictate and refuted by the same reasons by which the former is
refelled.

What Mr. C. urges against my sense of holy that is legitimate, 1 Cor. 7.14.
that it had been but affirming the thing, is showed to be false in the first
part of this Review sect. 16. And it is false which he imagins that the Apostle
thus reasoned, that after my exposition except one of the married couple be
believer their children are bastards, or that he ^scribed the sanctification to
the faith of the believer, which and what else he says about the scruple from
Ezra 10.11. and 9.12. is so fully answered in the first part of this Review
sect. 11, etc. to the end of the Book, that me thinks Mr. C. should before he
had printed his Sermons have viewed them, and not thus have printed these stale
objections often answered, without showing the insufficiency of the answers, if
he meant heartily, as one that endeavored to cl^er the truth.

But Mr. C. takes notice of this objection against the basis of his building,
that upon this account not only children of believers, but also nations must
be reputed holy, because the promise is that believers shall be blessings also
unto nations; To this he answers, The case is not the same, for children are
immediately under this word of blessing in the family relation, as the people
of God in the Church are immediately under that blessing, which the Lord
commands out of Sion. But as for nations, they are under it in a remote
capacity by means of what the Saints are in their families and in the Church.
Therefore although such as are of the Church, and the children also of such
families are holy, yet it follows not that therefore the nation should be
holy.

Ref. I reply, the objection in form stands thus; They which come under the
word of blessing from God, in as much as that word was confirmed not only unto
Abraham, but also to all believers, Genesis 22.17, 18. and 12.2, 3. must be
reputed holy. This is the effect of Mr. Cs. words p. ^04. and the main ground
of all his discourse for infant Baptism, I subsume. But nations, yea all
nations come under the word of b^essing from God, in as much as that word was
not only confirmed unto Abraham, but also to all believers, Genesis 22.17, 18.
and 12.2, 3. and if the word families be taken (as Mr. C. seems to take it)
for households, and all households, then the same objection is concerning, all in
households, servants, wives as well as children, they come under the ble^^ing
according to Mr. Cs. exposition; Ergo, according to Mr. Cs. arguing and
exposition, nations, yea all nations, families, households, all in them are holy
and to be baptized, which being absurd his opinion is also absurd. The minor is
in the texts, and Gal. 3.8. as Mr. C. expounds them, Ergo, the conclusion
follows from his own principles. His answer is neither true nor pertinent. Not
true, for children are not immediately under this word of blessing in the
family relation, nor the people of God in the Church (meaning the visible) are
immediately under that blessing, but only believers in the families or Church,
as the Apostle determines, Gal. 3.8, 9. Nor according to Mr* Cs. exposition are
the children more immediately under the word of blessing as confirmed to
Abraham, then the wife, servants, sojourners, neighbors. For the children are
not under the blessing but as the children of believers, and so according to
his own exposition page 37. Gods choice shall be by Families and Nations, so
that he will ordinarily cast the lot of the Saints in Neighbourhoods and places
together, and if so the blessing or choice is as immediately promised to
Nations, neighbourhoods, others in the same house as to children, nor are the
nations in a more remote capacity then the Saints in the families and in the
Church. Nor is the answer pertinent if it were true: For the major proposition,
which is his own, is not limited to them that come under the word of blessing
immediately in his sense, for then he should exclude nations, neighbourhood^,
families, contrary to the text, which mentions the blessing of all kinreds and
nations, and not only the children, and to his own exposition which extends it
to neighbourhoods and places together.

Mr. C. not trusting to this, says; To this I add, that children are in the
power of parents and at their disposing; and so as when they, in their
sanctification, or being made holy, give up themselves to God by faith, and
obedience to his Ordinances, their children are therein vertually given up
also, in as much as a believer in some respect gives up to God together with
himself all in his power. Now this cannot be said of any nation whatsoever.

Answ. But 1. The parents giving up all to God is not that which makes Children
to be holy neither according to truth, for they are made holy by Gods act
whither of Covenant or other act of consecration or separation to himself, not
by man's act of giving up by vow or otherwise to God, yea if the act of man's
giving up all in his power to God, makes children holy, it makes servants,
cattle holy to God, nor according to Mr. C. himself, who ascribes it to Gods
election, and word of blessing 2. If this be the way of making holy, by giving
up all at his disposing to God, then a believer at his first conversion makes
holy to God himself, for he gives himself to God, makes holy to God persons
not yet bego^ten, and so visible Churchmembers according to Mr. B. subjects
recipient of the seal of the Covenant, according to Mr. C. page 103. yea by
this reason a believers horse may be said to be holy to to God, and
baptizable. 3. This addition takes away his former answer. For if the giving up
all to God in his power at his disposing by the believer make them holy,
children are no more immediately holy then servants, wife, etc. all being
together given up to God in one act whether vertually or formally. 4. If a
believers giving up to God together with himself all in his power, and at his
disposing make them holy, then a believing ^^ing and State do make the whole
nation holy who are their subjects and so the objection stands good, that the
whole nation is according to Mr. Cs. conceit to be reputed holy

But Mr. C. says, It will be objected yet further, that the Jews are said to
be holy, even the whole people of the Jews, who now are unbelievers, Romans
11.16. yet have they no right to baptism; and therefore that this holiness of
the children, 1 Cor. 7.14. be it from their interest in the covenant of God
with Abraham, is no argument for infant baptism, because the unbelieving Jews
also are supposed by us to be holy upon the same account, and holiness to be
taken in the same sense in both places.

Answ. This objection is mine in my Exercit. sect. 5. but otherwise then Mr. C.
here sets it down. For 1 it is not there brought as an objection by it self,
but as a reason of my denial of this proposition universally understood, They
who are holy with Covenant holiness may be baptized. 2. I did not say the whole
people of the Jews, who now are unbelievers, but the elect of the Israelites
no^ yet called are holy in respect of the Covenant, and are not yet therefore
to be baptized. Yet neither to the objection as mine, nor as framed by himself,
does Mr. C. give a sufficien^ answer. For he grants the two places 1 Cor. 7.14.
Romans 11.16. are parallel, and in that sense they have been both above alleged
to prove that branch of Gods covenant with Abraham concerning a blessing upon
posterity, in order to the multiplying of believers. And yet it is as true,
that there is a great difference between them. Now this grant is enough to
prove that persons or people may be federally holy, and yet not baptizable,
which is the objection. Nor does the difference which he imagines (if there be
such a difference) in the two places, any thing at all infringe it. For whether
federal holiness in one place be ascribed to a whole people in respect of a
part or to particular persons, the connection between federal holiness and
baptizability, is showed to be null; and the major denied not true universally
understood, and so the objection is confirmed by this grant, not infringed.

Yea whereas Mr. C. pretends the difference to be great between the places,
the very thing be assigns makes no difference. He says, The Apostle says
expressly 1 Cor. 7.14. of such particular persons that they are holy, but of
Romans 11.16. the scope of the Apostle is to set forth the kind or sort of
people, namely Jews, not the particular persons that should be called. But
herein he opposes himself in the words next before, where he thus makes the
Apostle to intend both; Thus we are to understand that of the Apostle Romans 11.
when he says, of the people of the Jews that they are holy, namely, what
properly and peculiarly belongs to a part, even to those of them who either
then were, or afterward should be converted, be ascribes to the whole, and
in respect of that part he calls the whole body of that people holy. Now if
he call a part holy which should be called, he sets forth the particular
persons. And 1 Cor. 7.14. sets out the kind or sort of children as well as the
particular persons, whether after Mr. Cs. opinion, the children of believers,
or after mine, the children of married persons. And that which he argues makes
against him for me. For if that which is ascribed to the whole people belongs
by a synecdoche to a part, even those who are or shall be converted, then what
is said either Gen 12.2, 3. or 22.17, 18. or Romans 11.16, 17, 24. of families,
nations, branches, lump, may be understood synecdochically of a part of
families, nations or people, and those believers as Paul Gal. 3.8, 9.
determines as converts as Mr. C. and so not children of believers, much less
infants necessarily included in the families, nations, branches ingraffed, lump
that is holy, and consequently all Mr. Cs. arguing, made void by his own
concession, which hitherto he has framed from Abraham's Covenant to prove
infant Baptism. And what he argues, That the lump which is termed holy Romans
11.16. and the whole people termed beloved v. 28. is to be understood of the
better part, and of those that were then unborn, and of such a lump as should
have a being successively, and part after part, and so cannot be actually holy
then when the Apostle spoke, it does all exactly agree with my explication of
the ingraffing of the branches in my Apol. sect. 14. in the first part of this
Review sect. 1, 2, etc. And does well serve to answer the arguments for the
ingraffing parent and child into the visible Church christian against the sense
I give for the ingraffing into the invisible Church, by giving of faith
according to election. Nor did I ever say, the Apostles meaning Romans 11.16. was
that th^se particular persons of the Jews who pers^st ^n unbelief, or that the
whole people of the Jews are now in the times of the New Testament holy in any
sense whatever, but grant they are broken off from the holy root, verse. 20. are
cast^away, verse. 15. are enemies, and so unclean and profane, and therefore
not holy, v. 28. yet this meant, but of some, v. 17. a part, v. 25. and all
these things do well accord together, and with the perseverance of Saints
asserted against Arminians, since the people of the Jews are not by me asserted
to be broken off from the invisible Church of elect and true believers in
respect of what particular persons broken off were in their own persons, but in
respect of what the particular persons were in a former age of the same nation
or people.

Mr. C. p 109. imagines that Christ says, of little children is the Kingdom
of God, because of his sained additional promise: but he brings not a word to
prove it, nor does the Text yield any proof that they were believers children;
and I have proved the Kingdom of God is meant of that of glory. Review, par.
2. sect. 18.

And for his conceit, that Christ bid suffer them to come to him because of the
additional promise of Mr. C. it is without proof, and not agreeable to Mr. Cs.
own concei^. For if Christ would intimate, that this is part of the Gospel of
the Kingdom, that believers should be blessings to their children, namely, so
as they should be means of their conversion, he should rather have directed the
Apostles to suffer them to be brought to their parents to be educ^ted, then to
himself to lay hands on them. And Christ's anger against his Disciples argues no
such intimation, nor his saying that of them is the Kingdom of God, proves
their right to Baptism as does the receiving the Holy Ghost, Act. 10.47. For
that showed Cornelius actually a believer, so did not Christ's speech of the
little children, which expressed not their present but future estate, as is
proved, Review, par. 2. sect. 19. Nor is there a word brought by Mr. C. to
prove that Christ's command was given to his Disciples for a perpetual
obligation to the Disciples of Christ, in all ages then to come, to bring
infants to Christ in an external way, and therefore by Baptism. For though it
were recorded after his ascension, yet it follows not it was recorded to learn
this, to have a way of bringing infants to Christ by Baptism, there being
something else to be learned by it, and it is rather a sure proof that Christ
did not teach that by his command, since neither then nor after do we find the
Apostles did baptize an infant; and the phrase of coming to him cannot import
Baptism, since he did not baptize, Joh. 4.1, 2. and if any standing rule were
intended by Christ's command, it should be rather laying on hands and praying
for infants, then baptizing them.

Though it be granted, that to whom Christ is a King he is also a Prophet, yet
it follows not, that infants being such as of whom is Christ's Kingdom, they
are his Disciples as meant Mat. 28.19. much less that they are made Disciples,
when their parents are converted, because they are then in the way of the
Spirits teaching, Christ being a Prophet to other then Disciples meant Mat.
28.19. Nor is there the least hint. Act. 15.10. of infants being Disciples, and
the notion of Disciples by the parents conversion, or by being in the way of
the spirits teaching (which yet is not showed, but fancied by Mr. C.) are mere
devised whimzies refuted by me, Review, par. 2. sect. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
Nor is any sufficient answer given hereby, or by Mr. C. elsewhere, or any
other, or ever will be to the argument as brought by me against infant baptism,
Review, par. 2. sect. 5. and elsewhere.

What Mr. C. says, That more might be said about those words in answer to it,
namely, that in the words Baptizing them, Mat. 28.19. we have by a synecdoche,
a part for the whole (an usual form of speech in the Scripture) for we know the
Apostles commission did extend as well to a setting up of other Ordinances as
of Baptism. Therefore when he says, Go teach all nations baptizing them, it is
as if he had said, Go teach them, and enter them into the practice of the
worship of the Gospel; of which among other things the application of the token
of Abraham's Covenant to infants may be a part, any thing in that place
contained notwithstanding.

Answ. 1. Such a synecdoche in any institution of a rite is no where to be
found as this which Mr. C. dreams of, baptizing them into the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, that is, enter them into the practice of the
worship of the Gospel, not only Baptism, but also breaking of bread, etc. 2.
We know the Apostles commission did extend as well to the setting up of other
Ordinances, viz. breaking of Bread, 1 Cor. 11.23. as of Baptism, but not in the
word baptizing, Mat. 28 19. but in the word teaching them to observe all that I
have commanded you, v. 20. 3. There is this very thing which Mr. C. himself
says against baptizing infants, it is as if he had said, Go teach them, and
enter them into the practice of the worship of the Gospel: For sure Christ did
not bid them teach infants, nor do I think Mr. C. would have them entered into
the practice of the Gospel worship, but only baptized. And so Mr. Cs. answer
is a strengthening of the argument. Enough in answer to Mr. C. being unwilling
to make more exceptions on passages which need correction: why I have said so
much, the reason is given, sect. 77.

SECT. LXXXIII. Interest in the Covenant gave not title to Circumcision, as Mr.
M. in his 4th. conclusion would have it.
IN the Defense of his 4th. and 5th. concl. against my Examen Mr. M. says, he
will contract; and accordingly I shall be brief in my reply. He grants the
order of circumcising infants is repealed, as I answered in examining his 4th.
concl. but would have it added, that by Gods order Baptism succeeds in the room
of it, which I have refuted. Then upon my saying that Circumcision was not a
seal of the spiritual part of the Covenant, he censures this as pure
Anabaptism, leaving out injuriously my limitation, to all that were
circumcised, which if fairly added had cleared me; and perhaps if the so called
Anabaptists had been rightly understood, they had been found as innocent as my
self in this thing; I see enough in Paedobaptists dealing with me, to show how
great likelihood there is that the words of the Anabaptists in Germany were
perverted.

Mr. M. p. 180, 181. excepts against me for saying that Ishmael and Esau had no
part in the Covenant, denies that Ishmael had no part in it, when he himself
grants that they did never partake of the spiritual graces of the Covenant,
which is all one with that which I say, that the Covenant of grace was not made
to them, they had no part in it; For sure they to whom the Covenant of grace is
made, and have part in it, are all partakers of the spiritual graces of the
Covenant, or else God keeps not his promise; and for this I bring Genesis 17.19,
20, 21. Romans 9.6, 7, 8. Gal. 4.28, 29. (though I needed not, having Mr. Ms. own
confession) and therefore it is most false he says, I bring not one shadow of
a proof for what I say.

But Mr. M. thinks to maintain his speech, that Ishmael had part in the
Covenant, in that he was reckoned by circumcision to belong to the Covenant,
and obliged to seek after the spiritual part of it* to have his heart
circumcised, and to believe in the Messiah that was to come of Abraham's seed.

Answ. 1. It is contrary to Genesis 7.19, 20, 21. to say that Ishmael by
Circumcision did belong to the Covenant, it runs upon this palpable mistake,
that every one that was circumcised had thereby the Covenant sealed to him. 2.
Those that were uncircumcised, all the people of the world were obliged to seek
after the spiritual graces of the Covenant, to be holy, to believe; yet this
does not prove they had a part in the Covenant, and therefore this answer of
Mr. M. is frivolous. And so likewise is that which he says in answer to my
words (not rightly set down, my words were not, right to Evangelical promises
or any other benefit) that no benefit of the Covenant was the proper reason (I
added, and adequate) why these or those were circumcised, but only Gods
precept; though Gods command was the cause of the existence of the duty of
Circumcision, yet the Covenant of grace was the motive to it, and these two are
well consistent together. In which 1. he shows not whose motive it was, Gods or
man's. If he mean it was Gods to command it, it is nothing to the purpose to
show right to the Covenant of grace to have been the proper adequate reason of
the persons to be circumcised: if man's motive, it is false, whether we
understand it of ^he circumcised, who were infants, and therefore had no motive
to it, but were passive only, or the circumciser; for in ^brahams circumcising
Ishmael Mr. M. says I have given a very good instance to prove, that some may
receive the outward sign of the Covenant, and a v^sible ^^anding in the Church,
though he who administers the seal might by revelation know the inward grace is
wanting* Were his answer gran^ed, yet it proves not the contrary to my speech,
but confirms it, though this point be one of the hinges on which his first and
main argument turns* For i^ it be true that the adequate reason o^ persons
circumcising was not right to the Evangelical promises or other benefit in the
Covenant, but Gods prec^pt only, then the pillar of Mr. Ms argument f^lls to
the ground, All that are in the covenant are to be sealed, it being only true
thus, All in the Covenant, whom God ha^h commanded (...) sealed are to be
sealed.

What he says after, that I grant what is in controversy, because I grant men
may have a visible membership in the Church though they be not elected or
sanctified, it is alike frivolous, it being never in controversy; but whether
any may be said to be in or under the Covenant of grace, or to have the
Covenant of grace made to them who are non elect, and never sanctified.

That which Mr. M. p. 182. calls a piece of odd Divinity, that Circumcision
should seal righteousness to them who never are circumcised, nor reputed so,
nor capable of being circumcised, nor might lawfully be circumcised, being
understood as I express it of Abraham's personal Circumcision is the Apostles
express Divinity, Romans 4.11, 12. whose scope, say New England Elders in answer
to the 3d. and 4th. position, p. 65. rightly, in that place is not to define a
Sacrament, nor to show what is the proper adequate subject of the Sacrament;
but to prove by the example of Abraham, that a sinner is justified before God
not by works, but by faith, etc. Nor is this any more odd Divinity then Mr. Ms.
who asserts women virtually circumcised in the males.

That which he says, that visible professors have a visible right to the
spiritual part of Circumcision, I conceive false: For though they had a right
to Circumcision or Baptism, which they might receive of men, yet they had no
right at all to forgiveness of sins, justification, adoption, salvation* which
are only from God, and only true believers had right to.

That which he says, p. 182. that Circumcision was given the Jews in reference
to their Church state, not in reference to their civil state, is not true, but
said upon a mistake, as if the Church state and Civil were different in the
Jewish Commonwealth.

That which he confesses, that the formal reason of their being circumcised
was the command of God, is enough to show that interest in the Covenant did not
give right to Circumcision, but the command of God; and therefore without
showing a command for infant Baptism, this is no good argument, they are in the
Covenant therefore to be baptized, which enervates all Mr. Ms. dispute.

But he adds* The Covenant of grace, or their Church state was the motive to
it, and the thing it related to; and this fully answers the objection; for it
was commanded and observed as that which was a privilege and duty belonging to
the Covenant, and they used it as being in Covenant, the objection is wholly
taken off.

To which I reply, 1. The Covenant of grace might be in some sense, and the
Church state of Abraham's house in some respect, that is, to be a sign of it,
might be the end why God appointed Circumcision to Abraham's house; but motive,
that is, impulsive cause, I see not how the Covenant of grace and the Church
state can be termed, there being nothing but his own will, according to the
counsel of which he works all things, Ephesians. 1.11. that can be rightly termed
a motive to him to command it. 2. But be it in the sense I allow it termed
motive, or end, and a duty belonging to the Covenant as a sign of it, and the
persons who used it, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob used it as being in Covenant;
yet neither is it true that all that used it were in the Covenant of grace, nor
was it appointed as a duty to be used by them to all and they only that were
in the Covenant of grace* nor did God by the use of it, seal, signify, assure
or confer an estate in the Covenant of grace to every person whom he appointed
to be circumcised, and therefore no part of the objection is taken off, that
Circumcision was not the seal of the Covenant of grace to all circumcised
persons, but was appointed to persons not under the Covenant of grace, and
denied to persons that were, and consequently Mr. Ms. proposition not true; All
that were in the Covenant were to be sealed.

When Mr. M. said, persons were bound to conform to the manner of
administration, and this manner of administration he made to be temporal
blessings and punishmenst. I took it he meant they should conform to them.

He tells me p. 183. That though I confidently asserted heretofore, that
Ishmael, and Esau and others, were circumcised for some temporal respects, that
Circumcision sealed the temporal or political promises, but yet in saying they
received Circumcision neither in relation to outward things only, nor at all
either as temporal blessings or types, but because God commanded, I do as good
as deny it; since if they were circumcised with respect to nothing but the
command, it sealed nothing, it was no seal at all. To which I reply, I find not
that I asserted any where that Ishmael and Esau were circumcised for some
temporal respects, and though I alleged Cameron, saying, that it sealed
earthly promises, yet I never said it sealed them to Ishmael and Esau: Nor do I
count it any absurdity, to say it sealed nothing to them, or it was no seal at
all to them. And I conceive that Baptism which is no seal of such earthly
promises, nor can be a seal of spiritual and saving grace to every natural
child of a believer (of which he will not assert p. 116. of his Defense there
is a promise made to them) when it is administered to reprobates is no seal of
the Covenant of grace to them, nor any seal at all, and that he must as well as
I do (if he will speak congruously to his own doctrine) say that such persons
are to be baptized by reason of Gods command and no other. Yet I do not say
the command of Circumcision was not in reference to the Covenant of grace, as
Mr. M. intimates: but this I say, though God commanded Circumcision, that he
might signify Christ to come, and Evangelical grace by him, yet neither the
circumciser nor the circumcised did circumcise, or were to be circumcised
because of the persons interest in the Covenant of grace, as the proper and
adequate reason of the du^y of Circumcision, but because of Gods command, and
yet I nothing doubt but that in the use of it, they and others that were
neither circumcisers nor circumcised, as e gr. women were by faith to look on
the Covenant of grace through these administrations, that is to expect Christ
to come and blessing by him, which speeches are very easily consistent with my
own words and Scripture doctrine, though Mr. M. did not understand it.

When Mr. M. alleged that Circumcision could be no seal of Canaan to
Proselites, and I answered that yet the Covenant to Abraham had promises of
temporal blessings, and that some were to be circumcised who had no part in the
Covenant of grace, he tells me, 1. That he was proving that Circumcision was no
seal of the land of Canaan, which I grant, if he mean it to some that were
circumcised, yet if he mean it, to none, it is false. 2. He grants temporal
blessings belong to the Covenant of grace, according to that 1 Timothy 4.8. But
neither this nor any other Text proves, that the promises of a settled abode in
a fruitful land with peace, prosperity, and outward greatness, and dominion
therein, is promised to a Christian believer now, as it was to Abraham and
Israel after the flesh, Genesis 17.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. but the promise of this life is
upon the loss of outward things of a recompense in this life by receiving more,
yet with persecution, Mark. 10.30. which can be understood of no other then
spiritual comforts, which may be termed temporal blessings distinct from the
everlasting life which in the world to come they shall have. 3. It was not his
drift to prove that all that were circumcised had part in the spiritual graces
of the Covenant, but that they had a visible membership and right to be
reputed as belonging to the Church. But this is not that which he was to prove
that they were in the Covenant of grace.

Lastly, when I excepted against his speech [that Ishmael was really taken into
the Covenant of grace, and Esau, till by their Aposta^e they discovenanted
themselves.] 1. That he opposed the Apostle Romans 9.7, 8. Gal 4.28, 29. Genesis
17.19, 20. Heb. 11.9. To this he repl^es not. 2. That by this speech he asserts
falling from grace, this he denies because he meant by their taking into the
Covenant of grace not being under the spiritual grace of the Covenant, but the
outward administration.

But 1. this is but nonsense and delusory. For the outward administration is
not the Covenant of grace, Circumcision is not the Covenant of grace, nor
visible profession, nor indeed could he mean it without trifling and mocking
his reader when he argued, Infants of Believers are in the Covenant of grace,
therefore are to be sealed with Baptism or Circumcision. For infants of
believers make no visible, profession and if his argument were, they were under
the outward administration, that it, to be Circumcised or Baptized; and
therefore they were to be sealed, that is to be Circumcised or Baptized, is
mere trifling and delusory of the reader, who expects from his words, a proof
that Gods promise of righteousness and eternal life by Christ (which is and
nothing else the Covenant of grace) is made to every infant child of a
believer. 2. If this were Mr. Ms. meaning, Ishmael and Esau did not discovenant
themselves, for they did uncircumcise themselves, but showed that they regarded
not the blessing of Isaac.

But says Mr. M. I have no doubt but that all indifferent Readers well enough
understand what I meant, by being taken into the Covenant of grace, even such a
taking in as when the Gentiles were taken in, instead of the Jews who were
broken off, they were under the outward administration, visible professors,
had an external calling, which is Gods act though a common one.

To which I reply, 1. If they were taken into the Covenant of grace as the
ingraffed Gentiles, they were elect and true believers, if Esau and Ishmael
fell from that state of the Covenant of grace Arminian Apostasy is asserted.
2. Neither the outward administration of Circumcision to Ishmael and Esau, nor
their visible profession (whatever it were) was Gods act (which Mr. M. denies
not taking into the Covenant of grace to be) therefore by neither of these can
they with good sense be said to be taken really into the Covenant of grace. 3.
What external call which should be Gods act distinct from the outward
administration and visible profession mentioned, from which Ishmael and Esau
fell, I understand not. 4. What ever external calling it be which he means and
terms Gods act, though a common one, sure I am Mr. M. has not showed nor can
show that it is a real taking into the Covenant of grace, which I said truly,
nor has Mr. M. disproved or gainsaid it, is Gods act, either of election or
promise, or some act executing either of these, and the objection still stands
good, persons were to be circumcised who were in the Covenant of grace,
Ishmael was appointed to be circumcised, though it were declared Gods Covenant
did not belong to him, and therefore the reason of Circumcising persons was not
the Covenant of grace, but only the will and command of God to have it so.

SECT. LXXXIV. The enlargement of our privileges, proves not Infant Baptism as
Mr. M. in his 5th. conclusion, would have it.
MR. Ms. 5th. Conclusion was, The privileges of Believers under this last and
best administration of the Covenant of grace are many ways enlarged, made more
honorable and comfortable then ever they were in the time of the Jews
administration. For examining of which I set down something about privileges,
which Mr. M. grants, and says, what is all this to the purpose? I reply, I told
him it was to uncover the ambiguity of his speeches, in which all the strength
of his conclusion lay.

To what I said, that if he meant his conclusion of privileges of the
substance of the Covenant of grace, it is to be denied: Mr. M. confessed they
were the sameboth to Jews and Gentiles; but in respect of the administration I
granted it, he answers, 1. if this were granted it hurts not him, it is
sufficient if the administration be now more comfortable to Believers and their
children. To which I reply, that this grant enervates the argument to which
this conclusion tends. For if the privileges of the Covenant of grace
belonging to the substance of it be not enlarged, but the same in substance to
Jews and Gentiles, then no privileges of the Covenant of grace are enlarged;
for all the privileges of the Covenant of grace belong to the substance of it,
and to true believers or elect only, the visible membership and initial seal
contended for, were no privileges of the Covenant of grace, nor such as all
believers could claim for their children, they were personal privileges to the
Church of the Jews, and belonging to that administration (as Mr. Ms. phrase is)
or as I would speak to that peculiar national Church state which God vouchsafed
that people, out of special ends and respect to that people, of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came, and consequently by denying those privileges
we deny no privileges of the Covenant of grace to believers for their
children, nor ascribe less grace to them then the Jews had. And if the
administration be now more comfortable to believers and their children, it
being in that Circumcision and the yoke of the Law are taken away, it follows,
it is more comfortable to us, that no such thing as Circumcision was is put on
our children. Mr. M. and Paedobaptists do grossly mistake, as if Circumcision
did belong to Jews and their Children because of their interest in the
Covenant of grace, which neither is nor ever will be proved.

2ly. Says Mr. M. If there be no more honourableness in those privileges,
which belong to the substance of the Covenant, how comes it to pass, that in
your answers to those several texts which I and others bring to prove the
enlargement of privileges under this last administration, you interpret them
of those privileges which belong to the substance of the Covenant, or the
spiritual part of it?

Answ. In those answers I do not so interpret those texts of those privileges
which belong to the substance of the Covenant, or the spiritual part of it as
more honorable then the privileges belonging to the substance of the Covenant
of grace, or spiritual part of it now then to believers before Christ, but say
that the promises of the new Covenant, which is the Covenant of grace, are
better then the promises of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, which was the Covenant
of works.

Thirdly, says Mr M. Seeing that under this last administration these
privileges are communicated not only with more clearness, but in greater
abundance, I wonder you should say they are no more honorable and comfortable
now then they were then, is not abundance of grace more honorable and
comfortable then a little grace?

Answ. It is, but yet not privileges belonging to the substance of the
Covenant of grace. For this clearness and abundance comes not from the
substance of the Covenant of grace, but to use his phrase, from the
administration, in respect of which I granted they are many ways enlarged and
made more honorable.

But then says Mr. M. This will serve our turn well enough; for this was a
privilege belonging to their administration, that their infants were under it
as well as themselves; yield that for ours and the controversy is ended.

Answ. The yiedling that the privileges of believers under the N. T. are
enlarged, more honorable, and more comfortable, in respect of the
administration, will not serve Mr. Ms. turn, except it be yielded of this
particular, that the infants of Christian believers are visible Christian
Churchmembers, and to be entered by Baptism, as well as the Hebrew infants of
and into the Church of Israel by Circumcision, which would indeed end the
controversy if yielded, but was not so by me, who granted privileges of
believers now more enlarged in respect of the administration, because the
preaching of the Gospel, which is that whereby the Covenant of grace is
administered, is enlarged to Gentiles as well as Jews, and more honorable,
because preached by Christ himself, and more comfortable because in plain words
without shadows.

Mr. M. adds. To have nothing in lieu of the administrations then as they were
shadows of the substance, which is Christ, is very right: But to say, it is
our privilege to have nothing in lieu of them as they were external Ordinances
to apply Christ, is to say, it is our privilege to have no Ordinances to apply
Christ to us, and thereby to make us complete in him, which were a most absurd
thing to affirm.

Answ. Those external Ordinances applied Christ to them no otherwise then as
shadows of the substance, which is Christ, nor does Mr. M. in his Sermon, p.
10, 11. express their administrations of the Covenant of grace otherwise then
as figures, signs, types, and sacraments of spiritual things: so that if we
have nothing in lieu of them as they were shadows, but Christ, we have nothing
in lieu of them as external Ordinances to apply Christ to us; nor did they make
us complete in Christ, nor is it absurd to affirm that no external Ordinances
now do.

But says Mr. M. Circumcision was indeed a part of that administration, and
obliged them to the rest of that manner of administration, as Baptism does now
to ours; but did it not also belong to the substance? Answ. No. Was it not a
seal of the righteousness of faith, of Circumcision of heart, etc. Answ.
Abraham's was, not every ones Circumcision. Does not the seal belong to the
thing sealed? the conveyance and seal annexed to it are no part of the
purchased inheritance, but do they not belong to it? Answ. They do, but not as
of the substance of the thing sealed, or the inheritance purchased, or the
Covenant whereby it is promised: but as the sign whereby the futurity of it is
confirmed. Now surely he should use non sense, who should ^erm the sign or seal
the substance of the Covenant or thing promised, being neither essential nor
integral parts of them, but only adjuncts, without which they may be or not be
entirely.

To my saying, That it is so far from being a privilege to our children to have
them baptized, to have Baptism succeed in the stead of Circumcision, that it is
a benefit to want it, God not appointing it; I answer ( says Mr. M.) then
belike our privileges of the Covenant of grace are so far from being enlarged
by enjoying the Sacrament of Baptism, that it had been a privilege to have
wanted Baptism if God had not appointed it; and by as good a reason at least
you might have said, that Circumcision was so far from being a privilegde to
the Jews and their children, that it had been a benefit for them to have wanted
it, if God had not commanded it: Sure that is a strange kind of privilege, of
which I may truly say, that it had been a greater be- to them who have it, to
have wanted it, if the Donor had not commanded it.

Answ. Mr. M. by clipping my words has misrepresented my speech; he has left
out, that Circumcision was a privilege belonging not to the substance of the
Covenant, but to the administration which then was; a privilege to the Jews in
comparison of the heathens, but a burden in comparison of us, which was in
that it signified Christ to come, the obligation of the law, for which reasons
I judged it a great privilege to us and our children, that they have neither
it, nor any other thing in the place and u^e of it, but Christ manifested in
the flesh, because if we had any thing in the use of it, Christ must be
expected to come in the flesh, and Jesus denied to be the Christ, and we
debtors to keep the whole law. And then I determined absolutely, that the want
of infant Baptism is no loss to us and our children; not a loss in respect of
duty, God having not appointed it; nor of privilege, God making no promise of
grace to be confirmed by it to the infants of believers; which last words being
left out by Mr. M. the reason of my words is omitted, and my speech
misrepresented; but thus set down Mr. Ms. exceptions appear but cavils. For he
supposes our privileges of the Covenant of grace are enlarged by enjoying the
Sacrament of Baptism; but I know not any privileges of the Covenant of grace,
but effectual calling, justification, adoption, sanctification, glorification;
and if there be any other termed saving graces, or which accompany salvation,
and to say these are enlarged by enjoying the Sacrament of Baptism, especially
when administered to infants, is as much as to say it confers grace ex opere
operato. And I grant for us to have wanted Baptism had been a privilege, God
not appointing it, nor promising any thing upon the use of it, nor declaring
his acceptance of it, which is the case of infant Baptism. Sure I know none but
would think it a burden to be baptized, or be covered with water, though but
for a moment, were it not God commanded it, and accepted of it as a service to
him. And the like is true of Circumcision, the want of which, being so
painful, was a benefit, but for the command and promise of God signified by
it. Such actions as are no way privileges, but sins, without Gods precept and
promise, it is better to want them then have them, or act them; such is infant
Baptism; and if it be in the place and use of Circumcision, it is a heavy
burden, no benefit now, but a yoke of bondage.

I said Mr. M. was to prove either that Circumcision did belong to the
substance of the Covenant of grace, and he answers, That Circumcision, though a
part of their administration, did yet belong to the substance; not as a part of
it, but as a means of applying it: Which speech how frivolous it is, is showed
before, sect. 25. p. 165, 166. and in this section. Or that the want of
Circumcision, or some Ordinance in the place and use of it, is a loss of
privilege of the Covenant of grace to us and our children.

To this he says, And I have also proved, that though it be a privilege to
have nothing succeed Circumcision, as it bound to that manner of
administration, yet it is a privilege to have somewhat succeed it as a seal of
the Covenant, in as much as a Covenant with a seal is a greater benefit then a
Covenant without a seal.

Answ. 1. If it be a privilege to have nothing succeed Circumcision as it
bound to that manner of administration, then it is a privilege to have nothing
succeed it in its use, which confirms my before speech carped at by M. M. 2.
How vain the talk of Paedobaptists is about Sacraments being seals of the
Covenant of grace, is showed before sect. 31. 3. A Covenant with a seal is a
greater benefit then a Covenant without a seal when there is more assurance and
better estate thereby procured, but if as good assurance and estate be by a
Covenant without a seal, it is no greater benefit to have a seal, then to have
a Covenant without it. 4. There is a seal of the Covenant of grace, which
succeeds Circumcision as the substance the shadow, and that is Christ's
Cirumcision, Col. 2.11. and his bloudshedding, Mat. 26.28. Heb. 9.15. etc.
besides the seal of Gods spirit.

But says Mr. M. the thing I was to prove was that our privileges are
enlarged, not extenuated; which appears, partly, in that we have freedom in
what was burdensome to them in their manner of administration: which he meant
of Circumcision by his alleging Act. 15.10. and thereby it is manifest that it
is false which he said before, that Circumcision did belong to the substance of
the Covenant as a means of applying it. For that speech does imply, that the
Covenant of grace could not be applied without Circumcision, for that which is
of the substance of a thing, what way it is of the substance of it, is
necessary to the being of that of which it is of the substance, otherwise it
were a common accident, not of the substance of it: But without Circumcision
the Covenant of grace might be applied, yea, according to Mr. M. it is and may
be better applied, for otherwise our privileges were not enlarged in being
freed from it.

Partly, says Mr. M. because our Covenant is established upon better promises,
Heb. 8.6. To this I answered, the Covenant which had not so good promises was
the Covenant at Mount Sinai, v. 9. which was not the Covenant of grace (for
then it should have the best promises, there being no better promises then are
in the Covenant of grace, nor could it be broken as that was, nor occasion
finding f^ult as that did;) but it must needs be the Covenant of works as the
Scripture does plainly deliver, Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.10, 12, and 4.24. Heb. 12.18.
etc. and for this I alleged some of Mr. Ms. own words in his Sermon, p. 10.
That the Law was added not as a part of Abraham's Covenant, that in that giving
the Law there was something of the Covenant of works made with Adam in Paradise.

To this Mr. M. returns an answer, bemoaning me as running into a needless and
erroneous digression; that he said indeed in his sermon, that the moral Law was
added 430 years after the Covenant was made with Abraham, not as a part of that
Covenant, but as a Schoolmaster to whip them to Christ; that they finding the
impossibility of keeping the Law, might more earnestly long after Christ,
exhibited in those shadows of rites and sacrifices, etc. But to say that this
Covenant mentioned Heb. 8. was the Covenant of works, is a most erroneous
doctrine; look into the Text, and you shall find that the Covenant which is
there mentioned (which God finds fault with, and calls the first Covenant, in
opposition to this better Covenant) had Ordinances of Divine worship, had a
Sanctuary a Tabernacle, Priests and High Priests, Sacrifices, and other rites
belonging to the administration of it. Sir, was this the Covenant of works? I
hope you will not own it in your next.

Answ. It is, and I do still own it in the 43d. section of this part of my
Review, and do requite Mr. Ms. pity of me with the like bemoaning his
ignorance, and, if I mistake not, the Assemblies error about this in their
Confession of faith, chapter 7. art. 5. I have looked into the Texts, and I find
Mr. M. mistaken in the meaning of Gal. 3.24. perhaps following the unnecessary
supplement in our last English translation, where is added [ to bring us] which
the Text has not, but only the law was our boy-leader unto Christ, that is
until Christ, as v. 23, 25. show, and the meaning is plain, that the Apostle
compares the Law to a teacher, or guide, or overseeer of a child in his
minority to which the Israelites were confined, not in respect of its severity
as Mr. M. makes it, to whip them to Christ, but as a teacher directing them
though imperfectly by figures and types until Christ, and faith in him were
revealed. In like manner he mistakes when he says, God finds fault with the
first Covenant, the words being For complaining of them, Heb. 8 8. nor
complaining or finding fault with it: and when it is translated v. 7. if the
first Covenant had been faultless, it is not intimated as if it were faulty,
but they were faulty, as verse. 8. shows, and the Covenant is termed non (...)
not from the fault of it, but of them, which occasioned complaints of them, and
therefore it were better translated without complaint or plaintless, then
faultless. As for what Mr. M. alleges from Heb. 9.1. it no more proves that
the Covenant at Mount Sinai was the Covenant of Gospel grace, and not of works,
then because the tree of life was a symbol, type, or shadow of Christ, or our
blessed estate in him, therefore the Covenant made with Adam in Paradise before
his fall, was not a Covenant of works, but of Gospel grace; or Noah's Ark
typified Baptism, therefore the Covenant with Noah, Genesis 9. was a Covenant of
Evangelical grace. The Covenant of grace and of works are denominated from the
promise and condition, not from Gods intent in some things commanded. When our
Lord Christ, Mar. 10.19. told the young man of entering into life, he propounded
the Covenant of works, yet he had another end therein, to wit, to try and
discover him. Though the commands about the Sacrifices, High Priest, etc. were
to typyfie Christ, yet the Law as it was propounded Covenant wise is manifestly
declared to be the Covenant of works, Romans 10.5. Gal. 3.10, 12. yea, Mr. Ms.
own words prove it. For 1. where he cites the addition of the Law, Gal. 3.17.
the Law is not restrained to the moral Law, but contains all the commands of
the Sacrifices, etc. as well as the moral Law, which were added because of
transgressions, not only to restrain them, but also for the expiating of some
offenses against the Law, so as to obtain a partial temporary forgiveness by
them, as is manifest from Levit. 4. etc. Now the whole Law as delivered 430
years after the Covenant with Abraham, is contradistinct to the Covenant
confirmed before in Christ, or the promises; therefore as it was a Covenant,
Exodus 19.5, 8 it was a Covenant of works. 2. If it were not a part of the
Covenant with Abraham, it was not the Covenant of grace, for such was Abraham's
Covenant; but according to Mr. M. the Law was no part of that Covenant, Ergo.
3. That which was a Schoolmaster to whip, was not the Covenant of grace, for
the Covenant of grace does not terrify or whip, but such is the Law according
to Mr. M. Ergo. 4. That which was impossible to be kept, was not the Covenant
of grace, for that is never broken, but such was the Law or Covenant at Mount
Sinai according to Mr. M. Ergo. 5. If in the giving the Law there was something
of the Covenant of works made with Adam in paradise, then it was a Covenant of
works, this he must grant, unless he will have a mixed Covenant, partly of grace
and partly of works, which he opposes in his answer to me about Abraham's
Covenant; But in the giving that Law according to Mr. M there was something of
the Covenant of works made with Adam in Paradise, Ergo. 6. That which God
finds fault with is not the Covenant of grace, but acc^rding to Mr. M. God
finds fault with it, Ergo. 7. That which is termed the first Covenant in
opposition to this Covenant is not the Covenant of grace; But such according to
Mr. M. is that at Mount Sinai, Ergo. 8. The Covenant of grace is the better
Covenant, But such was not that at Mount Sinai, according to Mr. M. Ergo. And
truly I find so many Protestant Divines terming the Covenant at Mount Sinai
the Covenant of works, Perkins on Gal. 4.24. Pemble of Justification sect. 4.
c. ^. Cotton in his way of Congregational Churches cleared p. 46, 47. however
in some respect he will have it to have been a Covenant of grace, yet to the
carnal seed ^aith, it was a Covenant of works, and proves it out of Paul; And
adds, And so have the chiefest German Divines as well as Piscator and Polanus,
taken the Covenant on mount Sinai to be a Covenant of works. See Piscator
Ezekiel. 16. observat. ult. in v. 60. and 62. and Polanus ibidem. and Synt. Th. l.
6 c. 33. Pisc. observe. e v. 6. Heb. 8. Dicson paraph. Gal 4.21, 22, 23, 24.
Hebr 8.6, 9. Becman. Th Exercit. 5. p. 67 De saedere operum aut legis legimus,
Exodus 19.5. Deuteronomy. 5.2. 1 Reg. 8.21. Jer. 31.32. Heb 8.8, 9, 10. To whom I add my
Antagonists Mr. Geree vindic. vindic. p. 9. Mr. Baill^e in his Anabaptism, page
141. and might do many more if it were necessary. This is enough to show my
doctrine to have been unjustly termed most erroneous by Mr. M. being Paul's,
Mr. Ms. and others named, and therefore rightly owned by me.

To my words Exam. p. 10;. The next Scripture you thus express, The glory of
theirs had no glory in respect of ours, 2 Cor. 3.10. But this passage is
plainly meant of the Covenant at Mount Sinai, which is called the letter, v. 6
The ministration of death written and engraven in stones so glorious, that the
children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory
of his countenance, which glory was to be done away, v. 7. The ministration of
condemnation, v 9. which I suppose you do not understand of the Covenant of
grace, and therefore it is impertinently alleged, Mr. M answers thus Sir, I
wonder at your confidence in it: the Reader will easily discern that the whole
scope of that Chapter clearly holds forth the pre-eminence of the Ministry of
the Gospel above the Ministry of Moses his veiled Ceremonies: belike then with
you, Moses Ceremonies were the Covenant of works.

Answ. I wonder that a man of such note should wonder at that of which the
reason is given, and should take upon him to defend his own Sermon, and yet
pass by my reason against his allegation without rehearsal or answer to it. In
form it stands thus. That which was the letter which kills, written in Tables
of stone opposite to the New Testament, and the spirit which gives life, the
ministration of death, of condemnation by Moses, was the Law or Covenant of
works, for it is only the Covenant of works, not that of grace how darkly
soever delivered, of which these things can be said. But such was the Law or
Covenant at Mount Sinai, Ergo. It Is true, it was the Apostles scope to hold
forth the pre-eminence of the Ministry of the Gospel, but not barely above the
Ministry of Moses veiled Ceremonies, for the Apostle prefers it before the
Ministry of the Letter written and engraven in stone, v. 3, 7. which was the
moral Law, but above the Ministry of the whole Law, which comprehending all the
commands Mosaical promulged Covenant-wise, and not singly Moses ceremonies, are
by me termed the Covenant of works, and of this I am still confident.

Mr. M. skips over his impertinent allegation of Gal. 4.1, etc. and grants 1
Pet. 2.9. the spiritual part to belong only to the invisible Church, of which
he denies not the whole v. to be meant, but only tells me, the whole nation of
the Jews who had the honor to be termed holy, the children of God, Deuteronomy. 14.1.
to have the adoption, Romans 9.4. were not inwardly holy, or effectually called;
which I readily grant, nor need I prove that Romans 9.4. Deuteronomy. 14.1. were not
privileges which the visible Church of the Jews enjoyed, having not denied
it, but do expressly grant of Romans 9.4. that it speaks of peculiar privileges
of the Jews, and prove thence the Jews had some privileges above us, and that
the want of some privileges they had may be recompensed by some privileges
we have, and thence gathered that is a feeble reason, from the Jewish
privilege of infant Circumcision, to prove infant Baptism; yet nothing that
Mr. M brings, shows 1 Pet. 2.9. to be meant of any other then the elect, nor
that believers privileges of the Covenant of grace are enlarged.

What he says, that the comfortable manner of administration, and baptism are
enlarged beyond Circumcision, to females, and all nations, is granted; but this
groves not privileges of the Covenant of grace to be enlarged to each believer
now, although there are more believers now And for Gal 3.28. the words [ there
is neither male nor female] are not added to show Baptism to be administered to
whom Circumcision was not, for then [ neither bond nor free] should be added
for the same reason, which had not been right, for bondmen were circumcised
formerly, as well as then baptized; But to show a general equality of all
believers in Christ, and therefore that passage is meant only of true
believers.

Having showed the impertinency of Mr. Ms. allegations for his 5th. conclusion,
I answered the argument drawn thence for infant Baptism thus. 1. It is no good
argument, God gave such a privilege to the Jews, Ergo we must have such a
privilege too, without Gods institution, but arrogant presumption to claim it.
2. That God gave many peculiar privileges to the Jews which we have not, as
that Abraham was the father of the Faithful, Mary the Mother of CHRIST; no
family out of which CHRIST came but Abraham's, no nation that God has promised
after many hundred years rejection to re-ingraff besides the Jews.

This Mr. M. endeavored to prevent in his Sermon, by saying, These were
personal privileges belonging to some particular persons, not the whole Church
of the Jews, nor from the Covenant, but that to have infants belong to his
Church, and to have the initial seal are, and if that we have it not for ours,
the grace of God is straightened as to our posterity, which he counts absurd,

Hereto many things are replied by me. 1. That this was never a privilege to
believers, that their children should be in the Covenant of grace, God never
made such a promise to every true believer, that he would be God to every
believer and his natural seed, nor commanded that we should repute the infants
of believers to be in the Covenant of grace. This has been largely handled in
my review of Mr. Ms. second conclusion. 2. That the pretended privilege of a
Believers infant childrens visible Churchmembership and title to the initial
seal was not from the Covenant of Gospel grace, but from the peculiar dealing
of God toward the nation of the Hebrews, out of peculiar reasons concerning
that Churchstate which that people were to have until Christ came, which is
largely discussed in answer to Mr. Baxters second main argument Section 50,
etc. of this part of the Review. 3. That even then when it was a privilege to
the Hebrew people, yet title to the initial seal was not common to all
Believers children, not to those under eight days old, nor to females, nor to
Proselites of the gate, as v. g. to Cornelius and his children. 4. That a
privilege there is to the Jews, even to the Nation, and that arising from
Gods Covenant of Gospel grace, that their posterity shall after some hundred
years rejection be re-ingraffed, and yet this not to any Gentile Believer,
Prince, Preacher, or Martyr concerning their posterity, and therefore it is no
absurdity to say, that in some respect the privileges of the Covenant of
grace, even of the substance of it, were more large to some of the Hebrew
believers, then to the Gentiles in respect of posterity. 5. That the personal
privileges of Abraham, Mary, etc. were more truly pertinent to the Covenant
of grace, though not common to all Jews, then infants visible Chvrchmembership
and title to the initial seal. 6. That privileges are mere arbitrary things,
and that no reason why they are given to some and not to others, is needful to
be assigned besides the donors will. 7. That there is no more reason to say God
grace is less now, because infants are not visible Churchmembers and baptized;
then it is to say it is less because Christ is not descended from them, they
are not Fathers of the faithful. 8 That there were many privileges which the
Jews had which we have not, as those Romans 3.1. and 9.4. to have a Temple,
High Priest on earth, etc. 9. That the want of these is abundantly recompensed
by Christ's coming without any particular thing of the same kind in the stead
of them, and therefore the want of Churchmembership and initial seal, may in
like manner be said to be recompensed by his coming. 10. That the privilege
the children of Levi had, that their posterity should inherit the Priesthood,
be maintained by the offerings of the people, be exempt from many burdens, is
not now to Ministers children, nor any thing instead of it, and yet there is as
much reason from the Covenant of Levi why Ministers children should have this
privilege, or somewhat instead of it as from the Covenant of Abraham, that our
children should have Baptism in stead of Circumcision. 11. That young children
were to eat the Passover, and yet children of three or four years old are not
admitted to the Lords Supper; and consequently after the rate of Mr. Ms.
reasoning, the grace of God is straightened to us in respect of our posterity. 12.
That the grace of God is not denied by not baptizing infants, for that would
infer that it did give grace. 13. That by denying infants visible
Churchmembership and Baptism, we do not put them out of the Covenant of grace,
or Church of God. 14. That Baptism is a duty rather then a priviviledge 15.
That the use of it is rather for us to seal to God by it, that is, to testify
the repentance and faith of the baptized, then for God to us, as assuring by it
the promise of Gospel grace. 16. That by baptizing an infant the parent is not
assured that the child is in the Covonant of grace. 17. That through the want
of infants visible Churchmembership, such as the Jews children had, we have no
loss of privilege, but rather benefit, it being a state of imperfection. 18.
That the want of the initial seal which the Jews had is a benefit it having a
burden annexed to it. 19. That children have no less of the grace of God by
their want of Christian visible Churmembership and Baptism then the Jews
infants had. 20. That parents have as much cause of comfort concerning their
children without these as they have by them.

Mr M. p. 191. speaks thus; I think indeed it would take with no sober
Christian thus to argue: The Jews had it, therefore we must have it. But Sir
to argue thus, God gave such a privilege to the whole Church of the Jews,
that their infants should be reputed to belong to his Church, and have the
initial seal. Therefore if he have not granted to Christians that their
infants shall also be reputed to belong to his Church, and partake of the
initial seal; then his grace to Believers under the N. T. is straightened as to
their posterity. This argument appears so clear to me, that I must confess my
self one of those dull ones, who know not how to deny the consequence.

Answ. Mr. M. has ill recited my frame of the argument, which he rejects, by
leaving out the chief words [without an institution]. Yet his new frame mends
not the matter, but indeed is in effect all one with that which he says would
take with no sober Christian For [the Jewes] and [the whole Church of the
Jewes] are the same, and [had it] and [must have it] expressed but the same
which Mr. M. says in more words: Nor does he put in any thing of Gods will or
institution to have it so, and therefore there is no more reason why his new
frame should take with any sober Christian, then the former. Yet I shall view
it as it is And 1. I deny the antecedent, God did not give the privilege to
the whole Church of the Jews, that their infants should have the initial seal,
meaning it of all. 2. I deny the consequence, if by [grace] he mean Gospel
grace; though infants of Christians be not reputed to belong to the visible
Church, nor are baptized, yet the grace of the Gospel, that is, remission of
sin, sanctification, adoption, glorification (which is that the Scripture makes
Gospel grace) is not straightened to Christians as to their posterity. And the
reasons of this denial are so plain to me, that I see no clearness in it, but
should take my self dull if I should not discern its weakness. For the infant
visible churchmembership being by reason of the peculiar national churchstate
of the Jews, and circumcision of infants by reason of that which was proper to
the Hebrew people, or policy, into which proselytes were admitted, not from the
Covenant of grace common to all believers in all ages, it is easy to perceive
that notwithstanding the altering of these (which God has done,) the grace of
God is as much now to our children as to theirs.

And here I think meet to answer Mr. Geree's argument as he frames it, vindic.
Paedobapt. page 38. I do grant the sequel of the major, If children of
Christian parents be excluded the Covenant, then are the privileges of the N.
T. more restrained: But that we exclude them from the Covenant of grace is
false, we only deny the fictitious Covenant of Paedobaptists, that God has
promised to be the God of believers and their seed: nor is it any harsh
divinity, or derogatory from the incarnation of Christ, to say, the Jews
converted, whose infants had the birth privilege of membership in the Jewish
Church by natural generation, have not the privilege of membership in the
Christian, which is by spiritual regeneration. Nor does the term [ natural
branches, Romans 11.21, 24.] ever agree to Gentiles ingrafted, but that they are
still branches of the wild Olive by nature, nor any of them in the true Olive
without faith or election.

Nor does Mr. Geree show how he that denies baptism to infants denies the grace
and mercy of God to us, if the grace of God be not tied to the Sacraments. Nor
does he show that the privileges of believers young children of 4.5, or 6
years old are not as much straightened if they who were admitted to the Passover
are not admitted to the Lords Supper. For though the reception into the
Covenant and Church were sufficiently done in Baptism; yet they should not have
the privilege of growth and nutrition, which the Jews young children had by
the Passover, if Paedobaptists doctrine of the Passover, and Lords Supper be
right. But I return to ^r M.

Mr. M. tells me, That though I say my instances of Abraham's, the Virgin Mary's
and Jews privileges not being now to us, do press his conclusion; yet that I
speak no word to vindicate them from his answer, and therefore he gathers that
by this time ^ see that now some personal privileges* which a few of the Jews
had, may be denied us, yet it makes nothing against his argument; but if the
common privileges which every one of them had were denied us, our privileges
were straightened.

Answ. Mr. M. does not rightly say I spoke not a word to vindicate my instances
from his answer. For besides all or most of those twenty things either in my
Exercit. sect. 3. or in my Examen, par. 3. sect. 3, 4, 10, 11, 12. and
elsewhere, which do enervate his answer, I did directly reply, that neither was
his privilege of the initial seal to infants any other then personal, not a
branch of the Covenant of grace common to all in Covenant, for which by virtue
of the Covenant they might rely upon God; and for this I alleged the faithful
before Abraham, Melchizedek and Lot in his time, Job and Cornelius after his
time; and therefore if the want of privileges personal, as he terms them, does
not show a straitning of Gods grace to us now, neither does the want of infant
visible Churchmembership and Baptism now show it.

That of Melchizedek, Lot, and Job, Mr. M. says, has been often answered; but
he has no where showed, that they were not in the Covenant of grace, or that
by virtue of the Covenant they and their infants had right to the initial seal.
And as for Cornelius, I never intended to prove, that he was a member of the
Church of the Jews, nor that the privileges and churchmembership of these
proselytes of the gate were as honorable as those of the proselytes of the
covenant, but that though he were in the Covenant of grace, yet he had not the
privilege of churchmembership in the Church of the Jews, nor circumcision; and
therefore these privileges, whatever they were, were not branches of the
Covenant of grace common to all in Covenant for which by virtue of the Covenant
they might rely on God, as Mr. M. asserted.

To what I said, to be Father of the faithful, Mother of Christ, the
privileges Romans 9.4. and 3.2. do as much belong to the Covenant of grace as
Circumcision, Mr. M. answers nothing. Upon the words by me used, that the
phrases Romans 11.2^, 24. do seem to me to import, that the Jews had this
privilege to have their children reckoned in the outward administration, as
branches of the Olive by their birth, which the Gentiles have not, (which
speech I have altered in the first part of this Review, p. 64, 93.) Mr. M.
asks, But if we Gentiles have it not, then are not we, I pray you, straightned
in that particular? Answ. Yea. And I demand further, when we are graffed in and
so naturalized with them, do we not partake of all the fatness or privileges
of the Olive with them? what Scripture ever denied it? Answ. That we by
ingraffing are made natural branches, is denied* it is granted, we are
partakers of all the fatness and privileges of the Olive, to wit, spiritual
graces, but not of the privileges which the natural branches had by birth.

Mr. M. adds. I demand yet further, did the many ten thousands of Jews who were
baptized in the Apostles days, by their coming under this best administration
of the Covenant, and thereby kept their former growing in the Olive with
advantage; did they thereby deprive their children of that which you say was
their natural privilege? if you think so, produce your evidence to prove it;
if they were not, then it seems the Jews who believed in Christ, and kept their
station, had a greater privilege for their children then the Gentiles, who
grow to together with them, have for their children.

Answ. The natural privilege which I say the Jews had, was, that their
children were in the visible Church Jewish, and their males to be circumcised;
this by their Baptism they were deprived of, it being then no privilege, after
Christ exhibited in the flesh and preached, to be in the visible Church Jewish
opposite to the Christian, and to be circumcised. Nor is it true, that the
converted baptized Jews were in the Olive before they believed in Christ, or
kept their station in the visible Church Jewish, but were cast out, or that
they should have had greater privileges of the Covenant for their children, if
they had continued in the visible Church Jewish, and been to be circumcised,
then the Gentiles, whose children were not visible Christian visible
churchmembers, nor to be baptized, as is abundantly proved by me from Scripture
and otherwise in the foreparts of this Review.

To Mr. Ms. speech, as if we expunged infants out of the Covenant, it was
answered, that it was a calumny, whereto he replies, But do not you avouch,
that the infants of the Jews had this peculiar privilege and birthright to be
under the administration of the Covenant, which ours have not? Answ. I still
avouch it in the sense the phrase seems to be taken for being Jewish visible
churchmembers, and to be circumcised; but what he adds, which you know is the
only thing controverted betwixt us, is manifestly false, it being never so
much as questioned by me. He adds, May not I boldly say, that once the infants
of all covenanters had this privilege? Answ. No. May I not also exact of you
to show when and where this was taken away? Answ. It has been often showed,
infant-male circumcision in the Synod, Act. 15.24, 28. infants churchmembership
Matthew. 28.19. were taken away, of which there is enough said before, sect. 50,
etc. where infant visible churchmembership is proved to be altered, and yet
infants not expunged out of the Covenant of the Gospel, as Mr. M. suggests. On
the contrary, Mr. Ms. conceit as if the denying them visible churchmembership
and baptism were putting them out of the Covenant of grace, I intimated to come
too near the Popish opinion, of the necessity of infants baptism to their
salvation, which I thought worth answering, since it is all one in my conceit to
say, that by denying baptism to them we put them out of the Covenant, and to
say we damn them, it being certain none are saved but those who are in the
Covenant of grace.

To that which he says of our doctrine bringing discomfort to parents, in that
we leave their infants in the state of infidels, account them actually to
belong to the visible Kingdom of the Devil deny them the benefit of the
promise I will be the God of thee and thy seed, acknowledge no more promise for
them, then for the children of Turks I answer, these are mere calumnies
sufficiently discovered to be so, Exam. par. 2. sect. 10. Apolog. sect. 14.

SECT. LXXXV. Mr. Cobbers dictates, Just. Vindic. par. 2. chapter 1. touching
childrens baptismal right, are examined and refelled.
MR. Cobbet Just. vindic. par. 2. sect. 1. sets down this as his position, That
the initiatory seal follows the covenant; but he proves it not: And whereas to
the objection against it, that from Adams time to Abraham's, there was no
initiatory seal to those who were in Covenant; nor in Abraham's time to
Melchizedek, Lot, Job; he answers, That such extraordinary cases and times are
very impertinently urged by some to inf^ringe the force of ordinary rules and
principles: I say, his answer is insuff^cient. For 1. this only is an answer
where it is proved that there is such an ordinary rule and principle from which
these cases swerve: But no such rule or principle can be showed of an
initiatory seal belonging to persons in Covenant, from which this should be
counted an exception; therefore this is not an extraordinary case. 2. Besides,
extraordinary cases make a just exception from an ordinary rule for some, by
reason of some peculiar accident not happening to others: But to all in
Covenant from Adam to Abraham, there is not, nor can be showed any such
peculiar accident which happened not to others, which was the reason of
omitting an initiatory seal by those in Covenant: Ergo, it was not because of
extraordinary cases that it was omitted, but because there was no such rule. 3.
Extraordinary cases are few and rare, but the omission of an initiatory seal
was constant, and universal by those in Covenant until Abraham's time, therefore
it was not an extraordinary case. 4. Extraordinary cases and times are but for
a little while: But this omission was for above 2000. years, which me thinks
Mr. C. should not so dote as to count an extraordinary time; sure the time
wherein Circumcision was in force was shorter, and it was in that time often
omitted, and therefore we may by Mr. Cs. dictates as well say, the initiatory
seal was extraordinary, and the ordinary rule was, that those in Covenant were
not to have an initiatory seal, specially considering that even in Abraham's
time, and after, it was omitted by Melehizdek, Lot, Job. Nor is it of any
weight to say that there was not a visible political Church then; For. 1. no
doubt in their families were visible political Churches as well as in Abraham's.
2. The initiatory seal, as they call it, might and was to be to persons
without a visible political Church as to the Eunuch Acts. 8. to Moses children
in Midian etc Nor is it of any weight to say these Churches were not to
continue: For 1. that is not so certain as to be taken for granted. 2. Abraham's
posterity were not to continue still the Church of God, though they were to
continue longer then the posterity of J^b and Lot. 3. But if this were a
sufficient reason, why they should not have an initiatory seal solemnly
instituted for them, because they were not sucessively to continue, then should
not the Churches which were not successively to continue (of which doubtless
there were many from whom the Candlestick was quickly removed) have had baptism
instituted for them. 4. By Mr. Cs. reasoning, his rule the initiatory seal
follows the covenant must be thus limited, in ordinary times and cases when
and where there is a visible political Church which is successively to
continue. Which if it were granted him, yet it will never serve his turn to
prove this universal proposition, from which Paedobaptists infer infant
Baptism, All that are in the covenant are to have the initiatory seal or to be
baptized. But neither is it true in ordinary times, where there is a visible
political Church successively to continue. For it is not true of those in
Covenant in Abraham's house, neither the females, nor males of seven days old
only were to have the initiatory seal, though in Covenant. To that which is
said, that the females had not a superfluous fore^skin, besides what has been
said before to the contrary, I say 1. this however infringeth Mr. Cs. rule,
that in ordinary times in visible political Churches successively to continue,
the seal initiatory follows the covenant, for it does not so in the female
Hebrews. 2. If Gods will had been as Mr. C. would have it, he could have
appointed an initiatory seal common to females with males. But what says M. C.
to the instance of the males of 7. days only to infringe his rule? I find
nothing except this be an answer, in that case of the females as in some other,
that law of circumcision had something peculiar in it, albeit it had other
things in common with that of Baptism, which I take to be a sufficient proof
against him, that the rule of Circumcision is not a rule to us about Baptism;
and that his proposition is not true, that in ordinary times and cases,
respecting the political visible Church and its administrations, such little
ones as are of parents in such visible church state, they have external right
unto the enjoined initiatory visible seal, of which they are outwardly capable,
and ought not to be denied the use and benefit of it.

There is also an objection against the principle forementioned, All that are
in covenant are to have the initial seal, or as Mr. C. speaks, the initiatory
seal follows the Covenant, that if the connection be between seal and
Covenant, it is as well besween the after seal as the initial, and so they may
as well plead for infants coming to the Lords Supper, as in Cyprians time, and
as the young ones of the Jews did partake of the Passover. To this Mr. C.
says, Male infants were not to appear at the Passover, if so, then they must
appear at the Feast of Tabernacles and must carry boughs, from Deuteronomy. 16.^^,
17. compared with Levit. 23.34, 35, 38, 39, 40. that though persons have a
covenant right in general, yet their jus in re is to be suspended and not
elicited in case of incapacity, or of extreme coldness of the country, or
sickness etc.

Answ. 1. If infants were not to appear at the Passover, yet young children
not to be admitted to the Lords Supper were, nor does the text tie them all to
carry boughs who were to appear. 2. The objection holds as much concerning the
young ones at Jerusalem, who were to eat the Passover, and by Mr. Cs. reasons
such young ones should be at the Lords Supper, as having Covenant interest and
therefore jus ad rem, nor is there any such incapacity or danger to them in
eating the Lords Supper to suspend their jus in re, as is to be baptized in
Greenland, or in extreme weakness and sickness; and therefore ^y Mr. Cs.
reasons they ought not to be denied the Lords Supper. 3. If infants
Covenant-right to the Lords Supper be su^pended because of their defect of
understanding to examine themselves, their Covenant-right to Baptism is as
justly susp^nded til they repent and believe, which are as much and more
required to Baptism as self examination to the Lords Supper. And if it be true
then Mr. Cs. position is not right, that infants ought not to be denied the use
and benefit of Baptism. 4. If it were in Cyprians time a corruption to give
infants the Lords supper, so it was to baptize them, being on the same reason
of no greater an^iquity. But let us view what he says for the clearer handling
of his Thesis.

Sect. 2. He says, that mixed commands of God having some part circumstantial
and vanishing, some part substantial and abiding, the later is binding to us
since Christ's time, albeit the former be not; and he instanceth in a 7th. day
Sabbath: But neither he nor any other have yet proved any such substantial part
abiding in the command of Circumcision, and how little the instance given i^ to
his purpose, is showed before,. 77, 80, 81.

That which Mr. C. says sect. 3. is granted, that consequential commandments
grounded on Scripture are Scripture commandments, but that any command o^ a
positive rite in the old Testament is a command to us about a positive right of
the new, or that in mere positive worship that should not be excluded which is
not expressed, is not granted; to the contrary somewhat is said in the 2d part
of this Review,. 2, 3, 5. and elsewhere. I have often said prove infant Baptism
by good consequence, and I shall yield.

That federal ordinances, such as are the seals, are as well privileges as
precepts, which Mr. C. sect. 4. asserts, when they are rightly admininistred,
is granted; but it is denied that the Passover, Baptism, the Lords Supper, are
federal ordinances or seals of the Covenant of grace in Mr. Cs. sense, who p.
^31. makes Circumcision in the nature of it to be a seal of the righteousness
of faith; and in like manner those other, which he calls federal ordinances,
seals of the promise of the Covenant of grace, of the righteousness of faith in
their nature. There ^s not a word Acts 7.2* 8. by which it may appear that
circumcision of the child was reckoned as the Fathers privilege, nor their own
circumcision as their privilege, but only of Abr^ham that God g^ve him the
Covenant of Circumcision, whereby he was assured of a son by Sarah, and so he
b^gate Isaac and circumcised him the 8th. day, which privilege was peculiar to
Abraham, and to none other I know, excep^ Zachary John Baptists father be said
^o have the same privilege, nor is Rom 3.1, 2, 3, 4. any whit to M Cs purpose,
to prove that circumcision is reckoned as the Fathers privilege. For 1. it is
manifest that Romans 3.1. Circumcision is to be understood metonymically, as v.
30. for the circumcised, since it is not sold there was much profit by
Circumcision but of Circumcision, as before, what advantage of the Jew? nor was
the privilege v ^. the committing the oracles of God to them, the privilege
of Circumcision in the abstract or by circumcision as the means by which it
was, but the privilege of that people who were circumcised. 2. If it were
granted that the privilege were by Circumcision, yet that it was the Fathers
pri^iledge by reason of the child's Circumcision rather then his own, is a vain
fancy. Nor does Acts 2.38, 39. yield any more to his purpose, but is most
g^osly abused by Mr. C. as is showed before. 21, 23 Nor are the passages which
he alleges p. 132. out of my Examen, dissonant to any passages before or any
after, except those words of my Examen p. 10^. which I alter in the first; part
of this Review, p. 64, 93. And to his many questions from my words. I answer,
that ^e has not proved the Covenant of grace, wherein God promises to be a
God to them and theirs, to b^long to every Jew, but only to Abraham and his
seed, that is, so far as it is Evangeliacl only to his spiritual seed whether
of Jews or Gentile, and therefore I deny it was a privilege which every Jew
had, to be a God to them and theirs; and yet grant that Deuteronomy. 29.14. with ^0 6.
was a privilege, and so I yield to have been what God promised Ezekiel 36. from
the 17 to the end, and Deuteronomy. 14.2. and that sundry infants of the Jews b^se
born were in the Covenant of saving grace and Church Priviledges, and that it
was a privilege to them, and that the promises of the Covenant of grace are
privileges, and the same now to believers and as large and honorable as then,
and that the promises to their children mentioned Deuteronomy. 30.6. were of the
substance of the Covenant of grace, in respect of the thing promised, but not
in respect of the persons to whom, for God does not promise to all his elect or
true believers, that which he promised then in that case to the Israelites for
their seed, and I yield that even base born children may be in the Covenant of
saving grace, and yet these promises are not made to Church children, (as Mr.
C. speaks) ^s such, but only to the elect. Nevertheless I grant the same
promises now to be made to believers, which were then, to wit, rigtheousness
and life eternal by faith yea that they are larger now, no intensively in
respect of the thing promised, as if a greater degree of righteousness and
eternal life, were promised now then was then, but extensively in respect of
the people to whom the Gentiles now being cal^ed, and that mo^e amply th^n the
Jews, nor do I or any thing I say exclu^e believers children out of the
Covenant. But I still say, the Covenant of grace was no made then universally
to a Believer and his natural seed nor now, but only to the elect of them. Yet
this is not an ex^lusion of any in particular from the Covenant of grace, nor
an inclusion, but only a suspension of any determination of either, who are
elect, and who not being only known to God. And therefore to Mr. Cs. question
why are belie^ers children then excluded the Covenant? which injuriously
insinuates and I did exclude them, I say, let him answer it that does so. And
th^ugh I grant that our privileges now are enlarged, in respect of the
administration of the Covenant, in that the Gospel is preached to more nations
and more clearly, and confirmed by the blood of Christ etc then before ^hrists
coming (which ^s my meani^g in that speech) yet it neith^r follows tha^ I
count that administration of the Covenant initiatory seal (which is Mr Cs ^erms
not mine) as such to their children was no privilege to there must be such a
like privilege and not stra^^ned, at least not wholly excluded as that of a
like, though Mr. C^ say not the same, but a like administration of the
initiatory Covenant-seal, to in-churched believers children now, as Mr. C. in
his gibberish speaks. And though I say we have nothing in lieu of Circumcision,
but Christ come in the flesh; yet I do not say, nor need I, that Baptism is no
privilege to believers now: but I deny it to be a privilege in lieu of
Circumcision, and say that as Mr. C. grants it a privilege to believers, that
now they have not that manner of initiation by circumcision, so it is a
privilege to them that they have no manner of initiation in lieu of it. What
he says he has showed before from Ez. 37.25, 26, 27. is examined before.

Sect. 5. Mr. C. says, Baptism is a seal of the Covenant, no bare badge of
Christianity as some have said, albeit the more judicious of our opposites
yield this, that the Covenant of grace is said properly to be sealed in
Baptism, and that Baptism since Christ's incarnation is the appointed seal of
God to such as enter into covenant with him.

Answ. It is true that I said Exam p. 149. the Covenant of grace is sealed
properly in Baptism, but Mr. C. might have taken notice, that 1. I used not
this phrase as mine, but as Mr. Ms. 2. That I did yield this but three lines
before with this caution, Baptism seals the love of God in some sense properly.
3. That not long after I say, that in exactness of speech it seals no grace
properly, taking it for propriety of speech, but improperly, because
metaphorically, as sealing is taken for assuring. 4. I say as properly, notes
propriety of right, or title, or possession, in opposition to another, or that
which is alien, it seals as much the second as the first grace. And indeed this
is my meaning, that though in propriety of speech Baptism may not be said to be
the seal of the Covenant of grace properly, since it is but a metaphor or term
translated from another thing, and so shows not what the thing is, but what in
some respect it is like to: yet it may be thus termed the seal of the Covenant
of grace properly, that is, as the seal of a deed assutes the thing conveyed in
it to him that has propriety in it, so Baptism in that thereby we put on
Christ, does signify to the true Believer that he has union and communion
with him, and that he has thereby a propriety of right to righteousness and
life by Christ, according to the Covenant of grace. But this does no whit
contradict what I have disputed before sect. 31. against Mr. Ms. and others
doctrine, about Sacraments being seals of the Covenant of grace. Nor did I use
the words, that Baptism since Christ's incarnation is the appointed seal of God
to such as enter into Covenant with him, Exam. p. 83. as mine own expression,
but as Mr. Ms. though I granted the thing meant by it. Yet had I so said of my
self, it had not been for Mr. Cs. turn, who will have it a seal of Gods
Covenant to us, whereas those words as I yield them, rather import it to be our
seal whereby we enter into Covenant with God, and engage to him, which is the
most genuine use of Baptism, and in that respect rightly termed a badge of
Christianity. But Mr. C. would prove it a seal of the Covenant in another
sense, thus.

And it appears so, says he, 1. in that it agrees in the essentials with
circumcision as an initiatory seal, Col. 2 11, 12. which speech is ambiguous,
and yet in no sense, I conceive, true. It is doubtful whether he mean that to
be the initiatory seal is the essentials of Circumcision, and of Baptism, but
this sense is false: For to be a seal is not essential either to the one or the
other, the circumcision of the Sichemites was circumcision, though it were no
seal to them of the Covenant of Abraham; and Simon Magus his baptism was
baptism, though it were no seal to him of the Covenant of grace, much less is
it of the essence of either to be initiatory, for if there were or might be
another initiatory seal (as doubtless there might be if God had so appointed
it) yet circumcision and baptism had not been circumcision and baptism, now
what may be or not be without the ceasing of the thing to be is but an accident
to it, not of the essence of it. Besides, to be the initiatory seal of the
Covenant of grace, does more truly agree to the spirit of God, then to either
of them. Or whether he mean, that they agree in those things which are the
essentials of each, but that is more palpably false, for it is essential to
Circumcision that the foreskin be cut off, but that is not essential to
Baptism, there may be Baptism without it. Nor is there a word Col. 2.12. that
either expresses this thing or yields any ground for proof of it, as is showed
before by me here. 81.

As vain is that which follows, whence baptized Gentiles are said to be of the
circumcision, Phil. 3. and Jews said to be baptized, 1 Cor. 12. For neither are
Gentiles, Philip. 3.3. termed the circumcision, because they were baptized, nor
the Jews said to be baptized, 1 Cor. 12.13. because they were circumcised, or
because of the agreement of these in the essentials. But the converted
Gentiles, not all that were baptized; but only those, who were true believers
are termed the Circumcision in opposition to the Judaizing Teachers termed
before v. 2. the concision by a figure of speech, termed Eutelism, or slighting
them in that in which they gloried; and they are termed the Circumcision,
because they were truly circumcised before God in heart, and were his people.
And the Jews 1 Cor. 12.13. are said to be baptized no otherwise then the
Gentiles who believed, who were not circumcised in the flesh, and therefore
could not be termed baptized because circumcised; but Christian believers,
whether Jews or Greeks, bond or free, are all said to be baptized, and to be
made to drink, because they were baptized with water, and did partake of the
Lords Supper, as 1 Cor. 10.17.

Mr. C. adds more of these toys. Hence first instituted for a seal to the
circumcised Jews; to show it was in the essentials of sealing Abraham's covenant
to them, but the same with circumcision in a manner; only as that sealed it to
them visibly in Christ, as to come, this did it in like sort in reference to
Christ as come; that was the seal of the righteousness of Abraham's faith, or
that whereon his faith acted to righteousness of justification, Romans 4.11. even
the promise of grace in Christ, Romans 10.6, 7. with Deuteronomy. 30.14. Wherein 1. he
dictates, without any pretense of proof, that Baptism was first instituted to
the Jews to show that which he says; nor is there the least intimation thereof
in Scripture. 2. He seems to me to unsay by his limitation [ in a manner] what
he said before, it was the same in the essentials. For that which is the same
in the essentials is altogether the same, and not in a manner. 3. It is false
that baptism was the same in the essentials of sealing Abraham's covenant to the
Jews with circumcision: For it was as much in the essentials of sealing
Abraham's Covenant to the Jews (if I may use Mr. Cs. gibberish) that
Circumcision sealed the promise of the land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8, 9, 10, etc.
as that it sealed Christ to come; but surely Baptism never sealed the promise
of the land of Canaan. 4 That which I find of the seal of the righteousness of
faith, Romans 4.11. is meant of Abraham's personal Circumcision, and of no other,
and therefore is inep^ly applied to prove sameness of sealing of others
Circumcision and Baptism. 5. I conceive it somewhat inconsiderately said, that
Circumcision was the seal of the righteousness of Abraham's faith, which would
imp^y, that it assured that Abraham faith was righteous, wherea^ the meaning
is, that it assured that Abraham had righteousness by faith before he was
circumcised, as v. 10. he had asserted. 6. The other explication is worse, for
it i^timates as if the Apostle meant that the righ^eou^ness of faith ascribed
to Abraham is to termed, as that whereon his faith a^ted to righteousness of
justification, even the promise of grace in Christ, whereas the meaning is not
that it sealed the righteousness he was to obtain by acting faith in a promise,
but that it was a seal of the righteousness of faith which he had many years
before he was circumcised.

Mr. C. goes on in the same v^in of dictating thus. Hence when Christ is called
the minister of circumcision, it is thus explained by the end of the sign
administered, ^cil. to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers, Rom* 15.8.
Act. 7.8. Genesis 17.^1. Which speech seems to intimate, as if Christ were termed
the minister of circumcision, as if he did minister Circumcision to that end,
to confirm the promises: But that is too absurd for such a man to vent, since he
ministr^d ^ircumcision to none; and the meaning is plain, that he was the
minister of circumcision, that is of the circumcised jews among who^ ^he
preached and lived, as Peter is said Gal. 2.8. to have had the Apostlesh^ of
the circumcision, that is of the circum^ised Jews: And in this sense ^eza,
Willet, Diodati the new Annot. Dicson, Piscator, etc. expound it. Now this
being promised, it is ea^^e to perc^ive how i^per^inently this ^ext, which
mentions not at all Baptism, nor any use of Circumcision at all, but only the
end of Christ's ministry among the circumcised is alleged, to prove that
Baptism ag^ees in the essentials with circumcision as an initiatory seal The
Texts, Act. 7.8. Gen 17.1^. a^eas little t^ the purpose, there b^ing no mention
of Baptism, and they only proving what is not denied, that Circumcision was
the token of Abraham's ^ovenant As little is that which follows, Hence the
promise premised and then Baptism annexed as the seal, Act. 2.38. For neither
is it proved, that the promise there is the same with Abraham's Covenant, and
how pi^^ifully Mr. C. mistakes the meaning of it is showed before, sect. 22,
23. nor a word about Baptism as a seal annex^d to the p^omise but an
exhortation to repent and be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for remission
of sins and ^ssurance of the gift of the Holy Ghost, which are annexed to
repentance as much as to baptism

What he adds, Hence that washing annexed to the word, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. But
that the word there is the word of promise, much less of Abraham's Covenant Genesis
17, or that it is mentioned as sealed by Baptism, or tha^ therein it agrees
with Circumcision, is not proved. The word is the Gospel preached by which men
are made believers, and then baptized, and so purified, as Act. 15.9. Tit. 3.5.
Act. 20.32. and 26.18. Job. 3.15. and 17.17. etc. Nor is it any more pertinent
which follows.

2. Says he, It^s a baptizing in the name or covenant-fellowship of God the
Father, Son, and Spirit: he having exalted his word above all his name, Psalm.
138.2. Wherein 1. he seems to expound baptizing, Matthew. 28.19. into the name of
the Father, Son, and Spirit, thus, into the Covenant-fellowship; which is
somewhat strange, there being neither there, nor elsewhere (where the like
phrase is used) any mention of Covenant, or Covenant fellowship; and his
arguing, God has exalted his word above all his name, Psalm. 138.2. Ergo,
baptizing is in the name and Covenant-fellowship of God the Father, Son, and
Spirit, is a baculo ad angulum. 2. But were his exposition allowed, yet what
this is to prove that Baptism is a seal of the Covenant, Genesis 17. or any other
Covenant, I am yet to divine. Is baptizing all one with sealing? is
Covenant-fellowship all one with the Covenant?

3. Says he, It Is a seal of the remission of sins, and therefore of the
promise tendering the same, hence joined, Act. 2.38, 39. Act. 22. But neither
is the promise there joined as a thing sealed by Baptism, but as a motive to
the duties of Repentance and Baptism; nor is the remission of sins mentioned as
sealed by Baptism, but as a consequent obtained by Repentance and Baptism as
conditions pre-required thereto; nor is a seal of remission of sins all one
with a seal of the Covenant.

4. Says he, The nature of it shows the same, it being a Gospel Sacrament,
and that is a visible seal, and the seal is to the Covenant; hence called by
the name, Act. 7.8. 1 Cor. ^1 25.

Answ. 1. The term Sacrament, as it is applied to the rites of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, is no Scripture term, nor any other answerable to it in that use;
it is a term, as I said rightly in my Plea for Antipaedobaptists, sect. ^.
invented by the Latin Fathers meaning for that use. Mr Craggs reply in his
pamphlet, termed The arraignment and conviction of Anaba^tism, that it is used
in the twelve tables, in Tully pro Milone, shows he had a mind to cavil rather
then to answer fairly; nor is the book throughout any other then a fardle of
mistakings in Logic, and meaning of Scripture, and of cavils against my words,
mixed with much Poetical lightness, and scoffing, to which there is no need I
should return any more then the Archangels words, The Lord rebuke thee. 2. Nor
is there any common nature of ^acraments that I know of delivered or inti^ated
in Scripture; either that of the Schoolmen out of Austin that they are visible
signs of invisible grace; or of the Protestants who are term Calvinists, that
they are seals of the Covenant of grace: And therefore Mr. C should first prove
that to be of the nature of a Gospel Sacrament, as the term is used, before he
inferred so much as he does from it. 3 A seal it is true, is to a Covenant
sometimes, and sometimes it is to a decree, writ, letter, record of a thing
done, and so it is taken Romans 4.11. where Abraham, Circumcision is not said to
be a seal of the Covenant wherein something further was promised, but of the
righteousness of faith which he had before attained. 4. Act. 7.8. the Covenant
of grace is not called by the name of a Gospel Sacrament, but the Covenant made
with Abraham, Genesis 17. is only termed the covenant of circumcision, because it
was signified by it, which was no Gospel, but a Law rite. The Cup in the Lords
Supper, 1 Cor. 11.25. is termed the New Testament in Christ's blood, wherein
there seems to be an hypallage and inversion by the words as they are in Matthew.
chapter 26.28. Mar. 14 24. and by considering that of the bread he spoke thus, this
is my body, and therefore the words of the cup seem to be most fitly thus
placed and expounded, this cup, that is the wine in it, is my blood, that is
signifies my blood, which is the blood of the New Testament, that is by which
the New Testament is dedicated as the old was by the blood of calves and goats,
Heb. 9.18, 19, 20. Now herein is the notion rather of a Testament then of a
Covenant, and what is said is said of the cup only in the Lords Supper, not of
Baptism: Nor is it named the Covenant, but the blood of the New Testament, or
the New Testament in Christ's blood; nor is the term seal there used, and
therefore there is not a word to prove Baptism to be in its nature a seal of
the Covenant of grace, in this or any other of the Texts Mr. C. alleges.

I pass over that which he says, secondly Baptism is an initiatory seal, as
agreeing with him in the position, that Baptism is that which is to be first
before the Lords Supper, though his phrases be misliked. I agree with him also,
that Baptism being once administered, needs never be renewed, if done according
to Christ's institution. Yet what I said, Exam. par. 2. sect. 4. seems to me to
stand good, notwithstanding any thing here said by Mr. C. nor do I think it fit
to question whether it be the only initiatory seal.

The 6th. Section contains nothing but dictates without proof, and what is said
by way of proof is answered either sect. 38. etc. in the animadversions on the
3d. chapter of the first part of Mr. Cs. book, or in answer to Mr. Carter, sect.
80. In which it is showed, that there is no reference made Genesis 17. to a Church
Covenant distinct from the Covenant of grace, nor any command given Genesis 17.9,
10. to a Gentile believer and his seed, nor any general law about an initiatory
seal never repealed, as Mr. C. and others fain. And for his speech he uses,
that the Hebrew Church albeit qua such a political Church and national, etc.
differ from congregational Churches; yet qua visibilis Ecclesia politica and
ordinaria* so it was essentially the same with ours; it seems to intimate, that
the Church of the Hebrews, though as such a political Church it was national,
yet not as a visible Church political and ordinary, as if it were any otherwise
a visible political ordinary Church then as such a Church: And when he says,
as a Church visible political ordinary it was essentially the same with ours,
he can mean it no otherwise then of the same numerical essence; for as visible
and political the essence is determined to hic and nunc, an universal generical
or specifical Church is not visible and political. But that is false, since if
the persons be not the same, they cannot have the same numerical essence: Nor
can he mean it, that it is essentially the same with ours as visible in the
same form of government, for then he must make ours Pontificial; nor in the
same title to Churchmembership, for then he must make ours national: nor can he
avoid it if he will maintain this plea, that the Jewish Church was essentially
the same with ours, and as their infants were circumcised as children of
Churchmembers, in a Church visible, political, ordinary, which was national, so
ours upon the same reason are to be baptized, but that he must set up a
national Church by natural generation, nor can they of N. E justify their way
of excluding such children from the Lords Supper for ignorance, if they may for
scandal. The old objection, which Mr. C. falsely terms cavil touching covenant
females, is not yet answered, nor ever will be, it will still infringe this
universal proposition, All that are in Covenant with reference to Church
covenant are to have the initiatory seal for a time, and so will also that of
Jobs family, which why it should not be counted a visible political ordinary
Church, as well as Abraham's house in his time I see not, and if none are to be
baptized but such as are in an ordinary visible political Church to abide, how
can they of N. E. baptize the infants of such Churchmembers, as whether in N.
E. or old do not abide, but are quickly dissolved as we see by experience? And
if None but those who are in the covenant of grace in reference to Church
covenant are to be baptized, but though believers because in Rome or India they
are not a formed matter of a political visible Church but they are as materia
informis, they are quoad homines actually without, and not within any political
visible Church, how was the Eunuch baptized Acts 8? And if the covenant of
grace nakedly considered gives a person which is actually in it, a remote
right to the initiatory seal, but it does not give an immediate right thereto*
for so the covenant of grace as invested with Church covenant only gives this
proximate right to that seal God being the God of order, will have that his
Church seal to be attained in a way of order; as of old strangers might not be
circumcised, but with some submission to that Church order explicitly or
implicitly, and so now, and the order be as Mr. C in the 5th. section
determines, to be observed of communion in breaking bread after they were
baptized, how do those of N. E. admit to brea^ing of bread, those who who only
as born in a Parish were baptized in infancy, without another baptism? That
either Matthew. 28.19, 20. or any where else the orderly and ordinary
dispensation of the seal is committed to the visible Church. is more then I
find; nor do I know it necessary to right order that believers must be of a
particular visible Church before they be baptized. If Catechumini in covenant
and visible Church estate might be hindered from Baptism for trial for a time,
much more should infants of whom we have no knowledge concerning their future
or present estate, be in prudence put off from Baptism till there be some trial
of them, if their right were, as Mr. C. does, though falsely imagine.

Sect. 7. Mr. C. speaks thus, And because in this particular some stress of the
main case is put, 1. I shall endeavor yet fu^ther to confi^m it, that covenan^
interest carries a main stroke in point of application of that seal, to
persons interested therein, and not incapable thereof in any bodily respect.

Answ. This proposition being that in which some stress, or as I conceive, the
whole stress of the main case is put, should have been delivered more clearly,
and confirmed more fully, but as now it is, it is delivered ambiguously, and so
is fitter to delude a Reader then to instruct him. That seal which was last
mentioned was Baptism, but the proofs following show that he meant it of
Circumcision, and as if there were the same reason of Circumcision and of
Baptism (which neither he nor any Paedobaptist ever proved) what is said of
Circumcision is by him meant of Baptism, and so the Reader merely mocked. The
application of Baptism or Circumcision may either refer to Gods appl^ing it by
way of command, or man's by way of administration, and in this I think Mr. Cs.
speeches are delusory, sometimes meant of Gods application by way of command,
and sometimes of the administrators act in circumcising or baptizing. The
phrase of carrying the main stroke is likewise ambiguous, and so delusory, it
being uncertain whether it carry the main stroke with God as his motive to
appoint it, or with the administratour as his rule and warrant to do it. And
when he terms it the main stroke, it had been requisite he should tell whether
there be not some other thing which carries a stroke if not the main, yet so
great, as that without it the application of the seal is not warrantable, as
profession of faith by the person to whom it is to be applied. He might have
understood by my Examen, which he had to answer, that I took it a great fault
in Mr. M. that he did not more distinctly tell what he meant by the Covenant,
being in covenant, which he speaks of infants of believers. And sure if Mr. C.
had meant to deal rightly, as one that sought truth, and to show my error, he
should have cleared what Covenant he meant inward or outward, the Covenant of
Gospel grace purely delivered, or the mixed Covenant made with Abraham Genesis 17.
what the Church covenant is, how the Covenant of grace is invested with it,
when a Church is a political visible body, how a Church covenant is the form of
it, who and what persons and how they are interested in it, whether by Gods
promise, their own faith or profession or another, or by the Churches
admission. All which, or at least many of them, are requisite to be distinctly
declared, that a reader may clearly understand his meaning, and so examine his
proof. And whether the exception of incapacity in any bodily respect, be meant
only because of the females circumcision, or thereby infants are excepted from
Baptism, who have not the use of their tongues to profess the faith of Christ,
and are not well able to brook that dipping or plunging (which for all Mr. Cs.
scriblings, is and will be found the only way of baptizing appointed by
Christ) is uncertain. This were a sufficient reason for me to answer no further
to this proposition, but to wait till his Bill be mended Yet I shall examine
his proofs of this, which should be his meaning, if he spoke to his purpose;
That the interest which a person though an infant has to the Covenant of
grace, in that he is a believers child by virtue of the promise of God to a
believer and his seed, when that believer is a member of a visible political
Church by Church covenant explicit or implicit, is a sufficient warrant to that
visible political Church to admit, and to the Elder to baptize that infant
without any other revelation of God, or profession of the infant. Let Us now see
what Mr. C. brings for proof of this.

First, says he, then it is the groundwork given to the general Law about an
initiatory Covenant duty, scil. application of some enjoined initiatory seal,
and therefore must be of like force in the particular branches and ways of such
initiatory sealing, as circumcision and baptizing.

Answ. Such a general Law is a mere fiction, and what is meant by the
groundwork of it is uncertain. Genesis 17.9, 10. is no other Law but about
circumcision, the word rendered [therefore] may be otherwise translated, if it
were the only reading yet the sense might be this, because I make this
Covenant thou shall therefore circumcise thy males to keep it in remembrance,
or to assure thee and thy posterity that I will perform it. But that there is
any such intimation as if the persons circumcised were circumcised as and for
their interest in that Covenant is a mere dream often refuted by me, much more
is it a dotage to assert, that according to a persons interest in that Covenant
or a part of it, as Mr. C. conceives, so they have right to Baptism in the
Christian church.

Secondly, says Mr. C. the Covenant in such sort invested with Church
covenant, now it is the form of a political visible Church body; giving
therefore, both a Church-being as I may say, as natural forms do a natural
being, and withal the privilege of a member of such a church-body, suitable
to its memberly estate, as if this of the Church initiatory seal, even to the
least member thereof, although they are not yet so perfect in all actual energy
of complete members, and so neither in all actual privileges of such complete
members. I suppose what ever others deny this way, yet our opposites do not
deny, that Church Covenant explicit or implicit is the form of a visible
political Church as such, so that till that be, they are not so incorporated
as to be fit for Church dispensations, or acts of peculiar Church power over
each other, more then over others, over whom they can have no power, unless
they had given explicit or implicit consent thereto: as reason will evince.

Answ. This reason as I conceive goes upon these suppositions, which Mr. C.
conceives will not be denied. 1. That there is a Church Covenant over and
besides Gods covenant of Gospel grace, and man's believing and professing of
faith in him through Jesus Christ, whereby the members of a visible political
Church do engage themselves to walk together in Christian communion, and to
submit to their rulers, and to each other in the Lord. Now such a Church
covenant, though I confess it may be according to prudence at some times and in
some cases useful to keep persons, who otherwise would be unsettled, in a
fixed estate of communion, yet I find not any example of such a Church covenant
in the old or new Testament, and in some cases it may ensnare men's consciences
more then should be. 2. That the Covenant of grace, whether Gods promise to us
or ours to God invested with Church covenant, that is, as I conceive Mr. Cs.
meaning to be, together with it, is the form of a visible political Church,
which gives it the being of such a Church, as such, so that till that be they
are not so incorporated as to be fit for Church dispensations, or Church power.
In which I conceive are many mistakes. 1. That the Sacraments are seals, or
church dispensations are committed to the Church, which are not committed to
the Church, which consists of men and women, but to the guides and overseers
of it. 2. That Church power, or as Mr. Cotton in his treatise of the keys of
the Church, the power of the keys is committed or given to the Church; in
which are mistakes that either censures Ecclesiastical, or as the Schoolmen and
Canonists term it, the power of ordination and jurisdiction Ecclesiastical are
meant by the keys, Matthew. ^6.19. or that they were given to Peter as
representing the Church: the Scripture does no where commit Church
dispensations or power to the Church, but to the guides, and overseers and
rulers of the Church for the Church 3. That till a company of believers be a
visible poli^ical Church, they are not fit for church dispensations or
censures: which I conceive not true, there being examples in Scripture of their
breaking bread together, Acts 2. who were not such a political visible Church
of fixed members under fixed officers united by Church covenant, as Mr. C.
describes. Nor were Christ and his Apostles such a Church when first they did
break bread. Nor did Christ appoint Baptism Matthew. 28.19. to be only in and
with such a Church, nor do the exampls Acts 2. or 8. or 10 or 16 or 18.
intimate any such condition, but rather the contrary. 4. That the covenant of
grace with a church covenant fore mentioned, give the being of such a visible
Church political. But the Covenant of grace of it self does not give any actual
being, it is a promise of something future, and therefore puts nothing in
actual being extra causas, but assures it shall be by some cause in act, which
in this thing is the calling of God, from which the Church and each member have
their being as from the efficient, from faith in the heart as the form of the
invisible Church and each member, from profession of faith as the form of the
visible Church and each member, as Ames. Med. Th. lib. 1. cap. 32. Sect. 7.
that which makes it political is the union under officers and laws, without a
Church covenant it is a political visible Church, if there be but at present
an union or conjunction in the same profession of Christian faith under
officers and laws of a number of Christians they are a Church visible
political, though they should be dissolved the next hour, and though they enter
into no covenant of Church Fellowship or subjection for the future, and
therefore church covenant is neither of the form of such a true Church, nor (as
Mr. Weld in answer to Mr. Rathbard) of a pure Church, but it is a good means in
prudence to conserve a Church so constituted, that they may not divide and
scatter from each other, but may continue in communion. 5. That by this
incorporating they have peculiar Church power over each other, and without tht
Church covenant they can have no power. But neither do I conceive this true.
For the power which christians have is to reprove, admonish, censure, shun
society, choose officers, reject false teachers, etc. this power they have by
the laws of Christ, without a church covenant. 6. That Church dispensations and
acts of peculiar Church power are limited to those particular persons who join
with us by Church covenant. But this I conceive not right nor agreeable to such
Scriptures as these, 1 Cor. 3.22. and 10.17. and 12.13.

3. It is supposed by Mr. C. that the Covenant with Church covenant gives the
privilege of a member of such a church body suitable to its memberly estate,
as is this of the Church initiatory seal. But in this sure Mr. C. is quite out
and besides their own practice, who do not give the initiatory seal after they
are members by church covenant, but baptize them or suppose them baptized in
infancy, and then join them us members by church covenant; now if church
covenant did give the privilege of the initiatory seal, then they should first
enter into church covenant, and then have the initiatory seal or be baptized.

4. It is supposed by Mr. C. that there are such little churchmembers by such a
covenant as are to have the privilege of the initiatory seal though they be
not complete members, so as to have the actual privilege of the after seal,
and other church power. But sure the Scripture acknowledges in the Christian
church no members, but what partake of the Lords Supper as well as baptism (as
is manifest from 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor. 12.13.) and have church power as others
of their sex and rank.

Now all these suppositions though they were granted (except the last) would
not prove the thing Mr. C. aims at, and that which he makes the main reason
from whence he would infer the conclusion, namely, the Covenant with Church
covenant gives being and privilege of the initiatory seal makes against him,
infants making no such Church covenant, nor according to their own discipline
does their parents Church covenant serve instead of the child's, since before the
child can be admitted to communion of breaking of bread, and other power of a
member, and be taken for a member, he must himself enter into church covenant.

Thirdly, says Mr. C even in doubtful cases, where the extent of the command
is questionable, yet interest in the Covenant casts the scoals. As for
instance, in strangers which proved religious, albeit not of their family
servants, and so under the Law, Genesis 17.12, 13. they might be circumcised if
they desired other Church ordinances, etc. yet were they else free, unless in
such a case of their own desire that way, Exodus 12. end. Hence Cornelius a
godly Gentile, living near the Jews yet not circumcised, Acts. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
compared with chap 11 3, 14, 15, 18. yea but if the command bound them, why
were they circumcised? suppose Exodus 12. gave some liberty to the Church guides
that way, for such strangers as more usually dwelt amongst them; yet such as 1
Kings 8.41, 42, 43. which came from far, in a mere transient way, for some
temporary religious worship at the Temple, as that proselyted Eunuch Acts 8.27.
those were surely circumcised, else how admitted to Temple worship, Since that
was counted an abomination, for any other so much as to come there, Acts 21.28.
and if circumcised at any time by any of the godly Church guides consent, what
gave them right to it? not the commandment, Genesis 17.12, 13, 14. no nor that
Exodus 12. What was that to an Eunuchs case and others which never sojourned
with them for any space? were they then unlawfully circumcised? No verily, no
whisper of that in Scripture; God allowed of that passage in Solomon's prayer,
touching the strangers Temple service, 1 Kin. 8. and 9. explained. It was then
their external interest in Gods Covenant, which gave rise to that application
of the seal, and not the commandment; contrary to what some say, that not the
Covenant, but the commandment of God only, was the ground of Circumcision.

Answ. That which I said in my Exercit. p. 4. Hence I gather, first, that the
right to Evangelical promises, was not the adequate reason of circumcising
these or those, but Gods prceept as is expressed Genesis 17.23. Genesis 21.4.
Secondly, that those terms are not convertible [federate and to be signed] and
in my Examen, p. 38. that nothing but Gods will manifest in his institution can
be a warrant about Circumcision, p. 97. that the Jews received Circumcision as
appointed them from God, under this formal reason, and no other, I have showed
before to have been acknowledged by Mr. M. in his Defense; p. 92. when he said,
The command is the cause of the existence of the duty: and p. 182. The formal
reason of their being circumcised was the command of God. Nor is it at all
infringed by this reasoning of Mr. C. Those that were not bound without their
desire to eat the Passover, and so not to be circumcised, yet if they would
eat the Passover they were bound by an express command to be circumcised,
Exodus 12.48, 49. whether their sojourning was constant, or for a time only,
which likely was the case of the Eunuch, Act. 8 27. who it is probable was
circumcised, because there is no mention of the baptizing any uncircumcised
till Cornelius, though there be no certainty whether the Eunuch were a Jew by
birth, or a proselyte of the Gentiles, or whether he formerly had his constant
abode among the Jews, either in Palaestina, or elsewhere, or whether then he
did sojourn among the Jews then in Aethiopia. But if he were a mere proselyte
of the gate, yet he might come to the Temple into the Court of the Gentiles to
worship, as all acknowledge. Dr. Lightfoot of the Temple service, chapter 1. Mr.
Mede Diatr. on Act. 17.4. etc. And therefore there is no proof from hence, that
a person was circumcised by reason of the Covenant, and not of the command:
Yea, though Cornelius were in the Covenant of grace, and had external Covenant
interest, in that he was known to worship the true God, yet was he not by
reason thereof bound by God, or taken by the Jews as one that was bound to be
circumcised, or ever blamed for want of it; which shows that neither was the
Covenant interest indeed, nor taken by the Jews for the warrant or rule, or
reason of circumcising, but the command of God.

Fourthly ( says Mr. C.) it appears from the nature of an initiatory seal of
the Covenant, which must be as large as the Covenant, and so reach all the
parties comprehended actually by virtue of Covenant, according as such children
are, as before declared: especially, since it is the seal of Gods people and
visible Church as before showed, given first for the Church, in giving of
Pastors and Teachers only to the Church, which alone can administer the seals
in ordinary dispensations, Matthew. 28. end, and giving them withal to the
Church, as from her to be dispensed by her Officers, to such as desire the
same.

Answ. In stead of proofs here is a heap of dictates, 1. That Baptism is the
initiatory seal of the Covenant in its nature. 2. That it must be as large as
the Covenant. 3. That Pastors and Teachers given only to the Church can alone
administer the seals in ordinary dispensations, Matthew. 28.19, 20. 4. That the
seals are given to the Church, as from her to be dispensed by her Officers, to
such as desire the same. None of which will be yielded by me, without better
proof then I yet meet with. Sure Matthew. 28.19, 10. yields no proof for any of
them. It proves Baptism was to be administered by the Apostles, not every seal
by Church Officers.

He goes on, Now God people are known, either by actual profession and
confession of their own, as adults are; or by Gods promise and by parents
avouching God as theirs in Covenant and their childrens, Genesis 17.9, 10. thou
shall do thus, and thus, and thy seed also; to which he submits afterward,
and so his also with him and after him.

Answ. That Gods people are known by Gods promise, and by parents avouching God
as theirs in Covenant, and their childrens, is another dictate, which Mr. C.
brings not a show of proof for out of the New Testament; nor does that which he
brings from Genesis 17.9, 10. prove it concerning the infants of the Jewish
Church. For though there be a command to Abraham and his posterity to
circumcise, and this is termed keeping Gods Covenant, yet there is not a word
of parents profession, or Gods promise as making known who are Gods people, no
not in the Jewish Church, in which there were many to whom God made no promise,
nor parents avouched for them, who were known as Gods people by virtue of Gods
taking the whole nation for his Church, even when the Kings and people were
Idolaters. But if it were true that it were as Mr. C. would, this proves
nothing concerning the people of God in the Christian Church, in which none are
known to be Gods people, but by their own confession of says.

But Mr. C. adds, Besides the main in the initiatory seal to be firstly and
properly attended, as it is a covenant and Church seal is covenant and Church
interest. Hence called by the name of covenant, when yet it is but a
sacramental sign and seal of it, Genesis 17.13. Act. 7.8. that is first h^ld out
and sealed, as the convoy of all other desired good, 2 Pet. 1.4. But especially
in that initiatory seal the signation of the covenant, is of more considerable
weight, then the external symbol, ceremony and circumstance: either of cutting
or washing absolutely or relatively considered. If washing of a person in the
name of the Trinity, be a clearer and easier symbol then that of cutting the
flesh, yet not of such weight as is the covenant sealed both by the one and the
other. And to show that the covenant is the main thing considerable therein;
hence it is that the covenant is first propounded as the groundwork of the
commandment it self, as of Circumcision, so of Baptism, and much more of the
application of either, to any in covenant, Genesis 17.9, 10, 11. Therefore, scil.
because I have said I will be your God, I command you to do thus and thus; not
because I have commanded you, that I therefore promise to do this for you; or
do you thus and thus at my command, and then on, therefore I will do so and so
for you.

Answ, After the rest of his dictates, he here tells us, the main in the
initiatory seal to be attended is the covenant, which I grant; but deny that it
follows therefore, that the rule which the administrator is to observe,
according to which he is to administer it, is the persons interest in the
Covenant, so as that he must administer it to all and only those who are in
Covenant, or to whom the prom^se is made by God. For, besides the many reasons
to the contrary, even concerning Circumcision before given, Mr. Cs. own reason
is against him. For if the main in the initiatory seal to be firstly and
properly attended as it is a Covenant and Church seal, is Covenant and Church
interest, and therefore infants in Covenant to be circumcised and baptized; by
the same reason infants in Covenant are to be admitted to the Passover, and to
have the Lords Supper, since they are seals, they are Covenant and Church seals,
infants have Covenant and Church interest, in the initiatory seal these things
are to be attended as it is a Covenant and Church seal, and therefore in every
Covenant and Church seal as well as the initiatory. As for what he says about
Genesis 17.9, 10, 11. though I have sundry times observed that the reading [ v. 9.
therefore] is not necessary; yet omitting that exception, I grant what he says
of that Text, but withal note, 1. that the command is inferred not only from
the promise to be their God, but also from the promise of the land of Canaan,
v. 8. and therefore it might as well follow, They to whom God will give the
land of Canaan are to have the initiatory seal, as that they to whom he
promises to be God. 2. That which is said Genesis 17.9, 10, 11. is only of
circumcision. 3. If it were granted that the covenant is the groundwork of the
command it self, as of circumcision so of baptism, yet it follows not, much
more of the application of either to any in covenant. For though the covenant
were Gods reason, why he would appoint circumcision, yet that is no rule to us,
but his command only; a reason of the will of the commander is not always a
direction about the command, certainly not about each point in the command, as
Mat. 28.18. it follows not, All power is given to me, therefore preach and
baptize all over whom power is given to me. Besides, in this very thing the
covenant could be no direction whom to circumcise, ordinarily, since ordinarily
the circumciser could not know to whom in particular the promises, whether
Evangelical, or domestical, did belong, when they were to circumcise them. Yea,
though Abraham knew Ishmael had no covenant interest* there being no promise
made to him in it, but the contrary declared, Gen 17.19, 20, 21. yet he was to
circumcise him and did so. The like may be said of Esau and others.

Mr. C. adds. So the Gospel prophecy and promise is prefaced and put in the
preamble to that injunction of their baptism, by John, Luke 3.3, 4, 5, 6, etc.

Answ. It is true that the prophecy of John Baptists coming and work, and of
Christ's coming, Isa. 40.3, 4, 5. (which I acknowledge to be a Gospel promise)
are set down as the warrant of John's preaching the Baptism of repentance unto
remission of sins; but this does no^ prove that this was his rule in baptizing,
to baptize every one, even infants, and those only who had this interest in
the Covenant of grace, that to them and each of them God promised remission of
sins. Yea, since John's Baptism is termed the Baptism of repentance, it is clear
he required repentance of the baptized as the antecedent to his Baptism, and
therefore not barely such Covenant interest as Mr. C. ascribes to all infants
of believers only in profession.

He goes on thus. Hence the Gospel, and so the Covenant of grace, held out as
grounding Baptism, Act. 2.38, 39. And childrens Covenant right, was held out as
one branch of that Gospel, as we proved; and from the same principle, that they
were also to be sealed by Baptism; yea, albeit the Apostles urged repentance,
yet the seal is propounded as to the promise; Peter said, be baptized, for the
promise is to you: And this was no mere moral motive, but a Scriptural
groundword enforcing it, as it was a Scriptural groundwork virtually injoyning
and requiring them to repent, for the promise is to you.

Answ. [Hence] should, if there were any good sense in Mr. Cs. speech, refer to
something precedent, from whence that which he speaks is derived, which I
discern not, but a dark way of dictating, fitting such as love to puzzle, not
to inform a reader. It is before largely showed, that neither childrens
Covenant right external from parents faith has been held out by Mr. C. as one
branch of the Gospel, sect. 44. of this part of my Review, nor that barely from
this principle they were to be baptized; but that repentance in each person to
be baptized is made the antecedent to Baptism, sect. 22, 23, and elsewhere.
That Peter said not as Mr. C. sets down his words, is apparent from the Text
Act. 2.38, 39. that the promise is urged as a motive to those to whom Peter
spoke to do their duty of repenting, and being baptized, is so plain, as that
Dr. Thamas Goodwin upon the reading the first part of my Review, sect. 5. did
acknowledge it, and it is proved so sect. 21. here and elsewhere: Nor does Mr.
C. here or elsewhere show it to be any other Scripture groundwork then as a
motive to the baptized each of them first to repent, and then to be baptized,
no rule by which the baptizer is to administer it, or the baptized to claim it
as his right without his personal repentance, and declaration of his faith in
Christ into whose name he is to be baptized.

He adds. So Act. 10. Peter says, there is no let to their Baptism; and
thereof he makes the visibility of that Covenant grace, although common to
reprobates also in those first times, his groundwork; gathering thereby, that
they were not as formerly profane, unclean, and outlaries from the Covenant,
as Ephesians. 2.11, 12. but clean and nigh as they themselves were.

Ans. It is true there was no let to Cornelius his Baptism, and those other who
were with him, yet not merely because of their extraordinary gifts, but because
those gifts were manifested by their glorifying God, and as may be gathered
from Act. 11.17, 18. their glorifying God contained expressions of faith in
Christ and repentance, which whosoever should do as they did, it is without
doubt they should be baptized. But Mr. Cs. Covenant interest of infants, who
make no shows of faith and repentance as they did Act. 10.46. yields no warrant
for their Baptism.

He goes on, Washing of regeneration is not grounded on any thing in us or
without us, so much as on Gods grace, and so Covenant favor, Tit. 3.5.

Answ. It is true, this is the inward impulsive cause why God regenerates; but
Gods grace, and Covenant favor is no rule to a Minister to baptize by, since it
is an unknown thing, which agrees not with the property of a rule.

Hence also ( says Mr. C.) by Baptism persons are not sealed into any thing in
them so much as into the name of the Father, Son, and Spirit, even into the
Covenant name of grace, whereby he is known, and into Covenant fellowship with
the blessed Trinity, to which every baptized person, prove he elect or
reprobate, yet is thus externally sealed.

Answ. The terming of baptizing sealing, and the name of the Father, Son, and
Spirit, the Covenant name of grace, are Mr. Cs. new-minted phrases; if this be
his meaning, that every person rightly baptized, whether he be elect or
reprobate, is sealed by God, that is in Baptism assured of fellowship with the
Trinity according to the new Covenant of Gospel grace, I deny it; if only that
he professes his communion to be with them, I grant it; but this proves not
that Covenant interest of infants, who make no such profession, intitles them
to Baptism.

Again, says he, That fellowship with Christ, as head of the visible Church by
the Spirit in the judgment of verity or charity such; it is all but Covenant
grace and blessing.

Answ. Be it so: yet what this is to prove such fellowship to be a rule to
baptize infants, I see not.

Of old ( says Mr. C.) the consequent cause of the seal was grace in them and
theirs; but the antecedent cause was Gods Covenant grace to them and on them,
Genesis 17.7, 8, 9. and Deuteronomy. 30.6. and so now, that part of Abraham's Covenant was
not then appliable to infants, scil. walk before me, etc. but yet that was then
appliable; I will be their God, I will circumcise their hearts, and that
sufficed them, as Deuteronomy. 30. the Analogy holds now.

Answ. What may be said to be a consequent cause, I do not yet conceive, the
rule of Logic I have learned is, that the cause is before the effect: Yet what
ever it be Mr. C. means, though it might suffice for Circumcision, it does not
for Baptism; nor is that to be regulated by Analogy of Circumcision, as is
showed in the second part of this Review, sect. 2, 3.

Yet again, In a word, the seal is a seal not of nor to the commandment, but
covenant; this therefore is the main and principal in the application of it.

Answ. If Baptism be a seal, it seems to me not a seal of or to the commandment
or covenant, but the profession of the baptized; and therefore this is the main
and principal in the application of it.

Yet more, It is the covenant which has the main instrumental force, in the
fruit of the initiatory seal and the application of it, Ephesians. 5.25.26. and why
shall not the external interest in the covenant, have chief influence into the
external interest, as well of the application of the initiatory seal?

Answ. I understand not what fruit of the initiatory seal he means, nor what is
the external interest in the Covenant; the word, Ephesians. 5.25. 26. Is meant of
the word preached, which is not instrumental to infants for any santification
or cleansing their meant. The want of Gods appointment is the reason of not
applying Baptism to infants.

Once more, By external interest in the Covenant, persons so interested come to
have external interest, at least to the final causes of Baptism, as Covenant
mercy and blessing, the Spirit, Christ resurrection, etc. Tit. 3, 8. and 1.
Cor, 12.12, 13. 1. Pet. 3.21. And therefore as well so far inrighted in the
initiatory seal of it, whether they are adult or infants.

Answ. 1. External interest in the covenant, external interest in the final
causes of Baptism, are notions I understand not. 2. Covenant mercy and
blessing, the spirit, Christ's resurrection, are not final cause of Baptism, for
then when the end of Baptism is attained, they should be effects of Baptism,
for the end in intention, is the effect in execution; But this is too absurd.
3. An inrighting so far in the initiatory seal, which intimates a man may have
an inrighting so far to such a measure and no further, is another new notion I
understand not. 4. If Mr. Cs. antecedent had sense or truth, yet the
consequence is to be denied, no other interest external is inrighting to
Baptism, but that which is according to the institution, Matthew. 28.19.
discipleship, or profession of faith.

To the 8th. Sect. I answer by denying that the Covenant privilege of grace
Evangelical, has such distinction of principal and less principal counter
parties, as Mr. means C. (unless he understand by Christ the principal, and the
elect and true believers the less principal, as Gal. 3.16.) and that the
Covenant privileges of grace Evangelical belong to any other then the elect:
yet I grant the Covenant Genesis 17. and many privileges of Divine grace which
were not Evangelical, did belong to many of the Israelites, who made no good
use thereof. The Covenant Evangelical was never sealed personally to Ishmael.
That which Mr. C. dictates without proof about the everlasting covenant, and
the initial seal in its generical nature, is answered here sect. 80. and the
point about the ordinance of infants visible Churchmembership unrepealed sect.
50, etc. and the non-inclusion of infants Matthew. 28.19. under the term nation
is showed there, and in the second part of this Review sect. 9. The position of
Mr. Cs. sect. 9. may be granted, though Acts 2.38, 39. make nothing for it.
Sect. 10. Mr. C. proves nothing but that parents were to take care that their
children were circumcised; that which he says of the children begotten on
prohibited women, Ezra. 9. and Timothy begotten on a Jewish woman by a Grecian
husband, that they were circumcised, Act. 16.1, 2, 3. proves this, that the
children, who were not of the Congregation of Israel, and so no visible
Churchmembers were to be circumcised, nor had Covenant interest. The case
controverted 1 Cor. 7.14. was only concerning the persons unequally yoked, not
concerning their children. Acts 2.33, 39. Is not a word to prove parents are to
take care of the infants baptism, nor Genesis 7.1. with 1 Pet. 3.21. there being
not an infant in the Ark, nor typical Baptism being a rule concerning formal
Baptism of Christians; if it were, Masters must take care to baptize their
house, yea their married children though as profane as Cham, and their wives
with them. How impertinently 1 Cor. 10.2. is alleged, is showed in the second
part of this Review sect. 21. What Mr. C. observes out of Exodus 12.44, 48, 49.
that a stranger was not to eat the Passover, except all his males were
circumcised; if it be right, yet it makes nothing for proof of parents duty to
see their infants baptized, there being no such institution about Baptism and
the Lords Supper, as was about Circumcision and the Passover. It is granted
that the words [ Exodus 12.40.] Will keep the Passover to the Lord] are meant
only of an adult person, yet it is true also, which I say in my Examen part.
4. sect. 6. That males not come to years of discretion fit to receive the Lords
Supper were to eat the Passover, and consequently (if Mr. Cs. dictates were of
any of any validity) parents should see they eat Lords Supper. I grant, That
God made Abraham Genesis 17.7. a common person as well in reference to us
inchurched Gentiles, as to the inchurched Jews and Proselytes in point of
Evangelical covenant interest, but that he should be so made in point of
engagement from covenant interest, unto the receiving of the initiatory seal by
parents and children, Genesis 17.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. is but Mr. Cs. fancy
sufficiently refuted by this, that if it were true, then we Gentiles are bound
to circumcise our infants, (which is the only initiatory seal there meant)
contrary to Acts 15.24. Gal. 5.1, 2. That which is true of Abraham and his
natural seed, must be applied to Abraham's spiritual seed, true Believers of the
Gentiles and their natural seed; is but Mr. Cs. vain dream dictated without
proof. My grant in my Examen part. 3. sect. 1. page 37. (as the words show) was
not that children might be baptized vertually in their parents in exact speech,
so as to receive it in their own persons, but only in that sense in which Mr.
M. said women were circumcised vertually in the males, yet so as they might not
be circumcised in their own persons: which being considered, my words yield Mr.
C. no advantage.

To the 11th. section I grant, that Matthew. 28.19. ties not the Baptizer to know
the baptized to be internally and savingly interested in the covenant: But that
it suffices, that that sort or species of infants, scil. such like infants are
in deed and truth of Christ's Kingdom, I utterly deny. For then any infant in
the world might be baptized, because he is of that sort or species of infants,
scil. such like infants are in deed and truth of Christ's Kingdom. Dare any say
of no unbelievers infants is Christ's Kingdom? However it is true of Belivers
though not inchurched, and yet Mr. C. denies the right of the child, if the
parent be not inchurched. Mr. Cs. reason are vain, neither is our Lord Christ's
saying, Luke 18.16. any rule to us about baptizing; nor was the rule of
circumcising infants that some of that sort had the internal saving interest
and efficacy of this promise, I will be the God of thy seed, but the command of
God, without which it is better to exclude all infants, then upon our own heads
to bring on our selves the guilt of will worship by taking them in. Which must
of necessity fall on infant Baptizers after Mr. Cs. rule. For Christ's
appointment was to baptize infants no otherwise then persons of years. There is
no difference in the words Matthew, 28.19. between the reason of baptizing one
and the other. But persons of years were not to be baptized by Mr. Cs. rule, in
that they are of that sort or species of persons, scil. such like persons are
in deed and in truth of Christ's Kingdom, but only upon their own discipleship
or profession of faith, as the practice thoroughout the Acts of the Apostles
shows: Therefore neither are Believers children to be baptized after any other
rule. And yet infants are no more left in the wide wilderness, or any whit less
folded up in the Church by their non-baptizing, then they are by their baptism.
If they of N. E. do fold them up in the Church, why do they keep them from
Church Communion till they be made members by Church Covenant? If it be better
99 who happily have not so peculiar a title thereto, be folded up in the
Church, then that one of such lambs be left out in the wide wilderness, are not
they guilty of too much strictness in leaving out of the Church in the wide
wilderness, many weak lambs who are weak in faith, because they do not satisfy
the Church in the declaration of their experiences? But this is the guise of
men who are strict in their own inventions, as in Church Covenant, declaration
of experiences for admission to Church Communion, etc. to be loose about Gods
commands, as this of baptizing disciples of Christ is. Enough in answer to
these cloudy dictates of Mr. C.

SECT. LXXXVI. The 13th. and 14th. Chapters of Mr. Rutherfords first part of
the Covenant, are examined; and found to make nothing for Infant Baptism.
AFter the finishing the most of this part of the Review, my learned and godly
brother Mr. John Skynner of Weston in Herefordshire (who has written a solid
Treatise against Infant Baptism, entitled, Corruption corrected, in answer to
one Mr. Woodward) acquainted me that Mr. Rutherford had written for infant
Baptism in a Book of his of the Covenant of grace part. 1. chap. 13, 14 which
having read, I found (as he foretold me no more strength then others had
brought for it, and it is written rather like a Sermon then a Scholastique
Dispute, and with so many unproved dictates, such a number of obscure
expressions, (many of which I cannot discern good sense in, so that they have
need rather of construction then resur^tion) so many incoherencies and
inconsequences, as that I do not jhdge it worth while to answer him. Yet
because of the name of the man, and my words sect. 1. of the 2d. part of this
Review, I shall add some animadversions on those two chapters.

Chapter 13. he tells us, that (...) are in Covenant with God externally by visible
profession, which I (...), if meant of their own personal profession; but deny,
1. That th^^ promise Genesis 17.7. I will be thy God and the God of thy seed, is
a tacit and implicit profession, or makes (of it self) parties in Covenant
externally. 2. That infants born of covenanted parents are in covenant with
God, because they are born of such parents as are in covenant with God, Genesis
17.7. What is said Deuteronomy. 4.37. Deuteronomy. 10.15. is meant only of the people of
Israel, as the very words [ brought out of Egypt as it is this day] show; nor
is there a word in those verses, of their being in covenant with God because
born of such parents, but of Gods special choice of that people. It is false
which he says that the Apostle Acts 2.39. speaks in the very terms and words
of the Covenant, Genesis 17.7. It is true rather, that he speaks in never a term
or word there used. It is as false that the Apostle commanded any other to be
baptized Acts 2.38. then whom he commanded to repent. Did he not presume that
Anabaptists, as he terms us, were very Blockheads, he would not not presume,
that we should believe his vain dictates, when the very copulative term shows
the same are spoken to in one and the other command, and the words being an
answer to the question v. 37. show they are directed to those who spoke v. 37.
And the word [ you] used in the precept of Baptizing contains the same with
those who were to receive remission of sins, and the gift of the holy Ghost,
and are distinct from their children, v. 39. and therefore cannot be meant of
their children, much less of their infant children, whom it had been ridiculous
for Peter to have commanded to be baptized. How pertinent the answer had been
as I expounded it, is often showed before; though their children crucified not
the Lord Jesus, nor were concerned either in the evil of their parents, who
crucified the Lord of glory, nor in the good of their repentance more then
stones; yet I know no Anabaptists whose grounds infer, that the Jews children
who crucified Christ were not visibly in Covenant with their parents, not
capable of actual hearing the word, mourning for and repenting of their sins,
as Zach. 12.10. Matthew. 3.8, 9, 10. nor concerned either in the evil of their
parents, nor in the good of their repentance more then stones; nor do I
conceive it true that the opposites of infant Baptism say, that Covenant
promises are no more made to children, then to stones; but that these are vile
calumnies of Mr. Rutherford, unfit for such a man as he is taken to be.

How Isa. 2.2, 3. and 19.24, 25. Psalm. 22.27. Revel. 11.15. Isa. 60.1, 2, 3, 4.
Mal. 1.11. Psalm. 2.8, 9. and 72.7, 8, 9, 10. are to be understood of persons
adult only, and yet infants not cut off from the Covenant, is showed Review
part. 2. sect. 9. and elsewhere. It is not contrary to Acts 2.39. to say, that
Covenant promises are not to the children of Believers, and yet it has been
fulfilled, that the Gentiles and Heathen are become the Lords people.

What he says out of Exodus 20.6. Psalm. 37, 26. and 112.2. Deuteronomy. 28* is
answered here sect. 64.70, 71. It is not true that Paul, Romans 11.16. says the
same of the Jews root and branches, Fathers and children, which he says 1 Cor.
7.14. of the unbelieving yoke fellows sanctification in the yoke fellow, and
their childrens holiness. Nor is it true, that the same Covenant which was made
with Abraham, Genesis 17.7. was made with the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.16. or any of
the texts he cites, there being none of them that promise, that God would be a
God to them and their seed.

His allegations from Heb. 7.22. Heb. 8.6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. are showed to
be frivolous here, sect. 66. and elsewhere. What he talks of a Father having
no warrant to offer the Covenant of grace to one Pagan more then another, if
children be not in covenant, is vain, the offer of the Covenant of grace being
nothing else but the preaching of the Gospel, which is to be to all, Mark
16.15. whether in Covenant or no. The allegation that the promise Genesis 17.7. is
made only to the elect, Romans 9.8. is a plain proof of this position, that the
natural children of Abraham, and consequently Believers children now, except
elected, have not that promise made to them, and therefore are not in covenant
by Gods act of promise to them, which doctrine Mr. Rutherford himself taught in
his Apologetical. exercit. 2. c. 2. p. 306. when he said; The elect alone are
said in Scriptures federate, sons and heirs of promise, Romans 9.8. And to Christ
alone the Prince, and leading heir, are the promises made, Gal. 3.16. Psalm.
89.26, 27. in him, to his seed and children given to him of the Father, Heb.
2.13. Nor can he here deny, that the sons of the promise are the chosen of God,
in whom the word takes effect. Which if true, then it is most false, that a
Believers seed not chosen is in covenant with God, by virtue of that promise
Genesis 17.7. and his allegation of it, and Acts 2.^9. and other places for
baptism of believers infants, whether elect or not, as having that promise made
by God to them; is manifestly impertinent. Nevertheless we need not say, that
there are none covenanted with God but the chosen under the New Testament, or
that there is no such thing as an external visible covenanting with God under
the New Testament: but say, that no infant does visibly externally covenant
with God, so as thereby to be entitled to Baptism, since no persons are to be
baptized by Christ's appointment, but such as in their own persons do profess
the says.

The privileges mentioned Romans 3.1, 2. and 9.4. Mr. Rutherford himself
appropriates to the Jews, Due right of Presbyteries chapter 4. sect. 5. page 192.
What he says page 77, 78, 79, 80. is all answered before, chiefly in answer to
Mr. Blake, Review par. 2. sect. 9, or here, sect. 46, 47, 48. or in answer to
Mr. Baxter and Mr. Marshal. And if it were not, yet the Reader may discern its
impertinency, since the thing he endeavors to prove, is an external visible
covenanting in the New Testament (which can be only on man's part) and being in
covenant thereupon, and right to Baptism, and is not denied, whereas his
position he should prove is, that the Covenant choice on Gods part is extended
to the seed of Believers as such in the New Testament, p. 73. His words page
80. They cannot be baptized but as in covenant with God, are true, if meant of
being in covenant by their profession externally: but so infants are excluded;
if of Gods covenanting or promise, are false, and so are those other words, We
are the same way in covenant as the Jews were, and our visible Church now, and
the visible Church then are of the same constitution*

I call not the Covenant Genesis 17. civil, but mixed, containing some promises
civil, some spiritual, or rather the same promis^s, in one sense spiritual, in
another civil. I doubt not to say the Covenant to Adam and the Jews at Mount
Sinai were two Covenants of works, a third in the Gospel I know not. The
Covenant with David, Psalm. 89. 2 Samuel 7. so far as it was Evangelical, was the
same with that to Abraham, Genesis 17. and Adam Genesis 3.15. as they were
Evangelical, but so far as it was Oeconomical, it was different from both, and
another Covenant then those to Adam, Abraham, or the Jews at Mount Sinai: The
promise of working miracles, was not the Evangelical Covenant of grace, but
that of remission of sins and eternal life to the repenting believers, under
which was John Baptist as well as the Apostles, was it: yet I know no absurdity
to say, the Apostles were both under the Covenant of grace with John Baptist,
and another Covenant Mark 16.17, 18. different from that John Baptist and many
Believers were under. I find no promise of the blessings of their land, as Genesis
17. is to Abraham's seed of Canaan, to all believers in any of those texts,
Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 30, 31. Jer. 31.31. compared with 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
Matthew. 6.31. Luke 12.31. 1 Timothy 4.8. Heb. 13.5.6. Infants elect are in the same
Covenant Evangelical with Abraham, shall have a Covenant Resurrection and
Salvation, by Christ, yet not in the visible Church, but are saved without it.
It is no New Testament ordinance that Ministers preach the Gospel to every
creature, without limitation, or explication restrictive to the intelligent of
them, or baptize all nations simply, whether disciples, or believers, or not,
but the disciples or believers in Christ of all nations. That faith does not
sanctify in every subject, but in subjecto capaci, and so not an unbelieving
whore, 1 Cor. 7.14. proves, that the sanctifying or holiness there, is not
ascribed to the faith of the one parent, as to the formal reason, but to the
conjugal relation, contrary to Paedobaptists exposition of federal holiness, 1
Cor. 7.14. which Mr. Baxter has neither solidly nor learnedly vindicated, as
might have been discerned by reading the first part of this Review sect. 22,
etc. which if Mr. Rutherford read with the rest, it is likely ^e would no^ say
so unadvisedly as he does, that the dispute is at an end now. If God made the
Covenant Genesis 17.7. to Abraham not as a Father only but as head of a family,
and covenant holiness is of societie^ and houses under the New Testament as in
Abraham's house, then should infidels infants, yea infidels in a believers house
be baptized by Paedobaptists rules; then is it no privilege to believers and
their seed, then does the Apostle after Paedobaptists exposition of 1 Cor.
7.14. say false, that the children were unclean, that is, without federal
holiness* if neither parent were a believer. Most false is that which he says
without color of proof page 83. Not any are baptized in the New Testament
(except the Eunuch and Saul Acts 8.39.) who were baptized firstly, but they
were baptized as public men representing a seed; The contrary appears from
Luke 7.29. Joh. 4.1. Nor is it true, that societies as such, were baptized, nor
any such thing intimated in the words, Matthew. 3.3. Mar. 1.5. Lu. 3.21. but
only that a great number of people came to him and were baptized. Yea in those
places, as also Joh. 3.22, 23, 26. it is plain none were baptized, but such as
came to hear John, and by confessing their sins showed their repentance. No
more needs be said to the stale frivolous allegations of baptizing households,
then is said Examen part. 3. sect. 14. Review part. 2. sect. 20. nor to Romans
11.16, 17. then in the first part of the Review sect. 1, etc. The Lord sends
the Gospel arbi^rarily to a City, household, or single person, as to the Eunuch,
Paul, Sergius Paulus, as he pleases, and we are to enquire whether the faith
of the person be real, before he is to be bap^ized, though the Gospel be come to
the nation, house, or society. Nor is there any truth in it, no not according
to the Apostles doctrine, as 1 Cor. 7.14. is expounded by Paedobaptists, and
they dispute from Genesis 17.7. if the friend, not a father, be in the house or
society and profess the Gospel, he and his servants and friends obtain right
to Baptism.

Mr. Rutherford page 85. enquires, What is the formal reason and ground that
any has right to Baptism? The terme^ of the question seem to me to intimate,
as if he with other Paedobaptists, took Baptism only for a privilege d^rived
from a grant or Covenant of God, which I take to be only a duty both in the
baptized and baptizer, by reason of a command of Christ (though there be also a
privilege consequent upon it) and so the formal reason of it is the command,
and the qualification which the baptized is to have, when he is baptized, is
believing with all his heart; which if he wants he sins, yet not so as that the
person, if after a dogmatical faith he become a sincere believer, is to b^e
baptized again, but to repent of his former sin, as Peter advised Simon Magus.
The qualification, which the baptizer is to baptize upon, is a sober,
intelligent, serious and free profession of faith in Christ, upon which persons
are termed disciples of Christ and believers, and is the rule to the baptizer,
Matthew. 28.19. compared with Mar. 16.15, 16. which warrants his action, he being
not able to look into the heart. Mr. Rutherfords objection from Mar. 16.16. is
answered Review part. 2 sect. 7. p. 115. It is false, that none are to be
baptized, but covenanted ones; as Acts 2.39. meaning by Gods promise, his
promise of remission of sins and salvation to them by Christ, nor does Acts
2.39. prove it. If all infant* even of Pagans, and all aged are not to be
baptized* how is it true, that all nations are to be baptized without any other
circumscription, as Mr. Rutherford cites the command Matthew. 28.19. here page
84? I like his words. All in Covenant are not to be baptized. For such as are
only really and invisibly in Covenant, and do make no profession of Christ at
all, are not warrantably by the Church to be baptized. Only these whether old
or young that are tali modo visibili federati* such as professedly and visibly
in Covenant and called, Acts 2.39. are warrantably baptized* Hence they must be
so in covenant, as they be called by the word of the Covenant; for they cannot
be baptized against their will, Luke 7.29, 30. Which if Mr. Rutherford will
stand to, the controversy may be ended; and I promise him, that if he can
prove, or show that infants make any profession of Christ, are professedly and
visibly in covenant, are so in covenant, as that they be called by the word of
the Covenant, and that they are willing to be baptized, I shall yield to
baptize them. But this is frequent with Paedobaptists (as I have often showed in
Mr. M. Mr. B. and Mr. Bl.) to let fall such passages, especially in opening the
institution, Matthew. 28.19. in opposing Papists, Prelatists, Antibaptists, as
overthrow their disputes for infant baptism, and therefore they will not stand
to them, when they are urged against them, but by some shift elude them.

It is false which Mr. Rutherford says, that this proposition, Those to whom
the promise of the Covenant does belong, these should be baptized (if
universally understood) is Peter's Acts 2.38, 39. or that this assumption, The
promise of the Covenant is to you and your children, is the express words of
Peter. The offer of Christ in the preached Gospel, is not the call, meant Acts
2.3^. nor are all such as to whom the offer is made exter^ally in covenant, and
such to whom the Covenant is made and should be baptized; though I grant, if
they give a professed consent to the call of the Gospel, they are bap^izable.
Calvin's words are no proof, against those who yield not what he says of the
Anabaptists of his time. Mr Rutherfords words are too vain for a man of his
name, which say, that believing children are not children, but men of age. My
exposition of Acts 2.39. neither excludes sucking children, nor is the
inclusion proved by him from Matthew. 2.^8. 1 Cor. 7.14. the sense Mr. Rutherford
makes the only sense of Acts 2.39. the promise and word of the Covenant is
preached to you and your children in you, is false, for then it had been true,
that it was preached then to all afar off, which is manifestly false, and vain;
for it had been no comfort to them, since it might be preached without their
benefit, nor is this to be externally in covenant (except in Mr. Rutherfords
gibberish) both under the Old and New Testament. In the O^d persons were so by
birth, without preaching; in the New, they only who profess faith.

The other sense Mr. Rutherford sets down is none of mine, nor is it needful I
should answer the objections against it and the terms, the Lord has internally
covenanted with you; I take to be nonsense, no covenanting with us being an
immanent, but a transeunt act. My sense is fully set down here Sect. 13, etc.
and proved. I grant no more Covenant favor holden forth to their children,
Acts 2.39. then to the Pagans children, except in priority of tender. I make
not external covenant holiness, ceremonial holiness out of da^e, nor can he
clear it, or that by any thing I say, the words Acts 2.39. must be in a
contradictory way expounded, to wit, the promise is no more made to your
children so long as they are infants, then to Devils; which seeing he mentions
Mr. Ms. words but a little before, I have reason to conceive reflect on my
self; and if so, they have too great a show of Diabolism. Right to hear the
preached Gospel, and a Covenant or Gospel warrant peculiar to believers
children, is such talk as I understand not. I think hearing is a Duty obliging
all; Pagans have not only warrant, but also command to hear it, it is not
only lawful but necessary. The children of the most holy Christian Gentile
believers, are not Christians till they believe, and both they and their
parents when they believe are still Heathens; the term Heathens, being all one
with Gentiles contradistinct to Jews, and so used here by Mr. Rutherford
himself page 74. in words before cited, and I sometimes admire that some
learned men should suggest this to Readers and hearers as a h^inous thing to
term them Heathens, when they must be so, if they be not Jews, though most holy
Christians. The term Pagans, if it be all one with professed infidels
positively, I grant it belongs not to our children; yet they are infidels
negatively, till they believe, and are so accounted of them that admit them not
to the Lords Supper, as well as of those that admit them not to Baptism, unto
which actual profession of faith is as well required as to the Lords Supper. To
neither has a man any right by Covenant, although by the Covenant he has
right to the benefits of the Gospel. Baptism and the Lords Supper are neither
of them formally benefi^s, or seals of the Covenant of grace; though by
con^equent, in the right use of them, such benefit^ accrue to men by them. They
are hoth rites appointed by Christ, the one to be the baptized his sign,
whereby he professes repentance and faith in Christ, and engages himself
solemnly to adhere to Christ as his disciple, the other whereby he^ signifies
his remembrance of Christ's death, both our duties, and a right to duty, sounds
to me like nonsense.

I know no Anabaptist that ignorantly confounds the promise and the thing
promised, the Covenant and benefits covenanted; But this I aver, that when God
promises and covenanteth they are connex, there is no man to whom Cod
promises or covenanteth, but he has or shall have the thing promised or
covenanted. And this I learn from the Apostle Romans 9.8. who makes only the
chosen sons of promise, as Mr. Rutherford here page 77. expounds him; and that
is, as Gal. 3.16. he expresses himself, to Abraham and his seed were the
promises made or said, that is Christ personal or mystical, or both, and to no
other. And sure the Apostle Romans 9.6. did think it blasphemy to say, that God
had promised, and those he promised to should not have the thing promised; for
then Gods word should fall, and he be a liar. If Gods conditional promise be a
Covenant* yet it is made only to them that perform the condition. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, is not an universal promise to all
men, whether believers or not; but only to so many as shall believe. It Is true
we can exclude none, because we cannot exempt any from believing, and therefore
we are to make an indifferent offer to any, but God in his intention excludes
many, and his promise is not made to them whom he excludes, nor are they under
his Covenant, or in covenant with him, in respect of his act of promising;
though they may be said to be in Covenant, or under the Covenant in respect of
their own act of promising; I grant the command is to persons whether they
believe or not, obey or not, for that is not an enunciative speech, that
signifies any thing true or false, but is in the imperative mood, and extends
to all men whatsoever, so as whosoever does not as the command bids, sins: But
when Mr. Rutherford says, the promise is to you, and so are the commands and
threatenings, whether ye believe or not; whether ye transgress or transgress
not: (if an Anabaptist falsely so called may have the boldness to tell a
Professor in Divinity in an University in Scotland of ignorance) I should tell
him, he is mistaken, in saying, the promise is to you whether you believe or
no, the threatening is to you whether you transgress or no. For they being
enunciations in the indicative mood, if meant so, should be false; which to
impute to God, would asperse him with falsehood and injustice, which is
horrendum dictu. And in my apprehension it savours of ignorance which Mr.
Rutherford says page 91. Nor is it true, that the promise is made to the aged
upon condition of believing. The promise is made to them absolutely, whether
they believe or not. But the blessing of the promise and Covenant of grace is
given and bestowed only conditionally if they believe. The promise is
absolutely made, it is called conditional from the thing corditionally given.
For either I have lost my wits, or else a conditional promise is a conditional
p^oposition, expressing something that shall be, if some other thing be put;
and sure a conditional proposition is so termed from the words, not from the
event. A promise is a promise absolute or conditional, as soon as the words are
spoken, long before the thing promised is given, yea though it be never given.
The giving or not giving upon performing or not performing the condition, may
make the promise true or false determinately, but not conditional or absolute.
I forbear to uncover any further Mr. Rutherfurds nakedness in this speech, and
reset him to Mr. Baxter to correct him for that speech; nor is it true, that
the promise is not made to the aged upon condition of believing. And as for his
speeches, of the saving of infants of believing parents dying in infancy, and
our giving evidence thereof, there is so much said before of it, especially
against Mr. Baxter Sect. 73, 74. and elsewhere, that I need say no more here.
As for what he says, of our want of warrant to pray for them without their
being in Covenant; though it hurt not me, who grant of so many as are elect
that they are in Covenant; yet I think I have a warrant to pray by a general
command, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. and in faith by a general promise, Matthew. 7.7, 8.
the knowledge of Gods goodness, and the goodness of the thing asked.

In the rest of the Chapter, Mr. Rutherfurd endeavors to find a way, according
to which infants of believers may be said to be within Covenant, and the words
Acts 2.39. meant of them, and their title to Baptism thence inferred: for which
end he uses many words with distinctions, which are vain, without good sense,
or good consistency, or any thing to his purpose.

Four ways he conceives infants of believers may be said to be in Covenant. 1.
In that God makes the promise of a new heart to them; but this he grants is
true only of the elect; and not of all commanded to be baptized, Acts 2.38,
39. And page 86. he granted persons invisibly in Covenant without profession,
are not warrantably to be baptized. 2. In that God promises forgiveness of
sins, and eternal life upon condition of repentance and faith. Thus infants may
be in the Covenant of grace, but no otherwise then or rather not so much as
professed unbelievers, to whom it is tendered, who yet are not to be baptized,
and if the promise be meant so Acts 2.39. it proves not a right to Baptism
thence till the condition be performed, which when infants declare they do, I
shall baptize them. 3. That they are in Covenant because they are under the
command, for thus he speaks page 94. The Covenant must be considered in
abstracto, and formally in the letter as a simple way of saving sinners, so
they believe, so all within the visible Church are in the Covenant of grace,
and so it contains only the will of precept. In which he is mistaken, 1. in
that he says, the Covenant formerly in the letter is a simple way of saving
sinners, so they believe; for such a speech is not the Covenant in any sense,
much less formally in the letter in abstracto: such a speech as this, men are
saved if they believe, or the way of saving men is upon condition of believing,
is not the Covenant since it is not a promise, but a Covenant is formally a
promise, or an aggregate of promises. 2. In that he says, the Covenant
formally contains only the will of precept; whereas the Covenant formally
contains not at all the will of precept, the will of precept containing only
the command of what should be done by another, but the Covenant is a promise of
what the Covenanter will do; the one is expressed in the imperative mood, the
other in the indicative; nor is the will of precept in the letter as a simple
way of saving sinners, so they believe; for such an expression is no command at
all, but a declaration of event. 3. In that he says, so all within the visible
Church are in the Covenant of grace, which he seems to mean thus, they all and
they only. But sure either infants are not at all this way in the Covenant of
grace, who never hear the command propounded to them, or if they be, they are
no more in it then the Americans out of the visible Church* who never heard of
Christ, nor so much as professed unbelievers to whom the Gospel has been
preached; and therefore this way infants have not right to baptism* So that this
speech of Mr. Rutherfurd has, as many of his expressions, nothing but
ignorance and impertinency. 4. A person may be said to be in Covenant, in that
he is really covenanted and engaged by his consented profession, to fulfill the
Covenant; as Mr. Rutherfurd speaks page 92. This way I grant intitles to
Baptism; but sure infants are not so in Covenant, nor is the meaning so Acts
2.39. where the promise is Gods promise to us, not our promise to God; nor is
this the Paedobaptists plea, when they argue infants are in Covenant, therefore
to be baptized; for they mean by being in Covenant, that God has promised to
be a God to them as the seed of believers, Genesis 17.7. And therefore Mr.
Rutherfurd has not yet showed any way, according to which infants of believers
are entitled to Baptism, by virtue of the Covenant of grace; or from Acts 2.38,
39. notwithstanding all his blooding of it, to use his own term. Let Us view
what is in Chapter 14.

Neither is it true, that God says persons should be circumcised because of
Gods promise, Genesis 17.7. Nor, that women were circumcised in the males; nor was
Peter sent to baptize all the circumcised; nor are infants to be Baptized by
the ground of Circumcision; nor is there any thing Acts 2.38, 39. that says,
because the same promise is made to fathers and to children must infants be
baptized. Neither do I know what Mr. Rutherfurd understands by Theological
essence, or formal effects; nor do I conceive any truth or sense in Mr.
Rutherfurds talk of Circumcision and Baptism being the same in the substance,
nature, and Theological essence, and in the formal effects; much less that the
Lord has any such argument, Genesis 17.7. And though I should grant all are to
be exhorted to be baptized, who are under the same Covenant; yet not without
repentance and faith foregoing their Baptism, wit^out which the promise
warrants not Baptism. There is no such command Genesis 17.7, 8. that all these in
Covenant should be marked with the initiatory seal; nor is Baptism instituted
in place of Circumci^^on; and if it were, yet m^re is needful to warrant infant
baptism.

There is as plain precept Acts 2.38. and 8.36, 37. Mark. 16.16. Matthew. 28.19.
against in^ant Baptism, as is against infant Communion 1 Cor. 11.28. We have
good consequences out of the word against infant Baptism, without arguing from
the Covenant of grace; which Mr. Rutherfurd may see in the 2d. part of this
Review sect. 5 and none against the Holy Ghost, but from him. That the promises
of the Covenant of grace are expressly to infants of the New Testament is more
then I find Acts 2.39. or elsewhere. Dipping in rivers need not be onerous, and
may be without danger, to women with child, Virgins, some sorts of diseased
persons in winter, in cold countries, and it will require more strength in
dispute, then either Mr. Baillee, or Mr. Baxter, have showed, or I find yet in
Mr. Rutherfurd; to prove dipping in rivers (though Baptism be not necessary to
be done in rivers) to be against the word, the second, third, and fourth
Commandments. And against sprinkling, or perfusion instead of Baptism, there
is so much said in my Addition to the Apology against Mr. Baillee, Mr.
Rutherfurds Colleague, and delivered to Mr. Rutherfurd himself, and since
printed with a Letter to him, as is for ought I know, yet unanswered. All Mr.
Rutherfurds talk page 98, 99. that now infants of believers are casten out, for
no fault, of the Covenant of grace, and his aggravations thereof, are to be
taken for mere calumnies, and since the printing of my Ex^men, there is reason
to judge them to be thus wilfully vented by Mr. Rutherfurd, and till he name
the Anabaptists, and cite the place, I can take it for no other then a false
accusation, which he says of the Anabaptists that they teach infants to be
born without sin.

Mr. Rutherfurd dictates without proof page 100. that they were covenanting
parents and believers, that brought the little children Mark 10.13, 14 that
they were not diseased or possessed, that he would have the whole spece of
infants at all time ^o come to him, and those infants might be blessed as
elect ones, though no marks were given to parents or others, whereby to discern
elect children; these being no direction for them to bring children to Christ
under that notion. It is false that Anabaptists rebuke persons that bring
children to Christ as the disciples did, Mar. 10.13. Or that Christ instates
infants of believing parents as members of the visible Church. What Mr. ^obbet
has said of that act of Christ is refelled Review part. 2. sect. 19. and that
the Kingdom of God is that of glory, is made good against Mr. Blake there,
sect. 18 and not refused by me: I know no absurdity in it, to say, Christ might
bless infants of Pagans. What design Christ might have, or had, besides Mr.
Rutherfurds conceived purpose to hold forth the common interest of the whole
spece of infants within the visible Church, is showed there sect. 17. against
Mr. Baxter. I do gran^ the blessing, Mark 10.16. to be personal, and the
chiefest blessing beyond visible Churchmembership; and though we find not
proof that Christ blessed the whole race of infants of covenanting parents, yet
it is false that we make them blessed only as symboles of humility; or that
the blessing was some complemental salutation; or that (as Mr R. says of
Anab^ptists after hi^ calumniating manner) we will have them without Christ
and the Covenant, and under the curse of God; but grant that they were blessed
with the blessing of the Covenant of grace, and that many other infants are so.
Whether they were parents, or believers in Christ as the Messiah, who brought
the children, Matthew. 19.13. is uncertain; nor do I say, or need I, they had a
says grounded upon a possibility of election separated from the Covenant; nor
do I deny, that infants have their share of salvation by the Covenant; or that
a covenanted seed is prophesied to be added to the Jews, under the New
Testament; nor does any thing I say infer, that the children of believers under
the New Testament must be a cursed seed; yet there is none of the Texts Mr.
Rutherfurd brings, which proves a prediction, that the natural seed of
believers as such, shall be blessed and in the Covenant of grace, nor that
their infant seed shall be visible Churchmembers in the Christian Church: But
they are all impertinently alleged, some being meant of the Jews i^crease in
Jud^^ after their return from Babylon, some of the effectual calling of the
Gentiles; and most of them so far cleared before, that I count it needless to
make answer to each of the Texts by themselves. And Mr. Rutherfurds discourse
is so loose and full of impertinencies, and incoherencies, that I shall only
animadvert on some passages, till the whole be brought to some distinct
Scholastique form.

He tells us page, 168. That external covenanting goes before internal
covenanting, as the means before the end, and the cause before the effect: for
faith comes by hearing of a sent pre^cher, Romans ^0.14. and the preaching of the
Gospel is a saving means of begetting a new heart, and of a new spirit. Hence
1. All must be first externally in covenant, before they can be internally and
really in covenant. In which speech he seem^ to conceive external covenanting,
to be either preaching or hearing a preacher, else his reason had been vain.
But what nonsense scribbling is this, to term preaching or hearing covenanting?
A person may, and we may conceive some do, preach and hear, who never
externally covenant. Sure covenanting is promising, but so is not either
preaching or hearing. And if Mr. Rutherfurds words be true, no infant can be
internally and really in Covenant, who does not preach or hear.

His talk is as vain, Of the Lord being a God simply to some, and no more but a
God to them in regard of outward Church Priviledges, but to others more then a
God in truth and righteousness; not to all, as if God might be a God to some
not in truth and righteousness, or the being a God to his people, contained not
the greatest blessings, contrary to Lu. 20.37, 38. Heb. 11.16.

His further talk page 109. from Matthew. 19.14. is without proof, and all showed
to be vain, in the places before cited. Though the household sometimes
comprehend infants, yet not so still, nor Acts 16. as is showed Review part. 2.
sect. 20. Anabaptists neither do nor must grant, if infants be in Covenant,
they ought to receive the seal of the Covenant.

If Romans 11.16. be meant of holiness only intentionally, and not giving actual
right to Baptism, then the holiness there proves not infants to be baptizable.
That the Covenant Deuteronomy. 29.14, 15. should ^e made virtually radically with us
Gentiles, is a do^age with a witness: not only the express words v. 1. but
also the passages all along Chapter 29, 30. show it was the legal Covenant renewed
with the people of Israel and their posterity, to engage them to observe all
the Law of God given by Moses: not the Covenant made to Adam, Abraham, David,
the New, or better Covenant. If the Covenant may stand in one, then it is not
necessary that a people, nation* seed, body, should be in covenant, and
consequently it may stand without infants. The Apostle says not Romans 11.16.
the Fathers were the root. But Mr. Rutherfurd adds.

Hence Anabaptists, without all reason, say that he speaks not of federal and
external holiness, but of real, internal, and true holiness, only of the
invisible body predestined to life: for though invisible holiness cannot be
excluded, except we exclude the holiness of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were
without doubt a part of the roo^.

Answ. Anabaptists, if we must be so named, do say that the holiness Romans
11.16. is meant of real, internal and true holiness; and consequently the
persons there said to be holy, are all of the invisible body predestined to
life, and no other but such there meant: yet they deny not, that the holiness
of the Covenant and Church the^e meant were made visible by its working, the
collective body of the Jews predestinate to life; and that it is not said
without all reason, might have appeared to Mr. Rutherfurd, if he had read my
Examen part. 3 sect. 7. my Apol. sect. 14. page 67. Review part. 1. sect. 1,
etc. part. 3. sect. 75. yea if there were nothing else said but what Mr.
Rutherfurd here yields, that invisible holiness cannot be excluded, except we
exclude the holiness of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who were withoue doubt part
of the root, that which Anabaptists say, is not said without reason, and that
demonstrative. For if invisible holiness cannot be excluded, then it is
included, and if included together with external visible holiness, then the
holiness there meant is not external holiness alone; nor they who have merely
external federal holiness are there said to be holy, and consequently no
reprobate, but only the predestinate to life. And if Abraham, Isaac and Jacob,
be part of the root, and therefore invisible holiness cannot be excluded, then
the rest of the root and the branches which are made in the text alike holy,
must have invisible holiness also. But Mr. Rutherfurd ads.

Yet he must be taken to speak of that holiness of the Covenant and Church, as
made visible, and of the visible collective body of the Jews, not of only real
and invisible holiness. 1. Because this was true in the days of Elias, If the
root be holy the branches are holy; And it is a New Testament-truth of
perpetual verity, If the Fathers be holy so must the sons. The Fathers have
Church-right to Circumcision, to Baptism, to the Passover, and the Lords
Supper, so have the children: but it is most false of the invisible mystical
body and root only, and of real and internal holiness; For neither in Old or
New Testament is it true, if the Fathers be predestined to life, justified,
and sanctified, and saved, so must the children be.

Answ. The term [holy, Romans 11.16.] notes only real and invisible holiness in
that place, though the persons said to be holy have it made visible, and it
agree to the visible collective body of the Jews. And the proposition of Mr.
Rutherfurd to the contrary, If the Fathers be holy so must the sons, is most
false, not only being understood of invisible, but also of visible holiness,
of Churchright to Circumcision, to Baptism, to the Passover, and the Lords
Supp^r. Though the father were holy visibly, by profession of the God of
Israel, yet had not he nor his child right thereby to Circumcision, and the
Passover, without being a Proselyte of righteousness, taking on him the
precepts of Moses to observe, and joining to the policy of Israel, and yet even
then the child of age, who did not avouch the God of Israel, had no right
thereto. Nor by Paedobaptists own principles has the child of age right to
Bap^ism, or the Lords Supper, without his own profession, though the parent^ be
Christians; nor the infant of a believer baptized (as they conceive) right to
the Lords Supper.

Mr. Rutherfurd is grossly mistaken in making every believing parent the root
me^n^ Romans 1.16. and every natural child a branch: For then every believing
parent should bear his child: v. 18. and every natural child should derive
holiness from his believing parent; Abraham's natur^l children at this day are
not in the Olive, nor shall be till re-ingraffed. Abraham is the root, not as a
natural father, but as Father of believers, and ^one are branches or holy as
the Apostle there means, but through ^aith according to election. Nor are
hereby the distinctions of Jew inward and outward, child of the flesh and
promise taken away; nor whole Israel certainly saved. Nor by the branches be
meant all the visible body of the Jews old and young, which ^e mi^ht have
imagined would be replied to hi^ argument page 114. Nor is it new Divinity, but
old, That none are to be baptized but such as are under actual exercise of
their faith, which may be discerned, by their profession, in those that are
come to age. It is neither my Divinit^, nor follows (though Mr. Rutherfurd
c^nceives it does) on it, that predestination to life and glory, must be
pro^ogated and derived from the lump to the first fruits (he meant from the
first fruits to the lu^p) from the root and parents to the branches and
children; But this I say, that faith, and righteousness are propagated and
derived from ^braham as an exemplary root to all his spiritual branches or seed
by conformation to him.

I do not say, that the Apostle Romans 11. speaks of an invisible body, but this
I say, the Apostle by branches means two sorts of people, the one Jews, who
were then broken off from the Olive tree, which is the invisible Church of the
elect; the other Gentiles, then graffed in, yet not all the Gentiles, nor one
nation wholly and entirely, but a great part of them in comparison of what were
formerly in the Olive very numerous.

How these branches were an elect seed and yet fell away, were preached to, had
a national election and external calling, were in the room of the Jews, ^id
partake of the fatness of the Olive, is so fully opened in the places before
cited, that I think it unnecessary to add here any more. Only whereas he makes
it an absurdity, that the infants of baptized actual believers should be all
heathen as well as the casten off the Jews; it is to me and absurdity unfit
for any learned man to vent, that knows that Heathen in English is all one with
Gentiles and (...), to conceive otherwise, as if a Jew because cast off were
become a Heathen, or any Gentile believer or his infant, were or could be by
believing and baptism any other then an heathen, or a Christian of the Gentiles
did not still continue a heathen notwithstanding his Christianity. I do account
Mr. Rutherfurd and my self Christians, and yet Heathens. There Is not a word in
the Text, that warrants us to say of the children of the ingraffed and called
Gentiles that they have right to baptism; but what if the words be expounded as
Mr. Rutherfurd does, of the whole visible body of the nations will allow the
baptizing of infidels. Abraham's children were never taken into
covenant-fellowship universally. Abraham was indeed a moral not a physical
root, yet not as a believing Father, nor as a believing head of children, of
servants and strangers under him, but as Father of believers after him. And in
this respect, neither Adam, nor any other then Abraham is the root, and none of
Abraham's natural seed are branches or holy intentionally, but such as are
elect, and shall be conformed to him in believing and justification. Nor does
the Apostle when he says, the Jews are beloved by reason of the Fathers, make
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob the root; but intimate that God remembers them,
because of his Covenant made to them, his taking the title of their God, their
obedience to him, their prayers, and his constancy to them as his ancient
friends, when all the world were revolted.

The conceit of Mr. Rutherfurd concerning holiness external federal, as if it
were any cause or reason of re-ingraffing them or their infants, is so
frivolous, that I wonder any sober man should once fancy it. For what is it but
a state of outward church privileges, right to the seals, etc But to imagine
so great a work as the re-ingraffing, which infers salvation, should come from
Abraham's, Isaac, and Jacobs, or any other natural believing Fathers visible
Churchmembership, Circumcision, Baptism, etc. is to derive title to heaven,
from at best, an amissible privilege, which may be interrupted by men. What
more is to be seen in Mr. Cotton, Blake, Cobbet, Baxter, Mr. Rutherfurd may see
examined in this Review; by reading of which he may discern, that they have
neither closed the dispute; nor managed it so, as that their learning is to be
rested on.

SECT. LXXXVII. The distractions in Germany and our present distractions,
sprung not from Anabaptism as Mr. Cragge says.
THere having been a dispute a^ Abergavenny between me and Mr. John Cragge,
Sept. 5th. 1653. and a Sermon preached there (when I was gone thence) the next
Lords day, in opposition to what I taught, instead of letting me have a copy
manuscript, they were printed with much injury to the truth and my person.
Where^ore having had experience in Mr. Bs. dealing, what advantage the error
of infant Baptism got by such writings, I being then in London and meeting with
the Book, made a reply entitled, A Plea for Antipaedobaptists; to which Mr.
John Cragge has returned an answer, and entitled it, The Arraignment and
Conviction of Anabaptism. He has prefixed an Epistle to eight ominent Members
of the Parliament which ^ate anno 1654. He tells them that the Cause he defends
is and ought to be dearer to them, then any private interests, as whereupon
infallibly depends the peace of Church and State. He might more truly have
said, that infallibly the peace of Church and State depends on the reforming of
infant Baptism, which has corrupted the Church and State by bringing into the
Christian societies a world of ignorant, loose and profane persons, who being
the major part in all Churches, and Commonwealths, where Christianity has been
received, have persecuted the godly, domineered over the consciences and
liberties of the Saints, and upheld a proud and sensual Clergy, to the infinite
disturbance of the Eastern and Western Churches for many ages. And though I
hope better of the men to whom Mr. Cr. ascribes such heroic excellencies, that
they have or will have more wit or more grace, then to account Mr. Crs. cause
of infant Baptism dearer to them then any private interests. Yet I must confess
I cannot but mourn, that not only Parliament men, but also Ministers should be
so ignorant, as to be taken with such silly in^^pid clamours (I may truly say)
rather then arguings, as Mr. Cr. Mr. B. and others, have mislead them by.

That which he says, the former sad disasters of Germany and our present
distractions, both took their spring and growth, in a great measure, from
Anabaptism, ^is most false.

The disasters in Germany which were in the years 1524, 1525. did spring from
the great burdens and oppressions which were put on the Rusticks by their
Princes, Bishops, Abbots. Spondanus expressly in his Auct. of his Epit. of
Baron. Annals ad annum 1524. says, That they began in Suevia, by rising of the
Bores against their Lord Count Lupfius, and that the beginning thence being
risen, after an infinite number of Rusticks being stirred up to seditions upon
pretent of Gospel liberty (which Spanheimius himself in his Diatribe Historica.
4. refers to Luthers Book of Christian Liberty as the occasion taken by them)
committed great outrages. And ad annum 1502. tells us, That in the Diocese of
Spi^e, a conspiracy of Husbandmen against the Bishops and Canons, which was
called the Rustic League, began from two Rusticks: of which conspiracy the
ch^ef article was that they should shake off every yo^e, and in imitation of
the Helvetians should recover their liberty. And Lucas Osiander Epit. hist.
Eccles. cent. 16. l. 1. c. 16. p. 34. says, These particular seditions in
Germany, were the praeludia or fo^e plays of that great sedition of Rusticks,
which was in its vigor in the year 1525. And Gnodalius in his history of the
rustic tumults in Germany in the year 1525. lib. 1. says, That in Suevia,
where they first began, they did openly signify that they were not Gospellers,
nor did flow together for the Gospel sake, but because of exactions. Bp. Jewel.
Def. of the Apology of the Church of England part. 4. chap. 4. Divis. 1. to
Harding, saying, Were the hundred thousand Bores of Germany consumed by the
sword of the Nobility there for their obecience? answers thus, The Bores of
Germany, of whom ye speak, for the greatest part, were adversaries unto Doctor
Luther, and understood no part of the Gospel: but conspired together, as they
said, only against the cruelty and tyranny of their Lords: as they had done
two and twenty years before in the same Country, in the Conspiracy called Liga
sotularia, fifteen years before Doctor Luther began to preach: the partners of
which conspiracy had for their watchword the name of our Lady, and in the
honor of her, were bound to say five Ave mary's every day. Certainly touching
those later Rebels, it is known that Luther sharply and vehemently wrote
against them. And they themselves being demanded thereof, utterly denied both
the partaking, and also the knowledge of the Gospel. It is true Muncer was a
busy man in Thuringia, and stirred up the people disposed to tumults by reason
of oppressions, and at Munster in Westphalia in the years 1532, 1533. were
stirs and outrages; but even Spanheimius himself sets down the beginning of
them to have been upon the Protestant reformation, by the preaching of
Rotmannus and others, before the coming of John Matthias, and John Becold of
Leyden the Bishop and Canons of Munster being Papists opposing it. How in like
manner the Bishop of Geneva was expelled when the Protestants grew potent
there, and the like was done in other places, is manifest by records extant,
which acts have been repres^n^ed as alike odious with those of Muncer, and at
Munster, and would h ave been so reputed if there had been the like success, I
mean the adverse party had prevailed as they did in these.

Our present distractions cannot with any show of truth be said to take their
spring from Anabap^ism, by any that know things from the relation of men
im^loyed in public negotiations, their being neither in the beginning nor now,
either in the Council of State, or Parliaments, or Armies, or City of London,
or Universities, or Countries; any such persons or parties, as could sw^y
things any further then to put some stop to the violence of the Clergy against
them, to which as the cause of them, though not the only, the present
distractions are to be referred: to whom how much in former ages, and at this
present, the great troubles of the Churches of God are to be ascribed, may be
seen in part, in Mr. Baxters Book entitled, The Reformed Pastor, chapter 4. sect.
1, 2. and in many histories.

Mr. Cr. adds; which reason with experience dictates; for by their principles
whole nations are unchurched and none received into communion, but by
re-baptizing, all former members esteemed as Publicans and Heathens; hence
Magistracy and Ministry that dissents, are by them wholly disgusted, if not
discarded.

Answ... Experience has not proved either the disasters in Germany or our
present distractions, to have sprung from Anabap^ism, but from other causes;
chiefly, the oppression of Princes and Prelates. 2. Nor are Mr. Crs. reasons
sufficient to evince Anabaptism* a cause of such troubles. For the first
principle, that whole nations are unchurched, is as well the Independent as
Paedobaptists principle (among whom is Mr. Cradock counted a light in their
Goshen of Monmouthshire, by the relatour of the dispute in the Epistle
dedicatory) and if so, the present distractions are to be ascribed with as good
reason to Indepency as to Anabaptism, and perhaps with greater; it being
considered that they have been and are the more potent party. As the Papists
imputed all the troubles to Protestant principles of Christian ^iber^y, the
Prelates to non conformists, whom it hi^ gift long since compared with
Anabaptists, because they alleged against Prelacy Matthew. 20 25, 26. so the
Presbyterians charge the like on Independency, and perhaps Independents on
Anabaptism; yet none of their principles are indeed the spring of the troubles,
but the violence of the leading men of each party, who by their mis-reports and
clamors, stir up Magistrates and people against their opposites, and will by no
means allow liberty to them, nor willingly life: of which spirit Mr. Cr. seems
by his writing to be, and I suppose the State will discern all such as will
not tolerate others, who dissent in religion, intolerable. 2. It is false that
Magistracy and Ministry that dissents, is by Anabaptists wholly disgusted, if
not discarded. For though I cannot justify all so called, there being violent
spirits among them (who are intolerable) as well as others: yet neither do all
nor any great part that I know of, appear to be such. But if they did, yet sure
it comes ^ot from those principles forenamed by Mr. Cr. there being no such
consequ^nce included in those tenants, that they who are not Churchme^bers are
not to be accounted Magistrates. As Bp. Andrews answered* resp. ad Bellarm
Apol. c. 1 p. 30. Bellarmine alleging the Puritans did not admit the Kings
Supremacy* because they brought a parity into the Church. To the Kings
Supremacy what is parity among Elders in the Church? Videt ergo lector ludere
hic pa^, impar, Cardinalem; so may I say to Mr Cr. The Baptists do not count
whole nations to be Churches of Christ, and with them agree Independents, as
Dr. Owen of Schism, ch 7, etc The Baptists receive none into communion but the
baptized, esteemed all other as not in the Church visible (though these two
last are denied by many of them) what is the non-admission into the Church, to
the disgusting or discarding of Magistracy in the Commonwealth? The Reader
therefore sees Mr. Cr. to play here par impar, even and odd.

What Mr. Cr. has suffered for patronage of respect to tender Consciences, I
know not; nor who are for promiscuous toleration without distinction. What he
adds out of the old Testam^^t of P^inces punishing idolatry and blasphemy, was
done by special judicial laws of Moses, which do not bind Christian
Magistrates; if they did it makes nothing for the punishing of errors of
Christians about the Christian doctrine, by civil punishment. It is granted
that Ministers are bound to oppose errors by preaching, and Ecclesiastical
censures, both singly and in Councils; yet neither have Councils, nor the
learned Doctors been very happy in determining of errors, and heresies.
That which was heresi^ in one Council was Orthodox in another; under one
Emperor that was adjudged truth, which was blasphemy under another. What
strange kinds of Heretics were the Quartodecimani, Aerians, Helvidians, and
many more? Had Vigilantius or Jovinian (says Mr. Baxter in his Reformed
Pastor p. ^47.) had Hieromes name, some of their Heresies might possibly have
been articles of faith. Nor was it well done (however Mr. Cr. conceives) that
well-minded Emperors did rely so much on the advice of Synods and Bishops, as
to banish and destroy at the instance of them, such as they judged heretics
and schismatiques. The sad tragedies about the doctrines of the Trinity,
Images, Easter, etc. are a sufficient document to all wise rulers to be
cautelou^ how they use their power for suppressing persons deemed erroneous in
point of doctrine. There may be toleration of different opinions in a
Commonwealth without mixture of religion, and that such toleration does not
dissolve the bond of obedience, or breed any of those evils Mr. Cr. reckons up
(except by accident) the peaceable rule of the united Provinces of Belgia and
elsewhere shows. It is the intemperate zeal of Preachers and others against
dissenters, which is the chief cause of such evils as Mr. Cr. reckons up. I
remember that I have read, that the Bores of Germany were not subdued till
100000. of them were slain, but Sleidan reports not in his Com. l. 7. or any
other, that in Germany the Anabaptist grew so populous, that they could not be
vanquished, till almost a hundred thousand of them were slain by the united
forces of the Empire. But the Emperor objected to the Protestants that their
Preachers were a great occasion of the Rustical war, wherein an hundred
thousand were slain. But whether it were so or not so (what ever Mr. Crs.
protestations be) the writing this Epistle, with some other passages at the
time and to the persons to whom it was directed, show what we are to expect
from him and such as he is, if ever they have power over us. But of these
things only by the way.

SECT. LXXXVIII. Austins saying about Apostolical traditions is not to be
rested upon, nor his testimony about the antiquity of Infant Baptism.
AFter his own Epistle, and the Epistle of I. T. P. and the reprinting of the
conference between me and Mr. Vaughan, and the dispute between me and himself,
Mr. Cr. leaving out the former Epistle of I. T. P. begins with a descant on the
title of my reply, which he vainly makes to imply a suit against the universal
Church, though it be only an action against innovators, who have left the
plain way of Christ and his Apostles, and (as they have done in many other
things) brought in infant Baptism, to the great corruption of the Church of
God: And for Mr. Halls indictment, it is such as is fit for boys only to make
sport with; and were Mr. Hall or Mr. Cr. of such serious and grave spirits as
they should be, they would have buried it in silence, or been humbled for
handling things of God so lightly, such writings being fitter for light wits in
the University, then for Preachers and Pastors over Churches of Christ. My
calling Mr. Baxters book a cheat and mock titled book, is proved here to be
right; and that Mr. Ms. is no impregnable Defense, is here showed. The rest of
Mr. Crs. light Poetry in sect. 1. etc. par. 1. I let pass as the scum of his
wit, and only take notice, that he terms from Stow Sir John Oldcastle a
traitor, who was hanged on a gibbet and burned in St. Gyles field, whom Mr. Fox
in his book of Martyrs in the time of Henry the 5th. has against Alan Cope
vindicated, and by sundry arguments particularly by the manner of his death
mentioned by Mr. Cr. made it probable, that he died a Martyr oppressed by
popish Prelates. Whose case is a good document how little credence is to be
given to the censures of men, when the relations of them are made by their
prevailing adversaries. What I think of laying on hands, may be seen part 2 of
this Review, sect. 23. Dr. Featly was a man with whom I had sundry times
conference when he was in his greatest esteem, but never found him such as I
durst not look in the face when living, and sure his book of Baptism is
(beside^ what Denn has done) showed here and elsewhere not to be unanswerable.
With what spirit Mr. Cr. and other Paedobaptists, and my self, have written on
this subject, must be left to the cognizance of our Judge.

If Austins saying, l. 4. de Bapt. contra Donat. c. 23. That what the universal
Church holds* nor was instituted in Councels, but always retained, is most
rightly believed to have been delivered by no other then Apostolical authority,
were meant as Mr. Cr. sect. 5. p. 67. expounds it, including the Apostles, I
should yield it. But 1. I do not conceive that to be Austins meaning; for 1.
then the speech would be an inept tautology to say, that what the whole Church
including the Apostles holds, is most rightly believed to have been delivered
by no other then Apostolical authority; it were as if he had said, what the
Apostles held the Apostles held: 2. The very speech shows that Austin meant it
of the universal Church of his time, the word [ tenet] being in the present
tense, and the Councels meant being such as were since the Apostles, and that
he counted that to be instituted in no Councels, but to have been always held,
of which he could not show any beginning or any interruption: 3. Elsewhere his
speeches show this was his mind, as Epist. 118. ad Joann. Illa quae non scripta
sed tradita custodimus, quae quidem toto terrarum orb observantur dantur
intelligi vel ab i^sis Apostolis vel plenariis Conciliis quorum est in Ecclesi^
saluberrima autoritas commendata atque statuta retineri, and he instanceth in
the anniversary solemnities of Good Friday, Easter day, Holy Thursday, and
Whitsunday, and adds; and if any other thing has occurred which is kept by the
whole Church where ever it spreads it self. And accordingly he makes the
necessity of the Communion to eternal life as of Baptism to the Kingdom to be
from Apostolical tradition, tom. 7. de pecc. mer. and remis. l. 1. c. 24. Mr.
Crs. conceit is not right, as if the words, And if any man seek for Divine
authority in this thing, did intimate that his following rule was meant of what
was held in the Apostles time: for in them he means that which he after
fetches from Circumcision out of Scripture, besides that which the whole
Church holds, not instituted in Councels, yet still held. In this sense it is
urged by Canus, l. 3. loc. Theol. c. 4. as a rule to know genuine unwritten
traditions Apostolical from spurious, and rejected by Chamier, paustr. cath.
tom. 1. l. 8. c. 14.. 13. as impossible, since what has been in all ages and
Churches from the Apostles cannot be known; and it is urged by Bellarm. de
bonis oper. in part. l. 2. c. ^4. for Lent fast, and refuted by Chamier,
paustr. cath. tom. ^. l. 19 c. 7.. 36.

2. This rule cannot stand the Epistler in any stead for proving infant Baptism
without the Apostles writings, 1. because there is no way without them to know
what was universally held, there being no man able to know what the Church
holds in all places in his own time, much less what in former ages was held;
and many things have been taken even by Austin as universally observed which
were not, and many Councels held which are unknown, and many corruptions crept
very early into the Church whose original cannot be s^t down determinately, of
which Ushers general answer to the Jesuits challenge* gives reasons. 2. Infant
Baptism cannot be proved to have been universally observed, but as now it is
taught and used has been opposed by some of the Ancients, and is now rejected
by Protestant Divines, as it was by the Ancients taught and used. Nor is
Austins testi^ony Se^m 10. de verb. Apostoli (not Sermon. 15.) that the Church
always had and held Infant Baptism, valid for Mr. Crs. purpose; 1. because the
term [ hoc, this] may be rather referred to the doctrine of infants being born
with original sin, rather then the practice of their baptism, and to this sen^e
both the scope, words precedent, consequen^, and the terms, had, held,
perceives from the faith of Elders, keep to the end (which are most fitl^
appli^d to doctrine) make more prob^ble, as I noted in my Apology. 16. page 83.
2. Were the meaning of Austin about infant baptism, yet there were no cause to
rest on this testimony as credible, 1. because it is but a speech in a popular
Sermon, in which men speak not exactly as in other writings. 2. The words [ hoc
Ecclesia usque in finem perseveranter custodit] could be known only by guess
and conjectural presage, it being of a contingent matter not by Divine
revelation foretold, and therefore the other speeches (as likewise other
speeches, as that tom. 7. de pecc. mer. and remiss. l. 1. c. 24. show was his
wont) are to be conceived as spoken not out of any good records, but from that
which he found observed in his time, where he had been. 3 Because sermon. 14. de
verbis Apost. he says, that Cyprian Epist. 59. ad Fidum quid semper Ecclesia
sensit monstraverit; though he only set down what wa^ determined in that
Council of Carthage, which was in the third Century. 4. There are so many
speeches of the ancients false, uncertain, contradicting each other concerning
Apostolical traditions, universal observations, that many Protestants have
discredited them, of which some testimonies are set down by me in my P^aecursor
sect. 3. Salmasius appar. ad libr. de primatu p^pae, men^ions some other, as
page 134. All the Fathers with one accord make Paul and Peter founders of the
Roman Church, and yet were deceived; Hierome says, it was in all the world
decreed, that one should be a Bishop over others: and yet the Preface of Seldom
before Twisdens Collection of ancient British Histories, shows it wa^ otherwi^e
in Scotland of old. And for Austin Epist. 118. ad Janu. c. 1, 6. he makes the
anniversary solemnities of Easter, etc. of eating the Lords Supper fasting, as
always universally observed, in which he was mistaken. Mr. Cr. does abuse me in
making my argument, as if I had said Easter was always held, my words were; If
Austins rule were true, then Easter should be from the Apostles; not because I
thought it true, but because Austin thought so, and so by his rule Easter must
be counted to come from the Apostles, and his testimony is as good for it, as
for the universal observation of in^ant Baptism. 5. Not only Protestants but
Papists also do now reject things observed by the Ancients, as amply as infant
Baptism. Jewel Sermon at Paul's Cross, p. 48. Usher answer to the Jesuits
challenge, p. 23. It was the use of the ancient Church to minister the
Communion to infants: which is yet also practiced by the Christians in Egypt
and Ethiopia. The Church of Rome, upon better consideration has thought fit to
do otherwise. The putting milk and honey into the mouth of the ^aptized, the
standing at prayer on Lords days between Easter and Whitsontide, the baptizing
at Easter persons catechized in Lent, with many more are now left; though
Bellarmin. l 2. de bonis operibus in particulari c. 17. tells us, Abolitam esse
consuetudinem baptizandi catechumenos and absolvendi p^nitentes in pascha^e
verum est apud Lutheranos: caeterum apud Catholicos, ac praesertim in urbe
Romana nullus est annus, quo non multi Catichumeni in paschate baptizentur;
which I mention to show, that there ar^ some footsteps yet remaining of the
old baptizing. ^p. Jewel De^ense of the Apology of the Church of England, part.
2. ch 16. div. 1. says, there have been errors and great errors from the
beginning: he mentions there and in the Sermon at Paul's cross, baptizing for
and of the dead, giving the Communion to the dead body, and therefore there and
in his reply to Dr. Cole, he rejects customs of the ancient Church, and
condemns carrying home to the absent the Communion; mixing water with the
wine, and many more things; and still requires the Lords Supper and Baptism to
be administered according to the institution of Christ; which if Mr. Cr. or any
other can ever show to have been of infant Baptism, I will say as Bp. Jewel did
concerning the 27. Articles propounded at Paul's Cross, I am content to yield
and ^o subscribe: otherwise Mr. Cr. and other Paedobaptist^ by accusing me as
opposing the universal Church in Austins sense (though I deny it to be true) do
but con^emn themselves, who with Papists d^ reject things counted by the
writers of the (...) a^es Apostolical, and of universal observation near the
Apostles tim^s.

Nor is the (...) pr^p^sition of Mr. Cr. p. 67. true, That the whole Church
(...) the ^postles in all ages, collectively considered, cannot err either in
do^^rine or discipl^ne. For if the wh^le Church might err so in one age, it may
also in all ^ges c^llectively considered, the promises being no more (...) the
Church in all ages colle^^ively considered, then in each age distri^utively
considered, nor an^ means given to them after the Apostles colle^^ively
considered, to keep from error, then to each, distributively; yea the Churches
nearer the Apostles, had more means to keep them from error then other ages,
yet they erred in doctrine and discip^ine, as many writers show, about Easter,
the Millenary opinion, an^ many other. As for the promise Matthew. 16, 18. it is
not true of the whole Church visible, the gates of hell have and do prevail
against them, but of the invisible, and yet the promise is not to the invisible
that they shall not err, but that they shall not err finally to damnation,
which if they did, then indeed the gates of hell or of death should prevail
against them, that is (as Cameron rightly in his pr^lection) they should not
rise to life eternal Nor is there a promise Joh 16.13. to the wh^le Church, but
to the Apostles, the promise being as well to show them things to come, as to
lead them into all truth: And yet the promise i^ not so ma^e to the Apostles*
but that they might err as Peter did Gal. 2. though when they taught the Church
by writing or preaching, they were so guided as that they should no^ err. But
of this point of the militant Churches erring, I need say no more, but refer
Mr. Cr. to his own Author Dr. Rainold thesi 3.

6. Were it granted that antiquity did universally p^actise infant Baptism, yet
neither were the present doctrine or practice justified by it, but condemned;
and Mr. Cr. as truly may be said to p^ea^ against the universal Church as my
self. For it is manifest from the places wh^re there i^ mention of it in the
Ancients, that they ^aught it and pra^^i^ed it, only upon the opinion of the
necessity of i^ to save an infant from perishing, and because the very baptism
did give grace, remission of original sin, made believers, heirs of the
^ingdome of heaven, and accordingly they practise^ it only in case of danger
of death, very seldom, and this they did to unbelievers children, as well as
believers, (...) a work of charity, not of institution or right by their birth
to either But these things Mr. Cr. pleads against them (...) well as my self,
and both the doctrine and practice of Paedobaptists now is against the Ancients
as well as mine: Yea more, in that they had a constant course of baptizing the
catechized persons upon a solemn profession of faith, and did in all baptisms,
except that of the Clinici, that is sick persons baptized in their beds, plunge
the whole body, or dip it so as to be under water* which are now clean
otherwise and things unknown among Paedobaptists. So that as Bp. Usher in his
answer to the ^esuites challenge, in the article about praying for the dead, p.
245. proves the Romanists to have rejected the ancient prayer for the dead,
because they pray not for Martyrs and others in bliss for their resurrection,
but for persons in Purgatory to be delivered thence; so I may truly ^ay, the
Paedobaptists now have rejected the ancient infant Baptism, since they deny
Baptism necessary to salvation, or that it gives grace, and they do it only to
believers infants, by sprinkling or perfusion, without mersion, scarce to any
but infants, without any solemn course of catechizing ordinarily in order to
future Baptism, and to infants ordinarily out of the case of danger of death,
upon pretense of a federal holiness by birth, and ordinance of visible
Churchmembership unrepealed, unknown to the Ancients, and therefore their
doctrine and practice has no patronage from them.

Mr. Cr. p. 98. says, that I cunningly alter the subject of the question, when
I say infant-sprinkling was not held of the whole Church; and tells me, that he
and others do not say so. Which intimates that he and others desert the
maintenance of sprinkling infants as ancient; which diffidence is some
argument that the late Assembly have forsaken the ancient way of Baptism by
dipping, having in the Directory determined sprinkling as sufficient, and in
the practice of many of them taken away the old Fonts, more agree^ble to
antiquity, and brought in little stone Basins near the Pulpit or Readers Pew,
like Popish holy water pots* fit only for the novelty of sprinkling after the
Scottish mod^. N^r is Mr. Crs. way of pouring water on the face, or dipping in
part of the head, any more the baptizing Christ appointed, or antiquity used,
exc^pt in the case of the Clinici. It Is true Gods ordinances are not
destructive to nature, who requires mercy and not sacrifice; But this proves
(...) Baptism should be omitted altogether, and not the ordinance (...), and
people mocked as they are by the preacher, that says falsely, he baptizeth the
person, when he does only sprinkle or power water on the face, or dip in part
of the head.

SECT. LXXXIX. The testimonies of the ancient Writers of the Greek Church
concerning Infant Baptism are examined, and my exceptions made good against Mr
Cragge, Dr. Hammond, Dr. Homes, Mr. Marshal.
THe alleging of pseudo. Dionisius the Areopagite, and Clements Apostolical
Constitutions, is but to abuse the world with counterfeit names, discovered by
many learned Pa^ists and Pro^estants to be such, and the like is to be said of
Justin Martyrs forged testimony qu. 36. ad orthodoxos: which are not rejected
because questioned, as Mr. Cr. seems to intimate, but because they are by many
strong evidences proved not to have been the Authors, whose names they bear. As
for the evidence to matter of fa^t they give, that infants were baptized in
that age ^n which they were written, I do readily grant i^* and before too; yet
think it no advantage ^or the present pre^ended infant Baptism, which is clean
otherwise, and upon other reasons: a^ particularly, that the baptized infants
obtained good things at the resurrection by Baptism, but the unbaptized obtain
not good things. Nor is there a word in that to confirm the novel doctrine of
the childrens right to Baptism, as being in Covenant with the parents. For
neither are the parents there said to be believer^, but the bringers; nor by
the parents faith are they said to have right to Baptism, but by the faith of
the bringers to obtain good things at the resurrection: and therefore in vain
does Mr. Cr. thus endeavor to hide the deformity of that Authors doctrine,
which is no better then that which commonly Protestant Divines condem as
Popish. More honestly in this then Mr. Cr. does Bellarmin tom. 3. l. 2. de
effectu Sacram* c. 6. say, Ju^^in. in his Apology to Antoninus, says, We
obtain remiss^^^ of before committed ^^ns in water, etc. And before he had said,
that no man was brought to Ba^tism, unless he before believed. Like things he
has in his dialogue with Triphon. And chapter 8. always in the Church the custom
wa^, that those who would be Christians should first be made catechized
persons* and long enough instructed, and not baptized unless instru^ted, and
firm, and stable in faith, citing to thi^ end Justin in his Apology to
Antoninus, as showing the manners of the Church.

As for Irenaeus his testimony, lib. 2. adv. bar. c. 39. it proves not infant
Baptism. For though it be true that Mr. Mede in his Diatribe on Tit. 3.5. say,
None, I trow will deny that when the Apostle speaks of saving us by washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, he speaks of Baptism yet it
follows not that that the Apostle meant by regeneration, Baptism; nor is it
likely, since the word [ regeneration] is no^ to be read [by the washing which
is regeneration] as if it were by apposition, but [ of regeneration] as the
Genitive possessive, and the meaning is by the washing which signifies
regeneration, which is before the washing; yet if it were so, it proves not
Irenaeus meant by [ renascuntur are born again] are baptized, since he says not
are by washing born again, as the Apostles phrase is. Nor though it be granted
that in Justin Martyr and others of the ancients [ to be regenerated] is [ to
be baptized] does it appear that Irenaeus meant it so in that place, unless it
were proved it is so only meant by him and the ancients. Nor does Irenaeus l.
1. c. 18. term Baptism regeneration as Dr. Homes p. 118. suggests, but says
thus to the denying of Baptism of that generation which is into God. But that
indeed the word [ renascuntur are born again] is not meant of Baptism, is
proved from the words and the scope of them. For 1. the words are [ per eum
renascun^ur, by him, that is Christ, are born again] and it is clear from the
scope of the speech about the fullness of his age as a perfect master, that [ by
him] notes his person according to his humane nature. Now if then [ by him are
born again] be as much as [by him are baptized] this should be Irenoeus his
assertion, that by Christ himself in his humane body infants and little ones,
and boys and young men, and elder men, are baptized unto God. But this speech
is most manifestly false, for neither did Christ baptize any at all in his own
person, the Evangelist John 4.1, 2. expressly affirming, that though the
Pharisees heard that Jesus made and baptized more disciples then John, yet
Jesus himself did not baptize, but his Disciples did baptize, nor did the
Disciples baptize any infant at all as may be gathered from the whole N. T. 2.
The word which Irenaeus expresses, whereby persons were born again to God by
Christ, is applied to the example of his age, as the words and sc^pe show.
Omnem* tatem sanctificans ^or illam quae ad i^fum erat similitudinem. Ideo per
omnem venit aetatem and infantibus infans factus, sanctificans infantes, in
parvulis parvulus sanctificans hanc i^sam habentes aetatem, simul and exemplum
illis pictatis effectus and justiti and subjectionis. Juvenibu^ juvenis
exemplum ju^enibus siens and sanctificans domino. Sic and senior in senioribus,
ut sit perfe^tus Magist^^ in omnibu^ non solum secundum expositionem veritatis,
sed secundum aet^tem sanctific^ns simul and seniores, exem^lum ^^sis quoque
fiens. But he was not in his age an example of every age by his ^aptism, as if
he did by it sanctify every age, for then he should have been baptized in
every age but in respect of the holiness o^ his humane nature which did rem^in
in each age, and so exemplarily san^^ifie each age to God, so as that no age
but was capable of holiness by conformity to his example. 3 Irenaeus his words
are omne^ enim venit per semetipsum salvare, omnes inquam qui ^er eum
renasc^ntu^ in Deum, infantes and parvulo^, and pueras and ^uvenes and
seniores, (...) if the meaning were that Christ came ^o (...) all that were
baptized by him, or by his appointment, then he came to save Simon Magus, and
whoever are or have been baptized righ^ly, even Judas Iscari^t, if he were
bap^ized. But in that sense the proposi^ion of Irenaeus were most p^lp^bly
false, and therefore that sense i^ no^ to be attri^u^ed to his words. 4. Christ
is by Irenaeus said to san^^ifie as a perfect Master* not only according to
the exposition of truth, but also as an example to them of piety, justice, and
subjection; but this is to be^ understood not in respect of his Baptism only,
but his whole life, in which he was an example even an infant, for then he did
willingly empty himself, took upon him the form of a servant* was made in the
likeness of men, and being in fashion a man humbled himself to death, Phillip.
2.7, 8. By all which reasons I presume the Readers, who is willing to see
truth, will perceive this passage of Irenaeus to be wrested by Paedobaptists
against its meaning, to prove an use of Paedobaptism in his time. Which I have
the more largely insisted on, because indeed it is the only testimony of
credit which Paedobaptists have any color from for infant baptism in ^he 2d.
ce^tury: In the 3d. century it is not denied, but that infant baptism and many
more corruptions were; yet even then it was very rare, in case only of danger
of death, ^ut of that case dissuaded, in that case allowed upon the conceit of
giving grace by it, and saving the infant from perishing. But I shall allow Mr.
Cr. and other Paedobaptists, to say the most they can for this corruption.

Origin is alleged next by Mr. Cr. in Romans 6. l. 5. homil. 8th. on Levitic.
and 18.th. on Luke. The Exceptions against these are 3.1. they are
translations, Origens Greek in the Original is lost. The same may be said of
St. Matthews Gospel, which he writ in the Hebrew or Syriack now lost, the Greek
copy only extant. And of the LXX^. translations of the Old T. which our
Savior followed more exactly then the Hebrew Original, translations agreeing
with the Original copy b^ing equally authentic.

Answ. 1. There is no certainty, nor probability that Matthew did write in
Hebrew, says the Annotator on Matthew* in his argument of that Gospel the new
Annotations called by some the Assemblies at Westminster. Pareus in his Proeme
to his Commentary on Matthew, with the leave of antiquity, Eras^^^ and other
learned interpreters doubt not a little of that opinion that he wrote in
Hebrew, and the reasons of doubting seem not to be light, which may be seen
there, with answer to the objections produced out of antiquity. 2. Whether
there were such a translation by LXX. Jews, as Josephus relates of Aristeas, l.
12. antiq. Judaic. c. 2. I do not so much question, as the particularities of
the relation, but the authority of it is much qu^stioned, of which much may be
seen in Chamier. paustr. cath. tom. 1. l. 13. and it is much doubted whether
that we have be it, of which I am told learned Usher has written, which I have
not seen. But sure our Savior who spoke in Hebrew or Syriack followed it not,
nor do I think it safe or right to say that the Evang^lists or other holy
writers followed it more exactly then the Hebrew Original. But sure the
translation of Ruffinus of Origens Homiles is nothing like to either of these,
in which he confesses he did not exactly follow the Original* and it is likely
for this reason Voss. these. Theol. de Paedobap. part 2. thesi. 8. said, But we
shall the less care for Origin, because the things we cited are not extant in
Greek. But Mr. Cr. adds.

But 2 ly. it is said that the translation is censured by Erasmus and Perkins,
as in something contracting* adding, or altering. What is added is ingeniously
confessed by Ruffinus the translator himself; neither does acu^e Erasmus, nor
judicious Perkins, nor any of the Ancients most critical, impeach him in the
forequoted testimonies; therefore thi^ exception is blank.

Answ. This exception is good notwithstanding this answer. For 1. Perkins does
not only censure Ruffinus his translation, as in something contracting,
adding, or altering; but also puts Origens commentaries on the Epistle to the
Romans not faithfully translated by Ruffinus, among his counte^feit works. And
Erasmus in his censure of the Homilies on Leviticus, says, That a man cannot
be certain whether he reads Ruffinus, or Origin. And because Dr. Homes says I
make no exception against the translation of the Homily on Luke, he may take
notice that Erasmus in his Annota^ions on Luke ^.1. speaks much against the
Paraphrase of Origin on Luke and in ^is Annot. on Luke 1.3. Sic enim visus est
sentir^ quisqui^ i^ suit cujus extant i^ Lucam commentarii Adamantii titulo,
which sh^ws that Erasmus took not those Commentaries for Origens, or at least
d^ubted thereof. And I shall add the words of Scul^etus, in his medulla Patrum,
l. 6. c 2. Jam Ruffinu^ plurium librorum Origenis interpre ^a^t^m ^^surpavit
lic^ntiam: ut ademerit, adjecerit, mut^rit, quae sibi viderentur adim^nda,
adjicienda, mutanda: ut s^p^ incertus sit lector, utrum Origenem legate an
Ruffinum: cum Graeca Origenis opera non extent ho^^e, ^ quibus Latina versio
^orrigi possit and emend^ri. And I find cited Erasmus his preface on Hillary,
a^ charging Ruffinus with this practice of adding and ch^nging be and an
interpreter in all his translations, as of Eusebius hi^ History* but chiefly of
Origens writings. Grot. annot. in Matthew. 25.46. ^uid O^igenes senserit ex
ipsius scriptis difficile est dictu, adeo omnia a Ruffi^o sun^ interpolata.
Hieronymus Apol. adv. Ruff. l. 2. speaks thus to Ruffi^^^ concerning some of
his translations of Origin, Novit conscientia ^ua (...) addiderris, quae
subtra^eris, qu^ in utranque partem, ut ^ibi v^sum suerit immut^ris. Whereas
therefore Mr. Ms. fr^en^, Defense part 1 p 15. tells me. You call the Author of
them supposed O^igen: It had been your part before you had so branded them,
first to ha^^ made it manifest by some undeniable ev^dence or other that they
were not O^^gens: I tell him, that being but a respondent, it was enough that I
showed suc^ evidences a^ ^ did to prove the passages doubtful, an uncertain
witness being no g^od proof. And to Dr Homes his saying in his Animadv^ on my
Exerci^ p 129. Truly a man can hardly with patience enoug^ look upon Mr. (...)
^is dealing in this: When we urge Origin, he is not Origin wi^h him; but if he
do it, then Origin must be received* I answer, if the Dr. had had (...) e^ough
to have considered my words, he might have observed, that I only named Origin
Him on Romans 6. but did neither assig^ the (...) for the time in which thos^
words were written, no^ did (...) that they were to be received (...) his, but
added two reasons to (...) this imagination, ^s i^ by alleging thos^ words
under the (...) homil. on Romans 6. (by which only it is known) I did (...) his,
whereof the one was the cen^ur^ of Erasmus, the (...) Austin, nor Hierom
men^i^^ Origin as ^vouching (...) which is enough to show it to be likely, that
the passag^^ (...) by Ruffinus, though Hierom and others mention not these in
particular, since neither does he mention all the particulars of his dealings in
this kind, but charge them upon his conscience. Nor is it true, that what is
added is ingeniously confessed by Ruffinus the translator himself: For though
the words cited by Mr. Ms. friend, Defense, p. 16. show that Ruffinus
acknowledged of what sort his addi^ions were to his translation of his Homilies
on Leviticus, yet they show not what in particular they were; nor is any thing
produced to show the words cited for infant Baptism were not one. Nor is there
any good answer made to my allegation to prove that passage likely to be one,
1. from the bringing of them in (as it seemed to me when I read them) in a
patcht manner, not as if they were woven at first with the whole cloth, that is
the rest of the writing before and after, but as sewed to it by a botcher,
without any handsome coherence; which neither Mr. Ms. friend, p. 16. nor Dr.
Homes p. 130. deny, and therefore I count worth the observing by the judicious
Reader, when he shall examine the places, as being of some moment to discern
whether they were Origens words at first, or Ruffinus his assument. 2. Because
they are the very words which are frequently used by the refuters of Pelagians
in the 5th. century, who denied Original sin, whereas Origin is taxed as the
very Father of Pelagianism, by Hieron. praesat. ad lib. 4. in Hierem. and
elsewhere, as teaching (...) perfection or freedom from sin, contrary to the
express words of those cited passages; and when August. tom. 7. l 1. adv.
Julian. c. 1, 2. alleges ancients avouching Original sin, he never mentions
Origin; and therefore these passages, being so express against Pelagians, and
in the very words used by the refuters of them in Augustines time, are to be
judged to be added either by Ruffinus, whose words to the same purpose on the
50th. Psalm are cited by Chamier, pa^str. cath. tom. 3. l. 1. c. 6.. 9. and of
whom the same Author, tom. 4. l. 7. c. 9.. 30. says, Sciunt omnes docti
exiguam fuisse Ruffini in vertendis authoribus religionem, or by some other.
Nor are these passages in Origin only hints against some piece of Pelagianism,
which might be conceived by some few in his time, as Dr. Homes minceth the
matter, p. ^ 30. but express arguing against the main point of Pelagianism,
denying original corruption, and that in the chief arguments used by Augustine
and others. Nor did Origin Pelagianize a little only, but is supposed to have
first brought in Pelagianism into the Church, Hieron. adv. Ruffin. says Dr.
Owen* display of Arminianism, chapter 12. And though it is not ^enied that Origin
did deliver contraries, yet I think it is hard to find him so often, and so
directly arguing against his own tenet. Nor do I conceive, however Dr. Homes,
Mr. Blake, Mr. M. and others imagine contradictions in my words which are not
so, that ever Dr. Homes has found in my writings such clashings against my
self. Nor do I make such an argument as M. Ms friend Defense, ^.17. answers,
that the passages make against the Pelagians, and therefore necessarily they
were written after the Pelagian heresy was broached (which is a mere shifting
fashion in that Author who ever he were, used before in answering my argument
from Irenaeus words and scope, which he answers as if I made it from the scope
and not the words) but thus, these passages are plainly and directly against
the Pelagians chief point of impeccability, which Origin is charged to be the
Author of; therefore according to Rivets rule tractat. de patrum autoritate c.
14. it is not likely they were Origens, to which he answers not. I will add only
the words of Vossius Hist. Pelag. l. 2. part. 1. th. 6. p. 153. Idem Origines
T. 2. p. 471. nisi is potius Rufinus interpres (quis enim, quae vel Origenis,
vel paraphrastae adeo liberi suerint, hodii discern^t) in cap. IX. ( rectius
VI.) ad Romans ubi ait, ab sorde p^ccati m^ndus non est quisquam, etiamsi unius
diei fuerit vita ejus super terram. Sed fuse clareque imprimis ^oc de peccato
scribit lib. VIII. and XII. in Levit. nisi isti in Leviticum commentarii
Cyrilli potius sint, quando etiam in hujus operibus inveniun^u^, ac, ut in
Origenianis libri sexdecim, ita inter Cyrilliana sexdecim homiliae appellantur,
which shows, that that learned writer for Paedobaptism, did distrust those very
passages cited for infant Baptism to have been none of Origens.

Mr. C. a^ds. The third thing objected is, that he calls it a tradition; so
does the Apostle things contained in Scripture, 2 These. 2.15. Epiphanius calls
Baptism and other divine truths (...) traditions, and yet quotes Scripture for
them. Bellarmin calls infant Baptism a tradition, and yet brings ten places of
Scripture to prove it. Austin affirms lib. 10. c. 23. de Genes. that the
custom of our mother the Church in baptising of little ones i^ in no wise to
be despised, nor to be thought superfluous, nor at all to be believed, unless
it were an Apostolic tradition, and yet proves the necessity of it from Joh.
3.5. unless one be born again of water and the spirit, etc.

Answ. It was granted in my Examen that the greatest points of faith though
written, were by the Ancients called Apostolical traditions, but in this point
that the words ascribed to Origin meant an unwritten tradition, I alleged 1.
that the phraie^ pro hoc and ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem suscepit, and
secundum Ecclesiae observantiam, are sufficient proof to them who are
acquainted with the Ancients writings of those times. To this is nothing
replied by Mr. Ms. friend* Dr. Homes, or M. Cr. to show that these phrases are
applied to any other then unwritten traditions, when they are used of ri^es,
for the use or institution of which they allege no text of Scripture. 2. That
there is no text of Scripture cited for the use or insti^^^ion of infant
Baptism. To this it is replied, that Origin lays the ground on the Scriptures.
But those Scriptures are brought for the proof of origi^al sin, and the
necessit^ of infant Baptism, which were reasons of the Churches observance, not
proofs of the use and institution of it. And that the Scriptures do not give
any proof of the use or ^nstitution of infant Baptism, but only grounds of the
reasonableness, and why the Church took it up, is showed to have been the
judgment of many learned Papist^ and Protestants of later and elder time, in
my Praecursor sect 20 which may be easily observed, because they allege
nothing out of Scripture about ^nsti^u^ion or practice of it, but of nece^^^ty
to save the infant; which being a mistake, it appears ^he tradition wa^ not
from the Apostles. Besides, as Augustine alleged Joh. 3.5. for inf^nt Baptism,
so he also alleged Joh 6* 53 for infant Communion which he and the Ancients
observed a^ an Apostolic tradition, (...) many Churches observe even to this
day; yet we conclude it is but an unwritten tradition, and so judged by the
Ancients: All the places of the Fathers which cite Scripture for infant
Baptism, infant Communion, Easter, Lent^^ast, and many other things which the
Ancients observed, showing rather the reason of their observation, then the
institution, as Mr. Cawdrey speaks in another case, Sabb. rediv. part. 4. chap.
1.. 24.

To the 20th. section of my Praecursor, Mr. Baxter in his Praefestinantis
morator says, The Ancients took infant Baptism, as you say, for an Apostolical
tradition, but not unwritten. The warrant they supposed written: but not the
history de facto.

Answ. The ancients must needs take infant Baptism for an unwritten tradition
when they supposed the History neither de facto no^ of the institution to be
written, though they ^ook the custom of the Church (as Austin tom. 3. l. 10.
de Genes. ad litteram c 23 terms i^, having such reason from the necessity of
it to save them perishing upon the mistake of Joh. 3.5. for their warrant. But
how poor a mat^^r was taken by the Church for a reason to continue a custom,
may ^ppear even by those words of Austin in that place, which show also it was
taken only for a custom of the Church taken up by them, and not app^inted by
the Apostles. For having spoken as doubtful and uncertain what to say about
the question before agitated by him, concerning the creation of the souls of
the children from the parents bec^us^ of the objection from (...) Baptism of
little ones, he ^hen adds; Yet the custom of ou^ mother the Church in
Baptising little one^, is not to be d^sp^sed nor by any mean^ to be accounted
superfluous, nor a^ all to be believed unless it were an Apostolical tradition
For that little age has great weight of testimony, which first me^ited to shed
blood for Christ. Whereby it may appear, 1. That Austin ^ook i^ for a custom
of the Church, without example or institution written. 2. That he took such a
frivolou^ p^^^ence as the death of the children of Bethlehem slain b^ Herod,
Matthew. 2. to have great weight of testimony for the believing of infant bap^ism
to have been an Apostolical tradition. It would be counted arrogance in me to
censure the Fathers, yet when I find such silly reasons as Austin here and
elsewhere, and Cyprian Epist. 59 ad Fid^m, g^ve a^ warrant for infant Bap^ism,
so slightly passed over by Mr. B. and ot^ers, and their testimonies still urged
for the credit of infant Bap^ism* which do wi^h any that is willing to see the
we^kness of them discredit it, I cannot but for the truths sake say, that as in
many other things so in this of infa^t Baptism the Fathers speeches are so
vain, as that there is more need to bewail the error they have led people
into, then to the continuance of the deceiving of people by them, to allege
them for proofs, or to magnify, justify or excuse them.

Mr. B. adds. You might have spared all the 86. page, where you prove that
Papists take it for an unwritten tradition. We know they are desirous of any
pretense to set tradition above Scripture* Yet you know Bellarmin and others
commonly prove it by Scripture. The words of Becan^s (not. 24. as you say, but.
12.) yield, the (...) rightly interpre^ed to prove infant Baptism, and that is
all that I desire. I had thought that Chamiers answer to this might have
satisfied you. If you have forgot it, peruse it again tom. 7. lib. 9. c. 10..
40, etc. and tom. 4. l. 5. c. 9.. 32.

Answ. I could not well have spared any part of that page. Not only later
Papists engaged in the modern controversies, but also elder and disingaged
Papists and others, were alleged by me, of whom it is not meet to suspect that
they did acknowledge that infant Baptism is an unwritten tradition, out of a
de^re to set tradition above Scrip^u^e, but out of clear evidence of the t^u^h
of what they say. Nor do I think Mr. B. can show one Author until Luthers day,
who made infant Baptism any other then an unwritten tradition, although they
produce many of them Scriptures for the necessity, reasonableness, and
lawfulness of the Church to use it, to whose authority they ascribed too much
in the appointing such rites, and interpreting ^criptures to that end. I do not
find that the engaged Papists cited by me, did set tradition above Scripture,
b^t that they make it equal I grant. I know Bellarmin tom. 3. l. 1. de sacram.
bapt. c. 8. brings three arguments from Scripture for infant Baptism, and c. 9.
says, deducitur evidenter ex Scripturis, u^ di^imus, but how he means it he
(...) us thus in the same chapter; that though the argument of the Anabaptists
from defect of Command or example have great force against Lutherans, for as
much as they use that principle every where, that the ^ite which is not in
Scripture having no command nor example there, is to be rejected, yet it is of
no force against Catholics. For alt^ough we find no command expressly, that we
should baptize infants, yet that also is openly enough gathered out of
Scriptures, as we have showed above: and besides the tradition of the Apostles
is of no less authority with us, then Scripture, for the Apostles spoke with
the same spirit with which they did write. But that this is an Apostolic
tradition, we thence know whence we know the Apostolic Scripture to be the
Apostolic Scripture; to wit, from the testimonies of the ancient Church. The
words of Becanus were cited rightly by me out of his manual of Controversies l.
1. c. 2.. 24. (not. 12. as Mr. B. corrects me without cause) and they plainly
show the meaning of those men to be, that the Scripture only proves infant
Baptism by that sense of it, which is not manifest but by the tradition, and
practice of the Church I have perused Chamier paustr. Cath. (not tom. 7. as Mr.
B. directs, I know none such) but tom. 1. l. 9. c. 10.. 40, etc. and tom. 4. l
5. c. 9.. 32. But I am not thereby satisfied, that either the Ancients took
infant Baptism for any other then an unwritten tradition or that it ought to be
taken.

Mr. B. proceds. Mr. Rogers has made you know he is of another judgment. Mr
Bedford tells me he has corrected his word^ in a later edition. How could you
allege Dr. Field without considering how you wronged your self? Is nothing
written in Scripture but expressly? yea is not that Scripture proof, and plain
proof, which shows plainly from Scripture the grounds reasons and causes of the
necessity of the practice? Dr Prideaux thought Episcopacy provable from
Scripture: and therefore if he thought that infant Baptism must be proved the
same way, he is sure against you. For Dr. Taylour, if you have read all his
books, I hope you will no more reckon him amongst Protestants, having so much
of the body of Popery in them. Mr. Youngs words (if they be his) are against
you in the thing you cite them for. There are testimonia minus aperta: and
there are testimonia aperta pro fundamto and praemissis, quae sunt minus aperta
direct^ pro conclusione. My audaciousness in asserting plain Scripture proof
must be b^tter repressed then thus, if you will satisfy men of reason and
conscience.

Answ. I have made known in my Apology sect. 13. how Mr. Rogers shifts but
answers not the allegation I made of his words. And if M. Bedford have
corrected his words, I wish it have not been f^r the cause sake, against his
conscience. If he and Mr. Rogers can so easily say and unsay, who can give
credit to men that can thus blow hot and cold wi^h the same breath? I know no
wrong to my self done, by alleging Dr. Field. Though things be written in
Scripture which are not so expressly, yet is not that Scripture proof, nor plain
proof for infant Baptism, any more then infant Communion, which shows plainly
from Scripture, Paul's conclusion of original sin, Rom 5.12. and Christ's Joh.
3.5. which Ancients took falsely for grounds, reasons and causes of the
necessity o^ infant Baptism, as they did Joh. 6.53. of infant Communion, yet
took the use to be a custom ^f the Church, countenanced from Scripture
without institution of Christ, or practice of the Apostles And that this was
Dr. Fields meaning, is plain from his words; and this seems to have been the
common opinion of the Prelates of the Church of England, by the words by way of
Preface used at the solemnity of Ba^tism, and in sundry places of the Common
Prayer book, Catechism, art. 27. of the Church of England. And after this
manner thought Dr. Prideaux infant Baptism and Episcopacy proveable by
Scripture. I have not read all Dr. Tailors works, nor do I know but that he is
to be reckoned among Protestants. Dr. Youngs words are much for me, 1. In that
he produces no precept but that of Circumcision for infant Baptism. 2. That
he confesses the practice Apostolical to be somewhat obscurer, and therefore
adds the cust me of the Church from the times of the first ages, which is in
effect all one as to resolve the proof of infant Baptism finally into the
custom of the whole Church, especially when he says; we cannot smite the
Anabaptists with plain testimonies. Nor can Mr. Bs. distinction of more or less
open testimonies help him, since Dr. Young denies, that Paedobaptists can smite
with open or plain ^estimonies, the Anabaptists barking against infant Baptism.
If Mr. Bs. audaciousness in asserting plain Scripture proof for infant Baptism
be not yet repressed, nor men of reason and conscience satisfied, I must leave
them to the Lord. Enough I think is said about Origens words. I go on.

Dr. Hammond in his Defense of infants Baptism, page 98. says thus; About the
same time (the 3d. Century) or without question soon after wrote the Author
(under the name of Dionysius Areopagita) de Eccl. Hierarch. For as by Photius
it appears, Theodorus Presbyter about the year 420. debated the question,
whether that writer were Dionysius mentioned in the acts or no. And of this no
doubt has been made; but that he was a very ancient and learned Author. He
therefore in his 7th. chapter of Eccles. Hierarch. Edit. Morel. p. 233. proposes
the question, as that which may seem to profane persons ( i. e. heathens)
ridiculous, why children which cannot yet understand divine things, are made
partakers of the sacred birth from God, i. e. evidently of Baptism (concerning
the baptizing of infants says Maximu^ his scholiast) adding to the same head
also, that others in their stead p^onounce the abrenunciations and divine
confessions. And his answer is, 1. That many things which are unknown by us why
they are done, have yet causes worthy of God 2. That we affirm of this the same
things which our divine Officers of the Church being instructed by divine
tradition have brought down unto us, and again, our Divine guides ( i. e. the
Apostles says Maximus) considering this, appointed that infants should thus be
admitted according to the sacred manner, nothing can be more clear then that
the Apostolical tradition is by this ancient and elegant writer avouched for
the baptizing of infants, as a sufficient account of that matter, against the
reproaches and scoff^ of profane or heathen men, who deemed it unreasonable.
And so there is a most convincing testimony for that time, wherein that Author
wrote, which must needs be in the 4th. Century, before Theodorus Presbyters
debating the question concerning him, but most probably more ancient, and so to
be placed in this 3d. age.

Answ. 1. It is to be noted by the Reader, that Dr. Hammond does not so much as
pretend the antiqui^y of that Author to be before the 3d. century, and
consequently not that Dionysius the Ar^opagite mentioned Act 17 34. as some
Papists would have it, but are by learned men both Papists and Protestants
refuted, whereof may be seen Magdeb. centur. 1. l. 2. c. 10. Scultet. med.
Patrum, l. 11. c* 9. Perkins prepar. to the demonstr of the problem. 2. Though
Dr. Hammond conceive, that that Author is to be placed in the 3 d age by reason
of some words of Photius, (which for want of books I cannot examine) yet
Salmasius ad Col^ium says p* 1^9. quamvis subdititius ille (Diony^^us
Areopagita) sit auctor nec antiquior quinto seculo. p. 441. quem certa fides
est scripsisse circa finem quinti seculi. And that which Scultetus ubi supra
observ^s, that in his book of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy he writes many things of
Temples, of ^ltars, of Holy places, of a Qui^e, of consecration of Monks, of
the tonsure and shaving of heads, i^ me thinks a good argument, that the Author
was some idle dreaming Monk no elder then the 5th. century, and is so far from
being acc^unted a W^iter of esteem among Divines, that he is rather censured as
one who by his curiosities has corrupted Divinity. 3. Whether those who deemed
infan^ baptism unreasonable were infidels who derided it, or Christians who
scrupled it, is no^ c^eared by the Dr. Nor is it a^pare^t that by Divine guides
are meant the Apostles 4. B^t if it were, that Author makes it no other then an
unwritten tradition, if he did he would ^ave alleged some Scripture for i^;
and the words [ our Divine Officers being instructed, not as Dr. Hammond
translates it by Divine tradition, but unto or of the old tradition have
brought down unto us] do show, that he counted it a tradition unwritten and
delivered from one Officer to another until that time. Now it is granted that
in the end of the 3d. and following ages, infant baptism, and in like manner
infant communion were counted traditions Apostolical to save infants from
perishing, and such seems to have been the opinion of that Author. Pamelius
annot. 89. on Cyprian de lapsis. Tractat hunc locum D. Augustinus Ep. 23. ad
Bonifac. Haud obscure autem hic quomodo and supr^ indicatur vetus Ecclesiae
consuetudo communionis parvulorum, qualem etiam indica^e videtur Dionysius
Areopagita sub finem Eccles. Hierarch. and sua adhuc aetate D. Aug. Epist. 107.
ad vitalem. All which being conside^ed, this testimony is so far from being a
most convinci^g ^estimo^y of the derivation of infant baptism from the
Apostle^, that considering upon what ground they observed it, and how much
vanity was in the Ancients in their retaining many fond customs, and fathering
them on the Apostles, and when common defending them by Scriptures perverted,
it is a convincing testimony that infant baptism was no more from ^he Apostles
then infant communion, both mere corruptions taken upon mistakes and defended
by abuse of Scripture.

Mr. M. Mr. Cr. Dr. Homes, Dr. Hammond allege Gregory Nazianzen his 40th.
Oration about baptism* in which he advises the baptizing of infants, which
says Dr. Hammond, is a plain testimony of the Churches doctrine at that time,
the 4 th. century, about the year of Christ, 70. he flourished, and died in the
year 389.

Against this sundry things are objected, 1. that the same Author says (as I
find his words in Chamier. paustr. cath. tom. 4 l. 5. c. 9.. 66.) where he
gives instance in his 40th. Oration of baptism, of those who decease without
baptism, Neither can they receive it, either perhaps by reason of infancy, or
some altogether involuntary chance, by which it is that even they, who would,
obtain not that gift. From whence it is manifest, that in Gregory Nazianzens
time infants did decease without baptism, and that they could not receive it by
reason of infancy. Nor is this objection salved by making the reason of these
childrens not receiving baptism, because that sometimes it might fall out that
Christians might not have the opportunity of bringing their children to
baptism, because they dwelt among infidels or Paynims, where they could not
enjoy the benefit of the word and sacraments for themselves or their children;
therefore they were necessitated to put off the baptising of their children,
which seems to be Mr. Ms friends evasion in his Defense, p. 24. in that he
applies this passage in Nazianzen as well to the hinderance of the baptism of
children as of elder persons. For the words of Nazianzen show, that as some
deceased without baptism by reason of some (...), unvoluntary accident, whether
by the hand of God or men; so others he says deceased (...) barely by reason
of infancy, and that by reason of it (...) they were not in power or capacity
to receive it. Which is a plain testimony, that however in c^se of apparent
danger of death then infants mi^ht receive baptism according to his opinion,
yet ordinarily they were not in the power or capacity to receive it, and so did
sometimes die without it.

2. It is objected, and thereby this observation is confirmed, that when he
comes in the same Oration to set down what he would have done about infants
baptism he resolves 1. that they should be baptized if danger did urge it, that
they might not miss of the common grace, intimating that otherwise they should.
2. He gives his judgment for others that they should wait longer. 3. The
reason he gives of this longer waiti^g is, that they may hear some mystical or
spiritual thing, may be taught to answer somewhat, and if they understand not
fully, perfectly, and exa^^ly, yet they are instructed and informed. 4. That
(not as Dr. Hammond to give color to his conceit of sanctifying to be the same
with baptizing, 1 Cor. 7.14. by this means they may be baptized souls and
bodies; for if this were good reading, 1. they should baptize themselves, 1.
they should bap^ize their souls which were ridiculous;) but, so as that they
sanctify both souls and bodies by or with the great mystery of initiation.
Which shows he conceived 1. that by baptism benefit did come to infants though
they perceived it not; 2 that it sanctifies their bodies; 3. that it is be^ter
done, when children are taught to answer; 4. then they sanctify soul^ and
bodies, 5. that danger of death was a forcible impulsive to move to the baptism
of in^ants, 6. that without baptism infants should mis^ o^ the common (...).

To (...) Dr Hammond thus, 1. It is clear that it no way prejudg^s ^he doctrine
and practice of the Church formerly set down, (...) him, that infant children,
indefinitely considered might be b^ptized* and if dang^r appr^ac^ed, must, how
young soever they were: which is as contrary to the An^ipaedobaptist, and so to
Mr. T. as any thing.

Answ. 1. The phrase [ the doctrine and practice of the Church] is according to
the Pr^latical language* I think as much as the doctrine and practice of the
Prelates, (...) to the Scripture language is non sense, the Church being the
number of persons taught, and on whom bap^izing (...), not the person^ teaching
or practicing, who are stil^d ^he Elders of the (...) in S^^ip^ure. 2. That the
Elders of any Church (...) N^^^ianzen taug^^ that infant children, indefinitely
considered, might be baptized, and if d^^ger ^pproached, must, how young soever
they w^^e, (...) not pretended of any besides the Co^ncel mention^^ in Cyp^ian,
Epist. 5^ (...), which it is true determined, in opposition t^ (...) his
scr^ple, the lawfulness of baptizing any day, but not of any infants who were
likely ^o live without apparent show of danger of death, but ^a^her ^he
contrary is manifest from their reason, w^y they would h^ve them bapt^zed any
day before the 8th. because the son of man ^am to save m^ns souls, as much as in
us lies, if it may be, no soul is to be lo^^, and therefore to be baptized any
day before the 8th. N^w this (...), that (...) only of those infants who being
in apparent danger of death would be lost, if not baptized. N^w it is true
(...), and it is as contrary to the (...) of (...) position of the Papists,
tha^ ba^tism confers (...) that infants dying unbaptised pe^^sh, and if (...)
this doctrine and practice of the Church, yet it does prejudice the doctrine
and practice of Protestant Paedobaptists, who, contrary to Nazianzens mind,
would not have infants baptized in that case only, or for his reason, but
would have infants baptized out of the case of imminent and apparent danger of
death, and not deferred, upon a pretense of a Covenant right and visible
Churchmembership as their privilege, not as necessary to avoid the danger of
perishing.

2dly. ( says Dr. Hammond) that it is but his private opinion pretending not
so much as to any part of the Church of that, or former ages to authorize it.

Answ. 1. That Tertullian did in like manner determine as Nazianzen did, that
infants were not to be baptized but in case of imminent and apparent danger of
death, will appear in the examining of his testimony among the Latin Doctors.
2. I know no reason why the counsel and opinion of these two should not as well
be counted the doctrine and practice of the Church, and to be of equal
authority as Cyprians, and his Councels, Augustines, and Hieroms.

3dly. ( Says Dr. Hammond) that the state of children being so weak and
uncertain, that it is hard to affirm of any that they are not (for the first
three years) in any danger, his council for deferring will hardly be ever
practical to any.

Answ. The counsel of Nazianzen to baptize in case of danger was not of infants
that are in any danger* but of urgent or pressing danger, as the word (...),
press, urge, or impel, shows. And thus it is practical, as the use of private
baptism in those places where it is used does sufficiently show.

Fourthly, says he, that the deferring of which Nazianzen speaks is most
probably to be understood of those whose ^arents are newly converted, and
themselves doubt whether they shall be yet baptized or no, for to such he
speaks in that place from p. 654. A.

Answ. The reasons being general, this restriction appears groundless, not is
the Drs. conceit of any validity, that because four pages before ^e speaks to
them, therefore that counsel of his concerns their children only.

Lastly, says he, that the deferring till three years old, if it were allowed,
would no way satiisfie the Antipaedobaptists pretensions* and so still the
former passages ought be of force with all, and no heed given to the whispers
of Mr ^. and others, as if that holy Father dissuaded Baptism in any age unless
in case of danger, when he clearly says, (...), Let him in the tenderest age
be Baptized and consecrated to the spirit.

Answ 1. Why he should call my words or writings whispers any more then his
own, since they are audible enough were it not that I speak to deaf men who will
not hear, I do not deprehend, I imagine they are louder then the Doctor would
have them. 2. Tha^ men should not give heed to my words as well as the
Doctors, if they seek the truth impartially, I know not, since where truth is
sought both sides are to be heard. 3. It is true the deferring Baptism till
three years old, will not satisfy us as sufficient to rectify the abuse of
infant baptism is granted, no nor till thirty, except the person become a
disciple and believer in Christ: But it satisfies us in this, that Nazianzens
judgment was, that little ones should not be baptized till they come to some
understanding of the thing signified by baptism, unless in case of imminent and
apparent dan^er of death, though we conceive he allowed too short a time to
instruct the^. 4. If the word consecrated be meant of baptism, and from the
nails signify tender age, yet it is not likely he meant this tender age of
infancy, since he made persons incapable of baptism by reason of infancy,
judged it better to have them first instructed; If he did, he would have it to
only in case of danger of death imminent.

But says Dr. Homes, p. 142. 1. If Greg. Nazianzen does give reason why
infants should be baptized, in case they are not likely to live to be of ripe
years, it is so much the better for us.

^nsw. I suppose the Doctor does not think with Nazianzen, that the danger of
death is a sufficient reason for the bapti^zing an infant, for that arises
from the Popish conceits of regenoration by Baptism, ex opere operato, and the
necessity of it to save an infant from perishing. And therefore Nazianzens
reason must be the worse for him, since it thwarteth his opi^ion of baptizing
upon an imagined privilege of Covenant holine^s, and his practice of doing i^
ordinarily to infants of Churchmembers out of that case. And it would be
considered, that where the ground of a practice is disclaimed the alleging of
the practice correspondent to that ground and no further, is impertinent for
confirmation of the practice of the same thing, in a different manner, and upon
a different ground; as the Protestant Divines tell the Papists, that their
alleging the ancients commemorati^n of the dead, proves not the Popish prayi^g
for the dead to be ancient, as Dr ^sher at large in his answer to the Jesuits
challenge, since the Popish praying is upon the opinion of Purgatory, and for
them that are there, the Ancients for the Apostles, Martyrs, c. who are past
Purgatory, and for their resurrection; in like manner concerning the
allegations of the Ancients Monkery, which either was necessary only by reason
of the incessant persecutions of those times, or if voluntary, yet with labor
of their hands, and so different from the Popish Mo^kery which is idle, besides
Gods appointment, vol^n^^r^, superstitious, upon an imagined perfection in that
which is indeed sinful. And so for confirmation by laying on of hand, anointing
wi^h oil* use of the sign of the cross, setting up lights and many more, it is
fr^quent^y showed that they countenance no the P^^ish confirmation, extreme
unction, use of the sign of the cross, lighting candles at noon day in their
^^mples, etc. because they were in different m^nner, and for different reasons
and purposes then they are now used by them. And indeed the discovery of the
different reasons, manner, and end of rites used b^ the Ancients, from that
they are now used, is of greatest moment to show the novelty of the Popish,
Prelatical, Paedobaptists usages, who have not only quite departed from the
Scripture but also from antiquity, even in those things which the Ancients
practiced indeed, but not as they do.

Secondly, says Dr. Homes, he does give another reason, beside that of
partaking of common grace, namely, 1. (...), For it is better that they should
be sanctified without a feeling of it, then to depart without the seal. So he
thinks they are sanctified too in infancy as well as at riper years. 2. (...),
A reason also of this to us is Circumcision, that was wont to be done on the
8th. day, etc.

Answ. 1 The first of these is no other then the partaking of common grace (for
to partake of the common grace is all one as to be sanctified) only with a
little enlargement. 2. The 2d. is indeed rather a preventing of an objection
[that they could not be par^akers of the common grace without perceiving it]
rather then a further reason of baptizing them. And the answer is from two
examples, one of curcumcision which was given to infants without the use of
reason, the other of the anoining or sprinkling the door posts, which were
things insensitive, bringing salvation to the first born, which is such a
wooden reason as Dr. Homes thought fit to let pass in this place.

Thirdly, says Dr. Homes, We answer that all three reasons stand in force, as
well for all believers infants (God putting them under the promise, Genesis ^7.) a
for the infants that are in danger of death.

Answ. Wh^tever force there is in the reasons (which in my apprehension are
frivolous) to prove Dr Homes his opinion or practice, yet sure in Nazianzens
intent they are only for the coloring over of the practice of infant baptism,
of any whether believers or unbelievers children; only in case of apparent
danger of imminent death, and not at all for countenancing baptizing of
believers infants only at all times as federally holy.

Fourthly, says Dr. Homes, that Nazianzen urges diverse divine reasons (to him
evincing) for the baptism of infants in danger of death: but for the delaying
of others not in danger of death, he says, (...), I give my opinion ^he calls
it his opinion. And what is it? That (...), such children should stay till
three or four years old more, or less? And what is to be expected from children
of that age? more then from infants toward baptism? For Nazianzen himself
confesses, that though they may hear and answer some spiritual things, yet
they understand imperfectly. But does Nazianzen give us there any Scripture for
this differing? None. Does he give any reason? Even in effect the same as for
baptizing of infants in danger of death, to wit, that they may be sanctified in
mind and body.

Answ. 1. It Is true Nazianzen gives one reason for baptizing infants in case of
danger of death, which is the sanctifying them by it, not diverse reasons the
examples of Circumcision and anointing the door p^sts, being answers to an
objection, as I said before. Now that reason is so far from being Divine, that
it is from a mere superstitious conceit, as if the mere outward Baptism did
sanctify: Nor is it the same reason in effect for differing baptism three or
four years with that which he gives for infant baptism in case of danger of
death. For though he supposes in both Baptism sanctifies, yet he takes infant
Baptism to sanctify only the body, the other to sanctify body and mind. He
supposes they may learn some spiritual thing, though imperfectly, and so the
baptism may be a sign to them though obscure, and there may be some memory of
what is done, though confused, which though it be not as it should be, yet it
is better and more agreeable to Scripture then the infant Baptism, where there
is no signification to the baptized, nor remembrance of it. 2. Be it granted
that Nazianzen expresses but his opinion, and that it betters not the thing
much, and his reasons not so right as they should have been, there is in this
passage this evident, that infant Baptism was no tthen common as now, nor upon
such reasons as now, nor approved of as now it is, but out of the case of
danger of death imminent, apparently dissuaded, and consequently the present
common infant baptism an innovation from what was in that age.

Dr. Hammond adds, That Chrysostom in his Homily to the Neophyti, has these
words, For this cause (i. e. because there be so many benefits of baptism there
recited, ten in number) we baptize children though they have not sins, and that
he flourished in the beginning of the fifth Age.

Answ. Though find in two Homilies, one in the fifth, the other in the sixth
tome of Chrysostomes works of Eton print, some speeches unto the newly
enlightened or planted, yet I find not these words there, nor any where else in
any of his homilies. Yet I deny not them to be Chrysostomes finding them in
Augustine tom. 7. l. 1. against Julian the Pelegian, chapter 2. But perhaps if the
words before were viewed, it might be discerned whether the Baptism of little
ones then used, were only in case of danger of death apparently imminent, or
without that case. It is likely he meant that infants or little children were
baptized only in case of danger of death imminent, since many of his Homilies
express, even that where these words cited were, exhortations to the newly
baptized, and the relation of his life testifies, that when he was persecuted
by the Empress, and was about to baptize on the solemn festival in which
Baptism was used, the persons men and women that were to be baptized by him
fled away naked, being ready to be baptized upon his apprehension, which shows
they then baptized persons naked. And the occasion of the speech, as s^t down
by Austin, shows it was done upon the conceit of giving them grace, which is
manifest by the words (...) for this cause And the particle (...), also, in the
Greek, shows there was mention of baptizing others then little children. And in
the same place Austin says, ^ohn Chrysostom held, believed, and taught this,
not only that little children were not only to be baptized, but also to have
the Eucharist or Lords Supper, for without his flesh and blood they could not
have life. As for the other place Dr. Hammond ci^es in Chrysostoms 40th. Homily
on Genesis, that Baptism is lawful in the first age, I yield that Chrysostom
did in that age allow infant Baptism, but I think the Dr. cannot show that he
held it was to be done out of the case of apparent danger of imminent death,
or that the practice of baptizing them out of that case was ordinary It is most
evident by many proofs, that both then and some ag^s after, the ordinary usual
baptizing was of chatechized persons at the solemn feasts, when most in the
Empire were by profession Christians.

SECT. LXXXX. The arguments to prove Infant Baptism an innovation Exam. page 9.
are made good against Mr. Marshal, and Dr. Homes.
WHereas Mr. M. had said in his Sermon page 3 that it is manifest out of most
of the Records that we have of ^^iquity, both in the Greek and Latin Church,
that the Christian Church has been in possession of the privilege of
baptising the infants of believers for the space of 1500. years and upwards; I
said in my Examen p. 9. But it is wonder to me that if it were so manifest as
you speak, you should find nothing in Eusebius for it, nor in Ignatius. nor in
Clemens Alexandrinus, nor in Athanasius, nor in Epiphanius, that I mention not
others

To this Mr. M. or his f^iend replies, that I add three arguments to show that
Infant Baptism was not known in the Greek Church, but therein he abuses me,
for I add^d them not to that end, but to show that it was not so manifest as
Mr. M. said, that it was not universally known.

To my mention of the silence of Eusebius, etc. he says. 1. The question was
not started then, as the Fathers spoke not clearly of the traduction of
original sin, before it was denied by the Pelagians. 2 That it is enough to him
that none of the ^uthors named by me spoke against it.

Answ 1. The question of the Hieracites was raised in Epip^anius his time,
which did lead to speak of infants Baptism, and ye^ Epiphanius allegeth not
in^ants Baptism against them, though it had been for his purpose. 2. Sure
Eusebius that writes the Ec^lesiastical story, and such as wrote the history of
the Church, had occasion to mention it is ^hey do the B^ptism of persons of
age, he use of the Lo^ds Supper, the meetings of Christians, the orders of the
Church, the ordinations o^ Bishops and other things and would it i^ were so
man^f^st as Mr. M. said it was. ^3. It may be they spoke not against it*
because there was ^o question about it. Bu^ it is l^kely there was no question
about it, because there was in the first ages no practice of it, or very
obscure. For as soon as it began, Tertullian put in some exc^ptions against it
and after him Nazianzen. 4. If the Fathers before Po^^gius arose, did not speak
clearly of original sin, then it is likely the pa^^ages in Origin on Levit.
Romans Luke were nor his, since they speak clearly of the traduction of original
sin and that speech of V^ssius Hist Pel. l* 2 ^art ^ th 6. p. 153. is right;
For who can at this day discern what passages were the brats of Origin or his
paraphrasts?

He adds. 1. If any thing were brought out of Ignatius, you would tell me,
that you did not know Ignatius when you see him.

Answ. 1. Though Ignatius Epistles be very doubtful, yet I incline to think
some of them to be his which we have, and that genuine passages may be
discerned from spurious. 2. If any p^ssage, though spurious, were to be found
in him for infant Baptism, Paedobaptists would not stick to produce it, who
make no conscience to allege the words falsely ascribed to Justin Martyr in the
book of questions and answers to the Orthodox, and stick not to maintain the
allegation of it, as his, th^ugh it mention Origin, whom Dr. Homes imagins
Justin Martyr might hear of, though he died by his confession anno 169. and
Origin wa^ not born till about 156. as the passages in his Animado* on my
Exercit. p 111, 112, 127. compared do show. Besides the allegation of the Book
of Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, as Dionysius the Areopogites, the questions ad
^ntiochum, as Athana^^us his show, that neither this Author nor other
Pae^obaptists are ashamed to allege bastard writings, which say any thing for
infant Baptism.

Concerning Clemens Alexandrinus he tells me Defense p. 19. You desire to know
what Clemens Alexandrinus says (which is not true) why sure he had none but
great infants to be his Scholars (I conceive he means p^ofessed Pagan
infidels, But I t^ink this not true, since in his writings he directs
Christians, and opposes heretics) if you (who pretend to be acquainted
familiarly (which is very false) with the secrets of antiquity) be acquainted
with him you will know what I mean: He desired (as it is likely more Greek Fathers
who were converted from Paganism did) to set forth religion in such a way, as
might move other Pagans to come and confess the Christian says, that so they
might be added to the Church by Baptism, in such a way as was proper to the
baptising of grown men. Which is true, and confirms my presumption that when he
speaks of Baptism, as he does lib. 1. paedag. c 6. and elsewhere, he would have
mentioned infant Baptism and its benefit to the same end, if it had been in his
time in use, as Mr. M. in his sermon said.

Concerning Athanas^us he speaks thus, What say you to that passage in
Athanasius? Where he is showing how we are buried with Christ in ^aptism, and
rise again; he says the dipping of the infant quite under water thrice, and
raising of it up again, does signify the death of Christ and his resurrection
upon the third day, Athan. dicta and interpretatio script. q 94. is not that
testimony plain?

Answ. It is: But whose is it? Is not that Book one of those suppositi^ious
writing in the 2d. tome of Athanasius works, of which Scultetus Medul patrum
part. 2. l. 1 c. 42. says, qu dam nullo judicio videntur con cripta quae se
satis produn? Among which also are the quaestions to Antiochus, out of which
Mr. M. or ^is friend page 20, 21. cite two testimonies, on^ out of quaest 2*
and another quaest* 114 and says, the wo^ds are safe and sound buil^ on a
^os^el ground, owned by all the reformed Churches* which make infants of
believers baptized to enter into the Kingdom of heaven, excluding the
unbaptized, which hitherto has b^^n termed Popery. Nor is he excused from
abusing Readers with these bastard writings, by saying, the words following may
be erroneous, and yet written by Athanasiu^* when the words following are part
of the answer, which is erroneous, and they are so connex that they must be
the same Authors. As for the words, How do you prove what you allege out of
Tertullian and Gregory Nazianzen, and tha^ I make this a plea for my self* that
my allegations may gain a favorable construction, that my proofs taken out of
antiquity do as strongly prove the point in hand, as proofs are usually taken
in such matters, no whit excuses him, since my proofs are from writings not
suspected, his are from treatises judged by many of each tide to he
supposititious, mine from passages not excepted against, as his are, and
therefore my wondering cease not: and the silence of these, together with
Epiphanius his not urging infant Baptism against Hieracites; yield a strong
presump^ion of the rarity of infant Baptism then, though from thence the non
usage be not syllogistically concluded. And for the words he brings out of
Epiphanius, he might call Baptism the great Circumcision, yet reject infan^
Baptism (though I said not he did, but that it is like^^ it was not so manifest
as Mr. M. said) as he might call Pre^byters Priests, and Deacons Levites, and
yet not tie Presbytery or Deaconship to a tribe, and the age in which each sort
ministered in the Temple of the Jews. I add, that the words cited out of the
supposed Athanasius prove dipping under water then the usual way of Baptism.

What Dr. Homes brings Animadv. on my Exercit. page 143. out of Clemens
Alexandrinus Strom. l. 3. page 461. serves not his turn, but is rather against
him, for it mentions only one Baptism of Believers. And the same may be s^id
of what he brings out of Epiphanius his 2d. Book ^om. 2. contra haeres. 30.
page 52. In which he makes the perfect Circumcision not to be only of men in
the time of their imbecility, but of men and women, all the people of
Christians indeed, which omits if not excludes infants.

2ly. says Mr. M or his friend, def. page 21. you reason from the continuance
of the questions put to persons when they were to be baptized, and answered by
them: which I think because we must conceive children were not able to return
an answer to them, thereby you would infer they were not baptized^ But I
answer, when the Gospel was first declared into the world, such as being of age
were first taught were then baptized, Acts 2.41. and Acts 8.13, 37. After that
time such as were taught are said to be catechized: for (...). the Catechism
leads men to faith, says Clemens Alexandrinus Paedag. When such were prepared
and made fit to be baptized, certain questions were propounded to them
concerning their faith in Christ, their resolution to forsake the Devil, etc.
which are related by many of the Ancients: when those of age afterward brought
their children to baptism, these questions were likewise out to them (though of
themselves they were not able to make answer to them) but how warrantably, I
will not go about to prove; yet that they were used at infants Bap^ism* as well
as at the Baptism of such as were at age, it appears by Balsamon in Can. 6.
Conc. Neocaesar. Aug. Ep. ad Januarium, etc. To all which questions at
childrens bap^ism, such as un^ertook their education made answer on their
b^half. Therefore you cannot by these questions infer that children were not
baptized, seeing these Authors certify that questions were put to them, and
also tell us who answered for them.

Answ. It Is true I cannot, nor did I ever intend to prove that children were
not baptized in the third age, but the putting the questions to infants to
answer, shows that at first none were baptized but such as could answer to
them: and since this was but a ridiculous thing, which this Author will not go
about to prove to have been done warrantably, to put questions to infants to
answer, doubtless it came not from the Apostles or Apostolical men, who would
never have appointed so frivolous a thing* but as this Author does very
honestly confess, they baptized such as were taught and catechized, and as he
well notes out of Clemens Alexandrinus, Catechism leads men to faith, and that
to Baptism. And this undeniably proves, as Ludovicus Vives truly gathered, tom.
in August de civit. Dei c. 27. l 1. tom. 5. that at first none was baptized
till he could ask for it and answer to the questions, which custom he says he
has heard continued in some Cities of ^taly. It is likely those of the Greeks
about Cal^bria^* and so far as I can yet by search discern, this continued the
first and second Age, to baptize only persons of age. In the third Age, infant
Baptism with many other corruptions began, and then to keep a mimical show of
the old manner of a^swering the qu^stions, some made answer in the infants
name; which being after objected to Augustine, he answers Epist. 23. that the
answerer did not speak falsely, when he said the infant did believe, because he
had the Sacrament of faith: which was indeed no answer, since the answer was
made before the Sacrament, and the Sacrament could not make him a believer who
was not. Now this answer was not to engage them to undertake their education,
as this Autho^ seems to imply, but to assert they did believe before they were
baptized, it being originally the right use of that rite, to baptize none but
those who were first believers, till the supersti^ious conceit of an infants
perishi^g without Baptism first brought it in, as necessary in case of apparent
danger of imminent death, and no otherwise; as those many relics of Antiquity
in the speeches of Tertullian, Nazianzen, and others show; besi^es the
narrations of baptizing he catechized at solemn times, and the not baptizing of
children of believers till they came to age, the inten^ of b^ptizing Austin
when in you^h he was sick, but putting it off when recovered. But after his
time, the necessity of it being so vehemently pressed by him, and urged against
Pelagians, infant Baptism in process of time quite swallowed up true baptism,
and that which this Author here ingenuo^sly confesses was the primitive use,
is now cried down as i^ it were an innovation and an heresy. So monstrously
has the ignorance and intemperate speeches of Fathers, Schoolmen and others,
and the violence and mistakes of Luther, Calvin, and others, perverted the
doctrine of Baptism, and oppressed those that have sought to reform it, though
if there were no more to be said for them then what here this Author, whether
Mr. Marshal or Dr. Young confesses, it were enough to sati^fi^ men that were
willing to be satisfied, that infant Baptism was not at first when the Gospel
went first abroad into the world, and yet th^n doubtless Believers had infants;
but that afterward men brought their children to Baptism, when ^orrupt
opinions of its necessity and the giving grace by i^ were ^eceived, and to
al^ay the extreme bit^er and unreasonable heat of spirit, which is in the
clamarous Paedobaptists of our days. But I go on.

Mr. M. or his friend tells me, Thirdly* you conceive because many children
born of Christian Parents were not baptized when they were young, therefore it
was not their custom to Baptize infants. For the making good hereof, you bring
forth instances of Constantin^ the Great, Greg* Nazianzen, and Chrysostom.
Before he speaks of these instances, he sets down some known reasons, some
imagined, why some deferred among the Ancients their own Baptism; and he thinks
they might upon the like reasons defer their childrens.

Answ. 1. That they did defer their childrens Baptism confirms my opinion, that
it was not ordinary in the Greek Church to baptize infants. 2. That if they did
defer it upon the reasons imagined by him, then they thought it not necessary
to be done in infancy, as Paedobaptists do now, chiefly Mr. Baxter, plain
Script. proof part. 2. ch 8 who will have infants baptized immediately, as soon
as ever they are disciples; which by his grounds is at the first instant of
their birth, or before. 3. That very reason why some deferred Baptism to old age
to wit the doing away sin, was indeed the very reason of their baptizing
infants And Nazianzens confutation, telling some that all times were fit for
Baptism, seeing no time was free from death, shows how ill Mr M. chose that
passage to put in the Title page of his Book, unles^ he would have Readers to
baptize upon that opinion, as if thereby they could work out their salvation.
4. All this discourse about the various reason of men's deferring their own
Baptism, is quite besides the point about parents deferring their infants
Baptism, which not to have been upon any of those imagined reasons, but because
they thought it not necessary, nor did practice it but in case of apparent
danger of imminent death to the infant, will appear by weighing his answer to
my instances. ^o that of Constantines being not baptized in infancy, though
Helena his mother were a Christian it is said; 1. That it appears not that
Constantines parents were in his infancy become Christians. 2. Himself was also
an unbeliever many years. To which I reply though it be not apparent that
Constantius or Helena were Christians in the infancy of Christians, yet those
Historians that do conceive they were, and yet it being agreed he was not then
baptized, o^acitely yield* that it was not unusual for the children of
Believers to be unbaptized till they came to age.

Dr. Homes tells me That I have ill urged Constantin a Latin, for an instance
that Baptism of infants was not ordinary in the Greek church* But I think
otherwise since Constantin lived and died in the Greek Church, and therefore
fitly mentione^ among them.

The next mentioned by me is Gregory Nazianzen, the son of a Christian Bishop,
and brought up long by him, was not baptized till he came to be a youth. To
this says Mr. M or his friend How do you prove he was the son of a Christian
Bishop* His father was once in the Hyp^istarian error, whether he were
converted before Gregory was bo^ni^ is not expressed. When he was young he was
b^ed at A^^ens under heathens, to which it is not likely his father would send
him if a Christian, and why he was not baptized as soon as he was converted to
Christianity I conjecture the reason was that he might the better prepare
himself to receive baptism.

Answ. I did little imagine that this Author would have so far gratified the
Papists, as to join with Baronius and other Romanists, by shifts to avoid the
evidence of this instance, which Protestants urge to prove Bishops to have then
married and begot children after marriage. To his question, I prove him to have
been a Bishop by the same words of Gregory Nazianzen himself in the verse of
his life; by which Chamier paustrat. Cath. tom. 3. l. 16. c. 13.. 41. Dr. Hall
honor of the married Clergy 2d. Book Sect. 8. and others, prove Gregory
Nazianzen to have been begotten of his Father being a Bishop, where he brings
in his Father speaking to persuade him to help him in his charge, in these
words, as Dr. Hall turns them into English out of Greek, The years of thy age
are not so many as of my Priesthood Which how to free from Baronius his devices
of an byperbole, and the inconsistency with the other passages of his fathers
Baptism, and his study at Athens, and seeing Julian there, the Reader may see
in Chamier ubi supra at large. Where and in Dr. Hall he may find, that his
mother was also a pious Christian when he was born, and that she begged him of
God. And the Century Writers of Magd. say cent. 4 c. 10. She was born of pious
and holy progenitors. And though he travailed abroad, suppose at 12. years of
age, yet was he long brought up by his parents, especially in that time in
which he was to have been baptized, if the Baptism of infants had been then
ordinary: yet was he not baptized (as this Author confesses) till he was of
age, after he returned to his Father, who it is not likely did send him to be
trained up under infidels, however he might light on their acquaintance and
hear them. As for the reason of deferring his baptism, it is in vain to enquire
into another cause, then that which Gregory Nazianzen himself in his 40th.
Oration of holy Baptism gives, when he advises to baptize infants in case of
apparent danger of imminent death, but out of that case to defer it. And this
appears to have been the genuine reason, and the practice accordingly in that
(as Gregorius Presbyter relates in his life) when sailing to Athens a storm
arose, so that his life was in apparent danger, he was afraid of dying
unbaptised, and resolved to be baptized. The other reason assigned by Mr M or
his friend, is frivolous; for though the better to prepare himself to receive
baptism, might be the reason of his deferring it so long as he did when he came
to age, yet it could not be a reason of his parents deferring it, or of his in
infancy. So that notwithstanding these vain shifts of this Author, wherein he
joins with the Papists, who use the like devices to avoin this testimony urged
by Protestants to prove the marriage of Bishops then, and is refuted by them,
yet this one instance is an evident proof, that in the Greek Church baptism of
infants was not ordinary in the fourth Century, but used perhaps
extraordinarily in case of apparent danger of imminent death.

There is the less need of insisting on the instance of Chrysostom his birth
of Christian parents* and educated and baptized at age by Miletius, since that
of Nazianzen (...) pregnant. It Is true I did allege it as Grotius (...) saying,
whom I found counted for a learned man by Spanheimius and many others, and I
might well make use of him, as Protestants sometimes do of Papists that are
corrupt in point of antiquity. If Dr. Young were the Author of the first part
of Mr. Ms. Defense, and of the Latin Book of the Lords day, published in the
year 1639. under the name of Theophilus P^ylokyriaces Loncardiensis, he
himself cites Baronius for the Lords day in the very title page of his Book.
What Grotius was in his life and studies, I leave for those who knew him to
judge; his books though in many things corrupt, I might be allowed to make use
of, as of other learned men with judgment. In this thing I did think I might
the more securely take his word, because in the same place Annot. in Matthew. c.
^9.14. he declared he was for infant Baptism; nor do I think it was without
some reason which he affirmed, though my time and Library yield me not the
advantage of making search into this thing. It is enough that it is supposed by
learned men probable, which would not be if it were not then ordinary, that
the children of Christian parents were baptized after they had themselves been
believers. Which i^ plain by the resolution of the Synod of Neocaesar^a, elder
then the first Nicene, which determined; That a woman with child might be
baptized, because the Baptism reached not to the fruit of her womb, because in
the confession made in Baptism, each ones free choice is showed. For if in the
confession in Baptism each ones free choice is showed, then infants were not
ordinarily baptized, who could show no free choice in confession.

How this is vindicated from the shifts of Mr. M or his friend, may be seen in
my Apology sect. 16. p. 87, 88. which I think needless to repeat. And for
Grotius his saying, tha^ in every age many of the Greeks unto this day, keep
the custom of deferring the Baptism of little ones, till they could themselves
make a confession of their says, may be true, if either those in Italy
mentioned by Ludov. Vives Comment in Aug. l. 1. de civit. Dei, c. 27. were
Greeks, as it is likely in Calabria, where are Greek Churches as I remember
Brerewood shows in his Enquiries of Religion, or the Georgians children, or the
Christians children of Cholcos we^e Greeks; o^ whom Heylin in his Geography in
the description of Armenia, out of Brerewood, Alexand. Rosse in his Censure of
Religio Medici, etc say* they are not baptized till they be 8. years old. Nor
need the Anabaptists yet to blush, for all Mr. Ms. or his friends, or Dr Homes,
or Dr. Hammonds, or Mr. Craggs allegations, in saying that the An^ients,
especially the Greek Church, rejected the baptism of infants for many hundred
years. For there is no evidence produced for infant Baptism in the Greek Church
till Nazianzens time, who flourished says Dr. Hammond about the year of Christ
370. and died in the year 389. which is above 300. years, and he disswades it
except in case of apparent danger of imminent death, and says some are kep^
from Baptism by reason of infancy, and as Mr. M p. 24. of his Defense says,
all times were fit for Baptism, seeing no time was free from death, intimates
Baptism not fit for some time, except in that case, which may be gathered to
have been the only reason of infant Baptism, from what is s^id before of the
story of hi^ own baptism; and therefore I doubt not to conclude* that infant
Baptism was not so ancient in the Greek Church as i^ by Mr. M. and others
pretended, and as now it is taught by him and others, is a late innovation.

SECT. LXXXXI. The testimonies of Tertullian for Infant Baptism, and Dr.
Hammonds interpretation of chap. 39. de Anima, are examined with 1 Cor. 7.14.
I Proceed to review the proofs from the Latin Fathers for infant Baptism. Mr.
Cr. brings up Tertullian in the fron^, whom he reckons at the end of the second
Century, others at the beginning of the third, about 70. or less years after
John the Apostle, in which short tract of time, the Apostolical practice of
infant Baptism could neither be clouded, nor forgotten. Neither would he have
commended his private opinion as more profitable, that the Baptism of some
infants for some respects should ^e deferred, but have called it down, as an
innovation, if the practice of it had not been as transparent to every man's
apprehension as if it had been writ with the Sun beams. That infant Baptism was
in practice in Tertullians days, it appears by this question lib. de bapt. c.
^8. Quid festinat innocens aetas ad remissionem peccatorum? Why does innocent
age (meaning children in their infancy) make have for remission of sins?
meaning Baptism; which is a clear case, whatsoever Semi-Socinian Grotius say to
the contrary. That Tertullian was for infant Baptism himself appears, that in
his Book de Anima cap. 39. he presses it, when the child is in danger of death,
and gives his reason lib. de bapt. cap. 12. Praescribitur nemini fine Baptismo
competere salutem, it is prescribed that salvation is to none without Baptism.

Answ. 1. That Tertullian might not be mistaken, or that the practice of infant
Baptism could not be clouded or forgotten, is said by Mr. Cragge
inconsiderately; (...) before Tertullians time the great differences about
keeping Easter between Polycrates Bishop of Ephesus, where it is said, John
lived much and died; and Victor of Rome, who pretended tradition from Peter,
the mistake of ^renaus about Christ's age, with sundry others. 2. That
Tertullian would have called it down as an innovation, if the practice of it
had not been as transparent to every man's apprehension as if it had been writ
with the Sun beams, is a confident speech, but of no credit with those who know
Tertullian has not called down, the anointing the baptized, giving milk and
honey, using the sign of the cross, etc. which yet are undoubted innovations.
3. It is granted that infant Baptism was used in his time, but it is withal
true, that he dissuaded it or did call it down as an innovation, except in
case of danger of death, and that by sundry reasons; which if he had taken ken
infant Baptism to be from the Apostles, he would not have done. 4. The
allowing of it in that case arose (as Mr. Craggs quotations show) from the
error of the necessity of it to salvation. But Dr. Hammond says further.

Tertullian a man of great learning, and a diligent observer and recorder of
the customs and practices of the most ancient Church, lib. de anima c. 39.
affirms it from the Apostle, ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari;
that when either parent is sanctified or believer, i. e. baptized, the children
that are born from them are holy, and this, tam ex seminis praerogativa, quam
ex institutionis disciplina, both by praerogative of their seed, and by the
discipline of the institution, i. e. (as has been showed) by Baptism; adding
from the same Apostle that delivered those words 1 Cor. 7.14. that his meaning
was that the children of Believers should be understood to be designati
sanctitatis ac per hoc salutis, and evidencing what he means thereby, by the
following words, of Christ's definition Joh 3. unless a man be born of water and
of the spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of God, i. e. non erit
sanctus, shall not be holy; where Bap^ism is manifestly the thing by which
these children are said to attain that sanctity. And more he adds in the
beginning of the next Chapter to the same purpose. And so he is a comp^tent
witness for the beginning of that third age. And a little before, In the middle
of the first Century St. Paul delivered these words; Now are your children
holy, i. e. your children new born (as appears by the context and Tertullian)
are sanctified as that signifies baptized, in the style of the New Testament
and the Ancient Church.

And chapter 3 sect. 1. St. Paul 1 Cor. 7.14. speaking of the Believers children,
he says, (...), but now are they holy, i. e. it is the present practice of the
Church (that Apostolical Church in St. Paul's time) to admit to Baptism the
infant children of parents, of whom one is Christian, though not of others.
That this is the meaning of [holy] is there made evident, as by other
arguments, so by this, that the ancient Fathers who knew the sacred Dialect
call Baptism sanctification, Eum qui natus est baptizandum and sanctificandum,
in Cyprian, and (...), to be sanctified when they have no feeling of it, and
(...), let him be sanctified from the infancy, i. e. baptized then in Gregory
Nazianzen. To which testimonies, and the rest which is there produced of the
agreement of the Jewish style ((...) sanctifications for baptisms, to which
agrees Macarius saying of the Jewish Baptism, (...) it sanctifies the flesh,
hom. 47. p. 509.) because the main difficulty of the interpretation consists
herein, I shall now add more, one very ancient before any of these (within less
then an 100. years after the death of St. John) Tertullian de anima c. 39.
where speaking of infants and saying ex sanctifica^o alterutro sexu sanctos
procreari; that when either the father or mother is sanctified ( i. e. received
as a believer by Baptism in the Church, the children are holy, etc (clear
evidences of the notion of the word) this he there proves by these very words
of this Apostle, caeterum, inquit, immundi nascuntur, else (so caeterum in
Tertullians style is known to be put for alioqui, or the Greek (...)) were your
children unclean; adding instead of these other words [but now are they holy]
quasi designatos tamen sanctitatis and per hoc etiam salutis, intelligi volens
fidelium filios, hereby willing that we should understand that the children of
Believers are the designed or the sealed of holiness (in the sense, I conceive
wherein they that are baptized, are by the ancients frequently said (...), to
be sealed) and thereby of salvation also: And all this, says he, thus urged by
the Apostle, ut hujus spei pignora matrimoniis quae retinenda censuerat,
patrocinacerentur, that this hope might be a pledge to engage the believing
wife or husband not to part from the unbeliever. And he yet further adds
(still to the confirming of this interpretation) Alioqui meminerat Dominicae
definitionis, nisi qui nascatur ex aqua and spiritu, non intro^bit in regnum
Dei, i. e. non erit sanctus. Otherwise (or if this argument of the Apostle had
not been sufficient) he would have mentioned the definition of Christ, that
unless one be born of water and the spirit ( i. e. baptized) he shall not enter
into the ^ingdome of God, i. e. shall not be holy; showing still of what
holiness he understands the Apostles speech, that which the child of the
believer is made partaker of by Baptism; concludi^g, Ita omnis anima usque eo
in Adam censetur donec in Christo recenseatur, tamdiu immunda, quamdiu
recenseatur. Every soul is so long enrolled in Adam, till it be anew in
Christ, and is so long unclean till it be thus anew enrolled; which as it
supposes every child of Adam to be impure, till it be thus by Baptism made a
child of Gods, a memb^r of Christ, so it gives a full account of that
uncleanness, and that holiness of which the Apostle speaks; the former the
state of a child of Adam unbaptized, the later of him that by Baptism is
initiated into Christ. And p. 81. he says, he found this passage of
Tertullian chapter 39. de anima perfectly to accord to his interpretation of 1 Cor.
7.14. For which reason (though I at first intended only here to examine the
passage of Tertullian c. 39. de anima) I conceive needful to examine what Dr.
Hammond has said in his Defense against me, chapter 3, 4. about both places, and I
doubt not but that it will be made appear by me, that he has not avoided by
his Defense the exceptions I brought against his interpretation of 1 Cor. 7.14.
nor interpreted the Apostle right, nor Tertullian, nor that they do, as he
speaks, perfectly accord, to which I now address my self.

1. He omits the making good of his paraphrase of the Apostles words 1 Cor.
7.12, 13, 14. except only those words [ else were your children unclean, but
now they are holy] supposing it unnecessary if the interpretation of the last
words appear to be this [but now are infant children partakers of the
privilege of Baptism] which I acknowledge were true, if he could make good
this interpretation without making good the paraphrase of the rest. But there
being a manifest coherence of all together, and a plain argumentative
consequence implied v. 14. of the later part from the former, if the
interpretation of the later part will not consist with the words going before,
nor a good coherence and consequence in his sense making good the rest of his
paraphrase, it is necessary he should make good, at least that which if it be
not made good against my exceptions, the interpretation of the last clause will
not stand. Now I conceive there are in my exceptions, most if not all those
things, which I urged against his paraphrase and interpretation, which do
overthrow it, since there would be either want of sense, coherence, or
consequence in the Apostles speech, if Dr. Hammonds exposition were received,
which Dr. Hammond has not acquitted it from in his Defense.

One main thing on which the hinge of his paraphrase and interpretation turns,
is, that the sanctification and holiness there is derived from the faith of the
one party, and not on the conjugal relation; and therefore the term [ believer]
which is not in the text) is put by him in his paraphrase, and the terms
[husband and wife] omitted, which the Apostle puts down with emphasis. I
presume the Reader that reads my exceptions from p. 316. to 325. will judge the
Doctors excuse not sufficient, he gives for not answering them more fully, when
he assures me it were easy fully to answer them p. ^5. but does not,
especially in this point on which the controversy between us depends, and
therefore not (...) as the Dr. terms it. I think the Dr. has made a more
immoderate excursion in his heaping up testimonies out of the Fathers, in his
standing so much on the denial of an enallage, and the force of the preposition
(...). But I resolve to follow him, and hope to overtake him in long running,
though his Pen and Press be quicker in dispatch then mine.

The first thing the Dr. attempts is, to prove out of the Fathers, that the
term [holy 1 Cor. 7.14.] is as much as [partakers of Baptism] First says he,
the ancient Fathers who knew the sacred Dialect, call Baptism sanctification,
and Cyprian and Nazianzen are cited.

To which I answer, 1. The word of the Apostle is [(...)] the adjective [ holy]
which notes a state of discrimination from the unclean, not [(...) sanctified]
a participle connoting the action of the sanctifier, as well as the state of
the sanctified, and therefore may import Baptism, and not the other; now the
two Fathers the Dr. cites with Gregory Nyssen after, use not the term [ holy]
but sanctified, and therefore were it granted that they used [ sanctified] for
baptized, yet this proves not they or the Apostle to have used [ holy] for
baptized.

2. I think the Fathers he cites, did not in those passages he cites call
Baptism sanctification, though they took the person baptized to be sanctified
by it. My reasons are from their words. For when Cyprian says [ him who is
born to be baptized and sanctified] he seems to me to distinguish, not to
confound baptism and sanctification; and when Nazianzen in the place quoted
uses this phrase, (...), I think it is ineptly rendered by the Dr. p. 102. by
this means they may be baptized souls and bodies: sure the Baptism of water
does not touch the soul: and therefore Nazianzen is to be so interpreted as
though he included baptizing in the phrase of sanctifying as the means of it,
ye^ he does not confound them, or call Baptism sanctification. The like I
imagine might be said of Gregory Nyssen, if I had his book, whose words it is
likely if the Dr. had set down more fully, as he does in others, the
impertinency of his allegation would have appeared. As for the Jewish style of
sanctifications for Baptisms* it will be to be considered after. Macarius his
saying, that the Jewish Baptism sanctifies the flesh, is not a calling Baptism
sanctification. But the Dr. stands most on Tertullian, in which he takes i^,
that [ holy] is used as he conceives Paul to use it 1 Cor. 7.14 for [partakers
of Baptism] so he expounds, designatos sanctitatis, the designed or sealed of
holiness, in the sense he conceives, wherein they that are baptized are by the
ancients frequently said to be sealed and p. 92. designati sanctitatis, sure
must signify that they are initiated into Christ by the Christian right, or
sign, or ceremony of Baptism, as those which had the Heath^nish ceremonies used
upon them, were candidati daemoniorum, candidates of the Devil in the former,
thus early admitted and initiated into their sacra But neither do I conceive
the Apostle to have used [ holy] for holiness by baptism, nor that Tertullian
does mean that which the Dr. would have him, nor do the Apostle and Tertullian
perfectly accord Twice in that Chapter does Tertullian use the term [ holy]
once [ holiness] once [ sanctified.] The first passage is thus. Hinc enim and
Apostolus ex sanctificato alterutro sexu sanctos procreari ait, tam ex seminis
praerogativa, quam ex institutionis disciplina. From hence the Apostle also
says, holy ones to be procreated from either sex, sanctified as well by
prerogative of seed, as by discipline of institution. By either father or
mother sanctified the Dr. co^ceives meant, when either the father or mother is
received as a believer by baptism into the Church, by [holy] baptized, for he
makes the notion of [ holy] in those words of Tertullian to be the same with
designatos sanctitatis, which he interprets by sealed, that is baptized in the
ancients language. Page 61. [holy] appears to be this [but now are your infant
children partakers of the privilege of Baptism.] But that Tertullian mean by [
sanctified, baptised] is not proved by the Dr. and his paraphrase makes it in 1
Cor. 7.14. to import being converted to the faith; and so Tertullian ad uxorem
l. 2. explains what he means by [sanctified] gained by the wise to the faith. I
deny not that he made Baptism a means of that sanctification, but he does not
call (as the Dr. says) baptism sanctification, but the whole fact of Gods
grace, as he says, Dei gratia illud sanctificat quod invenit, by teaching and
inlightning the person sanctified. Yet herein Tertullian and the Dr. accord not
with the Apostle, for the Apostle supposes 1 Cor. 7.14. the person said to be
sanctified still an unbeliever, otherwise his reason had been nothing to
confirm the resolution v. 12, 13. which was the believing yoke fellow might
live still with the unbeliever, for the unbelieving husband, that is the
husband continuing an unbeliever is sanctified; but this cannot be meant
either of conversion to the faith or baptism, for then he should be a believer
when he is said to be sanctified, so that it is plain neither Tertullians
expression concurs with the D^ctors notion, not do the Dr. and Tertullian agree
with Paul. The other words sanctos procreari, since he restrains to infants, the
sanctity page 72. has this sense; the infants are procreated holy, that is
baptized, for thus he speaks; the Apostle in that place makes the
sanctification or bap^ism of the children a benefit of the believing parents
cohabiting with the unbeliever. But herein neither does Tertullian or the Dr.
accord with Paul, for he makes not the holiness of the children to be the
benefit of the parents faith, but of their conjugal relation, nor does the Dr.
accord with Tertullian. For the holiness there meant by Tertullian, is not
meant only of the time of infancy. 1. Because he says it to be as well, ex
institutionis disciplina, as ex seminis praerogativa. Where ex seminis
prerogativa the Dr. agrees p. 92. to be in that he is not so polluted by their
idolatrous ceremonies, and so is in some degree holy, not federal holiness, as
Mr. M. page 35. would the whole scope showing that to be the meaning, that they
are not so polluted as heathens children. Now ex institutionis disciplina, the
Dr. would have have p 9^. meant the doctrine of Baptism instituted by Christ in
his Church; for by this it is that baptism was allowed to those that were ex
alterutro sexu sanctificato procreati, born of parents of which either of them
was Christian. Thus in his book de bapt. c. 12. he uses a like phrase, tingi
disciplina religionis, to be sprinkled with the discipline of religion, meaning
evidently being baptized. Where the Dr. by the way does ill render tingi by
sprinkled, no Grammarian does so render it, nor does Tertullian so mean it, as
in the place may be observed. But to the thing. This cannot be the meaning of
Tertullian in that place. 1. The words are these, ut opinor autem aliud est
asperg^ vel interci^i violentia maris aliud tingi disciplina religionis. As I
think it is one thing to be sprinkled or intercepted with the violence of the
sea, as Peter was when against his will he was in the sea, another thing to be
baptized with the discipline of religion, that is, out of a willing yiedling to
baptism by the learning of religion, that is, knowledge and profession of faith
which religion prompts to, meaning plainly not the doctrine or command of
Christ, but the learning or discipline of his own heart, in the sense that
Tertullian uses after, disciplina verecundiae and modestiae. And that sense
which I give the Scope leads to, which is to show neither the Apostles being
dashed with the waves when the ship was almost covered, nor Peter's being almost
drowned, was Christian baptism, because it was not out of a voluntary
disposition from that discipline of religion which does dispose to it, but the
violence of the sea. 2. Tertullian could not mean as the Dr. would, since there
is no such institution of Christ either expressed by the Evangelists, or by
Tertullian. The Evangelists express no title to baptism, but by the persons own
faith or discipleship who is to be baptized, as is proved Review part. 2 sect.
5.

And Tertullian in his Book of Baptism a little after the words cited by the
Dr. c. 12. expresses the institution of Baptism thus; Lex enim tingendi
imposita est and forma praescriptae, i^e (inquit) docete nationes, tingentos
eas in nomen patri^ and filii and spiritus sancti. Huic legi collata definitio
illa: nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu non intrabit in regnum
coelorum: obstrinxi^ fidem ad baptismi necessitatem. Itaqae omnes exinde
credentes tingebantur. And after, Nam and prius est pr^dicare, posterius
tingere, and in the 18th. chapter gives his reasons against the hastening the
ba^tism of infants, as being not necessary, which if he had acknowle^ged such
an institution, as the Dr. imagins, he could not have said, and directs
according to the institution* Let them come when they grow up, when they learn,
when they are taught wherefore they come, let them he made Christians when
they can know Christ; and after prescribes, How they should go to baptism, with
prayer, fasting, kneeling, confessing of sins; and in his Book of Repentance,
calls Baptism the sealing of repentance, no where is any such institution of
infants Baptism from the faith of one parent; and therefore I conclude, ex
institutionis disciplina, is not meant as Dr. Hammond conceives.

On the other side I conceive that he means by [ sanctos procreari] real
holiness future, and by ex institutionis disciplina, learning of the doctrine
or institution of Christ. That the holiness is real saving holiness, is
gathered first from the joining together, designati sanctitatis ac per hoc
etiam salutis, which plainly shows, that the holiness meant is that by which is
salvation. 2. This is confirmed, in that it is made the effect of being born by
water and the spirit. 3. Shall enter into the Kingdom of heaven, is expounded
by sanctus, holy. 4. It is opposed to that uncleanness which they had in Adam,
and it is expressed to be in Christ, which must needs be a real saving
holiness. 5. If it be that which is by baptism, then it is not baptism it
self, as the Dr. expounds it, but a consequent on it, which is no other then
saving holiness. 6. This is proved from the expression of designatos
sanctitatis ac per hoc salutis; this is confessed by the Dr. to express the
same with procreari sanctos ex institutionis disciplina, but designatos
sanctitatis has the sense of designed to be holy, that is, a believer by
education, and so saved. I will set down the words of a Letter of my learned
and much honored friend and quondam scholar Dr. Wilkins, Warden of Wadham
College in Oxford, who at my request employed a friend to enquire into the
sense of this passage of Tertullian, and thus wrote to me: As for that phrase,
Designatos sanctitatis and salutis, though this reading be approved by
Pamelius, and de la Cerda in their editions, yet it is corrected by Johannes a
Wouwer, by that famous Manuscript Copy of Fulvius Ursinus, now in the Vatican,
which has it Designatos sanctitati. Which reading is now generally received as
the most genuine, as may appear by Rigaltius and Georgius Ambianus in his last
and best edition of Tertullian at Paris 1648. And the most proper sense of this
phrase must be, such as are designed by their parents to a religious education,
which is likewise signified by that other expression ex instituionis
disciplina. So that designatos sanctitati ac per hec etiam saluti, plainly
expresses, that whereas the Pagan idolaters did dedicate and consecrate their
children to Devils, and thereby made them unclean, the children of the believer
were brought into the world holy, both in that they were free from such
pollution, and also by prayer, vow, or resolution designed or intended to be
made holy by the discipline of Christian institution, and so to be saved, or to
enter into the Kingdom of heaven, by faith in Christ. 7. This sense is
confirmed by the words [ hujus spei pignora, the pledges of this hope] which
show that the holiness and salvation meant in the words before, was a thing not
then existent at the childrens birth, but intended and hoped for at age, upon
endeavors used by the believing parent. 8. This interpretation of designatos
sanctitatis, or sanctitati, is confirmed by the expressions of Hierome, Epist.
153. to Paulinus, where he says, Of thy second Problem Tertullian has
discoursed in his books of Monogamy, affirming the children of believers to be
called holy, because they were as it were candidati fidei, candidates of faith,
and not polluted with any of the filth of Idolatry. Which phrase expresses the
same with designatos sanctitati, and alludes to those who in Rome stood for
Offices in white, and notes that the infants were as it were in expectation of
being believers, and baptized, quod veluti ambiunt and expectant baptismum, as
Erasmus in his note on Hierom, Epist. 153. to Paulinus, or designed, that is
intended to be holy by the parents, that is to be bred up to profess the faith,
and so to be baptized.

To this says Dr. Hammond. 1. This of Tertullian is not the place that S.
Hierom refers to, but some other in his Books de Monogamia, that one book which
we now have under that title affording us no such discourse on that subject as
S. Hierom mentions.

Answ. 1. It is more probable that this is the place Hierom meant, the
expressions so agreeing and the matter, and that Hierom writing in have mistook
the the Title of the Book, and the term candidatos used in the Chapter before
for designatos. 2. However, whether it were so or otherwise, the words cited by
Hierom being to the same purpose will fitly explain the other.

2dly. ( says Dr. Hammond) All that S. Hierom cites out of that (not this)
place of Tertullian is very reconcilable with what Tertullian says in this
place, and with his opinion that the infants of Christians were baptized; for,
says he, they were quasi candidati fidei, as it were candidates of faith.
Candidates were they that stood for any Office, qui candida sumpta vest
consulatum, praturam, etc. postulabant, who putting on white garments sued for
any Office; and so candidates of faith, they that sue for this condition in the
Church of God, that of (...) believers, to which by baptism they are assumed,
and accordingly were to be brought to the font, like such candidates, in white
garments as they that were to be sanctified; i. e. baptized, among the Jews
Exodus 16.10. were also to wash their clothes or put on clean garments.

Answ. It Is true both places of Tertullian are very reconcilable, but not Dr.
Hammonds interpretation of designatos sanctitatis or sanctitati with candidatos
fidei. For Dr. Hammonds designatos is as much baptized, but candidatos notes
only a future thing in expectation, and candidatos fidei answering to
designatos sanctitatis or sanctitati shows the holiness to be says, and that
tending to salvation, not the bare title of a believer by baptism, but such a
faith as saves effectually ac per hoc etiam salutis, which puts it out of
doubt, that a real holiness though in intention and expectation only, and a
real saving faith though future, is meant by Tertullian in both expressions,
which is not avoided by the Doctors answer.

Again ( says the Dr.) when he says of them that they were holy as the
vessels of the Temple were holy, though they had no sense, this is a clear
laying of a ground, whereby children may be deemed capable of this relative
holiness, which is to be had by baptism, though as yet they are not capable
(for want of understanding) of inherent holiness.

Answ. It Is true Hierom expresses another way of holiness which infants might
have without understanding, but that this should be by baptism he does not
intimate. But if he did, yet he does not make it the meaning of Tertullians
candidatos fidei, and therefore serves not his turn to prove that by holiness
Tertullian meant baptism. Yea, this very thing is against it, since it is added
as another way of sanctity then that he first mentioned, as the words simulque
considera do seem to me to intimate; and therefore candidatos fidei and
designatos sanctitatis or sanctitati is not partakers of Baptism in Tertullian,
as the Dr. would have it.

Lastly ( says the Dr.) when he mentions it as an idiom of Scripture to call
them holy, who are cleansed, purified, expiated, speaking of those legal
lustrations or purifications, this gives an account of St. Paul's using the word
in the Christian Church for the Christian lustration, purification, expiation,
i. e. for baptism.

Answ. 1. It gives but a lame account till it be proved St. Paul uses holy for
baptized. 2. Though Hierom do say the Scripture names holy for clean, purified,
and expiated; yet this does not prove he conceived the Scripture puts holy for
Christian baptism.

Yet again says the Dr. And by the way it appears by St. Hierom, that he uses
promiscuously sancti and sanctificati, and so that gives us authority to
interpret [(...)] in the end of the verse, in the same sense in which [(...)]
is used in the beginning for those that are brought and received to Baptism.
All which are far enough from serving any of Mr. T. his interests, and might
have inclined him to have omitted that testimony of St. Hieroms, if he had more
maturely considered of it.

Answ. How this testimony serves my turn upon more mature consideration of it*
is showed. It is true sancti and sanctificati are used of the same persons, yet
they are not the same; as calidum and calefactum may be said of the same wood,
yet are not the same, since fire may be said to be hot, but not heated* and God
may be said to be holy, but not sanctified. But the Dr. f^rge^s himself when he
would have sanctified and holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. to be interpreted in the same
sense. For then when it is said the unbeliever has been sanctified, that is,
brought to the faith by the wives counsel and example, it should be said of the
infant children that they are in the same sense holy, that is, converted to the
faith.

Yet further says the Dr. Nay 3. I must add, that Mr. T. his rendering of
candidati and designati sanctitatis and candidati fidei by being in designation
of being believers and baptized, intended to be holy by the parents, to be bred
up to the faith and so baptized; is a most groundless inconvenient
interpretation. For if by holiness and faith be meant inherent holiness and
faith, then Baptism it self is the ceremony of consecrating and designing them
to this, and so precedent to that holiness (not subsequent to it as Mr. T. sets
it) and accordingly in the Church writings the word (...) believers, is never
bestowed on any, though of mature age and knowledge; till after they be
baptized, (...) and (...) illuminate and believers being all one, promiscuously
used for those that have received baptism, in opposition to catechumeni those
that have not yet attained it: But if holiness and faith be the relative
holiness then infants being as capable of that as vessels in the Temple, they
might be presently designed and consecrated to that, and not first bred up in
the faith, before they were partakers of it.

Answ. That the interpretation I give is neither groundless nor inconvenient,
is manifest by the phrase it self, designatos sanctitatis or sanctitati; the
Doctors interpretation is altogether groundless and inconvenient; For he
renders p. 59. designed by sealed, but he shows not that ever [ designatos]
signifies [sealed,] the term for that is obsignatos, Tertullian in his Book of
Repentance says, Lavacrum illud (meaning baptism) est obsignatio fidei, quae
fides a paenitentiae fide incipitur and commendatur: The term [ designed] notes
plainly the intention of the parent, and this is also plain from the next words
[ of this hope] which shows it is not baptism in infancy they were designed to,
for that they need not hope for, they might presently have; but real holiness
of saving faith, and therefore expressed by candidatos fidei, and that this
holiness was such a real holiness, appears by the addition ac per hoc etiam
salutis, there being no other holiness that could bring salvation, and the term
candidatos imports a suing or seeking for it, as Erasmus expresses it veluti
ambiunt and expectant; and Dr. Hammond p. 92. himself expresses candidatos
daemoniorum candidates of the Devils, ambitious to be admitted thus early into
his service. So that all these reasons show, that designatos sanctitatis notes
the intention of the parents with endeavors to produce faith, and so to bring
them to Baptism. Which is the more evident if it be read [ designatos
sanctitati] for that case plainly intimates a tendency to it. As for designatos
sanctitatis, which the Dr. that he may (...) serve his own purpose (which he
elsewhere causlesly imputes to me) turns [ sealed of holiness] I crave leave to
tell the Dr. that in my appehension it makes Tertullian speak nonsense; and
that it cannot be the meaning that it should note the consecrating by baptism,
it appears in that it should have been then sanctitate, or per sanctitatem.
Besides, they are said to be designatos salutis as well as sanctitatis and I
hope the Dr. will not render it sealed of salvation as if it noted the ceremony
of consecrating, Salvation in no Writer being put for for Baptism: And however,
here it is a distinct thing from sanctity, which the Dr. makes Baptism. So that
I think I may safely infer, that Tertullian means by [ designatos sanctitatis
or sanctitati rather] not Baptism, but the intention of the parents (for of
their act he speaks in opposition to the Gentile parents designing their
children to Devils; or as the terms are vowing, deputing to them, making them
candidatos) to breed them up in the faith, and so to bring them to Baptism and
Salvation, which his words in his Book de Baptismo, c. 18. show he approved as
best, except necessity through danger of death imminent and apparent urged the
hastening of it in little ones; regularly he would have faith first, and
baptism after, as the words in his Book of Baptism, and Repentance forecited
show. And whereas the Dr. says* in the Church writings the word believers is
never bestowed on any though of mature age and knowledge till after they be
baptized, and so faith must be subsequent not antecedent to baptism as I set
it, the Dr. may perceive his mistake by the words of Tertullian before quoted,
Itaque omnes credentes tingibantur, Lavacrum illud est obsignatio fidei; and
this is agreeable to Christ's speech, Mar. 16.16. He that believes and is
baptized shall be saved, to which perhaps Tertullian alluded when he said
designatos sanctitati, which Grotius follows, Annot. ad 1 Cor. 7.14. or
condidatos fidei ac per hoc etiam saluti, or salutis. The relative holiness
which vessels in the Temple were capable of, is far from Tertullians meaning:
Certainly Tertullians phrase of designed to holiness is so far from proving
infant baptism, that it proves the contrary, since he is not said to be
designatus or candidatus who has an Office or thing in possession, but he who
is chosen to it or seeks for it, and so has it only in intention or
expectation. As designatus saluti is not actually saved, so neither designatus
sanctitati actually baptized.

He adds. The children of believers, I willingly grant, are presumed to be by
them intended to be bred up to the faith; but if that intention of theirs bring
forth no present effect, if they do not bring them thus early and enter them
into the Church by Baptism, why should that bare intention of the parents give
them the style of holy or sanctified, or how should these infant children,
which may die before they come t^ those years, receive any present privilege
or benefit by that which is thus far removed from them?

Answ. The Drs. words answer this, p. 92. when he says, Whosoever is born from
either parent Christian, has one privilege by nature, by his very seed, that
he is not so polluted as the Idolatrous heathens children by their Idolatrous
ceremonies, and so is in some degree holy in that respect, which is a present
effect, opposite to the present evil effect which the heathen Idolatrous
devotions brought on their children.

He goes on. Now for the 2d. part of this suggestion, that what I say from
Tertullian, that they were holy, i. e. baptized in seminis praerogativa is a
mistake, I must answer by viewing of the proofs of his assertion: First, says
he, the holiness was not only by prerogative of birth, but ex institutionis
disciplina. This is sure a strange proof, It is not so, because it is not only
so. It Is certain that Tertullian says they are holy ex institutionis
disciplina, and as certain that they are as much so by prerogative of their
birth; the words are most clear, tam ex seminis praerogativa quam ex
institutionis disciplina, and that I never denied the second could not be
mistaken in affirming the first.

Answ. The words of the Dr. in his 4th. quaere gave occasion to think he
conceived the children of believers to be termed holy by Tertullian, that is
baptized either only or chiefly by prerogative of birth as that which gave
them title to baptism. But it seems he means that they had title to it, also by
the discipline of institution. But p. 92. he expounds the prerogative of birth
only by their freedom from Idolarous pollution; Now sure that gave not title
to baptism: An Idolaters child if born without those pollutions had not title
to baptism, he must be born according to his own exposition of the Apostles and
Tertullians words of one believer: and therefore he must needs be mistaken in
affirming the first, and he must needs miss Tertullians meaning if by holy be
meant baptized, and says they are baptized tam ex seminis praerogativa if that
give no title to it. The Dr. expounds ex institutionis disciplina thus, by the
Doctrine of Baptism instituted by Christ, by which Baptism is allowed to
children born of either parent Christian. I have showed before how short his
proof is of this sense. For present, Tertullians words, according to this
exposition have an inept tautology; For it is all one as to say, they are
baptized as well by prerogative of birth as by prerogative of birth, the
prerogative of birth by which they are baptized being all one with their
privilege of being born of a believer, which is acc^rding to the Dr. the
discipline of insti^ution. If Tertullian had meant as the Dr. would have it, he
had not used tam and quam, but said, holy by prerogati^e of birth according to
the discipline of institution; whence it may appear, that the discipline of
institution and holiness is another thing then the Dr. interprets it, nor by
his interpretation of the place will the place be clear. For not two
privileges (as the Dr. makes it) but one privilege, to wit, holiness, which
the Dr. makes to be baptism, is ascribed to them by a double means, freedom
from heathenish pollutions, and the doctrine of Christ about infants Baptism:
Whereas freedom from such pollutions gives no title to Baptism, and if
prerogative of birth ^e meant of federal holiness (of which is not a word
there) and the discipline of institution be the doctrine allowing baptism to
the child born of a believer, it is either an inept tautology, both being the
same, or incongruous speech, which should be thus mended, by prerogative of
birth according to the doctrine of baptism by Christ in his Church, imagined by
the Dr. but not extant in Scripture, nor Tertullian.

Nor do Tertullians words following, de Anima, c 40. Every soul is so long
enrolled in Adam till it be enrolled in Christ, and is so long unclean till it
be thus anew enrolled, prove that by [holy] Tertullian meant baptized. For in
the words before (to which [ ita so] refer) he makes holy to be the same with
entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, and the enrolrolling in Christ he makes
the same with being born of water and the spirit.

Of the words ascribed to Origin and Athanasius, enough has been said already.
Neither Cyprians nor Chrysostomes words prove, that [holy] is as much as [
partaker of baptism] in the Ancients language, much less in the Apostles 1 Cor.
7.14. to the further consideration of which I proceed after Dr. Hammond.

I excepted against Dr. Hammonds paraphrase of 1 Cor. 7.14. that the term [
young Children of Christians] is more then is in the text, which has only [
your children] which is not restrained to infancy. But the Dr. proves it is, 1.
By the authority of Tertullian, who says of infant children, that they are
procreated holy; and Nazianzen, who using this phrase (...), in all probability
refers to this place of the Apostle, and so renders (...) by (...), their
children, by their infant children.

Answ. 1. Tertullian does not say that the infant children are holy in infancy
only 2. No^ is there any thing said to make it in any sort probable, that
Nazianzen referred to that place of the Apostle, in which is neither (...) nor
(...), nor that he should render (...) by (...), when he uses not the same
case nor number the Apostle does, but only uses a description of young age,
which is not to my remembrance expressed by the other word (...) any where.

2. The other reasons are farther from the thing. For neither does it appear to
be the general doctrine of the Fathers, that the parents faith profits only
their infant children, some of them do reason from the faith of the woman of
Canaan, the faith of the ruler of the Synagogue, that faith of parents profits
children who were not infants. The other reason runs upon this mistake, which
should be proved to be the Apostles meaning (but is denied by me) that he makes
1 Cor. 7.14. sanctification or baptism of the children, a benefit of the
believing parents cohabiting with the unbeliever.

I said [ holy] for [ admitted to baptism] is a sense of the word no where else
found. But this the Dr. hopes he has cleared, both from the usage of ^he word
among the first Christian writers, which is answered, and the Jewish, of which
in that which follows, and says.

I might further do it even by this Apostles dialect, who in his inscriptions
of most of his Epistles to the Churches, calls all those to whom he writes, i.
e. the baptized Christians of those Churches holy, Romans 1.7. and sanctified and
holy, 1 Cor. 1.2. 2 Cor. 1.1. Ephesians. 1.1. Phil. 1.1. Col. 1.1. among whom no
doubt there were many, who were no otherwise holy or sanctified, then as all
baptized Christians are capable of that style.

Answ. True: But does he term any infant so in those places? or give them
those titles barely from Baptism? does he not expressly term them Saints by
their calling not by their Baptism? The Drs. allegations have not yet altered
my mind, but I think as I did his interpretation new, strange and absurd.

I alleged Aug. l. 2. de pecc. mer. and remiss. c. 26. (and the like is said l.
3^ c. 12.) Saying the sanctification of what sort soever it be, which the
Apostle said to be in the children o^ believers, yet it belongs not to that
question of Baptism, and the beginning or remission of sins

To this the Dr. answers, It Is true he says it belongs not to that question,
whether the sanctifying of the catechumeni after a sort by the sign of Christ,
and prayer of imposition of hands without Baptism, profits him not to the
entering the Kingdom of Heaven. And the meaning is such sanctification, except
it be that of baptism, cannot avail to remission of sins.

Answ. The Dr. mistakes in making the question to be of the Catechumeni,
mentioned c. 26. it is of the children of believers, who being termed holy, 1
Cor. 7.14. should seem not to need Baptism, which Augustine answers, 1. By
mentioning diverse sorts of sanctification, but not determining which is there
meant. 2. By resolving that what ever the sanctification be which the Apostle
said to be in the children of believers (not as the Dr makes it of the
Catechumeni) it belongs not to that ^uestion of Baptism (not as the Dr. does
palpably pervert the words p. 64. whatsoever sanctification it can be imagined
to be that the Apostle speaks of, except it be that of Baptism, it cannot avail
to the remission of sins, etc.) to wit mentioned chapter 25. whether it exclude
necessity of Baptism, original sin and the remission of it in the children of
believers termed holy. Which is plainly against the Dr. who will have it meant
only of baptism of infants of believers, by virtue of the believing parents
faith. As for my other objections against his paraphrase not answered, I am so
far from assurance that the Dr. can easily answer them, that by this answer I
judge he can answer none of them.

SECT. LXXXXII. Dr. Hammonds imagined evidence from [hath been sanctified] for
his sense of the fore part of 1 Cor. 7.14. is nullified, and my opinion of
enallage of tense vindicated.
CHAPTER 3. Sect. 2 the Dr. says thus. First then to my first evidence taken from
the word [(...) has been sanctified] referring to some past known examples and
experiences, of this kind (of a wives converting the husband, etc.) he has a
double answer. 1. That as my paraphrase expresses it, it should signify not
only that an unbelieving husband has been sanctified, but also that there is
hope they will, and so it should note not only some example past, but also
some to come, of which there can be a less reasonable account given, then of
putting it in the present tense in English. 2. That the enallage or change of
tense is frequent chapter 11.24. (...) in the present tense for the future, and
here (...) for (...) or (...), and in the next v. (...) in the preter for the
present, and so (...) here, not, has been, but is sanctified,or if in the
preter tense, yet that to be understood of a past thing, yet continued, as
(...) John 3.18. notes an act still continued in force. To these two I reply
briefly, and first to the former (the same which he had mentioned before, and
excepted against as an excess in my paraphrase, but both there and here without
the least cause;) For in my paraphrase I look upon (...) as a verb of the
preter tense, and as such only adapt the sense to it, referring it not to
future hopes, but to past experiments or examples; only because examples are
rhetorical syllogismes, and what has been frequently experimented may also
reasonably be hoped, I suppose that the Apostle so meant these examples, as
grounds of hoping the like for the future, not making this of the future any
part of the sense of (...) in the preter, but explicating the (...), or
rational importance (which is somewhat more then the (...) of the Apostles
speech) and supposing this conclusion to lie hid under this premise, as it is
ordinary in all discourse to set down the ^remises, distinctly leaving the
conclusion by every ones reason to be drawn from thence, without setting it
down explicitly.

Answ. That the Dr. in his paraphrase qu. 4.. 31. of his letter, put so much as
I have noted Review part. 2. sect. 26. of which there is nothing in the text
expressed, is not justified by this plea. For what ever addition a paraphrast
be allowed, yet sure no paraphrast is allowed to express that which he
conceives it deducible from the sense of the words in thirteen lines, and the
sense it self only in three and especially when he lays that in his
paraphrase as the ground of his argument for his position, which has not a
word in the text to lead to that inference. Sure I had great cause to except
against his paraphrase, which was so monstrous as to be defective in letting
down what was the chief thing to be heeded in the Apostles speech, to wit, the
relation of husband and wife, and so extremely exuberant, as to express that as
done often, which is mentioned in the singular number only, and ascribe the
sanctifying to the conversation not at all expressed, and put in a long
inference that has no intimation in the text, and mention an act of the
Church, of which there is no inkling there or near it, or any where else in
Scripture, and so many ways corrupting the sense, as I show ubi supra,
especially in the main supposing a mention made of a husband converted by the
wife, and yet the husband expressed by the Apostle as continuing an unbeliever,
and a husbands being sanctified by the wife which is ever ascribed to Gods
spirit, never to any Apostle, to make that which is used as a reason of
lawfulness, as if it were a motive from an advantage, to make that as a
Rhetorical motive, which is a Logical proof, to make that which was a rare
contingent event, which might and it is likely did as often fail as a convincing
argument to settle the conscience in the lawfulness of cohabitation, with other
faults, as being so audacious an attempt, as I think no approved writer can be
showed to have made, nor any considerate Reader will allow of. Nor would it
ever have come into my thoughts, that so learned a man as Dr Hammond is, should
have vented such a conceit as this is in his Letter and Annotations, did I not
find him set to maintain what the Church of England, that is the Prelates,
held or appointed, as others what the Scottish or New-English Churches approve
of.

As for his excuse of his dealing in his paraphrase, it is too narrow a
plaster for such a sore. For neither is any thing 1 Cor. 7.14. set down as an
example to move the will the judgment being before settled, nor any Rhetorical
syllogism, used, but a Logical; as the terms (...), used Romans 11.6. 1 Cor.
15.14, 18, 29, etc. show, nor does the Dr. prove, but suppose the Apostle so
meant; nor does he answer the allegations I bring to the contrary, Review par.
2.. 26. And his words here do imply as if this were the conclusion, that it is
probable and a ground of hope, that the unbelieving yoke fellow will be
converted by the believer cohabiting, and this the premise, for it has often
so come to pass, whereas there is not the least intimation of that conclusion
in the text, and it is manifest by the term [(...) for] that v. 14. is a proof
of the determination or conclusion v. 12, 13. concerning the lawfulness of
married persons living together in disparity of religion, not of Dr. Hammonds
imagined as tacitly implied conclusion.

But he says. Wherein that I was not mistaken, I had all assurance from v.
16. where the argument is pressed, and the conclusion inferred more explicitly.
For what know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband -- and the
like mentioned in the paraphrase from 1 Pet. 3.1.

Answ. Dr. Hammond had no assurance from v. 16. that the unbelieving husband is
often converted by the wife; the thing being expressed so doubtfully as an
uncertain contingent though possible, and so with some hope sperable, [ Hierom.
com. in 1 Cor. 7.14. In dubium quidem ^osuit sed semper ambiguam melius evenire
credenda sunt.] much less that there is a conclusion of the probability of the
converting of the infidel yoke^fellow, v. 14. deducible from the example and
experiment of what was done in time past, v. 16. being neither explication nor
proof of what is said v. 14. but a motive to make the thing determined as
lawful, v. 12, 13. more swasible, or a motive to what is said v. 15. that God
has called us in peace. In my apprehension if v. 14. were as the Dr. means,
the unbelieving husband has been sanctified, that is converted by the wife
often, and therefore it is probable, or there is a ground of hope, or it is to
be presumed, it will be so for the future, the Apostle had said the same v. 14.
which is said v. 16. and so there would have been a mere tautology in the
Apostles speeches, which is not to be conceived. As for 1 Pet. 3 1. though it
show such an event possible, yet not frequent, nor is there in Peter's words the
least hint that Paul's words 1 Cor. 7.14. are to be understood as the Dr. would
have them. But the Dr. has another string to his bow, which he thus urges.

And herein I have the authority of St. Hierom; as for my rendering (...) by the
woman (so I find it per mulierem in his 7. Epist. ad Latam, and so Marianus
Victorius in his scholia assures us, all the copies ancient and printed read
it) so also for this part of my paraphrase. He produces an example, because
(says he on the place) it has often happened that the husband has been
gained by the wife, according to that of St. Peter, that if any man believe not
the word, he should without the word be gained by the conversation of the wife,
that is, that when they shall see them changed to the better, all may know that
the law of God might have been taken in exchange for so inveterate a custom.
And so again Ep. 7. ad Laetam, speaking of the like example, we have well
(says he) and happily expected ( i. e. not mist of our expe^^ation) an holy
and faithful house sanctifies an unbeliever, adding his conceit, that Jupiter
himself if he had had such a kin^ed, might have been brought to the faith of
Christ.

Answ. It Is true that Hierom comment. in 1 Cor. 7.14. reads per mulierem, but
in Ep 7 ad Laetam he reads in uxore, and August. tom 7. l. 2. de peccat. merit.
and remis. c. 26. and that in Hierom in both places the terms fidelem and
fideli are, but not in August. though he render the later part thus, and
sanctificatur mulier infidelis in fratre. And I find in the scholies of Erasmus
(...) Roterdam, on Hieroms Epistle to Laeta this the fir^^ note. For he is
san^^^fied] The place is with S. Paul in the former Epistle to the Corinthians
cap. 7. In the ancient copies we find written in the husband, not by the
husband, and in the wife, not by the woman. For the Greek has it, For the
unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife in the
husband. Moreover what the interpreter adds [believer and believer] he has
done for explication. By which it may appear, that Erasmus says otherwise then
the Dr. says Marianus Victorius does, and for my part I imagine Erasmus is the
more credible scholiast of the two. It Is true that Hierom com. in 1 Cor. 7.14.
has the words the Dr. allegeth, but then he adds, which the Dr. leaves out.
Item ideo vir and uxor invicem sanctificantur: quia ex traditione Dei sanctae
sunt nuptiae. That is, Likewise therefore the husband and wife are to each
other or for each other, or in course sanctified, because by the tradition of
God marriages are holy, which expresses Hieromes second and better thoughts. By
which it may appear that Hierom took of (...) as if it were in the present
tense. And for the other place of Hierom it is true, Hierom has the words the
Dr. cites, if the word [ Jovem] be not put for [ proavum] or some such word as
Erasmus thinks. But then it is plain from the words left out by the Dr. Jam
candidatus est fidei quem filiorum and nepotum credens turba circumdat. That
is, He is as one that would be baptized, who has a company of believing
children and grandchildren about him. That the sanctifying is not made the
privilege of the husband in respect of his wife, or of the children by the
parent, but also the grandfather is conceived likely to be sanctified by the
children and grandchildren, and all is ascribed to example and instruction,
with this express speech, Fiunt non nascuntur Christiani; Christians are made,
not born such. And though Hierome says of Laeta's daughter Paula, that she was
prius Christo consecrata quam genita, and she had conceived her, ante votis
quam utero, yet the words cui imperatori, cui exercitui nutriatur, cui promissa
sit, regis amplexibus parat, de spiritualibus nuptiis sciscitantem, do seem to
me to imitate that young Paula was not then baptized, which if right it is
manifest, that children of believers were not baptized ordinarily then in
infancy. And me thinks the words of Hierom in his commentary on 1 Cor. 7.14. on
the words, Else should your children be unclean, but now are they holy; If it
were not so as I say your children would yet remain infidels: for it would
often happen that the children would follow those parents, who had believed.
Upon which hope he would have it believed, that the other might be saved as
well by the example of the children as by the marriage; show that Hierom
understood not the holiness of the children, of their baptism in infancy, but
of their embracing the faith, by following the example of the believing parent,
and in like manner the unbelieving parent was sanctified according to him, as
well by the example of the children as the marriage. So that however Dr.
Hammonds paraphrase in the forepart seems to have some countenance from these
passages of Hierome, yet the latter part is expounded clean besides the Drs.
mind, and the passages yield us such hints of the not baptizing of infants of
believers, as do overthrow his conceit; as if the infants of believers were
then ordinarily baptized.

Dr. Hammond adds. As for his 2d answer, I acknowledge such Enallages to be
ordinary in the Hebrew, and sometimes, but more rarely, found in the Hebraizing
Greeks or Hellenists, and consequently, that where the context will not bear
the sense of the tense which is used, there may be place for this Grammatical
figure, which yet is not to be made use of unnecessarily. Accordingly if there
were any convincing reason offered, that [(...) in the preter tense] could not
be born, ^ should not then doubt to interpret it by this figure, either in the
present or some other tense: But when (as here it is evident) there is no such
necessity, then 1. I cannot think fit to do so, ('it is dangerous to forsake the
literal sense, when it may be commodiously retained, and fly to either a
Rhetorical or Grammatical figure;) and having no motive to do so, I am next to
consider, what is the properest importance of that phrase in that tense wherein
it is used, and then I could not (I believe) have fallen upon any thing more
natural, then that the preter form of speech referred to the past experiences,
etc. This is a full satisfaction to his answer.

Answ. 1. The Drs. acknowledging that such Enallages may be, and sometimes are,
shows that his interpretation is not necessary, and therefore his inference
thereupon not certain, which is enough to make good my answer. 2. It is to me a
convincing reason, that there is an Enallage of the preter tense for the
present, not only because Camerarius and other learned men conceive so, and
our Translator so render i^; but also because by the making it to import an
experience past^nely, a sense is brought in (as I have showed in my Examen,
par* 3. sect 8. in the first part of the Review, sect. 19, etc. in the second
part of the Review, sect. 26.) which is neither agreeing with the words, nor
pertinent or accommodate to the matter of the Apostle speech 3 However the Dr.
believe, yet it is showed here, and Review par. 2. sect. 6 that to refer the
sanctifying 1 Cor. 7.14 to past experiences, is not natural. For the Apostles
speech being a reason, not of the commodiousness of living together in
disparity of Religion, (for if it had been of i^, they could have better
resolved themselves then the Apostle, yea, they could have refuted the Apostle,
and re^^^ied his reason against him, we find it not so by experience,) but of
the lawfulness, the reason must be conceived to import right, not event; and so
the speech is not of what has been, which only mentions experience, but of
what is de jure, or is lawful; and as Piscator rightly Schol. in 1 Cor. 7.14.
Sanctificatus est] id est, usus illius ut sanctus, and conscientiam uxoris non
ladens concessus est. And in this manner it is usual to express such sentences
in the preter tense, yet to be expounded by an Enallage, as in the same Chapter
the next v. (...) is in the preter tense, yet rightly rendered [ is not under
bondage,] v. 34. (...) therei^ difference, v. 29. (...) is short, 1 Cor. 8.3.
(...) is known, 1 Cor. 4.4. (...) am justified, 1 Cor. 15.1. (...) ye do stand,
v. 18. (...) are perished, 1 Cor. 16.9. (...) is opened, Tit. 1.15. (...) are
defiled, (...) usually is written, Matthew. 13.11. (...) is given.

Yet (says the Dr.) I may in the 2 d. place ex abundanti add thus much more,
that the utmost he can pretend to by the enallage (whether of the preter for
the present, or of the preter understood of a past thing yet continued) is as
commodious for my interpretation as the preter is: For if it be in the present,
then the importance will be, that it is a matter of present daily experience;
if in the past continued, then that it is matter both of past and present
experience, that the unbeliever is thus wrought upon by the believer, and
brought into the Church by Baptism, and this a just ground of hope, that so it
may be again in any particular instance, and so a competent motive that the
believing wife should abide with the infidel husband, and not depart as long as
he will live peaceably with her: And this sure was S. Hieroms understanding in
the words newly cited, the Apostle makes instance, produces example that this
has (and does) ordinarily come to pass; And to that also agrees the 16th.
verse, For how know thou etc.

Answ. 1. If it be in the present tense, the importance will not be, that it is
a matter of present daily experience, unless it be proved the term [
sanctified] notes an iterated event, which I conceive and think I have proved
to import right or lawfulness, so as that the sense is, the unbelieving husband
is sanctified to or in respect of his wife (as Beza, Piscator, Grotius, etc. do
conceive) that is, lawfully used, which is the only sense that fits the
determination of the Apostle, which is not of the convenience or commodiousness
or advantage in living together, but of the lawfulness, v. 12, 13. Nor if it be
in the past continued, will it fit the Drs. sense. For the Drs. sense is as if
sanctification were the same with conversion, but that is an act transeunt,
past, and not continued; and if it include baptism, as the Dr. would have it,
the sense should be, The unbelieving husband has been converted, and brought
to baptism, and continues to be converted and brought to baptism by the
conversation of the wi^e; which cannot be said of the person said to be
sanctified: Yea, there is no less then an implicit contradiction in the words
so expounded; for then it should be thus meant, The unbelieving husband
(remaining an unbeliever, as the Ap^stles speech supposes, else it were not
apposite to the case v. 12, 13.) is and continues to be wrought upon by the
believer, and brought into the Church by baptism. Yet were this exposition
allowed, it would no whit avail to the Drs. purpose, unless the futurity of the
same act were implied in that imagined sense of the Dr. For it is not the event
past that is the motive of cohabitation, but the hope of that which may be: And
yet the Dr. tells us in his paraphrase, he looks upon (...) as a verb of the
preter tense, and as such only adapts the sense to it, referring it not to
future hopes but to past experiences or examples. Ye^ he says, the Apostle
produces example, and to that also exactly agrees the 16 th. v. For how
know thou, etc. which does not at all mention an example or past experience,
which could not be not done being once done, but only an uncertain and
doubtful futurity. So that in this again the Drs. speeches do enterfere, and
his speech is most false, that the words v. 16. do exactly agree with the
meaning of the forepart of the 14th. v. as the Dr. expounds it. I omit that
there is not a word that intimates the bringing into the Church by baptism; and
i^ there were, it would import a strange experience of a wives bringing her
husband into the Church by baptism, which cannot be avoided by saying through
her persuasion it is done by another; For the Text expressly assigns the
sanctification, what or however it be, to the wives individual person, if then,
to her as an agent it is done by her. But I have said so much here, and Review
2d. par. sect. 26. of this exposition, as me thinks should make this exposition
of the Dr. to be exploded by the learned.

Yet he writes further thus. As for Mr. T. his instances of Enallage, though
now I may safely yield them all, and rather gain then lose by them, I shall yet
in the last place add my sense, that no one of them is any way convincing; that
of (...) is not, c. 11.24. for his passion was now so near approaching, that it
might very fitly be represented as present, and so that be the force of the
present tense.

Answ. This instance is convincing, that enallage of tense is sometimes used,
it being used in this place, as Piscat. scholie in locum, Enallage temporis and
metaphora. And the Drs. reason does no whit weaken the allegation of it; for
that which notes Paulo post futurum, a future near approaching, is not without
an enallage expressed by the present tense. And for the enallage in (...), I
conceive with the Drs. good leave, that usually the Greeks express by (...) or
(...) what the Apostle does by (...), and so there is an enallage of tense or
mood; and for (...), v. 15. if an enallage be not conceived, then it must not
import the present tense at all, whereas the Dr. grants it notes the preter
tense yet continued, which is all one as to say it notes the present tense,
which without an enallage it could not do. As for (...), Joh. 3.18. I wonder
the Dr. would intimate as if it were produced by me to the prejudice of the
preter tense, when my very words say expressly it notes a past thing yet
continued, and bring it to that purpose: But how this is far from being still
perfectly agreeable to his notion of (...), the unbeliever often has been, and
daily is converted; and brought to baptism by the believer, is apparent, in
that the continuation of the condemnation, Joh. 3.18. is only in respect of
legal force and virtue; but the sanctification 1 Cor. 7.14. is as he expounds
it, a mere transeunt act that imports no legal right, force, and virtue, and
therefore cannot be said to be continued as the other can. And how vain the
Drs. sense is, and how justifiable my interpretation is by an enallage, is
showed before.

SECT. XCIII. Dr. Hammonds rendering [by] 1 Cor. 7.14. is reselled, and my
rendering (...) [to] justified.
SEct. 3. The Dr. omitting what I said, that if (...) be rendered [ in] it
serves my turn, not his unless it be proved it must be rendered [ by,] and his
supplement [ by the company and conversation of the believer] proved, says
somewhat to my reasons of adhering to the reading of (...) 1 Cor. 7, 14. by [
to] 1. because this seems to me the fairest, easiest, and most congruous sense.
But 1. he tells me this is the begging of the question, that it is such must not
be here supposed when it should be proved. To which I reply, 1. if it be the
fairest, easiest, and most congruous sense, it is some proof. 2. That it is the
only sense which can stand with the words and scope of the Apostle, and is
avouched so by learned men, ancient and later Protestants and Papists, is
showed at large in my Exercit. sect. 5. Examen, par. 3. sect. 8 Review, par. 1.
sect. 11, etc. here sect. 76, etc. Refutat. of Dr. Savage his position in
Latin, sect. 9. Antidote, sect. 7. besides what occurs in my Apology,
Postscript, Plea, which is abundantly sufficient for acquitting me from begging
the question, which he does so importunely urge. 3. That the Dr. rather begs
the question then proves his interpretation, has and will appear in this and
the former view taken of it.

But the Dr. sullies the beauty of my sense of the Apostles words thus. The
fairness of the sense (simply taken) is not attempted to be proved, which yet
does stand in great need of it; For beside the redundance, or unusual sense of
(...), some other parts of the rendering are none of the fairest. As 1. the
believer may abide] as if it were simply free to abide or not abide, whereas in
the present case (when the unbeliever is willing to abide with the believer)
the believer is by the Apostle counseled at least, if not commanded (and that
is more then a liberty that he may.) To him the Apostle says (and his sayings
have sure authority with them) (...) let him not put away. Nay the interdict of
Christ belonging to all but that one case of fornication, Mat. 5. and Mat. 19.
it is evident that by force thereof the believing man must not put away the
unbeliever, that is, guilty of no more but unbelief. And accordingly the
preface (...) -- But for the rest (or for the other questions v. 1, 6, 8, 10.
say I, not the Lord) must be applied not to the immediate consequents of the
believers not putting away the unbeliever, that will stay with him (for that
had been determined by Christ in the negative) but to v. 15. If the unbelieving
depart, i. e. if the unbeliever will not dwell with the believer, except the
believer forsake his or her religion, what shall be done then? And to that the
Apostles counsel is, that marriage inslaves not the believer so far. All which
is a competent prejudice to that part or Mr. T his sense, The believer may
abide; For if that be it even when the unbeliever is willing to abide, then
she may also depart, if she rather choose, which will be found contrary to
Christ's precept.

Answ Nil tam recte dictum quod non possit male interpretando depravarier, as
the Dr. does here. It Is true I did in the second part of this Review Sect. 26
p. 319, 320. say (and gave reasons of it) that the Apostle 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. did
dot forbid leaving each other, but resolve only the lawfulness of living
together, but this did not intimate as if the believer were simply free to
abide or not abide with the unbelieving yoke fellow willing to live with her,
that when the unbeliever is willing to abide the believing wife may also depart
if she rather choose, but this, that notwithstanding the continuance of the
unbelief of the husband, the wife might live with him, it was not unlawful. So
that I asserted not a liberty of le^ving him upon any cause, but a liberty of
continuing with him, notwithstanding that reason ^ and therefore the Dr. did
ill to paraphrase v. 12. be ought not to put her away, v. 1^. let her by no
means separate from him. And I gave some reason from v. 15. where the
permitting to depart is a matter of liberty, as the word [ is not in bondage)
shows, and yet the word is as much imperative as v. 1^, 13. And I might have
added, that v. 18. let him not be uncircumcised, let him not be circumcised,
are there expressions of liberty, not of duty (as the reason v. 19. shows) and
yet are as imperative as the forms used v. 12, 13. [ See before of this, p.
624, 625, 626.] It Is true, to be circumcised might be forbidden elsewhere, as
Gal. 5.2, 3. and might be then unlawful, and so it might be forbidden in other
texts for the beliver to leave husband except in case of fornication, but in
these texts liberty only is expressed, in the one of living together
notwithstanding the unbelief of the one party, in the other continuing in that
state of circumcision or uncircumcision, as they were in when they were first
called to the faith of Christ. And this I think the Dr. should prefer as the
most suitable to his own exposition, since the frequent conversion of the
infidel by the believer, v. 14. is no fit reason to make it an unlawful thing
for her to depart, but only it may be some motive of her will to continue, as
the Dr. makes it. And I conceive v. 17, 20, 24. are to be so expounded, since it
is clear that to be a servant, or unmarried are some of the callings there
mentioned, as v. 21, 27, 28. show, but if it were a command of duty meant, v.
17, 20, 24. the servant must remain a servant contrary to v. 21. and the
unmarried not marry, contrary to v 28. And v. 27. (...) seek not a wife, being
as prohibitive a form as (...) v. 12, 13. an unmarried man should be forbidden
to woe a woman, contrary to v. 28. which exempts marriage from sin. So that
indeed all these imperative speeches v. 12, 13, 15, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 27. are
to be expounded as resolutions of liberty, and so precepts of indulgence, not
absolute prohibitions or injunctions of what may in no case be done, or must be
done as precepts of empire. And it is as when a person scrupling whether she
may be married to a Priest woing her is resolved thus, let her not forsake him,
she is not commanded to marry him, but resolved she may; so it is in this case.
Which being rightly understood, there is nothing opposite in my speech to
Christ's speeches Matthew 5. or 19. about not putting away except in case of
fornication, nor the Apostles 1 Cor. 7.10. Nor need I trouble my self whether
(...) be the other questions, v. 1, 6, 8, 10. though I think it should have
been then (...), nor whether it be to be applied to v. 15. as the Dr. would,
though it be in my apprehension very unlikely.

Secondly, says the Dr. In this rendering, (...) is englished (not by is or
has been sanctified, but ^ by [is as if he were sanctified] which indeed
acknowledges that he is not, truly (in any respect) sanctified, and then sure
this will be a strange construction, (...) the unbeliever (is not sanctified
but) is as if he were sanctified, when yet literally it must be rendered the
unbeliever has been, or (to gratify Mr. T.) is or continues to be sanctified:
For what is this but to interpret an affirmative by interposing a negation, he
is sanctified, by he is not? For so assuredly he is not, if he only be as if
he were.

Answ. According to me, (...) is rendered or englished [ is or has been
sanctified] but is expounded [is as if he were sanctified] as 1 Cor. 10. (...)
is rendered or englished [ were baptized] yet by Grotius expounded annot. 1
Cor. 10.2. baptizali sunt, id est, quasi baptizati sunt. Which me thinks should
be no strange construction to Dr. Hammond, who by his answer to Dr. Owen chapter
5.. 1, 2. seems to be acquainted with Grotius his annotations and other
writings, and to account of him as a very pious, learned judicious man. In this
exposition of Grotius there is as much an interpretation of an affirmative by
interp^sing a negation as in mine; the like I may say of other passages in the
New Testament, as when it is said Heb. 11.12. (...) dead or killed of Abraham
then alive, Matthew. 12.49. he that does the will of his father in heaven is
Christ's mother, who never bare him in the womb, Matthew. 12.5. they profane, who
did holy service, Matthew. 19.12. they made themselves Eunuchs, who were not
gelded.

The Dr. adds. With this let any man compare the interpretation I have given,
the unbeliever has been sanctified by the believer, i. e. examples there are
of such as have been thus converted from their unbelief, and this sense
enforced by the interrogation, v. 16. For what know thou, O woman, whether
thou shall save the man, etc. And by S. Peter's aphorism of daily observation 1
Pet. 3.1. the husband that obeyes not the word, i. e. the unbeliever, may
probably be gained by the conversation of the wife, and then let him
impartially pass judgment, which is the fairest and easiest rendering.

Answ. Content: If he will but take notice of this one thing (besides many
more) that the unbelieving husband, mentioned 1 Cor. 7.14. is said to be
sanctified even then when he was an unbeliever. Which is proved from the text.
1. The unbelieving huusband, and wife, v. 14. are the same with the unbelieving
husband and wife mentioned v. 12, 13. for the expression v. 14. is rela^ive to
v. 12, 13. otherwise it were impertinent to resolve the question, and the
particle [ for v. 14.] showing it to be a reason of the determination v. 12,
13. plainly proves it to be meant of the same persons who continued
unbelievers. 2. From v. 15. where the resolution of the doubt is continued, But
if the unbeliever depart, let him depart; which is not to be expounded of him
that was an unbeliever but is not, but of him who is when he departs, which is
confirmed in that he is opposed to a brother or sister, who if he were
converted should be a brother. 3. From v. 16. where still the unbeliever
mentioned v. 12, 13, 14, 15. is supposed to remain an unbeliever, else why
should his saving be made doubtful and contingent? And if the Dr. stand to his
own conceit, as if v. 16. exactly agreed with v. 14. it must be so construed by
himself. 4. His own Tertullian who says ex sanctificato alterutro sexu, not
utraque, and Hierome, and all other that add fidelem, v. 14. and all the
interpreters I know, that do make the sanctifying to be v. 14. in disparity of
religion, do agree in this, that the unbeliever v. 14. is meant of one that
continues an unbeliever, otherwise he should not be distinguished from the
believer, who was also an unbeliever formerly. Which if but observed, I dare
put it to any Reader of ordinary capacity to judge between us, whether the
Doctors sense be not so far from being the fairest and easiest, that it is
indeed a foul one, such as does imply a contradiction to the Apostles words,
the Dr. supposing the unbeliever v. 14. once such but not so then, the Apostle
supposing him to continue so, the Dr. expounding it thus; He that was once an
unbeliever, another then the unbeliever meant v. 12, 13. has been sanctified
by the believing wife, that is converted; and the Apostle, He that is still an
unbeliever, the same mentioned v. 12, 13. is sanctified; and whether mine [The
believer may abide with the unbelieving yoke fellow: For though he be an
unbeliever, yet in or to his wife, he is as if he were sanctified; it is all one
in respect of lawful [omitted by the Dr.) conjugal use as if he were
sanctified] be not the fairest, easiest, and most congruous sense, that is to
be given of those words 1 Cor. 7.14.

The Dr. goes on thus; His 2d. reason is, because, though the Dr. deny it, yet
I aver that the notion of (...) for to as a sign of the Dative case, is found
more then once in the N. T. The truth of this I must now examine, by the proofs
offered for the affirmation. And his first proof is, from Matthew. 17.12. (...),
This, says he, cannot be eluded, because the same speech is Mark. 9.13. (...)
and rendered by Beza in the former place fecerunt ei, they did to him. 2.
Whereas the Dr. says, (...) is used for (...), upon him or against him, it had
been meet the Dr. should have given one instance at least, of such
construction, which, says he, I do not believe he can do. To this I answer, 1.
By two ready instances in one verse, Luke 23.31. (...); if they do these things
(our ordinary English reads, in a green tree, but the sense and propriety
directs us to) on the green tree, what shall be done on the dry? here is the
very phrase that is used in that place of Matthew, (...), as (...).

Answ. I did aver more then the Dr. sets down, that the notion of (...) for [
to] may with good congruity and Grammatical analogy be affixt to it, 1 Cor.
7.14. and I used these words left out by the Dr. whereas he says (meaning the
Dr) (...) is used for (...) on him or against him, and that this is an ordinary
acception, of (...) for (...); I grant that it is an ordinary acception to use
(...) for (...), but not in the sense he here conceives, to wit, as (...)
notes on or against a person. Now the Doctors instance is but in one verse, and
therefore shows not the ordinary acception, and then whereas I expected an
instance of (...) for (...), as it notes on or against a person, he brings an
instance of (...) on a tree, and this is not of (...) for (...) against, which
had been more for his purpose, but for (...) on, though in the sense of [ on
him] (...) rather answers to (...), then (...). Yet the Dr. brings no authority
but his own for this his conceit of (...) for on, Luke 23.31. I add; that
though the Latin and English translators I have yet looked into, do render
(...) Luke 23.31. by in not on, super or contra (which are the Drs. notions)
yet I find Diodati in his Italian translation reading, al legno verde al legno
secco, which I take to be as much [ to] as if it were expressed by ligno
viridi, and ligno sicco or arido, without a preposition, and if so, the Dr.
has brought a text which further confirms my conceit against himself. In which
I am the more confident, because when an object patient, or a subject suffering
is expressed with the verb (...) or (...), it is either never or very rarely
said, (...), or (...), but (...) or (...), as in Luke 1.25, 49, 68. and 2.48.
and 6.11, 23, 26, 27, 31. and 8.39. and 18.41. and 20.15. Acts 4.16. and 9.13.
Luke 1.38. and 14.12. and 19.9. Acts 2.43. and 7.40. and 20.3. and 22.6, 17.
omitting other writers. Which is an argument to me, that Luke 23.31. (...) is
redundant, and that it is best transiated, to the dry, to the green, and so the
Dr. has given an instance for my notion, not for his own.

He says further. And then for S. Marks using (in the parallel place) (...)
for (...)] that proves not that (...) was rendundant in S. Matthew, or that it
was a bare sign of the Dative case, it being free to S. Mark to use any other
expression, different from S. Matthew so he retained the sense, as it is clear
in this place he does, doing injuries to him, being all one in effect with upon
or against him, though the phrases are not the same, which no way inferrs that
when the change of the phrase changes the sense, it were lawful so to vary it,
as in the place we have in hand ((...)) it is on both sides supposed to do.

Answ. The Dr. omits these words of mine [However if he could, yet me thinks it
should satisfy, that (...) notes no more than (...)* and is a sign of the
Dative case, because Mark who seems to have abbreviated Matthew, so expresses
it, and the common use of (...) when it notes dealings of man to man whether
good or bad, is usually expressed by the Dative case, as Matthew. 7.12. and 18.12
and 20.32. and 21.36, 40. and 25.40, 45.] to which the Dr. makes no answer, and
that which he says here, does confirm my notion. For if it were free to Mark
to use any other expression different from Matthew, so he retained the sense,
and yet he does not use (...) but put only the Dative case to express the
same; that Matthew did it appears that (...) and (...) are to the same sense
and phrase, to express injuries done to John Baptist, and that (...) in Matthew
is redundant, and nothing expressed by it but what is expressed in Mark in the
Dative case without it. What the Dr. means when he says ['tis on both sides
supposed ((...)) changes the sense, and so it is unlawful to vary it] I do not
understand, our present question is not whether it be lawful to change a
phrase when the sense is not changed, and unlawful when it is: but whether
(...) Matthew. 17.12. be redundant and a sign of the Dative case: this is yet
unanswerably proved to be by this, that Mark. 9.13. the same phrase and matter
is expressed without it, and there it notes only the Dative case, and that is
the usual manner of expression without (...), and therefore (...) must be taken
as redundant, and a sign of the Dative case only, Matthew. 17.12.

The Dr. goes on, A second instance which he conceivs cannot be eluded, is
Col. 1.23. (...), which was preached to every creature, and this he proves to
be the only rendering; 1. Because (...) to preach, is commonly with a Dative
case of the object, and though 1 Timothy 3.16. it is (...), yet our translators
and the Vulgar, and Beza read it, unto the Gentiles, as if there it noted only
a dative case; and if it were among the Gentipes there, yet here Col. 1.2^. it
cannot be so, because the object is in the singular number, but (...) when it
is for among, is joined still with a noun of the plural. And 2. that which,
says he, puts this out of all doubt, is, that the phrase Col. 1. answers Mark
16.15. (...). But to all this the answer is ready, by observing the exact
notation of (...) the whole creation (as we render it Romans 8.22.) as that
signifies the whole, but especially the Gentile world, and accordingly is
expressed by (...), Matthew. 28. and farther explained by (...) the whole world, to
which in S. Mark they are appointed to go, when they were thus to preach the
Gospel (...) to this whole creation. Now of (...) in this notion it is clear,
that though it be in the singular number, yet that has the power of the
plural, as the word [world] and the like, which every body knows is a noun of
multitude, and so is creation, when it is thus taken for the whole created
world, meaning the world of men, the nations or people of the world. And then
there can be no doubt but (...)] is most exactly thus to be rendered, preached
in, or among the whole creation, as Gal. 1.16. (...) preach in the nations, or
among the Gentiles, and so 1 Timothy 3.16. also, though the sense being no way
altered by rendering it unto the whole creation, or every creature, and the
Gentiles, it matters little though it be promiscuously thus rendered, which yet
must not prescribe for other places where the sense is so much changed by the
diverse rendering as in this case, (...)] is observable, where therefore the
litteral rendering being retained, we are not reasonably to conclude any more
from it, then that litteral reading will afford us. As for the parallel phrase
Mark. 16. that doutless can prove nothing; 1. Because the places are not nor
can be thought parallel. 2. Because if they were (as of Matthew. 28. and Mark 16.
has been granted) yet the parallel lying only in the sense, and that being
all one whether they preached to or among the Gentiles, this no way concludes
that the phrases are the same, or the (...) in one redundant, which is the
only thing, for the proving of which this parallel is produced, but of that I
have formerly spoken.

Answ. Had the Dr. showed any one interpreter that ever rendered (...) Col.
1.23. by inter omnem creaturam, among every creature, or that (...) as it
signifies inter or among or either of these prepositions, is put in Latin or
English before a noun of multitude in the singular number, he had said more
then I yet deem he can, or I think any other Grammarian, nor do I take the
word (...) to be a noun of multitude, there may be (...) though there were but
one individual, though I grant (...) notes many creatures, nor do I conceive it
good sense to render it in every creature, since the term [ creature] does note
persons not place, and to be preached in every creature, would imply such a
sense as will not suit with the matter, which is conceived by many
interpreters, to note the accomplishment of what Christ appointed Mark 16.15.
which leaving out the preposition (...), and the common use of (...) to preach
being with a Dative case of the object, I did infer that (...) is redundant and
a note of the Dative case, as Pasor before me in his Lexicon of the word (...)
of which he says, saepe ex Hebraismo redundat Col. 1.23. (...), predicati omni
creaturae. Sure if it were most exactly rendered, as the Dr. says, preached in
or among the whole creation, it is marvail none hit on this before the Dr. as
they have done Gal. 3.16. 1 Timothy 3.16. Whether Col. 1.23. and Mar. 16.15. be
parallel in the manner I make them, is to be referred to the Readers judgment,
when he shall compare them together. Sure I find all these, Beza, Camerarius,
Piscator, Zonchius, Grotius, Davenant, Trapp, the new Annotations, Elton,
referring to and explaining one by the other, and the Dr. confessing the sense
the same, every Grammarian that understands Greek may plainly see the phrase to
be the same save that (...) is added Col. 1.^3. and therefore from all these I
infer as most probable, and to me certain, that (...) is redundant, that it is
only the sign of the dative case of the object, that it is most truly
rendered as our Translators and many more rendered, to every creature, that is,
as Gorram expounds it, universis hominibus, to all, or all sorts of men. As for
the Drs. cautions about prescribing and concluding, they are impertinent to the
present thing concerning Col. 1.23. whether (...) be redundant the sign of the
Dative case there. Whether (...) 1 Cor. 7.14. he to be rendered [ to] whether
the sense will bear it, whether it make any other change in the sense then is
fit, or any more be concluded, then is deducible is before and after to be
discussed. Hitherto it appears not but that I said right, Matthew. 17.12. Col.
1.23. cannot be eluded.

The Dr. goes on, His third instance is (...) Acts 4.12. which he cannot yet
conceive, but that it is better rendered, to men, then among men. And his
reasons are; First, because (...) has most regularly and consequently ( it
should be constantly) a dative case of the person after it. Secondly, because
if it had been among men, it had been to be placed after (...) other, there is
no other name among men, given, but being placed after given, it is to be
expounded as referred to given not to other, and so must be read, to men, not
among men. Thirdly, It seems no good sense, nor true, that Christ was a name
given among men, for though he were among men, yet he was given from above, To
all which, he adds the judgment of Irenaeus l. 3. c. 1^. cited by Beza, and a
parallel phrase (...) for (...) Acts 7.44. To this I answer. First, That it is
true when (...) has any case of the person following and governed by it, that
is constantly the dative, but that is no way applicable to this phrase, (...),
for there the persons (...) are governed by the preposition (...) not by (...).
To the second, that the construction by among, is very good, placing it after
given, there is no other name given among men, i. e. no means of salvation
afforded by God, and continued among men. To the third, That Christ's being
given from above, no way prejudges his being given among men, both because the
benefit of this gift is a common donative, distributed among men, and also
because this gift is dispensed in form of humane flesh, Christ is become man,
and to be found and seen among men.

Answ. 1. That the persons (...) men, are governed by the proposition (...),
and not by (...), is not rightly said by the Dr. First, Because the placing of
it next after (...) shows it is governed of (...) given. Secondly, Because if [
men] were not governed of [ given] the participle [given] were superfluous. For
he sense would be the same, and the speech were as good language if it were
left out, and the reading only thus; neither is there another name under
heaven among men, whereby we must be saved. ^. That name whereby we must be
saved] should be put for [ means of salvation] and not a person distinctly is
both besides the usual acception of the term [ name] and the drift of the
words, which show that by [ name] is meant [ person] and makes the speech
false; For the preaching of the Gospel by Prophets, and Apostles, were means of
salvation afforded by God, and continued among men, besides Christ and his
preaching. 3. That this gift was dispensed in form of humane flesh, that Christ
was become man, and to be f^und and seen among men, shows not that he was
given among men, but to be among men, his giving was from above, as he often
says, that he came down from heaven, Joh. 6.38, 41, 50, 51, 58.33. given from
heaven, v. 32. Joh. 8.23. ye are from beneath, I am from above. Joh. 3.31. He
that comes from above is above all, he that comes from heaven is above all;
which is contrary to what Peter (as the Dr. expounds him) speaks here, that he
was a name under heaven given among men. And the other reason, because the
benefit of this gift is a common donative, and distributed among men, though it
perverts the sense, putting for [ the name] which signifies the person [ the
benefit] and confounding the person whereby we must be saved with the benefit,
which is no other then salvation, yet it makes for my sense. For what is it to
be a common donative, distributed among men, but to be given to men. So that in
the issue, the Dr. notwithstanding his struggling is not able to avoid it, but
that it serves my purpose of proving (...) redundant, and a sign of the Dative
case. What the Dr. says to what I add out of Beza annot. on Acts 4.12. the Dr.
might have remembered (if he ever read it) that in my Examen. part. 1.. 4. I did
take notice that Irenaeus was a Greek and wrote in Greek, but now only we have
his works in Latin except some few fragments, and Beza so great a learned man,
as had few equals, especially in the Greek language, it is likely knew so too;
and therefore the Dr. might have omitted that intimation, as if we were
forgetful thereof. And it had been fair if the Dr. had taken notice, that Beza
alleged first the old interpreter, as reading [ datum hominibus, given to men]
and Irenaeus (meaning his translator, who is commonly cited as Irenaeus] after
him, and that I added Camerarius, which the Dr. says nothing to, but has a
snatch at Beza's alleging Acts 7.44. which I rest not on, since it may be read [
with or among] as well as [ to] which is agreeable with our l^st translation,
Our Fathers had the Tabernacle of witness. But I follow the Dr. in his debates,
which it is indeed pity the Reader or the Dr. should be exercised with, being
fit for better undertakings then these, which he is detained with upon his own
motion, as one that is cedere nescius to a plain truth, not in obedience to me
who never enjoined him this exercise.

He says, For a 4th. instance, he again resumes that of Gal. 1.16. 2 Pet. 1.5.
That Gal. 1. where of God the Apostle says, that he was pleased to reveall his
own son (...), and when I had rendered that by or through me to others, This
exposition, says he, makes the Apostle tautologize ineptly. This strange
undecent expression, I wish had been spared, for certainly there was little
temptation for it: why, I pray, might not the Apostle without incurring either
part of that censure, say, God was pleased through me to reveal his son, and by
way of explication (and withal to denote the designation of that Apostle to
his peculiar province, as the Apostle of the uncircumcision) add, that I might
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles. Certainly every explication of an obscurer
or narrower, by a clearer or larger phrase, is not inept tautology, but that
which all writers which have desired to speak intelligibly, have always been
full of. And yet 2dly, the later part here, of his preaching the Gospel to the
Gentiles (he being peculiarly the Apostle of the Gentiles, as Peter and John
were of the Jews wheresoever dispersed) is more then was pretended to be said
by my rendering and paraphrasing the former part of it; for in that those others
had not been defined, who they were, or limited to the Gentiles. This Mr. T.
adverted not in his objection, I desire he will now take notice of it.

Answ. I could not well have spared the expression, having temptation for it
from Dr. Hammonds mis-interpreting the Apostles speech, so as to make it
according to the Drs. sense, though not according to the Apostles, an inept
tautology; which however strange, yet was no undecent expression, there being
nothing that reflects on the Apostle but on the Dr. tending to show the
absurdity of his interpretation, not of the Apostles words. From which the Dr.
does not relieve himself by his answer here. For the later phrase does not
express the same more clearly, there is neither a copulative conjunction nor
dis^junctive, expressed or implied, nor any other particle which may show the
later phrase to be exegitical of the former, but the particle (...) does
plainly show that, (...), the Evangelizing or preaching the Gospel, to be
m^ntioned as the end or consequent of the revelation, and therefore not the
same act. Besides the preaching the Gospel by a man is no where termed the
revealing of Christ by him to others, being known to him before, but the making
known to the person, and revelation is still made Gods, Christ's, or his spirits
act, and has a Dative case of the person who is the object to whom the thing
is revealed added to it, as Matthew. 11.25, 27. and 16.17. Luke 10.21, 22. John
12.38. 1 Cor. 2.10. and 14 30. Ephesians. 3.5. Phil. 3.15. 1 Pet. 1.12. and this must
needs be the meaning, the words before being, whereas before he was zealous of
the Law against the Christian profession, when it pleased God who separated me
from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace to reveal his son in him; or
as Beza annot. in locum (...) id est mihi, to me, which plainly shows that this
revelation was to him when he was called, which is called the revelation of
Jesus Christ to him, v. 12. and made the proof of his calling to be an
Apostle, not of men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, v. 1. and the reason
why he preached without conferring with the Apostles And thus does Perkins com.
on Gal. 1.16. rightly explain it, to reveal his son in me or to me, and to
express the manner or form of his calling or conversion, and expounds it thus,
to teach me the doctrine of the redemption of mankind by Jesus Christ, and the
words to preach Christ among the Gentiles the end of his vocation. As for that
which the Dr. desires me now to take notice of, I do, though I think it
needless, since the tautology I conceived to follow on the Drs. exposition, is
not in the object but in the act, revealing his son by the Apostle, being no
other then his preaching, which makes the speech nugatory, it pleased God to
preach his son by me, that I might preach. As for the place of 2 Pet. 1.5. since
the Dr. makes no more answer I need make no more reply, and I still aver that
all the places which I brought out of the N. T. have the notion of (...) for
to, as a sign of the Da^ive case.

To the places out of the Greek of the old Testament, he tells me, that three
only places in the whole Old T. would never infer that so it must be in the
New (which I grant) and there being no pretense of necessity that thus it wust
be here (which is also granted, except a necessity of a more fair, easy, and
congruous sense then any other rendering) these three will be of no avail to
me. But this is not yielded. For the two first, Deuteronomy. 28.60. and 2 Kings 5.25.
(...), vulg. adhaerebit tibi and semini tuo, being used constantly in the N. T.
with a Dative Luke 10.11. and 15.15. Acts 5.13. and 8.29. and 9.26. and 10.28.
and 17.34. Romans 12.9. 1 Cor. 6.16, 17, etc. it is a strong presumption that
(...) is redundant, and only the sign of the Dative case. And the other place
Psalm. 68.18. compared with Ephesians. 4.8. has some force, it being probable that
the Apostle expressed what the LXX meant by (...). But it was not of this last
only, but of all together, I said I took them to be more then enough to refute
the Drs. speech, that the notion, wherein (...) signifies to, which is a sign
of the Dative case, is never found once to belong to it in the N. T. nor can
with any tolerable congruity or Grammatical analogy be affixt to it.

SECT. XCIV. It is showed that Dr. Hammond has no proof from 1 Cor. 7.16. for
his sense of the forepart of v. 14. Nor will his sense of Holy for Baptized,
agree with the Apostles argument, though his sense of the forepart of the v.
were granted.
THe Dr. adds, My third proof produced for my interpretation of the first part
of v. 14. which to me put it out of all doubt, by comparing it with the reason
subjoyned; For what know thou O wife, whether thou shall save thy husband;
or how know thou, O man, whether thou shall thy wife?] He comes next to
examine, and has many exceptions against it, all which (without losing time in
repeating and viewing them severally) will be soon dispelled by a right
understanding of the force of the Apostles argument, as there I conceive it to
lie, Thus v. 14. It is matter of ordinary observation, that unbelieving
husbands have been brought to the faith and Baptism by the believing wife,
therefore I now exhort and counsel the believer not to depart from the
unbeliever, in case the unbeliever be willing to stay, v. 13. for this reason,
v. 16. Because whath has been so often, may very probably be hoped again, and
consequently upon the premimises the believer has ground to hope, that she may
in time gain the husband to the faith, and that being so fair a reward in her
view, (the saving or rescuing him from infidelity to Christ) may well enforce
the counsel of the Apostle, not to depart from him, as long as, without sin,
she is permitted to stay. By which it appears that this v. 16. is not a bare
evplanation of (...) v. 14. (on which Mr. T. his exceptions principally depend)
but an application of the argument formerly proposed, but now more signally
brought home to them, under the form of [(...) for what] by this means to
reinforce his conclusion of their not departing for the cause of infidelity:
If the Reader will but observe what is thus visible, he will want no more help,
to get out of the intricacies and roils, which Mr. T. has here spread for him
in this matter, which is in it self so manifest, as nothing can be added to it,
if either the text or my paraphrase may be permitted to speak for it self.

Ans. The Dr. seems to be much crest-fa^n, who having said his exposition
appeared most irrefragably by v. 16. wherein he said the forepart of v. 14. was
further explained. When four plain reasons were urged against this, he replies
to none, but only calls them intricacies, and toils, and says, my exceptions
depend on this, that v. 16. is not a bare explanation of (...) v. 14. whereas
my reasons prove it to be neither an explanation nor an application of the
argument formerly proposed v. 14. but another argument, not to prove the
lawfulness of the believers continuance with the believer, as v. 14. but either
as a motive to bring them to what he had concluded lawful, or to enforce what
he had said v. 15. And for what the Dr. says, that v. 16. the argument
formerly proposed, v. 14. is more signally brought home to them, it is not true
even according to the Drs. own paraphrase. For the Drs. paraphrase of v. 14. as
if therein a frequ^ncy of the conversion of unbelievers yoke fellows by the
believer, were well known as matter of ordinary observation, and so hopeful in
the case of the present doubters, brings home the argument more signally then a
mention o^ it as possible, doubtfully expressed as a contingent that might be
or not be. But I am willing the Reader should hear us both and then judge. I
for my part do still conceive the Drs paraphrase of the forepart of 1 Cor.
7.11. to be far from the meaning of the text, the reason of the Apostle being
by it made a Rhetorical argument to enforce the cohabitation as an advantage,
which is used to make it lawful, and urged from a contingent thing which no
whit cleared the doubt, but the reason might be retorted against him, and all
ascribed to the yoke fellow as a believer, when the term believer is quite
omitted, and that ascribed to the believer which is still elsewhere ascribed to
the spirit of God, and that expressed as done often and as of ordinary
observation, which is expressed in the singular number, and made by the Apostle
as doubtful and uncertain. And if these be intricacies and toils the Dr. has
had little compassion on me and his reader, who when he might so easily, would
not spend a little more time to help me out of them, though spread by himself.

The Dr. proceeds Sect. 4. His exceptions to the former part of my paraphrase
being now ended, I must attend what he has to say against the latter part of
it, that which concerns our matter in hand more nearly; The words (...), for
else were your children unclean, but now are they holy, i. e. upon that score
it is that Christians children are admitted to Bap^ism, viz. because by their
living in the family with the Christian parent, they probably will (and ought
to) be brought up in the faith -- and the Church (requiring and receiving
promise from the parents) reasonably presumes they will, and so admits them to
Baptism. The argument of the Apostle thus explained in my paraphrase (or if he
yet will have it more plainly thus, The Church upon confidence that the
believers children will be brought up in the faith, receives them to Baptism
when they are infants; And upon the same grounds of hope, that your abiding
with the unbelieving husband may in time convert him (as by experience it has
often been found) I advise you not to depart from him, if he will live with you,
For what know thou whether thou shall save thy husband? etc.) M. T. has
made a shift not to understand, and substituted another way of arguing in my
name, in stead of it, p. 331. And having done so I must leave him to combat
with the shadow of his own creating, no part of his impression lighting upon
that which alone I profess to be my meaning in it, which I leave him or the
Reader to see, in the particulars proposed by him, but must not now be so
impertinent, as to lose time in the persuit of them.

Answ. Since the Dr. has disclaimed my good words, and approbation of his
ingenuity, chapter 1. sect. 1. of this his defense, I shall forbear to commend his
ingenuity, but cannot choose but take notice of his shift he makes to avoid the
force of my reasons, by bearing the Reader in hand that I made a shift not to
understand him, that I substitute another way of arguing in his name in stead
of it, that I combat with a shadow of my own creating, no part of my
impression lighting upon that which alone he professes to be his meaning in
it, and therefore must not now be so impertinent as to lose time in the pursuit
of the particulars proposed by me. This is a pretty art to pretend a reason why
he need not answer what he cannot; like his, who when he could not make a good
account, devised how he might make none at all. The Dr. says I have
substituted another way of arguing in his name in stead of that he has set
down. Now sure this intimates that this he sets down was a way of arguing, and
calls hi^ explications he sets down the argument of the Apostle thus explained
in his paraphrase in the later way more plainly. But in neither do I find any
arguing ascribed to the Apostle in the later part of his word* 1 Cor. 7.14. but
in the former a mere d^claration upon what reason Christians children are (as
the Dr. conceives the Apostle mean^) admitted to baptism; in the later, an
addition of a paraphrase on the first part of 1 Cor. 7 14. with his advise
according to v. 12, 13. and his paraphrase confirmed by v. 16. Nor does the Dr.
at all explain those words, Else were your children unclean, though those were
the words I chiefly insisted on to show the absurdity his framing the Apostles
reasoning brought his words to, as the Reader may plainly perceive by my words
in the 2d part of my Review, sect. 26. p. 330, 331. But to show the Drs.
collusion in this thing, the Reader may observe 1. that neith^r in his
paraphrase in his 4th. qu. 31. (though he make it. 32. the importance of the
Apostles words, and force of his arguing) nor here, does the Dr. set down the
true force of the particle (...) else, which in his Letter, qu. 4.. 33. (to
which my answer was made, p 330, 331, 332. with which the Dr. here cavils) he
terms an argumentative style. For the expressions [ upon this score, on this
one consideration, upon this ground] are not exclusive terms, as (...) else is,
which implies not only that the thing is so upon that one consideration, but
also that without it it should be otherwise; nor does the Dr. seem to put them
as answering to (...) else were, but to (...) but now. 2. That (as I said
before) the Dr* does in neither of these paraphrases set down any thing as
answering to [ else were your children unclean] nor in his Letter, qu 4. 3^*
except these words are put to answer them [ yet the children of heathens are
not admitted to baptism,] which me thinks he should not do, since [ your
children] is in all his paraphrases [ Christians children, believers children]
and therefore I am loath to think him so much overseen* as that he should put [
the children of heathens are not admitted to baptism] for [ your children were
unclean,] 3. If he should, he should in that paraphrase much pervert the
Apostles meaning, by putting that which answers to [ else were your children
unclean] contrary to the Apostles order, after that which answers to [ but now
are they holy;] of which disorder, tending to pervert the Apostles meaning, his
plainer later paraphrase here is guilty, putting first that which he conceives
answerable to [ but now are they holy,] and then that which answers to [ the
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,] and then that which answers to
[ v. 13. let her not leave him,] and then the 16th. v. which sure is such a
disorder as is very faulty, so deforming the Apostles argument, as that its
like the leaving out of an arm or eye, the placing of the hand where the eye
should be in the painting of a man, whereby he is made a monster. 4. Whereas
the Dr. Defense of Baptism, p. 66. denies that he made the future hopes any
part of the sense of [hath been sanctified,] in all these paraphrases he sets
down nothing but the future hopes, which are no part of the sense by his own
confession, but as he imagines, the rational importance, the score, ground, or
consideration of admitting children to Baptism. And not only so, but adds more
then he makes the rational importance of the term [ has been sanctified] in
his paraphrase, as that by their living in the family with Christian parents,
they probably will (and ought) to be brought up in the faith, and the Church
requiring and receiving promise from the parents, reasonably presumes they
will. None of which he does so much as pretend to be the rational importance of
[ has been sanctified,] but adds them of his own; and with like fancying might
have added, the Church does reasonably presume they will be Teachers, Officers
in the Church, Martyrs, and what else they could wish them to be I refer it to
any sober ingenious Scholar to judge, whether such kind of paraphrasing,
especially when an argument is drawn from it, as the chief, if not only pi^lar
of the cause, be tolerable.

On the other side, that the Dr. did make the Apostles arguing otherwise, when
he refuted the answer to his argument hence, in his Letter, qu. 4.. 82. appears
by his words there, p. 257. (which I cited Review par. 2. page 322. and were
those whence I gathered the Drs. framing the Apostles argument) when he said,
The invalidity of this answer will be discerned First by the method of the
Apostles arguing in that place, for the co^habiting of the believing wife with
the unbelieving husband, etc. because the unbelieving husband has been
sanctified by the believing wife, or else were your children unclean, but now
are they holy: that must needs be this, unless there were some hope that the
co-habiting of a believer, should be a means to bring an unbeliever to the
faith, 'twould certainly follow, that their children were unclean; now putting
to it that which he in his paraphrases. 31. of his 4 th. qu. in his Letter,
where he expresses [hath been sanctified] thus, The unbelieving party has
been brought to the faith by the company and conversation of the believer, and
[unclean] by [not admitted to Baptism,] and [holy] by [admitted to Baptism,]
and [your children by [the young children of Christians whereof was an
unbeliever;] and I appeal to any that shall compare my words in the 2d. part
of this Review, sect. 26. p. 331. where I make this the Apostles arguing as the
Dr. expounds it, [ If some other unbelieving yoke fellow had not been converted
by the faith, diligence, and conversation of the believing party that then was,
then the children of you who are believers, but begotten or brought forth by
one that yet is an unbeliever, had not been admitted to Christian Baptism in
infancy: but now, that is, upon this score, that some former unbelieving
yoke-fellows have been brought to the faith of Christ by the faith,
conversation, and diligence of the believer, they have been admitted to
Baptism,] with the Drs. premised arguings and paraphrase in his Letter, qu. 4..
31, 82. and here, whether I have not rightly set down the Apostles argument as
the Dr. expounds him, and the Dr. has not changed here his frame of the
Apostles argument to hide the deformity of it, and whether there be any truth
in it that I have not understood his paraphrase, that I have substituted
another way of arguing in his name in stead of it, or have combated with the
shadow of my own creating; and whether these propositions [ the children of a
believing yoke fellow who is joined to an unbeliever had not been admitted to
Christian Baptism, if some other unbelieving yoke fellow had not been brought
to the faith. The children of a believer by an unbelieving yoke fellow have
been admitted to Christian Baptism, by reason that it has been usual that
other believers have brought the unbeliever to the faith] are not included in
the Apostles argument according to the tenor of his reasoning conceived by the
Dr. and whether there be any show of connection in the consequence of the
Apostle as the Dr. expounds it, and whether he has not shifted in stead of
answering, and imputed fiction to me that he might hide his own collusion.

SECT. XCV. Dr. Hammonds reasons from the terms holy and unclean for his sense
of baptized or not baptized are refelled.
THe Dr. next pretends to vindicate his reasons for his interpretation from my
exceptions.

My first reason ( says he) is, Because (...), holy, noting a relative
holiness, a setting apart to God, and the lowest degree of that imaginable,
being the initiating into the Church by Baptism, this must in reason be here
noted by (...) holy, as all visible professors, Ezr. 9.2. are the holy seed,
and in the Epistles of the Apostles, (...) holy. To this he answers, that it
being all granted, confirms not the Drs. exposition, because it is no good
argument a genere ad speciem affirmative, and because infants are not visible
professors. But sure when the species is such, that he that has not that, has
not any part of the genus, the argument will thus hold very irrefragably:
Suppose that of the Deacon to be the lowest order of Officers in the Church,
and that without which there is no ascending to any higher degree in the
Ministry, will not then the argument hold, He has some degree Ecclesiastical
upon him, therefore sure he is a Deacon? Thus sure it is in this matter, the
relative holiness belongs to no person, that is not baptized, Baptism is the
lowest degree of it, and all superior degrees of Apostle, Prophet, etc. in the
Christian Church are founded in that, therefore if the infant children be holy,
the infant children are baptized. So again, Baptism is the lowest degree of
visible Profession, therefore if these that are said to be holy are visible
Professors, then sure they are baptized; And so there is no force in that
whether answer or exception to my first reason.

Answ. That there is no force to avoid my exception in this reply, may appear.
1. That he says nothing to what I said p. 333. of the 2d. part of the Review,
that the term [holy seed] Ezr. 9.2. has a far different notion, as I show in
this Review Antipaed. par. 1. sect. 13, 25. from what the Dr. imagines. 2. Nor
does he here, or any where else prove infants to be visible professors. 3. Nor
does he prove Baptism to be the lowest degree of visible profession. 4. Nor
does the Dr. prove or can prove, that the holiness 1 Cor. 7.14. must be meant
of a relative holiness, of setting apart to God in the Christian visible
Church, short of real saving holiness. The opinion of matrimonial holiness I
assert, with many more, is not yet refuted. They who after Tertullian interpret
it of real saving holiness intentional, as Romans 11.26. the Jews uncalled are
holy, designati sanctitati ac per hoc etiam saluti, conceive they have as good
proof for it as the Dr. for his. 5. Baptism is not proved to be the lowest
degree imaginable of relative holiness in the Christian Church, nor the lowest
degree of visible profession. For 1. there is a lower degree by freedom from
Idol pollutions, such as Tertullian mentions c. 39. de anima. 2. There is a
degree of holiness by vow or prayer, such as Hannah devoted Samuel by, 1 Samuel
1.11. which Josephus Antiq. l. 5. c. 11. terms consecrating or sanctifying to
God, as the Greek version terms Numb. 6.2, 3. the separating of the Nazarite by
vow a sanctifying, and the Apostle prayer in the use of food a sanctifying it,
1 Timothy 4.5. 3. There is a lower degree of visible profession in the catechumeni
not yet baptized then Baptism is. 4. There is a lower degree of sanctification
of them, according to Augustine, l. 2. de pecc. mer. and remis. c. 26. cited
before by the Dr. here, p. 63, 64. when ^e said, Catechumenos secundum quendam
modum suum per signum Christi and orationem impositionis manuum puto
sanctificari, whence the Dr. himself says there, that some kind of
sanctification which the unbaptized might have by prayer and imposition of
hands, of which we sometimes read in the Ancients, as has elsewhere been
showed. 6. Nor is it proved that a person may not have the higher degree of
holiness in the Cnurch without Baptism. Sure a person may be converted,
regenerated before Baptism, and so holy. And it is yet a question, whether all
the Apostles and Prophets in the Church were baptized, though I doubt not they
were, and that regularly they should be; yet the very questioning it shows the
argument not to hold irrefragably, that he that is not baptized has no part of
relative holiness in the Church of God, or that all superior degrees of
Apostle, Prophet, etc. in the Christian Church are founded in that. Lastly, it
is apparent that the holiness 1 Cor. 7.14. is not Baptism, in that it is from
the birth, and so before Baptism, and from the parent not from the Minister, may
be though the child be never baptized, is derived from the lawfulness of
marriage society, not from the belief of one or both parents, and therefore not
Baptism, as the Dr. (so far as I know) without any example ancient or modern
makes it.

He adds, My second follows from the notation of (...) Acts 10.14. for those
that must not be received into the Church, as on the other side Gods cleansing
is Gods reputing him fit to be partaker of this privilege, whereby it appears
how fitly, receiving and not receiving to baptism] are expressed by [holy and
unclean.] To this he answers by acknowledging the conclusion, viz. the fitness
of the expression, All his exception is against my premise, the notion of
unclean, Act. 10. which, says he, signifies there not only one out of the
Church, but also one that a Jew might not go into or eat with. To this I reply
that my conclusion being granted, I may safely part with that, which inferred
it, as when I am arrived at my journeys end I have no further need or use of my
horse or guide that brought me thither: Let it be remembered, that [holy and
unclean] fitly express those that are received or not received to baptism, and
then I am sure I have not offended against the propriety of the words, by
concluding from this text, that in the Apostles time the believers children
were received to Baptism; And if I have as little offended against the rational
importance of the words in that place (as I hope has formerly appeared that I
have) then I hope I am perfectly innocent in inducing my conclusion. As for the
use of the phrase Act. 10. though now I need not contend yet I may add that the
notion of not entering to and eating with* containing under it this other of not
baptizing (for sure he might not baptize those to whom he might not enter) and
the baptizing Cornelius (and not only the entering to him) being the end for
which Peter received that vision) I still adhere that (...) in that place,
signifies one peculiarly that must not be received into the Church by Baptism,
and the holiness on the contrary reception to that privilege.

Answ. 1. I granted the fitness of the expression only conditionally, if the
holy Ghost had so thought good, but denied the holy Ghost did so, and therefore
he may offend against the propriety of the words, notwithstanding my
concession, and has as much need of his horse to get to his journeys end, as
if I had not yielded so much. 2. How much he has offended against the rational
importance of the Apostles words 1 Cor. 7.14. is showed before. 3. Were the
fitness of the expression absolutely granted, yet with the Drs. leave, I
conceive he needs to contend about the use of the phrase in his sense, or else
he will not be able to infer any thing for his purpose, since it is not the
fitness of an expression, but the use of words which must direct us in our
expositions, as being vis and norma loquendi. 4. That the use of it Acts 10.14.
is not for the Drs. purpose is manifest. For 1. the Dr. thus expounds common or
unclean by not received to Baptism, now if this were the notion of unclean Ac^s
10.14. then when Peter says [ I have never eaten any thing common or unclean]
he means he never eat any thing nor received into the Church by Baptism; and
when v. 15. it is said [ what God has cleansed that call thou not common] the
meaning is, what God has baptized reject thou not from Baptism, which is too
ridiculous an exposition to be urged. 2. If it be said that the (...), or
covered sense does import it, neither is that true. For 1. it is certain that
in the latent meaning, the Apostle discerned by the vision that which is common
or unclean to be meant v. 28. of one of another nation, and the eating, keeping
company, or going to, which is also gathered from Acts 11.3. where the thing
objected was, that he went in to the uncircumcised, and did eat with them. So
that from hence it is manifest, that the proper notion of unclean is (in that
place according to the subsense which the vision aimed at) one that being
uncircumcised might not be gone into to talk with familiarly, and and eat with,
though he were one that feared God. Which cannot be meant of want of baptism,
for so the clean, to wit, the unbelieving Jews were unclean, they were not
baptized with Christian baptism, but of exclusion from familiar society and
converse. 2. On the other side, by Acts 10.15. What God has cleansed that call
thou not common, Peter v. 28. shows he understood allowance to go to him,
preach to him, eat with him, as one accepted of God, v. 35. So that the
cleansing is the taking away of that restraint which was upon the Jews, of
converse with the Gentiles. Which being considered, if unclean Acts 10.14. were
to be expounded in the same notion which the Dr. imagines to be 1 Cor. 7.14.
not admitted to the Church by Baptism, then when God bid Peter count nothing
common or unclean, he bid him count no Gentile unbaptized, and when he said
what God has cleansed, it should be whom God has baptized, or admitted by
Baptism into the Church. And when the Apostle according to the Dr. uses
unclean 1 Cor. 7.14. in the notion in which it is used Acts 10.14. he should
mean, your young children were such as a man might not go into, converse with,
talk with familiarly, eat with, which certainly being meant of infants as the
Dr. conceives, is so ridiculus an exposition, as a sober man would not put upon
any profane Author, much less on the sacred writers.

As for that which the Dr. says, that the notion of not entering to, and eating
with, contained under it this other of not baptizing, for sure he might not
baptize those to whom he might not enter; it is so frivolous, as that it is
unfit for a man that takes on him to make Annotations on the New Testament. For
if this were good reasoning, it would follow on the contrary, every ones going
in to, and eating with one, were baptizing; and since others then Apostles or
preachers were to go into or not, they were to baptize or not to baptize, and
all that men might not go into or eat with, as excommunicate persons they must
be unbaptized, and by the same reason, since sure a Minister may not admit to
the Lords Supper, nor a Bishop ordain him for a Priest, to whom he might not
enter; the notion of not entering to and eating with, contained under it this
other of not communicating and not ordaining, and consequently holy contains
under it communicating, and ordaining, and so your young children are not
unclean but holy, should be by this very reasoning expounded, they are
admitted to the Lords Supper, and ordained Priests.

And what he adds; And the baptizing Cornelius (and not only entering to him)
being the end for which Peter received that vision, I still adhere that (...)
in that place, signifies one peculiarly that must not be received into the
Church by Baptism, and the holiness on the contrary reception to that
privilege, may as well serve to prove unclean has the notion of one excluded
from the Lords Supper, or heaven, and holy on the contrary the reception to
these, since these were the ends of Peter's going in, as well as baptizing, and
so to say your young children are holy, shall be as much as your young children
are admitted to the Lords Supper and to Heaven. These conceits of the Dr. go
upon two gross mistakes. 1. As if unclean were used in a sense suitable to the
Ecclesiastical practice in the Christian Church, whereas it is used according
to the use and conceit of the Jews peculiarly. 2. As if the notion of a word
did ex^end to the Concomitants and ends of the act expressed by it; which if
true, then election, regeneration, should have the notion of justifying and
glorifying, preaching the notion of adoption and sanctification. But enough of
this raw conceit of the Doctor, he goe^ on thus.

My third reason, says he, being taken from the use of the Hebrew (...) to
sanctify, for washing any part of the body, and on occasion of that,
mentioning a conjecture that the use of holiness for baptism, might perhaps
intimate that the primitive bapti^ms were not always immersions, but that
sprinkling of some part might be sufficicient; he has a reply to each of
these: To the former, that if this reason were good, then the husbands being
sanctified by the wife, must signify his being baptized or washed by her; to
the latter, that I have in my writings so often acknowledged the Baptism of the
Jews and Christians to be immersion of the whole body, that I ought to be
ashamed to say the contrary, and that I can hardly believe my self in it. To
these I answer, first to the former. 1. That I that affirm sanctifications
among the Jews to signify washings, do also know that it has other
significations, and that that signification is in each text to be chosen,
which seems most agreeable in all those respects which are to be considerable
in the pitching on any interpretation; consequently that the wives baptizing
the husband being a thing absurd and utterly unheard of in the Church of God,
whether in the Apostles or succeeding ages, this sense may not reasonably be
affixt to it; whereas the baptizing of infants being by the ancients affirmed
to be received from the Apostles, it is most reasonable to understand the words
of this, though not of the other (and so to apply the observation (as it is
visible I did) to the latter, not former part of the verse.

Answ. This is no answer, but a grant that the sanctifying 1 Cor. 7.14. cannot
be meant of Baptizing, since it is absurd so to expound it; and consequently, a
yielding the argument from the calling the Jews washings sanctifications, to
have no force. Nor does he at all help himself by saying, it is most reasonable
to apply it to the latter part of the v. For there is no reason in it, that
because the Jews use the word sanctification for Baptism, therefore holy
(which is another word, and in another predicament then sanctified, which is in
Passion, and the other in quality or relation) and not sanctified 1 Cor. 7.14.
is as much as Baptism, and because the word sanctifications has other
significations then washings, and may not be understood of Baptism in the
forepart of 1 Cor. 7.14. therefore holy, no where proved to be as much as
baptized, is as much as admitted to the Church by Baptism* and because the
Ancients mention infant Baptism to be received from the Apostles, as they do
other unwritten traditions of observing Easter, L^nt, giving infants the
Communion, etc. therefore holy 1 Cor. 7.14. must be without any example in
Scripture or Father of that use of the word, be expounded thus [ admitted in
the Church by Baptism.]

But yet the Dr. is loath to confess his error, but adds. And yet 2. if we
shall distinguish of the notion of [by] and expound [(...), by the woman] of
the persuasion, that the woman has used to bring her husband to baptism, and
not of her ministry in b^ptizing* we may very conveniently so interpret the
former part of the verse also that by the woman, (...), the unbelieving husband
has been brought to baptism, viz. by being brought to faith, to which this
privilege belongs.

Answ. 1. The Dr. brings no example of such a notion of [ by] or of such a use
of the term [ san^tified] any where else, and how ill it suits with the
Apostles argument, is showed fully before. 2. But were it yielded him, 1. it
would show that the alleging of the Jews calling their washings
sanctifications, to expound 1 Cor. 7.14, by was impertinent, the Jews
sanctifications being not b^ persuasion of another, but of themselves according
to Gods appointment, nor do they note first bringing to the faith, and then
admission by another to baptism but washing themselves; and that is one reason
why neither the use of sanctified nor holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. can be conceived to be
allusive ^o the Jewish sanctifications mentioned by the Dr. since in (...) high
Priest washed himself, and but his hands and his feet (...), but Christian
baptism was by the ministry of another, by imm^^^sion of the whole body, and
therefore this third reason of the Dr. is altogether in ^^^bable. 2. If [
sanctified 1 Cor. 7.14.] be to be (...) [ brought to the faith, and so to
Baptism] [holy is in like sort so be expounded, and then we might allow the
Drs. exposition of [ holy 1 Cor. 7 14.] wit^out any detriment to our cause, it
being granted the children of believers were brought to the faith, and so to
baptism.

Again says the Dr. As for his second exceptions to my conje^ture, founded in
the use of (...) san^tifications for partial, not total ^ashing^. 1. I answer,
that I mention it only as a con^ecture, with a perhaps and lay no more weight
upon it. 2. That for Christian baptism I no where affi^m that it was only by
immersion, nor on the other side that it was alway^ by sp^^^kling but
disjun^tively, either by one or the other (as by the word^ cited by him from
prac. cat. l. 6 ^ect. 2 is clear) supposing indeed that Christ's appointment was
not terminated to either, and so satisfied by either.

Answ. 1. The Dr. by putting in his conjecture, showed his willingness to have
maintained by some color, the abuse of sprinkling in stead of baptism, which
his own words cited by me, made me f^ar he did against his own light, and the
contrary is not cleared by this slight excuse. 2. The Drs. own words alleged
by me, plainly showed that he knew the primitive baptisms were always
immersions of the whole body, nor was any other use of water for baptism, till
the corrupt use of the circumfusion of the Clinici in the third Century began.
Nor do his words practic cat. l. 6. sect. 2. clear the contrary to be conceived
by him; For when he says By Christ's appointment whosoever should be thus
received into his family, should he received with this ceremony of water,
therein to be dipped, i. e. according to the primitive ancient custom, to be put
under water three times; and then a^ds, or instead of that to be sprinkled
with it; though he make Christ's appointment disjunctively the one or the other,
yet he makes the primitive ancient custom, only to be by putting under
water; as in like manner p. 35. and this was indeed the ancient primitive
custom, a Romans 6.3, 4. Col 2.12. show, and the known saying of Tertullian ^er
me^gitamur. And of any one, Dr. Hammond should acknowledg^ it, who
distinguishes the sanctifications of a part from (...), that is Baptism, and
says, the Jewish solemnity of Baptism* which he would have the original and
pa^tern of our Baptism, to be the washing of the whole body. As for his
propounding Christ's appointmen^ disjunctively, it discovers more of his
audacious and corrupt dealing by ma^ing that appointment, which is but one way
disjunctive, either that wa^ which is acknowledged to be Christ's, or another
way in stead of it, which cannot be shown to have been practiced by the
Apostles, or any Apostolical men in the primitive times. And in this thing it
is necessary that ^he ^^il dealing of Dr. Hammond, Mr. Baxter, and others, be
showed, who do most presumptuously add to the ordinance of Baptism^ when Christ
h^th appointed onel^ dipping, they add sprinkling; when Christ appoints only
Disciples made by preaching the Gospel to be baptized, they add infants who are
not such, and by a fictitious title ma^e them Disciples by their parents faith,
who learn and profes^ nothing themselves; (which he that read^ considerately
Mr. Baxters arguments in his 2^. disputation of the right to Sacraments, may
see sufficiently refuted, and may think he could not write that Book without
regret of conscience for what he had written in his Book of Baptism) and when
the New Testament makes none members of the visible Church Christian, but
professors of faith, they add infants of their own head; and when the Scripture
and Fathers in setting down the institution and practice of Baptism, plainly
express both so, as that they confess them to be only meant of the aged, yet
would have them to include also infants, contrary to the pl^in words and their
own confessions, and in their expositions so expound the texts, as expressing
only what agrees to the aged, and yet in their arguments urge the same for
baptizing of infants, which they could not do if they did not plead for infant
Baptism against heir own light, or were not extremely heedless at one time of
what they say at another: How ever it be with them, sure I am, no conscientious
Christian has reason to be satisfied by sprinkling, when Christ has appointed
no other then dipping, nor with infant Baptism* when as Mr. Baxter has fully
proved in his 2d. disput. that there is a necessity of profession of repentance
and faith before* and none are to be baptized but those that are first
professed Disciples of Christ; and though he supposes believers children
Disciples, and the parents profession to be instead of their own, yet no where
proves it, nor offers any proof, but what is merely conjectural, nor can any
Pastors or teachers of Churches, without most arrogant presumption baptize or
take for visible Churchmembers infants, whom neither Christ, nor his Apostles
did baptize or take for such. But I return to the Dr.

My last reason, says he, is taken from the effect of the legal uncleanness
contrary to those their sanctifications, viz. removing men from the
congregation; agreeable to which it is that those should be called holy, who
in the account of God stood so, that they might be received into the Church. To
this he answers, that it is said without proof that the uncleanness excluding
from, and sanctification restoring to the tabernacle, are proportionable to the
notion here given, of the childrens being excluded or included in the Church,
asking why Cornelius should be counted out of the Church being a devout man?
But to this I reply, that that which is so manifest needed no further proof,
for what two things can be more proportionable, or answerable the one to the
other, then the Jews calling those unclean and holy, who were excluded from and
restored to the tabernacle, and the Christians calling them unclean, and holy
that were excluded from and received into the Church, the exclusion and
reception being the same on both sides, as also the uncleanness and holiness,
and the proportion lying only betwixt the Jewish tabernacle, and the Christian
Church, which surely are very fit parallels as could have been thought on.

Answ. Were it so, yet it had been necessary to have proved the holy Ghost made
them parallels, that from the answerableness a reason might be taken to prove
thence the sense of holy and unclean 1 Cor. 7.14. after the Drs. mind: For it
is not the fitness of an expression, that must prove the sense we would, but
the use and the matter of the speech, in which the Drs. expositions are
defective. But the holy Ghost no where that I know resembles the mere visible
Church by the tabernacle, but the invisible, in which the spirit of God dwells,
or rather every believing Saint, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. and 6.19. Heb. 3.6. 1 Timothy
3.15. or the body of Christ, Joh. 2.19. Heb. 8.2. or heaven, Heb. 9.24. and the
uncleanness resembled by the legal uncleanness, is such as excludes, and the
holiness such as admits into communion with God, union with Christ, entrance
into heaven, 2 Cor. 6.16, 17. Revel. 21.27. and the sanctification resembled by
the Jewish washings, is that which is invisible by the spirit, 1 Cor. 6.11. not
mere outward baptism, and therefore if proportion or agreeableness could prove
a sense of those terms the sense would be fairer for the expounding of holiness
rather of real then relative holiness.

The Dr. adds, As for his question of Cornelius, it is most vain, the whole
discourse being not of real but relative sanctification, and the difference
most visible betwixt that sanctity which was truly in him in respect of his
devotion, fearing, praying, etc. and that outward privilege of admission into
the congregation of the Jews, which alone was the thing which in the account of
God or sober men was denied Cornelius. These be pitiful sophisms, and in no
reason farther to be insisted on.

Answ. All the discourse is not about mere relative sanctification, sure Dr.
Hammond when he expounds sanctified 1 Cor. 7.14. by being converted to the
faith, and the same with saved v 16. means it of real sanctification. But were
all the discourse about relative sanctification, yet the question was not vain,
but attains the end for which propounded, since Cornelius accounted unclean by
Peter, Acts 10.14. was not out of the Church of God, no not out of the Church
visible, being of good report among all the nation of the Jews, Acts 10.22.
though he were not in the policy of Israel, and therefore uncleanness has
another notion then the non-admission into the visible Church Christian by
Baptism, of which is enough said before. Nor are any of these things I allege
sophisms, but plain answers, nor any otherwise pitiful, then that they meet
with such a such a superficial and slight reply from the Dr. Of the different
interpretatio^s from the Drs. of 1 Cor. 7.14. in Tertullian c. 39. de anima,
and Augustine l. 2. de pecc. mer. and remis. c. 26. and l. 3. c. 12. enough
before. And Hieromes different interpretation, is that which is in the comment.
on 1 Cor. 7.14. in these words left out by the Dr. Item ide^ vir and uxor
invicem sanctificantur; quia ex traditione Dei sanctae sunt nuptiae, mentioned
here before sect. 92. And Ambrose or who ever was the Author of that Commentary
under his name in locum operum tom. 4. sancti sunt] quia de conjugiis legitimis
natis, both which agree with my exposition. The two testimonies the Dr. brings
out of Cyprian and Nazianzen are impertinent, the former makes a distinction
between baptizandum and sanctificandum, the latter if it call Baptism
sanctification, yet it does nor call Baptism sanctity, the word ascribed to
children 1 Cor. 7.14. and therefore rather the first part of the v. is to be
expounded if any thus, sanctified id est Baptized, which yields such a sense as
the Dr. will not own, and is showed before not at all to be satisfied by him.
Neither the antiquity of Cyprian, nor Gregory Nazianzen's skill in Greek
assures us they understood the sacred Dialect. How much Tertullian, whom
Cyprian counted his master, and how much Origin of whom Gregory Nazianzen
learned, mistook the meaning of Scripture, and generally the Fathers, may be
discerned by their writings remaining, or if any list to take a short cut to
satisfy himself, he may see much in Sixth. senens. Biblioth. l. 5. and 6.

In the 4 th. chapter sect. 1. of Dr. Hammonds Defense there is little or nothing
which at present I need reply to much of it being spoken to before. Only I
have thought it necessary to go back besides my first purpose to Review the two
first Chapters of his Defense, because he does so often tell me, that I do
inartificially deny his conclusion without answering to his premises.

SECT. XCVI. The Jewish custom of Baptism for initiation, was not the pattern
of Christian Baptism; as Dr. Hammond would have it.
CHAPTER 1. Sect. 1. of his Defense Dr. Hammond having excepted against my words
about waving (though it were his own term qu. 4. 21.) the more imperfect ways
of probation tells us; though infant Circumcision prove not infant Baptism a
duty, Yet it evidences the lawfulness and fitness of it among Christians by
analogy with Gods institution of circumcision among the Jews, and so certainly
invalidates all the arguments of the Antipaedobaptist (i. e. of Mr. T.) drawn
from the incapacity of infants from the pretended necessity that preaching
should go before baptizing from the qualifications required of those that are
baptized, etc. For all these objections lying and being equally in force
against circumcising of infants, etc. And this the rather, because the Apostle
compares ^aptism of Christians with Circumcision, Col. ^.11, 12. and then adds
some savings of Fathers, which are of no validity for his purpose of the other
there^ nothing true. For the arguments drawn from incapacity, fore going
necessity of preaching, qualifications, have their force from the institution
of Baptism by Car^t, which lie not at all against the circumcising infants,
which has another institution, and has no analogy with Baptism to acqui^
infant Baptism for unlawfulness or unfitness, except the Dr. can prove (which I
am sure he can never do) that the Church (as in the prelatical language he
uses to speak) has power to make that lawful and fit to be done in the
Sacraments of Christ, which is otherwise th^n Christ has appointed. The
Apostle does not at all compare baptism of Christians with Circumcision, Col.
2.11, 12. But these things are so fully argued Review part. 2 sect 5, etc. here
sect. 8* that till these sections are better answered then Dr. Hammond does
here, the arguments will be valid against Infant Baptism.

The force of the Drs. urging Christ's actions to little ones, Mark 10.16.
Matthew. 19.14. is so little as that in his Letter qu. 4.. 22. he confesses they
come not home distinctly to the baptizing of infants, nor do they prove any
unreasonableness or uncharitableness in our objections against their baptizing
of them, whom the Dr. affirms not either Christ or his Apostles to have
baptized, who had reason and charity enough to have done it, if th^^ had judged
i^ fit to have been done.

That Matthew. 8 6. is ridiculously applied to little children in age, is
demonstrate Review part. 2. sect. 17. Augustins saving credit in altero qui
peccavit in altero, and his reckoning infants baptized among believers, is
besides the Book, I mean the Scripture, and to be judged as no better then a
fond conceit. The lawful b^ptizing of some professors of faith who prove
hypocrites, is no color ^o baptize non professors of faith. It Is rightly done,
that that which contains no relation of Christ's or his Apostles baptising
infants, is put by him among the more imperfect probations, and such his
alleging 1 Cor. 7.14. is already showed to be.

That which the Dr. says Sect. 2. that the Fathers with one consent testify
the receiving our infants to Baptism, to be received from the Apostles as the
will of Christ himself, is so manifestly false, that, the very first of the
Fathers who makes mention of it Tertullian in his book of Baptism chapter 18.
disswades it and uses arguments against it, and those arguments as well are
against the believers infants Baptism as the unbelievers, whereby it is evident
he opposed the Baptism of any infants; whereto might be a d^d the case of
Nazianzen, together with his judgment forementioned, as evidences that infant
Baptism was not the judgment and practice o^ the universal Church for 1600.
years. The Dr. himself confesses that Peter de Bruis and Henry his Scholar,
and the Petrobuciani and Henriciani that sprung from them were opposers of it:
and therefore the Dr* does very much exc^ed truth in making it the judgment and
practice of the universal Church for 1600 years The term [ son of the Church]
used by the Dr. (...) by ^anonists, and others, and it is usual to term the
Church a Christians mother, and by the Church the prelates are usually meant,
and much advantage made of it to keep Christians under the yoke of Bishops
(...). But it is no Scripture term: in it the Elders, Apostle, (...) ^ermed
Fathers, 1 Cor 4^.5. all Christians Brethren and Sister 1 Cor (...) church
being no other then a company of B^ethen and Sisters, it is very unfit to call
the Church a Christians Mother, and therefore (...) willing not to be accounted
a son of the Church, nor do I acknowledge that the judgment and practice (i^
there were any such) of the universal Church for 1600 years (letting aside the
Apostles of Christ) ha^h any force or authority over me, nor do I fear the
incurring of Gods displeasure by oppugning or contemning it, but rather
considering how the Apostle 2 These. 2.7. tells me, that in his time the mystery
of iniquity did begin to work, and the vain altercations about Easter in the
2d. Century, and many other mistakes and blemishes even in the Apostles times
and much more after, together with the prediction of the falling away 1 Timothy
4.^. the exceptions against the seven Churches of Asia (...) our Lord Christ
himself, the imperfections that are in the writings of the first Fathers after
the Ap^stles, the exceptions against the histories of the Church, the imposing
on the Church suppositions Treatises, the co^rupting of authors, I think i^ the
safest way to avoid Gods displ^asure, not ^o rest on the practice or judgment
of the universal Church (i^ there were any such) after the Apostles, but only
on the writ^ngs of the New Testament, it being highly unreasonable, as the Dr.
says, that ^n institution of Christ's such as each Sacrament is should be
judged of by any other rule (whether the phan^es or reasons of men) but either
the word wherein the institution is set down, o^ the records of the practice of
Christ or his Apostles in Scripture, which comes home to the deciding (...)
c^ntroversie of faith and manners* and (...) to be ob^erved, and needs not the
Drs* records besides scripture however conserved or made known to us, whether
by unwritten tradition, or in the writings of Fathers, in which there is very
much uncertainty, but do deter men from adhering to this way as the inlet to
many Popish, and Prelatical abuses and errors; yet deny not good use may be
made of the ancient writers for clearing of many truths, if they be read with
judgment, and do resolve to review what has been brought for infant baptism
by the Dr. out of other writers besides holy Scripture.

Sect. 3. the Dr. complains of me, as doing some injury to his Book in leaving
out one considerable, if not principal part, viz. that which concerned the
native Jewish children, who were baptized as solemnly, as the Proselytes and
their chi^dren.

Ans. But by the Drs. leave, in this no injury i^ done him: For however he
mentioned Letter of Resol. qu. 4 sect. 5, 6. Baptism as a known rite solemnly
used among the Jews in the initiating of Jews and Proselytes into the Covenant,
yet both the words I allege Review part. 2. sect. 24. Out of his Letter q. 4..
24. and all other passages I yet find in his writings, make the Christian
baptism of believers and their infants, to be from the Jewish custom of
Baptising Proselytes, and children as the pattern, basis or foundation of it,
no where the Baptism of native Jews, is made the pattern of Christian baptism,
though he say. 24. the baptism of the native Jews was the pattern by which the
baptism of the Proselytes was regulated, and wherein it was founded. Yea the
Dr. in his practical Catechism l. 6. sect. 2. says, that as among the Jews
when any Proselyte was received in among them and entered, or initiated into
their Church, they were wont to use washings to denote their forsaking or
washing off from them all their former profane heathen practices (which did
not agree to the native Jews) so by Christ's appointment, whosoever should be
thus received into his family, should be received with this ceremony of water,
therein to be dipped, i. e. according to the primitive ancient custom, to be put
under water three times; And in his Letter qu. 4.. 37. so it is directly the
thing that the Jewish practice, in which Christ founded his institution, has
laid the foundation of in baptising Proselytes and their children, and to which
the primitive Church conformed. To which I may add, that the proof which the
Dr. brings for baptising of infants from Christ's appointment, is thus expressed
qu. 4.. 22. receiving of Disciples was the receiving of Proselytes to the
Covenant and faith of Christ, a Disciple and a Proselyte being perfectly all
one, save only that the latter denotes a coming from other nation, etc. which
shows, that he made the baptising of Proselytes and their children only, the
pattern of Christian baptism.

Next the Dr. sets down his proofs out of the Talmud, Gemara, and Maimonides,
and then concludes; And now I may, I hope assume, that not only there is
perfect truth in what I now affirm; that Baptism among the Jews belonged to
their natives as well as to Proselytes (even to all that entered into Covenant,
and those evidently were the Jewish children as well as men) but also that this
had before been evidenced in that resolution of the fourth Quaere, which here
Mr. T. has been pleased to examine, and consequently that it was no small
injustice, and unkindness in him both to the Reader and to me, that he would
omit to take notice of it, but assume and build on it as a thing yielded and
granted him by my discourse, that the Proselytes only and not the native Jews
were partakers of that Jewish baptism. This sure was a strange infirmity in an
answer.

Answ. It is a stranger infirmity in a Reply, that whereas I had expressly in
the 2d. Part of my Review sect. 24. p. 307. said, after the baptism Exodus
19.^0. the Jews did not baptize Jews but only Proselytes, the Dr. should not
take notice, that I limited my denial of the baptizing the native Jews, to the
time after the baptism Exodus 19.10. Now I think there is not one of his
allegations prove, that the Jews baptized native Jews after the giving of the
Law. I confess I was unwilling to rely on mine own judgment in this, or Mr.
Seldens, because the Dr. excepts against it (though I thought and think still
Mr. Seldom was in the right in this, and of any man living I imagined his
knowledge in things of this kind, to be most accurate and ample) and therefore
did write a Letter to my ancient acquaintance Mr. Edward Pocock Professor of
the Oriental Languages in Oxford, to inform me if I were mistaken: But whether
by reason of his bodily infirmity, or miscariage of Letters, or other cause* I
have received as yet no answer. At present having not the (...) cited by Dr.
Hammond, I return this answer, that none of the words as he cites them, show
that Baptism was to the posterity of native Jews (...) ^he giving of the Law
f^r entering the Covenant, not the (...). tr. de repud. Israel do not enter into
Covenant but by these th^^e things, by Circumcision* by baptizing, and by Peace
offering. Nor these in Gemara ad tit. Cherithoth. c. 2. Your fathers did not
enter into the Covenant but by circumcis^on and Baptism, and in Jabimoth c. 4.
Rabbi Joshua said, we find of our mothers that they were baptized and not
circumcised. Nor those of Maimonides tit Isu^bia. c. 13. By three things the
Israelites entered into the Covenant, by Circumcision, Baptism and Sacrifice,
and soon after, what was done to you, ye were initiated into the Covenant by
Circumcision, and Baptism, and Sacrifice. For that out of Gemara, the very
words (as the Doctor himself observes) speak of what the Jews did of old time,
not what was a custom continued among the Jews in after times, and so I make
no question but the words of the Talmud are to be understood, specially when
the words of Maimonides counted the exactest of the Rabbis in the Jewish
customs, set down thus out of Maimon. in mis. tom. 2. in Issurei biah chapter 13..
1, -- 6, 11, 14, 15. do plainly show this to have been the meaning of the
Hebrew Drs. as I find them in Ainsworth Annot. on Genesis 17.12. By three things
(say the Hebrew Drs.) did Israel enter into the Covenant, by Circumcision, and
Baptism, and Sacrifice. Circumcision was in Egypt, as it is written, no
uncircumcised person shall eat thereof, [Exod. 12.48.] Baptism was in the
Wilderness before the giving of the Law: as it is written, sanctify them to
day and to morrow, and let them wash their clothes [Exod. 19.10.] And
Sacrifice, as it is said, And he sent young men of the sons of Israel, which
offered burnt offerings, etc. [Exod. 24.5.] And so in all ages when an Ethnic
is willing to enter into the Covenant, and gather himself under the wings of
the Majesty of God, and take upon him the yoke of the Law, he must be
Circumcised, and Baptized, and bring a Sacrifice. And if it be a woman, she
must be baptized and bring a sacrifice; as it is written [Numb. 15.15.] as ye
are, so shall the stranger be. How are ye? By Circumcision, and Baptism, and
bringing of a Sacrifice: So likewise the stranger throughout all generations,
by Circumcision, and Baptism, and bringing a Sacrifice. Out of which words this
may be collected. 1. That the baptizing of Israel whereby they entered into
Covenant, was that Exodus 19.10. 2. That there is not in these passages any
thing that shows, that the Jewish Baptism for entering into Covenant, was of
native Jews after that time. 3. That the Baptism throughout all generations,
according to the Jews, was of strangers. 4. That the Jewish baptism, which was
the pattern of Proselytes baptism, according to Numb. 15.15. was the baptism
Exodus 19.10. and not any baptism of native Jews after that time. Which if true,
Dr. Hammonds reasons and allegations are plainly answered, that they prove not
a custom of baptizing native Jews in successive generations, to the time of
giving the Law at Mount Sinai. In which I am the more confirmed, because so
learned a man as Mr. Seldom l. 2. de Jure not. c. 4. de Syn. ed. Eb^. l. 1. c.
3. does so expressly say it, but also, 1. Because of the speech of the Rabbin
mentioned here by the Dr. and in his Letter q 4. 11. who said, That they found
that their fathers were circumcised, but not bapt^zed, that is ordinarily,
which the Drs. parenthesis seems to limit to Abraham, Isaac, etc. but is to be
understood of the Pa^riarchs generally, and other Jewish ancestors, who were
circumcised and not baptized. 2. Because there is no other bap^ism in all the
Old Testament, for entering into the Covenant of the Law, of originary or native
jews mentioned. It Is true there is mention of Ezekiel. 16.4. of washing an infant
in the day of its nativity i^ supple it, and in the Law many baptisms were Heb.
9 10. for purifications, none for entering into Covenant, that I find but that.
3. In the relation of the Sichemites being admitted to be one people with the
Jews, Genesis 34.24. circumcision only was then required without baptism. 4.
Where in the N. T* the Apostle ascribes to the Fathers baptism, he does not
mention baptism of water, but their passing through the Sea, and being under
the cloud, 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. for which baptism of water had been ^pter to show
correspondence to our Baptism, if such a custom of baptizing for entering into
the Covenant native Jews had been then in use. 5. Dr. Hammond himself, pract.
Catech. l. 6 se^^ 2. says, that among the Jews when any Proselyte was received
in among them and entered, or initiated into their Church, they were wont to use
washings, to denote their forsaking or washing off from them all their former
profane Heathen practices, but this could not be an end in the baptizing of
native Jews ordinarily, for they were not born in uncleanness, but sancti^y,
according to the Hebrew Doctors, having not been polluted with idols, and
therefore the end or reason of baptizing Proselytes not agreeing to the native
Jews that baptism was not requisite to them, and therefore used not ordinarily
of them. It is true when they had gotten strange Gods among them, which defiled
them, they were required to be clean and change their Garments, Genesis 35.2. and
perhaps some defilement of the Israelites by idol^ in Egypt, might occasion
that command, Exo. 19.10. But there was no reason of this in the ordinary
entering of the infants of Israel into the Covenant, who were not thus defiled.
6. The baptism of John Baptist for remission of sins was distasteful to the
Pharisees and Lawyers who thought themselves pure, Luke 7.29, 30. therefore it
is likely they us^d not such a baptism of native Jews, as imported an
acknowledgement of such defilement as they took themselves and infants to be
free from. 7. The Dr. says Letter of Resol. qu. 4th.. 18. They that were thus
baptized were said to be born again, and that, as if born of a new mother, as
it is often said in the Talmud, to which our Savior refers, when he talks of
regeneration (of which says S. Paul, baptism is the laver) of being born again
from above of water, etc. Joh. 3.3, 5. And this was so vulgar a notion among
the Jews that v. 10. Christ wonders at Nicodemus, that he understood it not:
Art thou a ruler in Israel and know not these things? But if there were such
a regeneration by water of native Israelites, which had been the pattern of the
baptism of Proselytes, Nicodemus doubtless had known it and answered otherwise,
therefore his wonderment was that Christ should require regeneration of him by
water, who was a Jew by nature (who need no such regeneration) and not a sinner
of the Gentiles, and consequently no such known custom ordinary of baptizing
native Jews. 8. The Dr. ibid. 17. says, ^hey that were thus received as
Proselytes by Baptism put off their former relations of kindred, etc. To which
surely our Savior refers, when he talks of leaving father and mother Mark
10.29. And Tacitus the Historian, nec quicquam prius imbuuntur quam exuere
patriam, parents, liberos, fratres vilia habere; their Proselytes are first
taught after renouncing the gods, to put off their country, parents, children,
brethren, to despise them. And the later Jews have a saying, that he tha^ has
married his own sister, or entered any the most incestuous bands, by becoming a
Proselyte cease^h to have that near relation of blood to her, and may (...)
with her as with a ^ife: which false su^erstructure in them is ye^ a testimony
of ^he truth, whereon it is falsely founded by them And this is a testimony also
of this, that the Jews did not thus baptize native Jews, because they never
allowed such incest, at they would have done, if they had by baptism
regene^ated thus native Jews, and conceived of the effect of it, as they did of
Proselytes baptism. 9. We read of the circumcision of Christ, John Baptist,
Timothy, Paul, but we read not of their baptism by water as the custom of the
Jews was to enter into the Covenant Proselytes; therefore there was not a
custom of baptizing native Jews infants. 10. There Is no way mentioned of
initiating Jewish females by any ceremony into Judaism, no description in the
Talmud, Gemara, Maimonides, of observing any such thing as the Dr. sets down
Letter of resol. q. 4. sect. 9. concerning Proselytes to have been used toward
the Jews, sundry of the things done to the Proselytes at their baptism, were
such as were proper to strangers; as namely, the baptizing into the name of a
freed man or a servant, the limitation of the privileges of the baptized,
which are evidences that this baptism was not used to native Jews, but only to
Gentile Proselytes. All which being considered, there was neither unkindness,
nor injustice to Dr. Hammond or his Reader in my discourse, and it is necessary
for him to consider better the considerations which I have offered in this
matter (unless he will become nonsuit) which have certainly force in them,
though this thing were omitted by me, which yet was not perfectly omitted (as
his language is) by me, nor the contrary supposed without proof.

But the Dr. however refuses not to attend me in all my motions, and I hope I
shall at long running overtake him. To what I said, Baptism, it seems was a
custom of all nations as well as the Jews, ci^ing Grotius for it on Matthew.
3.6. and Matthew. 28.19. the Dr. answers, Of the truth of this Observation I
shall raise no question, only I wonder what he could fancy from thence to
conclude for his advantage, and then he falls to ^onjecturing. But by my words
he might have easily res^lved himself what I aimed at in this, to wit, to show
the Jews baptism of parents and children is not undeniably proved to be the
pattern of Christian baptism, and Christ's institution of baptism but a copy
according to that pattern, i^ i^ be true that it were derived from the ^ame
common fountain, the ^ons of Noah in remembrance of the deluge, according to
that famous verse among the Greeks, the Sea sweeps away all the evils of men,
to which S. Pe^^^ alludes in making Baptism the ant^type ^o Noah's flood, which
the Dr ye^ds.

To this I added, that I knew not that Dr. H. or any other h^th alleged one
passage in Scripture or any of the Fathers, that might evince that the custom
of baptizing, or baptizing infants, was derived from the Jews initiating
Proselytes by baptism. To this, says Dr. H I answer, 1. By asking Mr. T.
whether he be ready to pay that reverence to the authority of the Fathers, as
to be concluded by their affirmations? To which I say, I am ready to pay that
reverence to the Fathers which is meet, but to be concluded by their
affirmations is more then is fi^, the same liberty is to be allowed me, which
learned men take usually to diss^n^ from them, when Scripture or reason lead
another way. He ^aith, If he be wonder why the uniform consent of them that
infants are to be baptized should not prevail with him? Answ. And I wonder 1.
that the Dr. should pretend an uniform consent of the Fathers, that infants are
to be baptized, when for the two first ages, there is not any just evidence of
the consent of one Father for it; in the third there is a dissent of
Tertullian, and in the 4th. of Nazianzen, and the rarity of its use; and tha^
upon such erroneous grounds, as it was practi^ed with infant communion, which
had alike consent, and in so ridiculous a manner, as to propound questions of
its faith and devoti^n to an infant, who could not understand or speak, and put
in others to undertake and answer for an infant, who could neither promise for
them wi^h^ut arrogant presumption what was not in their power, no^ profess
their faith without apparent untruth argue it to have been a corruption. 2.
That the uniform consent of the Apostles and Apostolical men, with Christ and
John Bapti^^ in Scripture, should not more prevail with a man who makes the
Scripture his Canon, then Fathers of those ages, wherein ma^y errors and
corruptions were received, and either hatched or fostered by them, but that he
should not only dare to practice the corrupt innovation of infant Baptism* of
which there is no instance in Scripture, but also omit the baptism of
believers, and oppose it, and harden men in their conceits, as if they were
baptized in infancy sufficiently, and for that reason to b^e reckoned among
Christians, though mere strangers from the knowledge or practice of
Christianity.

He adds, If he be not, why does he mention this as useful in this matter?

Answ. To show how little credit is to be given to the Drs. dictates without
proof.

The Dr. adds. But then 2dly, it must be adverted that this one containing two
questions in it, 1. Whether this of initiating into the Covenant by baptism
were a Jewish custom? 2. Whether from thence Christ derived this right of
baptizing Christians? The former of these was that which alone required
proving, the latter being of it self evident, without fa^ther p^obation;
supposing only that the Fathers testified that to b^ Christ's institution of
Baptism, which we find to have been thus agreeable to the p^actise customary
among the Jews. And this ^e illustrates by the like examples of
excommunication, and the post. c^nium, from whence he conc^ us Christ derived
the Lords Supper and excommunication by the Apostles.

Answ. For p^esent, omitting the instances of the Lords Supper, as d^ive from
the Jewish post c^nium, and excommunication Apostolical r^sp^ct Jewi^^, it has
been yeeld^d by me, that Christian baptism was in (...) of the rite like Jewish
baptism of Proselytes, acknowledged to have been a custom among them for
initiating them (not of native Jews (...) the giving of the Law) into the
Covenant, and it is probable that J^hn Baptist foll^wed in the external act
that rite, though to another end, he b^ptizing with the baptism of repentance
for remission of sins, they into he observance of the Law for righteousness,
and other subjects; John Baptist ^ews by nature, not so Pharisees. And as John
^aptist practiced, so Christ appointed, and his Apostles practiced Baptism with
express mention of the Trinity or the name of Christ somewhat differently from
John: and if the one be said to be derived from the other by way of
accommodation, I shall not contend about it, nor do I de^y tha^ Christ alluded
to this baptism of Proselytes, Joh. 3.3, 5. in the manner I have expressed
before, and the 2d. part of this Review sect. 16. Nor do I ^eny that the
Jewish, Christian, and Gentile baptisms may have their first ri^e from Noah's
deluge, but that which I insist on ^s, that the Jewish use was was not so
conformable to the Christian, as that it can be true that the Jewish was the
pattern of the Christian. As for the Fathers* Nazianzen, Ma^arius* Athanasius,
their words seem not to m^ to make a comparison between the Bap^ism Jewi^h and
Christian for initiation, but the Christian and Jewish which was occasionally
renewed upon any legal defilement, or often ite^ated by the Priests for
purification or sanctifying and so the words of Athanasius cited by the Dr.
in^imate, which say, the 3d. is the Legal baptism which the Hebrews had,
whereby every unclean person (not ^very one who was so by nature, as the Dr.
a^ds, but by accident) was baptized in water (as often as he was defiled) had his
garment^ washed, and so en^red into the Camp; which was another baptism then
that the Dr. makes the pattern of Christian baptism, to wit, that which was
once only used for initiation, and of this I think the Dr. finds no mention
in the Fathers, nor of the derivation of Christian baptism from it.

That which the Dr. says sect. 4. p. 18. from the Talmud, That when a
Proselyte is received he must be circumcised, and then when he is cured, they
shall baptize him in the presence of two wise men, saying, Behold he is as an
Israelite in all things; addi^g, A plain testimony (to the sense of those which
we formerly produced) of baptising both Jews and Proselyte, (for else how could
the Proselyte, upon receiving this, be said to be a Israelite in all things?)

Answ. Two ways; 1. In respect of the rite, he was circumcised and baptized,
as the Israelites at the giving of the Law Exodus 19.10. (not after that time)
were baptized; an^ the Proselytes p^sterity were then not after this time of
the first initiation into the Jewish people. 2. In respect of privileges and
profession, as it is said Ester 8.17. Many of the people of the Land became
Jews. Neither this then nor the other, are plain or obscure testimonies of
baptising native Jews, for ini^iating into the Covenant after the giving of the
Law.

That which I said that I alleged, that Mr. Seldom de Syned. Ehra. l. 1. cap.
3. p. 40, 41. mention^ some, who have conceived that the Jewish baptism in
initiating Proselytes, was in imitation of Christ's example, though he do not
believe it; and that Schickardus conceives, they added a certain Baptism to
C^rcumcision, to difference them from Samaritans, to show that notwithstanding
Dr. Hs. supposition, that the whole fabric he frames of Baptism, is
discernable to be built on that basis the customary baptism among the ^ews, yet
many will conceive it needs more proof then the bare recital of passages out of
Jewish writers, is a conclusion drawn out of the premises in the first figure,
thus; That is not so discernable but that many will conceive it needs m^re
proof then the bare recital of passages out of Jewish writers, which was not so
conceived by Schickard, and some others mentioned by Mr. S^lden. But the Drs.
supposition was not so conceived by those, Ergo. The ma^or rests on two things;
1. That experience shows, what some others who had understanding to conceive
did not conceive to be so, many its likely will not discern* 2. That the later
Jewish writers are not such certain proof of the ancient Jews customs, but
that more proof may be justly required then the bare recital of passages in
them. It is not unknown that some have excepted against Ainsworths allegation
of Rabbis, and that in his apology for it he himself says, Some things I note
from them, not as approving them my self absolutely, but leaving them to the
further consideration of the prudent. Preface to his annot. on Genesis Nor is it
unusual for Rabbis to dissent one from another, and Christian writer from
Jewish about their custom. Though I have no engine to draw many out of two,
nor were two only mentioned by me (for though Mr. Seldom cite only Petrus
Alfunsus for the first, yet he cites him a^ ascribing the thing to more then
one, nec defuere ex Judaeis Christiani aliquot, etc.) yet from the instance of
two such which have so conceived, I might ^rationally infer the likelihood,
that many would not be satisfied with the passages of the writers cited by him,
much less with the inference of the Dr. makes from thence.

But he tells me, to evidence to how little purpose I said thus much, I confess
my conceit of such a custom of baptising Proselytes before Christ's incarnation
among the latter Jews. Yet I think it was to much purpose notwithstanding
this my conceit, since thereby the foundation of the Drs. fabric is in^imated
to be such, as though I pull it not down others may.

I said, that either that custom should begin from Jacobs injunction to his
household Genesis 35.2. or from Gods command Exodus 19.10. for the Israelites to
wash their clothes before the giving of the Law (though the Jewish Doctors
allege these for it) I do not conceive (not as the Dr. misre^ites me he cannot)
those places speaking of washing Jews by nature, not Proselytes, whereas the
Jews baptized not Jews by nature, as Seldom de jure not. etc. l. 2. c. 4.
says, but by profession.

Here, says the Dr. are many weak parts in these few words. For 1. the
original of the cu^tome among the Jews is but an accessory wholly extrinsecal
^o the matter in hand* and in no respect necessary to be defined by us. If the
custom be acknowledged we need ask no more, for on that and not on that
particular original of it, it is that we superstruct our whole fabric, as far
as belongs to infant ba^tism.

Answ. Be i^ so, yet it was no weak part to examine the original of that
custom; nor impertinent, since if the o^iginal come from unwritten tradition of
Elders, it is somewhat the less likely Christ would make it the pattern of his
baptism, who neglected the traditions of the Elders, and excepted against them.
Mark 7.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

But then secondly, says he, for the two originals here set down and both
rejected by him, it is a little strange that he should think fit to do so, and
not to substitute any third in the place of them.

Answ. Neither was this any weak part, ^ith the originals of such customs ar^
so obscure, that there are few of them, whose head is known. The Dr. I suppose
cannot show the original of the post coenium among the Jews, of giving milk and
honey to the newly baptized among Christians, and yet I su^pose the Dr. counts
not this a weak part Yet Mr. ^oseph Mede in his diatr. on Tit. 3.5. find
another original, to wit, That custom of washing infants from the pollutions
of the womb, when ^hey are first born, mention^d Ez^k. 16.4 5. and gathered
from the answer o^ an Oracle in a story related by Plutarch in his quaestiones
Romana, not far from the beginning.

Hence (says he p. 272.) the ^ews before John the Baptist came amongst them,
were wont by this rite to initiate such, as they made Proselytes, (to wit) as
becoming infants again and entering in^o a new life, and being, which before
they had not. Which derivation of its original suits better with the opinion of
regeneration by it, in allusion to which as a vulgar notion among the Jews, the
Dr. conceivs Christ spoke Ioh 3.5. and the Jews imagined old kindred to be
lost, and this is a good evidence, that they baptized not native Jews, who were
not by them conceived to be born again, nor to have any need as being born in
sanctity, not in uncleaness Matthew. 3.9. Ioh. 8.33.

3dly, says he, For Jacobs injunction to his household, Genesis 35.2. it is no
where vouched by me as the original of this custom among the Jews, but only
an intimation given, that that other, the command of God before the giving the
Law, was agreeable to what we read of Jacob to his household, and so certainly
it is.

Answ. Be it so, yet Jewish Writers and others derive it from Genesis 35.2. and
therefore there was no weak part showed in my intimation of my dissent.

4thly, says he, the command of God, Exodus 19.10. in which Baptism is said to
be founded by the Jews, is not (as Mr. T. suggests) the command to the
Israelites to wash their clothes (nothing but the custom of changing their
garments can be founded i^ that) but the command to Moses to sanctify them (
Go unto the people and sanctify them to day and to morrow) in the Hebrew
notion of the word (...) sanctifications, for washing, either the whole or some
parts of the body, as is showed at large. 35. If Mr. T. did this unwittingly,
he may now reform his mistake; if wittingly, etc. I shall not then hope even
this length of words will be sufficient for his conviction.

Answ. Neither in this do I think I showed weakness or deceit, though I did it
wittingly, following herein Mr. Seldom, ^. 1 de Syned E^. c. 3. p. 25, etc,
where I think he has proved by the washing of the clothes is meant the
washing of the whole body, and that thereby is exp^essed the Baptism whence the
later Jews say they took the use of baptzing Proselytes, and not by the term [
sanctify them:] which was to be done by Moses not only once, but two days
together, and seems to be from v. 15. by his keeping them from their wives, and
perh^ps some other ways whether offering sacrifice, or anointing (by which way
also sometimes persons are said to be sanctified as Exodus 40.13. and here the
Priests are bid sanctify themselves, Exodus 19.22.) or some other way. To me it
is improbable that by sanctifying, Exodus 19.10. is mean baptising, though I
think it a general term comprehending that and some other acts. And thus I hope
the Reader will perceive I neither intended to disguise any thing, nor misguide
any man.

Lastly, the Dr. conceives my reason very vain, for the Jews baptized Jews by
nature* and it is evidenced from it they took the baptized Proselytes,
according to Numb. 15.15. And so it is evident, that of Exodus ^9.10. being the
original of baptizing native Jews, may, and must be the original of baptizing
the Proselytes.

Answ. But neither does it yet appear to me there is any weak part or v^nity in
this reason, nor has the Dr. proved the custom of baptising Jews by nature,
nor do I find the evidences the Dr. brings to opp^^e Mr. Seldom, or that I made
any misadventure in my few words, sect 5. Dr. H. thinks reason not to be tied
to Mr. Seldens authority, which I reject when ^tis not for my turn; which I
grant when the Dr. gives such reason of dissent as I did in my rejection of Mr.
Selden's interpretation of 1 Cor. 10*1. And for the Drs. interpretation,
neither has he cleared it by his showing my mistake of his meaning. For
neither were the native Jews wont to be initiated by Baptism, nor is my reason
avoided against his interpretation. For if the sense of the Dr. be, our
Fathers were baptized into Moses as native Jews are wont to be initiated by
baptism, yet the Dr. errs from the Apostles meaning, which is, that our Fathers
the Israelites were baptized into Moses, as well (not as the Jews in after time
by their Baptism, but) as we Christians by Christian Baptism into Christ.
Whether the Jews custom was to baptize native Jews after the giving the Law,
has been argued before; I proceed to my main position, and the Drs. answer to
it.

I set down my position thus; Nor do I think it true that the customary use of
the Jews in baptizing Proselytes and their children, was the pattern of Christ's
institution of Baptism, and the Apostles and first Churches practice. For
according to the custom of the Jews, John Baptist, and Christ's Apostles should
have baptized no native Jews, which was not so, but of all nations as Christ
appointed, Matthew. 28.19. To this the Dr. answers 1. by asserting they did
baptize native Jews. To this the Reply is by denial of this, and reserting to
the proof before.

2. Says the Dr. Nay so they might, though the Jews had baptized none but
Proselytes, for to that it would bear just proportion, that they should baptize
both Jews and Gentiles, in case both of them came in as Proselytes.

Answ. But this answer is a fallacy a little too gross to deceive any man of
common understanding. For if the Jews baptized no native Jews, but Proselytes
(not to Christ) but to the Jewish people, and their baptism was the pattern
(which was the Drs. word) of Christian baptism, then Christ should have
appointed, and John Baptist and the Apostles practiced baptism to no Jew,
though a Proselyte to Christ; For each thing ought to be appointed and done
according to the pattern, and no otherwise, that which is otherwise is not
according to the pattern, though it bear a proportion with it. My argument was
not as the Dr. makes it, The custom was to baptize Proselytes and not natives;
therefore Christ if be observed that custom was not to baptize native Jews,
but thus; therefore if Christ had made their custom his pattern, he would not
have appointed them to be baptized. If Moses had varied from the pattern showed
him in the Mount, he had not made it his pattern, so it had been in this, if
the Jewish baptism had been Christ and his Apostles pattern.

2. I said, Christ would not have avouched the baptism of John to be from
heaven and not from men, if it had been in imitation of, and conformity to the
Jewish custom. To this the Dr. says, But I wonder what appearance of
concludency there is in that reason? May not any thing be from heaven or by
Gods appointment which is derived from a Jewish custom? God may appoint a
ceremony known among men to be used in his service.

Answ. I grant it, but then the appointment of God is the pattern by which it
is to be regulated, not men's custom; I do not conceive that can be said to be
from heaven or God but from men, which is derived from, founded in and
regulated by as its pattern, a custom of men; as the Dr. says of the
Christian baptism, that it is derived from* founded in and regulated by the
Jewish baptism (not pretended to be an institution of God but an humane
invention) a^ the pattern whence it is copied out even by Christ, according to
the Dr. Letter of resol. q^. 4.. 24.

3. If it had been the pattern I said, it is likely some where or other some
intimation would have been given, as the Directory for Christians in the use of
Baptism. This, says the Dr. is too frivolous to require reply; for besides
that, the negative argument were of no force, if it were (...) is pretended; It
already appears that there are in the Jewish writers more then intimations of
this custom, and some indications of it even in the Scripture it self; as Joh.
3.5, 10. And for any plainer affirmations, what need could there be of them,
when both the matter it self speaks plainly, that there was no need of words
to those that knew the Jewish customs, as the first writers and readers of the
New Testament did, and when Christ's sole authority and practice of his Apostles
were sufficient Directory for the Christians in the use of baptism?

Answ. The Dr. might more truly have said, this reason is too weigh^y to be
removed by his reply. For 1. the thing it self is of very great moment to
tender consciences, who know of what moment it is that the great solemn
ordinance of Baptism should not be profaned, but rightly used. 2. Without a
certain Directory, no person can with peace seek Baptism, nor Minister give it.
3. The Apostle says for want of right observing the Lords Supper (and there is
the like reason of Baptism) Gods judgment overtook the Corinthians, 1 Cor.
11.30. 4. That an abuse is to be rectified by Christ's appointment, 1 Cor.
11.23. Though the Dr. say, the Lords Supper was derived and lightly changed
from the Jewish observance of the post. c^nium, yet did the Apostle not make
their custom the Directory to regulate it by, but Christ's appointment and
example; and therefore such a negative argument is of invincible force in this
case, if it be as I pretend; there is no intimation given in Scripture of that
custom as the Directory for Christians in the use of Baptism, therefore that
custom is not the pattern by which it is to be regulated, For otherwise it
were very tyrannous, for Christ to impose a Law on men's consciences, to
practice a rite after a pattern altogether unknown, and not so much as directed
to. To say the first writers and readers of the New Testament knew the Jewish
customs, is nothing to us, unless they had told us what they were, and that
we are to follow them. And if they did not tell us, they dealt unfaithfully in
not doing that which was necessary to be done for our information. 5. The
declarations in the Jewish writers cannot be our Directory unless we were
directed to them as our rule, or they were as the Canonical Scriptures to us.
6. The Jewish writers which mention this custom are later writers then the
Apostles time, and therefore they could not be the Directory, except we were
referred to them by prognostication. 7. The Jewish writers could not be a
Directory, except they could be had and read by those that need information
from them. But how few of those millions of Christians and Preachers, who have
need of direction in this thing, have heard much less have read, the Jewish
writers, the Talmud, Gemara, Maimonides? 8. How uncertain are their
determinations, even to those that read them, how cross one to another, appears
somewhat by what is said before. 9. Their intimations of this custom are but
obscure, and their declarations in sundry of the points in difference with so
little evidence, that such as Dr. H. and Mr. Seldom d^ffer about them. 10. The
indications in Scripture Joh. 3.5, 10. are not such but that (as has been
showed) it may well be doubted, whether they point at the custom of baptizing
for initiating into Covenant, or another usage at the birth of infants. 11. The
matter it self speaks not at all to us who know not the usage. 12. The Dr.
himself says p. 8. here, It is highly unreasonable that an institution of
Christ's, such as each Sacrament is, should be judged of by any other rule, but
either the words wherein the institution is set down, or by the records of the
practice, whether of Christ or the Apostles, therefore it is highly
unreasonable that the controversy of infant Baptism should be judged by Jewish
writers. 13. If Christ's sole authority, and practice of his Apostles, be
sufficient Dire^^ory for Christians in the use of Batism, as the Dr. says
here, he does very ill to make the Jewish custom not known but by Jewish
writers of dubious credit the pattern of it, and to expound Christ's institution
by it, as if the Dial were to be set by the clock, and not the clock by the
Dial; and all the Drs. pains about the Jewish custom of baptising is
superfluous, and so one^ous to the reader; and his way of probation of infant
Baptism, which he counts more perfect then other ways, is found to be most
imperfect and of no validity, but merely delusory.

I added 4. The institution and practice would have been conformable to it. The
Dr. tells me, And so I say and have made it cleur that it was, as far as to the
controversy in hand we are or can be concerned in it. To which I return* 1.
That if the Jewish custom were the pattern whence Christ copied out Baptism,
it was so in all things, or else it was not the pattern, no man calls that the
pattern, which having many particuiars in it, is followed but in one. 2. The
Dr. has not made it appear by any testimony of Scripture or Father, but only
by his own confident speeches, that ever Christ copied out his institution of
Baptism from the Jewish custom, or if he did, it is most evident both from the
Commission Matthew. 28.19. and from all the practice in the New Testament, if he
altered it in any thing he altered it in this thing; though the Dr. would face
us down, He has made clear (by nothing but his own sayings) that the
institution and practice of Christ and his Apostles have been conformable to
it, as far as to the controversy in hand he is or can be concerned in it. Yet
he has so much ingenuity as to add, But says Mr. T. the contrary appears,
adding one main instance of the inconformity, and 14. lesser disparities; The
main disparity, says he, is in their baptizing no infants of the Gentile at
their first conversions, whereas the Jews baptized only the Gentiles infants
at their first proselyting, not the infants of those who were baptized in
infancy. For the former of these he offers no manner of proof beyond his own
affirmation, and therefore it is sufficient to deny it* a^ he knows we do, and
evidently begs the question in assuming and not offering any proof to the
contrary.

Answ. This is refuted so fully by all the fore going Sections of that Book of
mine to which he answers, and the confessions of my Antagonists, and the story
of the New Testament all along, besides what is said in this part of the
Review, sect. 52.94. that I think the Dr. hardly could say this without
reluctance of conscience. That he denied, that at their first conversions no
infants of the Gentiles were baptized by the Apostles I did not know, yea I had
reason from his own words Letter of resolut. qu. 4. * 21^ to conceive he did
not deny it, forasmuch as if any place did evince the baptizing of infants of
Gentiles at their first conversion, they must be those places Acts 16.33. 1
Cor. 1.16. Yet the Dr. says, the mention in Scripture of the Apostles
baptizing a whole household at once, Acts 16.33. is not of it self demonstrative
or convincing: because that wider phrase may possibly be restrained to those
that heard and believed in that family, and it is not certain of either of
these, the Go^lers or Stephanus household, that they had any so young as infants
in their family; therefore it is confessed, that no concluding argument can be
deduced thence. If he deny it now he affirms the contrary, and so is to prove
it, which that he either has done or ever will, I do not imagine. A negative
argument from Divine testimony in this case is demonstrative, till the contrary
be made good.

The Dr. adds, For the second, that of the Jewish practice he pretends no more
then what he had before cited by reference (but now sets down in words) viz.
the affirmation of Mr. Seldom. But I have already showed how groundless that
affirmation of Mr. S. was, as to the native Jews children, who were still
baptized after the giving of the Law. And the same I now add for the children
of those Proselytes who had been baptized in infancy there appears not the
least proof of this from the Jewish writers, who are the only competent
witnesses in it.

Answ. If there were no more proof brought then what has been, that the Jews
baptizing the infants at first Proselytism, and the Apostles no infants at
first conversion, it were proved; that the Apostles practice of baptism was not
conformable to the Jewish custom: And for the other point, Mr. Seldens
affirmation is in the judgment of such as knew both, as good as Dr. Hammonds
negation. I confess I have not those Jewish writers he refers to, nor some
Books of Mr. Seldom de successione in bona defuncti, c. 26. lib. 1. de
successione in Pontificatu cap. 2. in which by his reference I guess he has
more ^ully handled this point, yet do I imagine, that knowing the accurateness
of the writer, any Reader will conceive that he had clear evidence for what he
wrote, or else he would not have so often and so plainly avouched it, that the
children of Proselytes after the first baptizing were not baptized, but only
circumcised according to the Jewish custom.

But the Dr. says, But for the contrary, I propose these two testinies taken
notice of by Mr. S. himself de Synedr. c. 3. out of Gemara Babylon. He wants
the right of a Proselyte for ever, unless he be baptized and circumcised. Here
Baptism and Circumcision are joined together, as equally necessary to a
Proselyte and that for ever. And Circumcision there is no doubt was to be
received by every male, no^ only at their first coming to the Church of the
^ews, at their first Proselytism, but through all posterities, every child of a
Proselyte that was not circumcised, became straightwayes no Proselyte. And then
sure this conjunction of Baptism with Circumcision on these terms of equality,
both of perpetual necessity to all Proselyte^, must needs extend the Baptism as
well as the Circumcision, beyond the first Proselytes and their immediate
children, to all their posterity that shall come from them afterward, for to
all those belonged Circumcision. So again in the same place, And if he be not
baptized, he remains a Pagan or Gentile; Here I shall ask whether the child
of a Proselyte who had been baptized in his infancy, were to be a Fagan for
ever? I suppose it will be answered, no; And then by the force of that
testimony of Gemara I conclude, therefore it must be supposed that he was
baptized, for else he would be a Pagan for ever.

Answ. It were very strange that Mr. Seldom should in the same chapter in which
he cites those words, lib. 1. de Syn^d. c. 3. p. 35. assert p. 28. before, and
p. 41. after, that neither Jews children after the giving the Law, nor
Proselytes children after their first Baptism, should be baptized, if the words
there did import the contrary. And therefore though I want the book to consider
it, yet I doubt not the sense of the words is plain thus, that the Gentile who
is not baptized at first as well as circumcised, wants for ever, not only a
little while, the right of a Proselyte, and is the very same which both Seldom
there p. 39. cites out of Maimonides Issuri ^ia. c. 13 and Ainsw. annot. on
Genesis 17.12. A stranger that is circumcised and not baptized, or baptized and
not circumcised, he is not a Proselyte till he be both circumcised and
baptized. So that the sense is not as the Dr. would, that no Proselytes child
shall have the right of a Proselyte, unless that child be as well baptized as
circumcised, but this, that he that at his first Proselytism is only
circumcised and not baptized, shall still want the right of a Proselyte as if
he were not circumcised at all, till he be baptized as well as circumcised. And
that to be the meaning, is plain out of the words that Seldom cites from the
same Book p. 35. a little after, where R. Eliezers opinion being that a person
may be a Proselyte if circumcised though not baptized, because so were their
Fathers; and Rabbi J^shuah's that he was a Proselyte who was baptized and not
circumcised, because so were their mothers; it is said, that the wise men
nevertheless have pronounced, that if any have been baptized and not
circumcised, or circumcised and not baptized, he is not a Proselyte till he is
as well baptized as circumcised; and the same is the sense of the other speech.
So that those words do not speak of any other then the first Proselytes Baptism
of that race, not of the posterity, nor of the conjunction of Baptism and
Circumcision but at the first entrance into the Covenant; and therefore to the
Drs. question I say, the posterity of a Proselyte were Israelites not Pagans,
though they were not baptized in their own persons by virtue of the parents
baptism, if they were not born before it.

The Dr. proceeds thus; Besides this two things I farther add, to remove all
possible force of this suggestion; 1. that if it were granted in the full
latitude wherein it is proposed, that the Jews baptized no other infants of
Proselytes, but those whom they had at their first conversion; yet this would
nothing profit Mr. T. For it were then obvious to affirm, that Christ who
imitated the Jews in that, and so baptized the children of Christian
Proselytes, did make some light change in this, and farther then the pattern
before him afforded, baptized all the posterity that should succeed them, and
were born in the Church in their infancy also, the reason though not the
patte^n belonging equally to them as to the children of the first Proselytes,
and the Jewish custom of baptizing their natives infants being fully home to
it.

Answ. The Dr. having tried to prove the posterity of the Proseselytes born
after their proselytism, to have been won^ to be baptized by the Jews, but
distrusting it is likely it would not hold, yet thinks to use another engine,
though it be as weak as the rest. For 1. he supposes, the Jews baptized native
Jews infants after the giving the Law, which is not true. 2. That Christ
imitated the Jews in baptising Proselytes children at first proselytism, and so
baptized the children of Christian Proselytes at their first conversion, which
is manifestly false. 3. That the Jews baptism was the pattern before Christ,
which is the thing in question. 4. That some children are born in the Church
Christians, which is a mistake. 5. That he made some light change in that of
not baptising Proselytes posterity, and farther then the pattern before him
afforded, baptized all the posterity that should succeed them, and were born in
the Church in their infancy also. Which is a palpable falsehood, it being
certain that Christ baptized none, nor appointed the baptizing of any
Christians infants, and is against the Dr. For 1. if the custom were changed
by Christ, then it was not the pattern. 2. The same proofs which show a change
in this, show as much a change in the other. 3. This change is ill called a
light change, which made so large a perpetual addition. 4. If the pattern did
not belong equally to all the Christians posterity, as to the children of the
first Proselytes, then the reason did not belong to them, since the pattern
according to the Dr. is all or the main reason, basis or foundation of infant
Baptism with him. 6. It is also false, that the reason of baptising the after
children of Proselytes, or the native Jews infants after the giving of the Law
was as before, since the reason of Baptism given by the Rabbis is the
uncleanness of the baptized, which they deny of native Jews after the giving
the Law, and of proselytes posterity born after their baptism. So that it may
be easily perceived, that the Dr. has not avoided the force of my objection
against the Jews baptizing being Christ's pattern, but heaped up many mistakes,
and some against himself.

2dly, says he, that it being by all granted, that the children which the
Proselytes had, at their first proselytism were baptized among the Jews; this
is as evident a confutation of the Antipaedobaptist, and so of Mr. T. as it
would if all their infants to all posterity were baptized; For by that very
baptising of the infants at their first Proselytism, it appears that infants
may be baptized, for I hope those Proselytes infants are infants; And if any
infants may and ought to be baptized, then are all their pretensions destroyed,
whose only interest it is to evince, that no inf^nts most or may be baptized.
And I hope this will be of some use to Mr. T. when he shall have considered it.

Answ. It is so, for thereby I perceive the inconsiderateness and va^^ty of the
Drs. writing. ^ grant the one confutes me as well as the other, that is not at
all. For what consequence is in this, I grant the Jews baptized Proselytes
children at first proselytism, and this they did according to their custom;
therefore ^ must grant that some infants of Christians may and ought to be
baptized by Christian baptism? Did I ever grant that the Jewish baptism of any
infants is to be our pattern, or was Christ's pattern? Yea, do I not dispute
against it? What a frivolous reason is this of so famous a Dr. For by that very
baptising of the infants at their first proselytism, it appears that infants
may be baptized, for I hope those Proselytes infants are infants? How does it
appear that what the Jews did we may do? Were infants of Proselytes to be
baptized because they were infants? or are our infants to be baptized because
infants, as the Drs. reason intimates? To omit his non sense of hoping that
infants are infants, I tell him that I have considered this, and that I find
it of no force to remove my suggestion, that my pretensions are not destroyed,
but that he has showed more futility in this passage, so seriously presented
to my consideration, then I should easily have imagined in such a man as he is.

But yet the Dr. adds, The only way Mr. T. has to confirm this of the Jews
not baptising any infants of Proselytes born after their first conversion, and
baptism is the resolution of the Jews, that if a woman great with child became
a Proselyte and were baptized, her child needs not baptism when it is born. And
this I had cited. 109. out of the Rabbis, and so indeed I find it in
Maimonides* tit. Isuribia. c. 13. But I cannot think that (whether true or
false) a sufficient proof to infer the conclusion; For the Jewish Drs. might
probably thus resolve upon this other ground, because the mother and the child
in her womb, being esteemed as one person, the woman great with child being
baptized, they might deem the child baptized as well as the woman, and not
account it needful to repeat it after the birth, which yet (by the way) it
seeems they would have done, if they had not deemed the child all one with the
mother, and consequently they must be supposed to baptize those children which
were begotten to the Proselyte after the time of his or her first conversion
and baptism. And accordingly the Christian Doctors in the Council of
Neocaesare^ can. 6. having resolved the contrary to that Jewish hypothesis,
viz. That (...), that the mother that bears the child differs from the child,
or is not at all one with it; and her confession in baptism is, (...) proper or
particular to her self, and belongs not to the child in her womb, give the
((...)) the woman that is with child, and is then converted to the Faith, leave
to be baptized when she pleases, supposing that the child which then she
carries, shall, notwithstanding her baptism, then be its self baptized after
its birth. Which as it is a clear answer to the argument deduced from the
resolution of the Jews in that point, so it is moreover an evidence how little
of proof Mr. T. had either from his own observation, or Mr. Seldens
Testimonies, from all which he can produce no other but this, which in the
sound is so far from affirming what he would have, and upon examination is
found to conclude the contrary.

Answ.The Dr. has a strange fancy, to think he can conclude the contrary to
what I infer from those words of the Jewish Drs. that when they resolve the
child needs not be baptized, therefore they were wont to bap^ize the children
of Proselytes born after their proselytism, As if the Jewish custom were
contrary to their Drs. resolution, when they say it needs not, yet they should
do it; if so, how vainly does the Dr. talk but a little before, that The Jewish
writers are the only competent witnesses in this thing] and proves all along
this Chapter their custom by these very writers?

But let us heed his reason; the Jewish Drs. might resolve it upon another
ground, the child's being one with the mother, and so the b^ptism needless to
that child, which yet by the way (or rather out of the way) it seems they would
have done, if they had not deemed the child all one with the mother, and
consequently other children must be supposed to be baptized.] So the Dr. upon
an imaginary ground, of which he brings no proof or show of proof, and a
conjecture of his own, that seems to him but to none else, infers downright
they must be supposed to baptize other children. It must be so, because (...)
he is a Rabbin, Dr. chair, of the irrefragabilis Magister noster; if he say the
right hand is the left we must say so too* But yet I am Joannes ad appositum,
and think I have better cards to show for my inference then Dr. H. for his* Mr.
Seldom who is also Joannes ad oppositum l. 2. de jure not. etc. c. 4. p. 170.
speaks not doubtfully like Dr. H. when he puts in hi^ parenthesis (whether true
or false) but cites Gema^. Babylon. ad Tit. Jabim. cap. 8. fol. 78. a and
Maimonides halach Isuri bia. c. 13. Shulcan Aruch lib. Jore Dea cap. 268. b and
having set down the Jewish Doctors resolution, that if a woman great with
child be made a Proselyte, and so received by baptism, her child needs not
baptism;] he adds, nimirum ex co quod nata est (...) seu in sanctita^e matris
aut (...) in ejus Judaismo (nam hisce sic ut untur vocibus) Proselyti seu
matris conditionem induebat, that is, to wit because in as much as it was born
in the holiness of the mother, or in her Judaism (for so they use these words)
it put on the condition of the mother,] that is, was holy, or a Jew as the
mother, and so needed not baptism, which plainly shows they counted not their
children who were holy, or Jews born after the parents bap^ism to need baptism,
and consequently did not bap^ize them. Nor does the resolution of the Council
of Neocaesarea any whit help the Doctor. For what consequence is in this,
there were some Christians in the 4th* Century since Christ, who did imagine
the mothers baptism might serve for the child, perhaps (for that is the Drs.
conjecture only) because they thought the child and mother one, therefore the
Jewish Drs. resolution is upon that ground, and to be limited to those only?
And for the Drs. mention of the words of the Council, it is against himself,
though imperfectly done; For 1. it supposes, the mother that bears the child
differs from the child, and her confession in Baptism is, (...), proper or
particular to her self, and belongs not to the child in her womb;] Therefore
according to the resolution of that Council in Baptism, the parent and child
are not one, nor the parents confession of faith stands for the child. 2. It
expressly affirms two things which quite destroy Paedobaptists principles. 1.
That in baptism she that brings forth communicates nothing to the child
brought forth, therefore the parents faith or baptism communicates no
privilege, or right of baptism to the child. 2. That every ones free choice in
confession is shown or to be shown in baptism; therefore no child is to b^
baptized according to that Councils determination, but upon its own confession
out of free choice showed or signified by it self. But of this Canon I have
said something before. By this which is said i^ appears how far the Dr. has
bin from giving a clear answer to the ^^gument, or examining any thing (as it
was fi^ he should and that rather he has so handled this point, as if his
study were like Protagoras in Gellius, to make a bad cause to seem good, or
Anaxagoras to prove snow black.

^ect. 6. The Dr. writes thus; This grand disparity then being cleared to be
Mr. T. his mistake, I shall not need to attend his other instances of
disparity, this accord which has been already mentioned and vindicated, being
sufficient to my pretensions, and no concernment of mine obliging me to believe
or affirm, that the parallel holds any farther then Christ was please^ it
should, and of that we are to judge by what the Scriptures or ancient Church
tells us was the practice of him o^ his Apostles; For 1. the Jews I doubt not
brought in many things of their own devising into this, as into other
institutions of Gods, and the later Jews more, as of the Proselytes being so
born again in baptism, that lying with his natural sister was no incest, and
the like: And 2. Christ, I doubt not, changed the Jewish Economy in many
things, as in laying aside Circumcision, in commissionating his Disciples to
baptize (and they leaving it in the hands of the Bishop, and those to whom he
should commit it. It is not lawful to baptize without the Bish^p, says
Ignatius, Ep ad Smyrn edit. Voss. p. 6.) whereas it was not among the Jews any
part of the Priests office, any more then circumcision was; And so in many
other particulars. But what is that to my pre^ensions, who affirm no more of
the accordance betwixt the Jewish and Christian practice, then either by some
indications in the Scrip^u^e it self, or by the Christian Fathers deductions
from the Apostles times, appears to be meant by Christ, and practiced by the
Apostles* and then by the Jewish writers is as evident to have to have been in
use among them. And this is all the return I need make to hi^ fourt^en l^sser
disparities, and all that he has at large ende^vo^red to infer from the^,
supp^sing and granting them all to be such.

Answ. Dr. H. had expressly asserted the ^ewish custom of Baptising Proselytes,
to be the pattern, whence Christian Baptism was copied out, and what is set
down in the N. T. i. e. in the words of Christ's institution, or in his or the
Apostles practice, he calls a copy of their custom as the pattern, Letter of
resol. qu. 4.. 24. And what was the Jewish custom, he proves only from the
Talmud, Gemara, Maimonides, or other Jewish writers* and says p. 27. they are
the only competent witnesses in it, which if so, his pretensions are made void
if there be one, much more if there be one main one, and 14. lesser
disparities. For sure what is a pattern must be followed, and is in all, or
else it cease to be a pattern. Had Moses made that which was showed him in
the Mount his pattern, if he had only done according to it in two, or three,
or one thing and not in the rest? Besides, how does or can the Dr. prove the
one to have been the pattern to the other, but by the universal conformity* To
say, it is a pattern when they agree in one or two things and differ in 14. is
all one as to say, a woman's coat is the pattern of a man's double^, because they
agree in having sleeves, or a Temple is the pattern of a dwelling house,
because they have both doors and windows. The Dr. therefore does in my
apprehension pull down what he has all this while been erecting, by his
acknowledging both the Jews bringing in many things of their own devising
otherwise then Christ appointed, and Christ's changing their Oecomy in many
things, and making the accordance no further then Christ was pleased it should
hold, and of that we are to judge by what the Scriptures or ancient Church tells
us, was the practice of him or his Apostles. For 1. then it will follow, that
infant Baptism c^n never be proved to be from Christ or the Apostles, since it
can never be proved that they practiced it or appointed it to be practiced
according to the Jewish custom. 2. The Dr. has merely abused h^s Reader,
endeavoring to possess him, as if infant Baptism might be better proved from
the Jewish ^ustome in their writ^rs, then from the Scripture; and yet in the
conclusion, the Jewish custom is disclaimed as a pattern, any farther then the
Scriptures or ancient Church tell us was the practice of him or his Apostles,
and by pretending that to be p^t^ern, which is not to be followed any farther
then we may judge by another Directory Christ was pleased it should hold. I let
pass what the Dr. says, of Christ's commissionating his Disciples to baptize,
and they leaving it in the hands of the Bishop, and those to whom he should
commit it, as not pertinent to the present business, though otherwise many
things might ^hence be gathered, to show that Bishops were not such in late
days as they were anciently, or they were very negligent in committing this
great business of Baptism to so many ignorant drunken Priests (who often did it
in their drink) which should have been done by themselves, and consider what
follows.

But yet, says the Dr. it is evident that some of them are not such; As when
he says, the Baptism of males must be with Circumcision and an offering, it is
clear that, though 1. Circumcision be laid aside by Christ, and 2. when it was
used it had nothing to do with Baptism, yet as to the adjoining of offering or
sacrifice, the parallel still holds, the prayers of the Church being the
Christian sacrifice, and those in the Christian Church solemnly attendant on
the administration of Baptism.

Answ. 1. If Circumcision when it was used had nothing to do with Baptism, how
could the Dr. (as he does here chapter 1. sect. 1.) take on him from Circumcision
to prove (no^ the duty, yet) the lawfulness of infan^ Baptism. 2. The
sacrifice which was required at the initiating a Proselyte, was a burnt
offering of a beast, or two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, both of them
for a burnt offering; so Maimonides tit. Isuri ^i^. c. 13. as Ainsworth annot.
on Genesis 17.12. Seldom de syned. l. 1. c. 3. ^ite him, but that is not prayer,
nor is it any more agreeable to the Jewish custom to use prayer without it,
then to use circumcision of the heart, Col. 2.11. without the outward, or the
answer of a good conscience toward God without baptism with water; and yet the
rubric of the Common Prayer Book in private Baptism allowed (if time did not
suffer) it to be done without so much as saying the Lords Prayer.

The Dr. adds. So parallel to the Court of three Israelites, by the confession
or profession of whom (says Maimonides) the infant was baptized, we have now
not only the whole Church, in the presence of whom ^tis publicly administered,
and when more privately, yet in the presence of some Christians, who are
afterward, if there be any doubt, to testify their knowledge to the Church;
but more particularly the Godfathers and Godmothers, being themsel^es formerly
baptized, do represent the Church, and the Minister commissionated thereto by
the Bishop, represents the Church also, meaning the Governors thereof.

Answ. Though Baptism by women and others not commissionated by a Bishop have
heretofore been tolerated, and been taken for current Baptism, and the terming
the Governors of the Church the Church, be language not like the Scripture,
but the Canon law, and the use of Gossips be a vain device, and the Minister
commissionated by the Bishop, with the Gossips sometimes so ignorant of the
knowledge of Christ, that they are not fit to be among Christians, nor to be
taken to represent a Church of Christ, nor do they stand under that notion at
the usual baby sprinkling, but as sureties or proxies to the child; and in
private Baptism there is none of these sometimes, yet were all the Dr. says
yielded, this is not according to the Jewish custom, which required a kind of
court of three Israelites skillful in Law to approve it, or else it is vo^d,
and so as Judges of the Baptism, of which sort the other are not.

The Dr. adds; But I shall not proceed to such superfluous considerations, and
so I have no need of adding one word more of reply to his 24. Chapter (as far
as I am concerned in it) unless it be to tell him that the Bishop^ Canons are
not the rule by which I undertake to define, wherein the Jewish custom must be
the pattern, wherein not; (but as he cannot but know, if he had read the
resolution of the 4th. Quaere) the practice of the Apostles of Christ, by the
testifications of the Fathers of the Church made known unto us, to which as I
have reason to yield all authority, so I find the Canons and rituals as of
this, so of all other Churches in the world (no one excepted) to b^ar perfect
accordanc^ therewith, in this particular of infant Baptism (though in other
lesser particulars they differ, many among themselves, and all from the Jewish
pattern.) And this I hope is a competent ground of my action, and such as may
justifi^ it to any Christian Artist to be according to rules of right reason,
of meekness, and sound doctrine, and no work of passion, or prejudice, or
singularity, or (as Mr. T. suggests) of the Drs. own pleasure, as if that were
the mutable principle of all these variations from the Jewish pattern.

Answ. 1. To call Cyprian, Augustine, etc. Fathers of the Church, which is
elsewhere styled their mother, is scarce consistent. 2. To yield all authority
to the practice of the Apostles of Christ, by the testifications of the Fathers
of the Church made known to us there is no reason; this is due only to the
holy Scripture: they testify sundry things as the Apostle practice, which was
not so, they speak sometimes in these things confidently upon false reports,
this would be an inlet to many superstitions, the Canons of Councils, and
Rituals of Churches are so full of weakness and blemishes, as that they would
be counted most useless writings ^o direct in faith or worship, did not their
age make some men dote on them* That all Churches accord in infant Baptism
cannot be true. The Common Prayer book is not justifiable in the allowing that
which is termed private baptism, in the use of sureties their mimical or falls
answers, saying they desire to be baptized, when it is not so. The Drs.
exposition Letter of resol. q 4. 116. I believe, i. e. this child stands bound
by by th^se presents to believe, etc. is so ridiculous (and Augustines tom. 2.
Ep. 28 ad ^oni^acium is like it) as that did not prejudice, o^ preingagem^nt,
or some other like reason prevail with Dr. H. he would never defend it. That
which the Dr. makes a competent ground of his action, does not justify his
tenet of infant Baptism to be according to rules of reason and sound doctrine,
whether he vary or not in his determinations from that which he makes the
pa^tern as he pleases, or the Bishops Canons order, let the Reader ju^ge by
what is said, and that which follows.

Of this score, says he, it is somewhat strange, which he thinks fit to add
concerning the form of Baptism, in the name of the Father, and the ^on, and the
Holy Ghost; In ^his one thing, says he, which Christ did no^ prescribe, nor
did the Apostles, that we find so conceive it, yet says the Dr. Christ's
prescription must be indispensably used. In reply to this I shall not s^end
much time to evidence this form to be Christ's prescription, if the express
words a^ his parting from the world, Matthew. 28. ^o ye the^^fore, and ^ach or
receive ^o disciplesh^p, all na^^ons, baptizing them in the n^me of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy ^host, be not a prescription o^ Christ's, and if the
universal doctrine and continual practice of the whole Church through all
times, be not testim^ny sufficient of the Apostles conceiving it (...), and a
competent ground of the indispensable continuing the use of it; I shall not
hope to persuade with him, only I shall mind him of the words of S.
Athanasius in his Epistle to S^rapion tom. p. 204. He that is no^ baptized into
the name of all three, receives nothing, remains empty and imperfect. For
perfection is in the Trinity, no Baptism per^^^ i^ seems but that* And if ^his
will not yet suffice, I shall then only demand whether he can prod^ce ^o
express grounds from Christ or the Apostles, or the univ^rsal Church of God
through all ag^^, or from any one ancient Father for his denying Baptism to
infan^s.

Answ What grounds we can produce from Christ, and Apostles for denying infant
Bapt^sm, may be se^n in (...) Part of this Review sect. 5, etc. what from
Fathers in this, and some other of my writings* that which Christ prescribed is
indispensably to be used, to baptize in^^ the Name of the Father, Son and Holy,
but all the question is about these words [ I baptize thee in the Name of the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost] whether Christ have prescribed them to be
indispensably used; so as tha^ if any say, I baptize thee in the name of
Christ, or the Lord Jesus, or be thou baptized, or a^ the Greeks use it [Let
this servant of Christ be baptized] into the Name of Father, Son and Spirit,
or, This person is baptized by ^e into the profession and owning of the Father
of Christ the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, and the
Comforter whom he sent as his Lord and Master, this be not agreeable to C^rists
prescription. I conceive it is, and that neither did Christ prescribe those
very words the Dr. se^s down, but the thing (of which Grotius ^nn^t. in Matthew.
^8.19. may be seen, where the Dr. may see, that to be baptized into the Name,
is not all one with bap^izing with the express naming of each o^ these, but
another thing, and how the ancients varied in their expressions, and how
Iren^us lib. 3 c. 20. says. In nomine Christi subauditur qui unxi^, and ipse
qui unctus est, and ipsa unctio in q^a ^nctu^ e^^.) Nor the Apostles when they
prescribed Baptism into the name of Christ, without mentioning the other
persons, Acts 2.38. and 10.8. and 8.16. Lu^^bard l. 4. sent. did. 3. ^ui
baptizat in nomine Christi baptiz^t in nomine ^rin^tatis, quae ibi
intelligitur; and this Ambrose before spoke, i^ lib. 1. de s^ir sanct. c. 3.
^iscat. schol. in Matthew. 28.19* But it is not to be thought that in these
words, Christ commands Misters o^ Pastors of the Church, that in baptizing they
should pronounce these words, baptize thee into the Name of the Father, etc.
For neither do the words of Christ so sound? nor may this be concluded from
them by necessary consequence. But he only commands, that they baptize in the
Name of the Father ^c. which may be done although those word^ be not ^ronounced
in baptizing And therefore tha^ which I said, needed not be somewhat st^^nge
in the Dr. And for the words of the Drs. Practic^l catech. l 6.. 2. the words
do show what I said the Dr. confessed, to have been no mis^^eporting of his
words; who did not say, he affirmed the putting under water (used by the
primitive Church to be appointed by Christ, exclusi^ely to sprinkling, but that
by Christ's appointment the baptized was to be d^pt in wa^e^* i.e. according to
the primitive ancient custom to be put under wa^er, and said expressly be
allowed of sprinkling, and yet varied from the J^wish pattern which requir^d
immersion; and from Christ's appointment (which though he propounded
d^s^junctively, yet I knew it could ^ot ^e so understood) and from the
primitive custom, and yet in another thing not so prescribed, will have it to
be indispensably used, which shows his variableness.

SECT. XCVII. Matthew. 28.19. Infants are excluded from being subjects of
Baptism, notwithstanding Dr. Hammonds pretensions.
TO what Dr. H. Defense of infants Baptism chapter 2. sect. 1. says, I reply. 1.
That his writing for the Common Prayer Book, is evidence of ascribing more then
was meet to the Canons of Prelates, since the Common Prayer Book stood as well
by the Prelates Canons, as the Act of Parliament, and those that are for the
one are for the most part for the other. 2. It appears to me that he has
offended much against the Sacrament of Baptism, in his Defense of infant
Baptism, the use of sureties, sprinkling in stead of Baptism according to the
Common Prayer Book, all which are mentioned before. 3. This to me is a sign
that the Dr. ascribes too much to the Canon which enjoined subscription and
conformity to the Common Prayer Book, in that he has opposed, as much I think
as any man of his rank, the reformation of these and such other faults as were
in it. 4. If there were a Catechesis in the term allegation, then my use of it
proves not my signification that the Dr. did produce Matthew. 28.19. as a proof
of his pos^tion: yet when I consider how the Dr. Letter of resol. q. 4. sect.
14, 25. does make the Jewish baptism the pattern whence the Christian is copied
out, and says; Christian baptism has nothing in the Copy to exclude
Christians children, which copy is set down in the N. T. i e. in the words of
institution, and these words. 25. are no other then those Matthew. 28.19. which
he endeavors to prove not only not to exclude, but also to include Christians
children, as he speaks. 121. Christ's baptism being founded in the Jews custom
of baptizing of Proselytes, and the custom among them being known to be this,
to baptize the Proselytes and their children, the indefinite command of
baptizing all nations, was all that was needful to comprehend the children
also of those that received the faith of Christ. I do still conceive he did
allege Matthew. 28.19. as a proof of his position, though not by it self* yet
with his imagined pattern of the Jewish custom, and that though he would not
openly, yet by his contending so much for the equivalency of Disciple and
Proselyte, and the extent of the term Proselyte, and his acknowledgement of
these words to be the copy in the N.T. he did tacitly yield, that if those
words Matthew. 28.19. include not infants under the discipled* then there is
something in the N. T. which excludes infants from Baptism Nor is he at all
relieved by what he says that whatever were the notion of Discipling there,
yet ^ee could not deem infants thereby excluded from Baptism, whom by another
medium, viz.* the Apostolical practice he supposed to be admitted to it by
Christ's institution; for that very medium is to prove it to have been Christ's
institution, and Matthew. 28.19. comprehends the words of institution, and is the
copy of the original, and therefore it is tacitly implied, that if infants be
no^ proved to be included Matthew. 28.19. there is something against infant
Baptism in the N. T. nor is it true that in that which is not included, is not
presently excluded, for in all such institutions or appointments, what is not
included i^ presently exclu^ed. Our Lord argues Matthew. 19.5, 6. two shall be
one flesh, therefore more then two are excluded; the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.23. thus
Christ appointed the Lords Supper, therefore no otherwise, wine is appointed
therefore water is excluded, eating is prescribed therefore reservation is
excluded, let the self-examiner eat, therefore infants excluded; the Dr.
himself, baptizing in the name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, prescribed
Mat. 2^.19. therefore that from indispensably to be used If the Dr. would look
on such a despicable piece, he might see this further proved in that Book a
part whereof he answers, Review part. 2. sect. 5. ^f not he may find enough
in Jewels Sermon at Paul's Cross 1560. and in all sorts of Protestant writers,
which by reducing things to the primitive institution, exclude other things
added by men as abuses. But the Dr. tells me, he that says man is a living
creature, does not thereby deny ^n Angel to be so also; True, but this is
impertinent, ^^th this is a proposition not a command; and as impertinent is
the other, when Christ gives his D^sciples po^er to heal diseases, Matthew. 10.1.
he cannot be deemed to with hold from them power of raising the dead, for that
we see comprehended in their Commi^sion v. 8. for th^s is not an instan^e of an
institution of what they should do, but a relation of what CHRIST gave them.

To my arguing from passages of the Doctors Letter of resol. q. 4.. 55, 92, 94.
pract. c^t l. 6.. 2. that infants are not baptized according to Chri^ts
institution, and Baptism no Sacrament to them, he tells me; 1. That Christ's
institution of Baptism was not (nor is ever affirmed by (...) to be) set down
in those words of Matthew. 28. that having been long before instituted and
practiced, as appears by plain words, Job. 4.1, 2. Whereto I answer; 1. The
first is not true, for in his Letter of resol q. 4. 24. he mentions, the copy
of Baptism set down in the N. T. i. e. in the words of institution, which. 25.
shows are those Matthew. 28.19. and. 29 having as he thinks avoided the exclusion
of infants, from the command Matthew. 28.^9. he says* Nothing is discernable in
Christ's institution of Baptism, which can exclude infant children of Christian^
from it, and again he terms them, that institution of Baptism for all nations.
2. His reason i^ as frivolous. For though it were instituted before, yet it was
set down Matthew. 28.19. as the institution of the Lords Supper was before the
Epistle to the Corinthians, yet is set down 1 Cor. 11.23.

Secondly, says he, that though Christ's will and institution for baptizing
infants be not so manifestly expressed in those words, Matthew. ^8.19. as shall be
able by the bare force of the words to convince any gain-sayer, without any
other way of evidence or proof added to it, yet by the Apostles practice of
baptizing infants (appearing to us by other means) it is most evident that they
who certainly did not mistake Christ's meaning; did thus understand and extend
his institution and commission. The truth of this is there made more evident.
30, etc. I shall not here repeat it.

Answ. 1. It is to be observed, that here the Dr. makes Christ's will,
institution, and commission, to be expressed in those words Matthew. 28.19. and yet
in the next words before he said, Christ's institution of Baptism was not (nor
is ever affirmed by him to be) set down in those words Matthew. 28.19. Quo teneam
nodo? 2. That he acknowledges Christ's will and institution for baptizing
infants, is not so manifestly expressed in those words Matthew. 28.19. as shall be
able by the bare force of the words to convince any gain-sayer. Now sure i^ not
there, no where. As for his other proof from other places, it is so fully
proved here to be vain, that if the Dr. do not, others will see it to be so.

Yet he adds* Secondly that the infant when he is to be ba^tized, does though
not by his own voice personally, yet by his lawful proxies, which the Church
accepts in his stead, profess the believing in three, the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, deliver himself up to three, etc.

Answ. How comes any man ^o be a child's proxy, who does not make hi^ so? By
what law becomes he a lawful proxy? Where did God allow him to become a proxy
or su^ety for an infant? How dares any take upon him to be a surety of the
Covenant, which i^ Christ's office Heb. 7.22? With what face can any Christian
say the child b^lievs, or desires ^o be baptized, when the child at that very
instant, by its crying shows its unwillingness thereto? How dares any undertake
it shall believe, when it is not in his power to give faith, and so many do not
believe, but oppose the faith, who are thus baptized? What warrant has any
parent, or (as Mr. Bax^er terms the Gossips) proparent, to profess the faith of
Christ in behalf of an infant, and to desire Christian baptism for it? What is
the Church the Doctor means, that accepts a proxies profession in st^ad of the
child? Who gave them or that person the name of the Church? What Commission,
whence have the Church power to exchange and commute ones profession for
another? Who gave the Minister authority to alter Christ's institution, and to
accept of that which Christ never appointed in stead of that which Christ
appointed? It is undoubtedly a most high presumption, derogatory to Christ's
peculiar office* forbidden Matthew. ^3.8. for any Minister, or Bishop, or
Council, or Congregation, who are all to be subject to Christ, and to follow
his prescriptions, to take on them in stead of the persons own profession
before Baptism to accept of another^, as ^ proxy, parent, or proparent his
confession, instead of the baptized persons profession? Th^ugh I marvail not
that Dr. Hammond a man Prelatical, who too much favors corruptions in Fathers,
Counci^s, and Prelates, disguising them under the name of the Church, which is
a pre^ence for many supersti^ions, should thus determine: yet I wonder how Mr.
Baxter and those who have opposed the use of the Cross in Baptism, and other
abuses of Papists and Prelates, should having proved in his 2d. Disputation of
right to Sacraments, that none but Professors of saving faith and repentance
are to be baptized, yet without the least proof or shadow of proof, but a
parents or proparents pro^ession instead of an infants, and without any
institution or practice in the New Testament, dar^ to teach and accordingly to
pra^^ise (...) and to require parents or others to profess the faith to that
and, and in their stead. Just zeal to the glory of God and honor of Christ,
and his truth, makes me thus earnest; no man can justly blame me in inveighing
against, if not the hypocrisy of such men, yet certainly the iniquity of them
who oppose humane inventions in one thing and no^ in another, and the
wickedness of them who either by Consistorial sentences excommunica^e as
Heretics, or by exciting Magistrates against them persecu^e, or in preaching
exclaim, or otherwise oppose those that will not yield to such corruptions,
though obtruded under the name of the Church.

I had said, yea if the positive will of Christ be the reason of Baptism, they
usurp upon Christ's prerogative, who baptize otherwise the^^ Christ has
appointed, and then if the precept of Christ does not nec^ssarily infer infant
Baptism (which the Dr. ingenuously acknowledges) it does by manifest
consequence deny it, since he forbids that to be done otherwise then he has
appointed when he has determined how it should be done. The Dr. when he says
above, the words [I baptize into the Name of the Father* Son, and Ghost] must
be indispensably used; me think by the same reason should conceive Christ's
institu^ion should be ^nal^e^ably used in baptizing those only whom he has
appointed to be baptized; Hereupon the Dr. says thus.

To this the grounds of answer have been already laid also, viz. that they that
baptize infants, baptize no otherwise then Christ appointed, and the Apostles
appear to have understood his appointment. By Christ's appointment not meaning
particularly his words Matthew. 28. but his will, otherwise made known to his
Disciples, when and in what words soever it was that he instituted baptism,
which must be long before this, even before his Apostles took on them to
baptize any, which yet they did in great abundance, Joh. 4.1. And of this
appointment or institution of Baptism by Christ it is most true, that if that
precept of Christ, whereby he first instituted Baptism, did not indeed
compre^end, and so necessarily infer infant Baptism, and was so understood to
do by the Apostles, it shall consequently be deemed to deny it. But then herein
lies a great fallacy, when from another appointment of Christ, viz. that Matthew.
28. which I acknowledge not to infer infant Baptism necessarily, he assumes in
universum, and reports it as my confession, that Christ's Precept (indefinitely
taken, and so extending to all Christ's Precepts at any time) does not
necessarily infer infant Baptism. Which is that grand illogical fault in
disc^urse of inferring an indefinite or universal conclusion from particular
premises. As for the comparison which he makes betwixt the indispensable use of
the words of Baptism Matthew. 28. and the as unalterable observation of Christ's
institution in respect of the Persons to be baptized, I willingly grant it, on
the condition premised, that he mistake not the text Matthew 28. to be the words
of that institution, whe^^in Christ defined who are to be baptized. Those words
are a Commission to the Apostles to go Preach to or Disciple all Nations, and
thus far extends to point out the persons* viz. that they should (as Disciple
so) baptize Gentiles as w^ll as Jews; and again, they are express for the form
of Baptism, that it should be in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, but they are not any kind of direction to that other matter of
receiving and admitting infants or not infants. That I suppose sufficiently
notified to them before, both by the common practice of their ancestors in the
Jewish Religion by the vulgar notion of Baptism, whilst it was familiarly used
among the Jews, both to their own and their Proselytes children, and also by
Christ's special direction (though the Gospels, which express not at all the
words of the first institution of Baptism do no^ set that down) in the time of
his Preaching among them, some while before that passage of story related, ^oh.
4.1, etc. From both of these, I suppose the Apostles learnt i^ (and not from
Matthew. 28.) and we learn it only from the Apostles, as shall hereafter appear.

Answ. That the Apostles learnt infant Baptism from Christ, or Dr. Hammond from
the Apostles, has not been made appear as yet. What he has produced from
Tertullian and the Greek Fathers, from 1 Cor. 7.14. and from the Jewish
custom, has been already examined and showed to b^ insufficient to that end.
His grants are, that if Christ did not institute at first infants Baptism, nor
the Apostles so understood it, it should consequently be deemed to deny it; and
if he did otherwise appoint it, then infants are excluded; and what is Matthew.
28.19. prescribed, is indispensably to be used; but he supposes a fore^going
insti^ution comprehending infant Baptism, notified otherwise then by Mat.
28.19. that Matthew. 28.19. determines neither pro nor con: for no^ against
infants Baptism, that I infer illogically, because not in Matthew. 28.19.
instituted, therefore no where else. And I do acknowledge I d^ so conceive,
that the Dr. having made that the copy, and confessing infant Bap^ism not to be
necessarily inferred thence, and that we must do no otherwise then Christ
appoints he must tacitly deny infant Baptism* and this inference of mine is
logical. What the Dr. says to the contrary does not avoid it. For 1. it is not
true that Matthew. 28.19. the words are not any kind of direction to this matter
of receiving and admitting infants or not infants. For 1. it expresses who are
to be baptized, when it says, baptising them, now [ them] must refer either
to [ all nations] without any other circumscription, and then he must appoint
them to baptize every man in the world, believer or not. But that is ab^urd,
Ergo. Or [ them] must refer to [ Disciples] included in the Verb [ Disciple or
make Disciples] but if so, no^ only the Genti^es as well as Jews are pointed
out, but also the qualification of them, whom they should baptize, they are to
be Disc^ples, now infants are disciples and not disciples, there is no middle
term between contradictory terms, therefore there must be some direction to
baptize infants or not infants. 2. These words are the copy of the pattern as
the Dr. says ubi supra, therefore if these words have no direction for infant
Baptism, the pattern had not; For the Copy and Pattern do agree with each
other, as the Decree and the Copy of it out of the Court.

2. It is not true that this is not the first institution we are to have
directions from in our practice, who baptize Gentiles. For there is no
institution concerning baptizing the Gentiles before that Matthew* 28.19. and
therefore hence must be direction for baptizing or not our infants, there being
no institution precedent as concerning them. Nor did the Apostles follow any
other, as is proved in the 2d. part of this Review sect. 5.

3. It is false, that the former institution did comprehend infant Baptism. The
con^ra^y is proved, 1. From the place which sets down (...) practice, Joh* 4.1.
it is there said, they made Disciples and baptized* Whence I argue. 1 Those
only whom the Apostles baptized, Christ appointed to be baptized; But they
baptiz^d not in (...), ergo Christ did not then appoint them to baptize them.
The major is out of doubt their practice only showing Christ's institution. ^he
minor is proved, 1. They baptize^ none but whom they made Disciples, but they
made no infants Disciples, as will be proved in that which follows, and may be
further thus proved. Such persons were made disciples by Christ and his
Disciple^, as were mad^ disciples by John, But he made no infants d^sciples, as
mi^ht be proved by the descriptions and acts of John's disciples in the Gospels,
Matthew. 9.14. and 11.2. and 14.12. Luke 7.^8. Joh. 1.35, 3^* etc. 2 The
Disciples baptized in the same manner and s^rt ^s Joh^ did his disciples, bu^
John baptized penitent persons who were not infants, Matthew. 3.6 all the people
who were baptized by him, are said to hear him and to justify God, ^uk. 7.29.
but these were not infants, Ergo. 3. Dr Ha^mond says Le^^er of resol q. 4..
^5. To make disciples, Joh. 4.1. and baptize, is all one wi^h disciple
baptising, Matthew. 2^.19. But in this according to the Dr. there is not any
kind of direction to that matter of receiving and admitting infants or not
infants, therefore Joh. 4.1, is no mention of their baptizing infants, and so
no infan^s baptized by them. 2. If Christ had instituted infant Baptism,
doubtless he would have ap^ointed it, and the Disciples practiced it on those
mentioned Matthew. 19.13, 14, 15. Mark 10.1^, 14 15, 16. Luk* 1^.15, 16, 17. But
he did not appoint nor they practice baptism on t^em, for it is said Matthew.
9.15. that when he had put his hands on them he d^parted thence, which shows no
more was done to them then was before set down, whereof none was their
baptizing, Ergo

4. It is false, that direction to baptize infants was sufficiently notified to
the Apostles by Christ. For 1. the common practice of the Jews could not
notify it to them, Christ ^o where appointing them to baptize according to the
Jewish manner, nor did they, For they baptized r^ther after John's mann^^, Joh.
4.1. but that was not as the (...) as appears by their excepting against and
rejecting his Baptism Luk^ 30. 2. The vulgar notion ^f Baptism did not no^ifie
it. (...) notion of baptism did not express one sort or other, yea ^hey used to
baptize other things Mark 7* 3, 4. besides persons. 2. If the vul^ar notion of
Baptism did notify infant Baptism, then it did notify i^ Ma^th. 28*19. where
it is expressed. But the Dr. says, those words are not any kind of dire^^ion
to that matter of receiving and admitting infants or no^ infants, Ergo. 3. The
special direction of Christ did not notify i^, if i^ di^* let it be showed* To
say, the Gospels express not at all the words of the first institution of
^aptism, nor do set that down, is against the Dr. For it is an high presumption
in any man to assert such a special direction of Christ, as neither the Gospels
nor other sacred writings set down, and if this may be done, Apocriphal
traditions may be vented, as Papists and others have done, telling us all that
CHRIST did and said is not written, John 20.30. Besides, Christ gave no other
special direction to the Apostles toward the Jews about Baptism, before that
was done which we read John 4.1. then he did to them toward the Gentiles,
Matthew. 28.19. For that was a copy of the Pattern. But he did not there appoint
infant Baptism as the Dr. acknowledges, Ergo. From all which I infer, that
Christ gave no other direction about Baptism, then what is expressed Matthew.
28.19. and that there he gave directions about in^ants bap^izing or not
baptizing, and that the presrciption there is to be indispensably used, not
only about the form of words in baptism, but also about the persons wh^m we
may baptize; and that infants are excluded shall be proved in that which
follows. Nor is this a pralusory (...), as the Dr. terms it, but such a just
dissertation as touches the main of the cause, and shows the Doctors
usurpation on Christ's prerogative, in defending such Baptism as is otherwise
then Christ appointed, nor has he brought one proof for what he says, he
has made evident that Matthew. 28.1^. was not the institution of Baptism* nor
any intimation on either side whether infants should he baptized or not, but
contradicted himself, and manifestly perverted the Scripture.

Sect. 2. The Dr. says to my exception [that though (...) is well rendered make
Disciples, yet (...) is not well paraph^ased by receive into Discipleship all
Nations baptizing them, For by this the making Disciples is made the same with
receiving into Discipleship or receiving Disciples, and Baptism the ceremony of
receiving into Discipleship, which is as truly the act of the baptized, thereby
professing or avouching his Discipleship] thus. Here is another subtilty of a
refined nature, making a difference betwixt making Disciples, and receiving
into Discipleship or receiving Discip^es: As if these two were not perfectly
synonymous, and by me evidently used, as such. I shall not dispute of words,
when the matter is clear, and when it is equally to my purpose which phrase is
used, whether making or receiving Disciples.

Answ. Either phrase would not have been equally to the Doctors purpose, making
Disciples not being applicable to infants, a^ perhaps it may be thought
receiving Disciples may, but whether either serve the Doctors turn or no, and
however the Dr. use them, or censure my di^^inction of them, yet I take his
confounding them to be a gross mistake, and such as perverts the text, and
should have been proved by him, before he thus used it, And against it I thus
argue. 1. Those terms are not perfe^^ly synonymous, whereof the one imports
that which may be without the other, this I think none will deny* But making
Disciples may be without receiving them. This is manifest. For a person is not
a Disciple before he is made, but he is made a Disciple before he is received,
therefore the one may be without the other. 2. The agents may be diverse in
making and receiving Disciples, a woman may make a Disciple, but not receive
him. 3. The means is different, the making Disciples is by teaching, as shall
be showed in that which follows, and is an act of diligence; the receiving i^
admission by authority. 4. Making imports an action, receiving rather a
passion. 5. Making Disciples does presuppose a privation of it, y^a perhap^
averseness from it; receiving presupposes a habit attained, and a willing
offer. 6. The making Disciples may be to another, but receiving Disciples is to
be ascribed to the master to whom they a^e D^sciples, as to himself receiving
them. 7. Dr. Hammond acknowledges (...) to import the same with (...) J^hn
4.1. Letter of resol. q. 4.. 25. but John 4.1. it cannot be rendered receive
Disciple^, therefore neither Matthew 28 19. 8. Neither Matthew. 28.19 nor any where
else has any transl^tor I knew, rendered [ receive Disciples] but many, make
Disciples, and make it as the Dr. the phrase parallel to John 4.1. and
therefore it is singular and absurd to render it here receive Disciples.

Secondly, sait^ he, When he affirms of Baptism which I make the ceremony of
the Apostles receiving them, that it is as true^y the (...) of the bap^ized,
this is no sub^ilty, but gross and visible enough. For certainly Baptism in the
active sense (as it is plain I understand it in that place where I paraphrase
Go and make Disciples and Baptize) is not the act of the baptized but of the
Baptist, The coming to Baptism indeed and the undertaking the vow, and making
the profession, is the act of the baptized, either personally or by his proxy,
which in reputation of Law and in acceptance of the Church, i^ his also, but
still baptism, or (to remove all p^^sible mistake) baptizing (...) Matthew.
28.19. is an act of the Baptizer only, and so the Ceremony of receiving into
Discipleship, whomsoever they thus duly baptize. I hope I need say no more of
this.

Answ. I said not baptizing, but Baptism the Ceremony (not ^s the Dr.
mis^recites my words, o^ receivers into Discipleship, but) of receiving into
discipleship is as truly the a^^ of the baptized, thereby p^ofessing or
avouching h^s discipleship as of the Baptizer, and therefore the baptized is
not merely passive in it, nor an infant does unde^go it. And I prove it thus.
1. Baptism is a duty of the baptiz^d as well as of the baptizer, as may be
proved from Acts 2.38. where the Apostle exhorts them to repent and be
baptized every one of them, in the Name of Christ Jesus for the remission of
sins; Now that which a man is exhorted to as his duty, is his own act. Ergo. I^
any say it is (...) in the passive voice, he may understand that Luke 11.38.
(...) though it be the same sense and voice, yet notes the action of the
baptized. 2. It is manifest also from the command to Paul, Acts. 22.16. that
baptism is the act of the baptized For first, it is a thing commanded to be
done by him. 2. It is in the middle voice, (...), which though I deny not to
have a passive signification, yet here, (...) cannot have any other then active
signification because of the accusative cause following, so neither can the
other, both being enjoined as duties, and the washing away sins being not meant
of forgiveness of them but turning from them; baptism being the sign of his
repentance, and both being to be joined together, Acts 2.38. and therefore
Baptism being called, the baptism of repentance, Mark ^.4. Acts 19.4. 3.
Bapti^ing into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, notes the a^^ of the
baptized as well as the baptizer, and thi^ is fully taught by Dr. Hammond
himself practic. cat. lib. 6. sect. 2. where he says ^ ^ baptize thee into the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost ^ being pr^scribed by
Christ to his Disciples must indispensably be used* and the meaning of them is
double. 1. On the Ministers part, that what he does he does no^ of himself,
but in the Name or power of, or by Commission from the blessed Trinity (which
by the way, I am sure none can (...) ^pparent (...) when they baptize infants,
much less when ^hey only sprinkle them.) 2. And more especially in respect of
the person baptized. 1. That he acknowledges these three, and by desiring
baptism makes profession of that acknowledgment, which is in effect the sum of
the whole ^reed. 2. That as he acknowledges these three, so he delivers himself
to them, as to the three principles or authors of faith or Christian religion,
and acknowledges no other as such (as to be baptized in the name of Paul
signifie^ to say, I am of Paul, i. e. to pin my faith on him in oppos^tion to
^^^has and all other) to receive for infallible truth whatsoever is taught by
any of these and nothing else. 3. That he delivers himself up to be ruled as an
obedient servant by the directions of this great master, a willing Disciple of
this blessed Trinity, and so the Greek phrase ^ into the name] does import; and
these th^ee acts of the baptized together, make up his part by way of condition
required of him to make him ca^able of that grace, which the Minister from God
thus conveys upon and ensures unto him. Besides which it notes the calling on
the Name of the Father by the Son, through the h^ly Spirit, as Acts 22.1^.
shows, where Paul is bid to be baptized or baptize himself, calling on the name
of the Lord, when baptized; and this I have proved to be meant (...) Luke 3.21.
and other (...) Review part. 2. sect. 5. p. 8^* ^0, 9^. So that baptism (...)
as well (or rather more) the ce^emony of the baptized, (...) ^^ the baptizer*
Which might be proved from those texts which speak (...) the use of it, as Romans
6.3, 4. Col. 2.1^. Gal. 3 26*27. 1 Cor. 12.^3. in all which and sundry more the
act of the ba^t^zed is noted, who does thereby signify his baptism into
^hrists death, being (...) by ba^tism into death, and his rising to newness of
life, putting on Christ, ^oyning into one body, etc. which I have cleared more
fully in the same p^ace page 6, 97 8, ^9. And this, the Dr says (...), i^ more
especially meant by ba^tising into the Name of the Father, Son and Holy spirit*
(...) their act as w^ll as the administrators* 4. I^ baptism were not as truly
the act of the baptized as the baptizer t^en it should be t^u^ baptism, if the
baptizer did d^p without an concu^^^ (...) of the bap^ized, yea though he we^e
forced to it, and against his will put under water, and this were warrantably
done by the baptizer, For he should do what ^s prescribed, But this is absurd,
neither School men nor any other allow such baptism, vide Th. Aquin. sum. part.
3. qu. 68. art. 7, 10. The Spaniards driving the Indians into the water
forcibly for baptism, and their going in thus under water is excepted against
as neither rightly done, nor true baptism. Therefore certainly baptizing
prescribed Mat. 28.19. does comprehend not only the act of the administratour,
but also the act of the baptized, in yiedling to it and concurring with it.
When Peter Acts 10.48. commanded Cornelius and those with him to be baptized in
the name of the Lord, there were three acts concurrent. 1. The Apostles
command, by way of authority appointing it to be done. 2. O^ the administratour
by way of Ministry. 3. Of the baptized by way of submission and putting himself
under water. Yet he is no^ thereby a mere Sebaptist* as i^ is reported some
heretofore have been, but is partly passive in consent, and s^bmission to what
the baptizer does, and partly a^tive in concurring with him. So that my speech
is cleared from being gross, as ^^ Dr. would.

Dr. H. adds. His second branch of exception is to those words of mine, Wherein
I say tha^ the making or receiving Disciples, supposes not any precedent
instru^tion, but looks wholly on it as subsequent. Against this I gave reasons
of dissent thus. 1. That which is expressed in Matthew by, Go ye therefore and
make Disciples all Nations, is in Mark, Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel ^o every living creature; which s^ews, how they should disciple all
nations; now they who are made Disciples by preaching the Gospel, are made
disciples by precedent instruction, Ergo, the making or receiving disciples
Matthew. 28.19. supposes precedent instruction.

But to this (says the Dr.) I answer; 1. That the words in Mark are no
otherwise parallel to those in Matthew, then as an Epitome is parallel to a
la^ger discourse, such we know S. Marks for the most part is, an abbreviation
of S. Matthews Gospel, as in many others, so in this particular; some passages
indeed there are in S. Mark in this place, which are not i^ S. Matthew, as
shall anon be showed, but in the particular now before us, S. Mark is according
to wont more concise: there is no mention in him of baptizing in the Name of
the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, nor consequently of
discipling, of which that was the ceremony, as in S. Matthew there is.

Answ This does rather confirm my major then oppose it. For if Mark express the
same more briefly and Matthew more largely in this particular, and there is no
other expression in Mark besides, Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel to every creature, which answe^s to Matthews words, Go make Disciples
all nations* then what is expressed in Matthew is the same with that which is
expressed in Mark. And indeed the time, occasion, and expressions (...) so
plainly evince this, that almost all editions and translations (which use
marginal references) and commentators I have seen, expound the one by the other.

Secondly, says the Dr. That Christ's appointment (...), to preach the Gospel,
(...) Mark, does no way infer ^he precedent instruction of every single person
that was received to baptism: the phrase signifies to proclaim or promulgate
the happy tidings brought into the world by Christ, grace, and mercy, and
eternal felicity to all that should come into him, and take his yoke upon them,
and learn of him. And upon the publishing of this to all the world to every
creature, i e. to the Gentiles universally, as well as the Jews, I suppose it is
very possible, that many of them should make all speed to come unto Christ, and
come out at the Apostles preaching, they and their whole households together
((...), as the Oracle commanded in Homer) and to bring their infant children,
as they used to do, that became Proselytes to the Jews, and then the Apostles
knowing their Masters mind for receiving of infants, and that (as from the
institution I suppose them fore instructed) to baptism, receive them all, and
(as many as interposed no voluntary hinderance) baptize them; and having taken
them into the School of Christ, make good provision for the future instruction
of them, as soon as ever they should be capable of it. That thus it was, I
pretend not (still) to deduce from these words Matthew. 28. but to infer from
another medium, the practice of the Apostles otherwise notified to us: All that
I am now to manifest is, that this passage has nothing contrary to our
hypothesis, but is perfectly reconcilable with i^, and this is done by the
scheme thus laid: And so it is most visible how no force there is in this first
reason of exception.

Answ. It is most visible that the Dr. was in a dream when he wrote this; 1.
Because he talks of an institution (which is only i^agined by him) of
receiving infants, and as many as interposed no voluntary hinderance to baptize
them (not excepting infidel^ children, contrary to his own interpretation of 1
Cor. 7.14. which declares them unclean, that is, not to be baptiz^d in the Drs.
sense) and to take infants into the School of Christ, as if the School of
Christ were to nurse up infants, for that was all could be done to them, and to
make good pro^ision for the future instruction of them, as soon as ever they
should be capable of it. Which is so ridiculous a conceit, as no waking man me
thinks should fancy it. For what provision could the Apost^es, who were to go
and preach the Gospel to every creature, make for the future instruction of
them, as soon as ever they should be capable of it, who were not to stay till
they were able to speak, or receive any commands from them? 2. The Dr. as if he
forgot his matter in hand, says; All that he was then to manifest, was that
this passage Matthew. 28.19. has nothing contrary to his hypothesi, but is
perf^^^ly reconcilable to it; whereas his business was to answer my argument
against his position, that the making or receiving Disciples Matthew. 28 19.
supposes not any precedent instruction, but looks wholly on it a^
subsequentpunc; 3. The Drs. answer, that Christ's appointment to ^reach the
Gospel in S. Mark, does no way infer the p^ecedent instruction of every single
person that was received to Baptism, might be true, yet his position false,
that the making Disciples Matthew. 28.19. supposes not any precedent
instruction, but loo^s wholly on it as subsequent. 4. His reason why to preach
the Gospel in S. Mark, does no way infer the precedent instruction of every
single person that was received to baptism, shows his talk to have been
incoherent, like the talk of a man in a dream; For what consequence is in this,
The phrase signifies, etc. Ergo, To preach the Gospel in S. Mark, does no way
infer the precedent instruction of every single person that was received to
Baptism? Might not all this be true, that the phrase so signifies, they so
publish, the thing set down be possible, the Apostles know Christ's mind, as
the Dr. imagines, and ye^ to preach the Gospel in S. Mark, infer the precedent
instruction of every single person that was received to Baptism? So that in all
this which the Dr says, there i^ no answer to my argument. But the truth is,
by the Drs. own grants my argument is m^de good. For if preaching the Gospel be
instruction, and this be the way of making Disciples, which are not deni^d;
then it must needs go before makin^ or ^eceivi^g Disciples, since the m^anes in
order of actual b^ing, must be before the effect, and so the Drs. position
fa^se: That the making or receiving Disciples supposes not a^y precedent
instruction, Matthew. ^8.19. but lo^ks wholly on it as subsequent Again, if before
baptiz^ng they were to publish the Gospel to all the World, to every creature,
i. e. to the Gentiles univ^rsally as well the Jews, then before any single
person was r^ceived to Baptism, instruction wa^ to be precedent, unless there
were any single person which was not comprised under all the world, every
creature, Gentiles universally as well as Jews: Yea the terms [ every creature
and all nations] comprehend every person that was to be baptized, and more; but
they were every one to be made Disciples, and that by preaching the Gospel to
them, before they were to be bapt^zed; Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.15. therefore
instruction of every single person was to be precedent to his reception to
baptis^. Hereto agree the words of Athanasius, Hierom and others, cited by me,
Review part. 2. sest. 5. p. 86, 87.

The 2d. says the Dr. follows, that such as the making Disciples was, Joh.
4.1. such is the making Disciples Matthew. 28.19. For by the Drs. confession they
are all one. But that was by preaching, as is plain concerning John, Matthew.
3.1, 2, 5, 6. and concerning the Apostles, Mat. 10.5, 6, 7. Ergo* Whence 3. I
further a^gued, that way the Apostles were to Disciple all nations, by which
they were to disciple the lost sheep of the house of Israel, but that was by
preaching, Ergo, discipling supposes precedent instruction.

To this, says the Dr. I answer, that the account last given is fully
satisfactory to this exc^p^ion also; For supposing the Apostles to publish
wheresoever they came the (...), the good news that was come into the world by
Christ, and the hearers not only to come in themsel^es, but to bring their
whole families, and so their infant children with them, there is no difficulty
to imagine, that they had thus made proclamation, received all, and made all
disciples, young and old, that either came or were brought, and so it being the
instru^ent to draw the parents themselves, and to move them to bring their
children to discipleship, it is still very visible how children should be
discipled, and conse^uently baptized by them, Baptism being the constant
ceremony of discipling. And though I am not able to affirm how it was actually
in John's Baptism, yet this I may say, that as far as can be discerned or
inferred from the phrase in either place ((...) and (...)) thus it very
possibly might be both in John's and the Apo^^les baptizing.

Answ. It is so far from being satisfactory, that there is neither pertinency
nor truth in this answer. For the Dr. answers, as if the thing I proved were
not, that making disciples presupposes instruction, because it is by
preaching, but that i^fants might be made disciples, though making disciples b^
by preaching; which is indeed not to answer to the argument, but to a
consectary deducible from the conclusion of it, which though it were not
infer^ed nor consequent, yet the conclusion might be true that discipling
presupposes some precedent instruction, and is not wholly subsequent to it.
Nor is it true. For 1. supposing the Apostles should do as he speaks, and the
hearers come in as he imagines, yet there is difficulty to imagine, tha^ they
that had thus made proclamation received all, and made all disciples, young and
old, that either came or were bro^ght un^o them; s^ecially considering how John
received n^ne we read of but such as confessed their sins, and the whole
people that were baptized of him justified God, Luk 7.9. believed him, Matthew.
21.32. others not, and the Apostles are said to make disciples before they
baptized, Jo^. 4.1. and a^o^e they bap^ized required repentance, Act. 2.38.
those who were baptized gladly received the word, v. 41.2. It being granted
that they made disciples by preaching, preaching being the instrum^nt to draw
the parents themselves, and to move them to bring their children to
discipleship, yet it is not very visible how children should be discipled; For
(...) ^ffection or conceit, might m^ve them to do that upon preaching* which
yet might not take effect, nor be received by the Apostles. 4. Nor is Baptism
consequent on such a discipleship, by offer or vow of p^rent^, wit^out
profession of the party to be bap^ized, there being no institution for it,
which is the only rule about bap^izing. 5. Neither i^ it ^rue, that Baptism is
the constant ceremony o^ discipling, though it be granted to be the ceremony of
disciples, a person is first a disciple before baptized, Joh. 4 1. they first
made disciples then baptized them. 6. It is not ^rue, that as far as can be
discerned or inferred from the phrase in either place ((...) and (...)) it
might not very possibly be both in John's and in the Apostles baptizing as the
Dr. imagin^, since (if there be degrees of possibility) it is not very possible
they should make any other disciples and baptize them, then such as the
Evangelists story relates they did.

But the Dr. tells us. 1. For John, it is true indeed that his Baptism attended
his preaching, yet does it not thence necessarily follow that none were
baptized by him, but those who particularly heard and obeyed his preaching; For
1. why might not those that heard it, divulge it to others, and bring them
before they heard him to desire to be baptized, and upon their confessing
their sins, and professing amendment, he baptize them?

Answ. Not likely before he had preached somewhat to them, however if his
preaching were brought to them by others, they were not baptized before
instruction.

2. Why might not those that heard it, or heard of it, give that heed to it, as
to bring all that were dear to them of what age soever, by that means to secure
them from the wrath to come; when Noah preached repentance to the old world, and
upon the decree of sending the flood upon the world of the ungodly, called all
to come into the Ark to him to escape the deluge, suppose others besides Noah's
family h^d hearkened to his preaching, or suppose he and his sons had had
infant children, can we imagine they would have lef^ their inf^n^s to that
certain ruin, and not have taken them into the Ark with them? And John's
baptism was answerable to that Ark, in respect of that approaching ruin on the
Jews, styled the kingdom of heaven v 1. and that evidenced to be a bloody
kingdom, explicated by casting into the fire v. 10. And can we imagine the
Jews that believed John, and came to his Baptism, did not bring th^se childr^n
with them to save them from the predicted evils and then I profess not to see
any reason to render it incredible that John Baptist should thus receive and
baptize those infants (though the Scripture affirmi^g nothing of it, and
tradition, as far as I know, as little, I shall neith^r affirm nor believe any
thing.) This only is certain, that among the jews of that time, infant children
were known to be capable of entering into covenant with God after this manner,
and of being partakers of the benefit of the Covenant by that means. And one
thing more I may add, that Christ himself, who was by his sinlesness, as
un^ualified for the repentance which John preached, as the infants were by their
incapacities, did yet come and was received to John's Baptism, v. 13. and then
in case infants were brought, why might not they be received also?

Answ. Because it was not appointed to them. And this is a reason (which the
Dr. may see if he will) to render it incredible that John should receive and
baptize infants, though infants of Proselytes born before their Proselytism were
by Jews baptized, who baptized upon a far different reason, to wit, the
pollution through idols, which did adhere to the Gentiles nativity, to wash
away that, and to engage them to the observance of Moses Law for righteousne^s*
whereas John Baptist baptized with the baptism of repentance for remission of
sins, even native Jews, directing them to the Lamb of God who was to take away
the sin of the world, and that he might be known was to be baptized of him. We
can therefore easily imagine, that the Jews that believed ^ohn and came to his
Baptism, did not bring infant children with them to save them from predicted
evils, because we read that they that were baptized of him confessed their
sins, Matthew. 3.5.6. justified God, Luk 7.29. Nor was Baptism appointed to them
as to Proselytes infants, nor do we read that John Baptist gave any inkling
of his mind to have infants brought. And it i^ a sign to me that the Dr. is
confident that he can lead men in a string, who adventures to ^uggest such
things as he confesses the Scripture affirms nothing of it, and tradition as
little, as far as he knows, and neither affirms nor beleives any thing in it,
and only upon a supposition that infan^ c^ildren would have been brought (...)
Noah's Ark if men had believed Noah, and John's Baptism was as Noah's Ark styled
the Kingdom of heaven, whereas John's and Christ's Baptism are not made
answerable to Noah's Ark in respect of the bare outward baptism, nor is it
styled the Kingdom of heaven, but the answer or interrogation of a good
conscience toward God by the resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. and
the preaching, beleiving of the Gospel throughout the world, Mar. 1.14, 15.
which they who were baptized were to entertain, and not infants, and therefore
not to be baptized till they did. And we may with better reason, then the Dr.
gives of his fancy, conceive Gods providence rather ordered there should be no
infants in Noah's Ark, that we might not fancy infants baptism thence, then that
we should as this Dr. or doatard supposes.

Yet again, says he, Then 2. for as much as concerned the Apostles, Man. 10.
F^rst it is there evident that they were sent to the lost sheep indefinitely,
and sure that phrase comprehends the lambs also, the infant children being lost
in Adam as well as the grown men, by the addition of their actual to original
sin? And then why should we doubt but the Apostles mission extended to them
also?

Answ. Because we read of no such thing done or appointed to be done, nor do
we know that baptism was appointed to be a remedy of original sin, though some
of the Ancients talk so besides the Scripture.

The Dr. adds. And 2. for their preaching, it is just as as John's was, to warn
them to beware of the imminent destruction, that vindicative act of God,
kingdom, v. 7. that all that should give ear and heed them, might hasten to
get out of that danger by reformation and new life; and the ruin being
impendent to the young as well as old, even the whole nation, why should not
the infant children be rescued from that by their Parents care in bringing them
to baptism, and timely engaging them to fly from the wrath to come, as soon as
they should come to understanding, enjoying in the mean time the benefit of
others charity?

Answ. It was fit they should enjoy the benefit of others charity in their
Prayers, and supply of ^uch things as were meet for them, of which sort the
Apost^es Baptism was not, nor did they understand it was Christ's mind that
they were sen^ to baptize them, for then they had baptized them, and not
rebuked those that brought them to Christ, Matthew. 19.13. Nor by bringing them
to Baptism were children rescued from the wrath to come, but by reformation and
new life.

Thirdly, says he, after their preaching though there be no mention of
ba^tizing (and so it was not fit to be produced to our present b^siness) yet
other things are appointed to be done, wherein infants were concerned as well
as others, as healing of diseases, etc. and if being incapable of receiving
benefit from preaching should be deemed an obstacle to their being baptized,
why should it not to their receiving cures?

Answ. Because that they might be baptized, it was necessary they should be
made disciples by preaching, not so that they might be cured of diseases. Nay I
may add, says the Dr. How should the dead in that place (who sure were as
incapable of understanding as the tenderest infants) be capable of being raised
by those Apostles, which yet is there affirmed of them, v. 8.

Answ. And I may add, that after this rate of reason, if mere capacity of
outward Baptism, and the charge of Christ to the Apostles to do acts of power
on any thing, without making it a disciple by preaching to it (as the Dr. here
fancieth of infants) fit it for Baptism, then the dead are to be baptized,
which was practiced of old, and the giving them the Eucharist, as appears by
the prohibition of it in the third Synod of Carthage Canon 6. and Balsamous
note thereon. But the Dr. it seems thought it ^t in this reply to me, to write
what came next to hand, whether it were fit to be produced to the present
business o^ not, of which sort also is that which he talks in answer to my
third reason, of preaching to the nations, and receiving all that come in to
the discipleship, whether on their own legs, or in others arms, whole families
at once, the parents, and upon their undertaking their infant children also,
which perhaps the Dr. might write early in the morning or late at night,
between sleeping and waking, it is so like a dream.

The Dr. goes on thus, His fourth proof is taken from the use and notation of
the word, which is so to teach as that they learn, and so, says he, is used
Matthew 13.52. (...) is rendered [instructed] by our last translators, and can no
otherwise be rendered then [made a disciple by teaching] so Acts 14.21. it is
said, Havi^g preached the Gospel to that City, (...), having taught or made
many disciples. For the notation of the word we have formerly said sufficient,
that i^ signifies to receive ad discipulatum, as into a School of spiritual
in^truction, (...), to make a disciple, and such he is made, (...) by any
motive or means either comes or i^ brought into the school, this indeed in
order to teaching in the Master, and to learning in the Scholar, and the one
so to teach, as that the other learn, but this sub^equ^nt to his being made a
disciple, the youth we know enters into the School, is admitted into the
College and University, before ^e learns a word there, the instruction or
learning is still looked upon as futur^, at his entering into discipleship.

Answ. How vainly does the Dr. talk of his former sufficient saying, when he
neither formerly nor now, give^ one instance in the New Testament or any other
Author* wherein (...) is as much to receive ad discipulatum, nor any Translator
or Lexicographer that so renders it Matthew. 28.19. or elsewhere! (...) to
disciple, Matthew. 28.19. is confessed by the Dr. to be all one with (...) to make
disciples Joh. 4*1. Now sure the D^* might well take his Readers for dunses, if
they could not distinguish between making disciples and receiving ad
discipulatum, to be made disciples, entering into a school that they might
learn, and being made a disciple, which always notes learning of something
an^eceden^. Nor is any termed a disciple, at least not in the New Testament*
till he ha^^ learned some of his Teachers doctrine; None were the disciples of
the Pharisees, John Baptist, the Seducers, Acts 20.30, till they learned some
of their teachers lessons, nor do I think in the Jewish writers are any termed
the disciples of their Rabbis, or said to be discipled till they learned. The
terming youths scholars at their first entering is nothing to the purpose, since
neither is a disciple and a scholar all one, the one being from learning, the
other from vacation from other employment that he may learn. Nor is the use of
words in our Universities and Schools, any rule whereby to expound the use of
words in the N.T. but Scripture is to be expounded by the use in Scripture,
which the Dr. in vain attempts to evade thus.

And this is all ^he importance of the word (...) Matthew. 13.52. only some
accidental differences may be observed, it is in the passive and in the Aorist
in the prete^^ense, (...), every Scribe which is or has been entered as a
disciple unto the kingdom of heaven, who since his entrance has been
instructed, and (as real passiv^s import) received influence, been really
affected and changed by discipleship, st^ll no way supposing that he was
instructed in the learning or mysteries of the king ^ome of heaven, before he
was thus admitted a disciple to it; After his admission, there is no doubt but
he does (or ought to) learn, nay being here (...), a Scribe discipled, a grown
man and learned among the Jews, before he came to Christ, I doubt not but some
knowledge he had of it before he entered himself a disciple (see bap^izing of
in^ants p. 199.) bu^ this not by force of the word (...), for still a disciple
he may be before he learns, and is therefore obliged to learn, because he has
assumed and undertaken to do so, either personally, or by others susception, by
his coming, or being brought to be a disciple.

Answ. Were not the Dr. a very bold paraphrast, he would never have dared to
say, that this is all the im^ortance of the word (...) Matthew. 13.52. to be
entered into a school for a subsequent instruction witho^t any precedent, which
is or has been entered as a disciple into the kingdom of heaven, who since his
entrance has been instructed, but this not by force of the word, (...) for
still a disciple he may be before he learns. Has the Dr. the face to say that
the words might be so understood Every Scribe that is or has been entered as a
disciple unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder,
which brings forth out of his treasure things new and old? Does not our Lord
Christ infer this as a consequent of their hearing, and understanding of the
parables wherein he had instructed them in the foregoing part of the Chapter?
Is there any Translator or Commentator before him that has thus expounded it?
The vulgar Hierome, ^igurine, read doctus, learned Beza, edoctus, well
learned. Hierome expounds it thus, Instru i erant Apostoli, scribae and not
arii salvatoris, qui verba illius and praecepta signabant in tabuli^ cordis
carnalibus regnorum c^lestium s^cramentis. Grotius annot. in locum, Doctor.
inquit, been paratus atque eruditus ad tradenda praecepta regni c^lestis. Yea
the Dr. himself here explains (...) thus, a scribe discipled, a grown man and
learned among the Jews, before he came to Christ; though he does grossly abuse
the text by making as if the scribe were taken for one so termed among the Jews
before he came to Christ, whereas the term is used of Christian teachers,
^^lusively to that orde^ of men among the Jews termed Scribes, in which sense
Christ says, he would send them Wise men and Scribes, Matthew. 11.34. which is
Luke 11.49. Apostles, and that text Chrysostom in his Homily on Matthew. 13.52.
makes like to it, and Grotius annot. in locum, proprie autem (...) respo^dent
ii qui in Ecclesia Christiana dicti sunt (...), quod nomen in Actis and
Epistolis Pauli aliquoties legitur. (...) Psalm. 58.6. and Prove. 30.24. It is no
better then a whimzy which the Dr. here ven^s, as if the force of the word
(...) noted not learning but admission to school, when the very use of the word
notes in this place one well learned; and to assert a man may be a disciple
before he learns, being only obliged to learn, by his own or other susception,
by his coming or being brought to be a disciple, when the very derivation is
from (...)* has learned.

The Dr. says f^r her. So in the other place Acts 14.21. (...)] signifies no
more then having received or initiated, i e. (I suppose) by thi^ righ^ of
baptism, made and baptized many di^ciples, which though it be there set down as
a consequ^nt of the Apostles preaching the Gospel in that City (for otherwise
it were not imaginable that they should receive any disciples there, they must
first proclaim admission to all that come, before any c^n be expected ^ither to
come or to be brought to them) yet may it very reasonably be extended to more
persons then those that understood their preaching, viz. to the infant children
of their Proselytes brought to them by their parents, and dedicated to Christ.

Answ. This text was produced to prove that the D^s. position was false when he
said, That the making or receiving disciples supposes not any precedent
instruction, but looks wholly on it as subsequent, since the word notes ^eaching
as our Translators, the Vulgar, Erasmus, read it, and the way of making
disciples is expressly made in the text, the preaching of the Gospel. The Dr.
says, it signifies no more then having received or initiated i. e. (he
sup^oseth) by Baptism, but this none else says, and that it may be reasonably
extended to infants, but he gives no reason, nor answers the objections to the
contrary, but he keeps his wont of vain cracikng.

Thus invailid ( says he of me) are his attempts from the notation of the
word, and by consequence his inference from thence (which is set down as his
fifth proof) that thereby it may appear how the Apostles understood the precept
of Christ to preach the Gospel to persons and thereby make them disciples. For
although the practice of the Apostles be indeed the means by which we may
discern how they understood Christ^ precept (and those two places cited by Mr.
T. from Matthew. 13. and Acts 14. do no way belong to that, they tell us not
whether they received infants to Baptism or not) yet I may very well ward my
self from any inconvenience, which this use of the word (...) in other places
can threaten, it being already vindicated from all necessity that it should be
confirmed to grown men, and not communicated to infants also.

Answ. How well the Dr. has vindicated the use of the word (...) from all
necessity that it should be confined to grown men, may appear from that which
goes before, in which it may be seen that he has neither brought one place to
show that ever it was applied to an infant, nor answered one objection to the
contrary. And me thinks he here overthrowes himself. He had said before* that
Acts 14.^1* (...)] signifies no more then ha^ing received, or initiated, i. e.
(I suppose) by this rite of Baptism made and baptized many disciples, yet he
says here, those two places cited ^y Mr. ^. from Matthew. 13. and Acts 14. do no
way belong to that, they tell us not whether they received infants to Baptism
or not, how then can they be reasonably extended ^o them? How is the word
vindicated from all necessity that it should be confined to grown men? Are not
these cross caper^? Again, if these texts tel^ us not whether they received
infants to Baptism, or not, it is because the word (...) is not meant of
infants, or because it imports precedent instruction, or Christ's precept Matthew.
28.19. was not meant of infants, or the Apostles practice was not to baptize
infants, or the word (...) signifies more then receiving or initiating by
baptism or some other reason* what ever it be it will overthrow the Drs.
supposition, that the discipling Matthew. 28.19. did not exclude infants. I would
further ask, whether the Dr. imagins that the verb (...) to disciple, be as
much as to baptize? If he say it is, then I would know how he can acquit the
words Joh. 4.1. where he confesses, that making disciples is the same with
discipling, Matthew. 28.19. and then the meaning must be, he baptized and
baptized, and Matthew. 28.19. baptize baptizing, from inept ^autology? If he say
it is more, then it is false, that Acts 14.21. it signifies no more, and if it
signify more, let him tell us what it is except teaching, that we may practice
it according to the command Matthew. 28.19. If that be it, let him show how
that is extended to infants, if he cannot, then the Apostles practice expressed
Acts 14.21. is to be so understood; and the Apostles practice being indeed the
means to discern how they understood C^rists precept, by that we may discern
that the Apostles understood the discipling Matthew. 28.19. of no other then
making disciples by preaching the Gospel to each, and thereby teaching them,
and consequently infants are excluded, which I was to demonstrate.

I added a sixth proof thus, A disciple and a believer appear to be the same,
by comparing Matthew. 28.19. with Mark 16.15, 16. For as the way of making
disciples is more fully expressed by preaching the Gospel; so the Disciple to
be baptized is expressed by [ the believer] which is put before bap^ism.

To this, says the Dr. I answer, ^. That that passage in St. Mark, He that
beleiveth and is baptized shall be saved, and he that beleiveth not shall be
damned, and so on to the end of the Gospel is (as even now I intimated) added
by that Evangelist, to the words, as they are set down in Matthew, and so being
an addition, cannot be looked on as exactly parallel to the words in Matthew,
Go and disciple all nations baptizing them* And this we also know is ordinary
for one Evangelist to set down more fully what is omitted or more shortly set
down in the other, and S. Mark that in other things was willing to abbreviate
S^. Matthew, does now visibly enlarge; And so the comparison cannot regularly
be made betwixt these ^wo Evangelists words* something being abbreviated in
Mark, which was more at large in Matthew, and something more conci^ely set down
in Matthew, and more largely in Mark. And then what necessity is there, that
Mark not mentioning discipling but believing, and Matthew men ioning discipling
but not bel^eving, the discipled and believers should be deemed the same. It Is
true indeed of grown men, none can in reason be admitted disciples, which are
not also believers (the ground of which I have set down in the resol of the
quaerep. 199.) but of infant children this is not true, for those, though they
cannot come, may yet be brought, and though not upon their own confession, yet
by the susception of others, made capable of the Churches charity, and so may
be disciples without actual or personal belief.

Answ. Though the words are not exactly parallel, yet they being of the same
matter at the same time, the one interpret the other, and then any man may
easily perceive, discipling all nations, to be the same with preaching the
Gospel to every creature, and thereby making disciples, and baptizing them,
that is disciples, to answer to ^e that believes and is baptized, and
accordingly all along the Acts of the Apostles, disciples and believers are the
same, and before Baptism believing is required, and they that were baptized
were first s^id to believe, and so generally Commentatours expound the words as
synonymous, nor does the Scripture make one qualification to Baptism for
infants, and another for grown men, nor any where term infants disciples; and
if none of grown men can in reason be admitted disciples, which are not also
believers, con^ent to be disciples of Christ, then infants by their susception
and bringing, are not made nor to be admitted discipl^s of Christ, without
act^al or personal belief* there being no such distinction of disciples in
Christ's words, nor any such appointment of baptizing disciples by such bringing
or susception* but in such actions there is great sin o^ rashness in those that
undertake, of profaneness in those that bring and admit nor is there any true
charity, but error, arrogance, and folly in the Church, which shall thus
presume to put one kind of disciples ^ancied by themselves in stead of another
appoint^d by Christ, who is the only institutor of Baptism, and so the only
r^gulator of it, and ^he term [ disciple] in grown men, being the same with [
believer] nor any other termed a disciple but a believer, it is clear none are
discipled, and conseq^ently none are to be baptized according to Matthew. 28, 19.
but actual and personal believers.

But the Dr. has not yet done, but adds. Nay 2dly, if Mr. T. his argument had
power to infer it, 'twere that which I might safely avouch, that infants may be
comprehended under the style (...), they that b^lieve and are bap^ized; so even
now we had it in the express words of Christ, the little ones (and S. Luke
specifies them to be (...) little infants) that believe on him; i. e. just as
they are said elsewhere to come unto him, when they are as incapable for want
of bodily strength of personal coming, as for want of strength of mind or
judgment of personal believing, and yet in respect of others bringing them to
Christ (and so to the Church in baptism) they are by Christ himself said to do
both of these, to come in one place, and to believe in the other.

Answ. Coming imports only a local motion to a place or person, and may be by
either a persons or things motion from an inward or outward principle in elder
or younger persons, he that is carried in a coach, or on horseback, or by
barge, is said to come to London or home, as well as he that goes on foot; but
believing is an immanent act, which neither is, no^ can be ano^hers a^t then
the persons, nor by any others motion then his own, nor from any other
principle without his own understanding. No where are infants in age termed
believers, one of these little ones, Matthew. 18.6. cannot be meant of little
ones in age, for it supposes then more little ones in age then present,
whereas there was b^t one present v. 2. and then it would be a very great sin
to offend a little one in age; but the wo^ds following v. 10, 14. show the term
little ones to be meant of those Christians who were apt to be despised, and
liable to going astray.

But if infants were meant Matthew. 18.6. yet it is false which the Dr. says,
That he might safely avouch that infants may be comprehended under the style
(...), they that believe and are baptized, for it follows in the Drs. own
words; But then 3dly, I willingly acknowledge that the word [ believe] in Mark,
belongs peculiarly to the grown men and women who are called by the preaching
of the Gospel, of whom though it be said, that believing and being baptized
they shall be saved, and not believing they shall be damned, yet it no way
follows, that none but such as thus personally believed, should be baptized,
or that being baptized they should not be saved; but lose all the benefit of
their Baptism.] So that the Dr. yiedling that Mark 16.16. is meant of grown
persons peculiarly, he could not safely avouch (unless an untruth might be
safely avouched) that infants may be comprehended under the style (...), they
that believe and are baptized, which is only Mark 16.16. and then it follows
hence that none are to be counted disciples but believers, nor any to be
baptized but such. The benefit of Bap^ism to infants I think is none, sure not
salvation without faith in act or seed, or something equivolent.

It follows in the Dr. The latter part of the words is considerable, He that
believes not shall be damned, infidelity is pitched on as the thing peculiarly
that incurs the certain damnation, i. e. the voluntary resisting the faith when
it is preached convincingly to them, and of that none are capable, but those
that are arrived to years of understanding; which as it is an indication that
that v* and those that follow in S. Mark of believers casting out devils, etc.
v. 17, 18. belong to adulti peculiarly, so it no way hinders, but S. Matthews
words being different from them, and supposed to be precedent to them in
Christ's delivery, may comprehend infants also, as such who are capable of
e^tring into discipleship, and of being brought and presented to the Apostles
by believing pa^ents. This being the way whereby the faith of the parents may
be signally beneficial to the child, in bringing him thus early into the
School, and so to the benediction of Christ, the parents together with the
infant children, as among the Jews so among Christian^, entering together into
Covenant with God.

Answ. I did ever conceive and so do others, and me thinks the Dr. should
conceive so too, that the commission Mark 16.15, 16. is the same* though with
some variation of words, but not of matter, with that Matthew. 28.19. and if so,
the Dr. has granted and proved enough here to show that believers Mark 16.16.
are only adulti capable of understanding, and so none other disciples to be
baptized Matthew. 28.19. which is that I was to prove; and need therefore add no
more to refute his stale crambe of his Jewish p^ttern, but shall consider what
he says for his position of making disciples without precedent instruction.

Dr. Hammond Defense of infants baptism chapter ^* sect. 2. p. 41. writes thus; I
say that the making or receiving disciples, supposes not any precedent
instruction, but looks wholly on it as subsequent. This ^ there concluded not
from the bare negative, because there was no precedent mention of such
instruction, where discipling and baptizing were both mentioned, but because in
that place on which the Antipaedobaptist so much relies, Matthew. 28.19.^ the
[(...) teaching] is expressly mentioned after discipling and baptizing, and so
is in reason to be deemed, and looked on, as subsequent to both, and so the
receiving ad discipulatum, refer to that then future instruction, p. 49. In
this matter Mr. T. is willing to find a difference betwixt teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever Christ has commanded them, Matthew. 28.20. and the
preaching of the Gospel in S. Mark: thinking by that means to avoid the
importunity of that text in Matthew, which evidently sets baptism before
instructing. But this can avail him nothing. For if by the Gospel in Mark we
understand the whole Gospel, as in reason we must, for that is ^t which must be
preached to every creature (the Gentile world) then is that directly all one
with teaching them to observe whatsoever he has commanded; But if by preaching
the Gospel we mean no more then, as Mr. T. here says, that Jesus is the
Christ, i. e. the proposing him as a Master, and calling all to come to him as
disciples, then this being supposed precedent to men's coming to discipleship,
or bringing their infants to it (for without this they cannot be expected to
come themselves, or to bring their infants) all the ^est is left to follow
baptism,and so all particular Christian instruction is subsequent* not
precedent to baptism, an effect of their discipleship, attending it no way
necessary to prepare for it, which is the u^most (...), which from that
circumstance of that text I undertook to demonstrate.

Answ. That the Dr. says not true in this, is manifest from his words, which
were, not (...) here, that all particular Christian instruction besides the
proposing Christ as a master, and calling all to come to him as disciples is
subsequent, but this letter of resol. q. 4.. 25. having said that (...) is not
duly expressed by our English, teach, but make disciples, or receive into
discipleship all nations, baptizing them in the name, etc. making this form of
Baptism their ceremony of receiving them; He adds, where the baptizing being
immediately annexed to the making or receiving disciples, and the receiving
d^sciples not supposing any precedent instruction, but looking wholly on it as
subsequent, all that are thus brought and received ad discipulatum, to be for
the future instructed and instituted in the Christian faith, may surely be
received by baptism, the ceremo^y which is there prescribed by Christ, with
which to receive disci^les. From which words it is evident he made (...),
without teaching to import the receiving of disciples, even infants brought by
others, and not only all particular Christian instruction subse^uent to
baptism, but even instruction and institution in the Christian faith, and the
receiving disciples supposing not any precedent instruction, but looking wholly
on it as subsequent; which if he now retract and acknowledge that (...):
imports more then bare admission of disciples, and includes preaching of the
Gospel that Jesus is the Christ, i. e. proposing him as a master, and calling
all to come to him as disciples, and this precedent to baptism, then is some
instruction in the faith necessarily precedent, and teaching by thus preaching
the Gospel included in (...), make disciples, and none appointed to be baptized
but they that are thus made disciples, and so no infants, and thus it will
avail me something which I noted.

As for what he says, that in reason we must understand Mark 16.15. the whole
Gospel, and that then is that directly all one with teaching them to observe
whatsoever he has commanded. Neither is it true, that in reason we must
understand the whole Gospel, but so much at least as the Apostles were wont to
preach to persons before they baptized them (for they best understood Christ's
Commission Mark 16.15.) which may be seen in these and such like places, Acts
2.36, etc. and 8.12, 35, 37. and 10.36, etc. and 16.31, 32. and 17.18, etc and
18.5. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4, etc.

Nor if it were true does it follow, that then that is directly all one with
teaching them to observe whatsoever he has commanded. For 1. I no where find
agenda things to be observed by us, termed the Gospel, but credenda things to
be believed Romans 1.16, 17. and 2.16. 1 Cor. 15.3, 4. Gal, 3.8. 2 Timothy 2.8 and
accordingly no where is the Go^pel propounded in the imperative, as a thing to
be done by us, but in the indicative mood, as a thing to be believed; and
accordingly we are commanded Mark 1.15. to believe the Gospel, and thus it is
meant Mark 16.15. For after it is appointed to the Apostles to preach the
Gospel, it is presently adde^ v. 16. He that believes, to wit the Gospel
preached, and is baptized, shall be saved. 2. If it were so that the ^ospel did
contain agenda, commands to be observed by us, yet to preach the Gospel could
not be directly all one with teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
Christ has commanded, for Baptism is a command of Christ, yet is not any part
of the subsequent instruction after baptism, which is meant by Christ in those
words, and yet if any, is to be accounted part of the Gospel. So that it is
evident, that the distinction I made between teaching the Gospel and other
commands was right, and that the Dr. by making all the ^eaching Matthew. 28, 19*
subsequent to Baptism, has perverted the order of Christ, and abused the text
for the countenance of his error of infant Baptism's consistency with Christ's
appointment, Matthew. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16.

The Dr. adds, p. 41. And to this sense I there made it manifest, that the
definition of Baptism, 1 Pet. 3.21. did refer that Baptism is (...) seeking to
God, as to the Oracle to enquire for the whole future life no way pre requiring
actual instruction, but coming to Christ and the Church, to receive it and
obey it for the future (and that done in some sort by those that ^re brought
when they are not able to come, and by the charity of the church received
there.)

Answ. There is neither a definit^on of Baptism 1 Pet. 3.21. nor any thing like
it, nor does the drift of the speech lead to such a concei^. That it is not a
definition of Baptism may appear by the properties of a definiti^n, for a
definition sets down what a thing is, and is reciprocal with the thing defined,
but the genus of Baptism cannot be answer, or interrogation, or stipulation
Baptism actively taken being an act of hands, passively of the whole body,
answer, interrogation or stipulation, if by words of the tongue, if of the
conscience of the mind, nor any difference from prayer, or vow, or such like
act. Nor is there any thing like it, there being no expression of the nature o^
baptism in the Church, but the use before God, nor is the intent to show what
Baptism is in it self, but when it sa^es, and the speech is a comparative
expression, like that in the same Chapter v. 3, 4. Matthew. 12.7. and other the
like; in which the meaning is, that baptism saves not when there is only a
putting away of the filthiness of the flesh, but when there is with it also the
answer, interrogation, or stipulation of a good conscience toward God, so that
the predication is not formal but connex^ve, not showing what i^ is, but what
it is accompanied with when it saves. Nor is the Drs. sense true. For such
seeking to God as he speaks of by baptism, when a child is brought by others to
learn, and by the Churches charity received, does not save as the answer of a
good conscience toward God is said to do, nor is the answer, interrogation, or
stipulation of a good conscience toward God without actual instruction, there
is no man that makes an answer, or promises or makes an interrogation without
some pre^edent instruction* whose act soever it be there must be some
knowledge of God and Christ, before there is seeking or enquiry and address to
him; nor is there any intimation of any ones bringing and the Church receiving,
nor any propounding any q^estion to l^arn, but if the allusion be to the use of
the old questions and answers, abrenuncias? abrenuncio. Credis? credo* Spondes?
spondeo; as Beza annot. in locum and others conceive: Or the term note an
answer or stipulation as Beza, or interrogation as the Vulgar ^ati^, or
confession as the Syriack, or examination and proving (which as Heinsius
Exercit. in locum conceives, is intimated as pre-requisite to baptism as well
as the Lords Supper) it is evidently another thing, then Dr. Hammonds tendering
a child, or a man's own offer of himself to be entered into a school that he
might learn. It is in my apprehension an act of plerophory of faith, through
the resurrection of Christ from the dead, the same or near that demand of the
Apostle. Romans 8.33, 34. Not such a low act which comes so many degrees ^h^r^ of
saving ^aith, as the Drs. enquiry or address as to an Oracle for future
instruction* by a man's own presenting himself or his child to the Church for
Baptism is, which is so childish a conceit, as I should think should har^ly
have comen into the head of such a man, did it not h^ppen to him, as to men
that talk with chil^ren, to talk as a child. But he adds more of the (...) when
he says.

And this farther illustrated as by the manner of children brought by parents
to school, without either knowledge of letters, o^ choice, or so much as w^sh
^f instruction, so by the manner of Christ's disciples being received of him,
particularly of Philip Joh. 1.44. who was called and received into discipleship
as soon as ever Christ met with him, i. e. before he was at all instructed by
him; and so also by the story of the Jews, Exodus 19.8. who undertook to obey
all the commandments of God, which he should give, which yet were not then,
but after given them, v. 20. which are clear evidenc^s, that those may be
received into discipleship, which have not yet had precedent instruction.
Against this all that he has to pretend is set down by him in these words. Let
putting to school be as early as the Dr. will imagine, yet none is put to
school till he does know his teacher, and so none is Christ's disciple in
Scripture language till he know Jesus to be Christ, and take him for his Lord,
which infants being not capable of, they are not disciples, not to be baptized
according to Christ's appointment. To this I answer, 1. That the example which I
had used of children being brought to school by the care of their parents, was
designed to show no more then this, that they may be delivered up to be
scholars, who as yet know nothing of what they are to learn, nor have actual
willingness to acquire knowledge, and consequently that entrance into
discipleship refers only to subsequent, supposes not any precedent
instruction. And this is competently evidenced by that example, though it were
supposed of the child that goes to school, that he knows his teacher, this
bare knowledge of the person of his teacher, being none of the documents which
he comes to learn, but the good letters that are professed and taught in the
school, nor indeed is it imaginable why a blind child which is brought to
school, or put to an instructor, and so cannot be deemed to know the master
before assuetude has acquainted him with him, should not yet be said, with as
full propriety of speech, to come to school, as he that uses his own eyes as
well as feet to direct him thither.

Answ. No child is ever entered a scholar without some such document as this,
you must hearken to your master, which is some precedent instruction, and
though he be a blind or a lame child, or both, he that puts him to school gives
him some item who is his master, and to what end he is brought to him (whereof
none is done to an infant) and though these be not the documents which he comes
to school to learn, yet they are documents which he is taught before he comes to
school.

The Dr. adds. 2ly. It is as true, that children that are brought to school do
not always know their masters before their entrance, no not by the most
superficial knowledge; many are brought to public schools, who never so much
as saw their masters till they are by their parents delivered up into their
power and discipline; if this be not plain enough, then change the similitude
from the Schoolmaster to the parent or guardian, or the very nurse, every one
of these are to feed, and nourish, and as he shall be capable, to instruct the
child, and so does Christ in a spiritual sense, whosoever is entrusted (by
being brought) to him in baptism. And we know God and nature does thus bring a
child to the parent, to the nurse or guardian, when the child knows none of
these, nor understands any more of all these transaction, then the infant does
at the font conceive what is done to it there. And so still this evidenceth the
vanity of this answer concerning the child's knowing his teacher.

Answ. It does indeed evidence the vanity of this Drs. answer, who being to
show how the words of Christ Matthew. 28.19. do not exclude infants from baptism,
since they are first to be made disciples, before they are to be baptized whom he
appoints to be baptized, having first turned the pr^cept of making disci^les,
in^o receiving of persons to be discipled, and making them disciples by
preaching the Gospel to them, into preaching it to others who may bring them to
school, and being urged with this that none are brought to school till he know
his teacher, has no better shift then here he uses to avoid it. For he it
that some are brought to school that have not a superficial knowledge of their
master, as having never seen him, yet they are not brough^ till they be told
they are to go to a mast^r, nor entered into the school (which was the Drs.
notion of making Disciples, Matthew. 28.19.) till he have some knowledge who is
to be his teacher. As for his other shift by changing the similitude, it is
worse, for thereby he quits the cause, the precept being not Matthew. 28.19. set
to nurse, but make disciples, and therefore though it be true, that a father,
guardian or nurse, are to receive a child that knows none of them, and are to
feed, nou^ish and instruct it as it is c^pable, and it is a good office to
bring an infant to such persons to such ends, yet is it neither agreeable to
use nor reason, but rather the part of a frantique man out of his wi^s, to
bring an infant to be admitted into a school to be taught or matriculated in
the University, nor does Christ appoint such to be admitted as disciples to
him; nor is it true which this Dr. says, that Christ does in a spiritual sense
feed, nourish and instruct whosoever is entrusted (by being brought) to him in
baptism; nor do I think but that the infant knows more the nur^e, and the
bringing of it to that end, then the infant does at the font conceive what is
done to it there. So that hitherto the Dr. has not avoided this objection,
that though i^ were granted him (which yet is not true) that making disciples,
Matthew. 28.^0. is no more then receive to discipleship or to school, yet infants
are excluded, who are by none received to d^scipleship, or entered into schools.
But the Dr. has one more li^t at this block which thus lies in his way.

But then, says he, 3dly. This so imperfect superficial knowledge of the
teacher, is in no wise worth considering in this matter; For I shall demand,
does such very imperfect knowledge of Christ, as a school boy has of his
teacher, the first hour ^e comes into the school, qu^lifie him for discipleship
to christ or no? If it do, then his Countrymen and Kinsmen, before he revealed
himself ^o be the Messiah and the Pharisees, which believed not his mirac^es
were sufficiently qualified, and then it is evident that those might be admitted
to discipleship, which were not believers, and so all Mr T. his hypotheses are
destroyed, and then infants may be disciple^ and baptized though they be not
believers.

Answ. This is very Doctor-like arguing, to put a question and then make the
answer absurd if it be affirmative, but show no absurdity in it, if it be made
negatively, as indeed it is. Which I should not have mentioned, but that he
twits me (though unjustly) in the beginning of the next Section, with setting
down a first reason without a second. I answer then to his question negatively,
and yet such imperfect superficial knowledge of a teacher, is worth considering
in this matter, to show that no infant who has not so much knowledge of Christ
as such a school boy of his master, is to be termed Chr^sts disciple or
admitted to discipleship. And yet if I had answered affirmatively, I think none
of my hypotheses had been destroyed; For such imperfect knowledge of the ma^^er
might be with faith in him, as able to teach him and willing to do him good,
and so a Christian who has b^t such imperfect knowledge of Christ as a
school^boy of his master the first hour he comes to school, may be a believer,
and know him to be the Messiah before he be baptized, and not, as his Kinsmen,
Country men, or Pharisees, an unbeliever.

Yet the Dr. tells us, As for that which he here interposes [the knowing Jesus
to be Christ, and taking him for his Lord] this bears no ^roportion with the
child's bare knowing of his master, but is far above it, equal to his making it
his own choice to have this master, rather then any other, and promising exact
obedience to him, which is much more then is to he found in most young
scholars* or indeed in any that are brought by their parents or guardians, who
alone are the persons who bear proportion with the infants brought by others to
baptism.

Answ. ^his might have been omitted, but that the Dr. was willing to write
something though it be i^pertinent, since it opposes not me; who said not that
the knowing Jesus to be Christ and taking him for his Lord, bears any even
proportion with the child's bare knowing his master, but only said as none is
put to school till he does know his teacher, so none in Scripture language is
Christ's disciple till he know Christ, not just so imperfectly as a schoolboy.
And yet I think there are some young scholars brought by parents or guardians,
who make choice themselves of their master, and promise exact obedience to him.

The Dr. concludes this Section thus. So that this reasoning of his, is soon
salved by distinguishing of disciples, that they are either such as come, or
such as are brought to School, Proselytes of their own choice, or children
under the care of others; of the former sort there are none but such as have
some rude imperfect knowledge of Christ, upon which they make this choice, and
without it would not probably be expected to make it; But for children which as
minors in their guardians hands, have no will of their own, there is no
necessity they should have knowledge to move their will, they may very
reasonably be acted by the will of others, and by their charity be made
partakers of those privileges which are communicated from Christ in his Church
to all true members thereof, and to that end be discipled and baptized, entered
by this ceremony into the Church of God, where instruction is to be had as soon
as they are capable of it, and in the mean while partake of those other
advantages, of which their condition is capable.

Answ. When the Dr. has proved out of Scripture, that there is any such sort
of Disciples of Christ as he here describes, who come not but are brought to
school by others, I shall acknowledge he has sa^ved my reasoning; till then I
take this for vain babbling, and conceive it little better then to speak of a
disciple who has no will of his own, nor knowledge to move it then to speak of
a man that is irrational, and to say they may very reasonably be acted by the
will of others, who are not so by their own, is in my apprehension all one as
to say, they may very reasonably be acted, who are acted as bruits. The
instance of Philip, Joh. 1.44. servs not the Drs. turn, for though he were
called and received into discipleship as soon as ever Christ met with him, yet
not before Christ spoke to him, and ^id him follow him, which implies some
instruction by him, and therefore it is false that the Dr. says, he was
received into discipleship before he was at all instructed by Christ, nor does
that of the Jews Exodus 19.8. who did then answer as disciples, but as servants,
or persons that covenanted.

But the Dr. has yet one more string to his bow, though the rest be cracked.
Lastly, says he, I concluded that the making or receiving disciples, supposes
not any precedent instruction by the nature of Proselytism, which as it is all
one with entering into Gods Covenant, and (in the Christian sense) with coming
to Christ and being received into discipleship, so it is that which children are
known to be capable of, not only by that text Deuteronomy. 29.^0. but by the custom
of baptizing infant Proselytes among the Jews, and by Christ's command to suffer
them to come unto him, whenever they were thus brought.

Hereto I said, that it is not true, that a Disciple and a Proselyte are
perfectly all one. For a Proselyte notes one that is by birth an alien from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and comes to Israel to own their God, and be part of
their policy, not to be taught, but to enjoy privileges with other Jews,
whether civil or ecclesiastical. But a disciple of Christ is one that owns
Christ for his teacher and Lord, only for spiritual benefits.

But certainly, says the Dr. this is no reason of difference, for besides that
I in that. 27. acknowledged this accidental difference, that a Proselyte
denotes a coming from some other nation (as a disciple does not) adding, that
this diffe^ence had no place in this matter, where the disciples are specified
to be received from all nations; besides this, I say, it cannot be unknown to
Mr. T. that I speak of Proselytes in such a notion as is equally competible to
all of what nation soever they are, that enter into Covenant with God.

Answ. Who but he that writes at random, would assert that a Disciple and
Proselyte are perfectly all one, and yet acknowledge this accidental
difference, that this is no reason of difference, and yet say, that a Proselyte
denotes a coming from some other nation (as a disciple does not) that this is
but an accidental difference, and yet in his own description make this very
difference, and when he expresses the Hebrew word for Proselyte, still terms
him (...) a stranger, that this difference had no place in this matter, when
his inference is from Proselytes who were strangers to the Jews, to prove
Disciples and Proselytes the same, and to tell me I must know his use of a
word, which he neither shows that he or any else have so used. But the Dr.
adds.

Thus do we find a Proselyte defined, Heb. 11.6. by (...) he that comes to
God, thus does a Jew when he enters into Covenant of obedience to him, and thus
did a Gentile when he undertook the whole Law of the Jews, and was therefore
(...) and (...) a Proselyte of the Covenant, and a Proselyte of their
righteousness, and such is every one whether Jew or Gentile that comes to
Christ, and as the two former of these were made partakers of privileges by
this means, particularly allowed freely to enter into the Congregation, and
infants as well as grown men were thus among them admitted into Covenant; so it
is not imaginable why it should not hold of the Christian Proselytes also, nor
why the Christian infants thus received into Covenant by Christ, after the same
manner as Jewish and Gentile infants were among the ancient people of God. i.
e. by Baptism, should not as properly be called Proselytes of Christ* though
they neither come from any other nation, nor ever associate themselves with
Israelites according to the flesh.

Answ. If the notion of a Proselyte were according to Heb. 11.6. I should agree
that a disciple of Christ and a Proselyte were the same; For such a Proselyte
is one that is a believer, as the words show; But without faith it is
impossible to please God; For he that comes to God must believe that he is,
and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. All such Proselytes
of Christ I doubt not are admitted into Covenant, to be b^ptized, to partake of
privileges in the Christian Church whether they be Jews or Gentiles,
according to that 1 Cor. 12.13. and when infants are proved to be such, there
will be no question about their Baptism, though not by reason of the Jewish
custom, yet by virtue of Christ's institution to baptize disciples and
believers on him. But that infants of Christians are thus received into
Covenant by Christ after the same manner as Jewish and Gentile infants were
among the ancient people of God, i. e. by Baptism, or that before they believe
they should be called Proselytes of Christ, or, that every one whether Jew or
Gentile that comes to Christ, is as a Gentile when he undertook the whole
Law of the Jews, and was therefore a proselyte of their Covenant and a
proselyte of their righteousness, or that a Christian believer is either termed
in Scripture a Proselyte, or any Jew is to be so termed properly is not to be
imagined, all these things being the mere dreams of the Dr. suitable to his
fancy of infant Baptism instituted among Christians after the Jewish pattern.

The Dr. proceeds thus; And whereas he says of the Proselytes coming to the
Israelites, that they came not to be taught but to enjoy privileges, I cannot
divine what motive he had to affirm it, for sure the infant child that was
baptized, and so received into the Congregation of Israel did come to learn the
Jewish religion, into which he was thus early initiated, and that was one
special privilege (the rest of the Heathen having not knowledge of these
Laws) the immediate end of his proselytism, yet not excluding those other ends
of enjoying all other privileges both Civil and Ecclesiastical thereby.

Answ. The infant had no end but such as the parent, who was indeed the
Proselyte, had, and the parents end was not to be taught, for he was taught
the Jewish religion before, and at his Baptism, the precepts of Moses being
recited to him while he stood in the water, by the Elders at whose command he
was baptized, and admitted into the Jewish policy, before which admission he was
to undertake the observance of them, the proper and immediate end of his
proselytism, was his enjoying those privileges which native Jews had as one
of that body, which shows that the admission of a Proselyte was not into a
school to learn, and therefore the notion of Proselytism not like the notion of
receiving to discipleship, which the Dr. fancies to be meant Matthew. 28.19. and
to be the same with admission to Proselytism; to show the mistake of which was
the motive why I set this difference between a Proselyte and a Disciple of
Christ, as the Dr. might easily have di^ined, if he had been minded to do so.

The Dr. says of me, And when he adds, but a Disciple of Christ is one that
owns Christ for his teacher and Lord, only for spiritual benefits, I might as
well acknowledge it, and ask why then an infant who has need of those
spiritual benefits, as soon as he is born should not be hastened to a
participation of them.

Answ. I know no reason why he should not, nor do I know any reason why he
should be baptized, nor how by it an infant may be hastened to the
participation of spiritual or other benefits, but know reason why an infant
should not be baptized, because Baptism is thereby profaned, and the infant
afterward usually hardened through pernicione presumption, as if he were
thereby made a Christian. The Dr. says also.

But it is farther evident, that spiritual benefits being first and
principally designed, other even secular advantages, may very lawfully be
respected, and reaped by them that are thus early brought in, whether as
Disciples or Proselytes to Christ.

Answ. That by Baptism infants are brought in as Disciples or Proselytes to
Christ, or attain any advantages spiritual or secular I know not, sure I am
none are lawfully respected in the use of infant Baptism, being wholly besides
Christ's mind, and if the end of Proselytism was (as manifestly it was) for far
different purposes from that of a Disciple of Christ, the Proselyte and
Disciple of Christ are not perfectly one, which I was to demonstrate.

Yet again, says the Dr. Two sage observations he here adds; 1 That there is
no mention of the Disciples of the Priests, but of the Pharisees and Sadduces,
and I can verily well grant it, who speak not of any lower kind of Disciples,
but either of God among the Jews, or of Christ, among us Christians, those
being the only Discipleship, to which they were admitted by the Ceremony of
Baptism, the Disciples of the Pharisees and Sadduces being but a subdivision
and notification of several Sects among the Jews, as there are different
denominations of Christians (the more the pity) which divide unity, but use not
new Baptism to discriminate them, I am sure contradict the Apostle if they do.

Answ. How sage the Drs. observations of making Disciples as all one with
receiving to discipleship, of baptizing after the Jewish pattern, etc. are is
seen before. This observation is not denied by the Dr. nor any thing said by
him to evacuate the use I intended to make of it, to show that to be a
disciple, does not no^e the coming to God to enjoy benefits, as the Dr. made
the notion of a Proselyte to import, for then persons should be termed
disciples of the Priests, which is not so, but to learn, and so the disciples
of Pharisees were those who learned their opinions. That which the Dr. says is
not true, that by Baptism persons were admitted to discipleship, nor that
disciples of the Pharisees and Sadduces were but a subdivision under Disciples
of God or Christ, for their disciples were no disciples of God or Christ, nor
pertinent to the avoiding the use of my observation. It Is true there are
different denominations of Christians (the more the pity) which divide unity,
and of them I know none so great as that of the Prelatists, who will neither
hear the Preacher who preaches the faith of Christ, nor join in prayer unless
the Common Prayer Book be used, nor own them as Presbyters who were not
ordained by a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter, nor join with that society as a
Church lawfully constituted where there is not Episcopal government, which I
take to be a manifestly unjust schism and recusancy. I know none that use new
Baptism, but Paedobaptists, who therein contradict Christ's institution and the
Apostles practice. Pistobaptists or baptizers of Believers of age, upon their
profession of faith, use the old Baptism which Christ appointed and the
Apostles practiced, not to discriminate them from others, but to do their duty,
and to supply a defect in infant sprinkling.

The Dr. says, His second observation is, that the Holy Ghost does not at any
time call Christians Christ's Proselytes, but his Disciples, that, says he, we
might not confound the notions of these terms. But I answer, 1. That those
Texts that express the Christians entering into discipleship, by coming unto
him (of which there are good store) do in effect call them Proselytes, for a
Proselyte is a Greek noun, derived immediately from the Verb (...), to come
unto.

Answ. 1. I think this not true, since the texts which express the coming to
Christ, do mean by it believing in him, as Joh. 6.35. shows, but that is not in
effect to call them Proselytes in the Drs. sense, nor is the notion of a commer
unto and a disciple all one, since a person may come to a person, yea to learn,
and never yet be his disciple.

And secondly, says the Dr. that if this word whether in it self, or in the
Verb from whence it ^omes, had never been used in the N. T. yet would it not
thence follow, that we might not confound the notions of Proselytes and
Disciples.

Ans. Nor do I make it any demonstrative argument but probable, as it is
probable, that the Holy Ghost calls not the Christian society the Synagogue,
nor the preachers of the Gospel (...) Priests, that we may not confound them. I
have often given a firm reason, why infants capable of coming to Christ,
blessed by him, and affirmed to be qualified for the Kingdom of heaven, should
be denied water to be baptized, even this, that neither Christ appointed it,
nor the Apostles baptized them, though he did the other to them. The Christian
Church or Minister might not deny baptism to infants, if they were qualified as
Cornelius and the Gentiles that came with him were Acts 10.46, 47. and 11.18.
What I said of infants being unqualified for Baptism, till by hearing they own
Christ as their Master, is fully proved in the ^d. part of this Review, sect.
5, etc. and it is therefore too too boldly said by the Dr. that it is a begging
of the question without the least tender of proof. Whether or in what manner
the little ones mentioned Deuteronomy. 29.10. did enter into Covenant, is so fully
discussed before Sect. 44, 45, 61, 66, 67. chiefly this last, that I need here
add no more. Either in one of those Sections or some where before in this part
of the Review, I have proved from the Text and Commentators, that those that
were not with them that day, v. 15. were unborn, chiefly in that v. 2. Moses
called unto all Israel, and they are said v. 10. all to stand there that day,
and therefore I might more justly wonder (though it be no wonder that the Dr.
thus abuses me) that he should have the face to say, I impose on the Reader.

He tells me, there is no mention of any act of the Fathers engaging them under
a curse or oath, but only of Gods oath which he makes to them, v. 12. But he
might have seen v. 14. these words, Neither do I make with you only this
Covenant and this Oath, but with him also that is not here with us th^^ day,
which I know not how it should be meant of any other then the unborn, for none
but they of Israel were then absent, and entering into an oath and curse as
they did Nehem. 10.29.

And for what he adds, If they had thus adjured or laid oath or curse upon
their children, yet would this make no difference betwixt their and our entering
into Covenant, we by the oath of Baptism which i^ laid on the child (by him to
be performed when he comes to ability, unless he will forfeit all the benefits
of his Baptism) do in like manner adjure our infants, though while they remain
such, they hear it as little as the Jewish infants did.

But sure there is a great difference between the solemn adjuration of Moses
and all Israel binding their posterity and recorded in the book of the Law, and
the obscure charge of an ignorant officiating Priest to three Gossips, whereof
some are so ignorant, that they know not what the Christian faith is at a Font,
which he terms the oath of Baptism, which is seldom either heeded or
remembered by any present.

And whereas he says, my rejecting his inference, that by parity of reason
infants may be entered into discipleship and baptized, to be a denying the
conclusion when the premises cannot be denied; It is not true, for the
consequence is plainly denied, and the reason is given of that denial, and each
branch proved in the Book before sect. 5, etc. And therefore I shall say no
more to this section, it being pity (to use the Drs. words) to lose time on
such trifling conceits empty of all proof, as this Dr. has dictated for infant
Baptism. He said better Pract. cat. l. 5.. 1. The Apostles powers were to
preach and baptize those that received their doctrine.

SECT. XCVIII. The testimonies of Cyprian, Augustine, and other Latin Fathers
for Infant Baptism, are showed to have come from their mistakes; and the
evidences why the antiquity of Infant Baptism should not be deemed such as is
pretended, are vindicated.
I Now return to the examination of the Testimonies brought out of the rest of
the Latin Fathers besides Tertullian for infant Baptism, whereof Cyprian was
the chief, and his testimony is thus urged by Dr. Hammond Defense of infant
Baptism, chap. 4. sect. 2. p. 99. In the midst of this third Age, An. Chr. 248.
was S. Cyprian made Bp. of Carthage, and ten years after he suffered
martyrdom, i. e. 158 years after the Age of the Apostles. In the year 257 he
sat in Council with 66 Bishops (see Justellus in his preface to the African
Canons p. 21.) and their Decrees by way of Synodical Epistle are to be seen in
his Ep. 58. ad Fidum fratrem, which is now among his works, ^amel. edit. p. 80.
The Council was in answer to some questions about Baptism, and accordingly he
there sets down his own opinion, together with the Decrees of that Council of
66 Bishops which were assembled with him; And so this, as it is an ancient, so
it is more then a single testimony, that of a whole Council added to it; and
yet farther to increase the authority of it, (...) cites this Epistle more then
once, and sets it down almost entire (...) a testimony of great weight against
heretics; and so it is ^^ed by S. Hierom also, l. 3. dial. cont. Pelag. In this
Epistle the question being proposed by Fidus, whether infants might be baptized
the second or third day, or whether as in Circumcision the eighth day were not
to be expected, he answers in the name of the Council, universi judicavimus,
'twas the resolution or sentence of all, nulli hominum nato misericordiam Dei
and gratiam denigandam, that the mercy and grace of God was not to be denied to
any human birth, to any child, though never so young (by that phrase [mercy and
grace of God] evidently meaning Baptism, the right of conveying them to the
baptized) adding, that it is not to be thought that this grace which is given to
the baptized, is given to them in a greater or less degree in respect of the
age of the receivers; and that God as he accepts not the person, so nor the age
of any, confirming this by the words of S. Peter Act. 10. that none was to be
called common or unclean, and that if any were to be kep^ from Baptism, it
should rather be those of full age, who have committed the greater sins, and
that seeing men when they come to the faith are not prohibited baptism, how
much more ought not the infant to be forbidden, who being new born, has no sin
upon him, but that which by his birth from Adam he has contracted as soon as
he was born, who therefore should more easily be admitted to pardon, because
they are not his own but others sins which are then remitted to him, concluding
that as none were by the decree of that Council to be refused baptism, so this
was the rather to be observed, and retained about infants and newborn
children. Thus much and more was the sentence of that ancient Father, and that
Council, and as the occasion of that determination was not any Antipaedobaptist
doctrine (there had no such then so much as looked into the Church, that we can
hear of) but a conceit of one, that it should be deferred to the eigth day,
which was as much infancy as the first (and so both parties were e^ually
contrary to the Anti^aedobaptists interests, the condemned, as well as the
Judges) so that it is no new doctrine that was then decreed, or peculiar to S.
Cyprian (who had one singular opinion in the matter of baptism) appears also by
the concurrence of the whole Council that convened with him, and by the express
words of St. August. Ep. 28. ad Hieronym. Blessed Cyprian not making any new
decree, but keeping the faith of the Church most firm, decreed with a set
number of his fellow Bishops, that a child new born might fitly be baptized.
Which shows it the resolution of that Father also, that baptizing of infants
was the faith of the Church before Cyprians time, not only the opinion, but
the ^aith, which gives it the authority of Christ and his Apostles.

Answ. I have been willing to set down these words at large since none urges
this authority more fully, though Mr. M. Dr. H. Mr. B, etc. do all allege it,
and it is the chiefest of all the testimonies Augustine produced for infant
Baptism, and therefore was translated by me into English, and printed at the
end of my praecursor. Concerning which act, Mr. B. praefest. mor. p. 401. says
thus, It seems to me God ordered Mr. T. to translate Cyprians Epistle to the
disgrace of his cause with the vulgar themselves. For none can be so blind as
not to see in it the antiquity of infant Baptism, which is all that we urge it
for. But if the cause I maintain be disgraced by translating that Epistle, I
shall take it as a sign that a spirit of dotage is fallen on men, so as to be
enamouted on the blemishes of the ancient: Sure me thinks none of the vulgar,
much less the learned, should be so blind as not to discern, that infant
Baptism was an error, which was maintained by the prime assertors, upon such
vain reasons as are in that Epistle, which are not excused by what Mr. B.
says, That the arguments are only for confutation of the objection concerning
infants uncleanness before the eighth day, and not to give the grounds that
warranted infant Baptism; For the truth is, both are done together, and the
best grounds they had for it are set down by them, which will appear to be so
frivolous by examination of them, that notwithstanding all the credit Dr.
Hammond endeavors to gain to it, yet men of mean understandings, I doubt not,
will by reading of it discern how ill that Council did in that determination.
Nor does it any whit be^ter the matter to say, that it was not Cyprian alone,
but also a whole Council of 66 Bishops which did thus agree with him. For in
like manner did the same Cyprian, with a more famous Council [See Epist. to
Jubaia. ponep. Quir. Janu. Steph.] at the same place, determine the rebaptizing
of the baptized by Heretics, with better show of Scripture and reason then in
his Epistle to Fidus, and alleged Apostolical authority as much as in this,
and yet he is deserted therein not only by the Bishops of Rome that were then,
but also by Augustine, and the African, and other Churches. Besides his
maintaining the perfusion of the Clinici, in his Epistle to Magnus l. 4. Epist.
7. his maintaining the necessity of water with the wine in the Lords Supper, as
the Lords tradition, l. 2. Epist. 3. ad Caecilium, with other things, do
sufficiently discover the weakness of Cyprian, and the Bishops of those times
in their determinations, and the slightiness of their reasons, which no
intelligent Divine should now urge, and therefore me thinks should not adhere
to their practice or tenants, grounded on such frivolous reasons. Nor in this
matter is Augustins or Hieroms authority such, as that we should rely upon
their approbations and speeches, their corruptions in this point, and in other
points showing their mistakes both in matters of doctrine, and fact, some
whereof are before noted section 88. and more will be in that which follows.

As for what Mr. B. says, That the antiquity of infant Baptism is all that he
with others urge Cyprian for, I reply, he and others need not to have done
that, since I acknowledge it to have been as ancient as Cyprian, not as it is
now; but 1. in the practice, used only in case of imagined necessity, to save
an infant in apparent danger of imminent death from perishing, as the words of
Tertullian de bapt. c. 18. and Greg. Nazianz. orat. 40. de sanct. bapt. and
sundry relations show to have been the practice. Now in this if Pro^estant
divines have rejected antiquity, and deny such infant Baptism as they
practiced, determining that there is not such a necessity of baptizing infants
for that reason, nor that they are to be baptized with private Baptism upon
such a fear, and accordingly declining it as superstitious, they thereby
justify us from their crimination of innovation in deserting the Fathers, when
they themselves do it in the same thing as well as we. And if Mr. Baxter (as
he does plain Script. proof. l. 2. c. 15. p. 153.) except against Tertullians
reasons as poor, and therefore reject his advice, why should not we reject
Cyprians and his Colleagues determination, which was built on as poor, if not
poorer reasons then Tertullians.

2. In the Doctrines taught: For they taught, that by Baptism the grace and
mercy of God was given, that without Baptism infants must perish, that every
one that is born of mankind is to be baptized, in which Mr. Baxter and other
Protestants do dissert them: Now if they disclaim their Doctrine in that which
led them to their infant Baptism, we have no reason to be bound to their
authority. Nor is the Doctrine the least matter to be considered, or the
reasons of their determination impertinent to a right judgment of their
practice. For as in other controversies between us and Papists, as about
Menkish profession, Lent fast, Prayer for the dead, etc. the main thing
considered, is, how far the Ancients practiced these, and upon what grounds, as
may be seen in ushers answer to the Jesuits challenge, and other learned
Protestants writings, so it is in this: By whieh we may discern, that the
Fathers practice of infant Baptism was upon the same grounds with those of the
Papists, which we reject; and therefore the Fathers testimonies do indeed
disgrace the cause of infant Baptism, and plainly show upon what erroneous
opinions it came in; and if prejudice did not dazzle their eyes, learned and
godly Protestants would rather suspect and judge infant Baptism a corruption,
then allege their determination for their justification. And for what is
alleged, that August. Ep. 28. ad Hierony. said, that Cyprian did not make any
new decree, but kept the faith of the Church most firm, it is manifest, that
the faith Augustine means was that infants had original sin, and without
Baptism must perish, which in like manner he taught about the Lords Supper
(which was given to infants in Cyprians time, as his Sermon de lapsis shows) l.
1. de pecc. merit. and remis. c. 24. l. 1. adv. Julian. c. 2. contra 2 Epist.
Pelag. l. 4. c* 4. Now as we and the Romanists have rejected infant Communion,
though as ancient as infant Baptism, or very near as ancient, so should infant
Baptism be rejected as upon the like mistake brought into the Church. The like
might be said of the exorcising, or exuffiation, that is, blowing away or
puffing out the Devil, of which Augustine speaks so much as used with Baptism
to infants, the anointing with oil, giving milk and honey, clothing with white
garments mentioned by Tertullian as common in his time before Cyprian, which
yet are left by us notwithstanding he make them in his l. 1. against Marcion,
lib. de Corona militis, Apostolical traditions. Out of which and many more
instances this may be collected, that the Fathers testimony of the use of
their time, or of Apostolical traditions, is not to be received without
examining their reasons, to which in this thing how little credit or heed is to
be given, will appear by the exceptions I have made in my Examen, and shall now
vindicate from what Mr. Ms. friend, and Dr. Homes say to them.

The first was, that in Tertullians time infant Baptism was not defined, since
he disswades it, De Bapt. c. 18. Scult. med. patr. part 1. l. 7. c. 42.
Tertullianus l* de Bapt. ^os duntaxat baptizandos censet, qui Christum nosse
potuerunt. The answers are, 1. that he was for infant Baptism, as appears by
his book De anima, c. 39. But this is refelled before. 2. That he mentions it
as then in use. Ref. It is true, but not allowed. 3. That he allowed it in case
of necessity. Ref. This is against those that deny the use of it for that
reason in that case. 4. That he dissuaded only the Baptism of infants of
infidels, since they only were in need of sureties, and likely to sail in
answering the engagement for them. Ref. This is not likely. 1. It^s not likely
such were brought in the times of persecution, nor that there were any
Christians who would become sureties for them. 2. It was usual then, as the
custom has been since, to have sureties at Baptism of infan^s of believers,
and also at the Baptism of the aged, as is gathered out of Tertul. de corona
militis, Inde suscepti, which is spoken of the ^ged. 3. The words of Tertullian
show he argued against the Baptism of any little ones in respect of their age.
4. His reasons (be they what they will) ^re against the Baptism of any little
ones, wi^h express direction for them to come not till they were of age to
understand* Venient ergo dum adol^scunt, veniant dum discunt, dum quo veniant
docentur, fi^nt Christiani, cum Christum nosse pot^erint. That is, Let them
come t^erefore when they be grown up, let them come when they learn, when they
are taught wherefore they come, let them he made Christians when they shall be
able to know Christ. Which makes it certain he meant this even of believers
infants, whom he presumed would be taught to know Christ, and that
An^i^adobaptist doctrine had then looked into the Church, though Dr. Hammond say
otherwise.

^he ^d. Exception was, ^ugustines and Hieroms relying on this Council, showed
their darkness.

Answ. Mr. M. p. 38. of his Defense* Though Augustine approved Cyprians
judgment, yet he relied not upon his reasons to make good infant Baptism; this
to him is no new doctrine, he had another eye upon the constant and sure faith
of the Church, which in that point be followed faithfully.

Ref. It appears by the words of Augustine, ep. 28. ad Hieron^m. where he
alleges this very thing for infant Baptism [ that Cyprian said not that the
flesh* but the soul unbaptized should be lost] that he relied on his rea^ons;
and the like is apparent, where he and Hierome set down his words, and argue
from them* tom. 7. l. 3. de pecc. mer. and remis. c 6 contra Julian. l. 1. c.
where Augustine has these words, Sed Cyprianus dicit peri^e parvulum nisi
fuerit baptiza^us, quam vis ei non propria demittantur, sed ^liena pec^ata. But
Cyprian says, a little one perishes unless he be baptized, although not his
own but another sins are forgiven him.

My 3d. Excep^ion was, That Fidus started the question out of a Judaizing
conceit, that the law of Circumcision which was not to be till the ^th day, was
to be considered, and that the footstep of an infant being in the first days of
his birth is not clean; which show a relic of Judaism in him.

To this it is said, 1. That Cyprian did not concur with him, nor the Council.

Refut. 1. However it appears that the Baptism of infants was then practiced
upon the superstitious conceit as if we were to do in Baptism as the Jews did
in Circumcision. 2. Nor does Cyprian appear by hi^ Ep. 7. l. 4. and elsewhere
to be free from thinking the ceremonial Law to direct us about Baptism.

2. That other learned men, as Athanasius, Nazianz. August. Chrysostom,
reasoned from Circumcision to Baptism.

Refut. No doubt of it, for as in the controversy about Easter, so in other
things they appeared too much to imitate the Jewish ceremonies, by which the
simplicity of the Christian service was altered.

My 4th. Exception was, That the resolution of this Counc^l was the springhead
of infant Baptism.

Answ. Before that time Baptism of infants was in use.

Refut. Yet it was not determined before, but dissuaded, nor was any authority
of any Council which was as a spring head to it, whence it continued a stream
before that, nor does Augustine in his allegati^ns for it, find any higher
spring of it then Cyprian and his Council*

My 5th* and chief Exception was, That the Council determined the baptizing of
infants upon these errors, which are now rejected by Protestants as Popish; 1.
That they thought baptizing giving Gods grace, and the denying it denying Gods
grace; 2. They thought the souls to be lost, which were not baptized; 3. That
therefore not only infants of believers, but all infants were to be baptized.

Mr. M. acknowledges the two first to be rightly gathered from the words of
the Epistle, but that he also urged that Baptism comes in stead of
Circumcision, and if some arguments were used by the Ancients which were not
good, the truth is not to be rejected, when some other are.

Ref. 1. The Council determined infant Baptism on no other argument. 2. If
infant Baptism could be proved by other arguments, I should yield to it;
however the credit and authority of this Council is taken away by reason of the
falsehood of the grounds of their determination.

2 ly. For the 3 d. inference, though he lays it down in general terms, that
none are to be hindered from coming to Christ: Yet what he says ought to be
understood of the Church, because he speaks of such as God has cleansed or
purified who were common.

Ref. 1. The words are as express as may be, We all judged that the mercy and
grace of God is to be denied, (by not baptizing them) nulli hominum nato, to
none born of men, as much as in us lies, if it may be, nulla anima pe^denda
est, no soul is to be lost for want of Baptism. 2. The very words Mr. M
alleges for a restriction to the Church are against it, they are thus. Sed
putamus omnem omnino hominem admittendum ad gratiam Christi, cum and Petrus in
Actibus Apostolorum loquatur and dicat: Dominus mihi dixit neminem communem
dicendum and immundum. But we think every man altogether should be admitted to
the grace of Christ, when Peter also in the Acts of the Apostles speaks and
says, The Lord has said to me that no man should be termed common and
unclean: Which is meant of all men, not only of the Church. And this enough to
answer Dr. Homes, who in his animadversions, p. 138. finds not that passage in
Cyprian, which I allege, and p. 139. says, Cyprian does not say, infants
perish if they be not baptized, though Augustine expressly says the contrary,
and p. 13^. takes on him to defend the sayings of that Council, as having no
error or hurt to say that Baptism gives grace instrumentally, and that without
warrant wittingly to deny Baptism is to deny Gods grace. But Protestant write^s
generally (as Austin before) judge the words to have a further sense, and the
words of the Epistle plainly show that they held by the very Baptism infants
had remission of sin and were saved, and without it were lost, and to deny them
Baptism was to deny them Gods grace. That which he says of me, ^, 139. That I
would not have it, that Cyprian does at all put in original sin among his
arguments for baptizing of infants, is not true; I only denied that he put it
in, in the manner Mr. M. conceived.

What I said of the absurdity and nakedness of that Epistle, has no more
immodesty then is common to Writers Protestant and Papists, who charge Fathers
and ancient Councels with errors, blemishes, and of^ times with harder
censures; if I had given that Epistle a ^arter censu^e I had done right, that I
spoke was soft enough, considering the great hurt which has come to the Church
of God by that Epistle, which determined childrens baptism by childish reasons.

Next to Cyprian of the Latin Fathers, are recited Ambrose and Hierome* and
Paulinus by Dr. Hammond, whose words with Augustines, and such Councels as were
in their times in the 4th. and 5th. Century, I shall forbear to reci^e, it
being acknowledged that in those ages it was practiced, and by reason of
Augustines esteem Baptism of infants was practiced in following Ages almost
without control; and in process of time, that which was before Augustines
days a rarity, became so frequent, as that it almost swallowed up the right
Bap^ism, which appears from the words of Walafridus Strabo, placed by Usher at
the year 840. in his Book de rebus Ecclesiasticis, c. 26. who is termed by Mr.
George Gillespie in his Aarons rod blossoming, p. 567. a diligent searcher of
the ancients which were before him, and of the old Ecclesiastical rites, which
with other observations tending to reduce the testimony of Augustine to its
just weight, are set down in my Examen, par. 1. sect. 8. and are now to be
vindicated by me from what Mr. Marshal and others reply.

Dr. Homes, p. ^58. excepts against what I said, that it was Augustines
authority that carried infants Baptism in the following Ages almost without
control; and 1. he asks, What carried it 300. or 400. years before? For all
that time it was frequent.] But this is not true, n^r ever proved by Dr. Homes.
Chamier, paustr. cath. tom. 4. l. 5. c. 15.. 19. says truly, Who sees not
that the custom of the scrutiny of the baptized was in that time, when scarce
the thousandth person was baptized before he came to age, and was diligently
exercised in Catechism. Dr. Hammond in his pract. Catech. l. ^.. 3. p. 23. All
men were instructed in the fundamentals of faith anciently before they were
permitted to be baptized.

2. ^hey that were carried by Augustine, were not carried by the authority of
the man, but by the Scriptures and reasons he urged. Which I grant; but those
Scriptures and reasons had never carried infant Baptism, if the name of the man
had not been more prevalent then his reasons.

3. It cannot be said that Augustines authority did in his time carry infant
Baptism in a manner without control, seeing he had so much bickering with the
Pelagians about it, who under some notion did con-against it, as we showed
before.] But by his leave it might be so said, and that truly, ^ith in the
bickerings against the Pelagians, Augustines authority grew; yea, Hierome in
the end of his 3 d. Dialogue against Pelagians, in the words cited by Dr.
Home^. p. 149. does himself refer the Reader to Augustines works about
baptizing infants, as the chief prop of that custom. However, that which I
said is manifestly true, that after his time, in the following Ages, Augustines
authority carried the baptism of infants almost without control.

Dr. Homes further excepts against my alleging Walafridus Strabo, and says,
1. Strabo is against me, 1. in saying in the first times, Baptism was wont to
be confirmed by imposition of hands. But the Dr. wrongs me i^ saying I deny it
Exercit. sect. 14. who only say it was a part or appendix of Baptism, as
Chamier said paustr. cath. tom. 4. l. 4. c. 11. sect 14 etc. not as among the
Papists or Prelatists used many years after baptism. But of this enough is said
Review part. 2. sect. 23.

2. About Athanasius, that in Athanasius his time, to his knowledge there was
baptism of little children. But how is this against me, who doubted not
concerning Athanasius his fact of imitating baptizing when he was a Boy, and of
Alexander his approb^tion of it, but said I marvailed I found nothing produced
out o^ Athanasius works for infant Baptism, if it were so manifest as Mr. M.
said. Now this was not in Athanasius his works, and the story does not at all
prove infant Baptism either in use or approved then, but rather the contrary.
For that fact was done by Athanasius at play, among boys at play, and it was
approved as baptism, because the baptizer and the baptized used the ordinary
actions done at baptism of the aged: which shows that Baptism was then used to
and by persons of age, though imitated by boys at play.

3. About infant Baptism, for which Strabo quotes many* authorities and
antiquities, as of the Concilium Gerundense; But this is not against me, who
deny not, but acknowledge many Councils for it, after and in Augustins time,
but know of none but that of Carthage in Cyprians Epistle to Fidus before, and
do judge those Councils weigh no more then one Augustine, whose authority they
relied on, and some of them used his very words in their Canons.

2. That Strabo faulters, and is much faulty in the thing he is quoted for. For
first, he calls the times of Augustine, who is but of late in comparison of
many ancients we have quoted prima tempora, that is, the first times, for
Walafridus quotes Augustines practice, that was not baptized till of ripe
years, to prove, that in the first times (as Walafridus calls them) men were
not baptized till able to know well, and make profession; when as Augustine
himself, as we have showed, and Mr. T. has confessed, did refer himself to
ancienter times a great deal, as to Cyprian that was almost 200 years before
him, for the practice of baptizing infants. 2. Walafrid says, illis solummodo,
etc. that is, to them only the grace of Baptism was wont to be given, who
were of integrity or ripeness of body and mind, etc. but gives not proofs or
reasons, but only one single instance of Augustine himself for an universal
proposition.

Answ. It appears not that Strabo faultered in either of these. He calls the
times unto Augustine, not only Augustines times, prima t^mpora, the first
times; and though he knew that Cyprian was alleged by Augustine for proof of
infant Baptism, yet Strabo might rightly say (not as Dr. Homes makes him, men
were not baptized (but) the grace of Baptism was wont to be given to them only
who might know well and make profession. And for this having set down the
ancient custom, he alleges the instance of Augustine, not because there were
no more, but at that time the thing being well known, and Augustines authority
being the chief means of making infant Baptism so frequent as it was after his
time, it was enough for his purpose to instance in Augustines own example, as
sufficient to show how the state of things was before. Nor is it likely that
Walafridus Strabo faultered in the third thing the Dr. objects, but that (not
he, but) some of the writers of his Book mistook, and put XXV. for XXXV. And
for the 4th. thing that he confesses, that religious wise men did baptize
infants more frequently after Augustines time, upon the apprehension of danger
if they neglected it, it confirms my observation, that infant Baptism grew to
be so frequent as it was by Augustines authority, but does not at all prejudice
my allegation of Strabo, For though he being corrupted with the superstition of
the age in which he lived, did judge well of the practice of infant Baptism,
yet his relation of the ancient use is useful for me to show, that it was but
an innovation Nor did my mention of his relation of the use of Gossips, and the
imagined spiritual kindred contracted by it, either blemish Walafridus or break
my shins, but served my turn to show what superstition crept in by infant
Baptism, as arising from the want of the primitive use of the baptized persons
own engagement at Baptism, which being not done by infants, was supplied by
this vain invention of men, and did (as generally such inventions do) occasion
that evil opinion of the spiritual kindred contracted, which superstition turned
to a conceit of inc^st between Gossips. This opinion, though it did not
necessarily follow on that us^ (For there might be Gossips without such
opinion, as there might be transubstantiation without adoration) yet as the
nature of superstition is to add one humane invention to another, and the
la^ter worse then the former, and the just judgment of God leaves men to err,
when their fear of him is taught by the precepts of men, Isa. 20.13, 14. (as I
have showed in my Sermon entitled, The leven of Pharisaical will^worship) so
it happened both in Baptism and the Eucharist, infant Baptism brought in
Gossips, they were taken for parents, thence conceived to be of such affinity,
that their copulation would be incestuous, and so in the Eucharist the opinion
of the Lords Supper, as if Christ's body were in the bread, begat
Transubstan^iation, that kneeling and adoration, which have more connection then
a rope of sand or pebles in a With, notwithstanding Dr. Homes his conceit, and
Stra^o's words need better answer then he gives.

All that Dr. Homes p. 161, 162, 163, 164, 165. says against my allegation of
Cluniacensis, does not either prove, that Peter de Bruis did not deny infant
Baptism, or that Cluniacensis did not allege Augustine for it, and de Bruis
rejected it, and appealed to the Scriptures (though I have acknowledged in my
Apology sect. 8. my mistake about the words of the ignorance of Greek, and the
mention of the Greek Church and the Council of Arles.) For why should
Cluniacensis say, Ecce non de Augustino sed de Evangelio protuli cui cum maxim
vos credere dicatis, etc. but that Augustine was wont to be urged against them,
but they rejected him and appealed to the Gospel. As for Peter de Bruis and
Henricus, their opinions I set them down as I found them reckoned in the
argument of Cluniacensis Epistle, not thinking fit to set down all that
Cluniacensis charge them wi^h, having by Mr. Gatakers Defense of Mr. Wotto^
against Mr. Walker concerning Abailardus, learnt how uncertain Bernards charge
was against him; and the like perhaps against Peter de ^ruis and Henricus by
Cluniacensis in some things: yet I have given reasons concerning their denying
infant Baptism, in my praecursor sect. 9. to which Mr. Baxter has no made
reply in his praefestin. mor. to avoid them, though he had most unchristianly
accused me of impudence and unconscionableness, for alleging them as
adve^saries to infant Baptism.

What I said of the Councils that condemned Palagiani^m, and the Drs. who
refuted it, that they followed Augustine, I did in some mistake, as in putting
Arles for Orange a City near, and perhaps in something else, being at that time
without all my ptinted books, which I had read before the year 1642. in which I
was plundered of them, and wrote my Examen in London anno 1644. and my
Exorcitation anno 1643. But I had some remembrance of my reading to that
purpose, which I imagine was by rea^ing the words of Dr. ^rideaux in his 3d.
Lecture de Gratia universali, which are thus to the same effect. Augustinus
(qui praecipue sudabit in hoc argumento, quomq^e Prosper, Fulgentius, and
Scholastici saniores sequuntur, imo ex ejus scriptis decreta Concilii
Aransicani 2 contra Pelagianos and Semipelagianos (ut ipse agnoscit Binnius)
cont^xuntur) sit vice omnium.

And for Augustins being counted one of the four Doctors of the Church,
esteemed like the four Evangelists, the speech (as I remember of Gregory the
Great) is so rife, that I presume it unknown to few Students in Divinity
Nevertheless I said, I for my part value Augustines judgment just at so much
as his proofs and reasons weigh; of which Dr. Homes says, that is well; but Mr.
Marshal says, I slight him, which is an unjust crimination of me, neither
Augustine nor any other writer, being not imediately inspired, requiring or
deserving any higher regard; and Protestant writers frequently in their
determinations ascribe authentic authority only to the holy Scripture, Ames
Bellarm. enerv. tom. 2 l. 1. c. 3. asser^tur ^ nobis Episcoporum in concilio
sententiam tant^m inquisitionem quandam esse, and dictionem sententiae
ministratoriam and limitatam ita ut tant^m valeat decretum concilii, quantum
valeat ejus ratio; which if right, my speech is unblameable. Nor am I to be
blamed for not canvassing every particular testimony alleged out of Augustine,
it being not denied he held infant Baptism at that time, and in such a manner
as Protestants reject, and how much credit is to be given to his speeches of
Apostolical tradition, is considered before section 88. Protestant writers do
often charge Augustine with doting, in this point of infant baptisms necessity
(whereof some speeches may be seen in Mr. Gataker de bapt. infant. vi and
eff^c. sect. 6. number. 27. sect. ^. number. 35.) and for my part I must say, that I
judge his reasons so light and his proofs so vain, that the testimonies out of
Augustine do very much confirm me, that infant Baptism is an error, and a very
pernicious abuse needful to be taken away out of the Church of God, the reason
of which may in some measure appear by my vindication of my exceptions against
Augustines judgment.

1. If infant Baptism had been such an universal and Apostolical tradition as
Augustine would have it, then the Church would have thought it necessary, that
all children of Christians by profession should be baptized in their infancy,
and the custom would have been so used; But that it was not so, appears first
from the baptism of Augustine, Adeodatus, Alipius; second, from other
observations set down in my Examen. p. 14.

The testimonies Mr. M. brings for universal practice, have been considered
before.

He adds p. 45. of his Defense, That Epiphanius in the end of his work,
relating what was generally observed in the Church, tells us, The baptism
administered in the Church in his time, was performed according to the tradition
of the Gospel, and the authority of the Apostles, as well as other mysteries
then in use, and we know, that in his time Baptism was administered to infants;
therefore in his judgment, what the Church did therein, they had authority for
it from the Gospel and the Apostles;] But there is more reason to conceive that
either he knew no infant Baptism, or that he took it to be an aberration from
the Gospel tradition and authority of the Apostles, not only in that he
mentions not infant Baptism, but also in Ancorato where he sets down the use of
Baptism he says, Ye ought not only to suffer every one instructed in the
faith, and willing to come to the holy laver, that he show himself to your sons
that he believes in the Lord, but also, that with uttered words, as the same
mother of all your and our Church has received, he teach and say, I believe in
one God the Father Almighty, etc.] Whence the Magdeburgenses cent. 4. c. 6. de
ritibus circa Baptismum, say; It is conjectured from these words, that in the
Churches of Cyprus, the rite of Confession was usual before Baptism; where he
also says, that Basil. exhort. ad bapt. writes, that no other then catechized
persons were baptized, who were called together at Easter; Although I deny not
that there was sometimes infant Baptism, yet by all the instances of the rite
of Baptism gathered by those Historians in that place, it appears to have been
very rare, and only in the case of apparent peril of immanent death. And this
is very probable to have been the reason why Socrates hist. l. 5.22. relating
diversities of several Churches about persons that had power to baptize, and
the time in which Baptism was commonly administered, and Sozom. 7* 19. several
customs of several Churches neither exclude nor mention infant ^aptism,
because it was so rare a thing to baptize an infant, and done so obscurely that
no instance is apparent of it in any history, in that or the fore^going ^ges.
And Dr. Homes p. 171. wrongs me in saying, Mr. T. himself charge Augustine and
Cyprian, that they thought too many infants were to be baptized, namely all
that had Christian parents or undertakers, for these latter words are not mine,
though I yield the former to be true.

To my instance of Augustins lat^ Baptism, it is said by Mr. M. defense p. 46.
One swallow makes not a spring peradventure some (though born of Christian
parents) were not in that age baptized in infancy; yet that is no way
prejudicial to the universal practice of the Church in which Paedobaptism was
received. But by his leave it is a great evidence, and seemed so to Strabo
nearer to those times then we are, that infant Baptism was not so univer^al as
Mr. M. makes it, when so ^minent a person of so eminently go^ly a mother, did
not take care to have him baptized in infancy. But besides, we have the words
of Optatus M^l^vitanus about the same ti^e, in his 4th. b^ok against ^armenian
the Donatist, thu^; No man is ignorant that every man, who is born though he be
born of Christian parents, can be without the spirit of the world; which it is
necessary should be excluded and separated from the man before the saving
Baptism. This Exorsim does, by which the unclean ^^irit is driven out, and made
to fly into desert ^laces. The ^ouse is made empty in the breast of the
believer; the house is made clean: God enters and dwells as the ^postle says,
ye are the Temple of God, and God dwel^ in you. Whence it is apparent, that
even those who were born of Christian parents were believers before they were
baptized, though I deny not that it was not the common doctrine, that infants
should be baptized; nor do I make that inference which Mr M. intima^es I do,
from that example of Augustine, that children of Christians by profession in
that age were not baptized in their infancy, but that they were seldom so, nor
except in case of appa^ent danger of imminent death: Which is manifest by the
instance of Augustine.

Mr. M. and Dr. Homes impute the delay of Augustins Ba^^ism, either to his
Fathers hindering, who was not then a Christian, or to friends permission of
him to have his own will, or to persecution. But all these are but mere shifts,
his own words con^es. l 1. c. 11. declaring the true state of the thing, which
are thus: I had heard being a boy, of eternal life promised us by the humility
of our Lord God descending to our p^ide, and I was already signed with the
sign of his cross, and was s^asoned with his salt already, even from the womb
of my mother, who much hoped in thee. Whence it is apparent that she was then a
Christian when she bare him in her womb, and dedicated him to Christianity, but
did not baptize him. After he goes on, and says, Thou saw Lord when I was
yet a boy and on a certain day pressed with a pain of the stomach, I was
suddenly sick almost about to dye, thou saw my God, because thou wast my
keeper already, with what motion of mind, and with what faith I asked from the
piety of my mother, and thy Church the mo^her of us all, the Baptism of thy
Christ my God and Lord. And the m^ther of my flesh was troubled, because also
she did bring forth my everlasting salvation with a chaste heart in thy faith,
now being very hasty, did take care that I might be initiated and washed with
saving Sacraments, confessing thee O Lord Jesus, unless I had been presently
recreated. Therefore my cleansing was delayed, as if it should be necessary
that I should be defiled if I did live, because to wit, after that washing,
greater and more dangerous guilt of sins in filthiness would be. So I did
already believe, and she, and all the house except my Father alone, who yet did
not overcome in me the right of my mothers piety, that I should not believe in
Christ; as he had not yet believed.

Whence it may be easily perceived, 1. That the child of a godly affectionate
Christian, who devoted him to Christ, and educated him for Christ, yet was not
baptized then in infancy, nor by the Church re^uired to be bap^ized. 2. That
when he was sick and like to die when he was but a boy, he earnestly required
from his mother and the Church baptism. 3. That it was not to have been done
without his confession of Christ. 4. That his recovery before it could be done
put it off, and no other reason was thereof, but that living he was likely to
be more guilty of sin if baptized so young. 5. That baptism was counted
cleansing, and a greater and more dangerous guilt apprehended if he did sin
after baptism. 6. That even then he did believe* and his mother and all the
house excep^ his Father, and yet it hindered not his Christianity, not is it
l^kely could or would hinder his bap^ism in infancy, if his mother and the
Church had thought it meet, or it had been the use out of the case of apparent
danger of imminent death. As for Adeod^tus, it is apparent his Father believed
before he begat him, and he was br^d up by him in Gods discipline, as he
says, l. 9. confess. c. 6. and though the Father was not baptized, yet the
Grandmother was, and yet Adeodatus was not baptized till 15 years old; and for
Alipius it is somewhat p^obable he was born of Christian parentage and bred up
so, but not baptized till of age. However that were, the case of Augustine is
full to prove what I conc^ived.

For a further declaration of the practice of infant Baptism, I alleged
Grotius his words, who conceived the baptism of infants more frequent in Africa
then in Asia or other parts of the world, and he gave his reason of it, because
of the mention of it in the African Council at Carthage, not in like manner in
other Councils, to which Mr. M. says, the Councils might not mention it,
because none did scruple it; But it is more likely none did scruple i^, because
there was no occasion to do so, there being little or no practice of it; which
is made very probable from the 6th. Canon of the Council of Neocaesarea anno
315. and the words of Nazianzen before mentioned. As for the constitutions of
Clement, in one whereof they are bid baptize their little ones, Mr. M. does
well to confess they are not Clements, and if the compiler of them did relate
the ancient customs of the Greek Church, he did relate later customs also,
among which that of baptizing infants is to be conceived one for the reasons
given. Grotius annot. in Matthew. 19.14. says, And many of the Greeks from every
age unto this day, keep the use of deferring the baptism of little ones, till
they could make confession of their own faith. But of this before, sect. 89.90.
I said that I did not find in Africa infants baptized but in case of danger of
death or for health of body. Dr. Homes says he has showed the contrary out of
several antiquities, and particularly out of Cyprian. But neither in Cyprian
nor any where else do I find it but the the contrary in Tertullian. And as for
Augustine it was not as he ^aith, that Augustines sickness whiles young was
some occasion of deferring his baptism for that time, but his sickness
occasioned the hastening and his recovery ere it was done put it off for that
time. Nor does m^ saying that they baptized infants for health of body (which
is manifest from Augustines 23d. Epist. to Bonifacius) clash with that which I
said of Augustines asserting the necessity of infant baptism to take away
original sin, and ascribing salvation to it, for he both might and did conceive
it to be done for both ends. My mention of the continued use of catechizing in
Augustines time* and long after, and the mention of baptizing whole Countries
upon the baptizing of their Kings was very pertinent, though not to show no
infants were baptized then, yet to show how and by what means the ancient
custom of baptizing ordinary believers upon profession of faith after
catechizing was so strangely changed, that whereas the preface in the common
prayer book before the administration of baptism says, it appears by ancient
writers that the sacrament of baptism in the old time was not commonly
administered but at two times in the year, at Easter and Whitsontide: At which
times it was openly ministered in the pre^ence of all the congregation, the
persons to be baptized having been before catechized, now it is quite
otherwise, so that in most Protestant and popish* Countries baptism is ordinary
even of inf^nts, at all times in obscure manner, and except of late in these
nations, in which God has begun to restore the right use of baptism, and what
Bellarmin in his 2d. book de bonis operibus in particular^. C. 17. says, that
in the City of Rome there is no year in which there are not many baptized at
Easter, who were catechized, the baptizing of believers is almost unheard of
and counted a heinous thing, and punished in some parts as a crime deserving
death or banishment. So great is the enormity of Paedobaptism, and so great the
wickedness of Paedobaptists.

The 2d. and main exception I took against Augustines judgment which might
move us to examine his reasons, was the ground upon which Augustine, Ambrose,
and generally the Popish paedobaptists held and urged infant baptism, to wit
the damning of the infant if dying unbaptized, which made Augustine to be
termed the hard Father of infants, and affrighted so people in after ages, and
does to this day, that they will have their children by all means, as they
count it, baptized, it is no matter by whom it be done nor how, so somewhat be
done; else they count them lost.

To this which is of so great moment to show the abuse of Paedobaptism it is
said, that Augustine pressed it upon other grounds, but that does not appear,
he urged it, it is true, from circumcision, but upon the same ground that the
uncircumcised male should be cut off from Gods people; nor did ^e so retract
his error, but that he still held infants should be damned although with the
mildest damnation of all. How the schoolmen and others do follow Augustine, Mr.
Perkins shows in his problem, and many elsewhere, and the Common Prayer, both
in allowing at first Baptism by Midwives, and in their Preface in the
administration of Public Baptism do plainly show it was the mind of the
composers of that book at first; no^ is there any thing therein, or any of the
Ancients, o^ Baptism as belonging to infant^ of believers as federally holy.
Which is a strong evidence that Augustines judgment was very corrupt in this
point, and that the Baptism of infants was introduced, and grew to such an
excess upon that error, and for that reason both Augustines judgment and it
are to be suspected as evil, and to be rejected.

A 3d. Exception against Augustines judgment, to show that he and Cyprian were
in these points of Sacraments not to be rest^d on, was* That Augustine Epist.
23. relates the story in Cyprian de lapsis about the giving the Wine to a girl
with credit to it, and some use of it without dislike of the custom; yea, l.
1. de p^cc. mer* and remis. c 20 he makes giving infants the Eucharist
necessary to salvation, alleging Jo^. 6.53. for it; and chapter 2. he makes it an
ancient and Apostolic tradition to give the Communion to infants, besides what
he says Epis. 106.^07. to the like p^rpose, and he ascribes to John
Chrysostom, l. 1. adv. Ju^ c. 2, the like; and E^is. 93. Innocentius Bishop of
Rome held the like; and this not only Maldonat on Joh. 6. acknowledged to
continue 600. years in the Church, from Cyprians time to Charles the Greats time
(as ^ remember the account is) but also Erasmus Resp ad Arch^ep Hisp. Chamier,
paus. cath. tom. 4. l. 1. c. 13.. 5. Gataker de Bapt. infant. vi. p. 269. say
the use of infant Communion was ancient; and to the objection, that this was
not defined, Dr. John Rainold, Apolog, these.. 10. answers; nor does Mr. M. or
Dr. Homes deny it, but Mr. M. asks What is your argument hence? I answer, There
is no reason to rely on Augu^tines judgment concerning the antiquity and
necessity of infant Baptism, or to press it on others, who did so foully mistake
about the antiqui^y and necessity of giving the Communion to infants, nor to
adhere to the Ancients determinations and use about infant Baptism, who did
err so much about infant Communion. For as Mr. Gataker de Bapt. ins vi. p.
200. says about Augustins authority conce^ning infant Baptism, it will not
seem equal to press the adverse party concerning the other authority of those
whose judgment in the other thy self declinest: But how Augustine doted about
infant Communion is manifest, therefore it is not reason to urge his testimony
about infant Baptism as to be rested on, but we may say as Vorstius adv.
Bellarm. tom. 3. contr. 2. these. 2. rat. 3. The doting of Augustine and some
other is ill brought for the consent of the whole Church; and we may make that
use of this instance of Augustines, Innocentius, and others error about infant
Communion, which Cameron does c. ^7. of his Examine. of Romans prejudices, to take
away the unjust fore-judging of the refusal of infant Baptism a^ unreasonable,
by showing how little the Fathers, particularly Augustine, are to be trusted,
and what just reason there is to forsake him in the one as they have done in
the other.

My 4th. Exception was, That Augustine 1. ascribes a certainty of regeneration
to children baptiz^d, though they were not brought for spiritual grace, but
temporal health. 2. That he justifies this fact, Epist. 23. ad Bonif.

Mr. M confesses He ascribed too much sometimes to Baptism, yet sometimes he
says of some, that they have the thing of Baptism without the sacrament, and
so Ambrose of Valentinian, yet Ambrose as well a^ Augustine at other times
attributed too much to outward Baptism. To which I reply. It is true, and so
did generally the Fathers, as may be seen abundantly in Mr. Gatakers strictures
against Bishop Davenants Epist p 52, etc. And this caused great abuses, 1. the
allowing of infant Baptism, yea, and much advancing it; 2. the allowing of the
Baptism of men that kept their beds by reason of sickness on their beds; 3. the
Baptism by wom^n; 4. the Baptism by Athanasius on his play^fellows, which he
did in pl^y with them, when but a boy, as sufficicently done for Baptism; 5.
the bringing of infants to be baptized for cure of their bodies. But says Dr.
Homes, By all the words Epist. 23. ad Bonifac. I should think Augustine does no
way justify or excuse their bad intention.] To which I reply, yet he justifies
their bad action, saying, by them the necessary service or ministry is
celebrated.

My 5th. Exception was, that Augustine Ep. 23. ad Bonif. was so tenacious of
customs then in use, that he does defend or excuse from lying the answer of
sureties, as if the child to be baptized did believe. In this Mr. M. says, I
scorn Augustines judgment; And I reply, I do not so much as Chamier, paustr.
cath. tom. 4. l 5. c. 15.. 22. where he ter^s it mimical* as if it were a play
on a stage, rather then the celebrating a Sacrament in the Church, which
Augustine defended. But says D^. Homes, This is impertinent to the question. I
reply, it is very pertinent, 1. to show how vain Augustines judgment was in
these things about Baptism and the Lords Supper: 2. To show what was the
primi^ive use of propounding the question of his faith to every baptized
person, which Vives, com. in August. de Civit. Dei, l. 1. c ^7. thought a good
evidence that of old none were baptized but persons grown up and able to answer
the questions.

^o this says Dr. Homes, 1. ^e wonder Mr. T. will assert confession of faith
in all Ages before all Baptism from witnesses or sureties, when as we know that
the first intimation of touching them was not till about 95 years after Christ.
And how novel the invention of their confessions is who can justly tell.

I reply, 1. I wonder Dr. Homes will so untruly say I do so assert* 2. If
sureties were so late an invention, surely infant Baptism was at new, it being
never without such sureties.

2. Says he, I propound it to grave consideration, whether sureties did not
confess in relation to themselves, that they might be reputed fit to stand as a
kind of parents to a child of an unbelieving parent to be baptized; even as
Abraham's profession of his belief in God, Genesis 15. Genesis 17. made him stand as a
parent to all his household.

I reply. Upon my consideration it was not so, because Tertull. de (...). c.
18. mentions them as undertakers for the child, and Bonifacius and Augustine
that they professed in the child's stead.

My last Exception against Augustines judgment was, That they baptized any
infants even of unbelievers, who ever brought them, and what ever were their
intention, they counted it a work of charity, and the defect of the faith of
the baptized they counted supplied by the faith of the whole Church.

To this says Mr. M. Neither I in that justify him: You may take notice that
here again you confess the question that infants were baptized.] I reply, this
was not the question. But says Dr. Homes, 1. ^oo much does not overthrow
enough.] I reply, it overthrows the imitableness of their practice. 2. This
argues against me that infant Baptism has been anciently more universally
practiced then adul^ Bap^ism.] I reply, if so, more infidels children should be
baptized then Christian converts, which is a monstrous fiction refuted by all
the remaining monuments of antiquity.

Mr. M. They baptized upon Covenant holiness believers children, infidels
children upon the engagement of undertakers to train them up. I reply, the
former appears not, the later was of others as well as believers children, as
is showed before. This is enough to show the invalidity of Augustine and the
Latin Fathers testimonies ^or infant Baptism as Protestants assert it.

To the recollection of the passages about the Ancients testimonies, Mr. M.
answers. 1. To what I said, that that they practiced infant Baptism on
erroneous grounds, the necessity of it to salvation, the certainty of the
remission of original sin by it, denying Gods grace to none, and therefore more
likely to be an error; Mr. M. says, p. 54. Do not Tertullian, Cyprian, etc.
argue from Circumcision unto Baptism (...) we now do, and others of them from
Covenant holiness? I answer, No not one that I know of.

2. To what I said, that it is not proved to have been practiced but in case of
supposed necessity, he says, It is otherwise, and an Arminian book termed
Censura censu^ae, of which I have made great use in this controversy (which is
not true) says, Augustine first grounded infant Baptism upon necessity. But I
answer, this is not true, that which is said before out of Tertullian,
Nazianzen, Cyprian, proves it otherwi^e; Yea, long after Augustine, Concilium
Ge^undense in the 6th. Century, appointed in the 4th. and 5th. Canon, That
ordinarily persons catechized not infirm should be baptized at Easter and
Whitsontide, the infirm at other times, and infants if infirm, and desire not
the mothers milk if they be offered, the day of their birth; which expresses
it to be a permission in that case, and shows it to be an exception from the
ordinary course: Yea, Magdeb. cent. 1^. c. 6. of the rites of Baptism, show
infants then to have been baptized only out of fear of death.

3. To what I said, that there was a constant course of baptizing believers
children at age, he says I have been been mistaken, and this practice was
disavowed by their inveighing against deferring ^aptism. I answer, 1. That I
have not been mistaken, appears by that which goes before. 2. They speak not
against deferring infants Baptism, but for it, though they speak against the
deferring it by the aged.

4. To what I said of their opinion of the necessity of, and practice of infant
Communion, he says, All did not so, though some of the Affricans did. I
answer, The chiefest of them, and some of them Europaeans held it. Dr. Field,
3d. book of the Church, chapter 1. says, According to the old custom used in the
primitive Church, the Greeks minister the Sacrament of the Eucharist to
children when they baptize them. And Ortelius in his Theat. where he describes
the Abissins in Africa, says, To all the baptized the same moment they
minister the holy Eucharist.

5. ^o what ^ said of their baptizing: infidels children, he says, It was not
their constant and general practice: But it app^ars not but that it was
practi^ed and al^owed of as well as the other.

6. To my words, that the ancientest testimony for pr^ctise according to any
rule determined is Cyprian, near 300 years after Christ, he says, he must
needs take notice of my overlashing; and I reply, ^ must needs take notice of
his overlashing in again mentioning Justin Mar^yr as a witness, though the book
be but suppositio^s; and Irenaeus, when ^e says nothing of it; and Origin* who
is d^ubtfull; and Tertullian who is against it; and excepting against my words
as overlashing, when the first determination of it in any Council was that of
Cyprian with hi^ 66. Bishops, which, as Dr. Hammond says, was anno 257. near
3^0. years after Christ.

7. To my words, that infant Baptism was not from the beginning, Austins semper
habuit semper tenu^t is opposed, to which how little credit is to be given, is
showed Apol. 16. he^e, sect. 8^. and in thi^ before.

8. ^o my alleging the proposal of the questions of repentance and faith to
infants as a sign that none but those who answered the ^u^stio^s were formerly
baptized, it is said, This supposes these questions to be of as ancient use in
the Church of God as Baptism i^self, which certainly you can never prove from
Scripture; I have produced testimonies for infant Baptism, before any you can
bring to witness, that those forms of questions and answers had any being in
the Church. But I think the question of faith pl^inly proved Act* 8.^7. to be
an^ecedent to Baptism; and the words of Beza, annot. on 1 Pet. 3 21. are thus*
Yet to me more nearly now considering the word (...), it does se^m better to
agree that we interpret it stipulation, and that we say the Apostle had respect
to the interrogations of Catechists, in which the ca^echised even then did
testify their more inward Baptism to be confirmed by the outward, as Act.
8.37. to which the whole Apostolic Creed looks, and that from the Baptism of
adult persons by a great error, if we look to infants themselves, translated
to the Baptism of infants, Do thou believe? I do believe. Do thou
renounce? I do renounce. Whence that of Tertullian, which is as if it were in
stead of a Commentary on this place in his Book of the Resurrection of the
flesh, the soul is not confirmed or sanctified by washing, but by answering.
Tertullian de corona militis, Aquam adituri ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in
Ecclesia sub antis^itis manu contestamur nos renunciare Dia^olo and pompae and
angelis ejus* Dehinc ter inergitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes, quam
Dominus in Evangelio determinavit. Grot. in Mat. 28.19. proves the profession
of faith out of Justin Martyr, who says expressly, Apol. 2. That the baptized
did promise to ^^ve according to the Christian Doctrine; and out of ^gnatius,
Irenaeus, Tertullian, etc. what they answered who we^e baptise^. In the Council
of Basil in the Oration of the Cardinal of Rag sium it is said, In principio
hujus sacramenti baptizabantur solum illi qui per se sciebant fidem
interroganti respondere* The testimonies of this kind are so ^any that I think
it superfluous to allege them. The very form of Common Prayer in propounding
th^se questions as they were in Augustines time to infants, is evidence enough
of the antiquity of that custom of propounding questions to the baptized.

9. To what I said of the examples of Greg Nazian Chrysos. Augus. Constable* the
Great to whom I might have added Hierome, of whom Erasmus in his life testifies
of his birth of Christian parents, yet not baptized till of age; Mr. M. answers
by referring to what is said before: And I entreat the Reader to look back to
what I say before, sect. 89, 90. and this.

10. In like manner the evidences against infant Baptism from Tertullians and
Gregory Nazianzen, disswasion, the testimony of the Council of Neocaesaria, the
silence of Eusebius, Epiphanius, Athanasius, the constant terming it an
Apostolical tradition, are referred to what is before said by Mr. M. and by me
to my answers to him and others, in those Sections, and sect. 88.

For Grotius, what reason I had to allege him, may be easily discerned by
those that know his a^ilities Censura censurae was unknown to me as yielding me
any advantage, (...) Mr. M. here minded me of that book. What Vives speaks he
had good evidence for, as in part may be seen in what is said before. Strabo's
testimony is such as Vossius his exception does not weaken, but is sundry ways
confirmed here. That I could have brought more testimonies, it has appea^ed in
part by this writing, and in part by my Praecusor, sect. 20 and my answer to
Dr. Savage in Latin, sect. 13.

The more I search i^ to the point of antiquity, the more I am confirmed in my
position, that infant Baptism is not so ancient as is pretended, as now taught
is a late innovation. Nor am I alte^ed from the opinion I had, that none before
Zuinglius taught infant Baptism as a privilege of believers children from
federal holiness. Tertullians and Athanasius his words serve not turn to prove
it, nor Epiphanius, Cyprian, Nazianzen, Augustine, or Chrysostom so taught it
from Circumcision as due to them by virtue of the Covenant to a believer and
his seed, but in other manner, as is before showed. Nor does the Pelagians
acknowledgement serve Mr. Ms. ^urn therein. The more testimonies Mr. M. might
have added, had added no more weight to the cause then those he alleged have
done. I did not charge the Ancients that they held that all who died unbaptised
were damned; but that in the case of infants born they taught, that if they
died unbaptized they should not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but perish,
or be damned, though with the mildest damnation: And this is manifest enough
from Cyprians Epistle to Fidus, and very many places of Augustine, Tertullian
l. de Bapt. c. 12. C^m vero prascribitur nemini sine Baptismo compe^ere salutem
ex illa maxim pronuntiatione Domini qui ait: nisi natus ex aqua quis erit, non
habet vitam, etc. However Ambrose and Augustine determine of the salvation of
grown persons without Baptism, if they believe, desire to be baptized, be
Martyrs, yet both they and many more held both Baptism and the Lords Supper to
be necessary for infants unto salvation by an Apostolic tradition, as M.
Perkins Demonst. of the problem in the point of Baptism proves, though perhaps
they could not reasonably grant the one and deny the other. That Calvin was a
m^n well versed in Antiquity for his time it is not denied, nor that he was a
man well acquainted in the Scriptures; yet that in neither he was in this point
in the right, is so fully demonstrated before, that I may safely say Calvin was
not therein Calvin as he is in his opposition of the Papists. And if Mr. M. or
his friend think it not meet to be tied to Calvin's judg^ment in the point of
the Sabbath and Lords day and Usury notwithstanding his skill in Antiquity and
Scripture, the same in equity is to be allowed to us about the point of
Baptism. I like Mr. Ms. acknowledgement with Rive^, that tradition is in most
points uncertain, and therefore he that will build sure must build on the
Scripture, and therefore we must necessarily come to arguments from the
Scriptures, which if they evince not the thing we shall in vain call to
Tradition. If Mr. M. had not first in his Sermon forestal^ed his hearers and
readers with the pretense o^ the Churches possession for 1500. years and
upwards, and Dr. Hammond resolved all his proof of infant Baptism into his
exposition of 1 ^or. 7.14. which he had no way to make good but by Tertullian
and some of the Ancien^s, I had spared this labor of showing t^eir and and the
Ancien^s mistakes. Tha^ Doctrine and practice of Baptism of Infants which
Austin says to be according to the sentence of the Gospel, is reject^d by
Pro^estants; who i^ they would in this, as in other things they have done
(...), according to Scripture and all their own principles, must baptize no
infants till they be made believers; till then they do but prevaricate, and
profane the holy Ordinance of Baptism.

SECT. XCIX. Mr. Crs. objections about my 9 untruths, his discourse about
re-baptizing are refelled.
I Return now to Mr. Cragg. Part 1. sect. 6. he charge me with 9 untruths,
outvying the number of the lines; in which he is a false accuser. In the first
he mis^recites my words, which were not, that the Epistle affirms, that the
baptising of believers had its spring and rise from Nicholas Stork; but thus,
As false it is that the baptizing of believers (called by these Anabaptism) had
its spring and rise from Nicholas Stork and others there named, which were
true. For though it was not in those words said by me, that the Epistle did so
affirm, yet it is true, 1. That Paedobaptists call the baptizing believers
which Nicholas Stork and others practiced Anabaptism; me thinks he should not
be so impudent as to deny that those whom they baptized were believers, or that
they baptized them, or that that Baptism is called Anabaptism by them. 2. The
very words of the Epistle are, the spring and rise of Anabaptism had its
beginning after truth, and says the first Author thereof was Nicholas Stork,
then Phipher, etc. there you have the spring and rise of it, and therefore in
my words there is no untruth, but Mr. Cr. does falsely insinuate as if there
were folshood and inconsequence in my speech, and sl^nderously make me one of
the great disturbers of the late reformation, and the first ^uthor of the
disturbance or Anabaptism, and cunningly altering the subject of the Question
from Anabaptists to baptizers of believers.

The 2d. thing he charge on me as untruth, was not expressed as Mr. Cr.
in^inuates, that Paedobaptists call the baptizers of belivers Anabaptists, but
thus [the baptizing of believers called by these Anabaptism] which cannot be
denied to be true, unless he deny that the baptizing used was not baptizing, or
the baptized no believers, or that they call it not Anabaptism. It is also
false that he says of me, that my judgment and practice is, that all that
will be saved must be baptized again, when they become actual believers* and
this I put in execution by making as many Proselytes by rebaptising as I can.

The 3d. untruth (as he calls it) is, that baptising of believers without
infants, or excluding infants, had not its spring and rise from Nicholas Stork;
and he notes, that the Epistle affirmed Anabaptism (which is another thing) had
its spring thence. But he neither shows what other thing Anabaptism is, nor
does he prove it to be an untruth, but by rendering my own instances against it
inv^lid. But therein he d^t^ bu^ abu^e me, who alleged not the instances he
brings to prove that proposition he terms an untruth; nor is there any thing
said by him, but what he has from Mr. Ms. Defense, and is a^swered before
here, sect ^^ 98.

The 4th* untruth he ch^rgeth me with, is, that infants Baptism was not
commanded by Christ, and he th^^ks to ^vince the contrary from Mat. 28.19. But
he says nothing but wh^t is ^^^ully refuted before, Review, part 2. sect. 5,
etc. part 3. sect. 97. and elsewhere, so that I nee^ say no more here to it.

The 5th. untruth he imagines* is* that infant Baptism was not practiced by the
Apostles, which being denied by the An^ipaedobaptists, the proof lies upon
them. But by his ^^ave the proof lies upon the Paedobaptists, to prove they did
baptize infants, since they claim a right to it, which mu^^ be proved by precep^
o^ example of the doing it. A negative argument in matter of fact of this
nature is of sufficient validity ^o show infant Baptism not to be according to
Gods will, since in mere positive instituted worship, wherein ^od has set down
what he will have done, he will have it so done, and no otherwise. It is pro^ed
before, Review, part 2. sect. 5. etc. part 3. sect. 52 that the Apostles
baptized not infants. Mr. Crs. imagined reasons why they might baptize none but
of ripe age, de facto, are vain, there being no intimation of any such reason^
in the History of the Apostles Acts: Yea, the story is against his surmises,
for the converted and baptized did not travel far to hear the Apostles, but the
Apostles traveled far to preach to them in their own Cities, and in them they
went from house to house, Acts 16.15, 34. and 20.20. Jerusalem and all Judea,
and all the region round about Jordan are said to go out to John Baptist to be
baptized of him in Jordan, confessing their sins, which cannot be meant of
infants. Though infants be a part of a Nation, yet Mat. ^8.19. Is. 2.2. by
nations no infant is meant, nor Luk* 19.19. is in^ant Baptism intimated. The
Baptism of infants is not proved from Act. 16.15. v. 32, 33. show that by the
house are meant persons of age: and by so expounding we diminish not Gods word,
nor make exception that God has not made, nor imply a contradiction, nor incur
a curse, as Mr Cr. after his vein of prattling, writes.

All that Mr. Cr. says in opposition to what I said of baptizing believers in
the first ages continued without any infant Baptism, proves not my words an
untruth, nor a frontless assertion, and is answered before, sect. 88, 89, 9^ ^n
which, and sect. 90, 91. all that he brings to evince my 7th. and 8th. untruth
(as he terms my words) is examined.

I justly account infant Baptism a Popish abuse, it being derived from these
principles, unwritten tradition, and necessity of it to save an infant dying,
which are judged Popish errors. And for answer to what Mr. Cr. says of my
9th. untruth, as he terms it, I refer the Reader to the 9th. Section of my
Praecursor, not refelled by Mr. Baxter in his Praefestinantis morator.

Sect. 7. Mr. Cr. excepts against me for saying, 1. That the Epistlers
assignation of the causes of Anabaptism are vain. 2. That Anabaptism is true
Baptism. 3. That the true cause is the light shining from Scriptures and other
Authors. 4. That this light was not discovered formerly as now. What he says
against the first, is but a repeating of the reasons, without any confirmation,
but some light Poetical peda^ti^ue expression^, which deserve only neglect.
Against the ^d. he gives his reasons against reiteration of Baptism, which are
nothing ^o me, who asserted not th^^ baptizing twice was true Baptism, but
baptizing ^f persons of age professing ^aith though in infancy imagined to have
been baptized is true Baptism. Yet do I see no force in the reasons he gives.
For 1. in the institution of Baptism, Mat. 28.19. the precept is to the
baptizer, and I presume he does not think the baptizer is not to reiterate his
act of baptizing, yea doubtless he is to baptize as often as there are Disciples
made by him. And as for the act of the baptized, which is implied it is true,
neither is it determined to be once or twice, and may therefore seem to be left
to liberty. That he allegeth, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, is clean
mistaken by him, the meaning ^eing only, what a man does with a doub^ing
conscience is sin to him, and so by this reason rebaptization is a sin only to
him that doubts of it. And when ^e says, Whatsoever is not grounded on the
Scripture is will worship, I presume he means it of that which is used as
worship, and determined to be but once. But then the question is only begged,
not proved, that Christ has determined Baptism to be but once. In that which
he says of Act. 19.3. (which is an instance of being twice baptized) I find
nothing brought by Mr. Cr. to avoid the force of it. For to be baptized into
John's Baptism can be no other then to be baptized with water according to the
pro^ession of John's Disciples, and this was true Baptism from Heaven, not
differing in the nature of it from Christ's, as say Protestant Divines; and it
is certain, that to be baptized into the name of the Lord Jesus, i^ to be
baptized with water into the profession of him, as Act 2.^8, 41. and 10.48. the
giving the Holy Ghost is distinctly expressed v. 6. to have been by laying on
of hands, and this was on the same persons v. 6. who were said to hear and to
be baptized v. 5. and these were not all the people mentioned v 4. bu^ twelve
only v. 7. and therefore it is far more probable, and in mine apprehension
certain, as the Ancients did conceive, that those twelve were baptized with
water twice, once according to the profe^^^on John's Disciples made at Baptism,
and the other according to the Christian. Nor am I moved by the observation of
Marnixius, ^p^roved by Beza in hi^ annot. in locum, and followed by many
others, That the particles (...) and (...) must necessarily answer each other,
and therefore ^he words v 4, 5. be Paul's. For 1. the particle (...) is put often,
and the matter requires it should be so conceived here, either as an expletive
that is without force, to which in the vulgar transla^ion nothing answers, as
it is Act 3.21, 22, etc. o^ an adverb of affirmation, or if it be a conjunction
di^cretive, that which answers to it is not that v. 5. there being no good
sense, to say, John verily baptized with the Baptism of repent^nce, saying unto
the people, that they should believe on him which should come after, that is,
on Christ Jesus; but they hearing this, etc. there being no apt discretion made
in such speech, if the particles be discretive, the other part is concealed,
and should be to thi^ purpose, But the Baptism we use is into the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, or into the name of the Lord Jesus already come.
And for this reas^n the particle (...) must be expounded as our interpreters,
when, or as a mere expletive as in the vulgar. 2. The words Act. 19.5. do give
an obvious plain sense on the other side as the words of Luke, thus, When the
twelve, mentioned v. 7. heard this of Paul, that it was Christ jesus to come
after John, on whom John would have his Disciples to believe when he baptized
them with the Baptism of repentance, then they were baptized into the name of
the Lord Jesus with express profession of him. Nor is it true that there is
express Scripture, Ephesians. 4 5. One Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, against the
iteration of the same Baptism. For as one Faith notes not one act of believing,
but one kind of faith from the unity of the object b^lieved, which may be and
is one faith though an hundred times iterated; so one Baptism notes not one act
of baptizing, but one kind of Baptism distinct from Pharisaical Baptism into
the observance of the Law f^r righteousness, termed one by the profession of
the same Doctrine or Lord, though it be an hundred times iterated. The same man
baptized an hundred times, and an hundred men once only baptized, each of them
have one Baptism in the ^postles sense, if they be baptized with the same
profession; and the same person though but once baptized, yet if with another
profession, has not that one Baptism there meant: One Baptism is not as much
as once baptized and no more, but Baptism into one profession and no other.

The 2d. argument is of no force, Baptism is the Sacrament of regeneration, or
new birth; and as Austin has it, we are ca^nally and naturally born but once,
so we are spiritually and supernaturally new born but once; Faith though it
admit of gradations begins but once, Baptism that matriculates us into Christ's
School is to be performed but once.

Answ. The Scripture no where terms Baptism the Sacrament of regeneration; nor,
if the expression be allowed, will it follow Baptism is to be but once. For 1.
it does not follow, natural birth is but once, therefore supernatural new
birth, which is only so metaphorically, is but once; as it follows not, we die
naturally but once, therefore we die to sin, or through sin but once. Natural
birth has not degrees, therefore neither regeneration. 2. Baptism is not
regeneration though it were yielded to be the sacrament of regeneration, and
therefore though regeneration could be but once, yet Baptism might be often. 3.
those that hold intercision of regeneration and faith (which I do not) will say
that regeneration may be often, and faith begin often. 4. Baptism may be termed
the sacrament of regeneration either as the cause or sign of it. If as the
cause of it so it should rather follow it should be often administered, as the
word is often p^eached to beget us again. If as the sign, so it may often be
used to signify it, though it be but once done; as the breaking of bread is
often used to signify Christ's death, though he died but once.

The 3d. argument, from once Circumcision, is of less force. For neither is it
true, that our Baptism succeeds Jewish Circumcision, nor is it proved that in
no case a person might be twice circumcised* nor if both these were granted
will it follow, that the rule of circumcising but once must be a rule to us of
baptizing but once, any more then the Jews Circumcision was tied to the 8th.
day, therefore so must our Baptism. Yet this reason of Mr. Cr. may be thus
urged against infant Baptism: Circumcision was tied to the 8^h* day, therefore
to circumcise on another day were sacrilege; Baptism is tied to Disciples, or
believers, Mat. 28.19. Mar. 16.15, 16. therefore to baptize infants who are not
Disciples or believers, cannot be justified without sacrilege, at the rate of
Mr. Crs. reasoning. The rest of that Section and the next Section need no other
answer then what is already made, there being no argument needful to be
answered, nor any thing almost but scosti^g Rhetoric, cavils,
mis^representations of my words and the passages a^ Disputes, which were
rightly represented in the 2d. Section of my Plea.

SECT. C. The arguments of Mr. Cragg for infant Baptism are re-examined.
MR. Cr. in the dispute at Abergavenny began thus, Some infants may not be
baptized, therefore some infants may be baptized; and this the Relator (who was
likely to be himself, or one whose relation he viewed and approved) terms an
Enthymema. To which in my Plea^ answered, 1. the consequence could not be made
good according to Logic rules, but by adding this Proposition, All that may
not be baptized may be baptized. 2. That it is like these arguings, Some
infants may not have the Lords Supper, therefore some may; some boys are not to
be ordained Bishops, therefore some are.

To this he replies, Part 2. sect. 1. 1. That the Relator and I were both
mistaken: Which if true, it was ill done that he did not rectify the thing ere
i^ was printed. 2. That my censure of this arguing as frivolous, arose from
ignorance or inadvertency, that betrayed me to a double mistake, 1. That there
was no way of arguing consecutive, by two Propisitions, bu^ Enthy^ematically,
so that they were immediately reducible, to a syllogism complete in mood and
figure. 2. If an Enthymema and reducible, that it must necessarily be resolved
into his syllogism as he calls it, All that may not be baptized, may be
baptized; some infants may not be baptized, ergo, some infants may be be
baptized. Truly this is so frivolous, and deserves so much contempt, that a
fresh man would laugh at it. And then he goes on, I would gladly know to what
mood of the first figure (for it has sub prae) his monstrous syllogism
belongs, consisting in the premises of two negatives, in the conclusion of an
affirmative; whereby (as every Puny knows) two Maxims are violated, 1. That of
pure negatives nothing is concluded. 2. That the conclusion should follow the
unworthier part, whereas he extracts an affirmative conclusion from negative
premises.

Answ. I am content that an ingenious fresh man judge whether there were any
ignorance, inadvertency or mistake in my answer to this arment, and whether
there be not gross ignorance and Sophistry, in his argument, and in the reply
impudent boldness to avow such a shameful act; and that any wise conscientious
Christian judge, whether the argument at first, or this reply, could come out
of any other then a wrangling spirit, bent to baffle a respondent, and make
sport for a company of vain auditors and readers, without any care befitting a
Christian teacher to clear truth. At first when I denied the consequence he
proved it not, but brought a syllogism concluding another thing then the
consequence; and whereas then his syllogism appeared to have four terms, he
brings another syllogism, in which he would infer, that because subcontraries
may be both true, therefore that proposition, Some infants may be baptized,
must be true; as if because both may be true, it follows that proposition must
be true: whereas every fresh man knows, that though both may be true, yet it is
true also one may be false, and that may be the proposition he infers,
notwithstanding the ^o^ce of that rule. Now in the reply he discovers the same
spirit. Though his relator (with whom he must concur, or else they juggle with
Readers) term his dispute an Enthymema, yet he would not have it so conceived,
bu^ tells us there is a kind of argumentation in Ke^kerm. syst. Log. l. 3. tr.
1. c. 1. defined, one sentence or proposition following another without
disposition of the medium as in conversions. But does he show there is any such
c^nversion, or any other way of consecution of sentences allowed by Keckerman
or any Logician in his argumentation? Then when I had reduced it to that
syllogism to which the Enthymeme was to be reduced according to Logic rules,
he has the impudence to term this my syllogism, and ^o suggest as if I were
not able to make a syllogism, or reduce that to a syllogism which was
reducible, whereas the syllogism was his own virtual^y, as all Logicians know
that understand the rule about Enthymemes, though it were formed by me rightly
and the monstrosity of it must ^ie at his door, not mine, who value little his
judgment of my abilities, better known to others of better esteem then to him.
And for the way he new forms it, it is quite another argument then what he made
at the dispute, and of which the minor is to be denied, which is thus, There
are some infants besides them that are excluded Baptism, but this is contrary
to the antecedent in the Enthymeme, Some infants may not be baptized, which
should be the minor He adds* that the force of the argument lies in the
immediatoness of the propositions, that what belongs not to one of them must
needs belong to the other, and a topic rule out of Cracanthorp, and some other
instances about divisions, in all which there is nothing but vanity. For let
Propositions be immediate, yet w^^n they are opposite as these are, some
infants are to be baptized, some not, the one follows not from the other, but
the contrary rather, except in those termed subaltern, which are rather
subordinate then opposite. His instances of consequences upon a sufficient
division, they are all impertinent here, where there is no division of term,
but the same terms are in both Propositions. In his answer to my instances he
would make a difference between the Propositions about infant Bap^ism and the
Lords Supper, and ordination to be Bishops, that the one is in a capable
subject, not the other; but he shows not that an infant is capable of Baptism
any m^re then of the Lords Supper, or a boy of ordination; nor if they were
does the force of the argument ^old more in the one then in the other: and
therefore it is his ignorance to say, the scruple here will be, whether infants
are capable of Baptism or no ^ut it is whether this ^llation be good, Some are
not, therefore some are to be baptized; which if right, it will follow in the
other instances of Communion and o^dination as well as in it. That which he
says of my grant of the capacity of Ba^tism, because I grant they may be
elected and believe and would if I knew it of infants baptize them, follows
not; for though my ignorance hinders not their capacity in themselves, yet it
hinders their capacity from me, I being not warranted to baptize any believer
till his faith be manifested to me.

Sect. 2. Mr. Cr. goes on to scribble after his usual manner. He had thus
dispu^ed, To whom belongs the essence of Baptism they may be baptized, But to
some infant, belongs the essence of Baptism, Ergo. To this I said, This
Proposition, the essence of Baptism belongs to infants, may have two senses. He
replies, as if I distinguished of a two f^ld essence of Baptism* which he terms
a Chymaera, the essence of a thing being but one and indivsible; which shows
he has some smattering in Metaphisicks, but is impertinent to the thing in
hand. For be it all granted, yet a Proposition which speaks of the essence may
have a twofold sense; and the senses I conceived of his words were rightly set
down, and more favorably to Mr. Cr. then his words did deserve. For this
Proposition, To some infants belongs the essence of Baptism, must have one of
those senses, or a worse, to wit, either that infants are in the definition of
Baptism, so as that there is no Baptism but of infants; or that Baptism is of
the essence of infants, so as that they are no infants without Baptism, which
are absurd. And to speak truly, the whole argument is ridiculous, take it what
way he will, except he give the same sense which I did, and then the minor and
the conclusion are all one, and the major merely tautological, To whom the
right administration of Baptism belongs they may be lawfully baptized, But to
infants, etc. Ergo* In the other sense it is more vain. For if the essence
numerical of Baptism belong to infants then not a moral right is asserted, but
either a present or a future event, and so the minor Proposition should be,
Some infants are baptized, which is a thing discerned by sense; or shall be
baptized, which were a prediction, but nothing to the point about moral or
legal right. To understand it of the specifical essence, makes no sense but
what is worse. His proof from the definition is also as vain* For it is a proof
of the same by the same: But he tells me, It is not all one as to argue infant
Baptism is Baptism, therefore it is right baptism, but it concludes infant
Baptism is baptism, therefore infants may be baptized, which is the question by
this inference put out of question. To which I reply, this talk (...) to me
like the words of a crazed man, there being no question between u^ about the
baptism of infants, whether they may be baptized, that is whether this may be
done to them so as that they be passive subjects of it, I never denied that
infants may be thus baptized, but the question is whether it may be lawfully
done by him that does it, and then to say they may be baptized is all one as to
say infant Baptism is right baptism, and so his argument from the definition is
that which he denies not to be vain, infant Baptism is baptism, therefore it is
right Baptism.

But he thinks to prove from the definition, that infant Baptism is right
Baptism, and he sets down his conceits of Baptism, that it is a relation whose
fundament is the Divine institution in^olding infants in all nations in
several families, which if he onc^ p^ove, he needs prove no more, but here he
does not attempt it, but excepts against me for denying Baptism to be a
relation, but an action or passion with a relation superadded, and he brings
against me sayings of Divines who call it a sign, which I deny not in respect
of the use, but that shows not the nature of it, no more then Circumcision is
in its nature a relation, because it is a sign of the Covenant in its use, the
carrying a scepter is in its nature a relation, because in its use it is a sign
of royalty. What he says, that I tell not whether it be action or passion, and
not to be placed in one category is to be placed in none, is answered by his
own confession, that in Baptism is included baptization which is both action
and passion, which is enough to show that Baptism is in its nature either an
action or a passion, and may be put in either predicament, and that in
different respects a word may be put in diverse predicaments, and his talk
false, that nothing formally can be placed in two categories, and the rest of
his talk about the genus of Baptism being a sign, and other passages to be but
mistakes.

But he attempts to gain his ^urpose by this argument, Every Sacrament is a
relation, But Baptism is a Sacrament, Ergo. To which I answered, both premises
^ight be d^nied, and as a reason of the denial alleged, ^ That the term [
Sacrament] being but a term invented by Latin Fathers, may be laid asi^e. He
replies, that the 12. Tables and Tully mention it, therefore it was long before
the Latin Christian Fathers; True, but not in the sense in which Baptism is
termed a Sacrament. But, if the word Sacrament be laid aside because a Heathen
word, then should also the terms Bishop, Pre^byter, Deacon, be laid as^de also.
Answ. No, f^r they are Scripture terms, not so the t^rm Sacrament in the
Ecclesiastical sense: Yet again, then Trinity, Unity, Humanity,
Antipaedobaptist must be laid aside. Answ. It follows not, yet what ^ said of
Sacrament I say of them, they may be laid aside, when an argument is drawn from
them, as here from the word Sacra^ent. He adds, Besides is there not (...)
mystery in the original? Answ. It is, but never in the use in which the term
Sacrament is used as now it is defined.

2. I alleged that there is no common nature of Sacraments (not as Mr. Cr. of a
Sacrament) expressed in Scripture, This he saves is untrue in the sequel. For
what consequence? There is no common nature of a Sacrament expressed in
Scripture, therefore Baptism is not a Sacrament, more then in this? There is no
common nature of infused grace expressed in Scripture, therefore faith is not
an infused grace.

Answ. It was not my sequel; but this, therefore the term Sacrament may be laid
aside, and no good argument is from the definition of a Sacrament to prove
Baptism to be a relation.

The term grace or grace of God, I do much question whether any where in
Scripture it be applied to inherent qua^ities in us, or good acts proceeding
from us, and I conceive that the use of it in that manner has occasioned or
strengthened the error of justification by inherent righteousness, because we
are said to be justified by grace, and do wish that when approvers of Preachers
are directed to examine persons of the grace of God in them, the thing had been
otherwise expressed, and that such an expression as the gift by grace, or the
like were used; yet I deny not there is in Scripture a common nature of those
gifts by grace in us which accompany salvation, and that faith is a gift by
grace infused, inspired, or wrought by the spirit of God.

Mr. Cr. says further, untrue in it self, for though not in one place there
may be in many places of Scripture compared together a common nature of
Sacraments compared together. And is there not the common nature of a Sacrament
expressed in one Scripture Romans 4.11. a seal of the righteousness of faith?
This is the judgment of the Ancients, and the most of the Divines of the
reformed Churches*

Answ. That neither the text Romans 4.11. nor the Ancients do so define a
Sacrament, is showed before; and however the Divines of the Reformed Churches
do define thence a Sacrament as the seal of the Covenant, yet not (as there it
is expressed) a seal of the righteousness of faith; But of this I have said
enough before sect. 31.

What I said of Austins definition of a Sacrament, that it is a visible sign
of invisible grace, as imperfect (which I proved by instances) was without a
miscellany of absurdities; ^f the descent of the Holy Ghost as a Dove were a
sign or seal of Christ's office of Mediatorship and not of his righteousness of
faith, yet it was a visible sign of his holy qualifications, Luke 4.18. Joh.
3.44. and so of invisible grace, and consequently a Sacrament by Austins
definition; Christ's washing his Disciples feet, showed his love and humility,
ergo, by Austins definition must be also a Sacrament; and holding up the hands
in prayer shows faith in God; kissing the Bible in swearing shows appealing to
God as Judge or hope in his word, which are invisible graces according to
Austin, and according to his definition Sacraments. And though it be added in
the Common Prayer book Catechism, ordained by Christ, yet it is not so in
Austins definition used by Mr. Cr. in the dispute, and if it had, holding up
the hands in prayer had been a Sacrament, being ap^ointed 1 Timothy 2.8. And for
the addition in the Catechism [ as a means to receive the same, and a pledge to
assure us thereof] I know no Scripture that ever made Ci^cumcision, the
Passover, the Lords Supper, or Baptism, means to receive invisible grace, and
how fa^ and in what manner it assures I have before sect. 31. and elsewhere
showed. Enough of Mr. Crs. vain pra^^le in this section.

Sect. 3. Mr. Cr. quarrels with my reconciliation of my own words, denying all
invisible Churchmembers were to be baptized, but affirming it of vi^ible. He
tells me, 1. This distinction is not fitly applied, for the proposition was
meant of visible Churchmembe^ship. But 1. however it were mea^t the expression
was, God appointed infants Churchmembers under the Gospel, and this might be
understood of invisible as well as visible Churchmembership; and therefore it
was fitly applied to take away the ambiguity of the expression. 2. It was fitly
applied also to ^l^er my meani^g, and to free my words from contradiction. 2.
He tells me my proposition is not true, for all visible Churchmembers are not to
be baptized, then all ba^tized before (they being visible members) were to be
baptized again. But what is this but wrangling, since the proposition was his
own, and I granted it with that limitation in his own sense, of them that were
not yet baptized? He tells me of the state of the question between us, which is
impertinent to the present business of clearing my words.

He adds, Invisible and visible members differs as Genus and species, all
invisible members are visible, but not all visible members invisible, the
invisible being extracted out of the visible; now if all invisible members be
also visible, it will inevitably follow they may be baptized, whether visible
by profession, or by prerogative and promise of parents or sureties of infants.

But what a dotage is this? Does visible Churchmember praedicari de pluribus
specie differentibus in quid? If it be asked what is an invisible Churchmember,
will any that is in his wits say he is a visible Churchmember? Is not this a
contradiction, to say all invisible members are visible? How is it proved that
any are visible members of the Christian Church, but by profession of faith?
The like dotage is in what he says after, that there is an intrinsecal
connection of th^se terms [actually to receive into Covenant under the Gospel,
and to appoint Churchmembers under the Gospel] that they are as essentially
coincident as to be a man and a reasonable creature* which makes this
proposition to be aeter^ae veritatis, those whom God did actually receive into
Covenant under the Gospel, those God did appoint Churchmembers under the
Gospel. For is the one to be defined by the other? Do not these terms express
existences restrained to hic and nunc (for sure actual receiving and appointing
are singular acts in ti^e) not essences? If these speeches of Mr. Cr. be
according to Metaphysical and ^ogical principles, I am yet to seek in them, as
having not heard or read of such principles before. And if God did promise
before the Law, fore^ell under the Law, actually receive into Covenant under
the Gospel, or appoint Churchmembers under the Gospel without faith or
profession of ^aith, then infidels are actually in Covenant under the Gospel,
and so justified; then is Mr. Baxters dispute against Antinomians, about the
condition of the Covenant and justification false, and if they be Churchmembers
without faith or profession of faith and to be baptized, and the truth of Mr.
Crs. proposition, those whom God did promise before the Law, foretell under the
Law, actually receive in^o Covenant under the Gospel, those God did appoint
Churchmembers under the Gospel, have no dependence upon ^aith or profession of
faith; then Mr. Baxters 20 arguments in his 2d. dispute of right to Sacraments
against Mr. Blake are fal^e; so that I need no more but to leave Mr. Cr. to be
chastized by his magnified Doctor Mr. Baxter about this point; and so enough of
this section.

Sect. 4. He terms this an untruth, that a person may be in Covenant, who i^
not yet born or conceived as my i^stance of Isaac implies, and says; It may
be confuted insito argumento, by an argument inbred in the terms, for he
implies and that right, that a person must be the subject of being in Covenant,
but none who is unborn, and unconceived as Isaac Genesis 17.22. is a person.] But
this is false, he may be a person though not in present but future existence.
Those Ephesians who were el^cted before the Foundation of the world, Ephesians. 1.4.
were persons when elected, for they were singular men, though not then in
actual being but future. Mr. Crs. reasoning in this, is like the reasoning of
Adam Medlicot my neighbor, in his book styled Comfortable doctrine for Adams
offspring, p. 99* Who will not have any particularly elected before the
foundation of the world, because then they were not any where men, and p. 96.
that none is absolutely elected till he believe, because not in Christ, and if
not in Christ not in election, and one is elected before another because in
Christ before another. And in his Honey found in the Lions Carcass, p. 102.
Although the purpose of election and reprobation was fully in God before time,
yet there could be no absolute or real election or reprobation of men and
women, until they had a real and absolute being. Surely infants are in
Covenant no otherwi^e then by Gods promise or man's vow, or some such act in
their behalf, and this may be before they are in being, and consequently they
may be in Covenant before they are in actual being. If I do not mistake, Mr. Cr.
both here Sect. 5. and in the 3d. Part Sect. 9. makes those with whom the
Covenant was made Deuteronomy. 29.10. to have been in Covenant, but doubtless the
Covenant there was made with the posterity yet unbegotten v. 14, 15. for no
other can be meant by him that was not with them that day, all that were born
or begotten then of the Congregation of Israel, whether by nature or
Proselytism being present, as the words v. 10, 11. show, and the end of the
Covenant being to prevent the Apostasy of their posterity v. 18. therefore the
unbego^ten were in Covenant. Nor is it a good argument, A man is in Covenant,
ergo he is, any more then a man is elected therefore he is, these terms being
termini diminuentes, as Logicians speak; and the verb ( est is) in these
speeches not noting the present existence of the subject of these propositions,
but of the act of the person who elects or covenants. A child unbegotten may be
said to be in a copy or a deed, and so in covenant in respect of the assuring
an estate to him when he shall be existent.

But Mr. Cr. tells me, 2ly. It is a false suggestion that to have a Covenant
made to one is to be in Covenant, if by having the covenant made to (for the
phrase is somewhat strange) ^e meant (as he can mean nothing else) a promise
from God to be and be in covenant, for a promise may be made to or of one, long
before he has any being, nor executed or performed till long after his being;
Then to be elected and ^o be in covenant would be both one, then Mary Magdalen
and Paul while a persecutor were in covenant, nay from eternity to be in
covenant would precede outward an^ inward calling, conversion, profession and
prerogative of birth, then which nothing can be more ridiculous.

Answ. It is so far from being ridiculous, that to me it is very plain to be in
covenant precedes calling, and to be in covenant is to have a covenant made to
one, and that a person is said to be in covenant with God by Gods promise to be
his God though the man be not existent. This is in my apprehension that which
Paedobaptists mean by being in covenant, for they usually say infants are in
covenant, which sure they mean of Gods promise to them, for they prove it from
Genesis 17.7. Acts 2.39. Nor can they mean it of any other being in covenant, since
there is no act of any infant or any other for him, that can denominate him in
covenant with God in the time of the Gospel, but Gods promise, which is long
before the being of those to or for whom it is made, Tit. 1.2. Gal. 3.16, 17.
And thus two Kingdoms are said to be in league and covenant, and they that are
born many years after may be said to be in covenant by virtue thereof. This
being in covenant may be, though the things covenanted be not executed or
performed till long after the being in covenant, as persons first enter into
covenant and then perform. And yet to be in covenant and to be elected would
not be both one, though attributed to the same persons, si^h there is a
different formal conceit of them, election being an immanent act, covenant a
transient, that from eternity, this in time, as to be justified and sanctified
are not both one, though to the same persons. Nor is it any absurdity to say
Paul was in covenant while a persecutor, nor that to be in covenant precedes
conversion, since i^ is by virtue of being in covenant that one is converted,
Heb. 8.10. Romans 11.26, 27. As for being in covenant with God by prerogative of
birth, I know not of any such in the time of the Gospel.

Thirtdly ( says Mr. Cr.) It is of the same leven of untruth, that Isaac was
in Covenant when he was not yet born, which his own quotation, Genesis 17.21.
proves against him. For he says he will establish a Covenant with Isaac in the
future, not that he does establish a Covenant in the present.

Answ. Surely Isaac was a child of the promise, Romans 9.8, 9. and Jacob, v. 11.
before they were born, and ^^nsequently in the Covenant; and when God said he
would establish his Covenant with Isaac, he meant no other then the Covenant
made with Abraham, and therefore it was made to him then, and he in Covenant,
though confirmed and performed after.

Mr. Cr. says of my speech, that a person is not actually received into
Covenant till he is born, and by some acts of his own eng^geth himself to be
Gods, That it is founded upon the basis of this mistake, that every Covenant
must be expressly and actually mutual between both parties; and talks after his
foolish fashion, as if it were an argument sophistically (though sillily) drawn
a negatione unius speciei ad totum genus: But this is his mere cavil. For my
reason added, receiving imports an offering, which is to be done by
profession, shows I inferred it otherwise. Against which his exception is in
these words, as if more were to be required for admission of visible members
into Covenant, then was for admission, or actual receiving of Christ as God*
man and Mediator to be visible head of the Church. To which I reply, When and
how Christ was visible head of the Church, is a point that requires much
discussion. To be head of the Church imports direction, government, etc. To be
visible head, is to do these things discernably by reason from something
sensible. That he was visible head of the Church till he was manifest to
Israel, and how he was visibly head of it but by his preaching, calling
Disciples, or how he was actually received as such but by believing on his
name, Joh. 1.11. or how he was admitted visible head but by John's Declaration,
his Baptism of him, the Spirits descent on him, and his Fathers Proclamation of
him, or how any according to the Evangelical order are admitted visible members
into Covenant but by their own profession of faith, and thereupon being
baptized, I understand not. But as for my speech, I see not how it imports that
which Mr. Cr. would have it to do, but only, That being actually received into
Covenant does import an offer or tender on his part who is to be received,
which however it might be under the Law, yet sure in the Gospel is no other way
but by the persons own profession; and this neither smells rank of Heresy nor
Blasphemy, but Mr. Crs. conceit as if under the Gospel some might be received
into Covenant, and admitted as visible members representatively by others, who
are their Proxies, and engage for them, they being but mere passives without
any voluntary act of their own, is but an innovation from what Christ or his
^postles appointed o^ practiced; and his acknwledgement that it is not
necessary that a Covenant be mutual, that the Covenant Ezekiel. 36.26. Genesis 15.8.
and 17.9. are such as wherein one party makes the Covenant without mentioning
the other but as patient, serves me to prove what I assert before, sect. 45.
against Mr. Bl. that a Covenant is not always a mutual agreement, and that a
person is said to be in Covenant in that a Covenant is made to him, and this
may be to persons not actually existent, against Mr. Cr. in this Section.

Mr. Cr. to prove that God did promise to Abraham that infants should be in
Covenant under the Gospel, alleges Genesis 17.7. and thus a^gue. He that makes
an everlasting Covenant to Abraham and his seed after hi^ in their generations,
pro^^^ed that infants should be in Covenant under the Gospel; God made an
everlasting Covenant with Abraham and his seed after him, Ergo.

To this I said I had many exceptions; for besides those to which Mr. Cr. here
replies, I might and do deny his major for another reason then I did before.
For now by his words p. 254. I perceive by being in Covenant under the Gospel,
he means an outward and visible Covenant, like to which he has p. 155. and p.
261. he calls this an impregnable rock which the Anabaptists will never
overthrow, that to be circumcised or baptized is all one as to be in visible
Covenant; and p. 158. he says, I clearly affirm with all the Reformed
Churches, that all in visible Covenant a^e subjects of Baptism, and all
subjects of Baptism are in visible Covenant. I must confess, Imagined that
Paedobaptists if they would speak plainly could mean no other by the being of
infants in Covenant under the Gospel but their being baptized; and so their
argument, infants are in Covenant, ergo to be baptized, is but a mere
tautology, or worse, they are baptized therefore they are to be baptized. But I
think I have sect. 25. before showed, that the distinction of outward and
inward Covenant as the Paedobaptists use it, is either non ens or nonsense,
and I now deny this Proposition, He that makes an everlasting covenant to
Abraham and his seed after him in their generations promised that infants
should ^e in covenant under the Gospel, not only for the reason given in the
Dispute, but also because I now perceive he means (unless he still juggle, as I
fear he will in the use of the phrases being in covenant, the covenant is made,
etc.) that God promised that infants should be baptized under the Gospel, which
is too ridiculous a sense to be put upon the promise of being a God to Abraham
and his seed, Genesis 17.7. much unlike Christ's exposition of the phrase, Luke
20.38, 39. and seems to be the attempt of men that have for their
baby-sprinkling resolved to avow the grossest absurdities. But to keep to the
Dispute as it has been printed. I said the covenant Genesis 17.7. to Abraham and
his seed after him in their generations, if it be understood of the natural
seed of Abraham, the everlastingness of it was but for a time, and that time
before the Gospel as in the next verse; the possession o^ Canaan is promised to
be everlasting, and yet the Jews now dispossessed of it. Which Mr. Cr. grants,
and therefore must needs grant, that the promise v. 7 though it be termed
everlasting, yet it is to be understood only of a limited time, as in other
passages, Exodus ^1.6. and 12.24. etc. if meant of the natural seed of Abraham.

To this he replies, How does that follow? If it had been with a particle of
exclusion, only to the natural seed, there might have been some color of
Dispu^e; and yet without all controversy, the everlastingness of it is
extended even to the na^ural seed of Abraham; for there has been, is* and will
be a succession of Jewish believers to the end of the world; which proves that
in his sense it is false, that the everlastingness of it was but for a time, and
that time before the Gospel.

Answ. My meaning was plain enough, that the Covenant as it was Evangelical,
that is, as it contains a promise of the Spirit, justification, etc. (which is
the only Gospel Covenant I know) if meant of the natural seed of Abraham, that
is, the generality, or body of them was but for a time before the Gospel, which
I learned from our Lord Christ, who foretold Mat. 21 43. that the Kingdom of
God should be taken from them, and the Apostle says was accomplished, Rom
11.20. that the branches, meaning the Jewish people, were broken off by
unbelief: and this is true, though it be true also that there have been a
succession of Jewish believers still, they being a remnant only according to
the election of grace, Rom 1^.5. and thus they were not merely Abarhams natural
seed, but also his spiritual, to wit, elect and true believers, to whom I never
denied the Covenant to be simply everlasting.

Mr. Cr. adds. But the truth is, it is not only meant of the natural seed, but
of the spiritual seed of Abraham, both whereof successively and in part, if not
altogether concomitantly (for there were always Proselytes) i^ is everlasting,
or to the end of the world.

Answ. If Mr. Cr. me^n, that to the natural seed, who are also the spiritual
seed, the Covenant Genesis 17.7. is simply everlasting, I grant it; but this does
no way advantage Mr. Cr. For then it will only follow, that to such infants as
are not only the natural seed of Abraham or a believer, but also are
themselves believers, God has promised they shall be in Covenant under the
Gospel; which would not be true of all the infants of believers, or any but the
elect: If he mean it as it is there meant (as appears by the next words, v. 8.)
being understood of the natural seed of Abraham of the nation or people of
Israel, and not of a remnant of them, it can be true only of a limited
everlastingness, and not at all of the Gentile believers infants, and so is not
at all for Mr. Crs. purpose.

But he tells me, It follows not, unless the same word in adjoining verses must
necessarily signify the same thing; which if so, an argument might be drawn
against the Infiniteness and Eternity of the Deity from these words, God of
Gods and Lord of Lords, Gods and Lords in the latter signifies creatures,
therefore in the former; but how inconsequently in both, a child may judge.

Answ. My arguing needs not proceed thus, but is good against Mr. Cr. thus, The
term [ everlasting] signifies a limited everlastingness before the Gospel, v. 8.
therefore it may be so meant v. 7. and if meant of the body of the Israelitish
people who were the natural seed of Abraham, it must be so meant, otherwise it
were not true. And for his instance, I think the argu^ent not good as he makes
it; yet it follows, the term [ God] does not necessarily of it self infer
infiniteness and eternity, but when it is appl^ed to the most High God the
Creator, who is the God of Gods, because it is sometimes spoken of Creatures.

But Mr. Cr. tells me, That v. 8. can be true only in one of these senses, that
they had title to all the Land of Canaan, though not actual possession of it,
or that it was a type of the everlasting spiritual Canaan, in which senses from
Abraham they possessed it; or that the plenary, and full possession of the
whole begins at the conversion of the Jews, and shall last from thence to the
end of the world without interruption, because neither Abraham nor his seed had
actual possession of all the Land of Canaan; none of these will support Mr. T.
his declining cause.

Answ. That the land of Canaan, Genesis 17.8. must be meant of that part of the
earth so called is manifest from the expression, wherein thou art a stranger,
or the land of thy sojournings, and might be, if need were, proved by
multitudes of other Scriptures And that the seed of Abraham is that which is
natural and before their later conversion, is apparent from v. 9, 10. where the
seed to whom the land of Canaan is promised are enjoined to be circumcised, and
the term possession v. 8. cannot be meant of a mere title, for that is implied
in the words will give, but the possessi^n is distinct from it and consequent
upon it, therefore I choose rather to untie Mr. Crs. knot by expounding it
thus, I will give to thee and to thy seed after thee all the land of Canaan for
an everlasting possession, but not altogether, thou shall possess a part in thy
time as a pledge of the whole, as his burying place was, and thy seed in
Joshua's and David's time shall possess the whole, and this shall be not only a
place to sojourn in, but a possession for them to dwell in, and that
everlasting, that is, f^r many ag^s, as Phine^as his Priesthood is termed
everlasting, Numb. 25.13. so long as they shall keep my Covenant and observe my
statutes. Now this will serve thus far to support my cause, which is still
standing and not declining, to show that the Covenant Genesis 17.7. as it is made
to the natural seed of Abraham is termed everlasting, that is, for a limited
time before the Gospel; which sense also the terms for ever and everlasting
have, Exodus 12.14. and 21.6. Numb. 25.13. etc and so the major Proposition of
Mr. Cr. justly denied, He that makes an everlasting covenant to Abraham and his
seed after him in their generations, promised that infants should be in
Covenant under the Gospel.

Sect. 5. Mr. Cr. endeavors to draw Gal. 3.8. to his purpose, to prove a
continuance of the Gospel Covenant to the end of the world, to Abraham and his
seed, by paraphrasing it thus; That the Scripture foretold that God would
justify the Heathen through faith, that is, the partition Wal^ should be
pulled down, and the Heathen nations should profess faith as visible members,
whereof some should be actually justified as members invisible. But besides his
inept expression of [heathen nations] which is all one with nations nations, he
abuses the text by paraphrasing [ through faith] thus; that the nations should
profess faith as visible members, when it should be, shall be true believers as
Abraham was, and would justify the nations, by whereof some should be actually
justified, whereas the text mentions no other then should be justified; and v.
9. terms them, they that are of the faith, who are blessed with Faithful
Abraham, and only meant by the nations, v. 8.

Mr. Cr. tells me, 1. That I injuriously mis-report his allegation, as that he
urged this argument drawn from Gal. 3.8. to prove that Abraham's natural seed
were promised to be in Covenant under the Gospel, whereas he urged it to prove
the Covenant Genesis 17.7. to have been a Gospel Covenant made with Abraham and
his seed, that is proprofessors and believers, whether carnally descended from
him or no. But sure he that reads his first argument in his Sermon p. 88, 89.
and his Defense p. 256. where his words are, the minor I prove from Genesis 17.7.
where the infants of believing parents are implied, it being a Covenant not
only established with Abraham, but with his seed after him in their generat^ons
for an everlasting Covenant, by virtue of which Isaac and all succeeding male
infants were circumcised; now sure these were Abraham's natural seed, and here
the Covenant is everlasting, and therefore according to Mr. Crs. reasoning to
extend to the end of the world, and the infants of believing parents, who are
their natural seed, are, he says, implied; which can be no otherwise then as
Abraham is imagined to be taken for each believer, and the believers natural
seed proportionably correspondent to Abraham's natural seed, by prerogative of
birth, as he there speaks, and then adds. In Gal. 3.8. there is implied
Abraham's seed, in that it was a Gospel Covenant, and that in him all nations
shall be blessed, and is directly for me, for it asserts the Covenant, and in
that justification to the believing Gentiles, not only from Abraham^ promise,
but also a promise to them and their seed; which plainly shows that he imagines
Gal. 3.8. the Gospel Covenant, to be a promise to believers and their seed who
are their natural seed, as in Abraham his seed is implied, which conformably
must be his natural. And if Mr. Cr. did not in the dispute mean Abraham's
natural seed he went from the point to be proved, and by me denied, that the
Covenant Genesis 17.7. was not simply everlasting to the natural seed of Abraham,
since they were dispossessed of Canaan. His suggestions therefore of my using
officious untruths and pious frauds, are but the venom of his spirit which
throughout his book he discovers, and most pestilently in that Section, for
which the Lord rebuke him.

What he next says, that when I say the thing promised Gal. 3.8. was
justification, and that of the heathen and that through faith, therefore this
text proves not Abraham's natural seed in Covenant under the Gospel, is, As if
all this might not be, and yet some of the natural seed of Abraham be in
covenant under the Gospel, who professed, were justified and had faith as well
as the heathen; which I grant; but then they were not only Abraham's natural
seed but also his spiritual, to which I grant the Covenant is made Genesis 17.7.
and is everlasting, and if he can prove infants of believers to be such,
there is no question but they are in Covenant under the Gospel and to be
baptized, till then he can never prove either from Genesis 17.7. or Gal. 3.8. that
Abraham's natural seed, much less infants of believing parents to be in the
Gospel covenant, which whether he had reason to be ashamed of attempting the
Reader may judge. That the entering into Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11. was a
tran^^unt fact and not a thing perpetually binding, I had thought none would
deny; nor argue as Mr. Crag does, it was by command, Deuteronomy. 29.1. they were v.
29. to do the words of the Law, and that was a command, and the revealed things
belong to them and their children for ever, therefore the entering into Covenant
v. 10, 11. was a command perpetually binding under the Gospel, which is too
frivolous to spend time in answering, and his argument, that if wives and
servants were in Covenant under the Gospel much more infants, is alike
frivolous, ^ith he himself makes no other then believing wives and servants in
Covenant under the Gospel, which when he proves of infants their being in
Covenant will not be denied. This is enough in answer to that Section and most
of the 8th. and 9th. Sections of the third part.

I said his allegation is vain of Heb. 8.6. to prove that if infants were in
covenant under the Law they are in covenant under the Gospel, whereas the
meliority of the Covenant is not placed in the extent to the sort of persons;
He asks me, what then? will it follow, if a Covenant was made to no more then
before, therefore not to all that were before? Answ. No, yet it will follow
that the text is vainly alleged to prove the co-extension to persons, that
speaks not at all of that thing, nor is it at all to the purpose, that it is
extended to more, to wit to Gentiles. For 1. however that text speaks not of
it. 2. It is extended to more nations of the world besides the Jews, but to
none but believers of those nations, and consequently not to infants of
believing parents as such. That the new Covenant contains promises of better
things then the old Covenant, and differs more then in administrations, is
showed before Sect. 43. and yet the^e is no such thing implied as if there were
salvation in any other then Jesus Christ, unless he could prove salvation were
by the promises of the Law. My third Paradox (as he calls it) that the promises
of the Gospel are not to any other then the elect and true believers, is proved
before Sect. 33. That there are in the Gospel Covenant promises of external
ordinances made to all visible members, is more then Mr. Cr. proves or any
other, and therefore I count it a figment, I know none but spiritual promises
in it, which Mr. Cr. grants are made absolutely and terminated or performed
only to the elect and invisible members, which is the same with my Paradox,
but has more assertors then his most gross speech, that the meliority of the
Covenant consists principally in outward ordinances, manner of administration
and dispensation, extent and amplitude of the proposal, not of grace and glory.
He adds, of which there was always the same reason; Enoch, Abraham, Eliah,
Moses, were as well justified by faith, which is true, but not according to the
Covenant of the Law, but by the Covenant of the Gospel, which it seems Mr. Cr.
understands not, though he assume the title of a Preacher of the Gospel.

Mr. Cr. says of me, His last assertion is, that because the promises of the
Gospel are not to any other then the elect, and true believers, therefore they
are not to infants as the natural seed of believers: The antecedent is proved
to be false, for though the spiritual part of Gospel promises is absolutely
performed and terminated to the elect, yet they are conditionally proposed to
all Professors; and the external part, which consists in administration of
ordinances, is equally belonging to all visible members. But are the promises
to all professors because they are conditionally proposed to them? If so, we
may say the promises are to the most obstinate infidels, to every man in the
world, for to them they are conditionally proposed. Sure this is not according
to the doctrine of the Scripture which makes the promises to be the believers
inheritance, 2 Cor. 1.20. 2 Pet. 1.4. Gal. 3.16. and 4.28. Heb 6.12, 17.
according to the doctrine of Protestan^s, the Saints Legacy, yea Paedobaptists
make them their privilege, Romans 9.4. though the promises there were other
promises. As for an external part of Gospel promises, which consists in
administration of ordinances equally belonging to all visible members, it is a
mere figment no where in Scripture; And the sayings of Mr. Cr. Part. 3. Sect.
11. p. 261. [ Christ is said Heb. 8.6. to be a Mediator of a better Covenant,
which could no^ be, if infants, that were in covenant, under the Law, were out
of covenant under the Gospel, and is grounded upon this impregnable rock, which
the Anabaptists will never overthrow, that to be circumcised or baptized is all
one as to be in visible covenant: that the reason of baptizing or circumcising
a person is their birth right, tuition, self-profession, whereby they are
visibly admitted into covenant, that what he has said Examen part. 3. sect. 1.
Antipaed. part. 1. sect. 5. touches not the true state of the Controversy, but
is a confused Maze intricated with his fallacia decumana, or master fallacy of
Gods making, whereas he should say, completing his Covenant only with the
elect, Heb. 8.6. the new Covenant is a better Covenant not only positively,
because it is established upon better promises in circumstantials, but also
because it is extended to move all nations; negatively would not be better, if
any sex, age, degree were excluded] contain such a heap of mistakes and
untruths as is not elsewhere usually found in the most heedless scribler. For
^. if the first speech were true, then unless we grant infants to be baptized,
which is in his language, to be in Covenant, either the new Covenant shall not
be better then the old, or Christ not mediator of it, which is as much as to
say, if infants who were circumcised under the Law be not baptized under the
Gospel then the promises of the Spirit, justification, Gods writing his laws in
the heart, teaching, forgiving sins cannot be better then the promises of the
Law, which assure righteousness and life to the keepers of the Law, or Christ
cannot be Mediator of the new Covanant, which if it be not a more monstrous
conceit and to be more abhorred by Christians then ever any Popish conceit of
the necessity of baptism to infants to prevent exclusion out of heaven, for
which Austin is by Mr. Cr. himself reckoned the hard Father of infants, I know
nothing. Sure all that doubt of infant Baptism, must by this reason either
doubt whether it were not as good to be under the Law as under the Gospel, or
whether Christ be a better Mediator then Moses. 2. It is a monstrous boldness
in him to tell us of a visible Covenant of so great necessity, and never tell
us distinctly what it contains, nor where it is to be found, especially when
not only my self, but his Oracle Mr. Baxter, has written so much against it,
as he has done in his Apology against Mr. Blake. 3. It is alike confidence in
his own conceits, to tell us, that it is an impregnable rock which the
Anabaptists will never overthrow, that to be circumcised or baptized is all one
as to be in visible Covenant, and yet show us none that uses such language but
himself. How does he think I or any other should answer his arguments, which
are vented in such gibberish as no Dictionary or Author, or use makes
intelligible? Is not his own first agument in his Sermon here page 254. Those
(meaning under the Gospel) that are in Covenant with God (meaning outward and
visible, which according to him is all one as to be baptized) ought to have the
seal of the Covenant which is baptism, But infants of Believing parents are in
the Covenant with God (that is in his language in the outward Covenant which is
all one as to be baptized) therefore they ought to have the seal of the
Covenant, which is baptism. In which he plainly makes 1. baptism the Covenant,
and yet the seal of it. 2. He argues in this manner, infants are baptized
therefore they are baptized, which either merely an inept tautology, such as
boys in Schools would hiss at in a Freshman, or else it infers from baptism
already done baptism to be done, which Paedobaptists call Anabaptism, and so
Mr. Cr. is turned an Anabaptist. 4. He tells us, this is an impr^gnable rock
which the Anabaptists will never be able to overthrow (though it be a Castle
in the Air built by his imagination and will of it self vanish) that the reason
of baptizing a person is his birth right, tuition, which proceeds only on that
conceit as if there were the same reason of Baptizing as of Circumcising, which
is often before showed to be false. 5. If his words [ whereby they are visibly
admitted into Covenant] be referred to the outward Covenant and baptizing,
then the sense is Anabaptistical, by baptizing they are admitted to baptism, i^
to [ birthright, tuition] and admission be meant as Mr. Baxter in his Book of
Baptism page 24. then the sense is, by birth right persons are baptized and so
they baptize themselves and need no other baptism besides Birth right. 6. He
corrects me for saying God makes, when I should say completes, as if the
Translators of Heb. 8.8. were mistaken, or Gods making his Covenant were not
his completing it, or he did not complete the Covenant he made. But this
exception of Mr. Crag shows either his ossitancy or unskilfulness; since it is
the same word in Jerem. 31.31, 32, 33. (...) to strike, rendered in the Greek
LXX by the Verb (...), and so Heb. 8.10. and 10.16. which is as much as to
dispose or put, and Heb. 8.9. by (...) I made although it be v. 8. rendered by
(...) I will complete, so that this exception is but nodus in scirpo, out of a
cavelling vein. 7. He says, I do not touch the true state of the controversy
Exam. par. 3. sect. 1. Antipaed. part. 1. sect. 5. though it be the very hinge
of it, unless they mean no otherwise by being in Covenant then baptism, and
then I must confess there is no controversy about the consequence of Mr. Ms.
argument Infants are in Covenant, that is to be baptized, therefore they are to
be baptized, but the argument to be derided as nugatory, as indeed it is. 8. He
terms my dispute there a confused Maze intricated, which either his ignorance
or impudence prompted him to do, sure he shows no confusedness in it. 9. He
calls my proposition of Gods making his covenant only with the elect or
spiritual seed, my Master fallacy, and yet it is proved from Scripture before,
and acknowledged by Protestants, yea Mr. Cr. himself to be true. 10. He takes
on him to foretell no satisfaction to be expected from the third part of my
Review before he sees it. 11. He says Heb. 8.6. the new Covenant is a better
Covenant, because it is established on better promises in circumstantials and
extended to move all nations, which are not in the text. 12. H^ says, it would
not be better if any sex age or degree were excluded, which being meant of
the outward Covenant, it were as if he said, the new Covenant were not better
then the old if an infant of a day old were excluded baptism.

He tells me page 140. His consequent is also unsound, for the internal and
spiritual part may be made intentionally to infants as the spiritual seed of
believers, and yet the external part and that of Ordinances to infants as the
natural seed of Believers, as well under the Gospel as under the Law; In which
passage the phrase spiritual seed of believers is a new notion, intimating that
believing fathers beget them spiritual, contrary to John 3.6. and that there is
in the Gospel promises a part which is of ordinances, which is a figment, and
that belongs to the natural seed of believers which is fal^e, and that my
consequent is unsound for that reason, which if it were good the consequent is
sound nevertheless.

What he adds, if the external part under the Gospel belong not to infants,
the Gospel and that made with Abraham are two distinct Covenants and
essentially different, and that made with Abraham and his seed carnal, as the
carnal Anabaptists affirm, their portion no better, then Turks they made (as
Calvin observes) as beasts, whereas the Covenant Genesis 17.7. is everlasting] is
true thus far, that the Covenant Genesis 7.17. so far as it did assure
righteousness to Abraham's spiritual seed by faith was the Gospel Covenant the
same with ours, made in Christ and everlasting, but this is nothing to prove
that there was such an external part of outward ordinances belonging to infants
in that Covenant. But that Covenant is mixed, Mr. Cr. himself says, there was a
promise of Canaan and temporal blessings in it though in the main the Covenant
were spiritual, and that part belonged to the Israelites by nature only, not
to our children at all. So that Mr. Crags terms of carnal and gross put upon
us, and Calvin's observation are but reproaches and calumnies by Mr. Cr. and
other Paedobaptists, devised and used by them wickedly to make us odious: but
in time their wickedness will return on their own head.

Sect. 7. Mr. Crs. speeches of infants sad condition without baptism, are like
the Popish talk of the necessity of baptizing infants that they may enter into
Gods kingdom. By denying their baptism we deprive them not of Gods Covenant.
The privileges Romans 3.2. and 9.4. were peculiar to the Jews; Did he write with
heed, he would not say they belong to infants of Gentiles under the Gospel.
When I say Baptism is not an ordinary means of salvation without faith, I mean
that no ones baptism but the baptism of true believers is an ordinary means of
salvation, which is true, though there may be true baptism without true saving
faith if it be professed. His talk of preaching to infants by presenting
objectively the benefit of that which is preached without manifesting to the
understanding, is another of his wild conceits. It 's no contradiction to say
infants are not saved by ordinary means, to wit, preaching the word, etc. and
yet to say they are saved by election, redemption, the work of Gods spirit,
since by ordinary means I understand and so do others, the Word and Sacraments
and Christian discipline.

It is false he says of me p. 146. that I confess if I knew infants were
elected I would baptize them, or that here I acknowledge of the species or sort
of believers infants, that they are not only elected of God but redeemed of
Christ and have the work of his spirit. Sect. 8. the major of his Syllogism [
That which was proposed and entertained with success amongst the Jews, which
were the natural seed of Abraham, was not only made with the spiritual seed of
Abraham] p. 147. is denied, he is grossly mistaken in conceiving believing
Jews were not Abraham's spiritual seed: and his arguing that many of the natural
seed of Abraham were believers under the Gospel, Romans 4.11, 12. to prove it
confirms the contrary. For all that are true believers (not every professor of
faith) or elect are Abraham's spiritual seed, and this I often expressed
plainly, and Mr. Cr. knew well enough; but says I speak ambiguously, that he
may have some color for his random roving talk of persons in visible Covenant
being children of the promise and Abraham's seed, which is much of it nonsense,
unproved dictates, and quite beside the meaning of the texts Romans 4.11, 12, 16.
and 9.8. which make none Abraham's seed, and children of the promise Genesis 17.7
as it was Evangelical, but true believers or elect persons, as is amply before
proved Sect. 28, 29. The rest of his scribbling in that Section runs on these
two mistakes, 1. That there is now under the Gospel a national Church as the
Jews was, and that the expression Ephesians. 3.6. may be applied to this whole
Nation. 2. That there is such an outward visible Covenant which God has made
with such a whole visible National Church, which is not proved from Deuteronomy. 29,
10, 12. Joh. 1.11. Psalm. 50.5. Joh. 15.2. two of which speak not at all of the
Gospel Covenant, nor of Gods making a Covenant with them, but of theirs with
God, the 2d. is expressly meant only of true believers, the 4th. of being a
branch in Christ (which it is true may be meant of a visible professor) but not
of being in the Gospel Covenant of grace, in which none any where are said to
be, nor is God said any where to make it to any but true believers or elect
persons, as is proved Sect. 33. There is not any thing Sect. 9. that I need
reply to, saving that he grants that the Gospel Covenant of grace Heb. 8.10,
11, 12. is made only to the elect, if by the Covenant I mean the end, event
and success thereof, which I confess I do, and acknowledge that I abhor any
conceit to the contrary, as if God should make a Covenant to any, which should
not have the end event and success answerable to his promise, and therefore
this Covenant promising things, which none in the event have but the elect, can
be said to be made by God to none but them, unless we will charge God with
falsehood, mutability or impotency.

Sect. 10. That Isa. 49.21.23. is a prophecy of the reducing the Jews from
Babylonish captivity is evinced from v. 19, 20, 21. in that the description of
the places wast and desolate, the land of their destruction, the place which
was too strait are meant of the land of Canaan, and Mr. Cr. himself thus v. 20.
the place is too strait for me, that is the Land of Canaan is too narrow to
contain the whole Church, and he himself expounds after, thou have lost the
other, v. 20. of the natural seed of Abraham, and the being desolate, a
captive, and removing too and fro off Jerusalem: But he will have it meant of
the time after the destruction by Titus, and the dispersion after it, for we
never find it verified literally that the Land of Canaan was too strait during
the time of captivity (as the words point) to contain the Jews. But where do
the words point that the Land of Canaan was too strait during the time of
captivity to contain the Jews. The words point at the multitude of Jews after
the return from the Babylonish captivity, at which time according to Zechariah
his prophecy, chapter 8.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. the Jews mightily increased and
prospered, and the place desolate confessedly being meant of Canaan and
Jerusalem, and the Jews the Captives, the sense of v. 22, 23. is meant
undoubtedly (in the first sense of the words) of the Jews reduction from
captivity, which was not true of them after the destruction by Titus, therefore
of their return from Babylon by Cyrus, and other Persian and Grecian Kings and
Queens favor. The like may be inferred from v. 24, 25. for therein i^ foretold
that they which were taken captive (who were the Jews) should be delivered. But
Mr. Cr. says, That one Democritus would not be enough to laugh at, nor three
Anticyra's suffice to purge that head, that would attempt from hence to draw an
argument to prove the foregoing conclusion: the words are these, even the
captives of the mighty shall be taken away; from whom? From Cyrus, Arta^^rxes,
Darius, Ab^su^rus? That would imply a contradiction, for he confesses that
these were nursing fathers that did bring back the Jews from captivity; the
prey of the terrible shall be delivered, children are not preys to their
nurses, nor are their nurses terrible to their children.) But we need not make
the mighty and terrible the ^ame with the deliverers or nurses. The Chaldean
Princes were the mighty and terrible to whom the Jews were captives and a prey,
and Cyrus and others after deliverers and nurses. Yet did we make them the same
persons there were nothing ridiculous in it, since the Jews were at first their
captives, and prey, and they terrible to them, and yet not long after
deliverers and nurses. So that we may retort Mr. Crs. words thus; One
Democritus (except such a scoffer as Mr. Cr.) would not be enough to laugh at,
nor three Anticyra's suffice to purge that Craig that makes such a silly
refutation. What he adds to disparage Mr. Gattakers notes may be dispelled by
reading the notes, nor is he alone in the sense he gives, Grotius in his
annot. agrees in that thing with Mr. Gattaker. And for the contents of the
Chapter though there is not sufficient reason to ascribe them to the Church of
England, they being made by one Translator though allowed by others without any
Canon, or Act of Parliament establishing them, yet I see not that they make
against my sense, but the making the content of v. 24. to be the powerful
deliverance out of captivity, did in the Dispute and does still seem to make
for my sense of delivery or returning of the ^ews out of the Babylonish
captivity, which being derided by Mr. Crs. party showed the levity of their
spirits, to whom this book shows him to be too like. Which is seen in his
alleging my words (not p. 14. as he cites them but p. 16.) against my reason;
which he makes my interpretation, though if he had added my words [and if so]
it would have appeared that I spoke not those words as my interpretation. And
for his allegation of Gods saying to Moses thy children which thou have brought
out of Egypt, I remember not where it is used; but [ thy people Exodus 3^.7.]
And for Mr. Crs. reconciliation, I do not conceive it may be congruously to
speech so paraphrased, the Gentiles shall bring thy sons, that is the Churches
by spiritual succession, the Gentiles by natural generation, Gods that is mine
by adoption. It may be accommodated mystically to the conversion of the
Gentiles as shadowed out by the reducing of the Jews from captivity, and yet
make nothing for infants Churchmembership or Baptism. For though I yield in the
litteral sense infants to be comprehended, yet in the mystical sense humble
persons, or mean contemptible persons, or new born babes, this is believers
desiring the word, may be meant. If the words be mystically meant, yet the
words are not a prophecy of a prophecy, but as many speeches are which have a
double meaning, as Genesis 15.5. and 17.4, 5. Exodus 12.46. one more open, the
other covert. And Mr. Crags purpose from Isai. 49.22. were not to prove it
foretold that infants under the Gospel should be brought to baptism, but to
prove the propositton in question, that God foretold that infants should be
Churchmembers under the Gospel, whence infant Baptism will follow; it seems Mr.
Cr. understands not the bringing of children in arms and upon shoulders of
bringing infants to baptism, and how else in a litteral sense they by bringing
in arms and on shoulders become Churchmembers I yet understand not, and am out
of hope ever to do.

Sect. 11. Mr. Cr. speaks thus. He says (meaning me) if by standard be meant
baptism, which the Scripture never calls Gods standard, and the bringing should
be to Baptism, then the sense should be, that supreme Magistrates, as Kings and
Queens, should bring infants in their arms, and carry them on shoulders to
Baptism, which no story mentions to have been done, and is too frivolous to be
made the matter of that prophecy, in which words there is neither veri^y, nor
consequence if sense. First he says, if by standard be meant Baptism, who
makes a Thesis of his Hypothesis? or affirms that by standard is meant Baptism?
To which I reply, Mr. Cr. of whom the relatour of the Dispute p. 35. says,
That to give me satisfaction (which he needed not) he told me, that by standard
he understood some visible Gospel Ordinance, as Baptism, without an etc. to
wit, Preaching, Praying, with many more; nor had I any reason to conceive he
understood any other since he named no other, nor did he say Gospel Ordinances,
as if he included the genus (as now he would evade) but some Gospel ordinance
in the singular number. Now I said Baptism is no where called Gods standard,
and he has nothing to reply hereto, but that it is so in this place, the Genus
being predicated on the species. But this i^ but a begging of what he should
prove, that by standard here is ^eant Baptism in pa^ticular or Gospel
ordinances in general. Sure the phrase of setting up the standard is very
unsuitable to the use of baptizing, which was not by setting up, but putting
down into the water. And if Mr. Crs. words or the text do not necessarily speak
of Kings and Queens bringing in their arms and on their shoulders to baptism,
my reasons are the same, and of a like force, if meant of the people. For no
story does mention carrying infants on shoulders to Baptism by the people, and
such a thing is too frivolous to be made the matter of this prophecy, which
expresses some great and wonderful thing to be done by Gods extraordinary
incitement and power, of which kind that is not. Though Mr. Cr. grant the
phrase of nursing fathers and mothers Isa. 49.23. to be metaphorical, yet he
applies the words before (which are alike m^taphorical) [ they shall bring thy
sons in their arms or bosom, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their
shoulders, v. 22.] according to the proper sense of the words, when he says,
the people should bring sons in their arms and daughters upon their shoulders
to Baptism, now if the words v. 23. be metaphorical so are those v. 22. which
is also acknowledged by Mr. Cr. 1 In that he grants that in story it is not
found that infants have been brought to Baptism on sho^lders. 2. In that they
are said to be brought to the standard, which is according to Mr. Cr. Baptism,
but that is not a standard properly but metaphorically, and therefore it
follows upon Mr. Crs grant, that the application of that one phrase of bringing
their sons in their arms and daughters on shoulders, according to the proper
sense of the words is not right. Nor is his endeavor to fit the metaphor to
infant Baptism any better, though in the Low Countries it were true that the
eldest son of a Commission Captain being born there whilst his father is in
the service of the State, is by the courtesy of the Camp enrolled in the
soldiers List on his birthday, and by the allowance of the State receives pay
from the time of his nativity, as he scribbles out of Fullers frivolous
Treatise termed Infants Advocate p. 99. For 1. if infants be listed, yet no
standard is set up, or hand lifted up to the people to bring them, nor are they
brought in their arms or bosoms in the Low Countries. 2. Nor was any such usage
among the Jews or Gentiles in Isaiahs time, to which he might be conceived to
allude, and it is too ridiculous to go about (as Mr. Cr. does) to explain a
metaphor alluding to an use in Isaiahs time by an use no where showed to be but
in the Low Countries in our time. That Mr. Gataker in the cause of infant
Baptism interprets innumerable places against me, ^s an untruth* Though Esther
were a ^ew, yet a Queen of the Gentiles, and ^^ese things foretold Isa 49.22,
23. were fulfilled in Cyrus time, and i^ Ahasuerus, Artaxerxes and Darius time
also, yea and after t^em in Alexander the Great, and some of his successors,
and their Queens as Grotius conceives, in his Annotations, who also and Mr.
Gataker show how the prediction of bowing down and licking the dust of the Jews
feet was fulfilled, though not in Esthers time (as I said the prophecy of
Queens being a nursing mother to the Jews was) yet in the times after before
Christ's incarnation. And for Mr. Crs. argument from v. 1, 6, 7, 8, 20, 21. let
him form it as strong as he can, yet he will never prove that Isa. ^9.22. is a
prophecy of infants visible Churchmembership in the times of the Gospel or
their bringing to Baptism, nor was I by any argument of Mr. Cr. forced to
surrender up this hold, that Isa. 49.22, 23. is a prophecy of the return of
the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, and their prosperity in Judea after
their return a^ore Christ's inearnation, and yet were it understood of the times
of the Gospel, I showed how it might be understood of grown men persuaded by
the preaching of the Gospel, as Junius in his Annotations, which Mr. Cr.
abusively puts into an argument as if it were alleged thus, Junius says so
th^re^ore it is so, and denies the antecedent and conse^uent. But neither was
the consequent mine, nor the antecedent as Mr. Cr. sets it down. But this
Janius says, that the standard Isa. 49.22. is the Gospel, which is the power
of God unto salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. and therefore it
is meant of persuading grown men by the preaching of the Gospel, and that all
those things are allegorically spoken of the amplitude of Christ's spiritual
Kingdom, and therefore not of bringing infants to baptism And for Cornelius a
Lapide, Hierome, Cyril* Haymo, if they held it fulfilled in Gospel times, and
extended the words to grown men, though they were for infants visible
Churchmembership and Baptism, yet they overthrow Mr. Crs. argument from thence,
which is of no force unless the words be understood only of Gospel times, and
of infants being brought to some visible Ordinance as Baptism, the contrary
whereof his own Authors show, and himself grants, and therefore I take all Mr.
Crs. reasoning in the Dispute and this Reply from Isa. 49.22. to be me^r
cavilling, and still think it meet to refer the Reader for the discerning of my
interpretation whether right or no, and my yielding that the words may be
accommodated to the calling of the Gentiles without any oppositeness to my
interpretation, or appositeness to Mr. Crs. inference whether true or not to
Mr. Gatakers Annotations, which for no other reason but because (however
otherwise he differ from me) I take to be the exactest, and the most
incomparable learned on that part of Scripture of any I know.

To Mr. Crs. defense Sect. 12. of his alleging thus Isa. 65.20 There shall be
no more an infant of days, that is infants shall no^ be incapable of the seal,
against my answer impliedly deny^ng the consequence, and saying it has no
proof but his dictate, which is thus. To which it were sufficient reply to say
it has no disproof, but his dictate, which is without all show of prohability,
there being not a word of any such thing as o^tward peace, increase,
possession, and long life to the Jews, unless in the type and that scarce
probable, but of the glorious estate of the times of the Gospel held out in
outward ordinances as shall appear. I oppose 1. that I needed bring no other
disproof, but denial being a respondent, but it is necessary he should make
good his sense if he will infer his conclusion thence. 2. My disproof was
right: for v. 18;^9. speaks of the outward peace of Jerusalem and her people,
their long life, increase, building* planting, possession* opposite to their
former troubles v. 16. are expressed v. 20.21, 22, 23. not a word of outward
ordinances.

Against this says Mr. Cr. And in Isa. 65.20. there is need of such an
interpretation, for as v. 17. the new heaven^ and new earth, and 18, 19.
creation, and Jerus^lem were analogical, and not proper, so the 20. v. is
wholly trop^cal and mystical. There shall be no more thence an infant of days;
How can thi^ be understood literally? did not infants after as well, as un^er
the captivity make up their week of days, months of weeks? etc. It must needs
relate to some thing under the Jewish Paedagogy, and nothing so probably as
that of theirs, that nothing was clean till a Sabbath had gone over it, and
therefore according to Divine institution Circumcision was not ti^l the 8th*
day, Mr. T. might have done well to have imparted us either his own or Mr.
Gatakers descant on these word^, but because they could devise nothing that
like the ears under the Lions skin would not discover the who^e imposture, ne
(...) quidem.

Answ. That Jerusalem is analogical is not proved, nor does it follow v. 17. is
tropical, therefore also v. 20. any more then Isa. 11 6, 7, 8. is allegorical,
therefore also v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9. Mr. Gatakers sense is plainly ^et down without
any imposture in his Annotations, which is this, There shall be no more thence
brought to burial by reason of untimely ends, as formerly a child that has not
fulfilled hi^ days, but shall live and attain to his just growth and full
(...) o^ years.] This sense is no^ infringed by any thing Mr. Cr. says, yea
his question, did not infants etc. ^onfirms it. That it must needs relate to
(...) under the Jewish Paedagogy, is not proved, nor that the conceit nothing
was clean till a Sabbath was gone over it, was of the J^wish Paedagogy, nor
that it was the reason of circumcising the 8th. day, nor do I see what hi^, if
it were granted, makes for his sense, There shall be no more an infant of
days, that is infants shall not be incapable of the seal while their age is
measured by days, as the Jews infants that might not be circumcised till a
week had passed over them. For there is neither mention of seal nor in capacity
of it, nor of circumcision, nor its limiting to the 8th. day, and Mr. Cr.
leaves out [ thence] that is from Jerusalem, which shows it is meant of infants
there being, and so not of Gentiles infants, and the prediction is of an event
of great moment, not of a capacity of a thing which might never be in the
event, and if it were is of small or no importance, nor is [ an infant of
dayes] well paraphrased by [ while their age is measured by dayes] For an
infant of days, is all one in regard of days an infant, or child as the
opposite term on old man shows, and his expression is either nonsense, or else
it is vain to suppose that a person is an infant while his age is measured by
days, for a person of many years has his age measured by days, and if the
meaning be, an infant that has his age measured by days, not by one day or
some hours is capable of the seal, then it should imply that an infant of one
day old is not. I am blamable for spending time in r^futing such fooleries, but
the intolerable insolent brags of Mr. Crags dispute and scribbling necessitates
me.

Mr. Cr. from Isa 65.20. argued thus, The child shall die an hundred years
old, or as well a Churchmember as i^ he were an hundred years old, therefore
children may be bapt^zed under the Gospel, and here p. 174. of me he says, He
denied the consequent which I made good first ab impossibili, because to take
it literally would imply a contradiction. For it is impossible being a child
to die a hundred years old, child is the subject of the question, which is to
be taken properly without enallage, shall die an hundred years old, the
predicate that cannot otherwise be affirmed of it but analogically resembling
in some capacity and qualification them that dies an hundred years old.

Answ. This arguing is indeed childish like, as if it were argued Luke 1.76.
Thou c^ilde shall be called the Prophet of the Highest, for thou shall go
before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways, to give knowledge of
salvation; Ergo, this must be understood analogically, child is the subject
of the question, which is to be taken properly without enallage; and so this
must be true of John Baptist while he was a child. The like might be said of
Luke ^.34. 1 King 13.2. He is but a child that knows not that in such
passages as these there is no need of imagining an analogical predication, but
that they are to be understood sensu diviso, as when our Lord Christ says Luke
7.22. the blind see, the ^ame walk, the Lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear,
the dead are raised, that is, such as were blind, lame, lepers, deaf, dead,
not in sensu composito, such as are when they see, walk, are cleansed, hear are
raised, so in the other place, not he that is a child while he is a child,
but he that is now, or shall be once a child shall before he dies be an hundred
years old, which agrees with the rest of the verse, and v. 22. as the days of
a tree are the days of my people, and mine elect shall long enjoy the work of
their hands ^hey being expressions of long life. And M. Gataker (...) rightly,
the syntax is familiar, and as clear as the day light or Sunshine: the child
or (...) that now is) shall die the son of 100 years; that is, shall be 100
years old when he dies. So Genesis 11.10. Genesis 21.25, etc. To which Mr Cr.
insolently ^eplies, I had thought syntax had been Gramatical construction
according to rule, not literal interpretation, or univocal not analogical
praedication. I say for Master Gataker that he may think still that syntax is
Grammatical construction according to rule, not literal interpretation, Mr.
Gataker says nothing to the contrary; yet literal interpretation is to be
according to the rule of Grammatical construction; he may think Syntax is
neither univocal nor annalogical praedication, there may be Syntax in imperfect
speeches that are no enunciations, nor in them any predication of one thing on
another, Mr. Cr. has been a Paed^gogue long enough to know, that which his
Schoolboyes might tell him, there is Syntax between a Noun Adjective and
Substantive, a Noun and a Preposition, or Interjection, where there is no
predication. He adds of Mr. Gataker, And this Syntax he says, it as clear as
the day light, or sun shine, perhaps to an Owl or Bat. Answ. Yea, and too to
as seeing men as Mr. Cr. though his Eagle-eye be in this as dark as an Owl or
Bat at noon.

He goes on, And what is this Syntax that is so clear? The child or youth that
now is, shall die the son of an hundred years, that is, shall be an hundred
years old when he dies; the child or youth, there is one addition, for the
Text mentions not youth, which is a distinct age from childhood. Answ. It may
be an addition to the English translation, but not to the Text, since as Mr.
Gataker shows the word (...) is applied to Joseph at 17 years old, Genesis 37.2.
to Benjamin, Genesis 43.8. when he is deemed to have been above thirty but that is
the ill luck of it, that then it will not serve Mr. Crs. turn for his infant
Churchmembership visible in the time of the Gospel Mr. Cr. adds, That now is,
there is another, the child was not yet, it was a prediction* Answ. So it might
be, and yet the child one that then was when Isaiah spoke it; nor is it any
more addition to the Text then if he had said, the child that shall be; nor any
untruth in the speech as expounded by Mr. Gataker.

Mr. Cr. goes on. There is a third [son of] by addition put in, old by
substraction taken away; excellent Arithmetic! besides here is a new creation
of a new generation [son of years] who ever heard such a Syntax? did the son
beget the years, or the years the son? or whether is elder? That is, shall be
an hundred years when he dies, here is an exposition of an exposition, and a
fourth addition [he and when] being superadded.

Answ. It grieves me not so much that Mr. Cr. has so much vilified my self, as
that though he pretend to be a Preacher of the Gospel, yet like a terrae
filius, or Grammar reader, he should show such contempt of a man then alive
when he wrote it (as I conceive by the date of his Epistle) however whether
alive or dead, a man very reverend, and (however he conceived of me) one of the
most learned and accurate writers (specially in such things as this) of his
age, and while he slights him discover so much folly and ignorance in Hebrew
and Greek, as an ordinary ^rammarian or student in the Bible would hardly have
showed; certainly it is unsuitable to his undertaking of a Schoolmaster. The
phrase (...) is word by word the son^ (...) hundred years, for without [ of] it
would be nonsense, it being the sig^^ (...) Genitive case, nor is [ old]
subtracted, but included in that expression, it being the Hebrew expression of
old or aged, as M. Gataker shows from Genesis 11.10. and 21.5. and 5.32. and 7.^
and 12.4. and 16.16. and 17.1. and 25.20, 26. and 37.2. and 41.46. and 45.26.
and elsewhere, and the same he might have learned from Ainsworth Annot. on Genesis
5.^2, etc. Hebr. son of 500. years, that is, going in his 500. year. An usual
speech in the Hebrew Scripture of men's age or of beasts; Genesis 17.1. Exodus 12.5.
And for [ he and when] how can they be said to be superadded, when the very
term [ shall die] is all one with [when he shall die,] which shows it is not
for Mr. Crs. purpose, for then it should have been, shall be born as an hundred
years old, as well a churchmember as if he were; but is agreeable to the
Prophets meaning, to express long life: And therefore his jeer of excellent
Arithmetic shows his folly in deriding that which was right. And for his
prattle, it shows his excellent ignoran^e of the Hebrew and Greek of the ^ible,
Bu^torf* These* Gram. Hebr. l. 2. c. 3. p. 360, in that piece which is termed by
Amama, etc. admirandum opus (...), nomen (...) filius periphrases and
Hebraismos facit ins^gnes: ut (...) filius areus Job 41.19. id est s^gitta and
similes innumeri. Sic I^^an. 17.12. (...), etc. Apud Latinos Horat. 1. carm.
od. 14. Terr^ filius, should one scribble as Mr. Cr. does here, Here Is a new
creation of a new generation [son of the bow, of perdition, of the earth] who
ev^r heard such a syntax? did the son beget the bow, perdition, the earth, or
the bow, perdition, the earth the son? or whether is elder? Would not a
Scholar say he played the fool? For this I leave him to Mr. Vaug^ans
correction.

But he seems to be more consid^rate in what follows. According to which
interpretation, the words must carry this sense, There shall no more infants
di^ when they are young, nor an old man till he (...) filled his days, for he
that now is a child shall not die till he be an hundred years old, I wonder in
what age this was performed, that no man died till he had completed his
century, no mortal disease, nor use of Physicians, but every man might
certainl^ know the day of his death.

Answ. The words contain not such an absolute universal longaevity, as Mr. Cr.
would make to be the consequent of our interpretation, but a length of days
opposite to former troubles v. 16. in which so many died by war, famine, and
pestilence, which therefore comparatively is reckoned as universal, as in like
manner Jeremiah chapter 50.20. speaking of the same times says the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for and there shall be none* that is, as formerly to
provoke God to cut them off by g^ievous deaths, as before the captivity. And
according to this i^ that of Zech. 8.4. and I said without any vaunting
Nebuchadnezzar like language, as Mr. Cr. abusively charge me with Isa. 65.20.
was rightly made by me answerable to Zech 8 4. which does not intimate, that
the Text was made by me, and not by the Holy Ghost, but made answerable, or
correspondent, which arrogates no more to me then if I had said, made clear,
made manifest, etc. Nor is any experience or History contrary to this, that the
Jews after their return from Babylon (...), prosperity, increase and long life
in Canaan a great while together, and were honored by diverse Persian Kings,
Alexander the Great, and some of the ^recian Kings, and the Nations near them
iu^ject to them. The Contents of the Chapter were never by any Synod or
Parliament interpretatively entitled to the Church of England, nor are to be
accounted any more valid, then Mr. Gatakers notes, who though a single man, yet
had his notes approved by other Annotators, and in some sort by the Assembly at
Westminster. Yet the Contents of the Chapter being v. 17. The blessed estate of
the new Jerusalem, and in the Margin at v. 19. Revel. 21.4. being put, show,
that Mr. Crs. conceit is no more favored by them then mine. And the speech
being to be understood comparatively to the former times, was true of the Jews
after their return from the captivity at Babel. V. 25. exp^essing the Jews
peace notwithstanding the Samaritan neighbors, was true at the same time,
although both were accommodated to the Gospel times, and the calling of the
Jews yet to come. Nor is it any strange thing in that Prophet to make the
restitution of the Jews from Captivity as answering to making new Heavens and
Earth, as Isa. 51.16. and 44.24, 25, 26. and 45.12, 13. Yet I deny not that 2
Pet 3.13. Revel. 21.1. the words are rightly applied to some other great work
of God resembled by this and to be yet accomplished. That the Israelites 1 Cor.
10.2. were actually baptized or washed under the cloud it raining upon them,
and in the Red Sea, the water touching their feet at least, after the dividing
of the waves in such a sudden passage, and blowing upon them with the
sprinkling thereof, is no where set down Exodus 13. and 14. N^r will such wetting
be ever found in any Greek Author to be termed Baptism formally, and therefore
it can be no other then similitudinary Baptism which is there meant, as the
eating Manna and drinking Water was a similitudinary partaking of the Lords
Supper, and Grotius did rightly expound [1 Cor. 10.2. were baptised] by [ were
as if they were baptis^d] and yet Isa. 65 20. is not rightly so expounded shall
die as an hundred years old, there being no need of such an interpretation, nor
any thing leading to it in the Text, but the expression is of long life; nor if
it were meant so, i^ it proved that infants must be Churchmembers, and capable
of some seal under the Gospel, unless there were no other w^y* then that in
respect of which he might be as one an hundred years old. Had Mr. Cr. sought
the clearing of truth, he had been willing to read out the whole that his
dealing might not be taken for deceitful. By my refutation of Dr. Savage in
Latin, some years since Printed, it may appear wh^t^er Text, Dr. Savage or the
Dr. of the Chair did avoid my argument. The rest of M. Crs. argumen^s are the
same with what others have urged, and have been answered in this and the former
parts as this Review; nor do I find that Mr. Cr. has added any thing of moment
to them, to which I need make further reply. As or his ^^^nts, quips,
misrecitals or mistakes of my words, mis-reports of my actions, together with
his own mistakes in Logic, Grammar, Divinity, they are otherwise discernable
then by a particular answer in Print to each part of his Book. I presume the
Christian and equal Reader will think it unnecessary to make any more reply to
what i^ written of infant^ Baptism, till some thing be found written which
better defends it then those have done who are here answered. If any other
think it fi^^ I should answer him also in particula^, he may conceive that if I
did p^rceive any thing that might not have an answer in that which is already
written, or had in it any difficulty, I should have done it: But being
conscious to my fel^ that I have not declined the answering of any out of
contempt of the person, or sense of the difficulty of doing it, but because it
is thought that I have been too large already, and that to answer every mere
quirk of wit is unnecessary, as knowing that however light wit^ that love to
show their skill in disputing be taken with them, yet solid conscientious men
will be led only with good proofs out of Scripture which may show the
institution of Christ, I do here supersede from this work and commend it to his
blessing, of whom and through whom and for whom are all things, to whom be
glory for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.

