Christianity not Mysterious: OR, A TREATISE Showing, That there is nothing in
the GOSPEL Contrary to REASON, Nor ABOVE it: And that no Christian Doctrine can
be properly called A MYSTERY.

By JOHN TOLAND.

The Second Edition Enlarged.

We need not desire a better Evidence that any Man is in the wrong, than to
hear him declare against Reason, and thereby to acknowledge that Reason is
against him. Archbishop Tillotson. LONDON, Printed for Sam. Buckley at the
Dolphin over against St. Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. MDCXCVI.

THE PREFACE.
I Believe all Men will readily allow, that none should speak with more Freedom
and Assurance than he that defends or illustrates the Truth. But if we credit
the History of former Time, or duly consider what passes in the present, we
shall find none more backward to speak their Minds in public than such as have
Right on their side. Indeed the Goodness of their Cause and Design should
fortify 'em, one would think, against all the Attacks of their Enemies* Nor are
there wanting frequent Examples of Persons, who with unshaken Constancy
suffered the most disgraceful and violent things for love of the Truth. Yet if
we make a just Computation, and take in the Primitive Martyrs with the Prophets
and Apostles themselves, the professed Defenders of Truth, only for Truth's
sake, will be found to be a small handful with respect to the numerous
Partisans of Error.

And such is the deplorable Condition of our Age, that a Man dares not openly
and directly own what he thinks of Divine Matters, tho it be never so true and
beneficial, if it but very slightly differs from what is received by any Party,
or that is established by Law; but he is either forced to keep perpetual
Silence, or to propose his Sentiments to the World, by way of Paradox, under a
borrowed or fictitious Name. To mention the least part of the Inconveniences
they expose themselves to, who have the Courage to act more aboveboard, is too
melancholy a Theme, and visible enough to be lamented by all that are truly
generous and virtuous.

The Pravity of most Men's Dispositions, and the Ambition of particular Persons
makes this Matter seem less strange in Politic and Secular Affairs; and yet a
Man may not only make new Discoveries and Improvements in Law or Physic, and
in the other Arts and Sciences impunibly, but also for so doing be deservedly
encouraged and rewarded. But wonderful! That the sacred Name of Religion which
sounds nothing but Sanctity, Peace, and Integrity, should be so universally
abused to patronize Ambition, Impiety, and Contention! And that what is our
bighest Interest perfectly to understand, should (for Reasons afterward to be
laid open) both be maintained to be obscure, and very industriously made so!
Nay, it is come to this, that Truth meets no where with stronger Opposition,
than from many of those that raise the loudest Cry about it, and would be taken
for no less than the only Dispensers of the Favors and Oracles of Heaven. If
any has the Firmness to touch the minutest thing that brings them Gain or
Credit, he is presently pursued with the Hue and Cry of Heresy: And, if he
values their Censures, compelled to make honorable Amends; or if he proves
contumacious, he falls a Sacrifice, at least in his Reputation, to their
implacable Hatred.

Nor is he like, we may be sure, to receive fairer Quarter from the declared
Antagonists of Religion, whose Principles, as they trample upon all Equity and
Truth, so they oblige 'em to hate and molest the strenuous Assertors of these
and all other Virtues. But of such depressing Considerations enough!
Notwithstanding which, I have ventured to publish this Discourse, designing
thereby to rectify, as much as I Am able, the narrow bigoted Tenets of the One,
and the most impious Maxims of the Other.

No Atheist or Infidel of any kind can justly be angry with me for measuring
Swords with them, and attacking them only with the Weapons they prescribe me.
The true Christian can no more be offended when he finds me employ Reason, not
to enervate or perplex, but to confirm and elucidate Revelation; unless he is
apprehensive I should render it too clear to my self, or too familiar to
others, which are Absurdities no Body will own. I hope to make it appear, that
the Use of Reason is not so dangerous in Religion as it is commonly
represented, and that too by such as mightily extol it when it seems to favor
'em, yet vouchsafe it not a hearing when it makes against them, but oppose its
own Authority to it self. These are high Privileges indeed, and the surest
Means of having always the better of the Dispute that could possibly be devised.

That the mistaken Unbeliever may not say I serve a Hypothesis in the Defense
of my Faith, like some who first imagine or receive an Opinion, and then study
Proofs to establish it, I solemnly declare the thing is much otherwise; and
that I hold nothing as an Article of my Religion, but what the highest Evidence
forced me to embrace. For being educated, from my Cradle, in the grossest
Superstition and Idolatry, God was pleased to make my own Reason, and such as
made use of theirs, the happy Instruments of my Conversion. Thus I have been
very early accustomed to Examination and Enquiry, and taught not to captivate
my Understanding, no more than my Senses to any Man or Society whatsoever. Now
the best Method, I think, of communicating to others the Truth, is that by
which a Man has learnt it himself.

That the well-meaning Christian may not suspect, as it falls out very
ordinarily, that I aim at more than I declare, and cunningly disguise some bad
Principles under the fair Pretense of defending the true Religion; I assure him
that I write with all the Sincerity and Simplicity imaginable, being as
thoroughly convinced of what I maintain, as I can be of any thing. If any good
Man should after this Protestation persist to think hard of me, it must needs
proceed from violent Prepossessions: for very few can be found that are not
deeply engaged in some of one sort or another, for which a due Allowance must
be made. How fond are we all apt to be of what we learned in our Youth, as the
Sight or Remembrance of the Places where we past that agreeable Time, does
strangely affect us! A Mother is more charmed with the lisping half-form'd
Words of her prattling Infant, than with the best Language, and most solid
Discourses. That any Upstart, but of Yesterday, should pretend to overthrow
what cost the Ancients so much Time and Breath to establish, and themselves so
great Pains and Charges to learn, is of hard Digestion to some. And when others
are but prayed to explain their Terms, which commonly signify nothing, or what
they must be ashamed to own that would never be thought in an Error, they are
uneasy, as an extravagant Merchant to examine his Accounts; and it is well if
they can restrain their Passions. Not only a few Men, but oftentimes whole
Societies, whilst they consider Things but very superficially, set such a Value
upon certain Sounds, as if they were the real Essence of all Religion. To
question or reject any of these, tho never so false and inconvenient, is
dangerous Heterodoxy: And yet, as I hinted now, they either signify nothing, or
have been invented by some leading Men to make plain things obscure, and not
seldom to cover their own Ignorance. What is unpardonable, the holy Scripture
is put to the Torture to countenance this Scholastic Jargon, and all the
metaphysical Chimeras of its Authors. But the Weakness of the greatest part of
these Prejudices is so notorious, that to mention them is sufficient
Confutation: Nor shall I be otherwise moved with any thing of this Nature, than
a prudent Man would be at the Declamations of such as have recourse to Railing
when Reason fails them.

As for those Gentlemen who suggest that the Credulity of Popery has frighted
me to an unwarrantable Distance from it; I have nothing to say for their
Satisfaction, but that I don't envy them the cheap an^ commodious Mean they
boast of, while I think Truth and Error to be the two Extremes. Religion is not
to be modeled according to our Fancies, nor to be judged of as it relates to
our private Designs; else there would be full as many Creeds as Persons: But
how little soever our Notions agree, and let our worldly Conveniences be what
they will, Religion is always the same, like God its Author, with whom there is
no Variableness, nor Shadow of changing.

If any should ask me whether I have so good an Opinion of my own Abilities, as
to imagine that I can prove a rational Account may be given of all those
jarring Doctrines, ambiguous Terms, and puzling Distinctions which have for so
many Centuries sufficiently exercised the Learned of all sorts: I answer, that
I don't pretend (as the Title. Page can testify) that we are able to explain
the Terms or Doctrines of this or that Age, Council, or Nation, (most of which
are impervious Mysteries with a witness) but the Terms and Doctrines of the
Gospel. They are not the Articles of the East or West, Orthodox or Arian,
Protestant or Papist, considered as such, that I trouble my self about, but
those of Jesus Christ and his Apostles. And in managing this Argument, with
every other good Action, I don't merely rely upon my own poor Seize, but
also upon the Grace of God, who, I hope, will enable me to vindicate his
revealed Will from the most unjust Imputations of Contradiction and Obscurity.

I may probably differ in many tbings from Persons deserve^ly eminent for their
Learning, and Piety; but that ought to be no Advantage against me if Truth is
evidently for me. Since Religion is calculated for reasonable Creatures, it is
Conviction and not Authority that should bear Weight with them. A wise and good
Man will judge of the Merits of a Cause considered only in it self, without any
regard to Times, Places, or Persons. No Numbers, no Examples, no Interests can
ever biass his solid Judgment, or corrupt his Integrity. He knows no Difference
between Popish Infallibility, and being obliged blindly to acquiesce in the
Decisions of fallible Protestants. And for my own part, as I would have none by
false or unfair Consequences make me say what I never thought of; so I would
not be told I contradict any thing but Scripture or Reason, which, I Am sure,
agree very well together. Nor can it appear strange that I should insist upon
these Terms, since I most readily submit my slef to them, and give all the
World the same Right over me. I am not therefore to be put out of Countenance
by venerable Names, and pompous Citations, that have no Value but such as an
ugly Rust and Color give ancient Coins. God alone, and such as are in^pir'd by
him, can prescribe Injunctions relating to the World to come, whilst human
Powers regulate the Affairs of this. Now, to speak more particularly concerning
the following Performance, I don't expect any Deference should be paid me by
the World, that spares no body; much less am I desirous of Abettors out of
Singularity: but rather if the Reasons I offer be not cogent, I shall take in
good part a modest and pertinent Animadversion. And if I am not so happy in
rendering things perspicuous to others, as they seem to my self, yet I have
fairly aimed at it, and spoke what I think to be Truth without Fear or Favor;
wherefore my good Intentions will need no other Apology.

Some Passages in the first Section or preliminary Dissertation of Reason,
which, in the former Edition, I suspected would prove a little obscure to
ordinary Readers, are now rendr'd more familiar. And tho I then declared that
the understanding of those Passages was of no Consequence to any that would
reason fairly, being only inserted to prevent the foreseen Wranglings of
certain Men, who study rather to protract and perplex than to terminate a
Controversy; yet I could not but readily comply at this time with the Desires
of those, who wished 'em more clearly expressed, tho it should cost me a few
Words more, whereof I shall always be as sparing as I can. I have likewise
every where else endeavored to speak very intelligibly, and am not without
hope that my Assertions do carry their own Light along with them. I have in
many Places made explanatory Repetitions of difficult Words, by synonymous
Terms of a more general and known Use. This Labor, I grant, is of no Benefit
to Philosophers, but it is of considerable Advantage to the Vulgar, which I Am
far from neglecting, like those who in every Preface tell us they neither court
nor care for them. I wonder how any can speak at this rate, especially of those
whose very Business it is to serve the Vulgar, and spare them the Labor of
long and painful Study, which their ordinary Occupations will not allow them.
Laymen pay for the Books and Maintenance of Churchmen for this very end: but
I Am afraid some of the latter will no more believe this, than that Magistrates
too are made for the People.

Nor can any from this Office of the Clergy infer, that the Vulgar are
implicitly to receive their Arbitrary Dictates, no more than I am to make over
my Reason to him I employ to read, transcribe, or collect for me. The Learned
will not, contrary to the Experience of their own Taste, take the Brewer's or
the Baker's Word for the Goodness of Bread or Drink, tho g^orant of their
Craft. And why may not the Vulgar likewise be Judges of the true Sense of
Things, tho they understand nothing of the Tongues from whence they are
translated for their use? Truth is always and every where the same; and an
unintelligible or absurd Proposition is to be never the more respected for
being ancient or strange, for being originally written in Latin, Greek, or
Hebrew. Besides, a Divinity only intelligible to such as live by it, is, in
humane Language, a Trade; and I see not how they can be angry at the Name, that
are so passionately in love with the Thing. But of this in due place.

The Poor, who are not supposed to understand Philosophical Systems, soon
apprehended the Difference between the plain convincing Instructions of Christ,
and the intricate ineffectual Declamations of the Scribes. For the Jewish
Rabbis, divided at that time into Stoic, Platonic, and Pythagorean Sects,
etc. did by a mad Liberty of Allegory, accommodate the Scriptures to the wild
Speculations of their several Masters. They made the People, who comprehended
nothing of their Cabalistick Observations, believe 'em to be all profound
Mysteries; and so taught 'em Subjection to Heathenish Rites, whilst they set
the Law of God at naught by their Traditions. No wonder then if the
disinterested common sort, and the more ingenuous among the Rulers, did reject
these nonsensical Superstitions, tho impudently fathered upon Moses, for a
Religion suited to the Capacities of all, delineated, and foretold by their own
Prophets.

I wish no Application of this could be made, in the following Discourse, to
the Case of any Christians; much less to the purer and better sort. Whoever
considers with what Eagerness and Rigor some Men press Obedience to their own
Constitutions and Discipline, (conniving in the mean while at all Nonconformity
to the Divine Law) bow strictly they enjoin the Observation of unreasonable,
unscriptural Ceremonies, and the Belief of those unfathomable Explanations of
what they stiffly hold themselves to be incomprehensible; I say, who considers
all this, is vehemently tempted to suspect they drive a more selfish Design
than that of instructing the Ignorant, or converting the Sinner. That any
should be hated, despised, and molested; nay, sometimes be charitably burned
and damned, for rejecting those Fooleries superadded, and in many Cases
substituted to the most blessed, pure, and practicable Religion that Men could
wish or enjoy, is Matter of Astonishment and Grief to such as prefer the
Precepts of God to the Inventions of Men, the plain Paths of Reason to the
insuperable Labyrinths of the Fathers, and true Christian Liberty to Diabolical
and Antichristian Tyranny.

But the common Method of teaching and supporting this Mystery of In^quity is
still more intolerable. How many voluminous Systems, infinitely more difficult
than the Script^ (...) read with great Atte^ ^y (...) ^t would be Master of the
present ^-logy? What a prodigious Number of barbarous Words, (mysterious no
doubt) what tedious and immeth^dical Directions, what ridiculous an^ discrepant
Interpretations must you patiently learn and observe, before you can begin to
understand a Professor of that Faculty? The last and easiest part of your
Labor will be, to find his Sentiments in the Bible, tho the holy Penmen never
thought of them, and you never read that sacred Book since you were a
Schoolboy. But a Distrust of your own Reason, a blind Veneration for those
that lived before you, and a firm Resolution of adhering to all the Expositions
of your Party, will do any thing. Believe only, as a sure Foundation for all
your Allegories, that the Words of Scripture, tho never so equivocal and
ambiguous without the Context, may signify every where whatever they can
signify: And, if this be not enough, believe that every Truth is a true Sense
of every Passage of Scripture; that is, that any thing may be made of every
thing: And you will not only find all the New Testament in the Old, and all the
Old in the New; but, I promise you, there is no Explication, tho never so
violent, tho never so contradictory or perplexed, but you may as easily
establish as admit.

But I will not repeat what I have expressly written of this Matter in an
Epistolary Dissertation, now lying by me, entitled, Systems of Divinity
exploded. In the following Discourse, which is the first of three, and wherein
I prove my Subject in general, the Divinity of the New Testament is taken for
granted; so that it regards only Christians immediately, and others but
remotely, who are prayed to weigh my Arguments by the said Supposition. In the
next Discourse, equally concerning Christians and others, I attempt a
particular and rational Explanation of the reputed Mysteries of the Gospel. And
in the third, I demonstrate the Verity of Divine Revelation against Atheists,
and all Enemies of revealed Religion.

This seems to me to be the best Method; for the Order of Nature is in your
Systems of Divinity quite inverted. They prove the Authority and Perfection,
before they teach the Contents of Scripture; whereas the first is in great
measure known by the last. How can any be sure that the Scripture contains all
things necessary to Salvation, till he first reads it over? Nay, how can he
conclude it to be Scripture, or the Word of God, till he exactly studies it, to
speak now of no other Means he must use? This Confusion then I have carefully
avoided; for I prove first, that the true Religion must necessarily be
reasonable and intelligible. Next I show, that these requisite Conditions are
found in Christianity. But seeing a Man of good Parts and Knowledge may easily
frame a clear and coherent System, I demonstrate, Thirdly, that the Christian
Religion was not formed after such a manner, but was divinely revealed from
Heaven. These three Subjects I handle in as many Books; whereof, as I said
before, the following Discourse is the first.

Before I finish, I must take notice of those Gentlemen who love to call Names
in Religion: for what are all Party-Distinctions, but, according to them, so
many sorts of Heretics, or Schismatics, or worse? But I assure them, that I
am neither of Paul, nor of Cephas, nor of Apollos, but of the Lord Jesus Christ
alone, who is the Author and Finisher of my Faith. I have as much Right to have
others called after my Name, as they to give me a Denomination, and that is no
Right at all. I say not this to prevent being invidiously represented,
according to a very common Artifice, under the Notion of any Sect in the World
that is justly or unjustly hated by others. This would be a poor Consideration
indeed! but it is my settled Judgment, that the thing is unlawful in it self to
a good Christian. Leaving others nevertheless their Liberty in this Point, it
must, at least, be granted inconvenient: for if you go under the Name of a
Lutheran, for instance, tho you agree with those of your Communion but in the
main Articles, yet their Adversaries will not fail, upon occasion, to charge
you with those other Matters wherein you dissent: And should you then declare
your Judgment, the rest of the Lutherans will not only be much offended, but be
apt also to call your Sincerity in question about every thing besides; which is
the known Temper of most Sects. The only religious Title therefore that I shall
ever own, for my part, is that most glorious one of being a Christian.

A Word or two more I must add in answer to the Malice or Mistake of some, who
will needs have it that I Am a declared Enemy to all Churchmen, and consequently
(say they) to all Religion, because I make 'em the sole Contrivers of those
inconceivable or mysterious Doctrines, which I also maintain are as
advantageous to themselves, as they are prejudicial to the Laity. Indeed there
are those, who, easily overlooking all Contempt of the true Religion, are very
ready to treat'em as pernicious Heretics, or unsufferable Atheists, that show
the least Dislike of what are acknowledged Additions to Christianity, whatever
Convenience or Necessity may be pretended for their Establishment. If any such
understand by Religion the mysterious Part of it, then truly it will be no hard
matter to prove me as little favorable to this Religion, as I Am far from
making any Apologies for my self to the Professors of it.

As for charging Churchmen with being the Authors and Introducers of the
Christian Mysteries, they must be my Enemies for telling the Truth, who are
displeased at it: for there is no matter of Fact more evident from every Page
both of the Civil, and Ecclesiastic Histories. Nor had the Laity ever any hand
in that Business, otherwise than as confirming by Legal Sanctions what they
were first persuaded to by the preaching of their Priests; as they do now
sometimes, at their Solicitation, imprison excommunicated, and prosecute
erroneous Persons, after the Excommunication is first pronounced, and the
Heresy decreed or declared by the Clergy. Now as all Churchmen are not in
their Opinions for these Practices, so I see no better Reason they have to be
angry with any Body for writing against them that are, than a good Prince can
pretend for punishing the Historian of a Tyrant's Vices, only because the
Tyrant had been likewise a Prince.

To all corrupt Clergymen therefore, who make a mere Trade of Religion, and
build an unjust Authority upon the abused Consciences of the Laity, I Am a
professed Adversary; as I hope every good and wise Man already is, or will be.
But as I shall always remain a hearty Friend to pure and genuine Religion, so I
shall preserve the highest Veneration for the sincere Teachers thereof, than
whom there is not a more useful Order of Men, and without whom there could not
be any happy Society or well constituted Government in this World, to speak
nothing of their Relation to the World to come, nor of the double Esteem which
they deserve for keeping Proof against the general Infection of their
Profession. But I have no Apprehensions from the sincere; and if the designing
Party discover their Concern by their Displeasure, it may well serve for a Mark
to distinguish them, but will not be thought an Injury by me.

ERRATA.
Page 20. l. antepen. f. any r. an. P. 122. l. 9. r. last Chapter. P. 156. l.
ult. r. puris. P. 166. l. 22. r. Decrees.

The CONTENTS.
Page THE State of the Question. 1 Sect. I. Of Reason. 7 Chapter 1. What Reason is
not. 8 2. Wherein Reason consists. 11 3. Of the Means of Information. 16 4. Of
the Ground of Persuasion. 18 Sect. II. That the Doctrines of the Gospel are not
contrary to Reason. 25 Chapter 1. The Absurdities and Effects of admitting any real
or seeming Contradictions in Religion. 26 2. Of the Authority of Revelation, as
it r^gards this Controversy. 38 3. That by Christianity was intended a Rational
and Intelligible Religion, proved from the Miracles, Method, and Style of the
New Testament. 46 4. Objections answered, drawn from the Pravity of Humane
Reason. 56 Sect. III. That there is nothing Mysterious, or above Reason in the
Gospel. 66 Chapter 1. The History and Signification of Mystery, in the Writings of
the Gentiles. 67 2. That nothing ought to be called a Mystery, because we have
not an adequate Idea of all its Properties, nor any at all of its Essence. 74
3. The Signification of the word Mystery, in the New Testament, and the
Writings of the most ancient Christians. 88 4. Objections brought from
particular Texts of Scripture, and from the Nature of Fait^, answered. 120 5.
Objections, drawn from the Consideration of MIRACLES, answered. 144 6. When,
why, and by whom were Mysteries brought into Christianity. 151 The CONCLUSION.
170

CHRISTIANITY not Mysterious, etc.
The State of the Question.
No 1. THERE is nothing that Men make a greater Noise about, in our Time
especially, than what they generally profess least of all to understand. It may
be easily concluded, I mean the Mysteries of the Christian Religion. The
Divines, whose peculiar Province it is to explain them to others, almost
unanimously own their Ignorance concerning them. They gravely tell us, we must
adore what we cannot comprehend: And yet some of 'em press their dubious
Comments upon the rest of Mankind with more Assurance and Heat, than could be
tolerably justified, tho we should grant them to be absolutely infallible. The
worst on it is, they are not all of a Mind. If you be Orthodox to those, you are
a Heretic to these. He that sides with a Party is adjudg'd to Hell by the
Rest; and if he declares for none, he receives no milder Sentence from all.

2. Some of 'em say the Mysteries of the Gospel are to be understood only in
the Sense of the Ancient Fathers. But that is so multifarious, and inconsistent
with it self, as to make it impossible for any Body to believe so many
Contradictions at once. They themselves did caution their Readers from leaning
upon their Authority, without the Evidence of Reason: And thought as little of
becoming a Rule of Faith to their Posterity, as we do to ours. Moreover, as all
the Fathers were not Authors, so we cannot properly be said to have their
genuine Sense. The Works of those that have written are wonderfully corrupted
and adulterated, or not entirely extant: And if they were, their Meaning is
much more obscure, and subject to Controversy, than that of the Scripture.

3. Others tell us we must be of the Mind of some particular Doctors,
pronounced Orthodox by the Authority of the Church. But as we are not a whit
satisfied with any Authority of that Nature, so we see these same particular
Doctors could no more agree than the whole Herd of the Fathers; but tragically
declaimed against one another's Practices and Errors: That they were as
injudicious, violent, and factious as other Men: That they were for the
greatest part very credulous and superstitious in Religion, as well as
pitifully ignorant and superficial in the minutest Punctilios of Literature. In
a word, that they were of the same Nature and Make with our selves; and that we
know of no Privilege above us bestowed upon them by Heaven, except Priority of
Birth, if that be one, as it is likely few will allow.

4. Some give a decisive Voice in the Unravelling of Mysteries, and the
Interpretation of Scripture, to a General Council; and others to one Man whom
they hold to be the Head of the Church Universal upon Earth, and the infallible
Judge of all Controversies. But we do not think such Councils possible, nor (if
they were) to be of more Weight than the Fathers; for they consist of such, and
others as obnoxious altogether to Mistakes and Passions: And besides, we cannot
have Recourse, as to a standing Rule, for the Solution of our Difficulties, to
a wonder by God's Mercy now more rarely seen than the secular Games of old. As
for the one Judge of all Controversies, we suppose none but such as are strongly
prepossessed by Interest or Educat^on can in good earnest digest those
chimerical supreme Headships, and Monsters of Infallibility. We read no where
in the Bible of such delegate Judges appointed by Christ to supply his Office:
And Reason manifestly proclaims them frontless Usurpers. Nor is their Power
finally distinguished from that of Councils to this Hour, by the miserable
Admirers of both.

5. They come nearest the thing who affirm, that we are to keep to what the
Scriptures determine about these Matters: and there is nothing more true, if
rightly understood. But ordinarily it is an equivocal Way of speaking, and
nothing less than the proper Meaning of it is intended by many of those that
use it: For they make the Scriptures speak either according to some spurious
Philosophy, or they conform them right or wrong to the bulky Systems and
Formularies of their several Communions.

6. Some will have us always believe what the literal Sense imports, with
little or no Consideration for Reason, which they reject as not fit to be
employed about the revealed Part of Religion. Others assert, that we may use
Reason as the Instrument, but not the Rule of our Belief. The first contend,
some Mysteries may be, or at least seem to be contrary to Reason, and yet be
received by Faith. The second, that no Mystery is contrary to Reason, but that
all are above it. Both of 'em from different Principles agree, that several
Doctrines of the New Testament belong no farther to the Enquiries of Reason
than to prove 'em divinely revealed, and that they are properly Mysteries still.

7. On the contrary, we hold that Reason is the only Foundation of all
Certitude; and that nothing revealed, whether as to its Manner or Existence, is
more exempted from its Disquisitions, than the ordinary Phenomena of Nature.
Wherefore, we likewise maintain, according to the Title of this Discourse, that
there is nothing in the Gospel contrary to Reason, nor above it; and that no
Christian Doctrine can be properly called a Mystery.

SECTION I. Of REASON.
1. THE State of the Question being thus fairly laid, our next business is to
proceed to the Proof thereof. But as the distinct and brief Explanation of the
Terms is of indispensable use in discussing all Controversies; so an easy and
natural Method is not less pleasing than profitable. It happily falls out that
the Terms of the present Question are disposed according to the Order I design
to observe; which is, First, to show what is meant by Reason, and its
Properties: Then to prove there is no Doctrine of the Gospel contrary to Reason:
After that, to evince that neither is there any of them above Reason; and by
consequence, that none is a Mystery.

CHAP. I. What REASON is not.
2. TO begin with the first, viz. Reason. It appears to me very odd, that Men
should need Definitions and Explanations of that whereby they define and
explain all other things: Or that they cannot agree about what they all
pretend, in some measure at least, to possess; and is the only Privilege they
claim over Brutes and Inanimates. But we find by Experience, that the word
Reason is become as equivocal and ambiguous as any other; though all that are
not tickled with the Vanity of Singularity, or Itch of Dispute, are at bottom
agreed about the Thing. I Will handle it here with what Brevity I can.

3. They are mistaken who take the Soul, abstractedly considered, for Reason:
For as the general Idea of Gold is not a Guinea, but a piece determined to a
particular Stamp and Value; so not the Soul it self, but the Soul acti^g in a
certain and peculiar Manner, is Reason. They err likewise, who affirm Reason to
be that Order, Report, or Relation which is naturally between all things: For
not this, but the Thoughts which the Soul forms of things according to it, may
properly claim that Title. They speed no better who call their own
Inclinations, or the Authority of others, by that Name. But it will better
appear what it is from the following Considerations.

4. Every one experiences in himself a Power or Faculty of forming various
Ideas or Perceptions of Things: Of affirming or denying, according as he sees
them to agree or disagree: And so of loving and desiring what seems good unto
him; and of hating and avoiding what he thinks evil. The right Use of all these
Faculties is what we call Common Sense, or Reason in general. But the bare Act
of receiving Ideas into the Mind, whether by the Intromission of the Senses, as
Colors, Figures, Sounds, Smells, etc. or whether those Ideas be the simple
Operations of the Soul about what it thus gets from without, as mere
Consciousness for Example, Knowing, Affirming, or Denying, without any farther
Considerations: This bare Act, I say, of receiving such Ideas into the M^nd, is
not strictly Reason, because the Soul herein is purely passive. When a proper
Object is conveniently presented to the Eye, Ear, or any other Sense rightly
disposed, it necessarily makes those Impressions which the Mind at the sam^
time cannot refuse to lodge. And we find it can as little forbear being
conscious of its own Thoughts or Operation^ concerning this Object: Thus when
my Eyes are sound and open, as at this time, I have not only an Idea of the
Picture that is before me, but I likewise know, I perceive, and affirm that I
see it, I consider it, it pleases me, I wish it were mine: And thus I form, or
rather after this manner I have first form^d, the Ideas of Knowing, Perceiving,
Affirming, Denying, Considering, Willing, Desiring, and the Ideas of all the
other Operations of the Mind, which are thus occasioned by the Antecedent
Impressions of sensible Objects.

5. By the word IDEA which I make so much use of here, and shall more
frequently in the following Discourse, I understand the immediate Object of the
Mind when it thinks, or any Thought that the Mind imploys about any thing,
whether such a Thought be the Image or Representation of a Body, as is the Idea
of a Tree; or whether it be some Sensation occasioned by any Body, such as are
the Ideas of Cold and Heat, of Smells and Tastes; or whether, lastly, it be a
merely intellectual or abstracted Thought, such as are the Ideas of God and
created Spirits, of Arguing, of Suspension, of Thinking in general, or the like.

CHAP. II. Wherein REASON consists.
6. BUT although these simple and distinct Ideas, thus laid up in the great
Repository of the Understanding, Be not, as was observed, what we call strictly
Reason, yet they are the sole Matter and Foundation of all our Reasoning: For
the Mind does upon occasion compare them together, compound them into complex
Ideas, and enlarge, contract, or separate them, as it discovers their
Circumstances capable or not. So that all our Knowledge is, in effect, nothing
else but the Perception of the Agreement or Disagreement of our Ideas in a
greater or lesser Number, whereinsoever this Agreement or Disagreement may
consist. And because this Perception is immediate or mediate, our Knowledge is
twofold.

7. First, When the Mind, without the Assistance of any other Idea, immediately
perceives the Agreement or Disagreement of two or more Ideas, as that Two and
Two is Four, that Red is not Blew; it cannot be called Reason, tho it be the
highest Degree of Evidence: For here is no need of Discourse or Probation,
Self-evidence excluding all manner of Doubt and Darkness. Propositions so clear
of themselves as to want no Proofs, their Terms being once understood, are
commonly known by the Names of Axioms and Maxims. And it is visible that their
Number is indefinite, and not confined only to two or three abstracted
Propositions made (as all Axioms are) from the Observation of particular
Instances; as, that the Whole is greater than any Part, that Nothing can have
no Properties.

8. But, Secondly, when the Mind cannot immediately perceive the Agreement or
Disagreement of any Ideas, because they cannot be brought near enough together,
and so compared, it applies one or more intermediate Ideas to discover it: as,
when by the successive Application of a Line to two distant Houses, I find how
far they agree or disagree in Length, which I could not effect with my Eye.
Thus from the Force of the Air, and the Room it takes up, I know it has
Solidity and Extension; and that therefore it is as much a Body (tho I cannot
see it) as Wood, or Stone, with which it agrees in the said Properties. Here
Solidity and Extension are the Line by which I find Air and Body are equal, or
that Air is a Body; because Solidity and Extension agree to both. We prove the
least imaginable Particle of Matter divisible, by showing all Bodies to be
divisible; because every Particle of Matter is likewise a Body: and after the
like manner, is the Mortality of all living Bodies inferred from their
Divisibility. This Method of Knowledge is properly called Reason or
Demonstration, (as the former Self-evidence or Intuition); and it may be
defined, That Faculty of the Soul which discovers the Certainty of any thing
dubious or obscure, by comparing it with something evidently known.

9. From this Definition it is plain, that the intermediate Idea can be no
Proof where its Agreement with both the Ideas of the Question is not evident;
and that if more than one Idea be necessary to make it appear, the same
Evidence is required in each of them. For if the Connection of all the Parts of
a Demonstration were not indubitable, we could never be certain of the
Inference or Conclusion whereby we join the two Extremes: So tho Self-evidence
excludes Reason, yet all Demonstration becomes at length self-evident. It is
yet plainer, that when we have no Notions or Ideas of a thing, we cannot reason
about it at all; and where we have Ideas, if intermediate ones, to show their
constant and necessary Agreement or Disagreement, fail us, we can never go
beyond Probability. Tho we have an Idea of inhabited, and an Idea of the Moon,
yet we have no intermediate Idea to show such a necessary Connection between
them, as to make us certainly conclude that this Planet is inhabited, however
likely it may seem. Now, since PROBABILITY is not KNOWLEDGE, I banish all
HYPOTHESES from my PHILOSOPHY; because if I admit never so many, yet my
knowledge is not a jot increased: for no evident Connection appearing between my
Ideas, I may possibly take the wrong side of the Question to be the right,
which is equal to knowing nothing of the Matter. When I have arrived at
Knowledge, I enjoy all the Satisfaction that attends it; where I have only
Probability, there I suspend my Judgment, or, if it be worth the Pains, I
search after Certainty.

CHAP. III. Of the Means of INFORMATION.
10. BUT besides these Properties of Reason which we have explained, we are yet
most carefully to distinguish in it the Means of Information, from the Ground
of Persivasion: for the Neglect of this easy Distinction has thrown Men into
infinite Mistakes, as I shall prove before I have done. The Means of
Information I call those Ways whereby any thing comes barely to our Knowledge,
without necessarily commanding our Assent. By the Ground of Persuasion, I
understand that Rule by which we judge of all Truth, and which irresistibly
convinces the Mind. The Means of Information are EXPERIENCE and AUTHORITY:
Experience (as you may see No 4.) is either external, which furnishes us with
the Ideas of sensible Objects; or internal, which helps us to the Ideas of the
Operations of our own Minds. This is the common Stock of all our Knowledge; nor
can we possibly have Ideas any other way without new Organs or Faculties.

11. Authority, abusively so called, as if all its Informations were to be
received without Examen, is either Humane or Divine: Humane Authority is called
also Moral Certitude; as when I believe an intelligible Relation made by my
Friend, because I have no Reason to suspect his Veracity, nor he any Interest
to deceive me. Thus all possible Matters of Fact, duly attested by coevous
Persons as known to them, and successively related by others of different
Times, Nations, or Interests, who could neither be imposed upon themselves, nor
be justly suspected of combining together to deceive others, ought to be
received by us for as certain and indubitable as if we had seen them with our
own Eyes, or heard them with our own Ears. By this means it is, I believe there
was such a City as Carthage, such a Reformer as Luther, and that there is such
a Kingdom as Poland. When all these Rules concur in any Matter of Fact, I take
it then for Demonstration, which is nothing else but Irresistible Evidence from
proper Proofs: But where any of these Conditions are wanting, the thing is
uncertain, or, at best, but probable, which, with me, are not very different.

12. The Authority of God, or Divine Revelation, is the Manifestation of Truth
by Truth it self, to whom it is impossible to lie: Whereof at large in Chapter 2.
of the following Section. Nothing in Nature can come to our Knowledge but by
some of these four means, viz. The Experience of the Senses, the Experience of
the Mind, Humane and Divine Revelation.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ground of PERSUASION.
13. NOW, as we are extremely subject to Deception, we may, without some
infallible Rule, often take a questionable Proposition for an Axiom, Old Wives
Fables for Moral Certitude, and Humane Impostures for Divine Revelation. This
infallible Rule, or Ground of all right Persuasion, is Evidence; and it
consists in the exact Conformity of our Ideas or Thoughts with their Objects,
or the Things we think upon. For as we have only Ideas in us, and not the
Things themselves, it is by those we must form a Judgment of these.

14. Ideas therefore being Representative Beings, their Evidence naturally
consists in the Property they have of truly representing their Objects. Not
that I think every Idea has a perfect Pattern to represent, as the Ideas of
Length and Motion in my Mind are like the Length and Motion of the Pen I
handle; for some Ideas are but the Result of certain Powers in the Particles of
Bodies to OCCASION particular Sensations in us; as the Sweetness of Sugar and
the Cold of Ice, are no more inherent in them than Pain in the Knife that cuts
me, or Sickness in the Fruit that surfeits me. But tho such occasional Ideas
have no Existence out of our Imagination, yet the Pleasure, Pain, and other
Qualities they excite, show us the Good or Harm their Subjects may do us; which
renders the Knowledge of them as useful as that of the Properties which really
exist in the Things themselves. Without the Heat and Light of Fire, what should
its Figure and Quantity serve for? And what sets a Price upon Ambergris, but
the Perfume? The Reason then why I believe the Idea of a Rose to be evident, is
the true Representation it gives me of that Flower. I know it is true, because
the Rose must contain all the Properties which its Idea exhibits, either
really, as the Bulk and Form, or occasionally, as the Color, Taste and Smell.
And I cannot doubt of this, because the Properties must belong to the exemplary
Cause, or to Nothing, or be the Figments of my own Brain: But Nothing can have
no Properties; and I cannot make one single Idea at my Pleasure, nor avoid
receiving Ideas when Objects work on my Senses: Therefore I conclude the
Properties of the Rose are not the Creatures of my Fancy, but belong to the
exemplary Cause, that is, the Object.

15. The Evidence of the Ideas of the Operations of the Mind, is infallible as
that of our own Being; and ^f by any Impossibility we should call the latter in
question, 'twould but serve to give us the greater Assurance of it: For besides
the unavoidable Supposition of our Existence in this very Proposition, I doubt
if I am; so it is clear, that whatever doubts must needs be as much something
as what affirms, and this something I call my self. Let us now but strictly
require this Evidence in all the Agreements and Disagreements of our Ideas in
things merely speculative, and as far as we can in Matters of common Practice,
(for these must of necessity sometimes admit Probability to supply the Defect
of Demonstration); and we may without a lazy Reliance upon Authority, or a
skeptical Progress to Infinity, successfully trace the Truth, and bring it to
view the Light from those subterraneous Caverns where it is supposed to lie
concealed. It is impossible for us to err as long as we take Evidence for our
Guide; and we never mistake, but when we wander from it by abusing our Liberty,
in denying that of any thing which belongs to it, or attributing to it what we
do not see in its Idea. This is the primary and universal Origin of all our
Errors.

16. But God the wife Creator of all, (ever to be named and thought upon with
Reverence) who has enabled us to perceive Things, and form Judgments of them,
has also endu'd us with the Power of suspending our Judgments about whatever is
uncertain, and of never assenting but to clear Perceptions. He is so far from
putting us upon any Necessity of erring, that as he has thus privileged us on
the one hand with a Faculty of guarding our selves against Prepossession, or
Precipitation, by placing our Liberty only in what is indifferent, or dubious
and obscure; so he provides on the other hand, that we should discern and
embrace the Truth, by taking it out of our Power to dissent from an evident
Proposition. We must necessarily believe, that it is impossible the same thing
should be and not be at once: Nor can all the World persuade us to doubt of it.
But we need not admit that there is no Void in Nature, or that the Earth
absolves an annual Course about the Sun, till we get Demonstrations to that
Effect.

17. If People precipitate their Assent, either because they find the Search of
Truth attended with more Difficulties than they are willing to run through, or
because they would not seem to be ignorant of anything, this is their fault.
Wherefore let us attribute all our false Notions to our own Anticipation and
Inattention: Let us confess our Destruction to be of our selves; and cheerfully
2 Pct. 2. 1.
thank our kind Disposer, who has put us under a Law of bowing before the Light
and Majesty of Evidence. And truly if we might doubt of any thing that is
clear, or be deceived by distinct Conceptions, there could be nothing certain:
Neither Conscience, nor God himself, should be regarded: No Society or
Government could subsist. But it is as true, that if we could not suspend our
Assent to dubious or obscure Propositions, Almighty Goodness (which is
impossible) should be the real Cause of all our Errors.

18. If it should be asked, why Assent is denied to true Propositions, since
Evidence necessarily requires it? I answer, it is because they are not made
evident: For Perspicuity and Obscurity are relative Terms, and what is either
to me may be the quite contrary to another. If Things be delivered in Words not
understood by the Hearer, nor demonstrated to agree with other Truths already
very clear, or now so made to him, he cannot conceive'em. Likewise if the Order
of Nature and due Simplicity be not observed, he cannot see them evidently true
or false; and so suspends his Judgment, (if no Affection sways him) where
another, it may be, receives perfect Satisfaction. Hence it is that we
frequently, with Indignation and Wonder, attribute that to the Stupidity and
Obstinacy of others, which is the Fruit of our own confused Ratiocination, sor
want of having thoroughly digested our Thoughts; or by affecting ambiguous
Expressions, and using such as the other has no Ideas to at all, or different
ones from ours.

SECT. II. That the Doctrines of the Gospel are not contrary to Reason.
1. AFter having said so much of Reason, I need not operosely show what it is
to be contrary to it; for I take it to be very intelligible from the precedent
Section, that what is evidently repugnant to clear and distinct Ideas, or to
our common Notions, is contrary to Reason: I go on therefore to prove, that the
Doctrines of the Gospel, if it be the Word of God, cannot be so. But if it be
objected, that very few maintain they are: I reply, that no Christian I know of
now (for we shall not disturb the Ashes of the Dead) expressly says Reason and
the Gospel are contrary to one another. But, which returns to the same, very
many affirm, that tho the Doctrines of the latter cannot in themselves be
contradictory to the Principles of the former, as proceeding both from God;
yet, that according to our Conceptions of them, they may seem directly to
clash: And that tho we cannot reconcile them by reason of our corrupt and
limited Understandings; yet that from the Authority of Divine Revelation, we
are bound to believe and acquiesce in them; o^, as the Fathers taught 'em to
speak, to adore what we cannot comprehend.

CHAP. I. The Absurdity and Effects of admitting any real or seeming
Contradictions in RELIGION.
2. THIS famous and admirable Doctrine is the undoubted Source of all the
Absurdities that ever were seriously vented among Christiens. Without the
Pretense of it, we should never hear of the Transubstantiation, and other
ridiculous Fables of the Church of Rome; nor of any of the Eastern Ordures,
almost all received into this Western Sink: Nor should we be ever banter'd with
the Lutheran Impanation, or the Ubiquity it has produced, as one Monster
ordinarily begets another. And tho the Socinians disown this Practice, I am
mistaken if either they or the Arians can make their Notions of a dignified and
Creature-God capable of Divine Worship, appear more reasonable than the
Extravagancies of other Sects touching the Article of the Trinity.

3. In short, this Doctrine is the known Refuge of some Men, when they are at a
loss in explaining any Passage of the Word of God. Lest they should appear to
others less knowing than they would be thought, they make nothing of fathering
that upon the secret Counsels of the Almighty, or the Nature of the Thing,
which is, it may be, the Effect of Inaccurate Reasoning, Unskilfulness in the
Tongues, or Ignorance of History. But more commonly it is the Consequence of
early Impressions, which they dare seldom afterward correct by more free and
riper Thoughts: So desiring to be Teachers of the Law, and understan^ing 1 Timothy
1. 7.
neither what they say, nor those things which they affirm, they obtrude upon
us for Doctrines the Commandments of Men. Mat. 15. 9.
And truly well they may; for if we once admit this Principle, I know not what
we can deny that is to^d us in the Name of the Lord. This Doctrine, I must
remark it too, does highly concern us of the Laity; for however it came to be
first established, the Clergy (always excepting such as deserve it) have not
been since wanting to themselves, but improved it so far as not only to make
the plainest, but the most trifling things in the World mysterious, that we
might constantly depend upon them for the Explication. And nevertheless, they
must not, if they could, explain them to us, without ruining their own Design,
let them never so fairly pretend it. But, overlooking all Observations proper
for this Place, let us enter upon the immediate Examen of the Opinion it self.

4. The first thing I shall insist upon is, that if any Doctrine of the New
Testament be contrary to Reason, we have no manner of Idea of it. To say, for
instance, that a Ball is white and black at once, is to say just nothing; for
these Colors are so incompatible in the same Subject, as to exclude all
Possibility of a real positive Idea or Conception. So to say, as the Papists,
that Children dying before Baptism are damned without Pain, signifies nothing
at all: For if they be intelligent Creatures in the other World, to be
eternally excluded God's Presence, and the Society of the Blessed, must prove
ineffable Torment to them: But if they think they have no Understanding, then
they are not capable of Damnation in their Sense; and so they should not say
they are in Limbo-Dungeon, but that either they had no Souls, or were
annihilated; which (had it been true, as they can never show) would be
reasonable enough, and easily conceived. Now if we have no Ideas of a thing, it
is certainly but lost Labor for us to trouble our selves about it: For what I
don't conceive, can no more give me right Notions of God, or influence my
Actions, than a Prayer delivered in an unknown Tongue can excite my Devotion:
If the Trumpet gives an uncertain Sound, 1 Cor. 14. 8, 9.
who shall prepare himself to the Battle? And except Words easy to be
understood be uttered, how shall it be known what is spok^? Syllables, tho
never so well put together, if they have not Ideas fixed to them, are but Words
spoken in Ver. 9.
the Air; and cannot be the Ground of a reasonable Service, or Worship. Romans
12. 1.


5. If any should think to evade the Difficulty by saying, that the Ideas of
certain Doctrines may be contrary indeed to common Notions, yet consistent with
themselves, and I know not what supra-intellectual Truths, he is but just where
he was. But supposing a little that the thing were so; it still follows, that
none can understand these Doctrines except their Perceptions be communicated to
him in an extraordinary manner, as by new Powers and Organs. And then too,
others cannot be edifi'd by what is discoursed of 'em, unless they enjoy the
same Favor. So that if I would go preach the Gospel to the Wild Indians, I
must expect the Ideas of my Words should be, I know not how, infused into their
Souls in order to apprehend me: and according to this Hypothesis, they could no
more, without a Miracle, understand my Speech than the chirping of Birds; and
if they knew not the Meaning of my 1 Cor. 14. 11.
Voice, I should even to them be a B^rbarian, notwithstanding I spoke Mysteries
Ver. 2.
in the Spirit. But what do they mean by consisting with themselves, yet not
with our common Notions? Four may be called Five in Heaven; but so the Name
only is changed, the Thing remains still the same. And since we cannot in this
World know any thing but by our common Notions, how shall we be sure of this
pretended Consistency between our present seeming Contradictions, and the
Theology of the World to come? For as it is by Reason we arrive at the Certainty
of God's own Existence, so we cannot otherwise discern his Revelations but by
their Conformity with our natural Notices of him, which is in so many words, to
agree with our common Notions.

6. The next thing I shall remark is, That those, who stick not to say they
could believe a downright Contradiction to Reason, did they find it contained
in the Scripture, do justify all Absurdities whatsoever; and, by opposing one
Light to another, undeniably make God the Author of all Incertitude. The very
Supposition, that Reason might authorize one thing, and the Spirit of God
another, throws us into inevitable Skepticism; for we shall be at a perpetual
Uncertainty which to obey: Nay, we can never be sure which is which. For the
Proof of the Divinity of Scripture depending upon Reason, if the clear Light of
the one might be any way contradicted, how shall we be convinced of the
Infallibility of the other? Reason may err in this Point as well as in any
thing else; and we have no particular Promise it shall not, no more than the
Papists that their Senses may not deceive them in every thing as well as in
Transubstantiation. To say it bears witness to it self, is equally to establish
the Alcoran or the Poran. And 'twere a notable Argument to tell a Heathen, that
the Church has declared it, when all Societies will say as much for themselves,
if we take their word for it. Besides, it may be, he would ask whence the
Church had Authority to decide this Matter? And if it should be answered from
the Scripture, a thousand to one but he would divert himself with this Circle.
You must believe that the Scripture is Divine, because the Church has so
determined it, and the Church has this deciding Authority from the Scripture.
It Is doubted if this Power of the Church can be proved from the Passages
alleged to that purpose; but the Church it self (a Party concerned) affirms
it. Hey-day! are not these eternal Rounds very exquisite Inventions to giddy
and entangle the Unthinking and the Weak?

7. But if we believe the Scripture to be Divine, not upon its own bare
Assertion, but from a real Testimony consisting in the Evidence of the things
contained therein; from undoubted Effects, and not from Words and Letters; what
is this but to prove it by Reason? It has in it self, I grant, the brightest
Characters of Divinity: But it is Reason finds them out, examines them, and by
its Principles approves and pronounces them sufficient; which orderly begets in
us an Acquiescence of Faith or Persuasion. Now if Particulars be thus severely
sifted; if not only the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles be considered, but
also their Lives, Predictions, Miracles, and Deaths; surely all this Labor
would be in vain, might we upon any account dispense with Contradictions. O!
blessed and commodious System, that dischargest at one stroke those troublesome
Remarks about History, Language, figurative and literal Senses, Scope of the
Writer, Circumstances, and other Helps of Interpretation! We judge of a Man's
Wisdom and Learning by his Actions, and his Discourses; but God, who we are
assured has not left himself without a Witness, Acts 14. 17.
must have no Privileges above the maddest Enthusiast, or the Devil himself, at
this rate.

8. But a Veneration for the very Words of God will be pretended: This we are
pleased with; for we know that God is not a Man that he should lie. Number. 23. 19.
But the Question is not about the Words, but their Sense, which must be ever
worthy of their Author, and therefore according to the Genius of all Speech,
figuratively interpreted, when occasion requires it. Otherwise, under pretense
of Faith in the Word of God, the highest Follies and Blasphemies may be deduced
from the Letter of Scripture; as, that God is subject to Passions, is the
Author of Sin, that Christ is a Rock, was actually guilty of and defiled with
our Transgressions, that we are Worms or Sheep, and no Men. And if a Figure be
admitted in these Passages, why not, I pray, in all Expressions of the like
Nature, when there appears an equal Necessity for it?

9. It may be demanded why I have so long insisted upon this Article, since
that none expressly makes Scripture and Reason contradictory, was acknowledged
before? But in the same place mention is made of some who hold, that they may
seem directly to clash; and that tho we cannot reconcile them together, yet
that we are bound to acquiesce in the Decisions of the former. A seeming
Contradiction is to us as much as a real one; and our Respect for the Scripture
does not require us to grant any such in it, but rather to conclude, that we
are ignorant of the right Meaning when a Difficulty occurs; and so to suspend
our Judgment concerning it, till with suitable Helps and Industry we discover
the Truth. As for acquiescing in what a Man understands not, or cannot
reconcile to his Reason, they know best the fruits of it that practice it. For
my part, I Am a Stranger to it, and cannot reconcile my self to such a
Principle. On the contrary, I am pretty sure he pretends in vain to convince
the Judgment, who explains not the Nature of the Thing. A Man may give his
verbal Assent to he knows not what, out of Fear, Superstition, Indifference,
Interest, and the like feeble and unfair Motives: but as long as he conceives
not what he believes, he cannot sincerely acquiesce in it, and remains deprived
of all solid Satisfaction. He is constantly perplexed with Scruples not to be
removed by his implicit Faith; and so is ready to be shaken, and carried away
with every wind Ephesians. 4. 14.
of Doctrine. I will believe because I will believe, that is, because I Am in
the Humor so to do, is the top of his Apology. Such are unreasonable Men,
walking after the Vanity of their Minds, having their Understandings darkened,
Ephesians. 4. 17, 18.
being Strangers to the Life of God through the Ignorance that is in them,
because of the Hardness of their Hearts. But he that comprehends a thing, is as
sure of it as if he were himself the Author. He can never be brought to suspect
his Profession; and, if he be honest, will always render a pertinent account of
it to others.

10. The natural Result of what has been said is, That to believe the Divinity
of Scripture, or the Sense of any Passage thereof, without rational Proofs, and
an evident Consistency, is a blameable Credulity, and a temerarious Opinion,
ordinarily grounded upon an ignorant and wilful Disposition, but more generally
maintained out of a gainful Prospect. For we frequently embrace certain
Doctrines not from any convincing Evidence in them, but because they serve our
Designs better than the Truth; and because other Contradictions we are not
willing to quit, are better defended by their means.

CHAP. II. Of the Authority of REVELATION, as it regards this Controversy.
11. AGainst all that we have been establishing in this Section, the Authority
of Revelation will be alleged with great show, as if without a Right of
silencing or extingu shing REASON, it were altogether useless and impertinent.
But if the Distinction I made in the precedent Section, N. 9. be well
considered, the Weakness of the present Objection will quickly appear, and this
Controversy be better understood hereaster. There I said REVELATION was not a
necessitating Motive of Assent, but a Mean of Information. We should not
confound the Way whereby we come to the knowledge of a thing, with the Grounds
we have to believe it. A Man may inform me concerning a thousand Matters I
never heard of before, and of which I should not as much as think if I were not
told; yet I believe nothing purely upon his word without Evidence in the things
themselves. Not the bare Authority of him that speaks, but the clear Conception
I form of what he says, is the Ground of my Persuasion.

12. If the sincerest Person on Earth should assure me he saw a Cane without
two ends, I neither should nor could believe him; because this Relation plainly
contradicts the Idea of a Cane. But if he told me he saw a Staff that, being by
chance laid in the Earth, did after some time put forth Sprigs and Branches, I
could easily rely upon his Veracity; because this no way contradicts the Idea
of a Staff, nor transcends Possibility.

13. I say Possibility; for Omnipotency it self can do no more. They impose
upon themselves and others, who require Assent to things contradictory, because
God, say they, can do all things, and it were limiting of his Power to affirm
the contrary. Very good! we heartily believe God can do all things: But that
mere NOTHING should be the Object of his Power, the very Omnipotency alleged
will not permit us to conceive. And that every Contradiction, which is a
Synonym for Impossibility, is pure nothing, we have already sufficiently
demonstrated. To say, for example, that a thing is extended and not extended,
is round and square at once, is to say nothing; for these Ideas destroy one
another, and cannot subsist together in the same Subject. But when we clearly
perceive a perfect Agreement and Connection between the Terms of any
Proposition, we then conclude it possible because intelligible: So I understand
God may render immediately solid, what has been hitherto fluid; make present
Beings cease to exist or change their Forms; and call those things that are
not, as tho they were. Romans 4. 17.
When we say then, that nothing is impossible with God, or that he can do all
things, we mean whatever is possible in it self, however far above the Power of
Creatures to effect.

14. Now, such is the Nature of a Matter of Fact, that tho it may be conceived
possible enough, yet he only can with Assurance assert its Existence who is
himself the Author, or by some Means of Information comes first to the certain
knowledge of it. That there was such an Island as Jamaica, no European could
ever reasonably deny: And yet that it was precisely situated in such a
Latitude, was watered with those Rivers, clothed with these Woods, bore this
Grain, produced that Plant, no Englishman before the Discovery of America,
could positively affirm.

15. Thus God is pleased to reveal to us in Scripture several wonderful Matters
of Fact, as the Creation of the World, the last Judgment, and many other
important Truths, which no Man left to himself could ever imagine, no more than
any of my Fellow Creatures can be sure of my private Thoughts: For who knows
the things of a Man 1 Cor. 2. ii.
save the Spirit of a Man that is in him? even so the things of God knows
none but the Spirit of God. But as secret things belong unto the Lord; so those
things Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
which are revealed, belong unto us and to our Children. Yet, as we discoursed
before, we do not receive them only because they are revealed: For besides the
infallible Testimony of the Revelation from all requisite Circumstances, we
must see in its Subject the indisputable Characters of DIVINE WISDOM and SOUND
REASON; which are the only Marks we have to disting^ish the Oracles and Will of
God, from the Impostures and Traditions of Men.

16. Whoever reveals any thing, that is, whoever tells us something we did not
know before, his Words must be intelligible, and the Matter possible. This RULE
holds good, let God or Man be the Revealer. If we count that Person a Fool who
requires our Assent to what is manifestly incredible, how dare we blasphemously
attribute to the most perfect Being, what is an acknowledged Defect in one of
our selves? As for unintelligible Relations, we can no more believe them from
the Revelation of God, than from that of Man; for the conceived Ideas of things
are the only Subjects of Believing, Denying, Approving, and every other Act of
the Understanding: Therefore all Matters revealed by God or Man, must be
equally intelligible and possible; so far both Revelations agree. But in this
they differ, that tho the Revelation of Man should be thus qualified, yet he
may impose upon me as to the Truth of the thing; whereas what God is pleased to
discover to me is not only clear to my Reason, (without which his Revelation
could make me no wiser) but likewise it is always true. A Man, for Example,
acquaints me that he has found a Treasure: This is plain and possible, but he
may easily deceive me. God assures me, that he has formed Man of Earth: This is
not only possible to God, and to me very intelligible; but the thing is also
most certain, God not being capable to deceive me, as Man is. We are then to
expect the same degree of Perspicuity from God as from Man, tho more of
Certitude from the first than the last.

17. This Reason persuades, and the Scriptures expressly speakit. Those Prophets
or Dreamers were to be stoned Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3.
to Death that should go about to seduce the People from the Worship of One God
to The Service of many Gods.
Polytheism, tho they should confirm their Doctrine by Signs and Wonders. And
tho a Prophet spoke in the Name of the Lord, yet if the thing prophesi'd did
not come to pass, it was to be a rational Sign he spoke presumptuously of
himself, and not of God. It Deuteronomy. 18. 21, 22.
was revealed to the Prophet Jeremy in Prison, that his Uncle's Son would sell
his Field to him, but he did not conclude Jer. 32. 7, 8
it to be the Word of the Lord till his Kinsman actually came to strike the
Bargain with him. The Virgin MARY, tho of that Sex that is least Proof against
Flattery and Superstition, did not implicitly believe she should bear a Child
that was to be called the Son of the Luke 1, 34, 35.
most High, and of whose Kingdom there should be no end, till the Angel gave
her a satisfactory Answer to the strongest Objection that could be made: Nor
did she then conclude (so unlike was she to her present Worshippers) it should
unavoidably come to pass; but humbly acknowledging the Possibility, and her own
Unworthiness, she quietly Ver. 38.
wished and expected the Event.

18. In how many places are we exhorted to beware of false Prophets and Mat. 7.
14. 2 Timothy 3. 13. Tit. 1. 10. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. 1 John 4. 1.
Teachers, Seducers and Deceivers? We are not only to prove or try all things,
and to hold fast that which is best, but also to try the Spirits whether they
be of God. But how shall we try? how shall we discern? Not as the Horse and
Mule which have no Understanding, but Psalm. 32. 9.
as circumspect and wise Men, judging Ephesians. 5. 15: 1 Cor. 10. 15.
what is said. In a word, it was from clear and weighty Reasons, both as to
Fact and Matter, and not by a blind Obedience, that the Men of God of old
embraced his Revelations, which on the like Account we are willing to receive
of their hands. I am not ignorant how some boast they are strongly persuaded by
the illuminating and efficacious Operation of the Holy Spirit, and that they
neither have nor approve other Reasons of their FAITH: But we shall endeavor
in its proper place to undeceive them; for no Adversary, how absurd or trifling
soever, ought to be superciliously disregarded by an unfeigned Lover of Men and
Truth. So far of REVELATION; only in making it a Mean of Information, I follow
Paul himself, who tells the Corinthians, that he cannot profit them except he
speaks to them by Revelation, or by 1 Cor. 14. 6.
Knowledge, or by Prophesying, or by Doctrine.

CHAP. III.
That by CHRISTIANITY ^s intended a Rational and Intelligible, Religion; proved
from the Miracles, Method and Style of the New Testament.

19. WHAT we discoursed of REASON before, and REVELATION now, being duly
weighed, all the Doctrines and Precepts of the New Testament (if it be indeed
Divine) must consequently agree with Natural Reason, and our own ordinary
Ideas. This every considerate and wel-dispos'd Person will find by the careful
perusal of it: And whoever undertakes this Task, will confess the Gospel not to
be hidden from us, nor afar off, but very nigh us, in our Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 14.
Mouths, and in our Hearts. It asfords the most illustrious Examples of close
and perspicuous Ratiocination conceivable; which is incumbent on me in the
Explication of its MYSTERIES, to demonstrate. And tho the Evidence of Christ's
Doctrine might claim the Approbation of the Gentiles, and its Conformity with
the Types and Prophecies of the Old Testament, with all the Marks of the
MESSIAH concurring in his Person, might justly challenge the Assent of his
Countrymen; yet to leave no room for doubt, he proves his Authority and Gospel
by such Works, and Miracles as the stiffneck'd Jews themselves could not deny
to be Divine. Nicodemus says to him, No Man can do these Miracles which thou
Joh. 3. 2.
do, except God be with him. Some of the Pharisees acknowledged no Sinner
Joh. 9. 16.
could do such things. And others, that they exceedea the Power of the Devil.
Joh. 10. 21.


20. JESUS himself appeals to his very Enemies, ready to stone him for
pretended Blasphemy, saying; If I do Joh. 10. 37, 38.
not the Works of my Father, believe me not: But if I do, believe not me,
believe the Works; that you may know, and believe that the Father is in me, and
I in him: That is, believe not rashly on me, and so give a Testimony to my
Works; but search the Scriptures, which testify of the Messiah; consider the
Works I do, whether they be such as become God, and are attributed to him: If
they be, then conclude and believe that I am he, etc. In effect, several of the
People said, that Christ when he should come Joh. 7. 31.
could do no greater Wonders; and many of the Jews believed, when they saw the
Joh. 2. 23.
Miracles which he did.

21. How shall we escape, says the Apostle, Heb. 2. 3, 4.
if we neglect so great a Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by
the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him; God also bearing
them witness with diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to
his own Will? Those who heard Christ, the Author of our Religion, speak, and
saw the Wonders which he wrought, renounce all the hidden things of Dishonesty,
all Craftiness and deceitful handling of the 2 Cor. 4. 2.
Word of God: And that they manifest nothing but Truth, they commend themselves
to every Man's Conscience, that is, they appeal to every Man's Reason, in the
Sight of God. Peter exhorts Christians to be ready always to give an Answer to
every one that asks them a 1 P^t. 3. 15.
Reason of their Hope. Now to what purpose served all these Miracles, all these
Appeals, if no Regard was to be had of Men's Understandings? if the Doctrines of
Christ were incomprehensible, contradictory; or were we obliged to believe
revealed Non-Jense? Now if these Miracles be true, Christianity must
consequently be intelligible; and if false, (which our Adversaries will not
grant) they can be then no Arguments against us.

22. But to insist no longer upon such Passages, all Men will own the Verity I
defend, if they read the sacred Writings with that Equity and Attention that is
due to mere Humane Works: Nor is there any different Rule to be followed in the
Interpretation of Scripture from what is common to all other Books. Whatever
unprejudiced Person shall use those Means, will find them notorious Deceivers,
or much deceived themselves, who maintain the New Testament is written without
any Order or certain Scope, but just as Matters came into the Apostles Heads,
whether transported with Enthusiastic Fits, (as some will have it) or,
according to others, for lack of good Sense and a liberal Education. I think I
may justly say, that they are Strangers to true Method, who complain of this
Confusion and Disorder. But the Proof of the Case depends not upon
Generalities: Tho, whenever it is proved, I will not promise that every one
shall find a Justification of the particular Method he was taught, or he has
chosen, to follow. To defend any PARTY is not my business, but to discover the
TRUTH.

23. The Facility of the GOSPEL is not confined only to Method; for the Style
is also most easy, most natural, and in the common Dialect of those to whom it
was immediately consigned. Should any preach in Xenophon's strain to the
present Greeks, or in correct English to the Country People in Scotland,
'twould cost them much more Time and Pains to learn the very Words, than the
Knowledge of the Things denoted by them. Of old, as well as in our time, the
Jews understood Hebrew worse than the Tongues of those Regions where they
dwelt. No Pretcnces therefore can be drawn from the Obscurity of the Language
in favor of the irrational Hypothesis: for all Men are supposed to understand
the daily Use of their Mother Tongue; whereas the Style of the Learned is
unintelligible to the Vulgar. And the plainest Authors that write as they
speak, without the Disguise of pompous Elegance, have ever been accounted the
best by all good Judges. It is a visible Effect of Providence that we have in
our Hands the Monuments of the Old Testament, which in the New are always
supposed, quoted, or alluded to. Nor is that all, for the Jewish Service and
Customs continue to this day. If this had been true of the Greeks and Romans,
we should be furnished with those Helps to understand aright many unknown
Particulars of their Religion, which make us Rulers and Teachers in Israel.
Besides, we have the Talmud, and other Works of the Rabbis, which, however
otherwise useless, give us no small Light into the ancient Rites and Language.
And if after all we should be at a loss about the Meaning of any Expression, we
ought rather to charge it upon Distance of Time, and the want of more Books in
the same Tongue, than to attribute it to the Nature of the thing, or the
Ignorance of the Author, who might be easily understood by his Countrymen and
Contemporaries. But no Truth is to be established, nor Falsehood confuted from
such Passages, no more than any can certainly divine his Fortune from the Sound
of Bow-bell.

24. If any object, that the Gospel is penned with little or no Ornament, that
there are no choice of Words, nor studi'd Expressions in it; the Accusation is
true, and the Apostles themselves acknowledge it: nor is there a more palpable
Demonstration of their having designed to be understood by all. I came not to
you, says Paul, with Excellency of Speech, or Wisdom, declaring 1 Cor. 2. 1.
unto you the Testimony of God. My Speech and my Preaching was not with
enticing Words of Humane Wisdom, but Ver. 4.
in Demonstration, or Conviction of the Spirit or Mind, and in Power or
Efficacy. This he speaks in reference to the Philosophers and Orators of those
Times, whose Elocution, it is confessed, was curious, and Periods elaborate, apt
to excite the Admiration of the Hearers, but not to satisfy their Reasons;
charming indeed their Senses whilst in the Theater, or the Temple, but making
them neither the better at home, nor the wiser abroad.

25. These Men, as well as many of their modern Successors, were fond enough of
their own ridiculous Systems, to count the things of God Foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.
14.
because they did not agree with their precarious and sensual Notions; because
every Sentence was not wrapped up in Mystery, and garnished with a Figure: not
considering that only false or trivial Matters need the Assistance of alluring
Harangues to perplex or amuse. But they were Enemies and Strangers to the
Simplicity of Truth. All their Study, as we took notice, lay in tickling the
Passions of the People at their Pleasure with bombast Eloquence, and apish
Gesticulations. They boasted their Talent of persuading for or against any
thing. And as he was esteemed the best Orator that made the worst Cause appear
the most equitable before the Judges, so he was the best Philosopher that could
get the wildest Paradox to pass for Demonstration. They were only concerned
about their own Glory and Gain, which they could not otherwise support, but
(according to an Artifice that never fails, and therefore ever practiced) by
imposing upon the People with their Authority and Sophistry, and under pretense
of instructing, dexterously detaining them in the grossest Ignorance.

26. But the Scope of the Apostles was very different: Piety toward God, and
the Peace of Mankind, was their Gain, and Christ and his Gospel their Glory;
they came not magnifying nor exalting themselves; not imposing but declaring
their Doctrine: they did not confound and mislead, but convince the Mind; they
were employed to dispel Ignorance, to eradicate Superstition, to propagate
Truth, and Reformation of Manners; to preach Deliverance to Captives, (i. e.)
the Enjoyment Luke 4. 18.
of Christian Liberty to the Slaves of the Levitical, and Pagan Priesthoods;
and to declare Salvation to repenting Sinners.

27. I shall add here some of the Characters which David gives of the Law and
Word of God, that we may admit nothing as the Will of Heaven but what is
agreeable to them: The Law of the Lord, says he, is perfect, converting the
Soul. The Testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the Simple. The Statutes
of the Lord are right, rejoicing the Heart. The Commandment of the Lord is
pure, enlightening the Eyes. The Fear of the Lord is clean, end^ring for ever.
The Judgments of the Lord are true, and righteous altogether. I have more
Understanding than all my Teachers, for thy Testimonies are my Meditation. I
understand more than the Ancients, because I keep thy Precepts. Thy Word is a
Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my Path. The New Testament is so full of
this Language, and the Contents of it are every where so conformable to it,
that I shall refer the Reader to the particular Discussion of the Whole in the
second Discourse. But I must remark in the mean time that not a Syllable of
this Language is true, if any Contradictions seeming or real be admitted in
Scripture. As much may be said of Mysteries; but we shall talk of that by and
by,

CHAP. IV. Objections answered, drawn from the Pravity of Humane REASON.
28. THere remains one Ob^ection yet, upon which some lay a mighty Stress, tho
it is like to do them little Service. Granting, say they, the GOSPEL to be as
reasonable as you pretend, yet corrupt and depraved Reason can neither discern
nor receive Divine Verities. Ay, but that proves not Divine Verities to be
contrary to sound Reason. But they maintain that no Man's Reason is sound.
Wherefore I hope so to state this Question, as to cut off all Occasion of
Dispute from judicious and peaceable Men. Reason taken for the Principle of
Discourse in us, or more particularly for that Faculty every one has of judging
of his Ideas according to their Agreement or Disagreement, and so of loving
what seems good unto him, and hating what he thinks evil: Reason, I say, in
this Sense is whole and entire in every one whose Organs are not accidentally
indisposed. It Is from it that we are accounted Men; and we could neither inform
others, nor receive Improvement our selves, any more than Brutes, without it.

29. But if by Reason be understood a constant right Use of these Faculties,
viz. If a Man never judges but according to clear Perceptions, desires nothing
but what is truly good for him, nor avoids but what is certainly evil: Then, I
confess, it is extremely corrupt. We are too prone to frame wrong Conceptions,
and as erroneous Judgments of things. We generally covet what flatters our
Senses, without distinguishing noxious from innocent Pleasures; and our Hatred
is as partial. We gratify our Bodies so much as to meditate little, and think
very grossly of spiritual, or abstracted Matters. We are apt to indulge our
Inclinations, which we term to follow Nature: so 1 Cor. 2. 14.
that the (...) constantly signifies the animal, and never the natural State of
Man. It should be in this Place translated sensual, as it is very rightly, Jam.
3. 15. and Jude, v. 19.
natural Man, that is, he that gives the swing to his Appetites, counts Divine
Things mere Folly, calls Religion a feverish Dream of superstitious Heads, or a
politic Trick invented by Statesmen to aw the credulous Vulgar. For as they
that walk after the Flesh mind the things thereof, so their Romans 8. 5, 7.
carnal Wisdom is Enmity against God. Sin easily besets us. There is a Law in
our Members or Body, warring against the Heb. 12. 1.
Law of our Minds or Reason. And when Romans 7. 23.
we would do Good, Evil is present with us. Ver. 21.
If thus we become stupid and unfit for earthly Speculations, how shall we
believe when we are told of heavenly things? Joh. 3. 12.


30. But these Disorders are so far from being Reason, that nothing can be more
directly contrary to it. We lie under no necessary Fate of sinning There is no
Defect in our Un^erstandings but those of our own Creation, that is to say,
vicious Habits easily contracted, but difficultly reformed. It Is just with us
as with the Drunkard, whose I cannot give over Drinking is a deliberate I will
not. For upon a Wager, or for a Reward, he can forbear his Cups a Day, a Month,
a Year, according as the Consideration of the Value or Certainty of the
expected Gain does influence him. Let no Man Jam. 1. 13, 14.
therefore say when he is tempted, I am tempted of God; for as God cannot be
tempted to Evil, so neither tempts he any Man: But every Man is tempted when
he is drawn away, and enticed of his own Lust.

31. Supposing a natural Impotency to reason well, we could no more be liable
to Condemnation for not keeping the Commands of God, than those to whom the
Gospel was never revealed for not believing on Christ: For Romans 10. 14.
how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? Were our reasoning Faculties
imperfect, or we not capable to employ them rightly, there could be no
Possibility of our understanding one another in Millions of things, where the
stock of our Ideas should prove unavoidably unequal, or our Capacities
different. But it is the Perfection of our Reason and Liberty that makes us
deserve Rewards and Punishments. We are persuaded that all our Thoughts are
entirely free, we can expend the Force of Words, compare Ideas, distinguish
clear from obscure Conceptions, suspend our Judgments about Uncertainties, and
yield only to Evidence. In a word, the Deliberations we use about our Designs,
and the Choice to which we determine our selves at last, do prove us the free
Disposers of all our Actions. Now what is sound Reason except this be it?
Doubtless it is. And no Evangelical, or other knowable Truth can prove
insuperable, or monstrous to him that uses it after this manner. But when we
abuse it against it self, and enslave it to our debauched Imaginations, it is
averse from all Good. We are so habituated, I confess, to precarious and hasty
Conclusions, that without great Constancy and Exercise we cannot recover our
innate Freedom, nor do well, having accustomed our selves so jer. 13. 23.
much to Evil. But tho it is said in Scripture, that we will neither know nor
understand; it is there also said, that we may amend our Ways, turn from our
Iniquity, and choose Life. Encouragements are proposed to such as do so. We
can, upon serious Reflection, see our Faults, and find that what we held most
unreasonable, did only appear so from superficial Disquisitions, or want of
necessary Helps; from Deference to Authority, and Principles taken upon Trust;
from irregular Inclinations and Self-interest, or the Hatred of a Party.

32. But notwithstanding all this, some are at a world of Pains to rob
themselves (if they could) of their Liberty or Freewill, the noblest and most
useful of all our Faculties, the only thing we can properly call ours, and the
only thing that neither Power nor Fortune can take from us. Under whatever Vail
these Men endeavor to hide their Folly, yet they are engaged in it by extreme
Pride and Self-love: For, not willing to own their Ignorance and Miscarriages,
(which proceed from Passion, Sloth, or Inconsideration) they would remove all
the Blame from their Will, and charge it upon a natural Impotency not in their
Power to cure. Thus they ingeniously cheat themselves, and choose rather to be
ranked in the same Condition with Brutes or Machines, than be obliged to
acknowledge their humane Frailties, and to mend.

33. Since therefore the Perfection or Soundness of our Reason is so evident to
our selves, and so plainly contained in Scripture, however wrested by some
ignorant Persons, we should labor to acquire Knowledge with more confident
Hopes of Success. Why should we entertain such mean and unbecoming Thoughts, as
if Truth, like the Almighty, dwelt in Light inaccessible, and not to be
discovered by the Sons of Men? Things are always the same, how different soever
the Conceptions of Men about them may be; and what another did not, I may
happily find out. That nothing escaped the Sight of former Ages is a Tale to be
told where one Person only speaks, and no Body present must contradict him. The
Slips and Errors which are taken notice of in the World every Day, serve only
to put us in mind that many able Men did not examine the Truth with that Order
and Application they should or might have done. There are a thousand things in
our Power to know, of which, through Prejudice or Neglect, we may be, and
frequently remain ignorant all our Lives; and innumerable Difficulties may be
made by imagining MYSTERIES where there are none, or by conceiving too
discouraging and unjust an Opinion of our own Abilities: whereas, by a Parity
of Reason, we may hope to outdo all that outdid others before us, as Posterity
may exceed both. It Is no Presumption therefore for us to endeavor setting
things in a better Light; as to know what we are able to perform is not Pride,
but foolishly to presume none else can equal us, when we are all upon the same
Level: For who makes thee to 1 Cor. 4. 7.
differ from another? And what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if
thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?
Have we not all the same sure and certain Promises of Light and Assistance from
above, as well as the Privilege of Reason in common? If any lack Wisdom, let
him ask it of God, who gives to all Jam. I. S.
Men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him.

34. To conclude, let no Body think to be excused by this imaginary Corruption,
but learn from the Scripture, our infallible Oracle, that the Gospel, if it be
the Word of God, is only contrary to the Opinions and Wishes of lewd Men, that
love to walk after their 2 Pet. 3. 3.
own Lusts; of those that speak Evil of the things which they understand not,
and debauch themselves in what they know in Jude, v. 10.
common with Brutes. It is hid to them whose Minds are blinded by the God of 2
Con 4. 3, 4.
this World; and to those who live by the Ignorance and simple Credulity of
their Brethren. To be brief, It is contrary to the false Reasoning of all that
will not know what it is to reflect or consider; but it is not above the
Possibility of their Reajon when they shall better improve their Faculties. The
Creation of the World was against the System of Aristotle, the Immortality of
the Soul against the Hypothesis of Epicurus, and the How the absolute Liberty
we expertence in our selves, is consistent with God's Omnip^lency and our
Dependanc^ on him, shall in due Place b^ censider'd,
Liberty of the Will was impugn'd by many ancient Philsophers. But is this to
be contrary to Reason? Have not these Men been quite baffled by as very
Heathens as themselves? And are not their other Errors since detected and
exploded by most of the Learned? Besides, they wanted a principal mean of
Information, viz. REVELATION.

SECT. III, That there is nothing MYSTERIOVS, or ABOVE Reason in the GOSPEL.
1. WE come at length to enquire whether any Doctrine of the GOSPEL be ABOVE,
tho not contrary to REASON. This Expression is taken in a twofold
Signification. First, It denotes a thing intelligible of it self, but so
covered by figurative Words, Types and Ceremonies, that Reason cannot penetrate
the Vail, nor see what is under it till it be removed. Secondly, It is made to
signify a thing of its own Nature inconceivable, and not to be judged of by our
ordinary Faculties and Ideas, tho it be never so clearly revealed. In both
these Senses to be above Reason is the same thing with MYSTERY; and, in effect,
they are convertible Terms in Divinity.

CHAP. I. The History and Signification of MYSTERY in the Writings of the
GENTILES.
2. WHAT is meant by REASON we have already largely discoursed; but to
understand aright what the word MYSTERY imports, we must trace the Original of
it as far back as the Theology of the ancient Gentiles, whereof it was a
considerable Term. Those Nations, who (as Paul elegantly describes them)
professing themselves wise, became Fools; Romans I. 22, 23, 25.
who changed the Glory of the incorruptible God into the Image and Likeness of
corruptible Man, of Birds, of Beasts, and creeping things; who turned the Truth
of God into a Lie, and worshipped the Creature as well as (and sometimes more
than) the Creator: Those Nations, I say, ashamed or afraid to exhibit their
Religion naked to the view of all indifferently, disguised it with various
Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Plays, etc. making the superstitious People believe
that admirable things were adumbrated by these Externals. The Priests, but very
rarely, and then obscurely, taught in public, pretending the Injunctions of
their Divinities to the contrary, lest their Secrets, forsooth, should be
exposed to the Profanation of the Ignorant, or Violation of the Impious. They
performed the highest Acts of their Worship, consisting of ridiculous, obscene,
or inhumane Rites, in the inmost Recesses of Temples or Groves consecrated for
that purpose: And it was inexpiable Sacrilege for any to -- Procul, O procul
este Prosani! Conclamat vates, totoque absistite Iuco. Virg. 1. 6. AEneid. v.
259. Callimach. Hymo. in Apol. v. 2. (...).
enter these but such as had a special Mark and Privilege, or as much as to ask
Questions about what passed in them. All the Excluded were for that Reason
styled the PROFANE, as those not in Orders with us the LAITY.

3. But the cunning Priests, who knew how to turn every thing to their own
Advantage, thought fit to initiate or instruct certain Persons in the Meaning
of their Rites. They gave out that such as died uninitiated (...). Plat. in
Phaedon. page 69. Edit. Paris. 1578. (...). Isocrat. in Panegyr. Initiaque ut
appellantur, ita re vera principia vitae cognovimus: neque solum cum laetitia
vivendi rationem accepimus, sed etiam cum spe meliore moriendi. Cic. l. 2. de
Leg. c. 14.
wallow'd in infernal Mire, whilst the Purified and Initiated dwelt with the
Gods; which as well increased their Veneration for, as a Desire of enjoying, so
great a Happiness. The Initiated, after some Years Preparation to make them
value what cost so much Time and Patience, were devoutly sworn Quis Cereris
rirus audet vulgar Profanis? Magnaque Threicio sacra reperta Samo? Ovid. l. 2.
de Art Amand. v. 601. (...). Ariltid.
never to discover what they saw or heard under Pain of (...). Solipater in
Divis. Quaest.
Death, tho they might discourse of them amongst themselves, lest too 3. great
a Constraint should tempt them to blab the Secret. And so religiously they kept
this Oath, that some of them, after their Conversion to Christianity, could
hardly be brought to declare what passed at their Initiation in Gentilism. The
Athenians thought no Torments exquisite enough to punish (...). Aristophanes in
Avibus; etiam Suidas in voce.
Diagoras the Philosopher, for divulging their Mysteries; and not content to
brand him with Atheism for laughing at their Weakness, they promised a Talent
as a Reward to any that should kill him. 'Twas Death to say Adonis was a Man;
some suffered upon that account: And many were torn in pieces at the Acarnanes
duo Juvenes per Initiorum dies non Initiati Templum Cereris, imprudentes
Re^igionis, cum caetera turba ingressi sunt. Facile eos Ser^no prodidit,
absurd quaedam percunctantes: Deductique ad Antistites Templi, quum palam
esset per errorem ingressos, tanquam ob infandum scelus interfecti sunt.
Livius, lib. 31. cap. 14.
Mysteries of Ceres, and the Witness the Story of Peatheus, which asforded the
Subject of a Tragedy to Euripides.
Orgies of Bacchus, for their unadvised Curiosity.

4. Credible Authors report, that the Priests confessed to the Initiated how
these Mystic Representations were instituted at first in Commemoration of some
remarkable Accidents, or to the Honor of some great Persons that obliged the
World by their Virtues and useful Inventions to pay them such Acknowledgments.
But let this be as it will, Myein in their Systems signified (...).
to initiate: Myesis, Initiation: Mystes, (...).
a Name afterward given the Priests, (...).
denoted the Person to be initiated, who was called an (...). Scholiast. in
Aristophanis Ranas.
Epopt when admitted; and Mystery the Doctrine in which he (...).
was initiated. As there were several (...). Schol. in Plut. Aristophan. Act.
4. Sc. 2.
Degrees, so there were different sorts of Mysteries. The most famous were the
Samothracian, the Eleusinian, the Egyptian, and those of Bacchus, commonly
known by the name of Pars obscura cavis celebrabant Orgia cistis, Orgia quae
frustra cupiunt audire Prosani. Cat. Epigram. 64. v. 260.
Orgies; tho the word is sometimes put for any of the former.

5. From what has been said it is clear, that they understood by Mystery in
those Days a thing intelligible of it self, but so veiled by others, that it
could not be known without special Revelation. I need not add, that in all the
Greek and Roman Authors it is constantly put, as a very vulgar Expression, for
any thing sacred or profane that is design'dly kept secret, or accidentally
obscure. And this is the common Acceptance of it still: for when we cannot see
clearly into a Business, we say it is a Mystery to us; and that an obscure or
perplexed Discourse is very mysterious. Mysteries of State, Sciences and
Trades, run all in the same Notion.

6. But many not denying what is so plain, yet being strongly inclined out of
Ignorance or Passion to maintain what was first introduced by the Craft or
Superstition of their Forefathers, will have some Christian Doctrines to be
still mysterious in the second Sense of the Word, that is, inconceivable in
themselves, however clearly revealed. They think a long Prescription will argue
it Folly in any to appear against them, and indeed Custom has made it
dangerous. But, slighting so mean Considerations, if I can demonstrate that in
the New Testament Mystery is always used in the first Sense of the Word, or
that of the Gentiles, viz. for things naturally very intelligible, but so
covered by figurative Words or Rites, that Reason could not discover them
without special Revelation; and that the Vail is actually taken away; then it
will manifestly follow that the Doctrines so revealed cannot now be properly
called Mysteries.

7. This is what I hope to perform in the Sequel of this Section, to the entire
Satisfaction of those sincere Christians more concerned for the Truth than the
old or gainful Opinion. Yet I must first remove out of my way certain common
places of cavilling, with which, not only the raw Beginners of the most
implicit Constitution raise a great Dust upon all Occasions, tho not able to
speak of any thing pertinently when jostl'd out of the beaten Road; but truly
their venerable Teachers are not ashamed sometimes to play at this small Game,
which, they know, rather amuses the Prejudiced of their own side, than edifies
the Adversaries of any sort. I wish there were more even of a well-meaning Zeal
without Knowledge, than of Art or Cunning in this Conduct.

CHAP. II. That nothing ought to be called a MYSTERY, because we have not an
adequate Idea of all its Properties, nor any at all of its Essence.
8. I Shall discuss this Point with all the Perspicuity I am able. And, first,
I affirm, That nothing can be said to be a Mystery, because we have not an
adequate Idea of it, or a distinct View of all its Properties at once; for then
every thing would be a Mystery. The Knowledge of finite Creatures is gradually
progressive, as Ob^ects are presented to the Understanding. Adam did not know
so much in the twentieth as in the hundredth Year of his Age; and Jesus Christ
is expressly recorded to have increased in Wisdom as well as in Luke 2. 52.
Stature. We are said to know a thousand things, nor can we doubt of it; yet we
never have a full Conception of whatever belongs to them. I understand nothing
better than this Table upon which I am now writing: I conceive it divisible
into Parts beyond all Imagination; but shall I say it is above my Reason
because I cannot count these Parts, nor distinctly perceive their Quantity and
Figures? I am convinced that Plants have a regular Contexture, and a Multitude
of Vessels, many of them equivalent or analogous to those of Animals, whereby
they receive a Juice from the Earth, and prepare it, changing some into their
own Substance, and evacuating the excrementitious Parts. But I do not clearly
comprehend how all these Operations are performed, tho I know very well what is
meant by a Tree.

9. The Reason is, because knowing nothing of Bodies but their Properties, God
has wisely provided we should understand no more of these than are useful and
necessary for us; which is ^ll our present Condition needs. Thus our Eyes are
not given us to see all Quantities, nor perhaps any thing as it is in it self,
but as it bears some Relation to us. What is too minute, as it escapes our
Sight, so it can neither harm nor benefit us: and we have a better View of
Bodies the nearer we approach them, because then they become more convenient or
inconvenient; but as we remove farther off, we lose their Sight with their
Influence. I Am persuaded there is no Motion which does not excite some Sound in
Ears disposed to be affected with proportionable Degrees of Force from the Air;
and, it may be, the small Animals concerned can hear the Steps of the Spider,
as we do those of Men and Cattle. From these and Millions of other Instances it
is manifest, that we have little Certainty of any thing but as it is ^oxious or
beneficial to us.

10. Rightly speaking then, we are accounted to comprehend any thing when its
chief Properties and their several Uses are known to us: for (...).
to comprehend in all correct Authors is nothing else but to know; and as of
what is not knowable we can have no Idea, so it is nothing to us. It is
improper therefore to say a thing is above our Reason, because we know no more
of it than concerns us, and ridiculous to supersede our Disquisitions about it
upon that score. What should we think of a Man that would stiffly maintain Water
to be above his Reason, and that he would never enquire into its Nature, nor
employ it in his House or Grounds, because he knows not how many Particles go
to a Drop; whether the Air passes through it, is incorporated with it, or
neither? This is for all the World as if I would not go because I cannot fly.
Now seeing the Denominations of things are borrowed from their known
Properties, and that no Properties are knowable but what concern us, or serve
to discover such as do, we cannot be accountable for comprehending no other,
nor justly required more by reasonable Men, much less by the all-wise DEITY.

11. The most compendious Method therefore to acquire sure and useful Knowledge,
is not to trouble our selves nor others with what is useless, were it known; or
what is impossible to be known at all. Since I easily perceive the good or bad
Effects of Rain upon the Earth, what should I be the better did I comprehend
its Generation in the Clouds? for after all I could make no Rain at my
Pleasure, nor prevent its falling at any time. A probable Hypothesis will not
give Satisfaction in such Cases: The Hands, for Example, of two Clock-Dials may
have the same external Motion, tho the Disposition of the latent Springs which
produce it should be very different. And to affirm this or that to be the Way,
will not do, unless you can demonstrate that no other possible Way remains.
Nay, should you hit upon the real Manner, you can never be sure of it, because
the Evidence of Matters of Fact solely depends upon Testimony: And it follows
not that such a thing is so, because it may be so.

12. The Application of this Discourse to my Subject admits of no Difficulty;
and it is, first, That no Christian Doctrine, no more than any ordinary Piece
of Nature, can be reputed a Mystery, because we have not an adequate or
complete Idea of whatever belongs to it. Secondly, That what is revealed in
Religion, as it is most useful and necessary, so it must and may be as easily
comprehended, and found as consistent with our common Notions, as what we know
of Wood or Stone, of Air, of Water, or the like. And, Thirdly, That when we do
as familiarly explain such Doctrines, as what is known of natural things,
(which I pretend we can) we may then be as properly said to comprehend the one
as the other.

13. They trifle then exceedingly, and discover a mighty Scarcity of better
Arguments, who defend their Mysteries by this pitiful Shift of drawing
Inferences from what is unknown to what is known, or of insisting upon adequate
Ideas; except they will agree, as some do, to call every Spire of Grass,
Sitting and Standing, Fish or Flesh, profound Mysteries. And if out of a
pertinacious or worse Humor they will be still fooling, and call these things
Mysteries, I Am willing to admit as many as they please in Religion, if they
will allow me likewise to make mine as intelligible to others as these are to
me.

14. But to finish this Point, I conclude, that neither GOD himself, nor any of
his Attributes, are Mysteries to us for want of an adequate Idea: No, not
Eternity. The mysterious Wits do never more expose themselves than when they
treat of Eternity in particular. Then they think themselves in their
impregnable Fortress, and strangely insult over those dull Creatures that
cannot find a thing where it is not. For if any Bounds (as Beginning or End)
could be assigned to Eternity, it ceases immediately to be what it should; and
you frame only a finite, or rather a negative Idea, which is the Nature of all
Limitation. Nor can it be said, that therefore Eternity is above Reason in this
Respect, or that it is any Defect in us not to exhaust its Idea; for what
greater Perfection can be ascribed to Reason than to know precisely the Nature
of things? And does not all its Errors lie in attributing those Properties to a
thing which it has not, or taking any away that it contains? Eternity therefore
is no more above Reason because it cannot be imagined, than a Circle, because
it may; for in both Cases Reason performs its Part acording to the different
Natures of the Objects, whereof the one is essentially imaginable, the other
not.

15. Now it appears that the pretended Mysteriousness of Eternity does not
consist in the want of an adequate Notion, which is all that we consider in it
at present. The Difficulties raised from its Duration, as, that Succession
seems to make it finite, and that all things must exist together if it be
instantaneous, I despair not of solving very easily; and rendering Infinity also
(which is inseparable from it, or rather a different Consideration of the same
thing) as little mysterious as that three and two make five. But this falls
naturally into my second Discourse, where I give a particular Explication of
the Christian Tenets, according to the general Principles I am establishing in
this.

16. As we know not all the Properties of things, so we can never conceive the
Essence of any Substance in the World. To avoid Ambiguity, I distinguish, after
an excellent modern Philosopher, the Nominal from the Real Essence of a thing.
The nominal Essence is a Collection of those Properties or Modes which we
principally observe in any thing, and to which we give one common Denomination
or Name. Thus the nominal Essence of the Sun is a bright, hot, and round Body,
at a certain Distance from us, and that has a constant regular Motion. Whoever
hears the Word Sun pronounced, this is the Idea he has of it. He may conceive
more of its Properties, or not all these; but it is still a Collection of Modes
or Properties that makes his Idea. So the Nominal Essence of Honey consists in
its Color, Taste, and other known Attributes.

17. But the real Essence is that intrinsic Constitution of a thing which is
the Ground or Support of all its Properties, and from which they naturally flow
or result. Now tho we are persuaded that the Modes of things must have such a
Subject to exist in, (for they cannot subsist alone) yet we are absolutely
ignorant of what it is. We conceive nothing more distinctly than the mentioned
Properties of the Sun, and those whereby Plants, Fruits, Metals, etc. are known
to us; but we have no manner of Notion of the several Foundations of these
Properties, tho we are very sure in the mean time, that some such thing must
necessarily be. The observable Qualities therefore of things is all that we
understand by their Names, for which Reason they are called their Nominal
Essence.

18. It follows now very plainly, that nothing can be said to be a Mystery,
because we are ignorant of its real Essence, since it is not more knowable in
one thing than in another, and is never conceived or included in the Ideas we
have of things, or the Names we give 'em. I had not much insisted upon this
Point, were it not for the so often repeated Sophistry of some that rather
merit the Encomiums of great READERS than great REASONERS. When they would have
the most palpable 3. Absurdities and Contradictions go down with others, or
make them place Religion in Words that signify nothing, or what they are not
able to explain, then they wisely tell them, that they are ignorant of many
things, especially the Essence of their own Souls; and that therefore they must
not always deny what they cannot conceive. But this is not all; for when they
would (instead of confuting them) make those pass for ridiculcus or arrogant
Pretenders, who maintain that only intelligible and possible things are the
Subject of Belief, they industriously represent them as presuming to define the
Essence of God with that of created Spirits. And after they have sufficiently
aggravated this Presumption of their own coining, they conclude, that if the
Contexture of the smallest Pebble is not to be accounted for, then they should
not insist upon such rigorous Terms of Believing, but sometimes be content to
submit their Reason to their Teachers, and the Determinations of the Church.

19. Who perceives not the Weakness and Slight of this Reasoning? We certainly
know as much of the SOUL as we do of any thing else, if not more. We form the
clearest Conceptions of Thinking, Knowing, Imagining, Willing, Hoping, Loving,
and the like Operations of the Mind. But we are Strangers to the Subject
wherein these Operations exist. So are we to that upon which the Roundness,
Softness, Color, a^ Taste of a Grape depend. There is nothing more evident
than the Modes or Properties of BODY, as to be extended, solid, divisible,
smooth, rough, soft, hard, etc. But we know as ^tle of the internal
Constitution, which is the Support of these sensible Qualities, as we do of
that wherein the Operations of the SOUL reside. And, as the great Man I just
now mentioned observes, we may as well de^y the Existence of Body, because we
have not an Idea of its real Essence, as call the Being of the Soul in question
for the same Reason. The Idea of the Soul then is every whit as clear and
distinct as that of the Body; and had there been (as there is not) any
Difference, the Soul must have carried the Advantage, because its Properties
are more immediately known to us, and are the Light whereby we discover all
things besides.

20. As for GOD, we comprehend nothing better than his Attributes. We know not,
it is true, the Nature of that eternal Subject or Essence wherein Infinite
Goodness, Love, Knowledge, Power and Wisdom co-exist; but we are not better
acquainted with the real Essence of any of his Creatures. As by the Idea and
Name of GOD we understand his known At^ributes and Properties, so we understand
those of all things else by theirs; and we conceive the one as clearly as we do
the other. I remarked in the Beginning of this Chapter, that we knew nothing of
things, but such of their Properties as were necessary and useful. We may say
the same of God; for every Act of our Religion is directed by the Consideration
of some of his Attributes, without ever thinking of his Essence. Our Love to
him is kindled by his Goodness, and our Thankfulness by his Mercy; our
Obedience is regulated by his Justice; and our Hopes are confirmed by his
Wisdom and Power.

21. I think I may now warrantably conclude, that nothing is a Mystery, because
we know not its Essence, since it appears that it is neither knowable in it
self, nor ever thought of by us: So that the Divine Being himself cannot with
more Reason be accounted mysterious in this Respect than the most contemptible
of his Creatures. Nor am I very much concerned that these Essences escape my
Knowledge: for I am fixed in the Opinion, that what Insinite Goodness has not
been pleased to reveal to us, we are either sufficiently capable to discover
our selves, or need not understand it at all. I hope now it is very manifest
that Mysteries in Religion are but ill argued from the pretended M^steries of
Nature; and that such as endeavor to support the sormer by the latter, have
either a Design to impose upon others, or that they have never themselves duly
considered of this Matter.

CHAP. III. The Signification of the Word MYSTERY in the New Testament, and the
Writings of the most ancient Christians.
22. HAving so dispatched these adequate Ideas, and, I know not what, real
Essences, we come now to the main Point upon which the whole Controversy
chiefly depends. For the Question being, whether or no Christianity is
mysterious, it ought to be naturally decided by the New Testament, wherein the
Christian Faith is originally contained. I hearti^y desire to put the Case upon
this Issue, I appeal to this Tribunal: For did I not infinitely prefer the
Truth I learn from these sacred Records to all other Considerations, I should
never assert that there are no Mysteries in Christianity. The Scriptures have
engaged me in this Error, if it be one; and I will sooner be reputed Heterodox
with these only on my side, than to pass for Orthodox with the whole World, and
have them against me.

23. Now by searching the Scriptures I find some of the Evangelick Doctrines
called Mysteries, in a more general, or in a more particular Sense. They are
more generally so called with respect to all Mankind: for being certain Matters
of Fact only known to God, and lodged in his Decree, or such Events as were
quite lost and forgot in the World, it was impossible for any Person, tho never
so wise or learned, to discover them; for the things of God knows none but
the Spirit of 1 Cor. 2. 11.
God, as none can find out the secret Thoughts of Man till he tells them
himself. Such Revelations then of God in the New Testament are called
Mysteries, not from any present Inconceivableness or Obscurity, but with
respect to what they were before this Revelation, as that is called our Task
which we long since performed.

24. If any should question this, let him hear the Apostle Paul declare for
himself and his Fellow Laborers in the Gospel: We speak, says he, the Wisdom
of God hid in a MYSTERY, which God ordained before the World for our Glory,
which none of the Princes of the World knew, etc. And, to show 1 Cor. 2. 7, 8.
that this Divine Wisdom was a Mystery for want of revealing Information, he
presently subjoins, Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have Ver. 9, 10.
entered into the Heart of Man the things which God has prepared for them that
love him; but God has revealed them to us by his Spirit. The most
perspicacious Philosophers were not able to foretell the Coming of Christ, to
discover the Resurrection of the Body, nor any other Matter of Fact that is
delivered in the Gospel: And if they happened now and then to say something
like the Truth, they did but divine at best, and could never be certain of
their Opinion. It is a most delightful thing to consider what Pains the
enquiring Heathens were often at to give a Reason for what depended not in the
least upon any Principles in their Philosophy, but was an historical Fact
communicable by God alone, or such as had undoubted Memoirs concerning it. Of
this I think it not amiss to add the following Example.

25. The same Experience that taught the Gentiles their mortal Condition,
acquainted them also with the Frailty of their Natures, and the numberless
Calamities constantly attending them. They could not persuade themselves that
the Species of Man came in such deplorable Circumstances out of the Hands of an
infinitely good and merciful Deity; and so were inclined to impute all to the
Wickedness of adult Persons, till they perceived that Death and Misfortune did
not spare innocent Children more than Robbers and Pirates. At last they
imagined a pre-existent State, wherein the Soul acting separately like Angels,
might have contracted some extraordinary Guilt, and so for Punishment be thrust
into the Body, which they sometimes compared to a Prison, but oftener to a As if
(...) had been a Corruption of (...).
Grave. This was likewise the Origin of Transmigration, tho in process of Time
the Sins of this World became as much concerned in that Opinion as those of the
other. But nothing is more ingenious than the Account which Cebes the Theban
gives us of the Matter in his most excellent Portraiture of humane Life. He
feigns (...), etc. Cebet. Tab. p. 11. Ed. Amst. 1689.
Imposture sitting in a Throne at the Gate of Life, in the Shape of a most
beautiful Lady, holding a Cup in her Hand: She obligingly presents it to all
that are on their Journey to this World, and these as civilly accept it; but
the Draught proves Ignorance and Error, whence proceed all the Disorders and
Misery of their Lives.

26. This Point was a great Mystery to these honest Philosophers, who had only
Fancy to guide them, and could not pretend to Instructions from the Mind of
God; but the thing is now no Mystery to us that have the Mind of 1 Cor. 2. 16.
Christ. We know that Adam the first Man became also the first Sinner, and
Mortal; and that so the whole Race propagated from him could be naturally no
better than he was: By one Man Sin entered into the World, and Romans 5. 12.
Death by Sin.

27. But some Doctrines of the Gospel are more particularly called Mysteries,
because they were hid from God's peculiar People under the Mosaic Economy;
not that they knew nothing concerning them, for the Law had a Shadow of good
things to come; but they Heb. 10. 1.
were not clearly and fully revealed till the New Testament Times, being veiled
before by various Typical Representations, Ceremonies, and figurative
Expressions. Christ tells his Disciples, Many Prophets and Kings have desired
to see those things which you see, and Luke 10. 24.
have not seen them, and to hear those things which you hear, and have not
heard them. Paul says, we use great PLAINNESS of Speech, and 2 Cor. 3. 12, 13.
not as Moses who put a VAIL over his Face: And then expressly adds, that this
VAIL is taken away in Ver. 14.
Christ, which could not be truly affirmed, were the things revealed still
inconceivable; for I know no Difference between not hearing of a thing at all,
and not comprehending it when you do. In another Place Paul has these
remarkable Words; The Preaching of Jesus Christ according to the REVELATION
Romans 16. 25, 26.
of the MYSTERY which was kept secret since the World began; but now is made
MANIFEST, and by the Scriptures of the Prophets, according to the Commandment
of the everlasting God, MADE KNOWN to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith.

28. These Passages alone sufficiently prove the Assertions contained in No 6
and 7 of this Section, viz. First, that the Mysteries of the Gospel were
certain things in their own Nature intelligible enough, but called Mysteries by
reason of the Vail under which they were formerly hid. Secondly, that under the
Gospel this Vail is wholly removed. From which, Thirdly, follows the promised
Conclusion, that such Doctrines cannot now properly deserve the Name of
Mysteries.

29. It is observable, that the hottest Sticklers for the Fathers do cite their
Authority only where they think it makes for them, and slight or suppress it
when not favorable to their Cause. Lest it should be maliciously insinuated,
that I serve the holy Scriptures after the same manner, I shall here transcribe
all the Passages of the New Testament where the word Mystery occurs, that a Man
running may read with Conviction what I defend. The whole may be commodiously
reduced to these Heads. First, Mystery is read for the Gospel or the Christian
Religion in general, as it was a future Dispensation totally hid from the
Gentiles, and but very imperfectly known to the Jews: Secondly, Some particular
Doctrines occasionally revealed by the Apostles are said to be manifested
Mysteries, that is, unfolded Secrets. And, Thirdly, Mystery is put for any
thing veiled under Parables or Enigmatical Forms of Speech. Of all these in
Order.

30. Mystery is read for the Gospel or Christianity in general in the following
Passages: Romans 16. 25, 26. The Preaching of Jesus Christ according to the
Revelation of the MYSTERY which was kept secret since the World began; but now
is made manifest, and by the Writings of the Prophets, according to the
Commandment of the everlasting God, made known to all Nations for the Obedience
of Faith. Now, in what Sense could this Mystery be said to be revealed, this
Secret to be made manifest, to be made known to all Nations by the Preaching of
the Apostles, if it remained still incomprehensible? A mighty Favor indeed! to
bless the World with a parcel of unin^elligible Notions or Expressions, when it
was already overstock'd with the Acroatick Discourses of Aristotle, with the
Esoterick Doctrines of Pythagoras, and the Mysterious Jargon of the other Sects
of Philosophers; for they all made high Pretenses to some rare and wonderful
Secrets not communicable to every one of the Learned, and never to any of the
Vulgar. By this means the obsequious Disciples apologiz'd for all that was
found contradictory, incoherent, dubious, or incomprehensible in the Works of
their several Masters. To any that complained of Inconsistency or Obscurity,
they presently answered, O, Sir, the Philosopher said it, and you ought
therefore to believe it: He knew his own Meaning well enough, tho he cared not,
it may be, that all others should do it too: So the Occasions of your Scruples,
Sir, are only seeming, and not real. But the Christian Religion has no need of
such miserable Shifts and Artifices, there being nothing in it above or
contrary to the strictest Reason: And such as are of another Mind may as well
justify the idle Dreams of the Philosophers, the Impieties and Fables of the
Alcoran, or any thing as well as Christianity. The second Passage is in 1 Cor.
2. 7. the Words were but just now read, and need not here be repeated. The
third Passage is in 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a Man so account of us as the Ministers of
Christ, and the Stewards or Dispensers of the MYSTERIES of God; that is, the
Preachers of those Doctrines which God was pleased to reveal. The fourth
Passage is in Ephesians. 6. 9. Praying -- for me, that Utterance may be given unto
me that I may open my Mouth boldly, to make known the MYSTERY of the Gospel.
Parallel to this is the fifth Passage in Col. 4. 3, 4. Praying also for us,
that God would open unto us a Door of Utterance to speak the MYSTERY of Christ
-- that I may make it manifest as I ought to speak. The Clearness of these
Words admits of no Comment. The sixth Passage is in Col. 2. 2. That their
Hearts might be comforted being knit together in Love, and unto all the Riches
of the full Assurance of Understanding, to the Knowledge of the MYSTERY of God,
and of the Father, and of Christ. Here is evidently meant the Revelation of the
Gospel-State: for whatever right Conceptions the Jews might have of the Father,
they had not that full Knowledge of Christ and his Doctrines, which are the
inestimable Privileges we now enjoy. The seventh Passage is in 1 Timothy 3. 8, 9.
Likewise must the Deacons be grave, not double-tongu'd, not given to much Wine,
nor greedy of filthy Lucre, holding the MYSTERY of the Faith in a pure
Conscience; that is, living to what they believe. The eighth and last Passage
relating to this Head is in 1 Timothy 3. 16. And without Controversy great is the
MYSTERY of Godliness: God was manifest in the Flesh, justified in the Spirit,
seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the World, received
up into Glory. I will not now insist upon the various Readings of these Words,
nor critically determine which is spurious or genuine. All Parties (how much
soever they differ about their Sense) agree that the Gradations of the Verse
are Gospel-Revelations; so that the Mystery of Godliness cannot be restrained
to any one, but is common to them all: It refers not to the Nature of any of
them in particular, but to the Revelation of 'em all in general. And it must be
granted, without any Dispute, that the gracious Manifestation of Christ and his
Gospel is not only to us wonderfully stupendous and surprising, but that it was
likewise a very great Mystery to all preceding the New Testament Dispensation.
From these Passages it appears, that the Gospel and the following Expressions
are synonymous, viz. The Mystery of the Faith, the Mystery of God and Christ,
the Mystery of Godliness, and the Mystery of the Gospel. No Doctrine then of
the Gospel is still a Mystery (for the Apostles concealed nothing from us that
A^s ^0. 20, 27.
was useful, and have acquainted us with the whole Counsel of God:) but it is
the Gospel it self that was heretofore indeed a Mystery, and cannot now after
it is fully revealed, properly deserve that Appellation.

31. We design in the second place to show, that certain Matters occasionally
revealed by the Apostles, were only Mysterious before that Revelation. The
Jews, who scarce allowed other Nations to be Men, thought of nothing less than
that the time should ever come wherein those Nations might be reconciled to
God, and be made Coheirs Romans 11. 15.
and Partakers with them of the same Privileges. This was never theless
resolved upon in the Divine Decree, and to the Jews was a Mystery, but ceases
so to continue after the Revelation of it to Paul, who, in his Epistles, has
openly declared it to ail the World. The first Passage we shall alledg to that
purpose is in Ephesians. 3. 1 -- 6, 9. If you have heard of the Dispensation of the
Grace of God which is given me to you-ward, how that by Revelation he made
known unto me the MYSTERY (as I wrote before in few Words, whereby, when you
read, you may understand my Knowledge in the MYSTERY of Christ) which in other
Ages was not made known unto the Sons of Men, as it is now reveai'd unto us,
his holy Apostles and Prophets, by the Spirit; that the Gentiles should be
Fellowheirs, and of the same Body, and Partakers of his Promise in Christ by
the Gospel -- and to make all Men see what is the Fellowship of the MYSTERY,
which from the Beginning of the World has been hid in God. The second Passage
is in Romans 11. 25. For I would not, Brethren, that you should be ignorant of
this MYSTERY, that Blindness in part is happened to Israel until the Fullness of
the Gentiles be come in. The third Passage is in Col. 1. 25, 26, 27. -- The
Church, whereof I am made a Minister according to the Dispensation of God which
is given to me for you, to fulfill the Word of God, even the MYSTERY which has
been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints: to
whom God would make known what are the Riches of the Glory of this MYSTERY
among the Gentiles. The fourth Passage is in Ephesians. 1. 9, 10. Having made known
unto us the MYSTERY of his Will, according to his good Pleasure which he has
purposed in himself, that in the Dispensation of the Fullness of times, he might
gather together into one all things in Christ. These Places require no
Explication, for the Sense of them all is, that the Secret of the Vocation of
the Gentiles is in the Gospel made known, manifested and declared; and
therefore remains no longer a Mystery. The next thing under the Designation of
a Mystery in the abovementioned Sense is one Circumstance of the Resurrection.
The Apostle having no less clearly and solidly than largely reasoned upon this
Subject, (1 Cor. 15.) obviates an Objection or Scruple that might be raised
about the State of such as should be sound alive on the Earth at the last day.
Behold, says he, ver. 51, 52. I show you a MYSTERY, I impart a Secret to you;
we shall not all sleep, or die, but we shall all be changed in a Moment, in the
twinkling of an Eye; -- the Dead shall rise, and we shall be changed. It is not
the Doctrine of the Resurrection then, you see, that is here called a Mystery,
but only this particular Circumstance of it, viz. that the Living shall at the
Sound of the last Trumpet put off their Flesh and Blood, or their Mortality,
without Dying, and be in an Instant rendered incorruptible and immortal, as
well as those that shall revive. In the fifth Chapter to the Ephesians, ver.
31, 32. we learn that the mutual Love and Conjunction of Man and Wife is a Type
of that indissoluble Union which is between Christ and his Church. This was
questionless a great Mystery before we were told it, but now there is nothing
more intelligible than the Foundation of that Resemblance or Figure. The
Kingdom of Antichrist in opposition to the Gospel or Kingdom of Christ is also
called a Mystery, because it was a secret Design carried on insensibly and by
degrees: but at length, all Obstacles being removed or surmounted, it appears
barefaced to the Light, and (as it was divinely foretold) ceases to continue
a Mystery. Let no Man deceive you by any means, says Paul to the Thessalonians,
(2 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.) for that Day shall not come except there be a
falling away or Apostasy first; and that Man of Sin be revealed, the Son of
Perdition, etc. And now you know what withholds, that he might not be
revealed in his time; for the MYSTERY of Iniquity does already work, only he
who now hinders, will hinder till he be taken out of the way, and then shall
that wicked one be revealed. These are all the Passages relating to the second
Head.

32. Mystery is, Thirdly, put for any thing veiled under Parables or
Enigmatical Expressions in these paralle^ Places following. The first is in
Mat. 13. 10, 11. The Disciples came and said unto him, Why speak thou unto
them in Parables? He answered and said unto them, Because it is given to you to
know the MYSTERIES of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not given. The
second Passage is in Mark 4. 11. And Jesus said to his Disciples, Unto you is
given to know the MYSTERY of the Kingdom of God; but unto them that are
without, all these things are done in Parables. The same Words are repeated in
Luke 8. 10. And it is most evident from all of 'em, that those things which
Christ spoke in Parables were not in themselves incomprehensible, but
mysterious to them only to whom they were not unfolded, that (as it is there
said) hearing they might not understand. It is now the most ordinary Practice
in the World for such as would not be understood by every one, to agree upon a
way of speaking peculiar to themselves. Nor is there any thing more easy than
the Explication which Christ gave of these Parables at the Request of his
Disciples.

33. There are but two Passages only left, and Mystery in them has no reference
to any thing in particular, but it is put for all secret things in its utmost
Latitude or Acceptance. The first Place is in 1 Cor. 13. 2. And tho I have the
Gift of Prophecy, and understand all MYSTERIES, and all Knowledge; and tho I
have all Faith so that I could remove Mountains, and have no Charity, I am
nothing. The second, parallel to this, is in 1 Cor. 14. 2. He that speaks in
an unknown Tongue, speaks not unto Men but unto God; for no Man understands
him, however in the Spirit he speaks MYSTERIES; that is, what is intelligible
enough to him, are Secrets to such as understand not his Language.

34. Having so particularly alleged all the Passages where there is mention
made of Mysteries in the New Testament, if any should wonder why I have omitted
those in the Revelation, to such I reply, that the Revelation cannot be
properly looked upon as a Part of the Gospel; for there are no new Doctrines
delivered in it. Far from being a Rule of Faith or Manners, it is not as much
as an Explanation of any Point in our Religion. The true Subject of that Book
or Vision is a Prophetical History of the External State of the Church in its
various and interchangeable Periods of Prosperity or Adversity. Bu^ that I may
not fall under the least S^spicion of dealing unfairly, I shall subjoin the few
Texts of the Revelation wherein the word Mystery is contained. The first is in
Rev. 1. 20. The MYSTERY of the seven Stars which thou saw in my right Hand,
and the seven Golden Candlesticks: Well, what is the Mystery or Secret of these
Stars and Candlesticks? The seven Stars are the Angels of the seven Churches;
and the seven Candlesticks, which thou saw, are the seven Churches, namely,
of Asia. Another Passage is in chap. 17. 5, 7. And upon her Forehead was a Name
written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, etc. And the Angel said, -- I will tell
thee the MYSTERY of the Woman. This he performs too in the following Verses,
which you may consult. Nor is it undeserving our particular Notice, that
Mystery is here made the distinguishing Mark of the false or Antichristian
Church. Mystery is a Name written on her Forehead; that is, all her Religion
consists in Mystery, she openly owns, she enjoins the Belief of Mysteries. And,
no doubt on it, as far as any Church allows of Mysteries, so far it is
ANTICHRISTIAN, and may with a great deal of Justice, tho little Honor, claim
Kindred with the scarlet Whore. The only remaining Text is in chap. 10. 5, 6,
7. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea and upon the Earth, lifted up
his Hand to Heaven, and swore by him that lives for ever and ever, who created
Heaven and the things that therein are, and the Earth and the things that
therein are, and the Sea and the things which are therein, that there should be
Time no longer; but that in the Days of the Voice of the seventh Angel, when he
shall begin to sound, the MYSTERY of God should be finished: that is, that all
the things figuratively delivered in this Prophecy concerning the Gospel (which
was shown above to signify the same with the Mystery of God) should have their
final Accomplishment, and so end with this Globe and all therein contained.

35. I appeal now to all equitable Persons, whether it be not evident to any
that can read, that Mystery in the whole New Testament is never put for any
thing inconceivable in it self, or not to be judged of by our ordinary Notions
and Faculties, however clearly revealed: And whether, on the contrary, it does
not always signify some things naturally intelligible enough; but either so
veiled by figurative Words and Rites, or so lodged in God's sole Knowledge and
Decree, that they could not be discovered without special Revelation. Whoever
retains any real Veneration for the Scripture, and sincerely believes it to be
the Word of God, must be ever concluded by its Authority, and render himself,
in spite of all Prejudices, to its Evidence. He that says the Gospel is his
only Rule of Faith, and yet believes any thing not warranted by it, he is an
arrant Hypocrite, and does but slily banter all the World.

36. Nor can a more favorable Opinion be harbored of those, who, instead of
Submission to the Dictates of Scripture and Reason, straight have Recourse to
such Persons as they specially follow or admire, and are ready to receive or
refuse an Opinion, as these shall please to direct them. Pray, Doctor, says one
of his Parishioners, what think you of such a Book? it seems to make things
plain. Ah! dear Sir, answers the Doctor, it is a very bad Book; he is a
dangerous Man that wrote it; he is for believing nothing but what agrees with
his own purblind, proud and carnal Reason. P. Say you so, Doctor? then I Am
resolved to read no more of it, for I heard you often preach against Humane
Reason; I Am sorry, truly, it should unhappily fall into my Hands, but I Will take
care that none of our Family set their Eyes upon it. D. You Will do very well,
Sir; besides, this Book is still worse than I told you, for it destroys a great
many Points which we teach; and should this Doctrine take, (which God forbid)
most of the good Books you have at home, and which cost you no less Pains to
read than Money to purchase, would signify not a Straw, and serve only for
Waste-Paper to put under Pies, or for other mean Uses. P. Bless me, good
Doctor, I pray God forgive me reading such a vile Treatise; he is an abominable
Man that could write it; but what? my Books worth nothing, say you? Dr. H's
Sermons, and Mr. C's Discourses Waste-Paper? I Will never believe it, let who
will say the contrary; Lord, why don't you excommunicate the Author, and seize
upon his Books? D. Ay, Sir, Time was, -- but now it seems a Man may believe
according to his own Sense, and not as the Church directs; there is a Toleration
established, you know. P. That Toleration, Doctor, will --. D. Whist, Sir, say
no more of it; I am as much concerned as you can be; but it is not safe nor
expedient at this time of day to find Faults.

37. There are others far from this Simplicity, but as firmly resolved to stand
fast by their old Systems. When they tell us of Mysteries we must believe them,
and there is no Remedy for it. It is not the Force of Reasoning that makes these
for Mysteries, -- but some by-Interest; and they will be sure to applaud and
defend any Author that writes in favor of their Cause, whether he supports it
with Reason or not. But I Am not half so angry with these Men as with a sort of
People that will not be at the Pains of examining any thing, lest they should
become more clear-sighted or betterinform'd, and so be tempted to take up a new
Road. Such Persons must needs be very indifferent indeed, or they make Religion
come into their Scutcheons.

38. The mention of Scutcheons naturally puts me in mind of those who are
little moved with any Reasons, when the Judgment of the Primitive Church comes
in competition. The Fathers (as they love to speak) are to them the best
Interpreters of the Words of Scripture; And what those honest Men, says a very
ingenious M. de Fontenelle, dans son Histos e des Oracles.
Person, could not make good themselves by sufficient Reasons, is now proved by
their sole Authority. If the Fathers foresaw this, adds the same Author, they
were not to be blamed for sparing themselves the Labor of reasoning more
exactly than we find they commonly did. That Truth and Falsehood should be
determined by a Majority of Voices, or certain Periods of Time, seems to me to
be the most ridiculous of all Follies.

39. But if Antiquity can in good earnest add any worth to an Opinion, I think
I need not fear to stand to its Decision: For if we consider the Duration of
the World, (says another celebrated Monsieur Perrault dans ses Parallelles des
Anciens and des Modernes.
Writer) as we do that of Man's Life, consisting of Infancy, Youth, Manhood,
and old Age; then certainly such as lived before us were the Children or the
Youth, and we are the true Ancients of the World. And if Experience (continues
he) be the most considerable Advantage which grown Persons have over the
younger sort, then, questionless, the Experience of such as come last into the
World must be incomparably greater than of those that were born long before
them: for the last Comers enjoy not only all the Stock of their Predecessors,
but to it have likewise added their own Observations. These Thoughts are no
less ingenious than they are just and solid. But if Antiquity be understood in
the vulgar Sense, I have no Reason to despair however; for my Assertion too
will become ancient to Posterity, and so be in a Condition to support it self
by this commodious Privilege of Prescription.

40. Yet seeing I am not likely to live till that time, it cannot be amiss to
make it appear that these same Fathers, who have the good luck to be at once
both the Young and the Old of the World, are on my side. It Is not out of any
Deference to their Judgments, I confess, that I take these Pains. I have freely
declared what Value I set upon their Authority in the Beginning of this Book:
but my Design is to show the Disingenuity of those, who pretending the highest
Veneration for the Writings of the Fathers, never fail to decline their
Sentence when it suits not with their Humor or Interest.

41. Clemens Alexandrinus has every where the same Notion of Mystery that I
have, that the Gentiles had, and which I have proved to be that of the Gospel.
In the 5th Book of his Stromates, which merits the Perusal of all that are
curious to understand the Nature of the Jewish and Heathen Mysteries; in that
Book, I say, he puts the Matter out of all Doubt, and quotes several of those
Texts of Scripture, which I have already alleged to this purpose. Nay he tells
us, that the Christian Discipline was called (...). Page 578. edit. Col. 1688.
Illumination, because it brought hidden things to light, the Master (CHRIST)
alone removing the Cover of the Ark, that is, the Mosaic Vail. He adds in
express Words, (...). Id^m ibid. page 576.
that those things which were mysterious and obscure in the Old Testament are
made plain in the New.

42. Every one knows how the Primitive Christians, in a ridiculous imitation of
the Jews, turned all the Scripture into Allegory; accommodating the Properties
of those Animals mentioned in the Old Testament to Events that happened under
the New. They took the same Liberty principally with Men, where they could
discover the least Resemblance between their Names, Actions, or State of Life;
and carried this Fancy at length to Numbers, Letters, Places, and what not.
That which in the Old Testament therefore did, according to them, represent any
thing in the New, they called the Type or Mystery of it. Thus TYPE, SYMBOL,
PARABLE, SHADOW, FIGURE, SIGN and MYSTERY, signify all the same thing in Justin
Martyr. This Father affirms in his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, that the Name
of Joshua was a Mystery representing the Name Jesus; and that the holding up of
Moses's Exodus 17. 11.
Hands during the Battle with the Amalekites in Rephidim, was a Type or Mystery
of Christ's Cross, whereby he overcame Death, as the Israelites there did their
Enemies: and then he adds the following Remark; (...). Page 338. edit. Col.
1636.
This is to be considered, says he, concerning those two holy Men and Prophets
of God, that neither of them was able in his single Person to carry both
MYSTERIES, I mean the Type of his Cross, and that of being called by his Name.
In the sa^e Dialogue he calls the Predictions of the Prophets (...). Page 294.
SYMBOLS, PARABLES and MYSTERIES, explained by the succeeding Prophets.

43. When Tertullian in his Apology justifies the Christians from those
inhumane Practices whereof their Enemies most unjustly accused 'em, he cries,
Quotidie obsidemur, quotidie prodimur; -- Si semper ^mus, quando proditum cst
quodadmittimus? Immo a quibus prodi potuit? ^b ipsis reis! Non utique; cum vel
ex forma omnibus Mysteriis silentii fides debeatur. Samothrac^a and Eleusinia
reticentur; quanto magis talia quae prodita interim etiam Humanam
animadversionem provocabunt, dum Divi^ servatur? Page 8. edit. Paris. 1675.
We are beset, we are discovered every day; -- But if we keep always hid, how
are those things known which we are said to commit? Nay, who could make them
known? Such as are guilty! Not so, surely: for all Mysteries are of Course
under an Oath of Secrecy. The Samothracian, the Eleusinian Mysteries are
concealed; how much rather such as being discovered would now provoke the
Justice of Men, and might expect to meet with that of God hereafter? They are
secret Practices, you see, and not incomprehensible Doctrines which this Father
counted Mysteries.

44. Origin makes the Encampments of the Israelites in their Journey to the
Promised Land to be (...). Lib. 6. contra Cells. page 291. edit. C^. 1677.
Symbols or Mysteries describing the way to such as shall travel toward
Heaven, or heavenly things. I need not add what he says of the Writings of the
Prophets, of the Vision of Ezekiel, or the Apocalypse in particular: for he is
universally confessed to have brought this Mystic or Allegorical Method of
interpreting Scripture to its Perfection, and to have surnish'd Matter to all
that trod the same Path after him; an Honor, in my Opinion, not to be envied
him. But he was so far from thinking any Doctrine of our Religion a Mystery in
the present Sense of the Word, that he expressly affirms them (...). Lib. 3.
contra (...). page 135.
to agree all with COMMON NOTIONS, and to commend themselves to the Assent of
every well-dispos'd Hearer.

45. The other Fathers of the three first Centuries have exactly the same
Notions of Mystery: And should they in this Matter happen to contradict in one
Place what they established in another, (as they ordinarily do in most things)
it would only serve to excluae them from being a true Rule to others that were
none to themselves. But what is no small Prejudice in our Favor, seeing we
have to do with Men so apt to forget, they keep very constant to this Point: so
that I may justly hope by this time the Cause of Incomprehensible and
Inconceivable Mysteries in Religion should be readily given up by all that
sincerely respect FATHERS, SCRIPTURE, or REASON.

CHAP. IV. Objections brought from particular Texts of SCRIPTURE, and from the
Nature of FAITH, answered.
46. SOME Men are so fond of Mysteries, and it seems they find their Account in
it, that they are ready to hazard any thing sooner than part with them. In the
mean time, whether they know it or not, they lay nothing less than their
Religion at stake by this Conduct; for it is an ugly Sign when People profess
that what they believe is above the Examination of Reason, and will suffer it
by no means to come into question: It argues in themselves a Distrust of their
Cause; and others conclude, that what dares not abide the Trial of Reason, must
needs it self be unreasonable at Bottom.

47. Notwithstanding these Consequences are so obvious, they harden themselves
against them, and are not ashamed to bring even Scripture to countenance their
Assertion. You shall hear nothing more frequently in their Mouths than these
Words of the Apostle, Beware lest any Man spoil Col. 2. 8.
you by PHILOSOPHY and vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the
Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. Ridiculous! as if Reason and
Truth were Vanity and Craft! By Philosophy is not here understood sound Reason,
(as all Interpreters agree) but the Systems of Plato, of Aristotle, of
Epicurus, of the Academicks, etc. many of whose Principles are directly
repugnant to common Sense and good Morals. Sophistry was never more in vogue
than in the Days of Paul; and several out of these Sects embracing
Christianity, found the way to mix with it their old Opinions, which they were
loath to quit for good and all. The Apostle therefore had weighty grounds to
warn his Converts not to confound the Inventions of Men with the Doctrine of
God. It appears nevertheless that this good Advice was to little Purpose, for
you will find the grossest Mistakes and Whimsies of the Fathers to have been
occasioned by the several Systems of Philosophy they read before their
Conversion, and which they afterward foolishly endeavored to reconcile with
Christianity, to the entire Ruin almost of the latter, as we shall show ^n the
following Chapter.

48. But as no particular Hypothesis whatsoever has a Right to set up for a
Standard of Reason to all Mankind, much less may vain Philosophy cr Sophistry
claim this Privilege: and so far am I from aiming at any such thing, that it is
the very Practice I oppose in this Book. When some have advanced the
Metaphysical Nonsense of doting Philosophers into Articles of Faith, they raise
a loud Clamor against Reason, before whose Evidence and Light their empty
Shadows must disappear. For as in Philosophy so in Religion every Sect has its
peculiar Extravagancies, and the INCOMPREHENSIBLE MYSTERIES of the latter do
perfectly answer the OCCULT QUALITIES of the former. They were both calculated
at first for the same Ends, viz. to stop the Mouths of such as demand a Reason
where none can be given, and to keep as many in Ignorance as Interest shall
think convenient. But God forbid that I should impute the like nefarious
Designs to all that contend for Mysteries now, Thousands whereof I know to be
the best meaning Men in the Universe. This sophistical or corrupt Philosophy is
elsewhere in the New Testament styled the Wisdom of this World, to which 1 Cor.
3. 19.
the Greeks were as much bigoted, as the Jews were infatuated with a Fancy
that nothing could be true but what was miraculously proved so: The Jews
require a Sign, and the Greeks seek after 1 Cor. 1. 22.
Wisdom. But this boasted Wisdom was then Foolishness with God, and so it is
now with considering Men.

49. A Passage out of the Epistle to the Romans is cited likewise to prove
Humane Reason not a capable Judge of what is divinely revealed. The Words are,
The Carnal Mind is Enmity against Romans 8. 7.
God; for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. But if
these Words be spoken of Reason, there can be nothing more false; because
Reason does and ought to subject it self to the Divine Law: yet this Submission
argues no Imperfection in Reason, as our Obedience to just Laws cannot be said
to destroy our Liberty. Reason must first understand the Law of Go^, and then
comply with it; for a Man can no more deserve Punishment for not observing such
Laws as are unintelligible, than for not performing what was never enjoined
him. The carnal Mind then in this Place is not Reason, but the carnal Desires
of lewd and wicked Men; whose Practices, as they are contrary to the revealed
Law of God, so they are to that of sound Reason too.

50. What has been discoursed of pretended Wisdom and sensual Minds, may be
easily applied to another Passage where it is said, that the Weapons of our
Warfare are not carnal, but mighty 2 Cor. 10: 4, 5.
through God to the pulling down of strong Holds, casting down Imaginations,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the Knowledge of God, and
oringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedience of Christ. It is plain
from the Words as well as the Scope of the whole, that these are the Thoughts
and Imaginations of foolish and profane Men, and should be captivated or
reformed by Reason as well as Scripture; as, in effect, they often are: for
such Persons not ordinarily allowing of Argument from Scripture, are first
persuaded by Reason, and after that they receive the Scripture. But can Reason
cast down or destroy it self? No; but it reduces those vain and impious
Sophisms which borrow its Name to cover or authorize the Disorders they
occasion.

51. It would be extremely tedious to go one by one over all the Texts which
ignorant or perverse Men alledg against that Use of Reason in Religion which I
particularly establish. Any single Passage to my purpose should, one would
think, give sufficient Satisfaction to all Christian Lovers of Truth: for the
Word of God must be every where uniform and self-consistent. But I have quoted
several in the second Chapter of the second Section, to speak nothing of what I
performed in the foregoing Chapter of the present Section. Yet because this
Reasoning might be retorted, and to leave no plausible Pretenses to Cavillers
or Deceivers, I have punctually answered the strongest Objections I have
observed in the most celebrated Pieces of Divinity; I say which I have
observed, for I should read the Gospel a Million of Times over before the
Vulgar Notion of Mystery could ever enter into my Head, or any Passage in that
Book could suggest to me that the Sense of it was above Reason or Enquiry. Nor
do I find my self yet inchn'd to envy those who entertain other Thoughts of it,
when all the while they openly acknowledge it to be a Divine Revelation. But
seeing the most material Difficulty made to me by a Friend, is that my Opinion
destroys the Nature of FAITH, I shall with all the Brevity I can deliver my
Sentiments concerning this Subject.

52. I will spend no time upon the ordinary Divisions of Faith into Historical,
Temporary, or Justifying, Lively or Dead, Weak or Strong, because most of these
are not so much Faith it self, as different Effects thereof. The word imports
Belief or Persuasion, as when we give Credit to any thing which is told us by
God or Man; whence Faith is properly divided into Human and Divine. Again,
Divine Faith is either when God speaks to us immediately himself, or when we
acquiesce in the Words or Writings of those to whom we believe he has spoken.
All Faith now in the World is of this last sort, and by consequence entirely
built upon Ratiocination. For we must first be convinced that those Writings
are theirs whose Names they bear, we then examine the outward State and Actions
of those Persons, and lastly understand what is contained in their Works;
otherwise we cannot determine whether they be worthy of God or not, much less
firmly believe them.

53. To be confident of any thing without conceiving it, is no real Faith or
Persuasion, but a rash Presumption, and an obstinate Prejudice, rather becoming
Enthusiasts or Impostors than the taught of God, who has no Interest to delude
his Creatures, nor wants Ability to inform them rightly. I proved before,
(Sect. 2. Chap. 2.) that the Difference between Human and Divine Revelations
did not consist in degrees of Perspicuity, but in Certitude. So many
Circumstances frequently concur in History as render it equal to Intuition:
Thus I can as soon deny my own Being as the Murder of Cicero, or the Story of
William the Conqueror; yet this happens only sometimes: But God speaks always
Truth and Certainty.

54. Now since by Revelation Men are not endu'd with any new Faculties, it
follows that God should lose his end in speaking to them, if what he said did
not agree with their common Notions. Could that Person justly value himself
upon being wiser than his Neighbors, who having infallible Assurance that
something called Blictri had a Being in Nature, in the mean time knew not what
this Blictri was? And seeing the Case stands really thus, all Faith or
Persuasion must necessarily consist of two Parts, Knowledge and Assent. It Is the
last indeed that constitutes the formal Act of Faith, but not without the
Evidence of the first: And this is the true Account we have of it all over the
New Testament. There we read that without Faith it is impossible Heb. 11. 6.
to please God; but he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he
is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. So the firm Persuasion of a
pious Man that his Requests will be granted, is grounded upon his knowledge of
the Being, Goodness, and Power of God. It was reckoned no Crime not to believe
in Christ before he was revealed; for how could they believe in him of whom
they had not heard? But Romans 10. 14.
with what better Reason could any be condemned for not believing what he said,
if they might not understand it? for, as far as I can see, these Cases are
parallel. Faith is likewise said to come by hearing; but without Understanding
Ver. 1^.
it is plain this Hearing would signify nothing, Words and their Ideas being
reciprocal in all Languages.

55. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews does not define FAITH a
Prejudice, Opinion, or Conjecture, but Conviction or Demonstration: Faith, says
he, is the confident Expectation of Heb. 11. 1.
things hoped for, and the Demonstration of things not seen. These last Words,
things not seen, signify not (as some would have it) things incomprehensible or
unintelligible, but past or future Matters of Fact, as the Creation of the
World, and the Resurrection of the Dead, or the Belief of some things invisible
to our corporeal Eyes, tho intelligible enough to the Eyes of our
Understanding. This appears by all the Examples subjoined to that Definition.
Besides, there can be properly no Faith of things seen or present, for then
it is Self-evidence, and not Ratiocination: Hope that is seen is not Romans 8. 24,
25.
Hope, for what a Man sees why does he yet hope for? But if we hope for what we
see not, then do we with Patience wait for it. So the Patriarchs received not
the Heb. 11. 13.
Promises, but saw them afar off, and were persuaded of them.

56. Without conceiving Faith after this manner, how could Christ be termed the
Light of the World, the Light Joh. 8. 12. and 9. 5. Acts 13. 47.
of the Gentiles? How could Believers be said to have the Spirit of Wisdom, and
to have the Eyes of their Hearts Ephesians. 1. 17. Ver. 18.
enlightn'd? For the Light of the Heart or Understanding is the Knowledge of
things; and as this Knowledge is more or less, so the Mind is proportionably
illuminated. Be not unwise, says the Ephesians. 5. 17.
Apostle, but understanding what the Will of the Lord is. And in another place
he exhorts Men never to act in dubious Matters till they are fully persuaded in
Romans 14. 5.
their own Minds.

57. But to all this will be objected that remarkable Instance of Abraham's
Faith, who was ready to sacrifice his only Son, notwithstanding God had
promised that Kings should descend of him, and his Seed be numerous as the
Stars of Heaven, or the Sand upon the Seashore. Did Abraham blindly obey then,
without reconciling the apparent Contradiction between God's present Command
and his former Promises? Far from it: for it is expressly recorded, that he that
had received the Heb. 11. 17, 18, 19.
Promises offered up his only begotten, of whom it was said, that in Isaac
shall thy Seed be blessed; So (...) should be translated.
Reasoning that God was able to raise him again from the Dead, from whence also
he had received him in a Figure. He rightly concluded that God was able to
revive Isaac by a Miracle, as he was miraculously born, according to another
Promise, after his Parents were past having Children, and so as good as dead:
therefore it is elsewhere written of Abraham, that Ver. 12.
being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own Body now dead, when he was
Romans 4. 19, 20, 21.
about an hundred Years old, neither yet the Deadness of Sarah's Womb; nor
staggered at God's Promise through Unbelief; but being strong in Faith he gave
Glory to God, and was fully persuaded that what he had promised he was able
also to perform.

58. Now what is there in all this, but very strict Reasoning from Experience,
from the Possibility of the thing, and from the Power, Justice, and
Immutability of him that promised it? Nor can any Man stew me in all the New
Testament another Signification of Faith but a most firm Persuasion built upon
substantial Reasons. In this Sense all Christianity is not seldom styled the
Faith; as now we usually say that we are of this or that PERSUASION, meaning
the Profession of some Religion. But surely nothing can better root and
establish our Persuasion than a through Examination and Trial of what we
believe; whereas the Weakness and Instability of our Faith proceed from want of
sufficient Reasons for it, whereupon Incredulity always follows; then fails
Obedience, which is the constant Sign and Fruit of genuine Faith; and hence
spring all the Irregularities of Men's Lives. He that says I know him, and
keeps not his Commandments, 1 John 2. 4, 6.
is a Liar -- For he that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk
as he walked. Nor can it possibly fall out otherwise, but that he who believes
without Understanding must be tossed and carried about with every Wind of Ephesians. 4.
14.
Doctrine, by the Slight and Cunning of Men ready to deceive.

59. Tho the Authority of the New Testament be so clear in this Matter, yet I
shall further confirm it by the following Observations. First, if Faith were
not a Persuasion resulting from the previous Knowledge and Comprehension of the
thing believed, there could be no Degrees nor Differences in it; for these are
evident Tokens that Men know more or less of a thing, as they have Desires or
Opportunities to learn it. But that there are such Degrees appears by the
Scripture, where those that have only an imperfect and perfunctory Knowledge of
Religion are compared to Infants who feed only upon Milk; 1 Cor. 3. 2.
but they who arrive at a more full and accurate Certainty are liken'd to grown
Men that can digest stronger Heb. 5. 12, 13, 14.
Food.

60. My next Observation is, That the Subject of Faith must be intelligible to
all, since the Belief thereof is commanded under no less a Penalty than
Damnation: He that believet^ not, Mark 16. 16.
shall be damned. But shall any be damned for the Nonperformance of
Impossibilities? Obligations to ^elieve do therefore suppose a Possibility to
understand. I showed before that Contradiction and Nothing were convertible
Terms; and I may now say as much of Mystery in the Theological Sense: for, to
speak freely, Contradiction and Mystery are but two emphatick ways of saying
Nothing. Contradiction expresses Nothing by a couple of Ideas that destroy one
another, and Mystery expresses Nothing by Words that have no Ideas at all.

61. The third Observation shall be, That if any part of Scripture were
unintelligible, it could never be rightly translated, except the Sound of the
Words, and not their Sense, be looked upon as the Revelation of God. Terms can
by no means be understood, unless the things they denote be understood also. I
may well understand Things without their Names, but never Names without knowing
their Subjects. And, in good earnest, to what sort of Assurance can any Man
pretend, that he has made a right Version of what he openly professes not to
conceive? It cannot be imagined how much the Notion of Mystery contributes to
the Obscurity of Scripture in most Translations. When an able Linguist meets
with a difficult Passage, he presently takes it for a Mystery, and concludes it
is to no purpose to be at more Pains about what is in it self inexplicable. But
an incapable Translator lays his own blundring Nonsense, and all the mysterious
Fruits of his Ignorance to God Almighty's Charge. These are the Wretches who
plentifully furnish the Atheistical and Profane with all the Matter of their
Objections against Scripture. But I hope in Time we may see a Remedy to these
Disorders.

62. The fourth Observation is, That except Faith signifies an intelligible
Persuasion, we cannot give others a Reason of our Hope, as Peter directs us. To
say that what we believe is the Word 1 Pet. 3. 15.
of God, will be to no end, except we prove it to be so by Reason; and I need
not add, that if we may not examine and understand our Faith, every Man will be
obliged implicitly to continue of that Religion where^n he is first educated.
Suppose a Siamese Or Priest.
Talapoin should tell a Christian Preacher that The God of the Siameses.
Sommonocodom forbad the Goodness of his Religion to be tried by the Light of
Reason; how could the Christian confute him, if he likewise should maintain
that certain Points of Christianity were above Reason? The Question would not
be ^hen, whether Mysteries might be allowed in the true Religion, but who had
more Right to institute them, Christ or Sommonocodom?

63. My last Observation shall be, That either the Apostles could not write
more intelligibly of the reputed Mysteries, or they would not. If they would
not, then it is no longer our Fault if we neither understand nor believe them,
for nothing cannot be the Object of Belief: And if they could not write more
clearly themselves (which our Adversaries will not suppose) they were so much
the less to expect Credit from others.

64. But it is affirmed, that GOD has a Right to require the Assent of his
Creatures to what they cannot comprehend: and questionless, he may command
whatever is just and reasonable, for to act Tyrannically does only become the
Devil. But I demand to what end should God require us to believe what we cannot
understand? To exercise, some say, our Diligence. But this at first sight looks
ridiculous, as if the plain Duties of the Gospel, and our necessary
Occupations, were not sufficient to employ all our time. But how exercise our
Diligence? Is it possible for us to understand those Mysteries at last, or not?
If it be, then all I contend for is gained; for I never pretended that the
Gospel could be understood without due Pains and Application, no more than any
other Book. But if it be impossible after all to understand them, this is such
a piece of Folly and I^pertinence as no sober Man would be guilty of, to puzzle
Peoples Heads with what they could never conceive, to exhort to, and command
the Study of them; and all this to keep 'em from Idleness, when they can scarce
find leisure enough for what is on all hands granted to be intelligible.

65. Others say that GOD has enjoined the Belief of MYSTERIES to make us more
humble. But how? By letting us see the small Extent of our Knowledge. But this
extraordinary Method is quite needless, for Experience acquaints us with that
every day; and I have spent a whole Chapter in the second Section of this Book,
to prove that we have not an adequate Idea of all the Properties, and no Idea
of the real Essence of any Substance in the World. It had been a much better
Answer, that God would thus abridg our Speculations, to gain us the more time
for the practice of what we understand. But many cover a Multitude of Sins by
their Noise and Heat on the behalf of such foolish, and unprofitable
Speculations.

66. From all these Observations, and what went before, it evidently follows
that Faith is so far from being an implicit Assent to any thing above Reason,
that this Notion directly contradicts the Ends of Religion, the Nature of Man,
and the Goodness and Wisdom of God. But at this rate, some will be apt to say,
Faith is no longer Faith but Knowledge. I answer, that if Knowledge be taken for
a present and immediate View of things, I have no where affirmed any thing like
it, but the contrary in many Places. But if by Knowledge be meant understanding
what is believed, then I stand by it that Faith is Knowledge: I have all along
maintained it, and the very Words are promiscuously used for one another in the
Gospel. We know, i. e. we believe, that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior
of the World. I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus that Joh. 4. 42. Romans
14. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 58.
there is nothing unclean of it self. You know that your Labor is not in vain
in the Lord.

67. Others will say that this Notion of Faith makes Revelation useless. But,
pray, how so? for the Question not, whether we could discover all the Objects
of our Faith by Ratiocination: I have proved on the contrary, that no Matter of
Fact can be known without Revelation. But I assert, that what is once revealed
we must as well understand as any other Matter in the World, Revelation being
only of use to inform us whilst the Evidence of its Subject persuades us. Then,
reply they, Reason is of more Dig^ity than Revelation. I answer, Just as much
as a Greek Grammar is superior to the New Testament; for we make use of
Grammar to understand the Language, and of Reason to comprehend the Sense of
that Book. But in a word, I see no need of Comparisons in this Case, for Reason
is not less from God than Revelation; it is the Candle, the Guide, the Judge he
has lodged within every Man that comes into this World.

68. Lastly, It may be objected, That the Poor and Illiterate cannot have such
a Faith as I maintain. Truly if this can be made out, it may pass for a greater
Mystery than any System of Divinity in Christendom can afford: for what can
seem more strange and wonderful, than that the common People will sooner
believe what is unintelligible, incomprehensible, and above their Reasons, than
what is easy, plain, and suited to their Capacities? But the Vulgar are more
obliged to Christ, who had a better Opinion of them than these Men; for he
preached his Gospel to them in a special manner; and they, on the other hand,
heard him gladly; because, no doubt, they understood Mark 12. 37.
his Instructions better than the mysterious Lectures of their Priests and
Scribes. The uncorrupted Doctrines of Christianity are not above their Reach or
Comprehension, but the Gibberish of your Divinity Schools they understand not.
It is to them the Language of the Beast, and is inconsistent with their
Condition in this World, when their very Teachers must serve above an
Apprenticeship to master it, before they begin the Study of the Bible. How
slowly must the Gospel have moved at the Beginning, if such as were called to
preach it had been obliged to qualify themselves after this manner! And no
wonder that it has such little Effects now upon Men's Lives, after it is so
iniserably deformed and almost ruined by those unintelligible and extravagant
Terms, Notions, and Rites of Pagan or Jewish Original.

69. Thus I have distinctly answered the several Objections made to me, and I
shall add no more on this Subject of Faith, when I have considered a Passage in
the first Epistle to Peter, where it is written, that the Angels desire to see
into certain things; yet those things are not inconceivable Mysteries, but the
Coming of Christ and the Gospel-state of Salvation, which were divinely
foretold to the Jews, and concerning which they carefully reasoned then; tho,
now those things are fulfilled, we are not permitted that Liberty. Receiving
the end of your Faith, says Peter, the Salvation of your Souls; of which
Salvation the Prophets have 1 Pet. 1. 9-12.
inquired and diligently searched, who prophesi'd of the Grace that should come
unto you; searching what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ, which was
in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the Sufferings of Christ,
and the Glory that should follow: Unto whom it was revealed, that not unto
themselves, but unto us, they did minister the things which are now reported
unto you by them that have preached unto you by the Holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven, which things the Angels desire to look into. Now here is no great
Mystery in all this, that the Angels, who being finite Creatures, can know
nothing but by Experience, Ratiocination, or Revelation, should be as curious
as the Jews, to penetrate into those future Events of such Importance, and so
very obscurely revealed.

CHAP. V. Objections, drawn from the Consideration of MIRACLES, answered.
70. WHen all other shifts prove ineffectual, the Partisans of MYSTERY fly to
MIRACLES as their last Refuge: but this is too weak a Place to make any long
Resistance, and we doubt not of beating 'em quickly thence with Ease and
Safety. But seeing, for the most part, the State of this Controversy is never
distinctly laid, I shall first endeavor to give a clear Notion of the Nature
of Miracles, and then leave it to be considered whether I have much Reason to
apprehend any Danger from this Objection. A MIRACLE then is some Action
exceeding all humane Power, and which the Laws of NATURE cannot perform by
their ordinary Operations.

71. Now whatever is contrary to Reason can be no Miracle, for it has been
sufficiently proved already, that Contradiction is only another word for
Impossible or Nothing. The miraculous Action therefore must be something in it
self intelligible and possible, tho the manner of doing it be extraordinary. So
for a Man to walk safe in the midst of Fire is conceivable, and possible too,
should any thing capable of repelling the Heat and Flames surround him: but
when such a Security is not provided by Art or Chance, but is the immediate
Effect of supernatural Power, then it makes a Miracle. An able Physician does
sometimes restore Sight to the Blind; and a Hand or Foot must dry up, when the
Circulation of the Blood and Humors is too much excluded from it: but if
without the ordinary Time and Applications those Members be cured in an
Instant, at the Command or Desire of any Person, such an Action is truly
miraculous, as well as the sudden Restoration of a sick Body to Health, which
Art or Nature must spend a great deal of Time and Pains upon.

72. No Miracle then is contrary to Reason, for the Action must be
intelligible, and the Performance of it appear most easy to the Author of
Nature, who may command all its Principles at his Pleasure. Therefore all those
Miracles are fictitious, wherein there occur any Contradictions, as that Christ
was born without opening any Passage out of the Virgin's Body; that a Head
spoke some Days after it was severed from the Body, and the Tongue cut out;
with Multitudes of this kind that may be met with among the Papists, the Jews,
the Bramins, the Mahometans, and in all Places where the Credulity of the
People makes 'em a Merchandise to their Priests.

73. Let us next consider, that God is not so prodigal of Miracles, as to work
any at random. The Order of Nature is not altered, stopped, or forwarded,
unless for some weighty Design becoming the Divine Wisdom and Majesty. And,
indeed, we learn from Scripture and Reason, that no Miracle is ever wrought
without some special and important End, which is either appointed by those for
whom the Miracle is made, or intended and declared by him that works it. If the
Apostles had barely cured the blind, the deaf, the lame, the diseased, this
would certainly procure 'em an extraordinary Esteem; and in some Places too
Divine Worship, as it happened to Paul and Ba^nabas at Lystra, when they had
Acts 14. 11, etc.
cured a born Cripple without any farther Circumstance; but this was only a
Means to gain the Attention of these Idolaters to the Doctrine they were about
to preach in their City. Nor is there any Miracle mentioned in the New
Testament, but what served to confirm the Authority of those that wrought it,
to procure Attention to the Doctrines of the Gospel, or for the like wise and
reasonable Purposes.

74. By this Rule the celebrated Feats of Goblins and Fairies, of Witches, of
Conjurers, and all the Heathen Prodigies, must be accounted fictitious, idle,
and superstitious Fables; for in all these there appears no End deserving a
Change in Nature. Besides, they evidently contradict our Idea of God, and quite
subvert his Providence. Diabolical Delusions would hereby receive equal
Confirmation with Divine Revelation, Miracles being performed in favor of
both. Nay, the Wonders of the Devil and his Agents would infinitely exceed in
Number and Quality those of God, and his Servants: which Affertion must hold
true were no Stories believed but the best a^tested in every Country of
England, to speak nothing of more credulous Nations; for it is very observable,
that the more ignorant and barbarous any People remain, you shall find 'em most
abound with Tales of this nature, and stand in far greater Aw of Satan tha^
Jehovah. In a word, the Heathens, after this rate, would be rivetted in their
Idolatry, and the ugliest Hag or most beggarly Astrologer equalize the Prophets
and Apostles. But why should good Reasons be spent in Confutation of mere
Fictions? for I challenge any Person whatsoever to produce one Instance of
these lying Wonders that contains all the true Characters of Historical
Evidence; and withal I dare engage as soon to prove the Goodness of the Alcoran
as of the Gospel, if the Belief of any Miracles, except Divine ^nes, be
grantedme. But they must draw some Advantage from the superstitious Fear of the
People, who so industriously cherish it.

75. After what has been already observed, I need not add, that all Miracles
secretly performed, or among that Party only to whose Profit and Advantage the
Belief of them turns, must be rejected as counterfeit and false; for as such
cannot bear the Test of moral Certitude, so they contradict the very Design of
Miracles, which are always wrought in favor of the Unbelieving. But the
Papists alone must be the VVitnesses of their own Miracles, and never the
Heretics they would convert by them: nor is their Practice less ridiculous in
confirming one Miracle by another, as that of Transubstantiation by several
more.

76. From all this laid together, it follows, that nothing contrary to Reason,
whether you consider the Action or Design, is miraculous. But there is a good
old Distinction that serves all turns: Tho Miracles are not contrary to Reason,
says one, yet they are surely above it. In what Sense pray? Which is above
Reason, the Thing, or the Manner of it? If it be answered, the last, I suppose
the Objector thinks I mean by Miracle some Philosophical Experiment, or some
Phenomenon that surprises only by its Rarity. Could I tell how a Miracle was
wrought. I believe I might do as much my self; but what may be said to have
been this or that way performed, is no Miracle at all. It suffices therefore,
that the Truth of the Action be demonstrated, and the Possibility of it, to any
Being able to govern Nature by instanta^eously extracting, mollifying, mixing,
infusing, consolidating, etc. and this, it may be, by the Ministry of thousands
at once; for Miracles are produced according to the Laws of Nature, tho above
its ordinary Operations, which are therefore supernaturally assisted.

77. But finally, it will be said, that in the State of the Question, at the
beginning of my Book, I maintained the Manner as well as the Thing was
explicable. But of what? of Miracles? No surely; but of those Doctrines in
Confirmation whereof the Miracles are wrought. This I stand by still, and may
add, I hope, that I have clearly proved it too: But to say as much of Miracles
would be to make 'em no Miracles, which shows the Weakness, and Impertinence of
this Objection.

CHAP. VI. When, why, and by whom were MYSTERIES brought into Christianity.
78. THE End of the LAW being Romans 10. 4.
Righteousness, JESUS CHRIST came not to destroy, but to fulfill Mat. 5. 17.
it: for he fully and clearly preached the purest Morals, he taught that
reasonable Worship, and those just Conceptions of Heaven and Heavenly Things,
which were more obscurely signified or designed by the Legal Observations. So
having stripped the Truth of all those external Types and Ceremonies which made
it difficult before, he rendered it easy and obvious to the meanest Capacities.
His Disciples and Followers kept to this Simplicity for some considerable time,
tho very early diverse Abuses began to get footing amongst them. The converted
Jews, who continued mighty fond of their Levitical Rites and Feasts, would
willingly retain them, and be Christians too. Thus what at the beginning was
but only tolerated in weaker Brethren, became afterward a part of Christianity
it self, under the Pretense of Apostolic Prescription or Tradition.

79. But this was nothing compared to the Injury done to Religion by the
Gentiles; who, as they were proselyted in greater Numbers than the Jews, so the
Abuses they introduced were of more dangerous and universal Influence. They
were not a little scandalized at the plain Dress of the Gospel, with the
wonderful Facility of the Doctrines it contained, having been accustomed all
their Lives to the pompous Worship and secret Mysteries of Deities without
Number. The Christians on the other hand were careful to remove all Obstacles
lying in the way of the Gentiles. They thought the most effectual way of
gaining them over to their side was by compounding the Matter, which led them
to unwarrantable Compliances, till at length they likewise set up for
Mysteries. Yet not having the least Precedent for any Ceremonies from the
Gospel, excepting Baptism and the Supper, they strangely disguised and
transformed these by adding to them the Pagan Mystic Rites. They administr'd
them with the strictest Secrecy; and, to be inferior to their Aversaries in no
Circumstance, they permitted none to assist at them, but such as were
antecedently prepared or initiated. And to inspire their Catechumens with most
ardent Desires of Participation, they gave out that what was so industriously
hid were (...).
tremendous and unutterable Mysteries.

80. Thus lest Simplicity, the noblest Ornament of the Truth, should expose it
to the Contempt of Unbelievers, Christianity was put upon an equal Level with
the Mysteries of Ceres, or the Orgies of Bacchus. Foolish and mistaken Care! as
if the most impious Superstitions could be sanctified by the Name of Christ.
But such is always the Fruit of prudential and condescending Terms of
Conversion in RELIGION, whereby the Number and not the Sincerity of Professors
is mainly intended.

81. When once the Philosophers thought it their Interest to turn Christians,
Matters grew every Day worse and worse: for they not only retained the Air, the
Genius, and sometimes the Garb of their several Sects, but most of their
erroneous Opinions too. And while they pretended to employ their Philosophy in
Defense of Christianity, they so confounded them together, that what before was
plain to every one, did now become intelligible only to the Learned, who made
it still less evident by their litigious Disputes, and vain Subtilties. We must
not forget that the Philosophers were for making no meaner a Figure among the
Christians than they did formerly among the Heathens; but this was what they
could not possibly effect, without rendering every thing abstruse by Terms or
otherwise, and so making themselves sole Masters of the Interpretation.

82. These Abuses became almost incurable, when the supreme Magistrate did
openly countenance the Christian Religion. Multitudes then professed themselves
of the Emperor's Persuasion, only to make their Court, and mend their Fortunes
by it, or to preserve those Places and Preferments whereof they were already
possessed. These continued Pagans in their Hearts; and it may be easily
imagined that they carried all their old Prejudices along with them into a
Religion which they purely embraced out of Politic Considerations: And so it
constantly happens, when the Conscience is forced and not persuaded, which was
a while after the Case of these Heathens.

83. The zealous Emperors erected stately Churches, and converted the Heathen
Temples, Sanctuaries, Fanes or Chapels, to the Use of Christians, after a
previous Expiation, and placing the Sign of the Cross in them to assure their
Possession to Christ. All their Endowments, with the Benefices of the Priests,
Flamens, Augurs, and the whole sacred Tribe, were appropriated to the Christian
Clergy. Nay, their very Habits, as -- Non discolor ulli Ante aras cultus;
velantur corpora lino, Et Pelusiaco praesulget stamine vertex. Sil. Ital. lib.
3. v. 23. Alba decet Cererem vestis; Cerealibus albam Sumite -- Ovid. Fast. l.
4. v. 619. Color autem Albus praecipue decorus Deo est, tum in caeteris, tum
maxim in Textili. Cic. l. 2. de Leg. cap. 18. (...). Lucian. de Deae Syriae
Sacerdotibu^. Linigeri fugiunt Calvi, sistrataque Turba. Martial. l. 12. Ep. 29.
white Linen Stoles, Mitres, and the like, were retained to bring those, as was
pretended, to an imperceptible Change, who could not be reconciled to the
Christian Simplicity and Poverty. But indeed the Design at bottom was to
introduce the Riches, Pomp, and Dignities of the Clergy which immediately
succeeded.

84. Things being in this Cond^tion, and the Rites of Baptism and the Supper
being very sensibly augmented, it will not be amiss before I pass further to
lay down a short Parallel of the ancient Heathen and new-coin'd Christian
Mysteries. And I shall endeavor so to do it, as to make it evident they were
one in Nature, however different in their Subjects.

85. First, Their Terms were exactly the same without any Alteration: They both
made use of the words initiating and perfecting. They both (...).
called their MYSTERIES Myeseis, Teleioseis, Teleiotika, Epopteiai, etc. They
both looked upon Initiation as a kind of deifying. And they both styled their
Priests Mystagogue, Mystes, Hierotelestes, (...)
etc.

86. Secondly, The Preparatives to their Initiations were the same. The
Gentiles used several Sacerdos stipatum me religiosa cohorte deducit ad
proximas balneas, and prius sueto lavacro traditum, praefatus Deum veniam,
purissime circumrorans abluit. Apul.

Haec sancte ut poscas, Tiberino in gurgite mergis

Mane caput bis terque, and noctem Flumine pur gas. Pers. Sat. 2. v. 15.

Ter caput irrorat, ter collit in aethera palmas. Ovid. Fast. l. 4. v. 31 c.


Washings and Lustrations; they (...), etc. Clem. Alex. page 13. Arnob. lib. 5.
fasted, and Vos quoque abesse procul jubeo, discedite ab ari^,

Queis tulit hesterna gaudia nocte Venus. Tibul. l. 2. Eleg. 1. v. 11.

Casta placent superis, pura cum vest venite,

Et manibus pueris sumite fontis aquam. Titul. ibid. v. 13.


abstained (...)
from Women before Initiation; tho the wiser ^ort did laugh at those who
thought such Actions could Omne nefas, omnemque mali purgamina causam

Credebant nostri tollere posse senes. Ovid. Fast. l. 2. v. 35.

Ah nimium faciles qui tristia crimina caedis,

Fluminea tolli posse putatis aqua! Idem ib. v. 45.


expiate Sin, or appease Heaven. But the Fathers, the admired Fathers, imitated
them in all these things; and this was the Origin of Abstinence from certain
kinds of Meat, of your mock Anniversary Fasts, and the Clerical Celibacy.

87. Thirdly, The Christians kept their Mysteries as secret as the Heathens did
theirs. (...). Homil. in Matthew.
Chrysostom says, We shut the Doors when we celebrate our Mysteries, and
exclude the uninitiated. (...).
Basil of Cesarea assures us, that the Esteem of Mysteries is preserved only by
Silence. And (...). De providen. Sect. 2.
Synesius says, that the Gentile Mysteries were performed by Night, because
their Veneration proceeds from Men's Ignorance about them. But why should that
deserve Blame in others, good Synesius, which you allow in your own Party? or
is it that the Christians have a better Right to Mysteries than the Gentiles?

88. Fourthly, The Fathers were extremely cautious not to speak intelligibly of
their Mysteries before Unbelievers, or the Catechumens; whence you frequently
meet in their Writings with these or the like Expressions, Norunt initiati.
August. in locis pluribus. (...). Chrysostom. in Genes. in Homil. 27. and alibi
passim.
The Initiated know, the Initiated understand what I say. And as the Heathens
did by Proclamation (...). Orpheus, Lucianus, etc.
drive away all the Profane from their Mysteries, so the Deacons of the
Primitive Church cried aloud before the Celebration of Baptism, but chiefly of
the Supper, (...).
Go out all you Catechumens, walk out all that are not initiated, or something
to this Effect, for they often vari'd the Form. Cyril of Jerusalem has a very
singular Passage to our purpose, (...). Cyril. Hicrosol. praef^t. in (...). Ed.
t. Paris. 1631.
Now when catechizing is rehearsed, if a Catechumen should ask you what the
Teachers said, tell it by no means to any that is not initiated: for we entrust
you with a Mystery, and the hope of the Life to come. Keep this Mystery then to
him that rewards: and if any should say unto you, What harm is it, if I also
learn? Answer him, that so sick Persons desire Wine: But if it be given to any
unseasonably, it makes him frantic, and so two Evils happen; both the sick Man
is destroyed, and the Physician is disparaged. Thus if a Catechumen hears those
things from any of the Faithful, he grows likewise frantic; for not
understanding what he heard, he argues against the thing, and laughs at what is
said: so the Believer that told it him is condemned as a Betrayer of Secrets.
Now you being one of us, see that you blab out nothing: not that what we say
are not worthy to be spoken, but that others are not worthy to hear them. When
you were a Catechumen your self, we never told you what was proposed. But when
you have learnt by experience the Sublimity of those things which are taught,
you will then be convinced that the Catechumens are unworthy to hear them.

89. Fifthly, The Steps and Degrees in both their Initiations are the same. The
Heathens had (...). Olympiodor.
five Degrees necessary to Perfection. First, common Purgation; Secondly, more
private Purgation; Thirdly, a liberty of standing amongst the Initiated;
Fourthly, Initiation; and, Lastly, the Right of seeing every thing, or being
Epopts. Among the Christians likewise there were five Steps by which their
Penitents were readmitted to Communion. First they were obliged to remain some
Years separate from the Congregation lamenting their Sins, whence this Step was
called Proclausis. (...).
Secondly, they were removed nearer the People, where during three Years they
might hear the Priests, tho not see them: this Step was therefore called
Acroasis. Thirdly, for three Years (...).
more they might hear and see, but not mix with the Congregation: this Period
was called Hypoptosis. Fourthly, they might stand with the People, but (...).
not receive the Sacraments: this was their Systasis. And, Fifthly, they were
admitted to Communion, which (...).
was called Mathexis. The new Converts likewise, under Preparation to (...).
participate of the Mysteries, were styled Catechumens; then competent; and,
lastly, Epopts, perfect, or Believers: which are the very Degrees in Name and
Quality, to which Pythagoras obliged his Disciples.

90. I could draw out this Parallel much larger, but here is enough to show how
Christianity became mysterious, and how so divine an Institution did, through
the Craft and Ambition of Priests and Philosophers, degenerate into mere
Paganism.

91. Mystery prevailed very little in the first Hundred or Century of Years
after Christ; but in the second and third, it began to establish it self by
Ceremonies. To Baptism were then added the tasting of Milk and Denique ut a
Baptismate ingrediar, aquam adituri ibidem, sed and aliquanto prius in eccle^a
sub Antistitis manu, contestamur nos renunciare Diabolo, and pompae, and
angelis ejus. Dehinc t^r m^rgitamur, amplius aliquid respondentes quam Dominus
in Evangelio determinavit. Inde suscepti lactis and mellis concordiam
praegustamus; ex eaque die Lavacro quotidiano per totam Hebdomadem abstinemus.
Tertullian. page 102.
Honey, Egressi de Lavacro perunguimur benedicta Unctione, etc. Id. page 226.
Anointing, the Sign of the Cross, a white Garment, etc. There was quickly
after a farther Accession of Questions and Answers, of antecedent Fastings and
Watchings, Kissing, and set times of Administration. After Baptism they did not
Tertul, in loco citato.
wash for a whole Week, exactly answerable to the Superstition of the Gentiles,
who never put off the (...). Scholiast. in Plut. Aristophan.
Garment in which they were initiated till it fell all to tatters. Next were
added Injection of Salt and Wine into the Mouths of the Baptized, and a second
Unction, with Imposition of Hands. But in later times there was no end of
Lights, Exorcisms, Exsufflations, and many other Extravagancies of Jewish, or
Heathen Original. From this Source sprang not only the Belief of Omens,
Presages, Apparitions, Priusquam in eos [scil. mortuous] injecta Gleba est,
Locus ille, ubi crematum est corpus, nihil hab^t Religionis: Anglice, Before
this Ceremony, 't^s not Halowd Ground. Cic. l. a. de Leg. cap. 22.

Archytas naufragus, praetereuntem exo^ans ne se insepu^um relinquat, sic
pr^ces absolvit apud Horatium:

Quanquam (...), non est mora longa: licebit, Injecto TER pu'vere, curras. Li^.
1. Od. 28. v. 35.


the Custom of Burying with three shovel-fulls of Earth, with other vulgar
Observations among Christians; but also Lights, Feasts or Holy Days,
Consecrations, Images, worshipping toward the Ris D^a (...), ^c tu conversus
ad ortum Dic quater; and vivo p^rlue rore man^s. Ovid, Fast. 1. 4. v. 777.
(...), Lucian. page 674. ^dit. Amst. 1687.
East, Altars, Music, Dedications of Churches, and in them distinct Places for
the LAITY, (as they speak) and the CLERGY: for there is nothing like these in
the Writings of the Apostles, but they are all plainly contained in the Books
of the Gentiles, and was the Substance of their Worship.

92. All the Rites of the Supper, too tedious to particularize, were introduced
by degrees after the same manner. So by endeavoring to make the plainest
things in the World appear mysterious, their very Nature and Use were
absolutely perverted and destroyed, and are not yet fully restored by the
purest Reformations in Christendom. But we must not forget how Tertullian
himself has acknowledged that for their frequent Crossings and other Baptismal
Rites, for their scrupling to let any of the Bread and Wine fall to the Ground,
or to receive them from any hand but the Priest's, with the like Ceremonies,
they had no color of Harum and aliarum ejusmodi Disciplinarum, si legem
expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies; Traditio tibi praetenditur auctrix,
Consuetudo confirmatrix, and Fides observatrix. Page 102.
Authority from the Scriptures, but only from Custom and Tradition.

93. Now their own Advantage being the Motive that put the Primitive Clergy
upon reviving Mystery, they quickly erected themselves by its Assistance into a
separate and politic Body, tho not so soon into their various Orders and
Degrees. For in the two first Centuries we meet with no Subdeacons, Readers,
or the like; much less with the Names or Dignities of Popes, Cardinals,
Patriarchs, Metropolitans, Archbishops, Primates, Suffragans, Archdeacons,
Deans, Chancellors, Vicars, or their numerous Dependants and Retinue. But in
small time Mystery made way for those, and several other Usurpations upon
Mankind, under pretense of Laborers in the Lord's Vineyard.

94. The Degrees or Constitutions concerning Ceremonies and Discipline, to
increase the Splendour of this new State, did strangely affect, stupify, and
amaze the Minds of the ignorant People; and made them believe they were in good
earnest Mediators between God and Men, that could fix Sanctity to certain
Times, Places, Persons, or Actions. They seemed almost a different and more
divine Species of Creatures, distinguishing themselves from other Men in their
Garb, in their manner of living by Tithes and Donations, in their separate
Places at Church, and several other ways. By this means the Clergy were able to
do any thing; they engrossed at length the sole Right of interpreting
Scripture, and with it claimed Infallibility, to their Body.

95. This is the true Origin and Progress of the Christian Mysteries; and we
may observe how great a share of their Establishment is owing to Ceremonies.
These never fail to take off the Mind from the Substance of Religion, and lead
Men into dangerous Mistakes: for Ceremonies being easily observed, every one
thinks himself religious enough that exactly performs them. But there is
nothing so naturally opposite as CEREMONY and CHRISTIANITY. The latter
discovers Religion naked to all the World, and the former delivers it under
mystical Representations of a merely arbitrary Signification.

96. It is visible then that Ceremonies perplex instead of explaining; but
supposing they made things easier, then that would be the best Religion which
had most of them, for they are generally, and may all be made, equally
significative. A Candle put unto the Hands of the Baptized, to denote the Light
of the Gospel, is every whit as good a Ceremony as to make the Sign of the
Cross upon their Foreheads, in token of owning Christ for their Master and
Savior. Wine, Milk, and Honey signify spiritual Nourishment, Strength, and
Gladness, as well as standing at the Gospel betokens our Readiness to hear or
profess it.

97. In short, there is no degree of Enthusiasm higher than placing Religion in
such Fooleries; nor any thing so base as by these fraudulent Arts to make the
Gospel of no effect, unles; as sar as it serves a Party. But I shall have a
better Occasion of exhausting the Subject of Ceremonies elsewhere. I treat of
'em here only as they made up the Gentile Mysteries, and were afterward
brought in to constitute those of the Christians. But as the vastmultitudes of
the latter quickly rendered all secret Rites almost impossible, so to preserve
the Mystery, things were purposely made downright unintelligible, or very
perplexed. In this Poi^ our pretended Christians outdid all the Mysteries of
the Heathens; for the Honor of these might be destroyed by Discovery, or the
babbling Tongue of any initiated Person: But the new Mysteries were thus
securely placed above the Reach of all Sense and Reason. Nay, so jealous were
the CLERGY of their own Order, lest any of 'em should irreligiously unfold
those sublime Mysteries to the profanely inquisitive LAITY, that they thought
fit to put it as much out of the Power of the Holy Tribe it self, as out of
ours, to understand them; and so it continues, in a great measure, to this day.

The CONCLUSION.
THUS I have endeavored to show others, what I Am fully convinced of my self,
that there is no MYSTERY in CHRISTIANITY, or the most perfect Religion; and
that by Consequence nothing contradictory or inconceivable, however made an
Article of Faith, can be contained in the Gospel, if it be really the Word of
God: for I have hitherto argued only upon this Supposition, for the Reasons to
be seen toward the end of the Preface.

Notwithstanding all Pretenses that may be made to the contrary, it is evident
that no particular Instances or Doctrines of any sort can serve for a proper
Answer to this DISCOURSE; for, as long as the Reasons of it hold good, whatever
Instance can be alleged must either be found not mysterious, or, if it prove a
MYSTERY, not divinely revealed. There is no middle way, that I can see. When
those Passages of Scripture I have cited for my Assertion, are either
reconciled to such as any would bring against me, or proved not to be
understood by me; when my Arguments against all inconceivable Mysteries, and
the Absurdity of God's revealing any such Mysteries, are confuted, it is time
enough then for others to produce Examples, or for me to consider 'em. And tho
by convincing People that all the Parts of their RELIGION must not only be in
themselves, but to them also must appear, sound and intelligible, I might
justly leave every one to discover to himself the Reasonableness or
Unreasonableness of his Religion (which is no difficult Business, when once Men
are persuaded that they have a right to do it;) yet the Duties I ow GOD and the
World oblige me to proceed further according as I enjoy Health or Leisure,
without limiting my self as to any time, that being a thing in no Man's Power
to command at his Pleasure.

My next Task therefore is (God willing) to prove the Doctrines of the New
Testament perspicuous, possible, and most worthy of God, as well as all
calculated for the highest Benefits of Man. Some will not thank me, it is
probable, for so useful an Undertaking; and others will make me a Heretic in
grain for what I have performed already. But as it is Duty, and no Body's
Applause, which is the Rule of my Actions; so, God knows, I no more value this
cheap and ridiculous Nickname of a Heretic than Paul did besore Act. 24. 14.
me: for I acknowledge no ORTHODOXY but the TRVTH; and, I Am sure, wherever the
TRVTH is, there must be also the CHVRCH, of God I mean, and not any Human
Faction or Policy. Besides, the Imputation of Heterodoxy being now as liberal
upon the slightest Occasions, out of Ignorance, Passion, or Malice, as in the
Days of Ireneus and Epiphanius, it is many times instead of a Reproach the
greatest Honor imaginable.

Some good Men may be apt to say, that, supposing my Opinion never so true, it
may notwithstanding occasion much harm; because when People find themselves
imposed upon in any part of Religion, they are ready to call the whole in
question. This Offense is plainly taken, not given; and my Design is nothing
the less good, if ill-dispos'd Persons abuse it, as they frequently do
Learning, Reason, Scripture, and the best things in the World. But it is
visible to every one that they are the Contradictions and Mysteries unjustly
charged upon Religion, which occasion so many to become Deists and Atheists.
And it should be considered likewise that when any, not acquainted with it, are
dazzled by the sudden Splendour of the Truth, their Number is not comparable to
theirs who see clearly by its Light. Because several turned Libertines and
Atheists when PRIESTCRAFT was laid so open at the Reformation, were Luther,
Calvin, or Zwinglius to be blamed for it? or which should weigh most with them,
these few prejudiced Scepticks, or those thousands they converted from the
Superstitions of Rome? I Am therefore for giving no Quarter to ERROR under any
pretense; and will be sure, wherever I have Ability or Opportunity, to expose
it in its true Colors, without rendering my Labor ineffectual, by weakly
mincing or softning of any thing.

FINIS.

