AN EPISTLE TO THE FLOCK, PROFESSING The true Light which lights every one
that comes into the World:

Wherein the Opposers and Villifiers of the True Light are (by the way)
Expostulated with.

And they that own it are exhorted to Answer the Light in the Consciences of
others by an unblamable life, and to grow up therein, both in the general, and
in their particular Relations.

Given forth chiefly for the Service of some in the Flock, and may be
serviceable also to others.

From a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, wheresoever it is found. W. T.

Printed in the Year 1674.

AN EPISTLE to the FLOCK, Professing the true Light which lights every one
that comes into the World, etc.
AS it pleased the Lord formerly to open my Mouth to check the Insultings of
the first Adversary that appeared in Print against this present Dispensation,
to have slain it in its Infancy; and afterward to reprove the fraternity of
those who stood under the name of Priests, crying out against all that
withdrew from them as Heretics and Seducers, etc. So now it has pleased him
to open my Mouth to speak to some in the Flock gathered in under the
acknowledgment of, and testimony to, the true light which lights every man
that comes into the World; yet not in that manner as I spoke to the former,
who appeared as open Adversaries, but in tenderness and love, to admonish and
to help forward the work of the Lord in the spirits of some, and to stir them
up to mind the weighty things which the Lord chiefly requires in the Life and
Conversation.

For let none think it sufficient that they are gathered into an outward
Profession of any Truth, or into this Society: But consider and understand that
the Kingdom of Heaven is like a Net cast into the Sea, which gathers of every
kind, some good, some bad. So it was in the Primitive, or first gathering after
Christ, and so it is now: Some gathered then, that were to be cast away; and we
may expect the same things now, Math. 13.19. So shall it be (says (...) Lord)
in the end of the World, The Angels shall come forth, and shall sever the Evil
Ones out of the midst of the Righteous, and shall cast them into a Furnace of
fire, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, ver. 50. So that although
there has been a separation from other Societies, and from the World, yet it
remains that every one make their Calling and Election sure, that they purge
out the evil that remains unpurged away out of the heart, till they become
blameless and without offense in the World, and bear so lively a Character of
the Innocence of Christ our Lord, that all that see, and certainly know their
Lives and Conversations, may say of them, This is the Seed which the Lord has
blessed.

Dear Friends, you have been called to the testimony of a precious Truth, if
you rightly understand it, and abide therein. And though it has many opposers,
yea, and such as think of themselves highly, as above so low a Doctrine; yet it
will stand when they shall fall. And although they vilify it, and would
reproach it with the terms of natural light, and common light; yet it will
discover their darkness in their traditional That is, Doctrinal Notions and
Principles received by tradition one from another, which they follow as their
light and guide (as the Pharisees did.) This being darkness, is great darkness,
holding them fast which stick therein.
which they receive upon trust one from another. What if the Light that
lights every man that comes into the World, be a common Light? Is it the
worse for that? Is the Sun the less excellent, because it gives light to all?
or its light the less precious because it shines upon all? Is the Rain the
worse because it falls upon the Bad as well as upon the Good? No more is the
true Light the less precious, because of the commonness of it, for that may in
some sense be called common which lights every man; even as that Power is
common which gives motion unto all, in which we live and move. Thou that
opposes it, it may be thou professes a light above it, as thou think. Well,
but for all that take heed that this discover not thy Nakedness, even as Christ
Jesus, that Light of the World, discovered the Nakedness of the Scribes and
Pharisees by the common Actions of their Life, such as were obvious to all.
Take heed that this common Light discover not in thee, Pride of heart as was in
the Pharisees: Exaltedness of mind from an outside Profession, as was in them,
or Covetousness under a Cloak of Religion, or Earthly-mindedness, or
Self-willedness, or Hard heartedness, or Crafty Policy to circumvent or get
beyond another, or Fierceness, or Implacableness, or Contentiousness, and such
like. For verily the common light in all men will manifest such things to them;
and then thy covering of thy self with thy more excellent light, as thou thinks
is become too narrow for thee, and will not hide thy nakedness from the world,
who have but that common light, as thou in disdain calls it. For if they see a
haughty spirit in thee, will not they count of thee as thou art, A Proud Man?
And their judgment and repute of thee is true, and will stand, being guided by
the true light which discovers thee to them by thy fruits. So if thou art a
Covetous person, the light discovers thee to the World. Yea, by common and true
Light, men are made manifest one to another where they live, and where their
actions are well known. And therefore they can see, and say one to another,
such a man is a hard-hearted man; and again, such a one is a tenderhearted
merciful man. What! do they see the heart? Does the common Light discover the
heart? Yea, by the fruits it discovers it: Therefore they can say (discerning
by the light) such a person is Zealous for his way of Religion, but I should be
loath to fall into his hands; I durst not trust him for all his Profession.
Such a person, it is true, he will not abuse himself with Drink, but he is Drunk
with his own conceits. And again of another they can say, Such a man is a
faithful trusty man, I durst commit any thing I have into his hands without
fear. Thus the Lord discovers Trees by the Fruits, Men by their Actions, and
the common Light receives as well as gives the discovery. And of this many
Friends have much experience, whose faithfulness and uprightness has such
testimony in the hearts of their Neighbors, that they dare trust them with all
they have, when they dare not trust their own Relations and Kindred. On the
other side, are there not some (I speak it with grief) whom the World will not
trust, though under the same outward profession of Truth? Why? Because they see
them in the same Nature with others that will overreach. So that no outward
profession of Truth can hide from the common Light. Therefore the Light, that
common Light is precious (even as the common Salvation is precious) to the
Profession of which you are called; and under the acknowledgment of which you
have been gathered. And therefore abide therein, and so walk as to answer that
Light in every man's Conscience. And think it not sufficient that you are
gathered out of several Societies, and out of the World, under the Profession
hereof, except you walk therein. He that walks therein, he is blameless
before men; they have no evil thing to say of him justly. For its by the Life
and Conversation among men, that a man is accounted an Innocent man, or an evil
doer; and its by the Light that he is seen to be so. He therefore that does not
in his Life and Conversation answer the common Light that is in all men, he is
not therein right before the Lord, who has set up that Light in every Man to
discern by.

Obj. It may be thou will say, But we find by experience that many good men are
evil spoken of by the World, and Reproached, and not reputed good men, though
they be so; the judgment therefore of the World is false concerning many
Righteous and Godly persons.

Answ. I Answer: First, mind that thou thy self do not judge wrong of men,
and count those Godly persons who are not. Consider whether their Godliness lie
only or chiefly in an outward Profession and Zeal of their way of Worship, and
for that Society that they are of: If so, then their judgment who judge by the
Life and Conversation, may be right, and thine wrong; as Christ's was right
concerning the Pharisees, and others wrong who only looked at their high
Profession and strickt observation of pious observances, as they were reputed.

Secondly: But if the persons Reproached be Innocent in Life, just and merciful
men, then those that know them well will scarcely speak evil of them (except in
the matters of their God,) unless the common light in them be obstructed and
darkened by some means, as by some private concern, or through malice and
enmity in their hearts; or by prejudice, judging by the hearing of the ear,
which is often unrighteous judgment, or through some particular traditional
Light, which is darkness. These and such like things pervert true judgment,
even as the Light of the Sun shining through glass gives the color of the glass
upon the opposite Object: So they that judge through these things, give
judgment according to those false mediums they judge through. But these stand
not in so doing in the common Light, but in a perverting light, which is
darkness; and this their judgment is judged to be false by those that stand
unbyassed in the common Light with them; and the very ground of that their
false judging is often seen by them. So that the unbyassed common Light is
still a true judge in the common actions of men's Conversation.

Object. It may be thou will further Object. That this Light is but a natural
Light, and a natural Light is not a true judge, no more than the natural Man
which cannot perceive the things of the Spirit of God.

Answ. Where the Apostle uses those words, 1 Cor. 2. He is there speaking of
the things which God has prepared for them that love him, such as Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard (but not of the things that appertain to the common life of
man, and are visible before all men) and such things indeed are not known but
by a farther Revelation in the Light and Spirit of God which searches all
things, even the deep things of God. However the common open Life of men is
seen and judged by the common Light (as thou calls it) that God has planted in
every man. And if thou will call that Light Natural, yet will that nothing at
all advantage thee, whosoever thou art that walks contrary to it; but it does
the more aggravate thy fault that thou lives contrary to a Light which God has
made so natural to thee, and so planted in thee, that thou can do no evil but
it discovers it in thee, yea, and records it in thy Conscience, as in a Book.
And there is the Book that is to be opened when the judgment is set, and thou
comes to be judged. And the things written in that Book, are the things done in
the body, whether good or bad, and according to them thou shall be judged. And
then this Light which thou calls Natural, and was privy to all thy actions,
yea, and to the intents and thoughts of thy heart, will be a Witness against
thee, and show thee thy evil deeds written in thy own Conscience, and so God
will be cleared when he comes to Judge, and all the world shall be convinced
thereby that they are guilty.

If thou call that Light Common or Natural in an evil signification, as if
it were no true Light, but a deceitful, delusive, unclean Light, and a Product
of the fallen Nature, then I shall not admit of those terms at all, for then
must it incline thee to evil of its own Nature (as false Lights do) and not
stand as a discoverer of evil in thee, and a faithful and true Witness against
it. Then also should it be a thing to be repented of; that is, to have the mind
turned away from it, and the actions of the life carried contrary to it, if it
be evil and delusive. And so when it checks thee secretly in thy heart for
Swearing or Lying, or wrong dealing, or any other evil action or purpose of thy
heart, thou should then the rather do them, because they are contrary to
this deceitful and delusive Light (as its accounted by thee) and so more likely
to be true and good than it. Or at least Wise, thou should not at all thereby
be moved to avoid those evils, because its but a sinful evil delusive light
that would stop thy carreer in them. Again, if that light be evil then its from
the fallen Nature, and so from Satan that works therein, And then is Satan's
Kingdom divided, and he by that light seeks to bring to naught his own Kingdom.
For that Light works against his Kingdom in men: It works to throw down
Hypocrisy and Deceit, and Lying, and Swearing, and Drunkenness, and
Uncleanness, and Wrath, and Envy, and Murder, and all such evil dispositions
and actions, wherein Satan's Kingdom stands, by discovering these things to the
Conscience to be evil, and witnessing against them; and so Satan is divided
against himself, if this Light be evil and from him. See what Consequences thy
opposing of thy self to the Scripture of truth puts thee upon. Had thou not
better submit to the Testimony of the Servant of the Lord, who said That was
the true Light which lights every man that comes into the World? Be ashamed
to say the Scripture is thy rule when thou fights against it, and says contrary
to it. It says, That was the true Light which lights every man that comes
into the World: Thou faist, it is not. How is it thy rule now, when thou denis,
or opposes it? Lastly, let this sink into thy heart, O vain Contender, who
strives against the Truth: Will thou make that to be evil, which leads, or
directs into the paths of Peace? and in following of which, even some of the
Gentiles have found an excusing Conscience? and if that excuse, we have Peace
with God; and for want of following it, how many called Christians dye in
horror, such as glory in their Christianity over the Heathen Unbelievers? But
tell me, shall not their Obeying that Light be accounted to them for
Christianity, when thy disobeying it shall be counted to thee Paganism and
Gentilisme, although thou glories over them? Even as formerly the
Uncircumcision of such who kept the Righteousne's of the Law was counted to
them for Circumcision; and the Circumcision of such as kept it not was
accounted for Uncircumcision. What did the name of Circumcision profit them
that were Transgressors and Evil doers under the Law? And what will the name of
Christianity profit thee who walks contrary to the Light that discovers sin and
wickedness in thee? Therefore own that Light that enlightens every man's
Conscience, and submit to it in thy life, and in thy words; own it in thy
actions as well as in thy expressions; and bring thy deeds to the Light, and
weigh them in the Light, that they may be made manifest that they are wrought
in God. And thou have also the harmony and consent of the Writings of the holy
men of God, concurring with that Light in thee, to make the testimony of it the
stronger in thee against all ungodliness and worldly Lusts. Therefore if thou,
who art called a Christian, walks contrary to it, the greater will be thy
Condemnation; the preventing of which is the thing to be minded by thee, and
not jangling about the Light in words, whilst thou disobeys it in practice.

If thou will needs call it natural and common, and yet own it from the Lord,
then I matter not that thy calling it so; please thy self in thy own terms; but
know That it is a Beam from the infinite Majesty, which has no fellowship with
wickedness, but discovers it, reproves it, and is contrary to it: And by the
testimony of it in thy self, and in all men, will the Lord be clear when he
judges the world in Righteousness.

I further affirm against thee that undervalues this light, that there is such
a piercing sight in it, that thereby the true Seed is known and discerned by
all that see them thoroughly; as it is said in the Prophecy of Isaiah, chap.
61.9. All that see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the Seed which the
Lord has blessed. He had been speaking a little before of the Meek, the
Brokenhearted, the Mourners in Zion, such as were under a Spirit of heaviness,
such as our Lord comforted, and Preached good tidings to, pronouncing them
blessed, Matthew. 5. (as was Prophesied of him to do, Isa. 61.1.) That Innocent
Seed, whose meek, quiet, humble temper, whose inoffensive spirit, whose
blameless life whosoever shall see, they shall be thereby convinced in their
hearts, That this is the Seed which God has blessed: This Convincement seeing
it shall be upon all that see them, it must needs be from a light common to
them all, which is the true Light. If any oppose this, let them show from
whence it shall be that all that see them shall have this discovery of them.
This testimony, I say the common Light will give of them in all men's hearts
that see and know them in truth. I shall not deny but that some may judge
otherwise, even of the true Seed through sinister respects, and prejudicate
received opinion, or by judging through received traditional Notions, or by the
hearing of the ear, or by judging according to other men's judgments, or being
swayed by some private concern, or judging by imagination and such like false
ways of judging, especially they that are of a Pharisaical Spirit, exalted in
the formal part of any Religious Profession, and judging through that; these not
judging in the common true Light that lightens every man that comes into the
world, may easily give a false judgment of the true Seed, whilst those whom
they despise, as having no Religion, may judge rightly of them; and sometimes
even their own Consciences may (from the common Light at present overswayed in
them) lay up in them at the bottom that which shall force them in due time to
confess to the true Seed, and that they mght have seen them if they had not
hearkened to those false ways of judging; so that still I say, the unbyassed
common Light that enlightens every man, is the true Light; and these particular
Lights, through which the false judgment proceeds are not the true Light.

Well then, If this be the true Light, let every one that Professes it, mind to
answer this Light in every man's Conscience. This you have been often exhorted
to do by those who have labored with you in the truth, and there may be need
still to put you in remembrance thereof, that so the actions of your life may
be approved of by all that know you, though they cannot approve of your way or
Religion, as they use to speak. And consider that herein you stand as the
lights of the world, even in your Actions, in your Conversation, in your Works:
Therefore says our Lord, Let your Light so shine before men, that they may see
your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven. It is not talking
good words, without living a good life that glorifies God. It Is the Life, the
Conversation that is approved or disapproved in other men's Consciences. It Is
that which gathers to Christ, or being amiss, scatters from him. Profess what
thou will, and with what eagerness thou will, as if thou were Zealous for him;
yet if Wickedness be found in thee, thou do but harden men's hearts against
the truth, and gathers not into the life of truth. If they see unfaithfulness
in thee, that thou have more respect to thy own ends, than to single truth;
minds thy own gain more than simple honesty; makes use of advantages from
another weakness, or ignorance, or tenderness, to get beyond him; this will be
seen that it is not right in the sight of the Lord; and the Light in others
will judge it, and thou do not approve thy self to their Consciences. And
though thou may smooth over thy action artificially with words, and make fair
pretenses, yet that does not make thee approved in their Consciences. Thou
may stop their tongues perhaps from clamor, but thou do not satisfy their
minds and Consciences. For It Is the voice of thy Actions, not of thy Words that
takes place in their hearts. And therefore there is no approving of thy self to
their Consciences, nor answering of the true Light in them, but by thy
faithful, honest, single, upright actions. And as thou approvest thy self to
their Consciences, so thou begers in them the like esteem of others. If thou
art of a haughty, lofty spirit, and despifest others, as the Pharisees did,
they think all are so, until they find it otherwise by experience and trial of
some. But if thou be humble, meek, lowly-minded, downright honest, and
faithful to be trusted, and thy Word as a Rock to be built upon, as it ought to
be; then thou honors what thou professes, and them that profess the same
truth with thee. If thou art a Busie-body, going about tatling of others, and
descanting upon them and their actions, and so sowing Enmity and Disaffection
in the minds of people toward one another, and so serving the accusing,
backbiting Spirit: where then is the bridle to thy Tongue? what is thy Religion
worth? The Apostle tells thee its Vain: Jam. 1.26. Thou that art such a one,
learn this lesson, to be swift to hear, slow to speak, as the same Apostle
teaches, ver. 19. And know that thou answer, not the Light in the Consciences
of others, but they see thee in the Light that is in them, and can read thee
what thou art when thou art gone. And if thou art a Servant, and pretendest to
have found the truth of Religion, and to be acquainted with the way of the Lord
more perfectly; yet art less mindsul of thy business, and carrys more stoutly
and faucily toward the Masters, art more stiff to be commanded in thy Service,
using Religion as a Cloak to withstand them; and when thou art reproved,
retortest biting words which may lash them; thou do not answer the Light in
their Consciences, which raises an expectation in them of more faithful and
well-pleasing Service; thou transgresses the Counsel of the Lord by his Holy
Apostles which they delivered to his Servants in the Churches; and thou stops
their way to the Kingdom of Christ, who look for better things to spring from
the true Spirit, and so thou art an offense in the world: And woe to the world
because of these and such like offenses. Therefore, who-ever thou art, Bond or
Free, Master or Servant, see to it, that thy life be upright, and single as
before the Lord who searches and sees all thy Actions, and the Intentions of
thy heart in them all; and by thy Actions in thy Conversation will discover
thee to the world; for he that is the Light, gives them Light to discern by.

And think it not sufficient that thou art gathered into such a Society, and
perhaps may have esteem among them; But consider that the Kingdom of Heaven
is like a net cast into the Sea, which gathers of every sort, good and bad: And
many things are gathered in the Net that are to be cast away again; the good
only are to be gathered into Vessels, the bad to be cast away. If therefore thy
life be bad, what will thy being gathered into an outward Profession advantage
thee? Therefore be not high-minded, because thou art gathered by the Net; but
fear lest after thou art gathered, the Profession become a snare to thee
through disobedience, for it may become a snare to the Rebellious and
Stout-hearted, and Disobedient to the Worldly-minded, to the Hard-hearted and
Unmerciful, to the Haughty and Disdainful, yea, to such as are lifted up and
exalted in their own thoughts, and in their own Righteousness, or in any thing
else (for whatsoever it is that the heart is exalted in, whereby to be lifted
up to behave it self proudly above others, its not right before the Lord.) To
such, I say, whose Religion lies in any form or formal part of any Profession
whatsoever, without an approved Life and Conversation, to such their Table may
become a snare, and a trap to hold fast such spirits in, while the Lord finds
our a purer path for his beloved Seed to travel on in.

If thou question this, consider, was not the ministration of the Law of Moses
given to the Jews to feed at, and to be refreshed at? was it not as a Table
spread in the Wilderness, as well as the providing of outward food for them
was? Did not this become a snare and a trap to all the Stout-hearted and
Hypocritical Professors of it? And so they stuck fast in the formal profession
of that ministration as in a snare, when the true humble Seed had joyful
tidings brought them, and were transplanted into a more spiritual and approved
way which the Lord directed them to walk in. And does not the Apostle Paul,
that chosen Vessel, mind the Corinthians, and in them us, That though the
Israelites were Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, into that
glorious ministration (for it was glorious in its time.) Yet for all that, how
did their Carcasses fall in the Wilderness, and never arrived at the Promised
Land, the Land of Canaan? Now these things, says he, happened unto them for
ensamples, and were written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
are come: Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall,
1 Cor. 10. Again, do but cast back thine eye, and look upon fore going
ministrations of latter years, and consider thy own esteem of them. Do not
thou thy self look upon them as a snare to many, holding their feet fast, that
they cannot get on in the pursuit of truth, and in following the Lamb
whither-soever he goes. Now as thou judges of them, it shall be judged of thee,
except thou walk humbly with thy God, and mindest the weighty matters that he
chiefly takes delight in. For the Seed is to go forward, and to grow up in
those things, and will leave them behind who are found failing therein,
although they be strict asserters of the outward form of their profession. This
is spoken to thee that art high and lofty in thy heart, and lifted up above
others in thy mind, because of thy prosession, while as yet thou comes behind
some of them in thy Life and Conversation; and in actions of Equity and Mercy,
and such weighty things. But to you that are despised and overlooked by such,
to you I say, you humble Shrubs, you Under-growth, you Meek and lowlyminded
ones, whose hearts are kept in the fear of God, and thereby made careful that
you offend not in your Life and Conversation, nor also with the Tongue; and so
do not make it an instrument of sowing Discord or Enmity among Brethren by
whispering and backbiting (you are as well able to rule the whole body.) Do
you keep humble where you are in the lowliness of your mind: And if others
exalt themselves over you, and magnify themselves in abasing you, or others,
and so would bear up themselves by vilifying others, as if they themselves were
some body, and others of light account: Yet be not you like them, neither be
troubled that you are hidden and overlooked; but rest in the Lord, waiting on
his Will, and keeping out of those evils, and recording things in your hearts
as you do; and you shall be preserved when many seemingly taller Trees shall be
thrown down with a storm, and their building be undermined with a Wave, and
thinking to stand, shall fall; except they come down to you, and repent of the
evil of their Tongues, and of the unfaithfulness of their Actions and Lives,
and of the leaven of Malice and Disaffection which by their Tongues they spread
in the hearts of others. For their work is contrary to the work of Christ, who
labored with his Father for the Unity of all those that were given to him; but
they busying themselves in the contrary, are found in that which is abomination
to the Lord, sowing Discord among Brethren, Prove. 6.16, 19. And stand not clean
in that which is to abide in Gods holy Mountain, in that they take up Reproach
against their Neighbor, Psalm. 15.1, 3. Therefore their work shall fall, and
their Building come to naught, and they, except they Repent, shall fall under
the judgment of others. How often have I seen it fulfilled, That judging has
turned upon the Heads of those persons themselves, who have been forward in
judging and condemning others; even as our Lord forewarned, saying, Judge not,
that you be not Judged, for with what Judgment ye Judge, ye shall be Judged;
and with what Measure ye meet, it shall be Measured to you again. Their
Religion is vain that cannot bridle the Tongue. And first I ask you, Wherein is
it that the true Brotherhood stands*

And to you also that are of a more circumspect Behavior and Conversation,
more able to govern the Tongue, and so the whole Body, who are not so forward
to asperse others, and are of a more exact life; walking in a more stayed
Wisdom; to you, I say, suffer a Word of Advice from a Friend. Take heed how you
give place in your hearts to Reports and Reproaches: Before you judge, know
certainly, not only the Truth of things reported, but also the ground or reason
of them, and upon what account they are done. For it is a very uncertain way of
judging, to judge by the hearing of the Ear, that is by Reports. How has the
whole Nation of the Jews been Sealed up under unbelief and hardness of heart,
by receiving a false Report concerning Christ; which Report was set on foot by
such as were of esteem among the Jews. Satan is the same subtle Adversary to
this day, and knows the Influence of false Reports, and misrepresentations of
things, and how they leaven the hearts of people with prejudice one against
another. And this I testify, that it hinders the shedding abroad of the Love
of God in their hearts; as on the other hand the preservation of the pure love
one to another tends to the perfecting of the Love of God in us, 1 John 4.12.
It was Prophesied of him, whose judgment is infallible and uncertain, that he
should not judge after the sight of his eyes (that is by outward appearance) nor
reprove after the hearing of his Ears; but with Righteousness shall he judge the
Poor, and reprove with Equity for the Meek of the Earth; and he bids us do the
same; Judge not (says he) by outward appearance, but judge Righteous judgment.
The outward appearance of an action may deceive you; the hearing of the Ear by
reports may deceive you; therefore know not only the truth of a report, nor
only the outward appearance; but also the ground of an action, and the
intention of him that does it (for that does much alter the nature of an action
before the Lord) lest you judge him that is not judged of the Lord; and so bring
the same judgment to return back upon your own heads.

And you that are just in your ways, and equal in your dealings, whom no man
can charge with Deceit, or Overreaching, or False dealing in your Affairs of
this World, keep steadfast in your Uprightness; and also press forward, that of
Just men you may become Good men; of Just men, you may become Merciful men; of
Just men, you may become Self-denying men. It may be some will say, What means
this? Is not every Just man a Good man? Is there any difference between Just
men and Good men, or between just men and Merciful men, and Selfdenying men? I
Answer, If there were not some difference, what means that saying of the
Apostle, Romans 5.7. Scarcoly for a Just man, (or Rightcous man as its rendered)
will one dye; yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to dye.
Surely when there is such difference in men's affections toward them, there
must needs be a sensible difference between them. Therefore consider that he is
counted a just man, that does not wrong another, though perhaps he will hold
fast what is his own: But he is a Good man, who besides his just equal dealing
with others, also delights in Mercy and good Eruits, who is of a more free and
bountiful good spirit; the tenderness of whose heart to the Distressed, and
good will of his mind to all, carrys him forth to exercise Mercy and
Bountifulness, or Kindness to all, according to his Ability. It may be for such
a man, some would even dare to dye: So that there is a difference between them:
Though the first be well approved of, and is a good foundation laid for Mercy
to spring up from. For if there be not that first at the bottom, and so things
be justly come by, let a man give what he will, and for what pious uses he
will, yet it is but Abomination to the Lord, as it is said in the Prophets, I
hate Robbery for Burnt-offerings. If it be got in a false way by Fraud or
Oppression, though it be dedicated to the use of the Lords Service, yet he
hates it. So that I say, Equity, just, upright honest dealing must needs be at
the bottom of every good work that is accepted. And where this is laid as a
foundation, and Mercifulness, and Kindness is built thereupon, this is
well-pleasing before the Lord, and of good report among men.

Also you that are Just in your Dealings, let your eye be still forward to come
to a further state, even to a more Self-denying Spirit among men. I shall set a
Pattern or two of this before you. You have heard (I suppose) of Abraham, who
was called by the Lord to leave his own Kindred and Country and to go sojourn
where the Lord should direct him; and he obeyed the Lord therein (being
commanded) and went forth he knew not whether; and Lot his Brothers Son went
with him: and these two had both of them very great Substance or Riches. And in
process of time, their substance grew so great, that they could not dwell
together, for the Land was not able to bear them, or sustain their Flocks. And
there arose a strise between the Herdsmen of Abraham's Cattle, and the Herds-men
of Lots Cattle. Now behold a pattern for you of Self-denial in Abraham. He was
Lot's Uncle, and he followed not Lot in his comeing forth of his own Country,
but Lot followed him; therefore in the case of strife, Lot should in reason,
have given way to Abraham; and in their separating should have given the choice
to Abraham, which way he would go. But behold Abraham denis himself for
Peace-sake, and gives Lot the choice of the Country, Genesis 13.8, 9. Let there be
no strife I pray thee (says he to Lot) between me and thee, and between my
Herd-men and thy Herd-men, for we are Bre hren. Is not the whole Land before
thee? Separate thy self I pray thee from me: If thou will take the left hand,
then I will go to the right; or if thou will take the right hand, then I will
go to the left. Thus Self-denying Abraham would stand to Lot's leavings.

Now observe a difference in their temper or spirit: Lot, though he was a just
man, yet did not so yield to Abraham, as A raham yielded to him. He suffered
Lot to please himself in the choice of the Country, and Lot did please himself,
and chose the best of the Country to his understanding; Even the Plains of
Jordan, where it was well watered every where, even as the Garden of the Lord,
and so most commodious for his Flocks, Genesis 13.10, 11.

But what was the Consequence of Lots pleasing of himself, and of Abraham's
Self-denial. Observe which was the Gainer, which was the Looser. Lots choice
drew him down toward Sodom, and at last into Sodom, where he was once taken
Captive together with the Sodomites, and all he had led away; and where his
Righteous Soul was vexed from day to day, to behold their unlawful deeds; and
where at last he was in danger to have been burnt with them. Abraham on the
other hand standing to Lots leavings, was sufficiently recon-penced by the
Lord. For the Lord appeared to him after that Lot was separated from him, and
bid him lift up his eyes and look Northward and Southward, and Eastward and
Westward, and promises to give him all the Land as far as he could see, and to
his Seed for a perpetual Inheritance. Besides this, Lots pleasing of himself,
set him in a place of great danger; Abraham's Self-denial kept him in safety.
And the Lord made Abraham Lots Deliverer, first from the Captivity of those
Kings which took him and all his away with the Spoils of Sodom; and afterward
from the burning in which Sodom was consumed: For its said, Genesis 19.29. that
when God destroyed the Cities of the plain. He remembered Abraham, and sent out
Lot, out of the midst of the overthrow, when he over-threw the Cities in
which Lot dwelt. Though Lot was a just man, yet the Lord had more respect to
Abraham in Lots deliverance, than to Lot himself: Such delight had the Lord in
Self-denying Abraham. And these words have been often sounded in my Spirit, I
love just Lots, but my delight is with the Self-denying Abraham's. Therefore I
lay these things before you as a mark for you to press forward unto. And they
that walk accordingly, though they be counted weak for so doing by others who
please their Earthly part in using more cunning for the world, yet they shall
reap the blessing from the Lord. I know there is no need of speaking these
things to some, who are taught of the Lord to walk in the same steps as Abraham
walked; but nevertheless, there be those to whom these things may belong, who
stand in need to be put in mind of them. After the same steps of Abraham did
his Son Isaac walk, when there arose strife between his Servants and the
Philistims, about the Wells he dug, Genesis 26. He still left those that they
strove about, to the Philistims, until he possessed one without strife, and he
called it Rehoboth, for now, said he, the Lord has made room for us. Thus were
they taught by the Lord, even to let go that which they had a right to, for
Peace-sake, and to avoid strife. And thus the true Love teaches where it is
risen in the heart in power. It seeks not its own. It Is so far from encroaching
upon another right, that it rather gives way to encroachments. Therefore you,
in whom this Spirit is found, be not grieved or troubled when you have to deal
with Spirits that are too hard for you in the affairs of this World, because
they dare make use of more Earthly subtilty to compass their own ends than you
dare do. The Lord that recompensed Abraham, will not forget you. Let them that
are of a more Earthly Spirit, lay fast hold of the Earthly things which they
love and prefer before simplicity of Spirit, but do ye lay hold on the better
things, and the Lord will make up your wrongs in due time. For want of this
Self-denial in these things, and by giving way to the Earthly mind, and to
Covetousness, which is a root of all evil, how many have withered in their
several Professions before us, turning back to the things which once their
faces were turned from.

And as you stand related in Families, be faithful in your several Relations
wherein you stand. For if you carry disorderly therein, that will be as a Worm
at the root of whatsoever you can profess, and will cause all to wither again
in whatsoever you may flourish. Walk in Love, and in Wisdom in your places to
wards them that are without, not as Fools opening the mouths of the World
against you for your folly, and then glorying in that, as if it were suffering
Reproach for the Truth, when it is only for your own headiness and disorder.
But mind things of good report, as the Apostle of our Lord exhorts; that so
your lives may be of a good savor before all, and you may be of good repute
among them that are without, and they may glorify God for you in the day of
their Visitation. But if you be Reproached for the keeping of your Consciences
clear in answering the requirings of the Lord, that will turn to your honor
and their shame that therefore do Reproach you.

Art thou a Master or Mistress in a Family, and art mild and gentle abroad, be
so at home also; not austere and fierce, but ruling thy Family in the fear of
the Lord, and in Love and meekness, instructing and directing those under thee;
so will thou be an encouragement to those that serve thee. If any be stubborn,
I do not bid thee lay aside thy Authority which God has given thee, but see
thou use it aright as for the Lord. Art thou a Husband, take heed how thou
suffers thy love to be alienated from thy Wife, or gives just occasion to
alienate hers from thee. If thou art a Wife, take heed how thou quenches thy
Husbands love by thy want of love to him, and be in subjection to him as thou
art commanded, 1 Pet. 3.1. And let your mutual love to one another, represent
the Love of Christ and his Church, lest the truth you profess above the World,
be evil spoken of through you.

You that are Parents, connive not at your Children in evil words; and perverse
and foolish actions, whereby they offend others, lest they grow head strong
also against your selves; but in love, and with a holy awe bear down such
things in them, retaining a sense of your love in their hearts; and especially
exalting the Name of the Lord, and his fear in them, that they may receive a
good savor of the truth, and things pertaining unto God, betimes in their
youth; and acquaint them with the Scriptures of truth from their Childhood, as
Timothy was acquainted; and lay not on Youth more than it is able to bear,
neither bring them up in Idleness and Sloathfulness, nor feed them with ability
to follow bad courses. Set before them an example worthy to be followed, for
they mind your example more than your words; and let not your Prayers and
Supplications to the Lord, in behalf of your Children be wanting, for the
ordering of their hearts is from the Lord. And you Children, be not stubborn
and stiff-necked against your Parents, for that is dishonor to them, and
disobedience to God, being directly contrary to his Will, who has commanded
you to honor them, and to obey them. Be submissive therefore and obedient to
them, honoring them by your submission, that (as the Apostle of our Lord
minds you) Thy days may be long in the Land which the Lord thy God gives
thee.

And you that are Servants, be faithful in your place, and so adorn the Truth
which you profess. And consider this well, That you cannot honor what you
profess, if your humble, submissive, obedient, faithful Service to your
Masters, according to the flesh be awanting; for therein chiefly are you eyed
by all persons. And the enquiry of every ones mind after prosessing Persons
(who profess more than themselves) is this. What is such a one in his life? If
you be Self-willed, and Stiff, trifling away your time, and neglecting your
Masters business, or be careless and wastful of things under your hand and
custody, and give provoking words to your Masters when they reprove you, you
are out of the path of Truth, what Zeal soever you pretend for the Truth. It is
not your running or busy talking for what you profess, that will answer the
Light in the Conscience of another, so as to justify you, if they know that
you are negligent, or unfaithful and careless in the meantime in your Service
to your Master. Therefore let this always remain in your minds, That your
Service ought to be such, as if you were doing Service to the Lord Christ,
whatsoever your Masters be, and whether present or absent. And indeed it is him
you serve, you that are faithful in your Service. And therefore let that bear
up your hearts who are found faithful, and yet meet with difficulties and
discouragements from your Masters. And though they be perverse and froward, yet
be you patient and submissive; and that may in time reach their Consciences,
and make them confess their evil carriage, and justify you, and so honor the
Truth which you profess. And be not troubled that you are Servants, thinking
that if you were free, you would run more speedily in the race set before you;
for you may bring as much honor to the Lord in your faithfulness, and
submissive service, as if you were free. Diligence and Providence in business,
and mindfulness that nothing go to wast and ruin under ones hand, if they be
free, it is looked upon as for ones self; but in Service to another, it is more
looked upon as from the fear of the Lord ruling your hearts, and more
convincing to others that the Lord is with you. Set before you the example of
Jacob, who served Laban thrice seven years faithfully, though Laban dealt
deceitfully with him, and changed his Wages ten times, Genesis 31.7. J. cob, for
all that being faithful, the Lord blessed his Labors, and increased Labans
Flock abundantly for Jacobs sake, and made Laban sensible thereof, and confess
it, Genesis 30.27. I find by experience, says he, that the Lord has blessed me
for thy sake. Oh strive to be such Servants as may have the blessing of the
Lord to go along with your Service, to the convinceing of those you serve, as
you see it was with Jacob.

And as it was with Jacob, so also with Joseph his Son, when he was Servant in
Egypt to Potipher. The Lord made all that was under his hand to prosper, as you
may read Genesis 39. Whereby his Master saw that the Lord was with him. And do not
think these Examples to be too high to be looked at by you that are Servants,
as if it were beyond expectation to attain to the like. For there is a like
blessing promised to every one, and attends every one that are found faithful,
delighting in the Law of the Lord, and Meditating therein Day and Night, Psalm.
1.3. And if you say, you have not that Wisdom which they had; If any man want
Wisdom, let him ask it of God, and he will give Wisdom where there is endeavor
to please him. And seeing the Lord has disposed the whole Earth (which is as a
great House that he takes care of) into Families; therefore Servants are as
needful in their places, as Masters in theirs. And as to your spiritual Estate
and Sonship, and your Eternal happiness, there is no respect of persons with
God. Therefore may Servants go on as cheerfully in their work of submissive
Obedience, as Masters in theirs of Commanding and Ruling. Be not therefore
troubled that thou art a Servant, but be contented in that Condition, until
thou see Providence leading thee forth as Jacob was. And Masters be not Cruel
and Tyrannical, or Unjust to your Servants, or like Pharoahs Task masters to
them, but consider them as of the same flesh and blood with your selves; and
also that they are or may be Heirs of the Kingdom of God as well as you. And
therefore use them as you would be used, if you were in their place.

And let every one that professes the Name of the Lord, mind the blameless life
that becomes Christianity. This therefore I say, That the Life of a Christian
is a Plain, Humble, Meek, Innocent, Just, Merciful, Faithful, Sober, Temperate,
Gentle, Loving, Kind, Chaste, Contented, Wise, Peaceable, Holy, Diligent,
Upright, Harmless, Inoffensive Life and Conversation; Chaste also to God as well
as to Man: For the right Christian does Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, and
will not prostitute his Soul to the known Superstitious Worships of Man's Wisdom
and ordering, which was always counted spiritual Whoredom with God: In such a
Life, or in pursuance thereof, does the true Christian live.

The Ground of this Christian life is from the Spirit of the Lord working in
man, and changing the heart (though some know it not) and inclining it to these
things which the Obedient and Faithful do walk in. And the Lord knows his
own, who are of an upright heart, though they as yet know not him, but may
doubt of their knowing of him, as Philip did. But continuing in his Fear, and
abiding in the Path of Righteousness and Holiness, they may come to know the
Lord, and that it is he that Operates all these things in them, and for them;
and to feel the cleansing and washing of their Consciences by the Blood of
Jesus Christ from all sin; which is enjoyed in walking in the Light, but not in
talking of it only.

The true Christian Life does not lie in words; as if to be changed from one
form of words to another, were it; although the Holy Spirit which changes the
heart require words suitable to himself; and to eschew corrupt words. Neither
does it lie in the changing of Apparel; although the Spirit that changes
require modest Apparel, suitable to himself, and suitable to that humble mind
which he forms in man.

Nor does it stand in high Notions, or soaring Imaginations, (wherein the
exalted nature gets up and magnifies it self above the simple-hearted,) but it
is in simplicity and godly sincerity. With such exalted Spirits the Apostles of
our Lord were much troubled in the Primitive times after Christ, and labored
much to keep down Believers from them, to the simplicity that was in Christ, as
you may perceive by their Epistles. Of such also our Lord made mention, and
strengthened the simple-hearted against them, in some of his Epistles to the
seven Churches of Asia. In that to Thyatira, he takes notice of some who were
high in their Imaginations and Notions; insomuch that they looked upon those
whom the Lord approved of, but as weak and low in comparison of themselves, and
as such as did not know the depths of Satan; for that was the phrase it seems
which they used. But the Lord encouraged the simple-hearted against their
exalted expression, and said, I will lay on you no other burden; but that
which you have already, hold fast till I come, Rev. 2.24, 25. And what would he
do when he comes? that he had expressed before, verse 23. I will give to every
one according to his Works; not according to their Imaginations.

Neither does the life of Christianity stand in any outward formal way,
although some way may be required for the gathering together of the true
Worshippers, who Worship in Spirit and in Truth. As its probable there was in
the old World before the Flood; for there was a distinction between the Sons of
God, and those that were called the Daughters of Men. Some were called Men, and
some the Sons of God. But how-ever, after the Flood it is expressly said, Job.
1.6. That the Sons of God came together to present themselves before the Lord.
So that this may be requisite, and has been practiced, more especially in all
ages since Christianity was openly named in the World. But observe, Satan
himself can come there as well as the Sons of God. The Pharisee can be there,
whose Religion lies chiefly, if not only in outward observances. For the Proud,
Covetous, Persecuting, Pharisaical, Hypocritical spirit can come under the
formal part of any Profession. And so there were those in the Apostles days who
had a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof, they were to be turned
away from. For their lives were corrupt, as you may read, 2 Timothy 3. where you
may see of what sort they were.

Neither does it stand in openings or visions of things, or understanding of
Mysteries, though these are excellent gifts given forth from the Lord, and
enjoyed by many of his Faithful Ones. Yet for as much as evil Men and Spirits
may have true Opinions, therefore the Life of a Christian does not consist
therein, but in living in Obedience unto the pure Life which does open. Balaam
had very eminent Visions and Openings of things, yet is he Noted in Scripture
for a false Prophet, because his Heart, and so his Life was not right before
the Lord. His heart run after the reward of Unrighteousness, and he gave evil
Counsel to Balaac against a People whom he knew the Lord had respect to, and
would not suffer him to speak an evil word of them to Balaac; yet he taught
Balaac to entice them to Fornication and Idolatry. Satan himself, and the evil
Spirits may have openings, and a sense given them of true things as its plain
they had in the days of Christ in the flesh: Art thou come, said they, to
torment us before the time? They knew that by him God would judge the World and
them; and they knew the time was not yet: Therefore, say they, art thou come to
do that Work before the time? They knew whence he was, and what he was: We know
thee, who thou art, said they, even the Holy One of God. Paul and Silas going
about in the Ministry of the Lord, the evil Spirits knew them, and followed
them, crying, These are the Servants of the Living God, Act. 16.17. and chap.
19.15. Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye said the evil Spirit to
the Exorcists, who took upon them to cast out Devils in the Name of Jesus. And
further, Satan knows when his time is near an end, and that he has but a
short time, Rev. 12.12. Therefore in respect of these things be wise to
Sobriety, and mind the approved blameless Life: And let not Satan disquiet and
trouble you, because you are not as such a one, or such a one, who have had
wonderful Openings from the Lord; but keep down to the Anointing, that abiding
unction which guides the Life, and discovers evil Paths, and leads into all
Truth, and keeps abiding in the Truth, and abiding in the Lord.

I do highly prize the serviceable gifts of knowledge and utterance, and such
like, given for the service of others: But the Union of my heart is with you
that are careful, that you offend not in your words, nor in your lives, who
walk humbly with your God, observing the checks, motions, inclinations of the
Spirit of Christ in your hearts; applying to the Lord in all cases, especially
of difficulty, as a Child to the Father, for Council, Guidance, Wisdom,
Strength, Assidance, Succor, Success; whose Holy Spirit is your Guide,
Strength, Assistance in Prayers and Supplications, and Thanksgivings, without
limitation to time, or place, so that you cannot be banished from your Temple
or place of Worship, or removed into a corner where you cannot offer up
Spiritual Sacrifices to God. You whose hearts do breath after the Lord, and to
be filled with his Holy Nature; and you who inwardly Converse with God,
dwelling in inward Peace and Consolation which the World cannot give, nor take
away, it being Administered by him whom they cannot reach: You, whose hearts are
balanced with the free gift of God to your selves, that excludes all boasting,
and with the true sense of the Universal Love of God over all, that shuts out
all Pharisaical exaltation, and despising of others, and so are kept lowly in
your minds. Also you who mournt in secret, who Hunger and Thirst after
Righteousness, to be filled with it your selves; and that it may fill the
Earth. Such as you it is that my heart is toward, from the least of you that
have the true savor of God in your hearts, to the greatest, from the Babe to
the Father. It Is you that my Soul longs after, wheresoever you are found
walking at present. And that such may be daily raised up more abundantly to the
magnifying of the Name of the Lord in the Earth, and to the convincing of the
World of the evil of their ways, and of a Righteous Life, that their hearts may
be opened thereby to believe the Truth, and to receive it in the Love of it, is
the earning of my Soul. For these are they which are the true Seed of Sion, of
which glorious things are spoken, and which the Lord loves above all the
dwellings of Judah, above all the outworks or formal ways of all professions.
It Is you that honor the Lord, and make his Name to be loved in the Earth.

And your Prayers do I desire on my behalf (as mine are for you) that
utterance, and strength, and faithfulness may be given me, to hold forth the
Truth seasonably and steadfastly, both in Life and Doctrine, as it is, or may be
communicated unto me.

And to you, the God of peace multiply all blessings with Joy and Consolation,
and make you to abound more and more in every good gift to his praise, and to
the raising up of thirstings after Righteousness in the hearts of others,

Amen.
POSTSCRIPT.
IF this shall fall into the hands of any that have an Enmity in them against
the Flock, and therefore catch at every failing they can espy, or hear of in
any Member, that therewith they may asperse the whole: Let them know, that
first of all, they ought to judge at home, and learn to separate between the
Precious and the Vile in their own Bosom, and then will they come to
distinguish after the same manner in the Flocks of Christ; and their desire and
endeavor will be rather to convince those that err, and strengthen those that
are weak, and gather those that stray, and support those that stumble, and help
forward those that come behind, and to hide the Infirmities of the weak, then
seek to blast the whole by the weakness or wickedness of some. Let such
remember the words of the Prophet Isaiah, Woe to him that calls good evil, or
evil, good; that puts darkness for light, and light for darkness, and so
confounds what God would have distinguished. The true Spirit is not a Spirit of
Confusion, but of Order and Clearness, distinguishing aright between the
Precious and Vile. And so did our Lord teach us to do by his example in his
Epistle sent to the seven Churches of Asia; the good that was found in them he
approved of, and encouraged, and reproved only the evil. He did not overlook
the good in them, because of the evil; neither did he approve of the evil
because of the good; but says he, I have somewhat against thee, Repent, etc.
Let us learn to be like-minded, lest any one by false and confused judging,
heap Judgment and Condemnation upon their own Heads.

W. T.


