The Danger of Mercenary Parliaments.
1. SEveral Treatises have been formerly written, and more (I doubt not) will
be in this juncture published, with Directions and Informations to the People
of England for choosing fit and proper Representatives for the ensuing
Parliament, wherein sufficient notice will be taken of the Failures and Defects
of several who have already been entrusted in that Service, and the due
Qualifications of such who are now to be elected. I shall therefore confine my
present thoughts only to one particular Head, which yet, in my opinion, seems
to involve in it the inevitable Fate of England, which wholly depends upon the
choice of Members for the next Session of Parliament: I mean the choosing or
refusing of such Persons who are now possessed of any Places and Preferments,
depending upon the gift and pleasure of the Court. If herein my Endeavors
prove unsuccessful, I shall have nothing left but the satisfaction of my own
Conscience to support me under the deplorable Consequents and Effects which
must necessarily attend the choice of a House of Commons filled with Officers
and Court-Pensioners. This is the last struggle and effort the People of
England have left them for their Properties; and should we now miscarry in
this, we may sit down and idly show our Affections for our Country, and
fruitlesly bewail the loss of our Liberties, but shall never meet with another
opportunity of exerting our selves in its Service. That I may therefore set the
Minds of People right in this Particular ere it be too late, I think it will be
only necessary to show the danger of choosing Members that are in Places from
two Considerations: First, From the nature of such a Parliament considered in
it self: And, secondly, From what has already been done by Parliaments so
qualified. In both which I shall be very brief, and content my self with much
fewer Arguments than might be urged upon this Subject: For I should almost
despair of being survived by the Liberties of England, if I could imagine there
was a necessity of saying much in a case not only of such irresistible Evidence
and Demonstration, but also of the utmost concern and importance to us.

2. First then, We shall best be able to understand the nature of such an
ill-chosen Parliament, by comparing it with a true one, and with the original
design of Parliaments in their Institution. I hope it need not be told that
they were at first intended for a Support to the King's just Prerogative, and a
Protection to the Subjects in their as just Rights and Privileges: For
maintaining all due Honor to the Executive Power, and all suitable respect and
encouragement to those who are entrusted with the Administration of the Laws:
For a poise and balance between the two extreme contending Powers of absolute
Monarchy and Anarchy: For a check and curb to insolent and licentious
Ministers, and a terror to ambitious and overgrown Statesmen: For giving their
Advice to his Majesty in all matters of Importance: For making necessary Laws
to preserve or improve our Constitution, and abrogating such as were found
burdensome and obsolete: For giving the King Money for defraying the Charges and
Expenses of the Government, or maintaining a necessary War against Foreign and
Domestic Enemies: For examining and inspecting the Public Accounts, to know if
their Money be applied to its true use and purposes: In short, For the best
Security imaginable to his Majesty's Honor and Royal Dignities, and the
Subjects Liberties, Estates, and Lives.

3. This being the nature and true design of a Parliament, let us now see
whether a House of Commons, full of Officers and Court-Pensioners, will answer
those noble and laudable Ends of their Constitution: And here indeed I begin
already to be ashamed of my undertaking; the proof of the Negative is so
ridiculous, that it looks too much like a Jest to ask any one in his Wits,
Whether a Parliament filled with Delinquents will ever call themselves to an
account, or what account would be given if they should? Whether an Assembly of
public Robbers will sentence one another to be punished, or to make
Restitution? Whether it is possible our Grievances can be redrest, that are
committed by Persons from whom there is no higher Power to appeal? Whether
there is any hope of Justice where the Malefactors are the Judges? Whether his
Majesty can be rightly informed in Affairs relating to Himself or the Public,
when they are represented to him only by such Persons who design to abuse him?
Whether the Public Accounts will be faithfully inspected by those who embezzle
our Money to their own use? Whether the King's Prerogative can be lawfully
maintained by such who only pervert it to their own sinister ends and purposes?
Whether a Parliament can be a true balance, where all the weight lies only in
one Scale? Or, lastly, Whether a House of Commons can vote freely, who are
either prepossest with the hopes and promises of enjoying Places, or the
slavish fears of losing them? Methinks it is offering too much Violence to
human Nature to ask such Questions as these; I shall therefore leave this
invidious Point.

4. Yet lest still any should remain unsatisfied, or lulled into a fond
opinion, that these Mischiefs will not ensue upon the Elections they shall
make, I shall further endeavor to convince those who are most moved by the
force of Examples, by coming to my second Particular, and showing how
Parliaments so qualified have all along behaved themselves. And here I must
confess there are not many Instances to be given, the Project of corrupting
Parliaments being but of a late date, a Practice first set on foot within the
compass of our own Memories, as the last and most dangerous Stratagem that ever
was invented by an encroaching Tyrant to possess himself of the Rights of a
freeborn People; I mean K. CHARLES the 2 d. who, well remembering with how
little success both He and his Father had made use of open Arms and downright
Violence to storm and batter down the Bulwarks of our excellent Constitution,
had recourse at last to those mean Arts, and underhand Practices, of bribing
and corrupting with Money those who were entrusted with the Conservation of our
Laws, and the Guardianship of our Liberties. And herein he so well succeeded,
that the Mischiefs and Calamities, occasioned by that mercenary Parliament, did
not terminate with his Life and Reign; but the Effects of them are handed and
continued down, and very sensibly felt by the Nation to this very hour. For it
is to that House of Commons the formidable Greatness of France was owing, and
to their account therefore ought we to set down the prodigious Expenses of the
late War: It was by those infamous Members that Money was given to make a
feigned and collusive War with France, which at the same time was employed
either in subduing the Subjects at home, or oppressing our Protestant
Neighbors abroad: It was this Venal Parliament in effect that furnished the
King of France with Timber and skilful Workmen for building Ships, as well as
expert Mariners, and a prodigious quantity of Brass and Iron Canon,
Morter-pieces, and Bullets from the Tower; by the help of which our own
treacherous King was able to boast publicly, and thank God, that he had at
last made his Brother of France a Seaman: By this means the Honor of England
was prostituted, and our Natural and Naval Strength betrayed, with which, like
SAMPSON, we should easily have broken all the Cords that Europe, or the whole
World could have made to bind and enslave us, had not this Parliament made a
Sacrifice of all to the Charms of a French DALILAH. To this profligate and
villainous Reign we are to ascribe the loss of all the considerable Charters of
England, the deaths of our best Patriots, the encouragement and almost
establishment of Popery, the decay of Trade, the growth of Arbitrary Power, the
ill effects of dishonorable Leagues, the shutting up of the Exchequer, the
progress of all sorts of Debauchery, the servile compliances at Court of a
rampant Hierarchy in the Kingdom, the insolent Deportment of the inferior
Clergy both in the Universities and elsewhere, their slavish Doctrine of
Passive Obedience and Nonresistance; in short, a general depravation of
Manners, and almost utter extirpation of Virtue and moral Honesty. These and
all the other Mischiefs of that Reign are justly chargeable to the account of
that pension'd Parliament, who either were the immediate Authors, or the
undoubted causers of them: who, tho they sat long and often, and could not be
ignorant of our deplorable Condition, yet having their Eyes blinded with the
dust of Gold, and their Tongues locked up with Silver Keys, they durst not cry
out for the rescue of their Country, thus inhumanly ravished in their very
presence. It will not consist with my de^^gn'd Brevity, nor is it here
necessary to give the Reasons that induced the Court to dissolve that
Parliament; nor shall I take any further notice of their great and fortunat
oversight in doing it, nor of their unfeigned Repentance afterward for it: I
shall only observe, That if the Nation had been so senslesly stupid to have
chosen the same Members a second time, who were Pensioners in the foregoing
Parliament, we had long ago suffered the dismal Consequences of our folly and
madness in such a Choice; nor should we now have had this liberty to warn one
another against splitting upon the like Rocks, and falling into the same
Precipices. But they were wiser in those times, and the consideration of the
dreadful Shipwreck they had so lately escapt, made them choose Pilots of a
quite contrary disposition, who, as far as in them lay, and as long as they
were permitted to sit at the Helm, repaired the shattered Vessel of the
Commonwealth, restored its Honor, revived its drooping Genius, gave force to
its Laws, countenance to its Religion, and, in a great measure, reduced our
banished Liberties, and exposed the Persons who sold them to the universal
hatred and reproach of their fellow Subjects; a Punishment indeed infinitely
less than they deserved for the highest Crime a Member of Parliament is capable
of committing.

5. As for King James's Reign, tho it was notoriously guilty of the breach and
violation of most of our fundamental Laws, which sufficiently justifies our
Carriage toward him, yet cannot we say that his Mismanagement is to be
ascribed to the corruption of any Parliament sitting in his time. It Is true
indeed he reaped too much advantage from the Conduct of the bribed Parliament
in his Brother's Reign, and used all possible endeavors to procure such
another for himself, well knowing it to be the most effectual means for
carrying on his ruinous and destructive Projects; yet either from the unshaken
Constancy of the People, or want of dexterity in his Ministers, he was
altogether defeated in his Expectation.

6. This miserable disappointment of King James's hopes made way for our late
glorious Revolution, which was brought about by the hearty endeavors, and
accompanied with the most unfeigned vows and wishes of all true Lovers of their
Country, who from hence expected a full deliverance from their present
Miseries, and a sure remedy from their future Fears: For what Happiness might
not the People well hope for under the Government of the best of Kings,
supported by the best of Titles, viz. The general Consent and Election of his
People? We were filled with golden dreams not only of a bare security for our
Estates and Lives, but an inexhausted affluence of all manner of Blessings a
Nation is capable of enjoying. But tho we have dreamt the Dreams, yet have we
not seen the Visions. And tho the Nation is by this time sadly sensible how
wretchedly they have fallen short of their expected Happiness, yet are they not
all acquainted with the true Spring and Fountain from whence all their
Misfortunes flow, which is indeed no other than that barefaced and openly
avowed Corruption, which, like a universal Leprosy, has so notoriously infected
and overspread both our Court and Parliament. It Is from hence are plainly
derived all the Calamities and Distractions under which the whole Nation at
present groans: It Is this that has changed the very Natures of Englishmen, and
of Valiant made them Cowards, of Eloquent Dumb, and of honest Men Villains:
it is this can make a whole House of Commons eat their own words, and
countervote what they had just before resolved on: it is this could summon the
mercenary Members from all quarters of the Town in an instant to vote their
fellow Criminals innocent: it is this that can make a Parliament throw away the
Peoples Money with the utmost profusion, without enquiring into the management
of it: it is this that put a stop to the examination of that scandalous escape
of the Thoulon Fleet into Breast: it is this that has encouraged the
mismanagements of the Admiralty in relation to the loss of so vast a number of
Men of War and Merchant Ships, as well as other Miscarriages which were by all
Men judged to proceed not from their want of understanding in Sea-Affairs: it is
this that has hindered the passing a Bill so often brought into the House for
incapacitating Members to bear Offices: it is this that could not only
indemnify, but honor a leading Member for his audacious procuring and
accepting a Grant of Lands, which by the Parliament had been set apart for the
public Service; a Vote that shall stand recorded in their own Journals to the
never-dying Infamy of that mercenary Assembly: it is this could make the same
Person most confidently affirm, that he was sure the majority of the House
would agree to what he was going to propose: it is this that could make Men of
peaceable Dispositions and considerable Estates vote for a Standing Army: it is
this that could bring Admirals to confess that our Fleet under their Command
was no security to us: it is this could make wise Men act against their own
apparent Interest: In short, it is this that has infatuated our Prudence,
staggered our Constancy, sullied our Reputation, and introduced a total
defection from all true English Principles. Bribery is indeed so sure and
unavoidable a way to destroy any Nation, that we may all sit down and wonder
that so much as the very name of a free Government is yet continued to us. And
if by our wary choice of Members we should happen to recover our ancient
Constitution, we shall with horror and amazement look back, and reflect upon
the dreadful Precipice we so narrowly escapt.

7. Fatal Experience has now more than enough convinced us, that Courts have
been the same in all Ages, and that few Persons have been found of such
approved Constancy and Resolution as to withstand the powerful Allurements and
Temptations which from thence have been continually dispensed for the
corrupting of Men's Minds, and debauching their honest Principles. Such
Instances of the frailty of human Nature may be given within these few years
past, as might make a Man even ashamed of his own Species, and which (were they
not so open and notorious) ought out of pity to Mankind to be buried in
perpetual silence. Who can enough lament the wretched Degeneracy of the Age we
live in? To see Persons who were formerly noted for the most vigorous Assertors
of their Country's Liberty, who from their Infancy had imbibed no other Notions
than what conduced to the public Safety, whose Principles were further improved
and confirmed by the advantages of a suitable Conversation, and who were so far
possessed with this spirit of Liberty, that it sometimes transported them beyond
the bounds of Moderation, even to unwarrantable Excesses: to see these Men, I
say, so infamously fall in with the arbitrary measures of the Court, and appear
the most active Instruments for enslaving their Country, and that without any
formal steps or degrees, but all in an instant, is so violent and surprising a
transition from one Extreme to another without passing the Mean, as would have
confounded the Imaginations of EUCLID or PYRRHO. All the stated Maxims, in
relation to the nature of Mankind, which have been long ago settled and
established by Philosophers and observing Men, are now baffled and exploded;
and we have nothing left us to contemplate, but the wild extravagancies of
Romantic Fables, the sudden conveyances of nimble fingered Jugglers, the
inimitable dispatches of transubstantiating Priests, or the now more credible
Metamorphoses of Men into Beasts.

8. The necessity we have lain under of frequent meetings of Parliament during
the War, has taught our Managers so much dexterity and address in their
applications to the Members of that Assembly, that they are now become
consummate Masters in that most detestable art of corrupting our
Representatives, by hopes and fears of attaining or losing Offices and
Preferments. And tho I here name Offices, yet those Offices are downright
Bribes and Pensions, since they are held precariously from the Court, and
constantly taken away upon noncompliance with the Court-measures; tho I am not
ignorant that several considerable Pensions were also paid out of the Exchequer
to Members of both Houses: For Places could not be had for all, tho they have
tried all imaginable arts for dividing amongst themselves the considerable
Posts in the Kingdom: For either by splitting of Offices amongst several
Persons which were formerly executed by one, or by reviving such as were sunk,
or by creating others which were altogether useless and unnecessary, or by
promises of Preferment to those who could not presently be provided for, they
had made above 200 Members absolutely dependent upon them. And what Points
might not such a number carry in the House, who were always ready and
constantly attending with more diligence to destroy our Constitution, than the
rest were to preserve it? who represented not their Country but themselves, and
always kept together in a close and undivided Phalanx, impenetrable either by
shame or honor, voting always the same way, and saying always the same things,
as if they were no longer voluntary Agents, but so many Engines merely turned
about by a mechanic Motion, like an Organ where the great humming Bases as well
as the little squeaking Trebles are filled but with one blast of Wind from the
same sound-board? Yet a few of them may in some measure be distinguished from
those pointblank Voters, whom neither their Country's Safety, nor their own
more dear and valued Interest, nor the persuasion of their once intimate
Friends, nor fear of Reproach, nor love of Reputation could ever prevail to
join in an honest Point, or dissent from a Question that carried in it the
Violation of the Rights and Properties of the Subject. These are the Men who
have persuaded his Majesty, or rather assumed to themselves not to fill up any
vacant Offices whilst the Parliament is sitting; but to keep all Pretenders in
a dependence till the end of the Session, and bind them up to their ill
behavior, which will then be their best pretense to demand their Wages of
Unrighteousness: Witness the Commission of Excise the last Session, which was
sued for by, and promised to above 30 Competitors, who all did their utmost to
signalize their several Merits for an Office, which doubtless will be at last
divided amongst those who have deserved worst of their Country. By these means
they made their Numbers and Interest in the House so great, that no Miscarriage
in the Government could ever be redrest, nor the meanest Tool belonging to them
be punished: some of which they did indeed take into their own hands, which
raised in the People a high expectation that some extraordinary Penalties would
be inflicted upon them; when their design at the same time was nothing else but
to protect and screen them from the ordinary course of Justice: such is now the
difference in point of Corruption between a common Jury and the Grand Jury of
the Nation! such a mutual assistance and support have they been to one another
in the several mismanagements of their Trusts: so favorable have they been to
their own Creatures, and so implacable to those who have any way opposed their
unjust Proceedings, witness their scandalous Partiality in the case of DUNCOMB,
which I hope to see printed at large for the satisfaction of the Public. If it
were truly represented, I am sure there needs nothing more to excite in the
People a universal detestation of their Arrogance and Injustice. And yet do
these Apostates pretend to value themselves upon their Merit in contriving that
most destructive Project of Exchequer Bills, by which all impartial men must
either think they notoriously dissemble with us, or that they have indeed lost
their Senses when they speak of public Service; the word is so unbecoming in
their mouths, and so awkerdly pronounced, that they seem not to breath in their
own element when they usurp the name. These are the men who have endeavored to
render our condition hopeless even beyond the power of the King himself to
relieve us: For tho his Majesty be deservedly loved and honored by his People
for his readiness to do them justice, and ease their oppressions, yet can we
not expect it from him whilst he is thus beset and surrounded, and his Palaces
invested by these Conspirators against his own honor and the welfare of his
Kingdoms. The only remedy therefore that remains is, to choose such a Parliament
who he under no temptations, and are acted by no other motives but the real and
true Interest of his Majesty and his Dominions; a Parliament that will fall
unanimously upon public Business, and be free from those petty Factions and
personal Piques which in the late Session so shamefully obstructed and delayed
the most important Service of the Commonwealth.

9. If it should be pretended, That the Nation is yet unsettled, and the fear
of King JAMES has forced them upon these extraordinary Methods for their own
preservation; I answer, That no cause whatsoever can be justly alleged in
vindication of such vile arts and pernicious practices. But I would farther ask
them, what necessity there is upon that account for their gaining such
prodigious Estates to themselves in so short a time, and in so merciless a way,
when the Nation was racked to the utmost by Taxes in a long and expensive War?
Is it the fear of King JAMES that has brought such a reproach upon our
Revolution, as if it needed to be supported by such mean and unjustifiable
Practices? Is it the fear of King JAMES that makes us content he should live so
near us, or that he should be maintained at our own charge of 50000 l. per
annum? Or has not rather King JAMES been made the pretense for the
unwarrantable Proceedings of our Conspirators during the War, and since the
conclusion of the Peace? It is very strange that King JAMES, who is but their
Jest in private, should be thus made their public Bugbear to frighten us out
of our senses like Children; so that King JAMES must be at last our ruin
abroad, who could not compass it by all his power and interest at home. And in
this sense I am of their opinion, That we are not yet quite delivered from the
fear of King JAMES, who must be made the instrument of our Slavery by those
very Persons who pretend their greatest merit to consist in delivering us from
him. But what is this but making the old abdicated Tyrant a footstool to ascend
the Throne of absolute Power, and a Scaffold for erecting that proud and
stately Edifice from whence we have so justly tumbled him down headlong? But
it is to be hoped the Nation will be no longer imposed on by such stale
pretenses as these, and that a well-chosen Parliament will not fail to pass
their severest Censures upon those who would thus jest us out of all that is
dear and valuable amongst us: That they will no longer resemble a flock of
Sheep (as CATO said of the Romans in his time) that follow the Belweather, and
are contented when all together to be led by the noses by such whose Counsels
not a man of them would make use of in a private cause of his own: That they
will at last vindicate the honor of England, and imitate their wise Ancestors
in hunting down these Beasts of prey, these noxious Vermin to the Commonwealth,
rather than suffer themselves to be led in collars and couples by one mighty
NIMROD, who upon the turning up of his Nose shall expect a full cry of
sequacious Animals, who must either join voices or be turned out of the pack.

10. Notwithstanding what I have said, I would not have any of them either
really imagine themselves, or falsely suggest to others, that I envy them their
Places and Preferments, which I am so far from doing, that I wish they rather
had them for the term of their lives; I desire only they may be subject to the
laws, and to some Power on Earth that may call them to account for their
Misbehaviours, that they may not be their own Judges, that our sovereign Remedy
may not prove our chief Disease, and that the Kid may be seeth'd in something
else than its Mother's milk. Nor would I by any means deny them their Seats in
Parliament, provided they are in a condition to speak and act freely, and
discharged from those temptations which I find they have not constancy enough
to withstand; for after all; I still believe many of them so honest that
nothing but Money or Preferments will corrupt them. But if nothing will satisfy
them but the downright subversion of our Constitution; if they will be content
with nothing but the utter abolishing of all Laws, and the rooting up of those
fences and securities provided by our Ancestors for the preservation of all
things that are sacred and esteemed amongst mankind; it is high time for the
Electors to look about them, and disappoint their unreasonable and exorbitant
hopes, and to spew them out as detestable Members of the Commonwealth; not only
as unfit to be trusted with their Liberties, but as unworthy to breath in the
air of a Free Government.

11. If any should say, That the alterations in Elections will stand us in no
stead, since whoever are chosen will still be bought off and bribed by
Court-preferments: I answer, it will require a considerable time to new-model
and debauch a House of Commons, nor can it be done but by displacing all those
who are already possessed, to make room for these new comers, which will make
the trade and mystery of Bribery more plain, and consequently more abhorred. And
since no Parliament can now fit above three years, the Court will meet with
fresh Difficulties to interrupt them, which may possibly at last make them
weary of these Practices. It Is true indeed, this Consideration ought to make us
more circumspect in our choice of Members, for tho we should choose but an
inconsiderable number of Pensioners, yet will they soon be able to work over a
majority to their side: so true is the saying, A little leaven leavens the
whole Lump. Whoever therefore out of any particular friendship, or other
motives of fear or private Interest, should vote for any one Person so
qualified; let him consider, that as much as in him lies, he makes a complement
of all the Liberties of England to the unsatiable avarice and ambition of
Statesmen and Court-Ministers. Since therefore we have so narrowly escaped our
destruction, and one Session more of the last Parliament would infallibly have
ruined our Constitution, we cannot surely be so grossly overseen as to neglect
the opportunity now put into our hands for avoiding the like hazards in time to
come; which may easily be done, if the Freeholders and Burghers in England will
petition and engage their Representatives to consent to a Bill which shall be
brought into the House, to incapacitate all Members for holding Offices and
Preferments: or if it should be thought too much to debar them altogether from
the enjoyments of Posts of honor and advantage, let them keep them during good
behavior, and not otherwise; that such Places may not be reserved in store for
those who shall be from time to time elected, and thereby a continued course of
corruption be carried on successively through the whole Nation, who will in a few
years insensibly find themselves so universally infected with this insinuating
Vice, that we shall be thoroughly ripe for destruction, and readily expose to
sale the Liberties of England by Auction to the fairest bidder. If it was
deservedly thought one of our most dangerous Grievances, that the Judges, who
only declare the Law, should hold their places ad beneplacitum; what condition
must we be in when our Lawmakers themselves are subjected to the same
temptations? Or what advantage have we got by having our Judges Commissions for
life, when our very Legislature it self is prostituted to bribery and fordid
gain? The fortune of England is now brought to the nicest point, and there are
critical seasons, which if neglected, will never again be offered; and should
we now fail in our duty to our Country, we shall assuredly fall unpitied by the
rest of the world. But if on the other hand we can by our foresight and
diligence prevent for the future the bribing and corruption of Parliaments, it
is not to be imagined what security, what happiness, and what immortal
reputation will be the neverceasing concomitants of such a Settlement. If the
very Rump of a Parliament, even in the midst of domestic Discontents, and beset
on all sides with foreign Assaults and Invasions, were able by that one
self-denying Act to maintain the public welfare from the danger of inward
Convulsions at home, and violent Concussions from abroad; if that small and
broken number without any Head, and under so many disadvantages, could by this
only means secure our peace, and so widely extend the repute and honor of the
English Name; what Country or what Region could ever give limits to the
unbounded reputation of a full and legal Parliament so nobly qualified? What
Nation could there be so powerful as to resist our Forces, or so politic as to
infatuate our Counsels? There is nothing within the compass of human wishes
that we might not assure our selves from the Wisdom and Virtue of such a
disinterested Assembly, headed and encouraged by the most auspicious Prince
that ever yet swayed the English Scepter: A Prince who only waits the
opportunity of our own willingness to be happy, and is fired with a longing
eagerness to see the Nation deserve the glorious effects of his inimitable
Conduct, and inexhausted Beneficence; who only wishes a happy Conjuncture of a
free and unbiased Parliament, that he might join with them in the rescue of
himself and us from the oppression of those devouring Harpies, who would tear
off the yet green and flourishing Laurels from his Majestic Brows, and
ungratefully cast a tarnish upon the luster of his bright and shining
Atchievments: That he might dissipate those inauspicious Vapors which have
hindered him from breaking out in the height of his meridian Glories, and
intercepted his benign and noble Influence upon his inferior and dependent
Orbs: That he might deliver up to Justice those traitorous and insinuating
Parasites, who endeavor to inspire into his sacred Breast an unworthy Jealousy
of his People, as if he wanted the assistance of a Standing Army to secure and
establish to himself that Throne which he has already so firmly erected in the
hearts and affections of his Subjects: And lastly, that he might wholly
discharge himself of those wretched and perfidious Statesmen, who endeavor to
fix the brand of their own acquired infamy upon their Master, that they may
make him as hateful to one party for their Vices, as he is already to another
for his own Virtues, and deprive him of the glorious Title of the World's
greatest Benefactor, which he has so justly purchased to himself by his
immortal Performances.

12. I shall conclude with one word, in answer to such who may possibly think I
have reflected too much upon the supineness and base neglect of the People of
England; as if it were possible they could be such monstrous and unnatural
Self-murderers, as to give away with their own breath and free consent all
their Rights to their Estates and Lives. I confess I should be glad to find my
labor lost upon this account: But I desire such to consider, that there are
many honest and well-meaning Englishmen who do not distinguish between our
present Government, and our present way of governing; whose distance from the
Parliament, multiplicity of Business, or other Circumstances in the world,
render them less able to penetrate the designs that are now carrying on for the
total subversion of our most excellent Constitution. And it is plain on the
other hand, that the great and unwearied diligence of the present Conspirators
against our Government, in order to support their future Elections, dos infer
their thoughts that the majority of the Electors are capable of being imposed
upon in this gross and unexampled manner. Since therefore those who are making
us Slaves, think it no great difficulty to effect their purposes, I see no
reason why I ought to be so tender as to forbear expressing my sears and
apprehensions of their success.

FINIS.

