To the Right Reverend, the MODERATOR, AND REMANENT MEMBERS OF THE VENERABLE
ASSEMBLY Of the Church of SCOTLAND, now Sitting at Edinburgh.
THE HUMBLE REPRESENTATION OF WALTER Earl of TARRAS. and the other Heretors
concerned, for Re-erecting the Kirk of Robertoun.
IN the year 1647. The General Assembly of this Church did by their Act,
Session (...) Ordain. Presbyteries to use all Diligence for Remeeding the
incommodious Situation of Parish Kirks: And in particular, they ordered a
Recommendation, to be Directed to the then Earl of Buccleugh for Building a
Kirk on Borthwick Water; (as appears by the Index of their unprinted Acts,)
which being Essayed by the Presbytery of Jedburgh in the year 1649 was
interrupted by the Invasion of the English, till the year 1658, at which time
the Heretors of the Parishes of Hawick, Hassenden, Wiltoun and Selkirk, all
lying upon, or near to Borthwick Water, made their Address to the Presbytery of
Jedburgh, for getting the Kirk of Hassenden Transplanted from the East End of
the Parish where it stood, to Robertoun, which is about the middle thereof; and
for Dismembring the remote Parts of the Parishes of Hawick, Hassenden, Wiltoun
and Selkirk from their respective Kirks, and annexing them to this new Kirk of
Robertoun; and that in regard, That on the heads of the Waters of Tiviot and
Borthwick there were at least ten Miles Destitute of any Kirk; whereas beneath,
where Tiviot and Borthwick meet, there are no fewer then six Kirks within the
bounds of four Miles; of which the Kirk of Hassenden being one, and having the
Kirks of Minto and Wiltoun on the one and other side; it then stood at the
East End of the Parish, which is at least twelve Miles of length in a straight
line from Hassenden to Creak, the West End of the Parish, upon the North-side
of the said Waters of Tiviot and Borthwick, and has the whole Parish of
Wiltoun, as it were, Interwoven with it by parcels, which being the Situation
of the Parish of Hassenden; and there being also some remote parts of the
Parishes of Hawick and Selkirk lying upon or near to the said Borthwick water,
which will be distant from their said Kirks, or any Kirk whatsomever, six,
eight, ten, or twelve Miles: The transplanting of Hassenden Kirk to Robertoun,
and annexing the said remote parts of Hassenden, Hawick, Wiltoun and Selkirk
to this new Kirk of Robertoun, would make the remotest of them to be not above
five Miles distant from the same, and five parts of six within two Miles of the
said Kirk: And on the other hand, the East End of the said Parish of Hassenden,
from which the Kirk was to be removed, would be sufficiently accommodate by
annexing it, partly to the Kirk of Minto, and partly to Wiltoun, lying on
either hand thereof; and two parts of three of the said East End would have the
advantage in being annexed to Wiltoun, which is nearer to them then the Kirk of
Hassenden; and the other third part would be no farther prejudged, then by
riding or going half a Mile, or at most a Mile farther to the Kirk then they
were wont: And likewise the aforesaids other three Kirks on the North-side of
Tiviot-water would by this means be in the very Center of their Parishes.

Upon which considerations, the Convenience and Equity of the aforesaid
Transplantation was so apparent, that not only the Presbytery of Selkirk did
thereto consent, but also all the Heretors in the said East End of Hassenden
Parish, by a Writ under their Hands, did unanimously concur in the foresaid
Address, except John Turnball of Know; who yet after a little opposition was
convinced, and joined with the rest: Whereupon the Presbytery of Jedbrugh
having with consent of all Parties perambulate the bounds, found a real
necessity of the said Transplantation: And having past an Act thereupon, which
was also Authorized by the Authority for the time: In pursuance thereof, the
said Kirk of Robertoun was in the year 1659. Built and completed, and Gods
Worship set up and Exercised therein for several years thereafter.

But in the year 1665, when Prelacy had overturned Presbytery, and was then in
great vigor: The Archbishop of Glasgow for the time, taking Offense at some
little slight he conceived to be put upon him by the deceased Sir Gideon Scot
the Earl of Tarras's Father; did first by a peremptory Letter directed to the
Presbytery of Jedburgh; and then upon the report of a pretended Visitation
appointed by the Synod of Peebles, give order that the Kirk of Hassenden that
had been Demolished should be Rebuilt, and the new Parish of Robertoun again
Dismembered: And that without so much as either making the appointed
Perambulation, or giving a fair Hearing to the Hereters and others concerned,
as the Protestation and Instruments taken by the Lord of Borthwick Brae, in
Name of the rest, does testify: And in this matter the Archbishop was so
Partial and Unreasonable; that albeit he had said openly, that if Sir Gideon
Scot would but write a Letter to him to forbear, he would do it: Yet his
Passion so far prevailed upon Sir Gideon's nor writing, That he commanded the
aforesaid Dissolution of the Parish of Robertoun, to the manifest Detriment of
upwards of 900 Souls that lived within the bounds thereof, and could not else
where be easily accommodate.

And farther, he carried his Partiality to that height, that he procured a
Decree of the then Commission for Plantation of Kirks, Ratifying what he had
done: But th s Decree being given in Absence, and manifestly by his
procurement, in compearing personally in the Commission, and declaring what he
had already done in that Affair; and withal the Decree is charge able with
several Nullities and Inconsistencies: And being at best but a Ratification,
Quae nihil novi juris tribuit, and to be understood salvo jure, etc. Is not in
this Case to be regarded.

After this Dissolution and Desolation wrought by the Bishop which continued
for several years. The Heretors and Parishioners did upon the granting of the
late liberty in the year, 1687. Erect to themselves a meeting house near to the
said Kirk, providing it with a Presbyterian Minister. And the Earl of Tarras,
with the remanent Heretors and Parishioners, being desirous, upon the
re-establishment of Presbytery, to have the said Parish and Kirk of Robertoun,
which the Archbishop had ruined, again resetled; Did in September, 1689. Apply
for direction and advice, to a meeting of Presbyterian Ministers at Drybrugh:
But they though abundantly satisfied, that the former procedure in erecting of
that Kirk, was orderly, could do nothing in the matter: In respect they were
not at that time Authorized by Law. Whereupon the said Earl, and others did
thereafter renew their application to the general meeting of Ministers at
Edinburgh, who did in this, as in other cases, recommend and refer the matter
to the next ensuing Synod of Merse, and Tiviotdail, to be by them examined, and
reported to the next General Assembly.

Upon this Reference, The Synod being met at Kelso, in July last, did appoint a
Commity to consider this whole Affair, and to revise the several Papers thereto
relating, and to report their diligence with their opinion and advice
thereanet. The which Commity being met and having seen all Papers relating
either to transplantation or overturning of the said Kirk, and having heard all
parties concerned; they upon a full examination of the whole matter. And after
having set down exactly what they had found therein, which agrees in every
point to the narrative above expressed, did return their report and advice;
First, That the erecting of the said Kirk of Robertoun, was most necessary for
Accommodating a large tract of ground, which they recommend to the Synod to
cause perambulate. 2dly. That the aforesaid arbitrary order given by the
Archbishop, ought to be simpliciter condemned, And Thirdly, That though they
think the Synod can give no Judgment, either as to the continuance or
demolition of the aforesaid Kirk of Hassenden, until the said decree of
Ratification given by the Commission for plantation of Kirks, be taken out of
the way; yet they also find that the aforesaid Decree was given for not
Compearance, and that the reason why there was no Compearance, was because that
none at that time durst oppose the actings of the Archbishop; neither were
Presbyterians fond of new Erections, nor that Kirks should be multiplied: as
the said report more fully bears.

Which report being made to the Synod, they unanimously approved the same;
condemning the abovementioned injunction given by the Archbishop of Glasgow,
and recommended it to several Gentlemen and Ministers by them named, to
perambulate the whole bounds above controverted, and report to the Synod, as
the Synod's Act dated the 24. of July, 1690 More fully testifies.

Like as the Perambulators appointed by the Synod, having met at the Kirk of
Hassenden, upon the 13. of August last, and then perambulated the whole Bounds:
They Judged it most convenient for the benefit of the People, lying at so vast
a distance from any Kirk; That Robertoun, be again Erected in a Parish, and
duly planted, and that albeit there may be about eight Hundred Souls lying
nearest to the Kirk of Hassenden. yet the remotest of them, are not above two
miles distant from the Kirk of Wiltoun on the one side, and a mile and an half
from the Kirk of Minto on the other: As the report of their Perambulation,
subscribed with their hands, bears.

Which report being made to the Synod, again met at Kelso, upon the 23, of
September last, they upon a Petition given in by the Parishioners of Robertoun
give this Answer; that the report of the whole affair concerning the Parishes
of Hassenden, and Robertoun; be given in to the next ensuing Assembly, unto
which they refer the same: As the extract of their Act bears.

Whereupon this venerable Assembly being now met, the said Earl of Tarras,
with the remanent Heretors and Parishioners of the said Kirk of Robertoun; do
in all Humility, lay the whole matter thereto relating, before the Assembly; to
be by them duly considered and determined upon, earnestly entreating and
obtesting the reverend Members thereof, That they would give their Judgment,
and take such course therein as may best contribute to the re-erecting of the
said Kirk and Parish of Robertoun, for the better accommodating of the People,
living at so vast a distance, as has been above represented, from any Kirk
whatsomever; seeing that the same does so manifestly conduce to the advancement
of the Glory of God, in the propagation of the Gospel, and the good and
edification of the Hundreds of Souls therein concerned. And that by the
narative above mentioned, It is also manifest that any opposition that has
been or can be made to so good a Work, does only flow from the selfish
disposition of such unreasonable Men, as wilfully refuse to cede the smallest
bit of their own ease, either for the more necessary accommodation of their
Neighbors, or the more visible advantage of the Gospel, which ought certainly
to preponderate in all such cases.

The granting of which just desire, is the more earnestly expected, in regard
that all craved, is only the reviving and restoring of what was formerly so
well settled by the Judicatories of the Church, before the late Interruption;
and the passing such a Judgment upon the whole matter, as is suitable to its
Ecclesiastic Authority; specially seeing that there neither is at present, nor
can be any Minister regularly fixed in either of these Kirks, and for all the
vast bounds of that Parish, until the questioned be determined.


