The Militia Reformed: OR, AN EASY SCHEME OF Furnishing ENGLAND with a Constant
LAND-FORCE, capable to prevent or to subdue any Foreign Power; and to maintain
perpetual QUIET at Home, without endangering the PUBLIC LIBERTY. The Second
Edition.

Tam Mart quam Mercurio.

LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown at the Black Swan and Bible without
Temple Bar; and Andrew Bell at the Cross-Keys and Bible in Cornhil. M.DC.XC.IX.

BOOKS sold by Andrew Bell in Cornhil.
DIscourses concerning Government, by Algernon Sidney, Son to Robert Earl of
Leicester, and Ambassador from the Commonwealth of England to Charles Gustavus
King of Sweden. Published from an Original Manuscript of the Author. Price 16 s.

A complete Collection of the Historical, Political, and Miscellaneous Works of
John Milton, both English and Latin. With some Papers never before published.
In 3 Vol. To which is prefixed, The Life of the Author, containing, besides the
History of his Works, several extraordinary Characters of Men and Books, Sects,
Parties, and Opinions. Price 40 s.

The General History of England both Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the
earliest Accounts of Time to the Reign of his present Majesty King William III.
Taken from the most ancient Records, Manuscripts and Historians. Containing the
Lives of the Kings, and Memorials of the most Eminent Persons both in Church
and State. With the Foundations of the Noted Monasteries, and both the
Universities. Vol. I. By James Tyrrel Esquire Fol. Price 1 l.

An Inquiry concerning Virtue, in two Discourses: the first of Virtue, and the
belief of a Deity; the second, of the Obligations to Virtue. Price in Calf 2 s.
6 d.

An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, and the Rights of Mankind in
Matters of Religion. With some Reasons in particular for the Dissenters not
being obliged to take the Sacramental Test but in their own Churches, and for a
General Naturalization. Together with a Postscript in answer to the Letter to a
Convocation-man. Price in Calf 2 s. 6 d.

A Detection of the Court and State of England during the 4 last Reigns, and
the Interregnum; consisting of private Memoirs, etc. With Observations and
Reflections; and an Appendix discovering the present State of the Nation.
Wherein are many Secrets never before made public; as also a more impartial
Account of the Civil Wars in England than has yet been given. By R. Coke Esquire
The 3d Edition very much corrected, with an Alphabetical Table. Price 7 s.

An Account of the first Voyages and Discoveries made by the Spaniards in
America. Containing the most exact Relation hitherto published, of their
unparalled Cruelties on the Indians, in the destruction of above 40 Millions
of People. Together with the Propositions offered to the King of Spain to
prevent the further Ruin of the West Indies. By Don Bartholomew de las Casas,
Bishop of Chiapa, who was an Eye witness of their Cruelties. Illustrated with
Cuts. To which is added, The Art of Traveling, showing how a Man may dispose
his Travels to the best advantage. Price in Calf 4 s.

The Art of Memory: A Treatise useful for all, especially such as are to speak
in public. By Marius D' Assigny B. D. Price 1 s.

A Letter to his Majesty K. William III. showing, I. The Original Foundation of
the English Monarchy. II. The Means by which it was removed from that
Foundation. III. the Expedients by which it has bin supported since that
Removal. IV. The best Means by which its Grandeur may be for ever maintained.
Price 4 d.

A Letter to a Member of Parliament, showing that a Restraint on the Press is
inconsistent with the Protestant Religion, and dangerous to the Liberties of
the Nation. Price 6 d.

There are now in the Press,

The second Volume of Mr. Tyrrel's History of England, for which Proposals are
printed.

The second Edition of the Complete History of Europe: Or, a View of the
Affairs thereof, Civil and Military, from the beginning of the Treaty of
Nimeguen, 1676, to this present Year 1699. Wherein are several remarkable
Transactions, etc. not in the former Edition.

The Militia Reformed, etc.
THE following Discourse (most Noble LORD) begun at your Request, and finished
within the short time You prescribed, is now made a Present to the World;
which, if the Favor deserves any Return, is obliged to your Lordship for the
Publication. You have long since justly acquired the Esteem of all good Men;
and the known measure of their Prayers, when they wish their Relations happy,
is that they may equal your Lordship's Probity and Understanding. But tho you
neither want, nor desire the regards of any besides the Virtuous; yet no News
can be more pleasing, than to hear of a constant Addition to your Friends, this
being an infallible Sign, that the Number of Publick-spirited Men increases:
For he must needs be your sworn Enemy, who is not a hearty lover of his
Country. I purposely forbear to express your Name, or to enlarge an Encomium,
which, I know, will not be grateful, tho unsuspected of Flattery; and therefore
I leave your Lordship to be entertained by mine, or your own more solid
Observations.

1. TO employ one's Thoughts on what he pleases, and to speak as freely as he
thinks, is the greatest Advantage of living in a free Government; the next to
this is being Master of what you possess from the Favor of others, or by your
own Industry; and then, that Merit is indifferently rewarded in Persons of all
Conditions and Degrees. Their due Value is ordinarily set upon the two last by
most Men, and Life it self should be readily exposed to maintain or acquire the
first; for, without it to live, is, in my Opinion, worse than any Death. Under
Despotick Princes none dares mutter at his own, or the Sufferings of his
Fellows; much less put so much Confidence in his dearest Friend, as to condole
their common Slavery, where the Informer is tempted with immense Rewards, and
certain Death or Disgrace attend the Accused. This is the blessed Unity of that
Constitution which some admire so much, because no Complaints are heard in it;
whence they would persuade us, that it is also free from all Grievances. But
where Laws secure the Rights of the SUBJECT, with the same Care as the
Privileges of the MAGISTRATE, no sooner is any pinched but he cries out; and
the Authors of the Peoples Oppression are obliged to change their Conduct, or
to rectify their Mistakes. Either the PRINCE is disabus'd, when his MINISTERS
have seduced him by false Representations; or sometimes the MINISTERS refuse to
act, if the PRINCE be resolved upon Arbitrary Courses. Now, it is our peculiar
Happiness in England, that no other Government in Europe is equal to us,
whether the DIGNITY of the Magistracy, or the LIBERTY of the People be
considered. But particularly in all dubious Affairs of Public Concern, it is
every Man's Duty to assist his Country by his Advice, as well as with his Hand
in time of Danger: And Matters are as freely debated among us abroad, as within
their own Walls by our Senators, who likewise in their printed Votes inform us
of all their Resolutions and Proceedings. These Considerations, joined with the
Request of a Person I honor, have prevailed with me to deliver my Opinion at
this time concerning the modelling and disciplining of our MILITIA; and I
question not but it will by our Wise and August Parliament be established on
such a foot as shall effectually defend us hereafter against all Foreign Force,
and constantly preserve our Freedom and Peace at home.

2. But before I descend to any Particulars, I must premise something
concerning the present Factions that unfortunately divide us, and which
discover their fatal Effects too much upon the present Occasion. One says, the
TORIES will never heartily consent to any Model that makes the MILITIA useful:
Another replies, that this is only an ill-natured Insinuation, while some of
the WHIGS oppose the thing openly, and are glad of any Pretense to conceal
their true Reasons. But these Names are now of a very doubtful signification.
We hear of Court and Country, of Apostate and Adhering WHIGS; nor are the
TORIES more united among themselves. It Is observable that no Man, however
otherwise negligent of his Conduct, is willing to own that without any reason
at all he differs from others in Word or Action: but whether he dissembles, or
ingenuously tells the Cause of his Dissent, yet Interest or Conscience (real or
mistaken) are the two principal Springs of all Divisions. Indeed we find by
frequent Experience, that where Interest secretly governs, Conscience is openly
pretended; but in this case no body's bare Profession is to be regarded, his
Actions being the most certain Interpreter of his Thoughts. If one therefore,
who would pass for a Patriot, has any Interest separate from that of the
Public, he is no longer entitled to this Denomination; but is a real Hypocrite
that is ready to sacrifice the Common Good to his Private Gain, than which no
worse can be said of any particular Faction. Now such Distinctions as these of
WHIG and TORY, cannot miss of being often made with a great deal of Partiality
and Injustice; for, according to your predominant Passion, he is a WHIG whom you
love, and he that you hate's a TORY; and so on the contrary, as you happen to
be engaged in either Party. Nothwithstanding* it is sometimes a mighty easy
thing to see through all these feigned Pretenses. Should one, for Example, who
was formerly taken for a Friend to LIBERTY, now that he has got or expects
Preferment, neglect or oppose any Public Good, in promoting which he might be
disappointed or deprived of his Post; this Man must not think to live always
upon the Credit of the old Stock, when it appears that either he has entirely
changed his Sentiments, or was never sincere; and that he resisted the former
Powers, because they were not kind enough to him, but not out of any fixed
Enmity to SLAVERY. Some Folks there be who seemed at the beginning to favor
the REVOLUTION, yet ever since opposed the Government, because they think their
real or fancied Merit not sufficiently rewarded by the King, to whom it is
impossible to heap Preferments upon every Body tho never so deserving, unless
they would be all Commanders without any to obey them. But we likewise know
others who from Enemies to King WILLIAM, are become his Friends; and this of
all Changes is the most natural and commendable, that one who by Education,
Example, or otherwise, was once engaged against the Interest of his Country,
should upon better consideration desert a Party to join with the Public.
Several of these, it may be, never thought during one hour of the Original or
End of Societies, till the late Differences gave 'em an opportunity and
encouragement to do it: And if the Discovery of Truth proves to be the Result
of their Study, we ought not to reject their Reasons now, because we justly
disallowed their Errors before. Certainly a true PATRIOT can be of no Faction,
nor consequently for excluding any from sharing the Blessings of that LIBERTY
they are willing to support. If the Romans admitted their vanquished Enemies to
an equal participation of their Laws and Privileges, how much more readily
should we embrace our own Countrymen with both Arms, and welcome the return of
our prodigal Brethren to their Duty toward our common Mother? But granting
that in this Business of the MILITIA, some of those who promote it are not
sincere, tho Charity commands us to hope the best, we need not be sollicitous
whether they are or not, so long as the thing is good in it self, and they
concur with us in establishing a Constitution they cannot afterward resist if
they would, nor, I hope, be willing, if they could. This is the highest Mark of
Sincerity; and, for my part, I shall never think him a Fo to England that has a
hand in it. But if any continue still scrupulous, let him not be ashamed to
imitate the Prudence of the great Apostle, who said, Some preach Christ even
out of Envy and Strife, Phil. 1.15, -- 11.
and some also out of good Will; The one preach Christ out of Contention, not
sincerely; -- but the other out of love. -- What then? Notwithstanding,
everyway, whether in Pretense, or in Truth, Christ is preached; and I therein
do rejoice, yea and will rejoice. Now what is judged lawful in Religion, and by
an Apostle too, may, I think, with a very good Grace be admitted in Politics.
After all, I am the farthest imaginable from being an Advocate for any
disaffected Persons. The Government is under no Obligation to indulge Men
continuing in opposition to it; nor should those, who are resolved upon
adhering to the late King, think upon abusing the Lenity of the present, if the
Immortal BRUTUS spared not his own Sons, when they were found plotting the
Restoration of the Abdicated Tyrant.

3. Another thing I am sorry to hear out of a great many peoples Mouths, is,
that we have not Virtue enough to agree upon any tolerable Model of training
our MILITIA, and that it is almost impossible we should ever recover our former
Reputation of Valor. But this Argument is nothing the less weak for being so
common; and the true Intent of such as always cry none but good Men can make
good Laws, is (besides affronting others) to place all Power in the hands of
their own Party, who with them are the only good Men. It Is Government or
Education makes all the Difference among Nations as to Military and Civil
Discipline, foreign Commerce, domestic Economy, or the like. Upon the first
Discovery of this Island by the Romans, its Inhabitants were found as savage as
we know the Americans to be now. The Climate of Rome is still the same, the
Bodies of its Citizens, and the Distances of other Places remain the same; yet
they have wholly lost the Secret of conquering the World, and are become as
poor and mean spirited as their Ancestors were gallant and brave: for the
latter were free, and the former are ignorant Slaves. To come nearer home, all
the Pains imaginable have been taken for a considerable space to render our
selves luxurious and illiterate, the better to dispose us to favor the
tyrannical Designs of our late Kings; but have we not so retrieved our Credit
in Europe under the Administration of his present Majesty, as if we had
voluntarily suffered it to be eclipsed a while, that it might shine the
brighter ever after? And to apply this more particularly still, I readily own
that the MILITIA, as now regulated, is burdensome and useless; but it follows
not that all are necessarily so, the contrary being plain from the Histories of
every Age as well as from present Experience. And before I have done I shall
give a Demonstration that the Frame of our Militia could not be more
successfully contrived to render it the Object of the Peoples Contempt and
Aversion, with a Design to create in them a good Opinion of Mercenaries, and to
make 'em believe a necessity of always keeping up a Standing Force of such. In
a word, when our Men are better trained, they will not make such a ridiculous
Figure under their Arms; and when the Charge is less felt or laid out to better
purpose, it will be more cheerfully paid.

4. But we are still encompassed with many Dangers. It Is said that those
Soldiers who have so bravely fought for ours and the Liberties of Europe,
declare it is not from any private Interest of their own, but out of regard to
our future Safety, they desired to be kept on foot; and that in Honor we ought
not to discharge Men who suffered so much for our sakes. We are to blame indeed
if we don't sufficiently provide for our own Security; but as to the Soldier's
Merits, I answer first, that their past Service is duly acknowledged, and
ordered to be rewarded. Secondly, That such as never saw our Enemies, are more
clamorous than those who beat them. And, Thirdly, That this unreasonable Demand
was not made by the Body of the common Soldiers, who are generally desirous of
returning home to their Wives, or their Relations, or their Callings; and more
particularly at this time, because that hitherto they have known nothing but
the Danger, Want, or Fatigue of the War; whereas, once tasting the Pleasures of
Idleness and Ease, they will every day become less willing to disband. And now
the Question all this while ought not to have been, whether these Gentlemen
mean what they say, or only pretend it; but what is most for the Advantage of
the Nation. This was the Motive of raising them, and should be that of
establishing or laying them aside. War being their Trade, it is no wonder if
they be always for continuing it; nor can it ever happen to be otherwise,
should they be wholly left to themselves, no more than any other Persons,
without the Intervention of the Civil Authority, would reform the Abuses of
their own Professions. But the Parliament has now put an end to this Dispute;
and, to the great Satisfaction of all good Men, granted to his Majesty a
sufficient Guard both for the Honor and Safety of his Person, with a competent
Number besides to secure some important Places till the New MILITIA is
regulated, which, I hope, in a little time may be happily effected. In the
following Model Provision is made for several hundreds of the disbanded Army,
and I dare say the Change proposed in their Condition will give most of 'em
Satisfaction; tho, by the way, they ought to be content, should the Parliament
proceed no further to gratify them than they have already resolved. The most
stupid Soldier knows very well an Army has nothing in it so charming that
could induce the Nation to raise one, but upon some pressing Necessity, and not
to keep' up perpetually; nor can the Service performed be ever so great, as not
to be requited under such a Return. I cannot determine whether it would occasion
more Indignation or Mirth to hear a Man contending, that because the Soldiers
defended our Liberty at the public Charge for nine Years against the French,
we can do no less than become their Slaves for ever. This Paradox is too gross
for any to maintain, or perhaps to intend; yet every considering and
indifferent Person must perceive the Consequence to be true. I shall therefore,
to avoid the Labor of proving what is self-evident, put you only in mind of
the Gentleman, who, having engaged the Maid to speak a good Word for him to her
Mistress, would needs when the Lady consented quit her, and marry the Maid, out
of pure Gratitude for the pains she had taken on his behalf.

5. But the Honor and Safety of the Nation is the commendable Design of all
sides; wherein they are certainly in the right, since all Countries must have
some Force to defend them against foreign Invasions and domestic Tumults: for
as it was their own Good and Security which occasioned Men first to quit the
State of Nature, and to associate themselves into Governments; so the Raising
and Regulation of their Forces must be directed and accommodated to the same
ends. An Island is best situated for Preservation, as having need of little
other Force, either to infest foreign Coasts, or to protect its own, besides a
numerous FLEET which it can never want. But if it be likewise a Government for
Increase, such as ours, its Situation naturally leading it to Trade and
planting of Colonies; and if it has the noble Ambition of holding the Balance
steady between other Governments, of succouring the Distressed, and grudging
Liberty to none, then it must be always provided with a considerable
Land-Force. Of this there is no Dispute. Then the only Question is, Whether it
be safest to trust Arms continually in the hands of ignorant, idle, and needy
Persons; or, only when there is occasion for it, in the hands of sober,
industrious, and understanding Freemen. That the latter can never be dangerous
to our Liberty and Property at home, and will be infinitely more effectual
against an Enemy attacking, or invaded by us, I am now going to prove; and at
the same time to deliver an intelligible and practicable MODEL of disciplining
and maintaining such a Force with very little Charge, and no Trouble at all. My
Method shall be to lay down a few Propositions, and those very short, to each
of which I subjoin a Discourse confirming or explaining it, and containing what
other Remarks might be naturally made in that Place. But I am so far from
writing all I have read or observed upon this Subject, that I shall omit
several useful things wherein the World seems to be already well satisfied, or
that are not absolutely essential to my purpose. As I expect the common Fate of
all Writers, that some probably out of Ignorance or Malice, and others,
perhaps, from substantial Reasons may except against my Performance; so I
desire (as in Justice I am bound) that all real Imperfections, or whatever the
Injudicious and Envious may mistake for such, be wholly laid at my own door,
and not charged upon the Subject, which ought not to suffer under the
Disadvantage of unskilful Management.

6. Now my First Proposition shall be, THAT ENGLAND CONSISTING OF FREEMEN AND
SERVANTS, NONE BE CAPABLE OF SERVING IN THE MILITIA BUT THE FORMER. By FREEMEN
I understand Men of Property, or Persons that are able to live of themselves;
and those who cannot subsist in this Independence I call SERVANTS. The bare
Explication of the Terms should, one would think, be sufficient to persuade any
Man of Sense that the former should not only be sooner trusted with Arms than
the latter; but that they must needs use 'em likewise to better purpose. For
besides that all the Endowments which Nature has made common to both are
improved in FREEMEN, the very Temper of their Bodies being much stronger and
livelier by better feeding, which is no little Ingredient to Courage, they
fight also for their Liberty and Property; whereas the other have nothing to
lose but their Lives, which are likewise infinitely dearer to those whose
Circumstances render 'em more agreeable and easy. The Romans, who understood
the Art of War beyond all the World, did not make SOLDIERY a Refuge to Poverty
and Idleness; for none but Men of Fortune and Property, whose private Interest
firmly engaged them to the Public Good, had the Honor of serving in their
Armies. Nay, so far were they from employing the poor and servile sort, that
unless a Man was worth a certain Sum appointed by Law, he was excluded from
military Duties, which in that Government was thought no reputable Privilege.
All that enjoyed not the Property assigned they partly called Capitecensi (a
Capitis censione) vocabantur qui (...) perquam parvo are censebantur. A.
Gellius, l. 16. c. 10.
POLMEN, as being returned for nothing but their Heads in the public Taxation;
and partly Proletarii, a munere officioque prolis edendae appellati sunt. Id.
ibid.
BREEDERS, as being no other way useful to Rome, but by increasing the Number
of its Citizens. Quoniam res pecuniaque familiaris obsidis vicem pignorisque
esse apud Rempublicam videbantur; amorisque in patriam fides quadam in ea
firmamentumque erat; neque Proletarii neque Capitecensi, Milites, nisi in
tumultu maximo, scribebantur. Id. ibid.
Seeing a Man's real or personal Estate, says AVLVS GELLIVS, are a sure Pledge
and Hostage for his Fidelity to the Government, and that these Enjoyments seem
to be the ground of one's Love to his Country, therefore neither the BREEDERS
nor the POLMEN were listed as Soldiers, but in case of extraordinary Tumults
or Insurrections. But they were armed upon those Occasions by the Armaque iis
sumptu publico praebebantnr. Id. ibid. Proletarius publicitus scutisque feroque
Ornatur ferro, Muros, Urbemque, Forumque, Excubiis curat. Ennius.
Public, and rather employed in keeping watch and ward at home, than led into
the Field against the Enemy. We find that all those who aspired at Tyranny or
any unlimited Power above the Laws, as Ipse (Marius) milites scribere non more
majorum neque ex classibus, sed uti libido cujusque erat, Capitecensos
plerosque; -- Quod ab eo genere celebratus auctusque erat: and homini potentiam
quarenti egencissimus quisque opportunissimas. Salust. in Bello Iugurt.
MARIUS for example, did constantly make Levies of the poorer sort, putting
Arms into the hands of those that had no stake to lose, and who for that Reason
would be sure not to design the Good of the Commonwealth, but only his Profit
that employed them: nor will they be more faithful to the latter than to the
Government when any other makes them a more advantageous Offer. Now, all this
is natural enough, and should not surprise any body: for the same Reason that
prevails with the Rich to fight for that Government, whose excellent
Constitution secures his Property to him, moves the Indigent to serve against
it; and that is to make both their Lives more easy; whence it may be concluded
that Citizens will always appear for Liberty, and Servants fight for Bread.
It Is well known, that all the World over, wherever the Sword is in the hands
of the People, it is a free Government be it of one or of many; and on the
contrary, all Tyrannies are supported by Mercenaries: nor is there any thing
peculiar in our Soil, our Air, or in our Persons to hinder the same
Circumstances from producing the like Effects. It is likewise to be considered,
that all Wars carried on by FREEMEN are suddenly finished, because, not being
instigated by Want or the desire of Rapine, they are ever longing to return
home to reap the Pleasure of their own Possessions, together with the agreeable
Society of their Families, Relations, and Friends. But all Wars managed by
MERCENARIES prove extremely tedious and burdensome, for they never end till the
Country that employs them be exhausted of all its Treasure, which is their sole
Motive of making Peace. It ought to be also remarked, that a MILITIA of
Freeholders is not only harder to be conquered than that of Servants or
Mercenaries, but must be even superior to an Army wholly composed of Gentlemen
under an Arbitrary Monarch: for the latter, notwithstanding their Honors and
Privileges, are not absolutely Free, but retained on the behalf of Tyranny;
whereas Men of Property being all disciplined (as we propose) and having Arms
in their hands for the Defense of Liberty, upon which from their Infancy they
are taught to value themselves, and to prefer it to all other Conditions (Life,
Riches, and Honors without it being not only precarious, but of no other use
except to prolong a miserable and infamous Slavery;) FREEMEN, I say, thus
trained, excel all others in Greatness of Soul and Courage: Nor are their
haughty Spirits ever to be subdued, especially when they consider they are
fighting for their own, and not otherwise employed for their Fellows than these
are for them, their common Endeavors being to secure every Man's private
Property. Such a Constitution, where all Persons are equally educated in Civil
and Military Discipline, was never conquered by any Standing Armies, unless
previously weakened by some intestine Divisions. On the other hand, of two Free
Governments it is possible indeed for the greatest to overcome the least; but
then we find (to use the Words of a most observing Man) that the Walls and
Towers of such a Government become its Funeral Piles, and that it expires in
its own Flames, leaving nothing to the Conqueror but its Ashes; witness
Saguntum when mastered by Carthage, and Numantia by Rome. I need not longer
insist upon this Matter, and therefore shall remark in the last place, that
whenever any free Empire degenerated into Tyranny, as that of Rome is known to
have done, then Men of Property were not enjoined or encouraged to serve
themselves, but either permitted to find others that would go out in their
room, or to pay down so much ready Money; upon which occasion says one,
speaking of the Romans, Talesque sociantur armis, quales Domini habere
fastidiunt. Vegetius l. 1. c. 7.
They sent those to defend them in the Field, whom they would scorn to admit
into their domestic Service. Indeed some of the Emperors perceived this Error,
and endeavored to correct it, but in vain, since at the same time they resolved
to continue arbitrary. But however the following Order was published by
GRATIAN, VALENTINIAN, and THEODOSIUS: Inter optimas lectissimorum militum
turmas, neminem e numero servorum dandum esse decernimus, neve ex Caupona
ductum, vel ex famosarum ministris tabernarum, aut ex cocorum aut pistorum
numero, vel etiam eo quem obsequii deformitas Militia secernit, nec tracta de
Ergastulis nomina. Cod. Theodos. l. 7. tit. 13.
We decree, say they, that in our best Troops there be no Slave enrolled, nor
any Servants out of Houses of Entertainment, nor any from Places of infamous
resort, nor out of Eating-houses, the Houses of Correction, or other such
infamous Fellows. Yet we are so far from observing this Rule of listing FREEMEN
only, that in the, 14 Car. 2.. 25.
Act now in force for regulating our MILITIA, no Man is obliged to serve in
Person, but may send whom he pleases to appear for him, tho never so poor and
weak, or ignorant of the use of Arms, and all other Arts.

7. Thus far have I discoursed of the Persons who are to constitute our
MILITIA, and now I come to the Method of training them; after which I shall
orderly proceed to their Number, Charge, Age, and other necessary
Considerations. My Second Proposition therefore is, THAT ONE AFTERNOON EVERY
WEEK THERE BE A PAROCHIAL EXERCISE OF ALL MALES, AS WELL SERVANTS AS FREEMEN,
FROM 16 TO 40 YEARS OF AGE. Whether this be done on Mondays, or Thursdays, or
Saturdays, is indifferent; and I must not forget that the Switzers think no Day
so proper for it as SUNDAY, from the following Reasons, viz. First, because no
other Business is interrupted by the Exercise proposed, all Labor being already
prohibited on that Day; so that Servants and their Masters have equal Leisure,
none are hindered from going to Fairs or Markets, nor any Meetings or Bargains
interrupted. Secondly, There needs not a more frequent repetition of the
Parochial Exercise, no Mercenary Soldiers in the World (whatever is boasted of
their Discipline) being trained near so many Days in the Year, tho no Duty be
performed in foul Weather. And thirdly, because after the Public Service of
GOD is over, People are thus restrained from idle Santring or immoral Courses,
and employed, as the Switzers think, in the next Work most becoming good Men,
the public service of their COUNTRY. But I prescribe no time, all that I aim
at being to have as many Days in the Year appointed as will be sufficient, and
also convenient. Every Saturday then, or Sunday in the Afternoon (for so I may
suppose) all the Men of every Parish are to assemble on some Green or Plain, it
may be where the Buts were of old, and instead of Tippling, Gaming, and other
Diversions equally pernicious to their Minds and Bodies, they learn the use of
Arms; wherein, as we see by Experience, they will be imitated by the very
Children, who by that time their Age obliges them to appear in the same place,
will be superior to their Fathers, and need so little Exhortation, that they
cannot be prevented from acquiring this Art. To this public Meeting will all
the superannuated and experienced Men, all the married and single Women resort,
and create in those that are to exercise a noble Emulation of excelling one
another in Agility or Skill, as every one is disposed to merit the Affection or
Applause of the Spectators. This weekly Exercise will not only be to all People
a grateful Pastime, and relaxation from their ordinary Labor or Busness, but
also greatly influence their very Constitutions, by rendering them more robust,
nimble, healthy, and accustomed to all manner of Fatigue. When it is once
settled, we can easily imagine how it may be perpetuated: But to effect the
former, we have now a happy Occasion put into our hands of rewarding no small
number of those Persons who have been employed in our Service abroad these
several Years past: For let all the Sergeants of the disbanded Army, and, if
their Number be not sufficient, several of the Corporals or other expert
Soldiers, be distributed one a piece over all the Parishes of England, and
enjoy half Pay, or what the Parliament shall judge more convenient for one Year;
during which time they shall be obliged to discipline the People on the Days
and Place appointed. And for their further Encouragement, let it be provided
also that they may have free License to follow what lawful Callings they please
in that Country or Town during their Lives. Thus King CHARLES the First, when
he was in the good Humor of issuing out a Proclamation Rushworth 's Collect.
Vol. 1. Page 197.
to instruct and exercise the Trained Bands, as well Officers as Soldiers, by
Men experienced in Military Exercises, ordered that diverse Low Country Soldiers
should be assigned to the several Counties for this end. But how this good
Design was put in execution every one knows; nor are we more ignorant how the
MILITIA was rendered useless under his Successor, when it was enacted that
single Companies should be exercised but 14 Car. 2.. 21.
four times a Year; and this Exercise not to continue above two Days at a time,
whereby they were likely to prove glorious Soldiers. Now, it is plain that all
the People of England may be parochially exercised in the Use of Arms one
Afternoon in every Week throughout the Year (unless prevented by bad Weather)
without any Expense but the pay of one Man for the first Year only; and without
any trouble at all, but on the contrary, to the great Satisfaction and
Recreation of the People. Here it may be objected, that this second Proposition
of Exercising all without any distinction, seems to contradict the first, which
ordains that only Men of Property be of the MILITIA. To this I answer, that
there is a vast difference between training all to Arms, and having every body
of the Army. I am still of the same Opinion, that none but FREEMEN be of the
MILITIA; and yet I am for training the Poor and Servants. First, there is no
trouble in doing it, they being to appear with their Landlords or Masters; and
tho they belong not to the Number of the Companies, yet they may well be
exercised in them. Neither is there any danger in it, seeing their Arms are
only delivered to them on those public Days by the Overseers in whose custody
they are all the Week; for I suppose a little Armory in every Parish. Besides,
the FREEMEN are always armed themselves, and ready to suppress the others upon
the least appearance of Disorder. Thus every Person in the Kingdom becomes a
Soldier; for tho a Servant changes his County, his Master, his Work, or
Treatment, yet wherever he comes there he is trained, and has no exemtion from
Exercise. The Design of this is threefold; First, because when the POOR and
SERVANTS become FREEMEN themselves (as, thanks to our Liberty, it happens every
day) they may not be ignorant of Military Duties. Secondly, That if the Nation
is not disposed to send part of their MILITIA upon any Foreign Expedition,
their Volunteers may not be raw undisciplined Fellows, but ready trained to
their hands; nor any thing wanting but to appoint 'em Officers, and to
distribute 'em into Regiments. Thirdly, Upon any sudden Invasion from abroad,
or in case of some Domestic Insurrection, they may be added as AUXILIARIES to
the MILITIA (by which name I shall always design them hereafter) and be
appointed either to serve in the Field, or to keep in Garrisons, as shall be
judged most expedient in such Circumstances. The Romans made use of 'em upon
all these Occasions, and called 'em Subitarii Milites, exercitus tumultuarius.
Subitaneous Soldiers, or a Tumultuary Army, from the sudden and tumultuary
manner or cause of raising them. The Parochial Assemblies to treat of Civil or
Military Affairs, are answerable to the COMITIA CURIATA of Ancient Rome; and,
by the way, seeing some Parishes may be very thinly inhabited, let every such
be joined to the nearest, and both be reputed as one.

8. Having thus laid the Foundation of all Discipline in the Parishes, my Third
Proposition is, THAT THE FORCES OF EVERY HUNDRED ASSEMBLE AT THE CAPITAL
THEREOF FOUR TIMES A YEAR, BOTH FOR PUBLIC EXERCISE, AND TO DISPUTE GAMES AND
PRIZES. These Meetings answer in some sort the COMITIA CENTURIATA of the
Romans, wherefore I shall make bold to call them Centuriate Assemblies; for our
Hundred, Cantred, or Wapentake, is termed Centuria by the politest Historians
that wrote of our Affairs in Latin. It is then easily understood, that in those
Centuriate Assemblies the People meet not to learn the bare handling of their
Weapons, that being already performed in the Parochial Exercises; but to show
their Experience, and the Progress, they have made at home. Here also they are
formed into, greater Bodies, and taught all that is peculiar to such, or
different from their Duty in single Companies. As for the Games and Prizes, all
wise Nations have instituted the like, sometimes for promoting of Trade, or
only for breeding good Horses; but generally to educate their People in the
love and practice of Arms, or other Exercises tending to fit and dispose 'em to
a Martial Genius, such as Racing, Fencing, Wrestling, throwing the Bar, or the
like; of which you may find various Examples in the Governments of Ancient
Greece and Italy. Let the Prizes in themselves be never so inconsiderable, yet
once that Honor and Reputation are annexed to them, Men will as eagerly contend
for 'em, as if they were the highest Lucre in the World. It has been observed
in all Ages, that nothing is so effectual to make one undertake or quit any
Enterprise, as the Commendation or Disgrace attending it; yet these have failed
sometimes, but a prospect of Gain seldom or never. Now our PRIZES are not
without their Profit, as well as Use and Delight; for, besides the real Value
of what is got, the Winner likewise stands fairest for Preferment, where Places
are disposed according to Merit. As for the Charge of those GAMES it may be
made very easy, an Annual Revenue being established for that purpose. It Is so
much the Interest of the Hundreds to concur in it, that rather than it should
not be done, the Capital Town, where the Meeting is to be, will gladly raise
the Sum in consideration of the brisk Trade it must occasion at those times:
But all such Expenses ought to be collected from the Inhabitants according to
their real or personal Estates. And they will contribute to no Tax, tho never so
necessary, so willingly as to this; because in the first place it is not
bestowed, as the best part of some other Revenues, on Men of no Merit:
Secondly, because it is not carried out of the Country: And thirdly, because
every Man has his lucky Hit for the PRIZE to fall to his own share. Now, it is
all one wherein the PRIZE consists, whether it be a Silver Chain, a Medal, or
any sort of Plate; for the Disputes in other Places were not less eager to
obtain Garlands of Oak or Laurel. But the most proper, in my Opinion, are some
good and beautiful Arms; for the Conqueror, and his Heir after him, will be as
loath to part with them in Fight, as proud of wearing them in time of Peace. And
this is indisputably more natural, and will prove far more effectual than the
Policy of JULIUS CAESAR, who used to adorn the Arms of his Men with Gold,
Silver, and Gems, that they might the less tamely quit such precious things to
the Enemy. There must be also a proportionable difference between the PRIZES,
the same neither in Kind nor Value belonging to the Horse and Foot, or to him
that hits the Mark in shooting, and to another that wins at some other Game;
for I would have them of all useful sorts, and a Field-piece likewise in every
Hundred to breed expert Gunners, with Magazines of Powder, Bullets, and all
other requisite Ammunition in every County. Lastly, I would have it ordained
that he who at these GAMES has got one PRIZE, should not be permitted to stand
for any other at that time; and that the Names of all the Winners be carefully
registered, as well out of regard to the Reputation of particular Persons, as
that the Public may know where to find able Men in time of need. What a Change
this Institution will beget in all the Kingdom; what Trade it will occasion in
the Country; and what Emulation between the Inhabitants of every Hundred (to
speak nothing of the principal Design) can scarcely be imagined by such as have
never experienced any thing like it; and yet there is nothing new or notional in
all this, the same having been successfully practiced either wholly or partly
in many other Places of the World. I shall add no more of the Hundreds, but
that every City being a County of it self, and other populous Corporations, may
hold their Centuriate Assemblies within their own Precincts, and be not obliged
to any Exercise abroad, except the Annual Encampment, whereof I am now going to
treat.

9. Tho it be of the highest Importance to have all Persons in our Nation
parochially exercised, and accustomed in the Hundreds to muster in larger
Bodies; yet they may be still ignorant of the Discipline of a complete Army, to
which all they have hitherto done is only subservient, as we first learn the
Names of the Letters, and then to join them into Syllables, in order to read
and understand a Book. My Fourth Proposition is therefore, THAT ENGLAND BE
DIVIDED INTO THREE EQUAL DISTRICTS, CALLED THE NORTHERN, MIDDLE, AND WESTERN
CLASSES; AND THAT THE STANDING MILITIA OF THE WHOLE CONSISTING OF SIXTY
THOUSAND MEN, TWENTY THOUSAND THEREOF DO ANNUALLY ENCAMP FOR THE SPACE OF THREE
WEEKS IN SOME ONE OF THE CLASSES; AND SO TO SUCCEED BY TRIENNIAL ROTATION,
WHICH RULE IS ALSO TO BE OBSERVED IN THE COUNTIES PROPORTIONABLY. This military
Division of the whole Kingdom may be as easily imagined or performed, as the
Circuits appointed for distributing of Justice. Nor is there any Difficulty in
apprehending the Triennial Rotation; Suppose, for example, that in the Month of
July, School, the twenty thousand Men, which is the Portion of the Western Class,
encamp somewhere in Cornwall, those of the middle Class in July, 1699, at any
Place in Hartfordshire, and those of the Northern Class in July, 1700, in some
part of Yorkshire: Then you return again in July, 1701, to Devonshire, the Year
after to Surrey, the sixth Year to Cumberland, and so perpetually round. The
Rotation in the Counties, or changing the Place of Encampment, is grounded upon
the clearest Equity; for if the CAMP proves a Trouble (as it is impossible it
should) to the County where it is, then Justice requires that all should bear
their share of it: And if on the contrary it be highly profitable by the vast
Trade it must occasion in the Consumption of Provisions, or otherwise; and
considering too that ready Money will be paid for every thing, then it is as
reasonable that all should enjoy the Benefit in their turns. As for the Order
to be observed, to take away all occasions of Dispute, there needs no more but
to cast Lots at the beginning in every Class, to know what County shall be the
first, second, third, and so on. But if an Objection should be raised by any
against the Number of the Classes, from the Largeness of their Bounds, and
consequently the great Distance in many Parts from the Place of Encampment; I
answer, that it is not the precise Number, but the Distribution for which I
contend: for the Kingdom may as well be divided into six Classes, each
containing 10000 of the MILITIA, and annual CAMPS in any two of 'em at a time.
Thus still the Triennial Rotation remains the same, and we have every Year
20000 Men (besides the London-Militia) encamped somewhere in the Kingdom, to
the great Terror of all our Enemies, and to our own unspeakable Advantage and
Reputation; we have an Army of sixty thousand FREEMEN to defend the whole
Nation, and yet every part of it always provided with a sufficient Number,
either absolutely to defend themselves, or to stop any Enemy till our whole
Forces draw together. But then this wheeling Number of sixty Thousand is very
inconsiderable, in comparison of many thousand FREEMEN more, that are always
ready to relieve, to repair, to succeed, or to join them upon occasion; to
speak nothing of those exempted from Duty, nor of the poor and servile; all
which Orders of Men are not only well disciplined, but obliged also to serve
upon uncommon Emergencies. But to return to our CAMP, there our MILITIA learns
the highest Perfection of Discipline, and is taught to make regular Sieges and
Attacks in all Forms, to storm Castles, to fight Battles, to gain advantageous
Posts, to make honorable Retreats, to entrench themselves, to forage, decamp,
and, in one word, to perform all the other Duties of an Army. Now, besides the
Necessity and Usefulness of all these Exercises, they will be extraordinary
entertaining too. The whole Country round will come to divert themselves in
this Place, and pass that Season the most agreeably of all the Year. It would
be a superfluous Labor to spend more Words in Commendation of this part of our
MODEL; and so I come to make one Remark concerning the Expenses, after taking
notice that the yearly general Exercise, prescribed by the Act for regulating
our MILITIA, yet in force, is to continue but only the space of 14 Car. 2. cap.
3.. 21.
four Days. The Assessments laid by this same Act are so grievous as well as
useless, that a long Experience, and the general Outcry against them, spare me
the pains of showing their Defects; nor will I for the same Reasons make any
stop at the Abuse of calling People so often from their Business, for no other
end but to fill the Muster-master's Pockets; neither will I insist upon the
intolerable Grievance of Trophy-money; all those things, as I said before,
being so universally known, that every body can prescribe a proper Remedy. I
proposed three Weeks (and I still think it time enough) for the Annual
Encampment, viz. a Fortnight for actual Service, and the other eight days, upon
the supposition of three Classes, for coming and going; and fewer will do, if
the Classes be six in Number. But suppose another Week be added, then it is
plain that the Charge of a hundred and twenty thousand Men during one Month, is
no more than the Pay of ten Thousand for a Year; whence every body may infer
how much cheaper we may entertain (...) thousand FREEMEN for a Fortnight or
three Weeks, than ten thousand MERCENARIES for a Twelvemonth, making all
reasonable Allowance in the Difference of their Pay. The Expense in our MODEL
then is both laid out to much better purpose, and made a great deal easier than
any of this nature heretofore. Nay the very Rotation should recommend it self
to all Men's Approbation, seeing it comes with respect to the Charge but every
third Year to the turn of each County, and as to the Duty much seldomer to
particular Persons; whereas the Rotation of the Jews was monthly, and took in
the whole People in a Year: They had 24000 Men under Arms every Month, and I
don't propose twenty thousand for one Month in twelve. But the Jewish MILITIA
kept Guards and Garrisons too; Now the Children of Israel after their Names,
(says the Author of the first Book of their Chronicles) the chief Fathers, and
the Captains of Thousands and Hundreds, and their Officers that served the King
in any Matter of the Courses, which came in and went out Month by Month
throughout all the Months of the Year, of every Course w^^e twenty and four
thousand. Ther^ needs no more to be said on this Head, only that the Cities of
London and Westminster, with their Suburbs and Liberties, together with the
Borough of Southwark, are not to be comprehended within any of the Classes, but
to have their own CAMP annually in some convenient Place adjacent.

10. So far of the Persons qualified to serve in the MILITIA, and the several
degrees of training them: Now we shall speak of their AGE; for although this
Particular is generally neglected in Mercenary Armies, yet it has been ever
carefully considered in all free Governments: because the Design of these being
to render the People happy, they impartially assign Labor and Ease to those
Periods of Life to which they are most suitable. Then my Fifth Proposition is,
THAT EVERY FREEMAN, WHEN HIS TURN COMES, BE OBLIGED TO PERSONAL SERVICE IN THE
MILITIA FROM THE EIGHTEENTH TO THE FIFTIETH YEAR OF HIS AGE; AND THAT ALL ABOVE
OR UNDER THESE YEARS BE EXEMPTED FROM THE SERVICE, THO NOT FROM THE CHARGE. The
Romans obliged their Citizens to Arms from the Servius (Rex Pop. Romani) ab
anno septimo decimo, quod idoneos jam esse Reipu^^i^ae arbitraretur, Milites
scripsisse dicitur a Tuberone Historico apud A. Gellium ( l. 10. c. 28.) eosque
ad annum quadragesimum sextum juniores, supraque eum annum seniores appeilasse.
seventeenth to the six and fortieth Year of their Age, in which time every Man
was to go upon the Service of the Commonwealth, (in case of need) if he were of
the Horse ten, or of the Foot (...). Polyb. de Militia Romana.
twenty times; and if he was hindered by Sickness or otherwise from completing
this Number, he might be compelled to do it until he was fifty. But all under
seventeen or above fifty were absolutely Lex a quinquagesimo anno Militem non
cog^t. Seneca de Brevitate vitae, c. ult.
excused, unless upon those extraordinary Occasions whereof we spoke before;
and then the Veterans and Emeriti (for so they called the superannuated
Soldiers) might not only be forced to take up Arms, but they ordinarily came in
of themselves when their Country was in danger, and by their Valor and
Experience did often save it from Destruction. In like manner, when any General
of great Reputation was to go upon some glorious Expedition, several Licinius
quoque veteres scribebat Milites Centurionesque, and multi voluntate nomina
dabant. Livius, l. 42. c. 32. Militares homines and stipendia justa, and
corpora aetate and assiduis laboribus confecta habere; nihil recusare tamen,
quo minus operam Reipublicae dent. Id. ibid. c. 33.
Veterans used to offer him their Service voluntarily, which was very
acceptable, being most useful both by their Example to the rest, and their own
personal Exploits. But I expect to be told, that GENTLEMEN will never consent
their Sons should be trained like Common Soldiers. Now it may be easily
perceived, that this Contemt upon the most honorable Profession of Arms is
purely accidental, and altogether occasioned by the Mercenary Soldiers abroad,
who, excepting some Officers and a few Volunteers, being most of 'em the Scum
of Mankind, consisting of ignorant, brutish, mean, beggarly, and idle Fellows,
that live only upon a scanty Hire, which is seldom punctually paid, they must
necessarily have recourse to Stealing, Robbing, Plundring, Assassinating, and
the like flagitious Practices; and what is still worse, the Arbitrary Princes
who maintain them, must even let them live upon their shifts, by countenancing
or conniving at these Disorders: for there is no Remedy unless they be duly
paid, which is never done except in Free Governments, such as ours and Holland.
But in a well-regulated MILITIA Gentlemen make their Discipline to be properly
an Exercise or Diversion in time of Peace; and in War they fight not only to
preserve their own Liberty and Fortunes, but also to become the best Men in
their Country. Nor are they any thing influenced by that PAY which the
Government justly allows them: for as they who sit quietly at home should bear
their Charges who serve 'em abroad, and not let those be Losers in their
private Affairs, whose Valor provides Security to theirs; so on the other
hand, when it becomes their turn who are now employed to keep at home, they
will as cheerfully contribute to maintain those who succeed 'em abroad, as they
received their PAY before. There is no Weight at all then in the Objection,
especially since no time is lost to Young or Old: and that there is none is
very evident, for no body will say that either Gentlemen or Artizans lose any
time in the Parochial Exercises; all People allow more time upon their
Pleasures every Year than is spent in the Centuriate Assemblies; and their turn
in the CAMP returns so seldom as to admit of nothing to be said against it.
After all, if Gentlemen will be at the pains of fighting for their own, (and
who can doubt but they will?) it is surely worth their while to learn the Art of
doing it; but of this by and by in a more proper Place.

11. The AGE of the Persons constituting our MILITIA being thus determined, we
proceed next to their COMMANDERS, who make the Subject of the Sixth
Proposition, which is, THAT ALL THE COMMISSIONED OFFICERS OF THE MILITIA HAVE
REAL OR PERSONAL ESTATES PROPORTIONABLE TO THEIR SEVERAL DEGREES; AND THAT ALL
PERSONS THUS RIGHTLY QUALIFIED IN EVERY COUNTY SUCCEED ONE ANOTHER BY TRIENNIAL
ROTATION, THE LORDS LIEUTENANTS ONLY EXCEPTED, WHO, BEING GENERAL OFFICERS, ARE
NOT TO BE CHANGED WHILE THE KING IS PLEASED TO CONTINUE 'EM IN THEIR POSTS. The
Reasons for qualifying the OFFICERS by their Property are the same with those I
have offered under the first Proposition for admitting FREEMEN only to serve in
the MILITIA, which spares me the Labor of Repetition in this place. As for the
Rotation of Officers proposed, it is grounded upon uncontested Experience and
Equity. All good Politicians have ever allowed that to be the best and noblest
Government where Men learn alternately to command and to obey; because at this
rate they are not only fitted to serve their Country upon all occasions, but
likewise made competent Judges of the Merit or Miscarriage of others. This was
the known Practice of the Romans, whose General Officers were, in the ordinary
Course of their Government, annually elected, no body thinking it a Disgrace to
serve under him this Year, whom he had commanded the last, nor to be afterward
an inferior Officer in that Army whose Exploits were the Effects of his Conduct
before. And truly this sort of Rotation seems to me a Duty required by the
Light of Nature: for keeping an equal Balance between those of the same
Qualifications contributes above all things to keep 'em in Peace and
Friendship. If the Offices shall be thought honorable, pleasant, or profitable,
no body envies another, because they are all to enjoy 'em in their turns: And
if on the other hand they should be found a Charge or Trouble, then doubtless
every one ought to bear his share of the Burden; nor is it at all material,
whether they be elected by LOT, or successively appointed by the KING. The
PEERS, who are commonly the Lords Lieutenants of Counties, are by this Model
restored to all the Privileges that were truly good and excellent in their
first Institution, the immediate Command of all the FREEMEN in England under
the KING being their proper Charge; and the eternal Fame which some of their
Ancestors have worthily acquired, is wholly owing to the glorious Actions they
performed in this Quality on the behalf of their Country; and not in the least
to that immoderate Power they might then exercise over the PEOPLE, who, if they
record any Nobleman upon this account, do it as an Example they execrate and
abhor, and not out of Gratitude or Love, as in the former case. To the only
Objection I apprehend against this Proposition, which is, that it seems to
limit his Majesty's Authority, I answer, That no Man can trust him with a
greater Power of doing Good (for he would neither accept nor use any other)
than I am willing to do; seeing in the Opinion I entertain of his Justice,
Valor, and Wisdom, I believe my self not inferior to any: which Declaration
ought to be esteemed the more sincere, inasmuch as I never had nor expect any
particular Favor from him besides Liberty and Safety, the common Blessings of
his Government. He knows already that all the Power he has is bounded by Laws,
and we are convinced by Experience that he refuses no Limitation to it when he
judges it to be for the Advantage of the Nation. Thus have the Act for
Triennial Parliaments, and that of regulating Trials in cases of High Treason
(to mention no more) past by his Authority; whereas no Prince that designed to
injure his Subjects, would ever give his Assent to either of them. A Person of
his Sagacity and Prudence will not easily be deluded by the mean Obsequiousness
of any MINISTERS, who make their Court with gratifying what they take to be
their Master's Inclinations; and, without any regard to his or the Nation's
real Interest, lay out all their Efforts to gain him some invidious Point: for
it is a settled Maxim with most of this Race, That ALL KINGS WHATSOEVER WOULD BE
ABSOLUTE; presuming on which pernicious Doctrine they bring a certain Ruin on
the Affairs of Princes, if not happily prevented by their own timely Fall,
which commonly happens in Free Governments. But a good KING, instead of
lessening his own Power by Concessions of this nature, gains more Security,
Respect, and Glory, than could be obtained by the most numerous Armies. I
cannot upon this occasion but relate the remarkable Story of THEOPOMPUS King of
Sparta, who, as VALERIUS MAXIMUS Cum primus instituisset (Theopompus
Spartanorum Rex) ut Ephori Lacedaemone crearentur, ita futuri Regiae potestati
oppositi quemadmodum Romae Consulari Imperio Tribuni plebis sunt objecti; atque
illi uxor dixisset, id egisse illum ut filiis minorem potestatem relinqueret;
Relinquam, inquit, sed diuturniorem. Optime quidern^* ea enim demum tuta est
potentia, quae viribus suis modum imponit. Theopompus igitur, legitim^s regnum
vinculis constringendo, quo longius a Licentia retraxit hoc propius ad
benevolentiam Civium admovit. L. 4. c. 1. de externis, * 8.
writes, when he first ordained that the EPHORI, or Overseers, should be
created at Lacedemon, to be such a Restraint upon the Kings there, as the
Tribunes were upon the Consuls at Rome. the Queen complained to him, that by
this means he transmitted the Royal Authority greatly diminished to his
Children: I leave it indeed less, answered he, but more lasting. And this, adds
our Author, was excellently said; for that Power only is safe, which is limited
from doing Hurt. THEOPOMPUS therefore, continues he, by confining the Kingly
Power within the Bounds of the Laws, did recommend it by so much to the
People's Affection as he removed it from being Arbitrary. But, lest I might
seem to digress, I demand, What Power is taken out of the KING'S hand by our
Proposition? For in the present Militia the Colonels, Majors, Captains, and
other Officers are to be appointed by the 14 Car. 2. cap. 3.. 2.
Lord Lieutenant; and I would have 'em chosen by his Majesty himself, or whom
he pleases to depute, but only qualified to serve their Prince and Country more
effectually: Nor can the Nomination be any where more safely lodged than in the
KING for his Life, provided the Act restrains it to Election under his
Successors, who will enjoy all reasonable Power, since they may appoint or
continue the General Officers at their pleasure. And, besides the foregoing
Considerations, nothing can render his present Majesty more easy than this part
of the Model, seeing that by it he has an admirable Opportunity of gratifying
all Sides, and disobliging none; for if he should put any TORIES in Commission,
the WHIGS would presently cry, that he was committing himself solely into their
Enemies Hands; and should the WHIGS be the only Persons entrusted, the TORIES
would justly continue still disaffected: Whereas on the foot of the Rotation
proposed he may fairly employ those of both Parties duly qualified to serve
their Country. And indeed I may venture to affirm, that this impartial
Distribution of Honor and Profit is the only way possible to heal ours, or the
Divisions of any other Government: for such as are not admitted to Confidence
and Preferment, are most of 'em offended upon no other score; and they who are
in possession of those Advantages will be always for retaining and engrossing
them, either by the Exclusion or absolute Ruin of their Adversaries. But as in
War the KING has equally protected all his Subjects, so I hope in Peace he will
abolish their infamous Distinctions, and render England the Glory and Terror of
the World.

12. The most excellent Institution imaginable cannot be of any considerable
Duration, unless extraordinary Care be taken about the Education of YOUTH,
which is shamefully neglected in this Age; for very few are at those Pains and
Expense in forming the Manners of their own Children, as they freely bestow to
breed up Setting-dogs and Race-horses, or on things altogether as frivolous and
indifferent. The sad Effects of this Disorder are visible enough every where,
and were ever carefully prevented in wise Governments. All Legislators had a
particular regard in their Laws to the breeding of the Young, well knowing that
such as they were, such the Government would prove to be. What Is amiss in this
respect among our selves is more easily discovered, than reformed. I shall
therefore at this time content my self with offering a Remedy in what
immediately concerns my Subject, and so the Seventh Proposition of this Scheme
shall be, THAT ALL NOW UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN YEARS, OR THAT SHALL BE BORN
HEREAFTER, BE INCAPABLE OF HOLDING ANY POST OF HONOR OR PROFIT UNDER THE
GOVERNMENT (EXCEPTING IN THE PROFESSIONS OF DIVINITY, LAW, AND PHYSIC) UNLESS
THEY FIRST QUALIFY THEMSELVES BY SERVING TWO CAMPAIGNS BY LAND OR SEA. By this
Proposition none already arrived to the complete Age of Manhood are excluded
from bearing Offices; and they who are now full Eighteen, are only kept back
till they are Twenty, before which time they could scarcely expect Employment
even as Matters now stand. I cannot therefore foresee that any Opposition will
be made to this part of the Model, seeing it neither affects them who are
actually engaged in Business, nor such as stand Candidates for Preferment: For
the blame of being unqualifi'd, as proposed, ought to be attributed to a Defect
in our Constitution, and not to any want of Merit in particular Persons. The
YOUTH themselves (if we can imagine 'em so basely disposed) are not in a
Condition to obstruct it; and if it happens to pass, it becomes as familiar to
those who shall be born hereafter as the other parts of our Government. There
remain then no Adversaries in all probability, unless some People should envy
the happy Effects of it to their Country, which we may better judge impossible
than SOLON that no Parricide could be perpetrated in his Republic, which is
the Reason that he ordained no Punishment for this horrid Crime. The most
unthinking among us must perceive that no other Method can be so effectual to
render our Country famous, and our Government lasting. When the Young Men (of
all others the most ambitious of Glory and Honor) are once convinced that this
is the only Road to Preferment, they will timely qualify themselves, and so all
Posts will be supplied with Persons of known Experience. Whoever has read the
preceding part of this Piece, cannot mistake my Sense about the Land-Campaigns;
but as to the SEA, he that is two Summers aboard any Man of War in our ordinary
Guards, or that goes twice in any Vessel into the Baltic, Mediterranean, or
the West Indies, and once to any part of the East Indies, shall be deemed
rightly qualified. It signifies nothing whether it be in War or Peace; for the
principal Design is to acquaint 'em with the Nature of this Service so
important to our Island, and to give 'em an opportunity of seeing Foreign
Countries in order to put a true Value upon their own. When one that has thus
past a part of his time is afterward a Member of the House of Lords or
Commons, of the Admiralty or Navy, he must needs speak more pertinently, and be
less easily deceived in the usual Disputes, whether any Miscarriage is
occasioned by Treachery or Accident; he can discern the Guilt or Merit of the
Seamen; he can judge of Victualling, Maning, or otherwise fitting out our Ships;
and determine the proper Seasons for every Action far better than another that
never was at Sea unless in a Ferry-boat to Calais or the Bril. We know likewise
by the great Care the KING has taken to supply his Ships with able Masters, and
by what we may observe in the Accomplishments of several Persons who failed in
them, that there is not a properer place of learning most part of the
Mathematics, there being no doubt to be made about the particular Art of
Navigation. And to speak no more of the Marine (for to hint these things is
enough) when Gentlemen are so long debarred all their ordinary Land-Exercises,
they have an excellent opportunity of studying Geography or Astronomy, and
mastering the best part of Ancient and Modern History: for they must read
something in their own defense against Idleness, the most painful Condition in
the World; and they may keep Books as conveniently in their Cabins, as in their
Studies at home. After a considerable number are thus initiated at Sea, while
others by Land make the ordinary Tour of Holland, Germany, Italy, and France;
and that several, perhaps, have traveled both by Land and Sea, no Government
in the World can be so well supplied with Learned, Polite, and able Men to fill
all sorts of Stations. The Romans did after this manner educate their Children
from their very Cradles in the Theory and Practice of those things wherein they
were afterward to make a glorious Figure in the Service of their Country.
They, to whom the particular Inspection of the YOUTH was committed, were not
Persons retired, and strangers to Business; but Men of nice Breeding, and that
understood Mankind as well as the Liberal Arts and Sciences. They informed
their Pupils (to whom they were rather Companions than Masters) in the Duties
of grown Age, before they arrived to it; and, having no Interest to keep 'em
more ignorant than themselves, they did not waste their time by teaching 'em
any barbarous Jargon, trifling Notions, or useless Speculations, which they
must unlearn again if they would be understood, or not be counted ridiculous
when they come abroad into the World. The Young Men, says Adolescentuli statim
Castrensibus stipendiis imbuebantur, ut imperare parendo, duces agere dum
sequuntur, assuescerent: Inde Honores petituri assistebant curiae foribus, and
concilii publici spectatores, antequam consortes erant. Epist. 14. l. 8.
PLINY, were early accustomed to Arms in the Field, that they might learn by
obeying to command, and to act the part of a General while they followed one.
Aspiring likewise to Civil Dignities, they stood by the Door of the Senate
House, and were Spectators of the Public Assembly before they were Members of
it. The Young Gentlemen also used to choose to themselves Patrons of the most
eminent Persons in the City, whose great Actions they diligently observed, and
proposed not so much to imitate, as to exceed them. Every Morning they went to
their Levee, and thence accompanied them to the FORUM and other public Places,
where they patiently bore Hunger, Thirst, and all manner of Fatigue, that they
might attain to the highest pitch of Eloquence, and be thoroughly versed in
Civil Affairs. When the Business of the Day was over, they dutifully waited
home upon their Patrons, and these again on their part took abundance of care
to improve the Youth. They were as cautious to give 'em any ill Examples in
Words or Action, as to their own Children. They entertained them with the
greatest familiarity, and the general Subject of their Discourse was about
framing good Laws, and the several kinds of Government; in their own, they
taught 'em wherein consisted the Quae Vis magistratibus, quae caeteris Libertas
Id. ibid.
Magistrates Power, and the Liberty of the People; they explained the Art of
War, and read Divine Lectures concerning the Excellency of Virtue; never
forgetting to inculcate upon every occasion the Love of their Country as the
Foundation of all their future Actions at Home or Abroad: Nor did the
Conversation want facetious and pleasant Intervals to make it easier to both
sides. This was the true Source, not only of that unparalled Friendship,
Valor, Prudence, Justice, Eloquence, and Generosity wherein that bravest
People of the Universe excelled; but even the preeminence of their Historians
above all the Modern proceeds from hence: For the Young Gentlemen being so
intimately acquainted with the Actions of their Patrons, and writing down their
remarkable Sayings, or copying their most finished Compositions, they
afterward frequently mentioned or quoted them; so that all the best and
virtuous Examples became commonly known. But of this Subject I shall speak more
copiously in my BRUTUS, or THE HISTORY OF LIBERTY AND TYRANNY which I am now
digesting, with a Design, whenever finished, to publish it in BRUTUS, five
Libertatis and Tyrannidis Historia.
Latin and English. In this Work I endeavor to copy the People whereof I treat,
and will confirm my Subject with the most beautiful Passages of the Ancients,
as well as illustrate it by Modern Examples, both of the Dead and the Living.
As to the latter I shall make little mention of the worse sort, thinking to
dishonor 'em more by silencing their Names, should my History last to
Posterity, than by relating their infamous Actions; and if my Book miscarries,
they are but in obscurity still. That the number of extraordinary Men is very
small in our Age, we need not desire a clearer Demonstration than to find so
few Histories tolerably penned; for it is want of Matter, and consequently of
Encouragement, but not of Ability, which makes our Writers so much inferior to
those of past times, when CICERO himself courts to be immortalized by the Ardeo
cupiditate incredibili, neque, ut ego arbit^^^, reprehendenda, nomen ut nostrum
scriptis illustretur, and celebretur tuis. -- Neque enim me solum commemoratio
posteritatis ad spem quandam Immortalitatis rapit: sed etiam illa cupiditas, ut
vel auctoritate testimonii tui, vel indicio Benevolentiae, vel suavitate
Ingenii, vivi perfruamur. Epist. Famil. l. 5. Ep. 12.
Pen of LUCCEIUS. PLINY, who lived in the decay of the Roman Empire and
Manners, tells us what Honors were formerly conferred on those who wrote the
Histories of Governments or Great Persons: Fuit moris antiqui, eos qui vel
singulorum Lauds vel urbium scripserant, aut Honoribus aut Pecunia ornare:
nostris vero temporibus, ut alia speciosa and egregia, ita hoc in primis
exolevit. Nam postquam desiimus facere Laudanda, laudari quoque ineptum
putamus. L. 3. Ep. 21.
But in our time, says he, this Custom, as several good and excellent things,
is quite abolished; for since we left off to do commendable Actions, we think
it impertinent to be commended. This Digression (if any thing that makes for my
purpose may be so called) is intended to excite our Youth to pursue Fame by
noble and useful Performances. TULLY, whose Eloquence and Quality of a Roman
Senator made him an Advocate for Kings, disdains not to acknowledge that he
wrote the best part of his incomparable Works to reform Quod enim munus
Reipublicae afferre majus meliusne possumus, quam si docemus atque erudimus
Juventutem? his praesertim moribus atque temporibus, quibus ita prolapsa est,
ut omnium opibus refrenanda ac coercend^ sit, etc. De Divinatione l. 2. c. 2.
and instruct the Youth; which in that declining State of the Commonwealth, was
strangely corrupted. The two Years of Action which I add to their Sedentary
Studies, will not, I hope, seem tedious, if in their reading they observe that
the Romans were to serve ten times to become capable of certain Posts, seven
times for others, and four e're they could fill any place almost in the
Government.

13. Hitherto the whole Discourse related to our own DEFENSE against Invasions;
but sometimes we are obliged to transport Armies beyond the Seas, either to
ASSERT our own Rights against insolent and treacherous Enemies, or else to
ASSIST our Friends and Allies. That such Occasions may frequently happen, none
will go about to deny; yet Multitudes (I Am afraid) will dislike the Methods I
would have observed in the management of our Foreign Wars. But my Assertions are
not the less solid because some People are Cowards, and others now unaccustomed
to what their Ancestors successfully practiced heretofore: Nor ought the rest
of the Scheme, should any reject this part of it, be counted the more weak or
inconsistent. So my Eigth Proposition is, THAT THE MAIN BODY OF OUR ARMIES
ABROAD BE WHOLLY COMPOSED OF THE FREE MILITIA, THE ONE HALF TO BE ANNUALLY
RELIEVED BY SUCCESSIVE LEVIES IN THE CLASSES; AND BE ALWAYS CORROBORATED WITH A
SUFFICIENT NUMBER OF AUXILIARIES. We proved before under the First Proposition,
that FREEMEN will fight better than SERVANTS, that all Wars carried on by the
former are quickly finished, that wherever the Sword is in their Hands that
Government is free, and that they are consequently disused or discouraged from
bearing Arms by such as design to set up a Tyrannical Power. Now, all these
Reasons should prevail with us to send our MILITIA of Citizens abroad instead
of Mercenaries. The Romans in point of War are the best Example, with respect
to Success or Safety, that any Nation can imitate; and while they strictly
adhered to this Rule, they were both invincible themselves, and no People on
Earth could resist the Force of their Arms: But when their Ancient Orders were
neglected or abolished, then they became an easy Prey to all that invaded them.
Thus the Eastern Nations, tho infinitely superior in Numbers and Territories,
yet by reason of their luxurious living, and that they placed their chief
Strength in mighty Bodies of Mercenaries, they were quickly subdued by the
MILITIA of Italy; nor would the Inhabitants of that Country perform less at
this present time, were they under the same Discipline. The Gauls, Germans, and
Brittons were more valiant, it is true, than the Asiatic Nations, and better
ordered (for they were a kind of MILITIA) but they were also finally subdued
and broken by the Roman Legions. On the other hand, when the Sword was taken
from the Citizens or Freemen, and put into the Hands of Servants by the
Arbitrary Emperors who durst not trust Men of Property, the Oriental Countries
not only shook off the Roman Empire; but likewise the Lombards and Goths
invaded Italy it self; and tho not exceeding the old Gauls and Germans in
Courage or Conduct, yet they absolutely conquered the Conquerors of the World.
In short, the Romans lost their LIBERTY and PROPERTY, and with them all that
ardent LOVE to their Country, which made them so freely bleed in its Defense
before. And indeed no Man of sense ever meant any other thing by that
Inclination for one's Country, so much celebrated in the Works of Orators and
Poets, but only the good Government of it. Dimicare pro Aris and Focis was a
synonymous Expression in the mouth of a Roman, for pugnare pro Patria. Hence it
is that BRUTUS reproaching CICERO for the servile Court he made to OCTAVIUS,
speaks to him in these Terms; Videmur ergo tibi Salutem accepturi, cum vitam
acceperimus? Quam, si prius dimittimus Dignitatem and Libertatem, qui possumus
accipere? An tu Romae habitare, id putas incolumem esse? Res non Locus oportet
praestet istuc mihi? Lib. ad Brut. Ep. 16.
Do you believe then, says he, that we receive Security when our Lives are
spared? Or how can we accept of the latter, if first we must part with our
Liberty and Dignity? Do you think that to be safe, it is enough to live at
Rome? The Thing and not the Place can only put me in that condition. And
afterward he adds, -- Aut long a servientibus abero, mihique esse judicabo
Romam, ubicunque liberum esse licebit. Id. ibid.
Either I shall reduce those to their Duty who oppress their Country, or remove
to a great distance from you that are willing to be Slaves, and, wherever I may
be free, there think my self in Rome. We likewise are taught to love our
Country above all others, valuing our selves every moment upon being ENGLISH
MEN; and that most deservedly, for we cannot speak too magnificently of our
Felicity. But we never mean our Soil or Climate, seeing these are much excelled
by several others in the World; therefore it must be our Government that makes
the Scale heavier on our side. A partial Affection to the Land where we first
drew our Breath, abstracted from other Considerations, is but a childish
Prejudice, not less ridiculous than that of some elder Persons, who think it an
extraordinary Blessing to be laid in the same Graves with their Relations. The
Romans then were always possessed with a hearty Kindness for their Country; and
being earnestly desirous of returning to it in Peace, as well as certain of
receiving the Rewards and Applause due to their Merit, they performed Wonders
abroad. The Reason why no other People did as much is, because the Government
of no other Place was so well constituted. Here was no difference between the
Citizen and the Statesman, between the Husbandman and the Soldier; whence the
Minds of the Inhabitants were enlarged to that degree, that they became capable
of designing and effecting every thing. Their KNOWLEDGE and POLITENESS made them
sensible of the Excellency of their Constitution, which still increased their
Fondness of it, and rendered 'em so valiant to preserve it. Their City and
Territory were divided into several TRIBES, not unlike our Counties, and their
Assemblies called COMITIA TRIBUTA. Their People again were distributed into six
Classes, besides the lesser Divisions of Centuries, and Curiae or Parishes.
Now, their MILITIA going always abroad by Rotation out of the Tribes and
Colonies, together not seldom with their Allies, whenever they were beaten (as
in the dubious Events of War it must happen sometimes) they were immediately
repaired; and so one Army constantly sent after another, which could not fail
where the People were all disciplined, till no Force whatsoever was able to
stand before them. But when a Mercenary Army is once routed and dispersed, then
all is irrecoverably lost, because that either you cannot presently take the
Field again, or you only oppose the Enemy with undisciplined Multitudes. Now we
may easily conceive why a MILITIA of Freemen are for venturing a Battle
whenever they are favored with an Opportunity of doing it, whereas MERCENARIES
are observed to decline fighting as much as they can; for, to speak nothing of
what we said before concerning their different Dispositions, the first are sure
of making good their Losses by a Rotation of their Fellows, and the latter wait
for Advantages, because the Loss of one Battle is often enough to ruin them.
From all that is premised, I think I may conclude, that to make successive
Levies of our own FREE MILITIA out of the several Parts of England, and
corroborated with some AUXILIARY REGIMENTS, is the best Method of waging the
Wars abroad, whether we design to bring 'em to a speedy Period, or to spread
wider the Terror of our Fame and Arms. The Names of all Persons capable of
Military Duties in every County must be carefully registr'd to facilitate the
Rotation, as was done in the Roman Tribes, where every Man was sworn (both in
regard of the Charge and Service) to conceal neither the Name, Age, Condition,
or Quality of any in his Family, that every one, who was able, might by his
Purse or Person contribute to the Public Good. The Regiments may likewise be
denominated from the Countries or Places that send them, which will create an
Emulation in the several Parts of the Kingdom to outdo each other's Actions.
They will be as eager sometimes for regaining the Honor which one lost, as
fearful to lose what the other won. Thus Men of ARTS and ARMS will be the very
same Species among us, whereas now they are extremely different in most Parts
of the World; for the former are generally Cowards, and the latter barbarous
and rude. From all these Considerations, I cannot be persuaded that any Man of
Property will refuse to go in his turn (which can seldom happen) on foreign
Service. If he hires a mean Person to supply his Place, this is raising a
Mercenary Army, whereby he makes his Man become his Master. And how little
soever FREEMEN think of the matter, while such Creatures are out of the
Kingdom, yet they will find 'em wonderful troublesome on their Return, should there
be no other Difficulty but that single one of disbanding 'em. It Is strange what
a Confusion very small Numbers of 'em produce in a Country, as has been
abundantly demonstrated by the Ingenious Author of the unanswerable Argument
against a Standing Army. The few Soldiers that returned in King CHARLES the
First's time from an unsuccessful Voyage to Cadiz, were not presently disbanded
as they ought to have been, but quartered up and down in several Parts of the
Kingdom: And a Great Person, who was an Eyewitness tells us, That these
Rushworth 's Collect. Vol. I. p. 420.
Soldiers broke out into great Disorders; they MASTERED the People, disturbed
the Peace of Families, and the Civil Government of the Land; there were
frequent Robberies, Burglaries, Rapes, Rapines, Murders, and barbarous
Cruelties; unto some PLACES they were sent as a PUNISHMENT; and wherever they
came, there was a general Outcry. The Highways were dangerous, and the Markets
unfrequented; they were a Terror to all, and undoing to many. I said before,
that every Roman Freeman was obliged to bear Arms (if need were) twenty times
from the seventeenth to the six and fortieth Year of his Age; that they were
excused from Duty after fifty; and that in case of extraordinary Necessity the
old Soldiers might be compelled if they did not give in their Names when
desired, but that they did for the most part voluntarily offer their Service to
their Country. This whole matter, with several other admirable Effects of their
Discipline, is represented to the life in the Speech of a Farmer to LICINIUS a
Roman General. When the War was declared against PERSEUS King of Macedonia,
several Veterans were listed and came in freely; but some of 'em were
displeased, that they should be placed in any lower Order than they had
formerly possessed. This occasioning a Difference between the Consuls and the
Tribunes of the People, out steps the Countryman, and bespeaks the Assembly in
the following manner: Spurius Ligustinus tribus Crustuminae ex Sabinis sum
oriundus, Quirites. Pater mihi jugerum agri reliquit, and parvum tugurium in
quo natus educatusque sum; hodieque ibi habito. Quum primum in a tarem veni,
pater mihi uxorem fratris sui filiam dedit: quae secum nihil attulit praeter
libertatem pudicitiamque, and cum his foecunditatem, quanta vel in diti domo
satis esset. Sex silii nobis, duae filiae sunt; utraeque jam nuptae. Filii
quatuor togas viriles habent, duo praetextati sunt. Miles sum factus, P.
Sulpitio, C. Aurelio Consulibus. In eo exercitu qui in Macedoniam est
transportatus, biennium miles gregarius fui adversus Philippum regem: tertio
anno virtutis causa mihi T. Quintius Flaminius decumum ordinem hastatum
assignavit. Devicto Philippo Macedonibusque, quum in Italiam portati ac dimissi
essemus, continuo Miles voluntarius cum M. Portio Consule in Hispaniam sum
profectus. Neminem omnium Imperatorum, qui vivant, acriorem virtutis
spectatorem ac judicem suisse sciunt, qui and illum and alios duces longa
militia experti sunt. Hic me Imperator dignum judicavit cui primum hastatum
prioris centuriae assignaret. Tertio iterum voluntarius miles factus sum in eum
exercitum, qui adversus Aetolos and Antiochum regem est missus. A Man. Acilio
mihi primus princeps prioris centuriae est assignatus. Expulso rege Antiocho,
subactis Aetolis, reportati sumus in Italiam: and deinceps bis, quae annua
merebant legiones, stipendia feci. Bis deinde in Hispania militavi, semel Q.
Fulvio Flacco, iterum Ti. Sempronio Graccho Praetore. A Flacco inter caeteros,
quos virtutis causa secum ex provincia ad triumphum deducebat, deductus sum. A
Ti. Graccho rogarus, in provinciam i^* Quater intra paucos annos primum pilum
duxi: quater and tricies virtutis causa donatus ab Imperatoribus sum: sex
civicas coronas accepi: viginti duo stipendia annua in exercitu emerita habeo:
and major annis sum quinquaginta. Quod si mihi nec stipendia omnia emerita
essent, nec dum aetas vacationem daret, tamen quum quatuor milites pro me uno
vobis dare, P. Licini, possem, aequum erat me dimitti. Sed haec pro causa mea
dicta accipiatis velim: ipse me, quoad quisquam qui exercitus scribit, idoneum
militem judicabit, nunquam sum excusaturus. Ordinem quo me dignum judicent
Tribuni militum, ipsorum est potestatis: ne quis me virtute in exercitu
praestet, dabo operam; ut semper ita fecisse me, and Imperatores mei, and qui
una stipendia fecerunt, testes sunt. Vos quoque aquum est, Commilitones, etsi
appellationis vobis usurpatis jus, quum adolescentes nihil adversus Magistratum
Senatusque autoritatem usquam feceritis, nunc quoque in potestate Senatus ac
Consulum esse, and omnia honesta loca ducere, quibus Rempublicam defensuri
sitis. Livius l. 42. c. 34.
I am SPURIUS LIGUSTINUS, O ROMANS, of the Crustumin Tribe, and originally a
Sabin. My Father left me a little spot of Land, with a small House, in which I
was born and bred, and I dwell there at this time. As soon as I was of Age, he
gave me in Marriage his own Brother's Daughter, who, excepting her Chastity,
and that she was freeborn, brought me no other Dowry; yet fruitful enough to
supply a richer Family. We have six Sons and two Daughters, the latter both
married. Of our Sons four are grown Men, and the other two yet Striplings. I
first bore Arms in the Consulship of PUBLIUS SULPITIUS, and CAIUS AURELIUS. I
was two Years a private Soldier in that Army which was transported into
Macedonia against King PHILIP: The third Year FLAMINIVS, in regard of my Merit
assigned me the tenth Division of the Spearmen. PHILIP and the Macedonians
being conquered, when we were brought back into Italy and disbanded, I went
immediately a Voluntier under MARCUS PORTIUS the Consul into Spain. That of all
Generals living, he was the most nice Considerer and Judge of Merit, is known to
every one who has been any considerable time in the Field under him or other
Commanders: Now, he thought me worthy to preside over the first Order of the
first Century of the Spearmen. I went the third time a Voluntier in that Army
which was sent against the Etolians and King ANTIOCHUS, when MANLIUS ACILIUS
created me first Commander of the first Century. But ANTIOCHUS being expelled,
and the Etolians reduced, we returned into Italy, and there I served two of
those Campagns to which the Legions are annually obliged. Afterward I was
twice a Soldier in Spain; once under the Praetor QUINTUS FULVIUS FLACCUS, and
again under TIBERIUS SEMPRONIUS GRACCHUS. I was brought home by FLACCUS among
the rest of those whom he had chosen for their Courage to grace his Triumph;
and returned back into that Province at the request of TIBERIUS GRACCHUS. I was
Captain of the first Company of the Regiment four times within the space of a
few Years: I was by my Generals rewarded four and thirty times for my Valor: I
received six Civic Crowns for saving the Lives of so many Citizens: I have
taken Pay, in a word, two and twenty times in the Army, and am now above fifty
Years old. But if I had not completed the Number appointed by Law, nor were to
be excused from Duty by reason of my Age; yet since in my own room I could give
you, LICINIUS, four Soldiers, it were just I should be discharged. But I would
have all this understood only of the goodness of my Cause, were I disposed to
plead it; for as long as any General judges me an able Soldier, I shall never
excuse my self. What Post the Tribunes will assign me, lies in their own
breasts. And, that none in the Army exceed me in Courage, shall be my
endeavor: for, that it has been always so, my superior Officers, and such as
served along with me, are witnesses. Now although, Fellow Soldiers, you claim to
your selves the right of Appeal; yet since during the whole course of your
Youth you never did any thing against the Authority of the Senate or
Magistrates, it is fit that you now also pay Obedience to the Senate and
Consuls, esteeming all those Posts to be honorable, wherein you have an
opportunity of defending your Country. Having thus harangu'd, the Consul, after
commending him with many words, led him out of the Assembly into the Senate,
where he received the Thanks of the House; and he was by the Military Tribunes
preferred according to his desert: whereupon the other Centurions quitted their
Appeal, and readily compli'd with the pleasure of their Superiors.

14. All Men would live somewhere eternally if they could, and they affect to
become Immortal even here on Earth. To have their Names perpetuated, was the
true Spring of several great Men's Actions; and for that only end, have they
patiently undergon all manner of Toil and Danger. But this Inclination never
discovers it self so plainly, as in the care Men take of their Posterity. Some
are content to live Beggars all their Days, that their Children after them may
be rich: for they look upon these as their own Persons multiplied by
Propagation; whence such as had none themselves, adopted the Children of others
to bear their Names. The Legislator of the Israelites, as well as he of Sparta,
had a peculiar regard to this natural Desire, which in no Country must be
neglected for Reasons upon which I need not insist at this time: Wherefore the
Ninth Proposition is, THAT NO MAN BE OBLIGED TO GO UPON ANY FOREIGN EXPEDITION
DURING ONE YEAR AFTER HIS MARRIAGE; NOR ALL THE SONS OF ANY MAN AT ONCE; NOR AN
ONLY SON EVER, UNLESS HE IS WILLING HIMSELF. The Design of this Proposition is
made so plain already, that, without more to do, I may pass to the Tenth and
last of our Scheme, which is, THAT ALL LEVIES PERMITTED TO FOREIGN STATES IN
THIS KINGDOM, OR ANY FORCES LENT TO THEM, DO ENTIRELY CONSIST OF AUXILIARIES;
AND THAT NO FREEMAN HAVE LEAVE TO SERVE ABROAD UNLESS AS A VOLUNTIER TO QUALIFY
HIMSELF FOR IMPLOIMENT AT HOME. The Reasonableness of this Proposition is
likewise so evident from what went before, that it wants no larger Commentary.
I could add here several other Particulars, but they will come to be established
of course, if this SCHEME prevails wholly, or for the best part. I shall
therefore write nothing now concerning the Methods of Listing or Disbanding, of
Paying or Clothing, nor of Rewards or Punishments; tho with respect to the
last, I cannot omit one pleasant Passage: for the Romans among diverse kinds of
Penalties, such as Fine or Imprisonment, used upon certain Occasions to Fuit
haec quoque antiquitus militaris animadversio, jubere ignominiae causa militi
venam solvi et sanguinem dimitti; -- ut non tam poena quam medicina videretur.
A. Gellius, l. 10. c. 8.
let a Soldier Blood, as if it had been Madness or Folly in him to commit such
Faults, and that he wanted Physic more than Correction.

15. If this Scheme of Reforming the MILITIA be so intelligible and coherent,
as I flatter my self it may, it would be a superfluous Labor, and no Complement
upon the Reader's Sagacity, to remark distinctly all the good Effects and
Consequences of it. Yet one I find convenient to mention, not that I think it
less obvious than the rest, for it appears most evident at first sight; but
because some Gentlemen are pleased to oppose it, and it is that I am for ARMING
ALL THE PEOPLE. Now this is, in my Opinion, so useful and necessary, that,
should we obtain nothing, besides, it were well worth our while to procure an
Act for this alone: For what can better demonstrate the Confidence his Majesty
places in the unquestionable Affection of his Subjects, or more increase and
confirm the Veneration on these have for him, than that he puts 'em in a
Condition of defending themselves against all his and their Enemies, without
needing or expecting the Assistance of others? But notwithstanding I took all
possible care to be duly informed, I could never hear any weighty Objection
made to this Proposition, tho two are commonly offered, and the first of 'em
is, that there will be no end of Robberies, and House-breakings in the Country,
if the common People be once armed. I perceive these Gentlemen design to be
popular, and the Vulgar are hugely obliged to 'em for their good Opinion. But
supposing the worst, Robberies will be so far from being more frequent than at
this time, that this is the only right Method of totally suppressing all such
Disorders. It is an ordinary thing for two or three Fellows to commit a Robbery
in sight of twenty People, stronger and stouter than themselves, but that are
either without Arms, or know not how to use 'em; whereas, upon the foot of our
MODEL, when any House or Persons are known to be attacked, they are not only
provided for their own Defense, but the Neighbors are all ready to come in to
their Assistance, both with Arms in their hands, and as able to handle 'em as
House-breakers can be supposed to do. But if the objecting Gentlemen have any
meaning, it is that Rogues only should have Arms, and honest Men none to oppose
them: For when any are disposed to violate the Laws, they always take care to
arm themselves without any deference to Public Authority; nor do we find that
Thieves ever want Weapons, notwithstanding any Prohibitions to the contrary,
which they no more regard than they do those which forbid 'em to steal. But
good Men, on the contrary, will yield Obedience to the Laws; and so be exposed,
if thus left naked and unarmed, to the Insults and Assaults of the most
determined Villains. The next Objection is, That if the People be armed,
there is an end of all the GAME in the Kingdom. Now supposing this were true, I
think of the two we should sooner expose a few Birds to the People, than the
People to the French or other Enemies. But indeed the GAME is in no danger.
Deer, for example, might be destroyed with Bows and Arrows, no less than with
Guns; yet in old times Englishmen were not disarmed, but restrained from
shooting Deer only by Laws, which may be accommodated to Guns as well as to
Bows. Hare, Partridg and Pheasant are the principal GAME for Gentlemen's
diversion; and every one knows that these are more conveniently and frequently
destroyed by Nets, Hounds, Setting-dogs, and other Methods, than by shooting.
Severe Penalties, which those concerned will be sure to see inflicted, will
prevent any thing of this nature; and I hope we will never see the Nation disarmed
a second time, under pretense of preserving the GAME. But, perhaps, it will be
said, that although FREEMEN may be trusted with Arms, there will be danger from
the Poor and Servile. This Objection was sufficiently answered in the Discourse
subjoined to the Second Proposition; and besides I may add, if that will
satisfy, that Servants are not armed according to this Scheme, but only
disciplined against a time of Necessity. I supposed before an Armory in every
Parish, out of which on the days of Exercise only the Poor and Servants are
furnished. And here I would not forget to hint that all such Arms provided at
the Parochial Charge should be tried and approved at the Tower of London,
without any Liberty lest to the Overseers to purchase others for this end, and
that they be likewise all distinguished by the Parish Mark. I had several
Opportunities in this Discourse to show the Defects of the Act now in force for
regulating the MILITIA, and my last Remark upon it shall be, that the Isles of
Wight and Purbeck are left to 14 Car. 2. cap. 3. 22, 30, 31.
train their People as formerly. The Tower-Hamlets likewise having been always
(as it is said in the Act) under the Command of his Majesty's Constable or
Lieutenant of the Tower for the Service and Preservation of that Fort, are
permitted to be disciplined in such manner and form as heretofore. The Reason
of this Clause is very plain; for those two Islands lying so much exposed to
foreign Invasions, it was fit they should be extraordinarily well provided for
Defense. And so the Tower-Hamlets, because they were to keep Guard in the
Tower, and might from thence distress the City, tho, lest they might not prove
so unkind to their Neighbors, they were neglected as the rest, and exercised
according to the Act: but the other Parts of the Kingdom being most likely to
disrelish the Measures of the COURT, were industriously made incapable of
Resistance. And that this Suspicion may not seem ill grounded or malicious, I
would fain know which was the best Model of training the MILITIA, the New or
the Old? if the former, why should the Benefit of it be denied to those Places
that stood most in need of it? and if the latter, why ought not the whole
Nation to be as sufficiently trained as one or two Islands? But all Persons own
that Guernsey and Iersey, Wight and Purbeck, are equal in their Discipline to
any Standing Forces. But of this enough; nor can I allow my self to question
but all Parties will now unanimously join to render the MILITIA useful for the
King's and our common Preservation: for that a Standing Army or a Militia is of
absolute Necessity, is agreed on every side; but the Army is ordered to be
disbanded, and should those who were for continuing it now oppose the
regulating of the Militia, they give us a Demonstration that either they never
thought us in so great Danger as they pretended, or that they would have us
entirely lost, because we refused to be saved after their Method, tho our own
be more effectual and less expensive. I should now conclude, seeing no
Objection remains against arming the whole Free People of England; but I must
first take notice, that our Ancestors in Germany did in the time of the Roman
Empire practice the very same thing, and that they always came armed to their
Public Assemblies. Nihil autem neque publicae neque privatae rei, nisi armati
agunt. Sed Arma sumere non ante cuiquam moris, quam Civitas suffecturum
probaverit* Tum in ipso coneilio vel principum aliquis, vel pater, vel
propinquus Scuto Frameaque juvenem ornant. Haec apud illos Toga, hic primus
juventae honos: ante hoc domus pars videntur, mox Reipublicae. De moribus
German. cap. 13.
The Germans transact no public or private Affairs, says TACITUS, but under
their Arms; yet is it not usual for any to carry Arms till the Community first
allows him to be capable. Then some principal Person in the Assembly, or the
young Man's own Father, or one of his Relations, gives him a Shield and Spear.
This is their Ceremony of declaring them to be of Age, and this is the first
Honor conferred on Youth. They were considered only as belonging to a private
Family before, but as a part of the Public ever after. That this was our own
Original Constitution in the Saxon time, none can be ignorant who is never so
little versed in our ancient Customs and Writings. But we read particularly in
King EDWARD's Laws, that upon a Day and Place appointed, all that owed Suit and
Service to any Hundred came to meet their new Governor, who stuck his Lance in
the Earth, and then took Fealty of them, which they performed by touching the
Governor's Lance with their own (as the Germans used to give their Assent by
clattering their Arms) whence the whole Place or Meeting was then, as it is now
in some of the Northern Parts of England, called a Wapentake, from the touching
of their Weapons.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. line 24. read keep it. In the Margin, P. 29. l. 2. r. 14 Car. 2. cap.
3.. 21. P. 41. L. 28. for sixty r. twenty. P. 58. l. 11. dele is.


