TO The Supreme Authority of the NATION, The PARLIAMENT of the Commonwealth of
ENGLAND, etc. THE HUMBLE PETITION And RECANTATION Of many Dis-satisfied
Persons, commonly known by the Name of ANABAPTISTS.
In all Humility Shows,
THat your Petitioners cannot but acknowledge themselves a seduced and misled
People, who through the Temptations of Satan, and his Grand Instruments Sir
Harry Vane and the Lord Lambert, have chose unto themselves new paths to walk
in, and have gone astray from the good Old Road of Submission and Obedience,
and have rackt their Consciences upon the Tenter-hooks of my Lord Fleetwoods
Valor: That the aforesaid Hectors having lost their design, have left us a
wretched and confused Multitude, And having not the fear of God before our
eyes, we did attempt to disturb the peace of this Commonwealth, and in order
thereunto, we do confess we did provide Arms and Ammunition for the private
Seizing and Securing the Honorable City of London, and likewise of your
Honors, with a Resolved intent (according to our old received Principles) to
overturn the Seat of Magistracy, and invade the Ministerial Function with the
profundity of our own conceited Doctrine, (invented by John of Leyden) and to
lay wast their dwelling places and to level their Churches with the Ground.

Now forasmuch as we have failed in these our Damned Plots and Contrivances,
and that we find no blessing to attend unrighteous Actions; and whereas since
our leaving off our Colemanstreet Divinity, and praying Blindfold for the
Prosperity of what we desired, we find that we have no answer either by our
Urim and Thummim, or Enthusiasm, which is our wonted way of our receiving
answers to what we ask; but Confusion has overtaken our intents, and we are
now left to your Honors Mercy and Indulgence, without which we can neither
think our selves safe, nor reckon our Lives for our own.

We therefore most humbly implore your Honors, (after your consideration what
useful Members We have been to this Nation:)

1. That the persons taken in this our Defection may be tried for their
Censpiracy by a Jury of Twelve men, the Hangman being Foreman; the favor of
whose Function we question nos but we shall receive.

2. That Capt. Kiffin (that sweet PREACHER upon Solomon's Canticles) may have
liberty to make his Recantation in his own Synagogue near Tower-street; and
that H. Hills may assist him in the Work, out of his elaborate piece of
Repentance for Adultery, Entitled, The Prodigal son returned to his Fathers
house.

3. That the steel-Swords and Knives taken from your Petitioners may be
converted into Plow-shares and Pruning-books, thereby to induce the Country to
pardon our past-offences; and that such Conversion may be made at your
Petitioners proper Costs and Charges.

4. That We have liberty granted by your Honors to persevere in our Religious
dispensations; we being willing to give ample security for our future good
behavior; as likewise to pray for the New Representative, as we have done for
you.

5. That an Act of Indemnity may pass for such of us as your Honors think,
good to have hanged: And that Patience, our Orthodox preaching Tailor, may
accompany them to the place of Execution.

6. That the Trained Bands of London may be discharged their Duty of Watching
and Warding, We being now both ready and willing to render Obedience to your
Commands, We having now tried all things, desire to hold fast that which is
good.

These our humble Requests being granted, Your Petitioners shall daily Pray,
etc.
LONDON, Printed for James Johnson. 1660.


