THE Inconveniences of Toleration,

OR AN ANSWER To a late Book, Entitled, A PROPOSITION Made to the KING AND
PARLIAMENT FOR THE SAFETY and HAPPINESS OF THE KING and KINGDOM.

In those days there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was
right in his own eyes. JUDGE. 17. 6. London, Printed for W. Garret. 1667.

Inconveniences of TOLERATION, etc.
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE is a Thing which has often made a very Great Noise in
the World; and is at the first View, a thing highly plausible; but although it
looks hugely pretty in the Notion: yet it was always found strangely Wild and
Unmanageable when ever it came to be handled by Experience; and we shall
constantly find, That those which cried it up for the most Reasonable Thing in
the world, when Themselves stood in need of it, as soon as ever They came in
Power, would never endure to hear of it any longer. They who plead for it for
Themselves, do not use to allow it to others; it has always been so unlucky,
as soon as ever it has succeeded, to be laid aside.

Now Liberty of Conscience is either Absolute, and Universal, or Limited and
Restrained: if Universal and Absolute, it lays us open to all the folly and
phrenzy imaginable, to all those Heresies which the Scripture calls Damnable,
and is a public Invitation to all sorts of strong Delusions, and the believing
of Lies, which St. Paul cautions us so much against, 2 These. 2. 10, 11. And in
Rev. 2. 14. 15. the Church of Pergamus is charged not with holding Errors Her
Self, but tolerating Them in Others. Her guilt was, That She had among Her,
Those who held the Doctrine of Balaam and the Nicolaitans.

But if it be Limited and Restrained: Then it is no longer Liberty of
Conscience; but there is a clear Confession, That Conscience is not so Sacred a
Thing, but it ought to have Limits and Restraints set upon it. If it be asked,
Will you force men to go against their Consciences? I answer, That Consciences
may be such, that men ought not to be suffered to act according to them. The
Scripture tells us of Seared Consciences, Reprobate Minds; and Those whose very
Mind and Conscience is defiled; So that Conscience alone is no sufficient
Justification; Conscience has its Rule, may swerve, and ought very well to be
looked to. I know that no man ought to act against his Mind or Persuasion; But
I know withal, That there ought great care to be taken, what Minds and
Persuasions men are of. Thus much I thought fit to premize, Because that the
Cause is thought sufficiently pleaded, as soon as ever it can be alleged, This
is our Conscience: For it may be your Conscience and your Crime too.

THe First Thing which I shall observe in this Treatise, which pretends to so
much Peace, Good Will and Moderation, is the Time of its coming out, and that
was the Time of an Invasion: Was this a Time to rip up and aggravate
Discontents at Home, when we were set upon with a Powerful Enemy from abroad?
Who but a Dutch man would have gone about to have affrighted the Credulous
Vulgar, with this Canting Dismal Strain? p. 86. There are I perceive many Fears
and Hopes upon the Minds of People, and the Presages of their Hearts are many:
I know not whether there be any dark notices from some Spirits that preside
over us, of some great Events, sometimes when they are near us: But methinks
the Minds of some have of late aboaded some very GREAT EVIL, or Great Good not
to be far from us, etc. He who at such a time, Proclaims the Fears of the
Nation, Intended sure to make them fear much more: This way of divulging such
Melancholy Omens, could have no end, but to dishearten our People, or to
inflame them. I could not, me thoughts, pass by this Observation; because it
was one Sad Instance, That the Puritan Spirit has not at all altered his old
way of Acting; For so did their Forefathers in 88 try how far they could
terrify the State at that Time, because it was a Time of great Danger.

Ut externo bello, ita etiam interno Schismate hoc tempore laboravit Anglia
(schismatica enim pravitas semper bello ardente maxim luxuriat) Nec certe
contumax in Ecclesiasticos magistratus impudentia, and contun elio sa
improbitas insolentius alias se exercuit. Camb. Eliz. p. 497.
England at this Time did labor not only with a War Abroad, but with Schism
at Home: For Schismatical Pravity never fails to add a New Combustion to the
heat of War; The Contumacy, Impudence, and Contumelies of these Men did never
show it self with greater Insolence. Cambd. Eliz. p. 497. in Editione Land.
MDCXV.

They persumed upon the necessities of the State; then they thought they might
propose and rail at pleasure, because the Queens Hands were sufficiently full
of other business; Then came out Mar-prelate, Diotrephes, the Demonstration,
etc. Thus they use their Native Country as Simeon and Levi did the Sichemites,
as soon as they were sore, then not fail to fall upon Them. If ever the State
lies under a Disadvantage, These will not fail to help on the Disturbance.

But from the time of the Publication, proceed we to the Book it self* The
First Thing we find Observable is p. 9, 10, 11.

THere is a company of People about Us in the Country, etc. The most of them
are certainly Inoffensive Persons, and there is no more against Them, than
Pliny had against the Christians; that They meet and Preach and Pray together,
etc.

How harmless, or Inoffensive They may seem to You, we know not: But This, nor
our Neighbor Nation, has not found Them to be such Tame and Modest Things:
The Time has been Known, when They could devour Widows Houses, as well as for
a pretense make long Prayers.

Our Charity prompts us to hope, that there are amongst This Sect several good
and well meaning People, and such which of themselves would be very harmless
and inoffensive; yet, Law makers ought to consider not only what People are, or
would be of Themselves, but what use others are like to make of them: It is no
News for Men to be made the Instruments of a Design, and yet to know nothing of
it; to be the great Engines of such businesses, which had they seen thorough
Them, They would have dyed, rather than to have any thing to do with: We are
therefore not only to consider the People who meet there, but who they are,
which have the Managing of such Meetings; as suppose now that the separated
Congregations should think those men the fittest to be Their Guides, who led
them on to the late War* That the chief speakers there should be the Abetters
and Applauders of the Murder of the King. And these amongst Them who are of
their own Nature the most harmless and Inoffensive, are the most likely there
to be imposed upon: It is therefore the greatest Kindness of Government toward
such Innocent Men, not to permit the Subtle and Malicious, to make a Prey of
Them, and abuse their Credulity to be the Instrument of Their Teachers
Contrivances. And whereas it is here said, that They Meet only to Preach and
Pray together: It ought to be considered that we could repeat strange Things,
which have been said in Prayers and Sermons; neither are we sure that They meet
only to do that: we Know, that there may be, and do verily believe, that there
is a quite other use of such Assemblies, viz. To Form and to Know a Party, to
Communicate Intelligence and Discontents, to have a Plausible and Unperceivable
way of scattering abroad among the whole Nation, all sorts of little and
Malicious stories. There is no such Dangerous way of Libelling, as that which
is vulgarly called a good Gift in Prayer.

THe next Thing observable is p. 13. I wonder really in whose shops. They have
bought their Spectacles, that They can see this great Thing Unity of Folks
Spirits, in Uniformity, etc.

Surely Uniformity does of all Things in the World look most like to Unity: And
St. Paul recommends it to us upon this very score; That we all speak the same
things, being with Him a very great Evidence, That there are no Divisions
amongst Us. But because the The credit of these Glasses wherein we persuade our
selves, That we see clearly Unity in Uniformity, does it seems depend very much
upon the Shop they came out of: We shall gratify our Author so far, as to let
Him Know whence we had Them; and to go no further, We were Advised, in the
making and using of this sort of Glasses by one who we are sure, will not be
denied to be a most Skilful Workman in such like Affairs; even the
Non-conformists entirely beloved Mr. Calvin in his Epist. ad Protectorem
Angliae, where we have Him expressing his judgment clearly and fully for
Uniformity in all its Parts, and utmost Extent of it. "It is Expedit quidem
prospicere desultoriis ingeniis quae sibi ^imium licere volune, claudenda est
etiam janua curiosis doctrinis.
fit (says he) to take great heed of the desultory wits, i. e. The light giddy
heady People, who desire for themselves too boundless a Liberty; the Gate is
also to be shut against curious, i. e. new fangled Doctrines.

But How is this, think You, to be done, by Liberty of Conscience? no, b Ratio
autem expedita ad eam^em una est, Si exict summa quaedam doctrinae ab omnibus
recepta, quam inter praedicandum sequantur omnes, ad quam etiam observandam
Omnes Episcopi and Parochi jurejurando astringantur, ut nemo ad munus
Ecclesiasticum admittatur, nisi spondeat sibi illum doctrinae Consensum
inviola^um futuram.
but by a more sober way. And for This, there is but one ready and assured way:
If there be some one Form of Doctrine received of all, which in their Preaching
all should follow, to which also all the Bishops and the Parish Priests should
by Oath be bound; and that no man should be admitted to any Ecclesiastical
Benefice, unless he promised that That consent of Doctrine should be to him
Inviolable.

Here we have Him clear and express, full and home for Uniformity so far as
Doctrine reaches. But Secondly, He is as clear for Uniformity in Prayers, and
the Rites and Ceremonies thereof.

As to the Form of Prayers and Rites Ecclesiastical, I do very much Quod ad
formulam Precum and Rituum Ecclesiast icorum, valde probo ut Certae illa extet
a qua Pastoribus Discedere in functione sua Non Liceat, tum ut consulaetur
quorundam simplicitati and inertia, Tum ut certo constet Omnium Ecclesiarum
inter se Consensus, Postremo etiam ut obviam eatur desultoriae quorundam
levitati qui novationes quasdam affectant, p. 68, 69, etc.
approve, that there be one certain One, partly to provide against the
simplicity and idleness of some, and partly to Demonstrate the agreement of our
Churches between themselves, and Lastly to provide against the desultory Levity
of those men who are always affecting Novelties. The Second of these Reasons
comes home to what our Author makes such a Wonder of, viz. That Uniformity is a
great Degree and Evidence of our Unity: And we are told a little before in the
same Epistle that there are a sort of seditious People in England, which all
Authority is highly concerned to provide against, and He Describes them Thus,
There are (says he) some Brainsick People in England, who Cerebro si quidam
qui sub Evangelii nomine (...) passim invectam vellent. Uliore gladio coerceri,
etc.
under the pretense of the Gospel, bring in all sorts of disorder. And his
sentence is very Peremptory concerning them; that They ought, To be restrained
by the Avenging Sword.

Now who these People are, who are complained of, as the destroyers of all
order, is not surely hard to be conceived: They are the Destroyers of all
order, who refuse to be under any, who will own the obligation of no Law (as to
these Externals wherein order alone can have any place) but take it very ill;
that they are not left wholly and altogether to their own Humor and
Capriciousness, or what ever else it is possible for them to mistake for, or to
pretend to be their Conscience. And now if we think that Uniformity looks like
Unity, we hope the Glasses which we see this thorough, will be no longer
derided, when we consider in whose shops we found them exposed to our open
view, and we our selves were particularly called upon by the chief Artificer,
to make use of Them for this very particular purpose and occasion.

But that Uniformity is a Thing highly to be desired, and by all possible means
to be endeavored after and procured, Is a Thing which I suppose will not be
denied by that Party which is here chiefly pleaded for; Because that they have
with Hands lifted up to Heaven, sworn Themselves, and not only so, but with all
manner of Art and Violence, did persuade and force every one they had Interest
in, or Power over, to Swear with them; That they would endeavor to bring the
Churches of God in the Three Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and
UNIFORMITY in Religion, Confession of Faith, Form of ChurchGovernment,
Directory for Worship and Catechizing. See the First Article of the Covenant.

We have One Argument more for Uniformity, and that is, The Horrible Divisions
which we have seen to arise for the want of it; and here we appeal to the Sober
Part of our Adversaries, who when time was, made great Complaints of this very
Thing, the sight of the hideous Heresies, Schisms and Scandals, which did
immediately arise among Themselves, did make them cry out mightily to their
Rulers for a Law, to set bounds to the Consciences of their own Brethren.
Liberty of Conscience is so wild a Spirit, as no Circle will keep in order: And
to speak the Truth, it is a Contradiction to own that pretense, and then to
offer to set any Bounds unto it.

But to draw toward a Conclusion of this Argument, we do verily believe, That
Uniformity if it were carefully maintained, and diligently looked after, would
in a few years recall our Ancient Unity; The People would quickly forget all
these Fantasies, if it were not for these small Levites which are perpetually
buzzing them into their ears; We should quickly see, that the People would come
to the Churches, if there were not so many Conventicles to keep them thence;
and if they were but used for a little while to come thither, they would not
find the Liturgy to be such a fearful Idol, as they have been often told of:
And I durst confidently say, That if a Trial were made in any gathered Church
about the Town, and many of our Prayers were there repeated memoriter, that
that man would be accounted one of great Gifts that could pray so sweetly: It
is nothing but unacquaintedness which makes them liable to be so scared, with
all those terrible and groundless Stories. And I here durst boldly appeal to
Thousands, who have since the Kings Return, gone once or twice to hear the
Common Prayer out of Curiosity, and have gone ever after out of Conscience; and
have much wondered at and despised their own credulity, in that they were ever
brought to entertain such hard jealousies of so harmless a Thing.

BUt we are told in the next place, That to make Laws in Religious Matters
especially, (and by the same Rule in every thing else) is a thing, to say no
more, perfectly insignificant and absolutely useless, For, It is a Principle of
a serious tender Christian, that he would not do any thing for fear, which he
would not out of Conscience, i. e. As these words must signify in this place,
he will do no more for the sake of the Law, than he would have done without it:
And it is a deadly Temptation against the present Injunctions, that they have a
penalty annexed to them.

Did ever any hear of a Law without a Penalty? was ever an Injunction drawn up
in this form? These things we do enjoin you to do; and if you do them, it shall
be to you the same thing as if you let them alone. If the Church has power to
command us any thing, we need go no farther than common sense to infer; That
she has power to punish, if that be not done which is commanded; and now that
the Church has power to make Injunctions of this nature, We have evidence
enough from the Scripture it self, where we find out Savior so far owning this
Authority, as that he submitted to it: The Feast of the Dedication was of
Institution purely humane, and yet our Lord observed it; John 10. 22. Nay
farther, our Savior did not only observe humane Institutions, where there was
no particular command in Scripture for them; but he also did observe such as
were in outward Circumstances, quite different from what the Scripture has
appointed them to be in. If this seem strange to us, let us look into Exodus 12.
11. where we find the very manner of eating the Passover plainly prescribed to
us, to be done in a standing-Posture, and that with all the punctual Formality,
of their Loins girt, Shoes on their Feet, and Staves in their Hands. Now our
Savior eats it quite otherwise, in a Tableposture leaning, without* Loins
girt, Shoos on his Feet, or Staff in his Hand, in perfect compliance with the
Uniform practice of that age he lived in.

And that all good Order and Authority was not buried with the Synagogue, is
apparent from St. Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 10. Let all things be done Non potest haberi
quod Paulus hic exigit nisi additis Constitutionibus tanquam Vincul^s, quibus
ipse Ordo and Decor^m servetur.
decently and in order. Upon which Calvin: This which St. Paul here requires,
cannot be had, unless some Constitutions (like Bonds) be added, by which Order
and Decorum may be observed.

And Melancthon in his common places, Cap. de politia Ecclesiast. throughout:
Take away the Obligation of humane Ordinances, Nec regi nec coerceri homines
possunt etc. Ita sciamus Dissipatis Ordinationibus Ecclesiasticis periclitari
etiam Ecclesiam.
Men cannot be governed or restrained; So that let us assure our selves; that
take away the Ordinances of the Church, and the Church it self is in danger.
Add in the close of that Argument, Let us look but into humane Ipsam vitam ac
naturam hominum intueamur, quae non potest carere Ceremonils and ritibus, ut
saepe jam dictum est.
Nature, and Man-kind's way of living, and we shall find that it cannot want
Ceremonies.

But why do we mention particular Persons? when if there were occasion to
multiply words in so clear a case, we have the joint confession of all the
Reformed Churches; and he who pleases to look into the Harmony of Confessions,
may satisfy himself at leisure: We shall only mention the Bohemian, because
it carries its reason along with it. C. 8. Sect. 10. P. 12.

They do teach likewise, That there ought to be a set-Constitution, Docent
etiam administrationis constitutionem and ordinem certum in Sacra Ecclesia
praestandum esse; Absque enim Ordinis Constitutione and Administratione
externa, non potest bono loco esse, aut been cum ipsa agi, sicut and cum nulla
alia etiam minima communitate.
and a certain Order of Administration in the Holy Church; For without a
Constitution and an outward Administration for Order, it cannot possibly go
well with the Church, as with no other, no not the least Community. But now
suppose the Church make these Laws, how if Inferiors will not obey them? For
that Mr. Calvin shall be their Judge in his Epistle to Farel p. 9. This has
always obtained in the Church, which has also been decreed by the ancient
Synods, that he who will not be subject Semper hoc in Ecclesia valuit quod
veteribus Synodis fuit decre^um, ut qui Subjici communis Disciplinae legibus
noluerit MUNERE ABDICETUR.
to the Laws of the public Discipline, should be put out of his Office and
Employment.

Having now upon these several, and we hope convincing Grounds, showed, that
the Church should have a power of commanding, and consequently, of Imposing
Penalties in case of Disobedience: We shall a little return and take some small
notice of the first ground of this his Argument.

THat a tender Christian will not do any thing for fear, which he would not out
of Conscience.

If this be intended to represent the Gallantry of that Party, which is here
pleaded for; as being a company of Heroic Spirits, as that they may be
persuaded or encouraged, but are at no hand to be frighted into any thing: We
shall then say, that we never yet saw reason to believe that they were persons
of such great bravery and resolution: We have heard indeed by one who knew them
well (King James) That no Deserts would oblige them, nor no Oaths bind them;
but we never yet heard, but they were as liable to be terrified as any other
Mortals. We suppose that Mr. Love may well pass for one of these serious and
tender Christians, and yet Fear prevailed so far upon him, as to make him
acknowledge his great Guilt and unfeigned Sorrow for his great Offense; and own
those whom he conspired against, as the Supreme Authority, and promise all
manner of Duty and Submission, in hopes of a Reprieve; and that this was not
altogether Conscience, appears, in that when they would Reprieve him no longer,
he called them Rebels and Traitors. Once again, Mr. Jenkins too, did recant
then; and we are more sure that he did comply then, out of the principle of
Fear, than we are that his not-Conforming now, proceeds purely out of a
principle of Conscience. Nay, did not that whole Party lay aside all mention of
the Covenant from Mr. Love's death, till just upon the King's Restoration? Now
I suppose Fear had some influence upon them in this, as well as Conscience. The
truth of it is, they are like Spaniels, if they seem to love any, it is after
they have been soundly beaten; or rather, they are of the basest of all
Dispositions, who really love no body, but yet will cringe and fawn upon any
one, so long as they are afraid of him. And if this be the character of a
tender Christian, to do nothing for fear; sure we are, that the tender
Christian is (of all places) the most unlikely to be found amongst those who
talk so much of having tender Consciences.

IN pursuance of the former Argument, we are told, p. 14. That, if in lieu of
proposing such a piece of Banishment to fright the Nonconformists into the late
Oath enjoined in the Act at Oxford, there had been offered a Liberty of the
Ministry, on that Condition, without any Penalty, the Act had been perhaps to
purpose.

It is to me not a little wonder; that any one who has but the face of a man,
can pretend to complain, as if there had been any severity in enjoining the
Oath made at Oxford: And to satisfy any, whether that which is here called
Banishment, ( i.e. removal five miles from a Corporation) be a Punishment any
thing less necessary for the refusing that Oath, there will be little requisite
besides consulting the Oath, which follows in these words, viz.

I A. B. do swear, That it is not lawful on any pretense whatsoever, to take
Arms against the King; and that I do abhor that Trayte ous position, of taking
Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those who are
Commissionated by Him, in pursuance of such Commissions; and that I will not at
any time endeavor any Alteration of Government either in Church or State.

Now it is clear, that this Oath is not an Ecclesiastical, but a Civil Oath,
made purely for the safety of the King's Person and Authority, and was, with
some addition, in force before; and being refused, the pretense was not any
thing of Disloyalty, (no, the time was not come to profess that) but because
there was in it a clause for the Renouncing of the Covenant: The Parliament
therefore being willing to comply, not only with their infirmity, but with
their very peevishness, contrived the substance of the former Oath without that
clause in it, only binding them to profess, That it was not lawful to bear
Arms, etc. ut supra. Now the refusal of such an Oath as this, wherein they are
only required to swear, That they will not serve this King as they did his
Father; One would think were Confiscation of goods, perpetual Imprisonment, or
Banishment, in the proper sense of that Word; when lo, it is nothing but the
being removed five Miles from a Corporation. They who will not promise, not to
subvert the Government, shall have the whole Protection of It, with this only
Caution taken against them, That they shall not live in such populous places,
where they may have Opportunity to seduce great Numbers every day, to those
Attempts which they will not be brought so much as to profess for to disclaim.
And yet even this is not exacted, as those who walk London Streets, know well
enough; and now where there is so direct, so reasonable, and withal, so
Merciful a Law; One would think, that instead of complaining, they should
rather express their Gratitude toward the King for his so wonderful, I had
almost said so Groundless an Indulgence, in not putting in execution this Act,
which is so great a piece of his own security, as it is a restraint upon those
who will not so much as Engage themselves, not to Destroy him and his
Government.

THE next, p. 15, is a Project of our Author's against his own Brethren; and
that is, to serve them as Julian did the Primitive Christians, to keep them out
of every Office and Employment. And

I shall thus far yield to his Advice, as to acknowledge, that if it were
carefully followed, we should quickly see that it would have a very good
effect. But we must add, that he has put a very odd Complement upon His
Majesty and the Parliament in thus representing Them to be worse than Julian.

BUt the next, p. 17, is infinitely more inexcusable; he does there tell us how
the King of Japan first put to death every man who was a Christian: This not
serving the turn, he executed the whole Family where any Christian was
harbored: This not doing it neither, he commanded that both that House where
any Christian was found, and the next two Houses on both sides of it, should be
all put to execution.

And now when he did reasonably suppose, that every one who reads this dismal
passage, had his heart full of horror and detestation at this so barbarous and
unexampled inhumanity, he most spitefully inferrs. That this is the course
which he and his are to expect likewise.

LAy that right hand on your breast, weigh what I say; You must either come to
This, if you see to the end, or you must come to an Accommodation.

Have these men already forgot how their Lives were (by the plain Known Laws of
the Land) every one forfeit to His Majesty? And how earnest the King was to
pass the Act of Indemnity: How Religious he has been in observing it? And when
themselves find the Government so mild, as they by this sort of scribbling dare
show how little they are afraid of it; see what manner of returns they make.
Ought not now some other course besides Mildness, be taken with them, who shall
thus dare to Allarum the Nation, that if he and his have not their Wills, there
is approaching the most horrid Tyranny which ever the Sun saw? I dare
confidently say, That however these Jealousies may promise their Design, in
inflaming the people; yet themselves do not in the least believe, that ever
such Rigor is intended toward them: and if they were more afraid, they would
not complain half so much.

Hitherto we have had little but Lamentations and Complainings, that there are
in general, Laws and Injunctions which they cannot away with.

BUT now, p. 18. We are plainly told what there is in those Laws which does so
much offend them: First, negatively; It is not the Dignity of the Bishops,
their Lordships and Revenues; It is not their Cathedrals, Organs, and their
Divine Service, in what State and Magnificence they please: It is not
Common Prayer, no nor any Ceremony of the Church, for all its significancy, if
it be but a Circumstance of Worship, and no more, that could hinder most of the
judicious and sober Nonconformists to come over to you, etc.

These things it seems are Lawful, and they can come over to them: It were to
be wished that they would instruct their Proselytes but thus much as they here
openly profess, and not for ever infuse dismal jealousies into the heads and
hearts of the people, against those things which themselves own so perfectly
innocent, and what they can at any time come over to: But has not the
irresistible evidence of Truth, here forced them to give up at once no less
then their whole Cause, or at least, to take away all manner of color from it?
For seeing that these things are all innocent, What one thing can there
possibly be alleged to create any longer scruple?

Here is a clear Confession, That these men are guilty of the most unreasonable
Schism that ever was, or ever can be in the World, because it is such a Schism
which is in their own judgments utterly without any reason; For there is not
any thing required, but what they here profess that they can come over to: The
Church exacts Conformity to nothing but what the very Dissenters acknowledge
that all the sober and judicious men among them can come over to. But are these
men to be esteemed, or Sober, or Judicious, which stand out in so causless a
Schism? which keep up so needless a Separation, and divide (not to say the
Church, but) their Native Country, by refusing to do such things which they
know and own, that they may do, and do them very unlawfully.

But if these things do not keep them out, what does? For these are all the
things which the Dispute lies about; Why? It is these Declarations,
Subscriptions, and Oaths, which you impose upon them, etc.

If the former does not hinder, I see no reason why this latter should; For, if
we may do such a thing, why may we not declare that we will do it? If we do
believe these things, why may we not Subscribe to them? And what is the harm of
an Oath to a thing which has no harm in it: And as to the Imposition, that
alone cannot alter the Case; For if such a thing (suppose a significant
Ceremony) be in it self lawful, then the Magistrate by imposing a significant
Ceremony, has only imposed that which is a lawful thing. The Law is here
notoriously and confessedly innocent in every particular, because that every
particular which it does require, is owned and confessed to be innocent.

BUt as for Oaths, we are farther told, That be they taken, or be they not
taken, they signify nothing.

We live then certainly in a very mad Age. But of all men, the Presbyterians
are the best qualified to teach this Doctrine, That Oaths, be they taken, or
not taken, they signify nothing. All Europe will bear witness, that with them
they have indeed signified nothing.

AND that, not only because there is no hole whereout a man can creep, that
has taken a former Oath, but he can get out of the same, or find another like
it, in any new Oath you put upon him, p. 20.

At this rate, there must be no Oaths at all, Because too many may be tempted
to break them; but I shall not make any longer Annotations upon this, because I
will not presume to vie skill with a Puritan in what belongs to the shifting
out of any Oath, especially if it be a lawful one; I shall readily acknowledge,
that they are, of all others, the most experienced Masters of that Faculty.

BUT in Confirmation of what went before, we are farther told, That there is
nothing that is a man's duty, or unlawful, before he has taken the Oath, but it
remains as it was, after he has taken it; and he will be obliged neither more
nor less, (I speak as to the thing, not degree) whether he take it, or not take
it.

The Obligations of Oaths is certainly much stronger than this Author seems
here to make it: The thing which was my duty before, if once I become sworn to
it, this is a very strait Bond to tie me faster to it; my soul is particularly
laid in pawn, and God Almighty, besides a Judge, is a Party to exact the thing
in that I have sworn it: Nay, in unlawful things, the Oath has a sad
Obligation; not to do the thing, it is true; for nothing can bind me to commit
a sin: but alas, by taking this unlawful Oath, I have brought my self into a
necessity of sinning, let me take which course I can; whether I do the thing it
self* or break the Oath whereby I swore to do it. If the Limitation in the
Parenthesis (I speak as to the Thing, not Degree) were intended to qualify the
crudeness of this (otherwise) wild Assertion, I am content to let it pass: I
shall only add, That if we should grant these premises, he could not infer a
Conclusion wide enough for his purpose, because his enumeration of particulars
is very Lame; for, besides, those things which are Duty absolutely, and those
which are absolutely Unlawful, there are a sort of things of a middle nature,
only Lawful of themselves, but not necessary; which before the Oath I might
have done, but after the Oath I must do; and this part of the Division ought
not to have been forgot, because our great Contest is concerning these things
of this middle nature.

BUT p. 23, 24, the Proposer speaks home, I would to God there had never been
an Oath, besides the Assertory Oath, etc.

And p. 25, Indeed an Oath in civil Things, that is taken of good will, is of
moment; but an Oath upon Constraint we abhor.

Sure the Wisdom of all Nations has been strangely mistaken, if so be, that
Promissory Oaths are not things of very great use and Obligation: Solomon,
among other Reasons by which he presses Obedience to Kings, reckons up this as
one, and that not the least considerable, in regard of the Oath of God. The
Examples of this in the Scripture, are very frequent, David and Jonathan, David
to Bathseba concerning Solomon's Succession; to the Gibeonites, with many
others: And the indispensable Obligation of such Oaths, is declared Numb. 30.
v. 2. If a man vow a Vow, or swear an Oath* to bind the soul with a bond, he
shall not break or profane his Word, he shall do according to all that
proceeds out of his mouth.

WEll, but this, perhaps if the Oath be taken voluntarily, of our own accord:
For, indeed, an Oath: in Civil things, which is taken with a good will, is of
moment; but an Oath upon Constraint we abhor.

Then if any will of their own accord swear not to kill the King, these may,
but at no hand we must not compel them to it. The Scriptures furnish us with
many Examples of imposed Oaths, by Moses, Josua, David, Asa, Iehoida and
Nehemiah, etc. 2 Chr. 15. 12. Asa caused the people to come to Jerusalem, and
there they made a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their Fathers; but perhaps
the people were every one of them Unanimous, and desirous to enter into such a
Covenant: That is not likely, that there should be so immediate, and so sudden
a change, seeing that v. 3. they had been for a long season without the true
God, and without Priest to teach, and without the Law: And v. 13. We see a
plain, and a very great Coercion used, And whosoever will not seek the Lord God
of Israel, shall be slain, whether he were small or great, man, or woman. Ezra
10 v. 5. He caused the Chief Priests, and the Levites, and all Israel to swear,
that they would do according to this word.

And thus did all the good Kings of Judah, as it were easy to produce, impose
Oaths, and that too in Religious matters: Now there were amongst them diverse
certainly of different persuasions, who would have been glad to have been
exempt from those Oaths, as appears by their several Groves and High Places
(amongst which, no doubt, there were several pious and well-meaning, however
deluded persons, who might have said, We worship God according to our
Consciences, and the best of our Light.) But these different Lights and
Persuasions did not hinder those godly, as well as wise Magistrates, from
imposing such an Oath; but rather it was the grand cause or motive of such
Impositions, to discover who they were who were of another Persuasion, that
they might be observed, and care taken of them, that they might be questioned,
and, if possible, in time reduced.

THE next is a rare Reason, why there should be never any more Laws made, Ruit
humanum genus per vetitum; To command a thing wherein we were before left free,
is enough to whet our humane nature unto opposition; to prohibit it, will make
it coveted, etc.

If people do grow eager after a thing, merely because there is a Law against
it, There is but one way to prevent (...) and that is, To put the Law in
vigorous execution. I must confess, That a little Restraint does sometimes whet
our appetite; and that the vulgar are so silly as to desire a thing sometimes
merely because it is forbidden them; and we shall readily grant that it is thus
in the instance he has given us, That, if many of the ejected Ministers who
are flockt to now when they venture to preach, had liberty to say on till they
had wearied themselves and Auditors out, we should see how the rolling
Snow-balls would melt, and, excepting a few of the Eminent of them, their
Congregations would quickly grow thin enough.

We are easily persuaded* that the people would quickly see cause to grow weary
of them, and do very much wonder what it is which makes them at all flocked
after! How such flat, and empty, and wretched Stuff, should ever have the luck
to be esteemed Gospelpreaching.

PAge 29. I do verily hope in the Lord, That there is nothing in these fears
and dreadful abodings of many good men's hearts, about the Discipline and way of
Worship in our Church, but a conceit, the Lord knows, I do not know.

Is it not therefore very wisely and Christianly done of the Magistrates, to
silence those Men who make it their great business to put such foolish and odd
conceits into the peoples heads, who make them to fear, where you confess that
no fear is? Are these men fit to have the charge of Souls committed to them,
who love to keep their Proselytes all their lifetime in Pupillage, under those
childish and empty terrors, which you properly resemble to Ghosts and Goblins?
Things which may indeed fright us very much, but it is only because we will not
be made to understand that there is nothing in them: And whereas we are
advised, p. 33. To root out such conceptions; we must still accept our Author's
concession, That these are conceptions fit to be rooted out; and we think, that
if that sort of Teachers were removed, who nourish up such silly Apprehensions,
these jealousies, as having no foundation, would in a little time, of their own
accord, wear all away.

The next thing considerable, is an Argument for Liberty of Conscience upon a
Politic Account, That Liberty of Conscience is the thing which always
prevails, which side soever it is of.

IT was this which (...) the better of the King in the Wars, pulled down the
Bishops, w(...)ng with the Parliament-Army, afterward pulled up the Parliament,
and sat down and reigned with Cromwell, p. 45.

Is this the chief Art they have to recommend Liberty of Conscience to the
King's Affections, to lay before Him how it Murdered His Father, proscribed
Himself, and sat down with the Usurper on the Royal Throne? Sure this is not
intended, as that this was a likely way to endear it to the King, that it has
done so much against Him: It is strange that this should be used as an Argument
to this King and Parliament, to Establish any thing, because it was the thing
which Reigned with Cromwell, and shall Eternize that Mortal, ibid. I cannot
persuade my self, that one, who only intended to supplicate for Favor, would
ever have pleaded so unsuitable a Motive: I rather, therefore, construe it as a
Tacit Threat: This is that which Liberty of Conscience is able to Do; and if
you will not grant it, you have felt its force once already, and you know not
how soon you may feel it again. But of all the things which are here said in
the behalf of Liberty of Conscience, I cannot choose but smile, that it is here
said to Restore the King, p. 46. Surely the Church of England may say, without
Boasting, That Her Sons were the truest, the most constant Subjects the King
had: You cannot name any other Party in the Nation, choose where you will, but
something may be Objected, as to their Deviation from the strict Rules of
Loyalty, among the Nobility, Gentry, Citizens, Contrymen; if there were any
who were beyond their Neighbors eminently Royallists, they were likewise noted
as eminently Prelatical: These were the men who made every other Government
uneasy, by Dissenting from, and upon all occasions Opposing of it: All other
Denominations set up, courted, owned every Usurping Power, engaged, addressed,
did what they could to make an Interest, while the Episcopal Persuasion
always held off. These were always Praying, Pleading, Plotting for the King;
when according to your own Confession, the tender Consciences were pliable
enough to be bent any way; and your Darling, Liberty of Conscience, as you are
not ashamed to tell us, made no scruple of Conscience, to sit down and Reign
with Cromwell.

But if in Cromwell's time, you were one of those who Enjoyed the Liberty of
your Conscience, we are sure that we could not Enjoy the Liberty of ours: Was
not Prelacy, as well as Popery, excepted in the Instrument of Government, that
Liberty should not Extend to that Persuasion? Was not the Reading Common Prayer
a thing then Prohibited? and that under no less a Penalty than Deprivation, and
sometimes Deportation for the third Committing such an Offense? An Episcopal
Divine was then forbidden to Preach, or so much as to keep a School. Let us
remember the Major Generals, and then we shall not forget what kind of Liberty
of Conscience that was which sat down, and reigned with Cromwell. This is, I
must needs say, a bold way of making a Proposition to the King, to tell him of
Eternizing of Cromwell.

Page 47. We here meet with a Query so very impertinent to the matter in hand,
that I wonder how it was brought in. The Bishops, and Deans, and Prebends, he
thinks, should not have had the whole p^ofit of their Leases, the Arrears might
have been left for public Accounts, and good works.

In a Discourse which pretends wholly to Peace and Accommodation, I wonder how
this comes in, being perfectly Extrinsecal to any thing which they at present
have any occasion to plead for, unless they have a fancy that they cannot serve
God now according to their Consciences, because that the Bishops, seven years
ago, were permitted to have the Letting of their own Leases.

But if a Tender Conscience be that which is afraid of the very appearance of
Sin; How comes it to pass that they are so angry that the State did not commit
Sacriledg? These men cannot be content, if the Church does ever recover Her
own, and be but once, as it were, expostliminio, restored to those Rights which
they had once Robbed Her of. Not to mention Merits, or Sufferings, we only
speak of the Justice of the thing. His Majesty's Piety is indeed for ever to be
Celebrated, in being thus the Church's Nursing-Father; it had suffered for Him,
and He scorned that Advice which would have had it to Suffer by Him. And as for
the good works which he fancied that money might have been better employed in,
Who shall secure us, that, suppose the Church had lost it, it should have been
employed wholly in good works? Was not this the very Plea of Judas, Might not
This have been sold for five hundred pence, and given to the Poor? How
Charitable and Publick-Spirited are these men grown upon other men's Purses!

Former Sacriledges have been committed upon such plausible pretenses as the
Public Benefit and Security; but if we consult things aright, we shall not
find that the Public ever gained by such courses, nor do we believe that it
ever will; nor indeed is it fit that it should do so. While these things
continue in the Church, the Public has a considerable Interest in them: take
them away thence, and you raise some private Families, whose turn being now
served, the Public has no influence upon them any longer. Men may talk of the
Common Good, and pretend that; but no man will be an Instrument of Sacriledg,
without an eye to his Private Interest. As the Case now stands, How much of the
Churches Revenue is still payable to the King? And how much more has He the
Disposal of? Now those Lands are in the hands of those who are the King's
constant Dependants; take them away, and you may give them to those who may
immediately turn his Enemies; and if we should make an Observation upon
experience, we might perhaps find, that those who have enjoyed the spoils of
the Church, have not always showed themselves the firmest Friends to the
Crown. But as to that money for Fines, which the Author speaks only about, we
think it was employed about very good Works: Was not the Repairing of the
Twenty years Losses of so many Learned, Pious, and Loyal Persons, of it self a
very good work? The Repairing of Cathedrals, and furnishing of them, was a very
good, and a very costly work: The Redemption of Captives, was a very good work:
His Majesty's Favor was most humbly acknowledged in a large Benevolence: The
re-building of Houses, and augmentation of Vicaridges to eighty pounds per
annum, was a good, and a very great work. And to these let them add, how much
was abated to the Tenant, of that proportion which any other Landlord would
have taken; let us consider these things, I say, and we shall find, the sums
of money which came really into the pockets of the Clergy at that time, not to
have been in any proportion near that which Envy has Suggested. I shall add
but one Consideration more, which I did not join with the rest; because, though
it was a great Loss and Charge to the Church, I can scarce reckon, to have been
a good work; and that was, the Consideration, which was taken of the
Purchasers, who of all men had perhaps the least reason to be considered; yet
so generous was the Churches mercy, as she did not only forgive, but reward
those who had been the Robbers of, and Spoilers of Her Houses and her
Patrimony.

IN the next place, p. 49. Our Author thinks that the Covenant ought not to
have been renounced, etc. If this care had not been taken, the People might
have had some temptation to believe, That the State had tacitly confessed, that
the Covenant had had some real Obligation: and if that were once allowed, the
whole Foundation of this Proposition had been utterly removed; so great a part
of the Nation having (as we have before observed) sworn to bring the Nation to
Uniformity, 1. art. of the Cov.

This might have been a President for a violent Faction, or part of the two
Houses to impose an Oath another time; had not that practice of theirs been so
solemnly disclaimed, it might have been then said, that this had been done by
them once before, not only without, but against the Kings Express Command and
Authority, and that Act of theirs was not so much as questiomed; which sure it
would have been, had it not been warrantable; especially since all who took the
Covenant, have therein sworn to defend each other, in the maintaining and
pursuing thereof; and that they shall not suffer themselves Directly, or
Indirectly, etc. to be Divided and withdrawn from this Blessed Union, whether
to make Defection to the contrary part, or to give our selves to a detestable
Indifferency, or neutrality in this Cause, etc. But shall all the days of our
life, zealously and constantly continue therein against all Opposition, and
promote the same according to our Power, against all Lets and Impediments
whatsoever, etc. See 6 Art. of Cov. The King's Enemies had an Act of Indemnity;
but nothing could have secured the King's Friends, so long as the Covenant was
not declared Null; the fourth Article lying as a Bond upon a considerable part
of the Nation, to bring all them to Trial and Condign Punishment.

Now is it at all credible, that any Nation in the World would allow a great
part of the People to believe themselves to continue under the Obligation of an
Oath entered into, in the time of, and in the pursuance of a Rebellion; an Oath
downright contrary to the standing Laws and Government, and yet not so much as
call upon them to disclaim it? No, sure all wise Estates would agree to that
known saying of Henry the Fourth, That He would be ready to make a Peace with
any of the Leaguers, but he would never make any Peace with the League.

PAge 54. There are among the Non-conformists, sober and Godly men, which are
to be compounded with; and there are zealous and Giddy, which are to be born
with, etc. But how are we sure that it will not Displease the Former, that we
bear with the Later? We do very well remember, that there was a time that
themselves would not have done it, and that they were very angry with those who
did Do it. What Composition, or what Toleration will serve the turn, we know
not: But if themselves will once agree upon it, what it is which will please
them, each and all; they shall then know more of Our minds concerning it.

For the Later of these sorts, it is proposed, viz. The zealous and giddy, That
there may be a Liberty granted to these People, for Assembling according to
their Consciences; (a rare Contrivance this, that there must be Public Liberty
to giddy zeal!) but their Meeting-places should be open, (that others may turn
giddy, by beholding their giddiness) that so if they speak any thing against
the State, there may be some ready to bear witness of it: Alas, How easy is it
to Couch Sedition in words very innocent of themselves, so that the Law shall
not be able to take advantage over them: and yet the Auditors shall very well
understand their meaning! But if this be not Caution enough, we have one more,
That no man be suffered to speak there, who is not Forty years of age, at least
Thirty five. Now these two cautions he supposes will render Conventicles very
harmless: And truly we like them only thus far, as they have something of a
Rule in them; for the lesser Liberty they have, the lesser harm they will do;
the more a Conventicle is bound up, the less it is it self, and consequently,
the less Mischievous: But we doubt, that this Caution will not be sufficient;
because, when men arrive to those years, they may perhaps be more wary, but not
at all the less Dangerous. But why may not some of those, whom this Rule
Excludes, reply upon this Proposition, That He who makes it, is himself a
Borderer upon Antichrist; And that His Feet stand upon the very Brink of
Babylon: He has in him so plain a Tang of an Imposing-Spirit. Must the motions
of the Spirit exspect, till he arrives at Forty? Has not a man a Conscience,
and that a tender One, till he is Thirty five years old? Must precious Gifts
wait till we are of such an Age? What is this but a Contrivance of Man, a plain
Issue of a Carnal Spirit? Liberty of Conscience ought to be left to its own
Liberty, or it cannot possibly be called by that Name. Does the Scripture tie
us up to such a year? And who shall dare to Impose, what Christ has left free?
What ever answer you would return to so wild a Discourse, think upon and try,
whether it would not justify the Magistrates proceeding altogether as well as
your own, you will find, there is a necessity of a Rule, and then your great
pretense for each private Conscience, stating its own Liberty, is utterly and
unavoidably laid aside and gone.

BUT p. 61. He readily foresees, that a much greater Latitude than himself
intends, will be apt to get in at this wide door of Liberty of Conscience; and
therefore he takes care to shut it against the Papists. There is nothing more
plain, than that if these Arguments of his are valid, they conclude for the
Papists and the Turk too, If any one of them be a man of Conscience, and that
in his Religion he act according to it. But the Parliament will provide well
enough in that matter, p. 62.

No doubt they will, but we are sure that they cannot possibly do it but by
doing that which this whole Book is designed against, viz. In imposing
Penalties in matters of Religion, and exacting those Penalties too, although
those whom they exact them of, should happen to be really Conscientious.

PAge 66. We meet with some Proposals to alter diverse of our Civil Laws, As
Enfranchisements of Servile Tenures, enjoining every one to buy his own Tithe,
and the money laid out in glebe, a Register of Estates, Tenderness toward
Consciences.

These are fine projects, and if the Author thinks it worth his while, he may
deal with those who are most concerned in his designed alterations; but the
first of them makes us doubt, that the man may be inclined to be a Leveller;
and so we leave him to the mercy of the Landlords.

But these Inventions do delight our Author so very much, That he thinks that
they alone are security enough for the Everlasting Peace of the Nation; and
they are enlarged upon, as if the man really thought that there were something
in them; For, when things are brought about, as he has contrived, then there
must needs for ever after, be amongst us a calm and a most settled Peace: For
says he, Where there are no hopes from Innovation, no body will go about to
make it; But when a People have all that can be had, etc. then there will be no
hopes from an Innovation; Ergo, When these things are taken into Consideration,
then shall our Government of Monarchy in this Land, (leaving the Persons of our
Successive Sovereigns unto Providence and their Chances) be out of danger for
future Generations.

What is here meant by (leaving the Persons of our Successive Sovereigns unto
Providence and their Chances) I wish our Author had farther explained himself;
But as for his contrivance to settle things at that pass, that no body shall
have hopes from, nor desire to, an Innovation: I dare say that this Gentleman
is no Statesman, in that he supposes such a thing so much as possible; this
thing is only then to be hoped for, when there will be no Ambitious, no
Revengeful, no Discontented, no Poor, no Mistaken man in the Nation. There will
be always those who wish for a Change, because that there will be always those,
whose present condition is not altogether so splendid as they could wish it to
be: In the most happy Times, some will really be, more will fancy themselves to
be, unhappy.

Our Author some pages backwards, tells us, That if he is mistaken in the
Argument he there prosecutes, he will shut up his Table Book, and make no more
Observations from Experience. Truly I shall even give him leave to do so,
seeing that he has learnt no more from it, than to believe that Innovators are
in earnest, when they profess that they take up Arms only for the common good.

THese Proposals being over, There is a long pitiful Address; the sum of all
that which it is founded upon, being p. 72. Do you know that many of these
things are really against men's Consciences? and would you indeed have any such
to do them, though they be so?

If these things are really, and in good earnest against their Consciences, we
are sorry for it, and do not know how to help it, but themselves do, or when
they please may do so: In the mean time, why should not this Author join with
us, in Condemning those Preachers which infuse such needless jealousies into
the Peoples heads, which himself confesses (as we have often observed) that
there is no real cause for? Himself confesses that they are not more panick,
than empty terrors; he resembles them to the fear of Fairies, and supposes
that there is nothing in them. But, Which, now think we, should give place? The
public Law, or the private Consciences? especially in our Case, where the
Apologist owns the Law as to the matter, to be in the right, and verily
believes that the Conscience as to the scruple is in the wrong. But what is now
to be done as the Case stands? The Command is only to a Lawful thing as it has
been often granted, but it is believed to be unlawful: I shall answer this
which is the grand fundamental doubt, out of the words of one of the chief
Ringleaders of that Party, (and for his sake, I hope they may meet with a fair
Reception) Mr. Baxter in his Disputations about Church Government, Chap. 15. P.
483. If we do through weakness or perverseness, take Lawful things to be
unlawful, that will not excuse us in our disobedience, our error is our sin,
and one sin will not excuse another sin; and paulo post, It is their own erring
judgment that intangleth them in a necessity of sinning till it be changed.
with much more to the same purpose, in that whole Chapter throughout.

But after all this Dispute, suppose at the last that it should not be
Conscience, and in many of their Leaders, we have great evidence, that it is
not so. At the conference at Hampton Court before King James, Dr. Reynolds, Mr.
Knewstub, Mr. Chatterton, did clamor as loud about Conscience as any now do,
or can. But when the Arguments upon which their Consciences pretended to be
founded, were to their own Conviction, all weighed and answered, there was then
desired an Indulgence for some few worthy and sober men, because of their
Credit: And are we sure, that Credit has nothing to do in this Case? Men are
loath to use those Ceremonies, lest they should lose the Credit of that zeal,
which has formerly appeared so much against them.

BUT p 77. It is not the severity of Laws that can do any thing with the mind,
though it may with the outward man: Force may make men Hypocrites, not
Converts, to a Faith which is enjoined, etc.

To this we answer with St. Austin, If it does not remove Timor poenarum etsi
nondum habet bonae conscientiae delectationem saltem intra claustra
cogitationis coercet malam cupiditatem Aug. cont a literas Petiliani. Lib. 2.
Chap. 83.
the Error, yet it may prevent its spreading. If it does not utterly take away
the Cause, yet it hinders most of its mischievous Effects: And in a little
time, it may do the other too: Heresy is not seated so solely and altogether
in the Mind, but St. Paul thinks fit to rank it among the works of the Flesh;
it has oftentimes no sublimer Motives, than many other of the most sensual
Transgressions; outward Considerations, are very frequently its cause, and may
sometimes be its Cure. And this our Author Himself assures us of, That this is
the best way to fetch in others, who certainly will grow weary at the long run,
when they shall have work provided, but no Benefice, till they Conform: One of
his own Projects depends upon this, that the having no Benefice, will be a most
effectual means to make them in time, willing to Conform. I shall only add to
this, that these are very bold Beggars, who whilst they are pleading for
Indulgence and Moderation, cannot forbear to throw out threatenings. If the
Bishops will not, etc. They may write down in the Books of what shall hereafter
befall them. Moniti meliora p. etc.

This is something of the Strain of Martin Junior, We have sought to advance
this Cause of God, by humble suit to the Parliament, etc. Seeing now, the means
used by Us have not prevailed, if it come in by that means, which will make all
your hearts to ache, blame your selves. Bancrof. out of Mart. p. 144. Dangerons
Positions and practices.

There is one Concession behind, which we are to thank our Author for, that He
seems p. 86, 87, to hold it unlawful to expect Deliverance from any, but the
King: We desire only to know whether all the Party which He pleads for, be of
that mind too. Mr. Hocker assures Us, that your Predecessors were of the
opinion, That their way was to be set up whether Her Majesty or the State will
or no. Hooker Pref. out of Martin, p. 28. and in the King's large Declaration,
concerning the Tumults in Scotland, p. 409. We meet with several of their
positions laid down, amongst which, This is one, It is Lawful for Subjects to
make a Covenant and Combination without the King, and to enter into a Band of
Mutual Defense against the King, and all Persons whatever; and yet there were
Two Acts of Parliament at that time in force, which declared all such
contrivances punishable with Death.

And we do not at all doubt, but that if we had a mind to it, we could give one
considerable Instance within the Memory of Man, how this whole Parcy here
pleaded for, did unanimously* and with great Vigor list themselves apace, did
contribute their Persons, Prayers and Purses, toward the forming and
maintaining of an Army, to say no more, not raised by the King. It does
therefore highly concern these People publicly to disown their Predecessors,
and their own Principles and Practices, or else they cannot expect to be
believed in This, so seemingly Loyal a Concession, That it is unlawful to
expect deliverance from any but the King.

I do not remember any other passage in this Proposition, to be at all
Considerable; only one Notion he has, which is scattered up and down his Book,
that Penaltits and Rigor does but alienate their minds farther from us;
whereas Indulgence would work upon their Affections, and by degrees upon their
Judgments. Now on the other side, we think, and that upon the Grounds of
Experience, as well as Reason, That there is not good nature enough in them for
kind usage to work upon; of this we shall give one, but that shall be a most
convincing Evidence. The Kings Majesty, immediately after his most happy
Restoration, being desirous to satisfy so many of all Parties, as did not
resolve for ever to remain unsatisfied, did accordingly give so much respect to
the clamours then made against the Liturgy, as to order a review of it. But
withal did, by his Declaration set forth about that affair, desire, that so
many of Them as would be thought Conscientious, or peaceable, would in the mean
time read so much of the Liturgy, as themselves had no Exception against: an
easy request one would think; Read only so much as you have no Exception
against: Here Conscience sure could not be pretended, when their own Conscience
(nay their very jealousy) was the only Rule which was set Them to walk by, yet
they stood it out, only because there was no danger in standing: out and after
all, the Act of Uniformity brought many of the fiercest to read the whole of
that, of which before they could not be brought to read a syllable; so much is
a Law more available than an Indulgence: And as many did come in that
Bartholomew-tide, so (had there not been so great expectation of a Toleration)
we have reason to believe, that many more would have come in.

WE have now Considered every passage in this Treatise, which seems to be any
way Material* and must take leave to profess that we are not able to guess what
it is which this Author really would have; and we farther believe, that he
himself cannot tell us: Nor need we desire the Laws to continue in force any
longer, than till the Tender Consciences can agree what to have in the stead of
them. The Penner seems in one place, to be one of the most Moderate, and not to
desire the removal of our present Constitutions, but only a temporary
Indulgence toward some Persons, whom he thinks very well of, as being in his
Opinion, men sober in their Judgments and in their Lives, only they have got
some odd Jealousies in their Heads; which though the Apologist, is verily
persuaded, that they have nothing in them; yet he would have the men born with,
as being otherwise good men; and besides he thinks, that by this means there is
great hopes, that Liberty, and Custom may in time prevail over these
acknowledgedly groundless fancies. This is his sense, p. 18. 29. 74. etc. But a
Law, with an Indulgence annexed to it, is felo de se: It may something be
resembled to Nebuchadnezzar's Image, whose feet were partly Iron, and partly
Clay: ( i. e.) as Daniel there interprets it, such a Kingdom shall partly be
strong, and partly broken; and as it is there said that the Iron shall not mix
with the Clay, so it will be here, the Conformists and Non-conformists shall
never care to join, or be heartily brought to love one another: the difference
of Judgment does unavoidably slide into distance of affection, and from the
profession, we are naturally brought to mislike the Persons who are of it.

Besides to Relax a Law upon the account of Conscience, or the pretenses of a
higher degree of Purity in the same Religion, is as much as to Proclaim the
Dissenters, to be the most really Conscientious: That those who do Conform, are
mere Formalists, Time-servers, compliers with that which is uppermost; but the
Non-conformists shall be taken for the Sincere men, who walk according to
Light, and to keep the Gospel pure without the mixture of humane Inventions:
And this alone will be a very great Temptation to many an honest, but weak man,
who has more Zeal than knowledge, to Enrol himself among those Men, who are
allowed to differ from the Religion of the State upon the pretense of higher
Purity, and greater seize.

But because that this Proposal pretends to be made very much upon hopes; that
by this means, the differences will in a short time, be brought to cease of
their own accord: We desire therefore to Know, how long he would have this time
of Trial last; or will he yield, that if this course does fail, as to this
promised effect, that after such a time is past, we shall have recourse to our
old Laws again; and for the present, I wish it were Stated now, how far he
would have this Indulgence reach: And that we knew certainly, what were a
tender Conscience. Shall it be sufficient to pretend a Scruple at the Law? or
is there any other Rule to know this by? Or must we believe every one who
says, he does scruple it: St. Peter says, There be some who speak Lies in
Hypocrisy, because of advantage: Who now shall distinguish, unless there be
some other Judge, beside the party concerning whom this question may arise? I
desire farther to know, whether this pretense shall reach absolutely and
universally to all sorts of Consciences, and all manner of pretenses of them,
or else Limitedly, and Restrainedly to such a sort or number of them. And we
would fain know certainly, what those sorts, kinds and numbers are. Let our
Author pitch upon which of these two Members of the Division he pleases, and
then try if with either of them, he can bring his whole Party to subscribe:
This we all desire to have, and thus much we will be content with; we are sure
that the Sectaries will not be content with one; and we are sure that the time
was, when the Presbyterian, would not endure the other; And this very Author
seems much Divided in the Points* one while, he seems only for an accommodation
between Us and the sober Protestant, by which soft phrase he understands the
Presbyterians, and while he is in this mood, he explodes the wildness of the
Sectary, and compares him and the Papist to the upper and nether Jaw of
Destruction, opening her Mouth upon Us, p. 7.

But in another place, he is plainly of another mind, pleading earnestly and
openly for that Liberty of Conscience, which sat down and Reigned with
Cromwell, p. 45. and that we know was downright Sectarism; now it is but
reasonable for us to demand, which of these two Pleas he would stick to; both
he cannot have, because they are Inconsistent, and if the Law would consent,
yet these two distant Pleas will not, cannot agree, but must necessarily
everthrow each other.

It highly concerns all those who are for making Alterations in Laws and
Governments, to consider what it is they are about, and whether their present
contrivances are like to carry them, lest they unawares bring things to such a
pass, which themselves will be most sorry to see them at. Of all Projects,
Innovation does most often fail the hopes conceived of it, The Beginners being
frequently ashamed before they come half way to the end; and it must needs
always be so, because such a work is not to be carried on, but by great
multitudes of several Interests and Inclinations; the greatest part of which
must necessarily be disappointed, and consequently discontented, and so many
unforeseen accidents do perpetually arise, in a business of this nature; new
people and new principles coming every day in Play, that the First beginnings
are become utterly at a Loss, they are immediately out-gone and presently after
laid aside. But not to carry this observation farther than our present
business, the Presbyterians and the Sectaries, however they may join now in the
making of this Proposition, let it be but once granted, and they shall
immediately differ upon the nature and bounds of it: late experience has given
us abundant Evidence, that neither of these, have reason to trust one another:
The one only meaning to change us into another sort of Government: The latter,
not enduring any such thing: All Europe is witness, that nothing but the fear
of a common Enemy, or a common Force over them, is able to keep the Godly of
all Judgments from running foul one upon another.

If we should now ask a Presbyterian, if he would be willing to be accounted
accessory to the infinite number of Heresies, Schisms and Scandals which will
immediately, and unavoidably arise, if every one be left to walk according to
their own Light and Conscience, he will answer, Far be it from him, to be
guilty of so horrid a thing; he has Covenanted, Preached, Written, bore
Testimony against, so sinful and Intolerable a Toleration. And on the other
hand, go to the Sectary and ask him, Is this your meaning, only to change our
Form of Government, for another you like better of? he will answer, no by no
means: They are all alike of humane Invention, and so alike blameable; besides,
they will abhor to be oppressed by those of their own Party, while they Act but
in pursuance of their common Principle; and this you shall have more fully, in
the words of the common Champion and Patron of them, both about this very
Argument and concerning the Presbyterians, Had not they (viz. the Presb.)
labored but lately under the weight of Persecution? and was it for them to sit
heavy upon others? Is it Ingenuous to ask Liberty, and to give it? what greater
Hypocrisy than for those who were oppressed by the Bishops, to become the
greatest oppressors themselves, so soon as the Yoke was removed? Oliver Cromwell
in his speech at the Dissolution of one of his Parliaments, 1654. p. 18. These
therefore, however they may now piece up into one, are really two Parties, have
Designs absolutely inconsistent; that which soever prevails, the other is like
to have little joy of it.

But as it is Evident, that neither of these will Tolerate each other; so there
is no reason, why the Magistrate should Tolerate either of them: And first, For
the Presbyterian; the reason is clear, because he will Tolerate no body else,
as appears plainly by the Covenant: and if you will have one shameful Instance
of their Rigor, remember how they had the face to deny to that Royal Martyr
our late Sovereign of Blessed Memory, the attendance of his own Chaplains; He
must make use of their way of Devotion, or by their Consent, He must have none
at all; give me such another Instance of Barbarity, and seek it where you can.

After this, it is needless sure to give you another Instance of their rigor,
indeed of their Inhumanity; but yet we must do it, to show their constant
temper. Deposing of Kings comes but seldom, therefore we shall see what private
men are to expect from them; They have refused to admit to the Communion, or to
pray for people lying on their Deathbed, only for not taking the Covenant;
have declared that all Nonsubscribers were Atheists: These mild inoffensive
people, who must be dealt so tenderly with, because of their weakness, have
preached it publicly, That Episcopacy must not only be pulled up, but the
Bishops must be hanged up before the Lord, and that the bloodiest and sharpest
War was to be endured, rather than the least error in Doctrine, or in
Discipline. See the large Declaration concerning the Scots, p. 404.

And how the Magistrate is particularly concerned to reduce these men to order,
appears from the Insolences they have committed and defended against him, when
they have been cited to appear before the King and His Council, for some of
these seditious Preachments; i. e. Being commanded to appear before the King
and Council, they refused Coram comparere jussi fastidioso quodam contemptu
abnuerunt, quasi Pulpita a Regum Authoritate essent exempta; and Eoclesiastici
non principis Imperi^ sed Presbyterio subessent.
with a disdainsul kind of contempt, alleging that Pulpits were exempt from
the Authority of Kings and Ecclesiastical Persons, were subject not to the
Authority of the Prince, but to the Presbitery. Cambden Eliz. p. 361.

And amongst other, this was plainly averred in the Case of Mr. Andrew Melvin,
who being cited before the King and His Council, declined their judgment,
affirming that what was spoken in the Pulpit, ought first to be tried by the
Presbytery, and neither King nor Council might in prima instantia meddle
therewith, though the Speeches were Treasonable. Spotswood, p. 330.

But that a King is concerned as much as his Royalty is worth, to provide
against these men, will appear by sixteen of their public and owned Positions,
all to be met with in the forementioned Kings great Declaration, concerning
Scottish Tumults, 407. etc. of which we single out these. 7th pos. The Assembly
is independent, either from King or Parliament in matters Ecclesiastical. pos.
9th It is lawful for Subjects to make a Covenant and Combination without the
King, and to enter into a Bond of Mutual Defense against the King and all
Persons whatsoever. pos. 11th. If Subjects be called before the King and
Council for any misdemeanour, If they who are called, do any way conceive that
the matter for which they are called, does concern the Glory of God, or the
good of the Church, then they may appeal from the King and Council to the next
General Assembly and Parliament; and in the mean time before their appeaels are
heard or discussed, they may disobey the King and Council. pos. 12. That when
the King is entreated to indict a General Assembly, it is not that there is any
need of his indiction, but rather to do him honor, and to beget countenance to
their proceedings. pos. 14. An Assembly may abrogate Acts of Parliament, and
discharging Subjects of their obedience to them, if they any way reflect on the
business of the Church. pos. 15. The protestation of Subjects against Laws
established, whether it be made Coram Judice, or Non Judice, before the Judges
or the People, does void all obedience to those Laws, and discharges all the
Protestors from any Obligation to live under them, before ever these
Protestations and the validity of them shall come to be discussed before the
Competent Judges of them, nay, although they be repelled by the Judge, before
whom they were made. And this they taught their Proselytes to do often in the
Marketplace, and so they discharged themselves and one another from any Law as
often as they pleased. pos. 16. A number of men being the greater part of the
Kingdom, may do any thing which they themselves conceive to be conducing to the
Glory of God, and the good of the Church, notwithstanding any Laws standing in
force to the contrary, p. 413. large Declaration.

Having now done with these, the toleration of the Sects will I hope be d
spatched easily. The Mother Sect being laid aside, the lesser under ones will
not hope to stay behind: And surely if the Magistrate love Religion or himself,
he will not be persuaded to tolerate these neither. First, for Religion, who
sees not that this Artifice makes Religion weak and despicable by the being
crumbled into so many pieces? it renders it most ridiculous by being so exposed
to all sorts of dotage and imposture. What can possibly give unbelievers a more
jnst and frequent occasion of scorn than this, that every one who has but a
freak in his brain, shall have free liberty if he pleases, to Christen it a
motion of Spirit? when every thing that is most extravagant, may have License
at pleasure to recommend it self as a degree of farther Light. Here we shall
see men shaking all day, as if the Spirit came to them in Convulsions; there we
shall see them run naked about the Streets as if with the Old Man they had put
off all degrees of Modesty. But these things cannot perfectly be described,
because they may vary every moment, no man living being able to tell how many
more absurdities this may come to in the very next moment. Whether the Sects be
fit to be tolerated, can only then be reasonably determined, when we are
certain how many, and what they are. And as to the outward part of the
Magistrates care in this business, who shall secure us, that this Liberty of
Conscience may not in a while be pleaded for, as to moral transgressions? also
according as the Light does farther increase upon them, Quid quod de furtis
quoque and adulteriis and homicidiis inter Anabaptistas and Libertinos Quaritur
an scelera sint? Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis; p. 118. What a
pitiful restraint is a Law to a man who has a Vision? tell him of an Act of
Parliament, he comes full fraught with the mind of God; nay, what shall the
most express precept in all the Scripture signify to one who is got above the
dispensation of the Letter? Let us remember the Anabaptists in Germany, no men
meeker at first, none bloodier at last. Sleiden. Lib. 10. p. 247.

Now that the Magistrate will find himself to be highly concerned what opinions
any numbers of men shall once come to profess in his Dominions. is hence
evident, because that Opinions have a very great influence upon Actions: He who
is allowed to raise a Sect, has a very fair opportunity put into his hands of
making himself Head of such a Party, and by being permitted to have their
Consciences, he will find it no hard matter, to have their Persons and their
Purses at his own disposal too. Hence it is, though some Princes have been
sometimes forced to suffer dissenters from the Established Profession; (by
reason that they were so numerous, or so subtle, that they could not go about
to suppress them without discovering how unable they were to do so) yet they
always looked upon such Dissenters, as the next door to Enemies; and
accordingly had perpetual eye and guard upon them, as those who were of all
other the most likely to be the Authors, or occasion of the next disturbance.
It is a great mistake, to imagine that Sects are things to be despised, because
that men of Parts and Breeding are not easily nor usually the first which are
seduced by them; we shall grant that its beginning, nay, and its greatest
growth are amongst the meanest people, those whose fortunes are low as their
understandings; but perhaps it may not end there neither; but like a Pestilence
which may begin in an obscure Alley, and yet in a while no part of the City or
Kingdom may be free from it: Besides, are not the vulgar People the Hands and
Instruments which the greatest must always make use of? and a Deception got
amongst them, may by a little Connivance multiply so fast, as to be able to
dispute for Superiority, and instead of longer demanding an Indulgence, they
may in a little time refuse to give one; and by how much the ordinary sorts of
People are less masters of Reason, by so much the easier may they be set on in
those courses, which are absolutely unreasonable.

The safety of all Governments does Depend upon This, That it is certainly
stronger than each single Person; and for all sorts of Unions and Joining Heads
and Forces together, that There be no such Things, but under the Guidance of
the Magistrate, and by His appointment: And then be the Discontented Persons
never so many, yet so long as They have no way of Uniting, They are but so many
single Persons, Scattered, Weak and Insignificant, having no means of any
Common Council, They can never join in any Common Design. But let them once
have any one Phrase, to know one Another by, any settled Place for their
constant Meetings, and a Set and Known Company for Them to Meet with; or any
Bond whatever, which does Unite Them, and They presently become a Distinct
People and begin to be Dangerous, as having an Interest and Counsels of their
own, which the Government is not the Manager of, nor Privy to; but shall
quickly find it self highly concerned, by all means to provide against. And
this is the Foundation of that advice which Moecenas gave to Augustus, At no
hand to endure Those who attempted to bring in new strange Worships into the
State, Dion. Cass. Lib. 56. l. 1, 52. p. 561. in Edit. Steph. For from thence
says he proceed. (...). Maecenatis oration apud Dionem. Cass. l. 52. p. 56 ^.
in Edi^^ Steph.
Some Confederations, Conspiracies, and Associations, things certainly which
the Government had need to be much aware off. And it is a very vain thing to
Imagine, that those who profess such great niceness of Conscience, whatever
their opinions be, they will use none but lawful ways to promote them: It is
rather true, that they will reckon all ways lawful, by which it is possible,
that they may promote them.

Let it once be permitted to crafty, active and talking men, to Instill into
the minds of all sorts of people the necessity, usefulness, or the rare
excellency of any one thing, or Contrivance whatever beyond all that which the
present Laws and establishment does provide for: and is not here a most readily
prepared matter for any bold Bontefeu to work upon, who will take upon him to
help the Nation immediately to this so fine a thing: Has not any such
undertaker, a vast and already formed party in all parts of the Nation? Let him
but represent it to them, that the present Government is the only rub which is
in their way between them and this their so fancied happiness, and what will be
a consequent resolution; but let us remove that obstacle, so public a good is
much to be preferred sure before any particular form or family, the welfare of
the Nation is the great End, and Governors themselves were created but in order
to that, and consequently are to cease as often as that End can be better
attained without them.

Though the pretense be nothing but Conscience, yet every discontent will join
to make the cry most loud and general. Schisms do of themselves naturally grow
into Parties, and besides are most plausible occasions for any else to join
unto them. The gathered Churches are most excellent materials to raise new
Troops out of: and when they are thus far prepared they are at the service of
any one who will attempt to lead them on.

If All men were Wise and Honest, if every one understood well and would act
accordingly, it were then perhaps reasonable enough to leave things clearly to
Conscience, as the very best Rule we could possibly think of: But let us add,
that if this would supersede the necessity of the coercive power of our Laws in
Religious matters, it would do this much more in all civil Ones: For no Laws,
which ever were or can be in the world, can provide in any degree for those
large measures of Justice, Equity and Fair dealing, which would infallibly
everywhere be to be met with, if we were sure that men would always have a
care to keep a good Conscience: Truth, Justice, Temperance, etc. are things
which every man's Conscience does, and must needs tell him are his Duty. Yet
were it not for the fear of Laws we should find that Conscience is not alone to
be trusted, even in these things which are her Natural, her most familiar
Objects. And if we see that she does daily praevaricate in these plain and
obvious things where she is so easily sound out; we have no great cause to
trust to her fidelity: that she will not also dissemble in those things which
are more remote and obscure, and hidden so far from the best of our discovery.
Let those therefore who plead for Liberty of Conscience consider, that there
are Two sorts of men which ought to be provided against, to keep this
Contrivance of theirs from being absolutely the most senseless and dangerous in
the whole World: and we profess our selves unable upon their grounds to provide
against them, viz. Those who do pretend Conscience; and those who abuse it. And
there is a Third sort likewise which some care ought to be taken of, viz. Those
vast numbers which are every day still* liable to be more and more abused by
such Pretenses. Those Laws are not fitted for the Temper of this World, which
proceed upon this Supposition, That every one who looks demurely is presently
in good earnest, That men say nothing but what they think. Let us consider,
that it is very possible for men to Personate, and then we shall not be so
eager to desire a general license for every one who has a mind to become a
public Cheat.

The Inconveniences likewise, which such a Toleration will bring upon a
Temporal account, will be very great and very Universal: not a City, not a
Parish, nay perhaps not a Family free from them. And we shall quickly see what
a sad pass things will come at, if the unconsidering part of mankind shall ly
thus exposed to every one who will go about to deceive them.

And then from these diversities of Judgments, and many times when it is only
different forms of speaking, there will immediately arise great distances of
affection: for these divisions of Reuben there will presently be great thoughts
of Heart, Surmisings, Censures, Jealousies, Railings, Evil-speakings,
Animosities, Peevishness, Malice, perverse Disputings, and every evil way, each
Congregation will have some one little Proposition, which all its Proselytes
must be known by, which all their thoughts must be always running upon, and
every body else must needs come up too. The smallest gathered Church cannot
hold its Members together, unless it has some particular thing to engage them
upon, and to have them known by: For they cannot with any face separate from
all Mankind, but they must have something to say for it.

This Contrivance, however it be absurd and dangerous, will notwithstanding
that, have always many who will be very fond of it, for it is a most ready way
for every forward fellow to think himself somewhat in that he is got into such
a Sect; and then he thinks, that if he can but improve the notion a little
farther, he shall then be the more taken notice of: and if he finds that his
Addition is but a little taking, he will then forsake his Masters to set up for
himself; divide from that Church of which he is now so precious a Member, to
gather a purer of his own: And so this Light will serve most bravely for
himself to shine in.

But if this had been a new Invention, its Contrivers might then have been
allowed to have entertained huge hopes of it, but alas, it has been often
tried and always brought great confusion along with it: and therefore there was
then great care taken by the Romans, what Religion their subjects were of, one
of the ancientest Laws; we read of, Separatim nemo habessit Deos, neve novos,
sed ne advenas nisi public adscitos privatim colanto. Tul. l. 2. de legibus.
XII TABLES. This was an especial part of AEdiles care. Ne qui nisi Romano Dii,
neque alio more quaem patrio colerentur, Live. lib. 4. p. 155. Easily concluding
that as soon as ever they had another Religion, their Country had lost the
better half of them. In variety of worship the one must needs reckon the other
Erroneous, perhaps Impious; and then how lamentably must that City be divided,
whose Inhabitants think themselves bound as they love God to hate one another:
and it has been often seen that a common enemy has crept in at their
intestine divisions, and destroyed both; while the one did not enough care to
help the other.

Be our Apprehensions concerning Divine matters never so different, I grant
that we ought not for the sake of them to want the duties of common humanity;
we shall grant that so to do, is a great error. But alas! it is too general a
one; and lawmakers are to consider not only what men ought, but what they use
to do. Why shall I fight (says one) for a Prince who is an Idolater? And why
should I (says another) take any care to relieve that City which is only a
Bundle of Schismatics? And what was the policy of Jeroboams calves think we
but this? He did not cast of the true God, but only set up another way of
Worship, as easily concluding, that if I can but persuade them to be of another
religion, I shall easily keep them to be another Kingdom; do but divide their
Faiths, and the Nations will never care to unite again.

And pray tell me, what shall a Prince do in that case, where there are diverse
ways of Worship allowed, and frequented in the same Nation? Shall he
discountenance the professors of any one, by keeping them out of all Office and
Employment? If so, he disobligeth that whole Profession, loses so many hearts,
who sure will think themselves to be very hardly dealt with in that they are
disrespected, only out of their Zeal to God, and because they follow the best
of their Light. And what will they think of such a State, which does refuse to
employ them merely upon this account, because (in the words of our Author) they
use all manner of means to save their Souls? Or secondly, shall the Prince
carry himself equally and indifferently toward all Persuasions, countenance and
prefer them all alike? This can hardly be, because he himself must be of some
One, and that will think it self not fairly dealt with if it has not some
pre-eminence; And when he endeavors to show himself indifferent to all
persuasions, it will then be said, that he makes use of all Religions for his
own Ends, but himself really is of none; and so perhaps none of them will be
really for him: And thus by endeavoring to displease neither party, he shall
certainly displease them both; at least the Zealots of all sides will represent
him at the best as one Lukewarm, and so only fit (as it is in the Revel.) to be
spit out at their Mouths.

Men may talk of their fine projects as long as they please, but surely where
the Church is already so settled, as that it has a great dependence on the
Government, and the Government has a standing influence upon that* those
Politics must needs be very strange which go about to alter such a
Constitution, and instead of a Clergy thus regulated, it is no kindness sure to
the Monarchy to set up such a Ministry which shall depend chiefly upon the
People. And when the whole method of the Preachers maintenance, and reputation,
must be the various Arts, by which he can either guide or follow the several
humors of each of his Congregation; No man can tell what it is possible for a
good Craftsmaster to persuade the multitude unto.

As to our particular case, if these People, what this book pleads for, had
barely a Toleration, I do not know that it would satisfy them; I suspect it may
increase their number, and so enable them in a while to demand much more, and
when they are a little stronger, their way would appear not only true but
absolutely necessary. vid. Bancrof. dangerous positions, and practices. page
108.

For however they do now speak us fair, and tell us, that the things imposed
are all lawful, and all that they desire is, that some persons may in pity be
borne with who do not think them to be lawful, yet we shrewdly suspect that
they teach their Proselytes much otherwise; for the people as long as ever they
have been under these men's Tutourage, are not yet altogether so mad, as to make
so great and withal so needless a separation: If their Teachers would but let
them know so much, that these things are all lawful, which all this clamor and
scruple is made about; they would never I say, be persuaded to have all these
heart burnings and jealousies, to fight and make parties against that Church,
which in these its chiefest adversaryes esteems, held or practiced nothing
which was at all blameworthy, any otherwise than as its Dissenters by mistake
conceived it to be so. No certainly, the poor people are without doubt still
led on with those obsolete and forsaken pleas of Popery, Superstition,
Will Worship, and Idolatry, which though their Teachers know, and here confess
to be nothing, yet I doubt they will not let their Disciples know so much: they
are persuaded that we are Idolaters, and have been more than once animated to
execute the rigor of Moses his Law upon us for it: and when the next
opportunity offers it self, we shall be called Babylon once more, and then the
consequent will be as formerly, Happy shall he be who takes thy Children and
dasheth them against the stones.

In one word then, to allow this pretense of Conscience is no way prudent,
because there is no probability that it can produce any good effect: It is a
thing, of which you shall never be able to see a good end. Toleration then upon
the whole matter is very unnecessary at this time, because the Impositions in
the Apologists own Judgment are very lawful, it is very unsafe, because we know
not how great Evils it may produce; we have showed, that they will not tolerate
each other, and that the Magistrate has no reason to tolerate either of them,
it brings great scandals upon Religion, and must needs breed great quarrels in
the State. And lastly, If it were granted, themselves are not yet agreed about
its Nature and Bounds, and so if we should at present give it, they would as
yet be at a very great loss what to do with it. Let us then be permitted to
continue as we are; seeing it is not agreed in what manner we shall be altered,
and the Alterations proposed by this Author A Discourse of the Religion of
England asserting, that Reformed Christianity settled in ITS DUE LATITUDE is the
stability and advancement of the Kingdom. Lately printed.
have been demonstrated to be dangerous to the Religion and to the government
of the Kingdom.

There was another TREATISE lately Published concerning the due Latitude of
Religion, that Author is likewise concerned to fix his own Latitude, and let us
know how much it is; that he and his whole Party will be content with, I shall
make no present observations upon him, but only lay down two of his own
Concessions by which he has clearly given up his whole Cause.

The first is, p. 28. Such is the complicated condition of humane affairs, that
it is exceeding difficult to devise a Rule or Model that shall provide for all
whom Equity will plead for. Therefore the Prudent and Sober will acquiesce in
any Constitution, that is in some good sort proportionable to the Ends of
Government. If so, they are in this Authors judgment neither Prudent nor Sober
men, who call so loud for a Toleration.

The second is, p. 38. Nevertheless, if when all is said, some dissatisfaction
does invincibly possess the judgment, In that case, Christian Humility, and
Charity as well as Discretion, advises such Persons to acquiesce in their
private Security and Freedom, and not to reach after that Liberty, that may
unsettle the Public Order, and undermine the common Safety. If so, those men
want Humility, Charity and Discretion, who demand a public Liberty for their
Consciences,

We take these few Lines to be a sufficient answer to all the Rest, and they
are so plain, as that I shall not need to Comment upon Them.

FINIS.

