EMMANUEL; OR, God-Man.

A Treatise wherein the Doctrine of the first Nicene and Chalcedon Councels,
concerning the two Natures in Christ, is asserted against the lately vented
Socinian Doctrine.

By John Tombs, B. D.

Isa. 9. 6. For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the
Government shall be upon his shoulder: And his Name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace.

London, Printed for F. Smith at the Sign of the Elephant and Castle without
Temple Bar. 1669.

Imprimatur,

Ex Aed. Lambethanis Martii 8. 1668.

Tho. Tomkyns R. R in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gilber* to Archi-Ep. Cant.
a Sacris domesticis.

TO THE READER.
WHereas this Treatise begins with mention of Christ's words, Mat. ^6. 10, 33.
which carry a show of impertinency, I think it fit to advertise thee that
indeed this is but a s^red of a Treatise concerning the Kingdom of God, and
licensed under the Title of Theocracy, and because of a writing against the
Divine Nature of Christ not long before vented (which I was not aware of when I
composed it) I yielded to the motion of publishing this by it self, it being
suggested to me, that so Printed it would be useful and seasonable, which
having told th^e of, I crave thy Prayers for him who is

Thine in the Service of our Lord Christ. JOHN TOMBS.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1. THe God whose Kingdom is to be sought is the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Sect. 2. Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the sense professed in the
Nicene Creed. Sect. 3. Christ's being God in the sense of the Nicene Creed, is
proved from John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9. 10, 14, 15, 18. Sect. 4. The Exceptions
against the proof of Christ's Godhead, from John 1. 1, etc. are set down. Sect.
5. The sense of John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 14, 15, 18. given by the
Adversaries, is reselled. Sect. 6. The reasons of the Adversaries Exposition of
John 1. 1, etc. are showed to be insufficient. Sect. 7. Christ's Generation
before the world was is proved, from John 8. 58. Sect. 8. Christ's being before
the world was, is proved from John 17. 5. Sect. 9. Col. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16,
17. is urged to prove the Godhead of Christ. Sect. 10. The proof of Christ's
Godhead, from Col. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. is vindicated from Exceptions.
Sect. 11. Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. are urged to prove the
assertion of Christ's Godhead. Sect. 12. The Argument from Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4, 6,
8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. is vindicated from Exceptions. Sect. 13. Heb. 7. 3. is
urged to prove the Eternal Sonship of Christ. Sect. 14. Christ's Kingdom is the
Kingdom of the Son of Man, so termed according to his excellency above all men.
Sect. 15. Christ's Consubstantiality with the Father, according to his Deity,
with us, according to his Humanity, as the Chalcedon Council determined, is
asserted and proved from John 1. 14. Acts 2. 30. Romans 1. 3, 4. and 9. 5. Sect.
16. The Exception against the Argument, from Acts 2. 30. Romans 1. 3, 4. Romans 9.
5. is set down. Sect. 17 This Exception against the Argument is refuted. Sect.
18. The consubstantiality of Christ with the Father and us, is proved from 1 Timothy 3. 16. Sect. 19. The Exceptions against this proof. Sect. 20. These
Exceptions are refelled. Sect. 21. The same consubstantiality of Christ is
confirmed, from 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. Gal. 4. 4. Romans 8. 3. 1 John 4. 2. Heb.
2. 14. and 10. 5. John 16. 28. Sect. 22. Christ's consubstantiality with the
Father and us, is proved from Philip. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. Sect. 23. The Exception
against this Argument is recited. Sect. 24. The Text is explained in order to
the refelling of the Exception. Sect. 25. Some Objections against the proof,
from Philip. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. are answered, particularly Objections against
expounding the form of God, Philip. 2. 6. Of the state of Empire.
SECT. I.
The God whose Kingdom is to be sought is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

BEing taught by Christ to pray, Mat. 6. 10. Thy Kingdom come, and ver. 33. to
seek first the Kingdom of God; it is necessary we know what is meant by the
terms [God the Father, the Son.] For explaining whereof we are to consider that
the word (...) translated God answering to (...) (as I show in my Oath-book
lect. 1. sect. 5.) in its common notion, notes any Numen, divine power, which
is worshipped, whether real or nominal: Agreably to which St. Paul tells us, 1
Cor. 8. 4, 5, 6. As concerning therefore the eating of th^se things that are
offered to Idols, we know that an Idol (though worshipped as God by deluded
Gentiles) is nothing in the world (has no power to do good or hurt) and that
there is none other God but ons: For though there be that are called Gods,
whether in Heaven or upon earth (as there be Gods many and Lords many) but to
us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in or for
him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him: where it
is observable that the term [one God] is attributed to the Father, to wit of
Christ, who as he is styled Ephesians. 1. 2. our Father, so v. 3. the God, and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; who is therefore frequently termed in the
writings of the Evangelists, especially St. John by our Lord Christ the Father
and his Father, and distinction is made between one God and one Lord, as in
this place, so also 1 Cor. 12. 5, 6. Ephesians. 4. 5, 6. (it is 1 Timothy 2. 5. one
God, and one Mediator between God and men) and accordingly the Apostolical
salutations, benedictions, prayers, and valedictions run thus, Romans 1. 7. 1
Cor. 1. 3. 2 Cor. 1. 2. Ephesians. 1. 2. Philip. 1. 2. Col. 1. 3. 1 These. 1. 1. 2.
These. 1. 2. Grace to you, and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ with addition of mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 2. 2 Timothy 1. 2. Tit. 1. 4. From God
the Father. 2 Cor. 1. 3. Blessed be God even the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 3.
14. For this cause I bow my knees unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Col. 1. 3. We give thanks to God and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
praying always for you. 1 These. 1. 2, 3. We give thanks to God always for you
all making mention of you in our prayers, remembering without ceasing your work
of faith; and labor of love, and patience of hope, in our Lord Jesus Christ,
in the sight of God and our Father. James 1. 1. James a servant of God, and of
the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 1. 2. Grace and peace be multiplied unto you,
through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord. 2 John 3. Grace be with
you, mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ the
Son of the Father in truth and love. And accordingly where the word [God] or
[Father] is put simply it is distinctly applied to the Father of our Lord
Christ, Romans 1. 1, 3, 4, 8, 9, and 3. 25, 26. and 5. 1, 2. 8. 10, 11, 15. and
6, 4, 11, 23. and 7. 4. 25. and 8. 3. 17. 33, 34, 39. and 10. 9. and 14. 17,
18. and 15. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. 16. 17, 19, 30. and 16. 20. 26, 27, 1 Cor. 1. 1, 2,
9. 24, 30. and 3. 23. with many more both in the Epistles and other writings of
the New Testament in which God is distinguished from the Lord Christ, and is
therefore meant of the person of the Father, concerning whom the Apostle does
expressly say, 1 Cor. 11. 3. I would have you know, that the head of every man
is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
In like manner Archbishop Usher in his Diatriba about the ancient Apostolical
Creed of the Roman Church, and other forms of faith wont to be propounded in
Catechism and Baptism both by the western and eastern Christians tells us, page
13. out of Rufinus, that almost all the eastern Churches do thus deliver their
faith: I believe in one God the Father Almighty, and in the following speech,
whereas we say, and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, they deliver it
thus, and in one Lord our Lord Jesus Christ his only Son, which he shows in the
shorter and larger Cre^ds Hierosolymitan, Alexandrian, that of Eusebius
Caesariensis recited at the first Nicene Council, and with some addition
assented to as their Creed Dr. Pearson Exposition of the 8th. Article, we have
already shown that the Father is originally that one God, which is deried by
none.

Hereby we may understand who is meant by [the Father] to wit, the Father of
Christ, and therefore the Kingdom is termed by Christ the Kingdom of his
Father, Matthew. 26. 29. because it is appointed or delivered to Christ by the
Father, Luke 22. 29. Matthew. 11. 27. and 28. 18. John 3. 35. and 5. 19, 20, 21,
22, 23, 26, 27. and 13. 3. Act^ 2. 33. 36. 2 Pet. 1. 17. and in all his
administrations Christ expresses his aim not to be his own, but his Fathers
glory, John 8. 50. 54. and 14. 13. Sometimes it is termed the Kingdom of their
Father, Mat. 13. 43. because God appoints it to the Saints, Luke 22. 29. and
12. 32. and therefore Christ says, Mat. 20. 23. To sit on my right hand, and
on my left is not mine to give, but it shall be given to them for whom it is
prepared of my Father, Mat. 25. 34. Then shall the King say to them on his
right hand, come ye blessed of my father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you,
from the foundation of the world. Acts 1. 7. It is not for you to know the
times or the seasons which the Father has put in his own power: For which
reason it is said. 1 Cor. 8. 6. Of him are all things, and believers (...) for
or to him, in the sense in which it is said, Romans 11. 36. For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things; to him be glory for ever, Amen: And
concerning Christ it is aid, Phil. 2. 8, 9, 10, 11. Because he humbled himself
and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross, therefore God also
has highly exalted him, and given him a name, which is above every name, that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven and things in
Earth, and things under the Earth, and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus is the Lord, (that is) God's King, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, at
his appearance and in his Kingdom, and this shall be) to the glory of God the
Pather: And more fully St. Paul expresses it, 1 Cor. 15. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28.
Then comes the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God even the
Father, when he shall have put down all rule and all authority and power: For
he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet: The last enemy that
shall be destroyed is death: For he has put all things under his feet; but
when he says, All things are put under him, it is manifest that he is,
excepted which did put all things under him, that God may be all in all; Whence
you may observe that the term [God] is distinctly put for the person of the
Father, in contradistinction to the Son, and that it is the Father who appoints
the Kingdom to the Son, that he puts his enemies under his feet, that the Son
shall deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, that the issue or end is, that God
to wit the Father, may be all in all, that is, in all the management of this
Kingdom from the beginning to the end the Father may be glorified by the Son,
and by all others to whom the Kingdom is given.

SECT. 2.
Jesus Christ is the Son of God in the sense professed in the Nicene Creed.

THis leads us to enquire concerning the terms [Son of God, of Man, Christ, the
Lord Jesus Christ] which are the titles by which he is expressed, whose the
Kingdom is said to be, and therefore we cannot rightly conceive of this Kingdom
without understanding these terms: That the title the Son of the living God,
given to Jesus Christ the Son of Man is a fundamental Article of the Christian
Faith, is manifest from Christ's approbation of Peter's answer to Christ's
question to his Disciples Matthew. 16. 13. Whom do men say that I the Son of man
am? To which St. Peter answered, verse 16. Thou art the Christ the Son of the
living God, whereto it is said Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art
thou Simon Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven: And again, when Jesus said to the twelve, Will ye
also go away? Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have
the words of eternal life, and we believe and are sure that thou art that
Christ the Son of the living God, John 6. 68, 69. And when the Eunuch said to
Philip, Acts 8. 36. See here is water, what does hinder me to be Baptized?
Philip said, If thou believe with all thine heart thou may, and he answered
and said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, verse 37. St. Paul
Acts 9. 20. preached Christ in the Synagogues at Dimascus, that he is the Son
of God. and John 1. 49. Nathanael said to Christ, Rabbi. thou art the Son of
God, thou are the King of Israel. 1 John 2. 22. He is Antichrist that denies
the Father and the Son. verse 23. Whosoever denies the Son, the same has not
the Father. 1 John 4. 15. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God,
God dwells in him, and he in God. 1 John 5. 5. Who is he that overcomes the
world but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? verse 11, 12. And
this is the record* that God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in
his Son: He that has the Son has life, he that has not the Son has not life.

Nevertheless there is great difference about this appellation [the Son of God]
whether it import Divine Nature distinct from Humane, or Humane Nature, yet by
Divine operation, not by the ordinary way of natural generation as other men
are begotten, but by the supernatural operation of the Holy Ghost according to
that of the Angel to Mary, Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee; Therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God. Whence the
Samosatenians and Photinians of old, so the Socinians in this last age deny
that Jesus Christ had Being before his conception by the Holy Ghost in the
Virgins womb, but the Arians granting him to have a Divine Nature, say, that he
was created by God the first creature out of nothing, and then that by him God
the Father made all things else: In opposition to whom the Creed of the first
Nicene Council, as it is in Eusebius his Epistle to the Church of Caesarea set
down by Archbishop Usher in his Diatriba de Symbolis page 16. out of At
hanasius operum tom. 2. page 48. edit. Commelinian Socrates lib. 1. Hist. c. 5.
Theodoret. lib. 1. c. 12. and Gelasius Cyricenus in Act. Council. Nic. part 3.
c. 35. is thus: We believe also in one Lord Jesus Christ born the only begotten
of the Father, that is of the substance of the Father, God of God, light of
light, very God of very God, begotten not made, of the same substance with the
Father, by whom all things were made, both the things in heaven, and the things
in the earth: In which there are these propositions included, 1. That Jesus
Christ was before any creature was made. 2. That he was begotten of the
substance of the Father, not made of nothing, as the Arians held. 3. That he
was very God of very God, of the same substance with the Father. 4. That by him
all things were made, whether in Heaven or in Earth, which propositions are
proved by these Texts of Scripture.

SECT. 3.
Christ's being the Son of God in the sense of the Nicene cre^d is proved from
John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 14, 18.

THe first Text of Holy Scripture which I shall produce to prove them is, John
1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 14, 15, 18. where it is thus said, In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the
beginning with God: All things were made by him, and without him was not made
any thing that was made, in him was life and the life was the light of men: And
the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not: verse 9.
He was the true light which enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
verse. 10. He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not, verse 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth. verse 15. John bare witness of him, and cried, saying, This is
he of whom I spoke, He that comes after me is preferred before me, for he was
before me. verse 18. No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. It is agreed on,
that by [the word] is meant Jesus Christ, as appears from verse 17, 29. and
other passages in the Text, and therefore thence I argue: He who was in the
beginning of the Creation with God, was God, by whom all things were made,
whose life was the light of men, the true light inlightning every man that
comes into the world, by whom the world was made, who was made flesh, was the
only begotten of the Father, in the bosom of the Father, before John the
Baptist was, before any creature was made, begotten of the substance of the
Father, not made of nothing, very God of very God, of the same substance with
the Father, by whom all things were made: But such was Jesus Christ, therefore
he was, before any creature was made, begotten of the substance of the Father,
not made of nothing very God of very God, of the same substance with the
Father, by whom all things were made: The minor is almost the express words of
the Text, the major is evident from the equivolence of terms, it being all one
to be God in the beginning by whom all things were made, the world was made,
the only begotten of the Father in his bosom before John Baptist as to be
before any creature was made, begotten of the substance of the father, not made
of nothing, very God of very God, of the same substance with the Father, by
whom all things were made.

SECT. 4.
The exceptions against the proof of Christ's Godhead from John 1. 1. etc. are
set down.

NEvertheless the major proposition of the argument is denied, and for a reason
of the denial it is said.

1. That the scope of the Apostle, is to set forth by whom the Gospel began, as
appears by the very appellation of [the Word] here given to Christ in regard
of his Prophetical office in publishing the Gospel.

2. That by [in the beginning] is not meant the creation of Heaven and earth at
first, but of the preaching the Gospel and the new creation, as is meant Mark
1. 1. Luke 1. 2. John 6. 64. and 8. 25. and 15. 27. and 16. 4. Acts 11. 15.
Heb. 2. 3. 1 John 1. 1. and 2. 13, 14, 24. 2 John 5. 6. which note a special
term of beginning, which was the time of Christ's preaching, in respect of which
he is said to be (...) beginning, Luke 3. 23. to wit to preach the Gospel when
he was about thirty years of age, not as it is translated, began to be about
thirty years of age.

3. That he was with God in Heaven about that time, being taken up into the
third Heaven, as Paul was, 2 Cor. 12. 2. and so was in the bosom of God, as is
gathered from John 3. 13, 31, 32. and John 6. 62.

4. That he was a God as Moses is said to be Exodus 7. 1. because of the power
he had to work miracles, and therefore John 1. 1, the Word is said to be (...)
without the article (...), and should be rendered [a God] not [God or the God.]

5. That by [all things made by him] is not meant the Heaven and Earth at the
first creation, but the things or persons belonging to the new creation by
Jesus Christ expressed in these places, 2 Cor. 5. 17, 18, 19. Ephesians. 2. 10.
Ephesians. 3. 9.

6. That when it is said, the world was made by him] the meaning is, the Church
was reformed by him, or life eternal was revealed by him, called Heb. 2. 5. the
world to come.

7. That his life was the light of men by his preaching: or that in him was
life upon his Resurrection, and that this life was the light of men by saving
them, and raising them up from the dead.

8. That it should not be read John 1. 14. he was made flesh; but the Word was
flesh, that is, a man of humane weakness after he was a man, and so not meant
of his humane nature at his incarnation, but his after condition in his life.

9. That as Isaac is termed (...) Heb. 11. 17. by reason of his being
Abraham's Heir, and extraordinary birth, not because he was the only begotten
of the substance of Abraham: So Jesus Christ is termed the only begotten of the
Father, not from his peculiar generation of the substance of the Father before
the Heaven and Earth were made, but so other peculiarities, 1. Because he was
by peculiar operation of the Holy Ghost generated in the Virgins womb, which is
the reason of this title of the Son of God given to Christ by the Angel
himself, Luke 1. 35. 2. Because of his special sanctification and mission,
which is the reason given by Christ himself, John 10. 36. 3. Because of his
resurrection from the dead, which is the reason given by St. Paul Acts 13. 33.
and therefore termed the first begotten from, or of the dead, Col. 1. 18. Rev.
1. 5. 4. Because of his singular exaltation and office, which is agreeable to
what is said, Psalm. 89. 27. and whereby he is termed the first born among many
brethren, Romans 8. 29. and by reason of his calling to the office of
chief-Priest-hood that is applied to him, Heb. 5. 5. which is written, Psalm. 2.
7. Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.

10. That he was before John Baptist, not in him, but in power (...) mightier,
or stronger than him, which is the word used concerning the same speech in the
other three Evangelists, Matthew. 3, 11. Mark 1. 7. Luke 3. 16.

SECT. 5.
The sense of John 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 10, 14, 15, 18. given by the
Adversaries, is refelled.

I Reply, 1. That Irenaeus lib. 3. Adv. Heresies, c. 11. and others near the
Apostles time, say, that the scope of the Evangelist John in writing this
Gospel was to oppose the Heresies of the Gnostics, Ebion, Cerinthus, Marcion,
Valentinus, and such others, as whether from Platonic Philosophy, or other
fancies, corrupted the doctrine of the Godhead, made Christ a mere man,
contrary to which St. John asserts his divinity in the beginning, and thence
got the name of the Divine, and his Gospel to be that part of Scripture which
does most plainly deliver Theology or speech of God, and thereby as also in
relating many Acts and Sermons of Christ omitted by other Evangelists which
makes a supplement to their Histories.

2. That the series of the Apostles words, the expressions compared with Genesis
1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. of [in the beginning was the word with God, all things were
made by him, the life was the light of men, the light shines in darkness, and
the darkness comprehended it not] are so correspondent to each other, that none
but will say, that at least St. John did allude to Moses his description of the
first creation, and that he did use Moses his expressions, and therefore meant
the same thing, has been conceived not only by Christians, but also by
A^relius the Platonist, as Eusebius, in his book of Evangelical preparation,
lib. 11. c. 19. relates; nor is it to be slightly passed over, which John
Cameron observes in his answers to questions on the Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter
1. v. 2. concerning Gods manner of delivering mysteries in the Old Testament,
that it was to be but dusky, as in the twilight, until the Messiah his time,
who should fully discover the things of God as the Sun, when it is risen, does
things before obscured, and that the Apostle knew Christ's creating the world in
the beginning even from Genesis 1. For wherefore, says he, I beseech you, should
Moses (which no where else is done in the whole Scripture) so often bring in
God speaking, let this and that be made, and after it was made? For certainly
God then used no speech as when he spoke to the Prophets. It is but a cold
answer, that Moses did so write, that it might be signified after a humane
manner, that God made all things by his beck. For who doubts of that, or does
not indeed know, that to make the frame of the world God used no tools or
engines? Besides, if that were the intent, why is not also elsewhere God
brought in using like speech, when he did some great work or miracle? I do no
whit doubt but John had an eye on that place, when he termed Christ the Word,
as if he had said, that Christ was pointed out by those expressions; He said,
and it was made, although obscurely indeed, as befitted those times, even as
also obscurely mention is made of the Holy Spirit, in the same chapter, when
Moses said, and the Spirit of God moved upon the waters. For indeed at first
view he seems to speak of some wind and so the Chaldee Paraphrast expounded
that place. But because no reason can be given whence that wind should arise,
or fit cause why it should move upon the waters, men might be inclined to
conjecture that Moses in that place had respect to another thing. In the same
manner plainly, since no reason of so diligent and heedful an observation fit
enough can be given, that God spoke of each thing severally, Let it be made and
it was made, there must be some mystery couched under those expressions: When
therefore in the New Testament we are taught, that all things were made by
Christ, let the Jews either open and explain to us that Mystery, or let them
not show themselves stiff in this matter. I confess indeed, that without the
light of the Gospel, we should be hesitant here with the Jews; but since Christ
is called the Word, and said to be he by whom God made all things, no man has
any more cause of doubting left, but that Moses would intimate it by that
diligent observation which the words of the Psalmist, [Psal. 33. 6. 9. By the
word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath
of his mouth: He spoke and it was done, besides those word^ Psalm. 136. 5. to
him that by wisdom (which (...) signifies as well as speech) made the Heavens,
Psalm. 148. 5. he commanded and they were created, did so far intimate that the
Chaldee Paraphrast, Isa. 45. 12. reads; I in my word have made the earth, and
created man upon it and Isa. 48. 13. By my word I have founded the earth, and
Philo the Jew besides other sayings in his book of allegories showing his
inklings of his knowledge of this mystery, though dark says, the word or
reason, (for (...) signifies both) made the world: These with many other
allegations, which might be produced out of Jewish Writers, and others do
evince, that the Evangelist means the same creation, when he says all things
were made by him, and the same beginning when he says, In the beginning was
the word, as Moses meant, when he said, In the beginning God created the Heaven
and the Earth. Genesis 1. 1.

3. The sense of the words in which the force of the argument consists is
according to the plain and obvious use of the words and phrases; the other for
the most part without example, and so streined, as that it may easily be
perceived, they studied rather to wrest, than to interpret them; as will appear
by comparing the allegations and senses on both sides given in the particulars
as they are in order examined in the next Section.

4. The Adversaries acknowledge, that the intent of the Evangelist in that
which is said of Christ, was to set out Christ in what he was singular, and was
excellent in him: But to expound his words as they do, is to make the
Evangelist deliver things common to him with others, as to say, in the
beginning was the Word, that is, preaching the Gospel, or in the beginning of
the preaching of the Gospel the Word Christ was, that is, had a being, that he
was with God, that is, was known of God, is to say no more than might be said
of John Baptist; to say he was with God to learn Mysteries is the same which
St. Paul says of himself, when he was rapt into Paradise, or is true of Moses
when he conferred with God in the Mount; to say all things were made by him,
that is, by his preaching the Gentiles were become new creatures, is no more
than might be said of Peter, Paul, and other Apostles; to say he was a God in
office, that he had Divine Power to work Miracles, is to say no more of him
than might be said of Moses, of the Apostles, nor do they or can they give any
good reason, which may agree with the Majesty and Wisdom of so divine a writing
and Writer as this of John, to deliver things so obvious in so obscure Phrases,
as are not congruous to a divine Historian, when the same might be, and were by
other Evangelists delivered in plainer expressions; nor why he should prefix
those sacred Aphorisms before his History, if they contained no Mystery, but
things easily perceivable by sense; nor is such an end, as is imagined by some,
to show that John Baptist was not the Messiah, any thing probable to have been
propounded by John the Evangelist, who wrote long after John Baptist was dead;
nor could be, or was by any conceived to be the Christ: Such things as these
can hardly be imputed to the Evangelist without some note of dotage.

5. To expound the words [in the beginning was the Word] that is, in the
beginning of the preaching of the Gospel was the Word, that is, Christ was
preaching of the Gospel, or the preaching of the Gospel was, is more like an
inept tautology of a trifler, than the holy, wise saying of a Divine Writer.

6. The sense given by the Adversaries is in sundry things not true; for in the
beginning of the preaching of the Gospel Christ was not with God in Heaven, as
they expound, verse 1. 2. his being with God, but was come from Heaven, and
conversed familiarly with men; nor is it true, that in the beginning of the
Preaching of the Gospel (be the beginning at John's beginning to preach, or
Christ's, or his Apostles, or the continuing of it in the days of his flesh)
all things belonging to the new Creation, the new Covenant, the reconciling the
world, the preaching and propagating of the Gospel were done by him. For the
many Miracles of Christ were not done in the beginning of the Preaching of the
Gospel, nor was his dying for us, nor the sending his Apostles, and their
impowering by the coming of the Holy Ghost to them till after his Resurrection
and Ascension: Yea those men who expound the words, John 1. 3. All things were
done by him of divine and marvelous works, yet many divine marvelous works, as,
the opening of the Heavens, the descent of the Spirit in the form of a Dove,
the transfiguration and glory in the Mount, the rending the veil of the Temple,
the Earthquake, cleaving the Rocks, opening the Graves, darkening of the Sun at
his death, his Resurrection from the dead, they deny to have been done by
Christ or the concurrence of his power or operation; nor is it true in their
sense, that without him was nothing done that was done; For in the business of
the preaching of the Gospel before Christ's manifestation to Israel, John did
preach and Baptize, and in the working of Miracles there were some that did
cast out devils in Christ's name, who followed not Christ, Luke 9. 49. Nor is it
true, that in their sense the world was made by Christ, that is the Gentiles
reconciled by Christ's Preaching or the world reformed; for that was done by the
Apostles after his Ascension: And if it be said, that after Christ's Ascension
all things were done by him, that the world was made by him, that was not in
the beginning, in which they say, he was the Word, that is, did preach the
Gospel, was a God, that is, did work Miracles, was with God, that is, was taken
up into heaven, and therefore the making of all things, John 1. 3. cannot be
understood according to their own exposition of [in the beginning] of Christ's
care in ordering and moderating all things belonging to his Church after his
ascension, nor had any more been said of him as then done than may be said now,
which is contrary to the adversaries grant, that some more than ordinary
remarkable things is related of Christ by St. John in the first verses of his
Gospel: Whence may be justly inferred that the Exposition given by them neither
is consistent with the truth of things, nor the Evangelists words, nor their
own sayings.

SECT. 6.
The reasons of the Adversaries Exposition of John 1. 1, etc. are showed to be
insufficient.

BUt besides other absurdities, which are in the Exposition of the Adversaries,
the reasons they give are mistakes and insufficient for what they produce them:
For in the first there is a great mistake, as if the Evangelist used the term
[Word] to intimate by whom the Preaching of the Gospel began; For Christ is not
termed (...), which we translate [the Word] because he was Gods Messenger to
declare Gods mind to us in the Gospel; the term [Word] is not fit to express a
deputy, but the term [Ambassador, Lega^e] but because it signifies Reason, and
Wisdom, and therefore fitly expresses Christ, who was the Wisdom of God, by
whom he made all things at the beginning of the Creation, Psalm. 136. 5. Prove.
3. 19. with whom he was when he prepared the Heavens, Prove. 8. 27. to which the
Evangelist alludes, when he says, John 1. 2. the same was in the beginning
with God, and the Author of the Book of Wisdom, chapter 9. 2. alluding to that,
Genesis 1. 26. Let us make man in our Image, says, who have framed man in thy
Wisdom, or, because all things are said to be made by the Word of God, as in
the places before alleged, Psalm. 33. 6. 9. Psalm. 148. 5. alluding without
doubt to the expressions, Genesis 1. 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 20, 24, 26, 28. and
accordingly the holy Writers in the New Testament, express the first Creation,
as done by the Word of God. St. Paul 2 Cor. 4. 6. God who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness. Heb. 11. 3. Through faith we understand that the
worlds were framed by the Word of God. 2 Pet. 3. 5. For this they willingly are
ignorant of, that by the Word of God, (...) the heavens were of old, and the
Earth standing out of the water, and in the water, or as it may be read,
consisting of water, and by water; for which reason the Chaldee Paraphrast in
abundance of places, especially where Gods creating of Heaven and Earth is
signified, uses this expression, I have done it by my Word, as Isa. 45. 12.
and 48. 13. Hos. 1. 7. whence it is apparent that St. John used the term (...),
the Word as a title known to the Jews, answering to the Chaldee, (...); and
that, as Heinsius Arist. sac. exercit. in non. c. 3. observes, it undoubtedly
comes from the East, not from the Greeks, and that by reason of his relating
Gods acts, especially the Creation, as done by the Word, it is not given by the
Evangelist to Christ, to signify his preaching of the Gospel, but his creation
of the World at first, and consequently to be understood of his Divine Nature,
in which he created all things in the beginning of the world; nor does the
speech, 1 John 1. 1, 2. that what was from the beginning which he and other
Apostles had seen with their eyes, and their hands handled of the Word of Life,
prove, that the term [Word of Life] imports only Christ's humane nature, or that
he is so termed from preaching the Gospel: For it is not said, that they
handled or saw the Word of life, but they heard, saw, handled, (...) concerning
the Word of life, that is as verse 2. And the life was manifested and we have
seen, and witness, and show unto you that eternal life which was with the
Father, and was manifested unto us, that is, as is expressed, 1 Timothy 3. 16. God
was manifested in the flesh; so that what they heard, saw, handled, concerning
the Word of Life, or Divine Nature was manifested in the flesh by his words of
command to unclean Spirits to depart, to the Winds and Seas to be still, by his
Miracles which they saw, felt, tasted, whereby he manifested his glory, Joh. 1.
14. and 2. 11. and 11. 40. whence Christ argues, John 10, 37, 38. If I do not
the works of my Father believe me not, But if I do, though ye believe not me,
believe the works, that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I
in him. John 14. 10, 11. The words that I speak unto you I speak not of my
self, but the Father that dwells in me, he does the works: Believe me that I
am in the Father and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works
sake; nor is Christ described, Rev. 19. 13. where he is called [the Word of
God] as a Prophet to show that the title [Word of God] imported his preaching,
but as a Warrior to show his power; not as the Essay on Rev. 19. 13. Because
he came immediately from the Divine Majesty in Heaven to publish the Gospel to
the world, and had full power to do whatsoever miracles he pleased.

2. It is true that [in the beginning] is wont to be restrained to the matter
in hand, nor is it denied but that in many of the places alleged in the second
exception [in the beginning] is meant of the preaching of Christ, nor is it
material in this point, whether [beginning] Luke 3. 23. be referred to Christ's
age, or the preaching of the Gospel, though the latter be less probable,
because then when Christ was Baptized of John he had not begun to preach the
Gospel till after his temptation in the Wilderness. But the thing to be proved
is, that the preaching of the Gospel is the matter in hand, Joh. 1. 1, 2. The
word [the beginning] is used John 8. 44. 1 John 3. 8. Mat. 19. 4, 8* and 24.
21. Mark. 10. 6. and 13. 19. Heb. 1. 10. 2 Pet. 3. 4. for the beginning of the
Creation, and the very expressions, John 1. 1, 2, 3, (...), 5, 10. and other
evidences before alleged show it, answers to (...) Genesis 1. 1. Gr. (...), as
John 1. 1. and in both places are delivered with the like agreableness to Gods
Majesty in creating, that even as Longinus the Philosopher magnified Moses his
description of the Creation, so Franciscus Junius that eminent Divine was taken
with the reading of John 1. 1. etc. and from his inclinations to Atheism was by
it brought to the knowledge of Christ, as he relates in the narration of his
own life. As for the sense the Adversaries give, In the beginning was the Word,
that is, in the beginning of the Gospel was the Word, that is, the man Christ
Jesus called the Word, in that he was the immediate Interpreter of God, by whom
he revealed his counsel touching our salvation, as we are wont to disclose our
secrets by our words, which reason, it is said, may not obscurely be collected
from the 18. v. of the same chapter, and the Word was with God, being taken up
into Heaven, that so he might talk with God, and be indeed his Word, or the
immediate Interpreter of his Will, and receive the most certain and absolute
knowledge of the Kingdom of Heaven which he was to propound to men, it has no
color from the Text; For neither is it said, in the beginning of the Gospel,
nor the appellation of [the Word] is given to Christ in regard of his
Prophetical Office, nor is it said in the beginning the Word was preaching, but
simply was, noting his existence, not his acting; nor will the order of the
Apostles Propositions consist with the sense they give, for then St. John
should have said thus: In the beginning the Word was with God, and after he had
been with God, he came down from Heaven and was the Word, that is, preached the
Gospel, and then he was a God, as being endued with divine Power and Empire, to
cast out Devils, and to do great works, as Moses did; whereas the first thing
he sets down in the being of Christ in the beginning, and then his being with
God, and his being God, and the making of all things by him, which can be
applied in this order to no beginning, but that of the Creation, and therefore
[in the beginning] must be understood of the first Creation of all things, and
not of the publishing the Gospel, as they would have it.

3. This consideration also overthrows their sense of the words [was with God]
of his being taken up into Heaven, that so he might talk with God, and be
indeed his Word. For if it were meant of his taking up into Heaven in a humane
body (as 2 Cor. 12. 2. is said of Paul) then it should have been put first,
whereas it is the second and fourth Proposition, John 1. 1, 2. and being
repeated, v. 2. and then it following, verse 3. all things were made by him,
and without him not one thing was made that was made, it plainly shows that the
meaning is, that he was with God in the work of Creation of the Heaven and
Earth, so as that all things were made by him as the Son of God, or God with
the Father: As for the words, verse 18. of his being in the bosom of his
Father, they do not show his receiving instructions from God, as a Messenger,
taken up into Heaven, that he might be sent down again to deliver his Message
perfectly and amply, but the love* and intimacy and nearness to his Father, in
that he was his only begotten Son, and therefore was perfectly acquainted with
him, and his mind: And it seems to me that the Evangelist alluded, John 1. 1,
2, 18. to the passages which are Prove. 8. 29, 30. When he gave to the Sea his
decree, that the waters should not pass his commandment, when he appointed
the foundations of the Earth, then I was by him as one brought up with him,
(Hebr. (...) a Foster Child, Aquila, (...) nursed as a Child in the bosom) and
I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him, which is the opinion of
Grotius annot. ad J^. 1. 1. Prove. 8. 27. and many others, and shows, that the
being in the bosom was not as a Servant to be employed, but as a Son, in whom
he delighted, as is said, Matthew. 3. 17. and 17. 5. As for that which has been
immagined concerning the meaning of the words, The Word was with God, John 1.
1, 2. as if it were thus, He was known to God, though unknown to men till he
was manifested by John, as it is partly false, since he was known to Mary his
Mother, Zecharias, Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna, Joseph, to the Wise men of the
East, as the Son of God, King of the Jews, a horn of Salvation out of the house
of David, the Lord, the rising from on high, the light of the Gentiles, the
glory of the people Israel, the Lords Christ, as may be perceived by reading
Luke 1. and 2. chapter Mat. 1. and 2. so is it frivolous, as being without any
example of such use of the expressions, and contrary to the use of the phrase,
which still notes presence of being, or subsist^nce, or cohab^^ation, as Mat.
13. 55, 56. Mark 6. 3. and 9. 19. Luke 9. 41. 1 Cor. 16. 6. etc. and signifies
Joh. 1. 1, 2. his being with God in the beginning of the Creation, as (...)
with thee, Joh. 17. 5. (...), Prove. 8. 30. which the Chaldee Paraphrast reads,
at his side, and Exodus 20. 19. Let not the Lord speak with us by the Word which
is before the Lord, and the Wisdom of Solomon as it is styled, chapter 9. 9. says
thus: And wisdom was with thee which knows thy works, and was present when
thou made the world, where the translators in the margin not unfitly place
Prove. 8. 22. Joh. 1. 1, 2, 3, 10. as parallel Texts to show the presence and
cooperation of the Word in the making of the World; which show the Jews had
some ^nkling of the Words subsistence at the Creation, though the writing be
Apocryphal, nor does his being with the Father John 1. 1, 2. signify objective
presence, but essential.

As for the device of Christ's being taken up into heaven in his humane body, as
it is a late invention, so it is improbable, since no certain time or other
circumstance is expressed in the Evangelists, in which it should be, which in
so remarkable a thing it is not likely would have been omitted any more than in
Paul's narration of himself, 2 Cor. 12. 2. if such an ascension had been; nor
is the reason given that he should be taken up to Heaven that he might talk
with God, and receive the most certain and absolute knowledge of the Kingdom of
Heaven, which he was to propose to men, probable, since another reason is given
of his knowledge, John. 3. 34. For he whom God has sent, speaks the words of
God: For God gives not the Spirit by measure to him; nor is he any where said
to go from the Earth, and to return thither; and when Christ speaks of his
going to Heaven, he says, Luke 24. 26. Ought not Christ to suffer these
things, and to enter into his glory? Which intimates his going to Heaven, to
have followed his sufferings, and Heb. 9. 12. the Author of that Epistle
says, By his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, (...) whether it
be read once, or for once, or at once, it notes but one time entering into
heaven with his blood, as his offering was but once, Heb. 10. 10. and not often
as the High Priest Aaronical did. As for what is alleged, [that John 6. 38,
46, 51, 62. Christ affirms that he came down from Heaven, and had seen God,
and that he was the living bread which came down from Heaven, whereof whosoever
did eat should live for ever; so the bread which he would give was his flesh,
which he would give for the life of the world: And afterward asks the Jews,
what if they should see the Son of man ascending up where he was before?
namely, before he began to preach the Gospel, as he himself intimates, John 8.
42. Where he says, if God were your Father, you would love me, for I went out
from God, and came: for neither came I of my self, but he sent me: And John 16.
28. Where he says, I came out from the Father, and came into the world: Again
(or rather on the contrary) I leave the world, and go to the Father: which
going forth from the Father, every one may easily perceive, by the opposition
of the following clause, is meant of a local procession of Christ from God, and
that before the discharge of his Embassy: for to come, or to come into the
world signifies to treat with men in the name of God, and to perform a public
Office among men, See John 1. 15. 27, 30. and John 1. 5, 20. Mat. 11. 3, 18,
19. Ioh. 17. 18. compared with chap. 16. 21. and chap. 18. 37.] it evinceth not
a bodily ascent into Heaven of Christ to learn of God before his publishing the
Gospel, For it is not said whither he ascended before, but was before, which
notes presence there, but not local motion; nor is it said in his humane body;
though it be said, the Son of man was there before; yet this may be understood
by the figure of communication of properties very frequent in speeches of
Christ, according to his Divine Nature; nor is he said to be there before his
preaching the Gospel, restraining the time to it; it may be meant of his being
in Heaven before the World was, as it is said, John 17. 5. nor is it said,
Christ's flesh came from heaven, or that he came from Heaven by local motion, or
saw God by his eyes of flesh; his coming and seeing God, may be understood of
his Divine Nature in respect of which he was of Heavenly Original, though his
being bread be meant of his flesh and humane nature in which he suffered, and
his coming out from God, and coming John 8. 42. is expounded of his receiving
commission from God, as the words show, neither came I of my self, that is, I
have not taken upon me this Office, I now administer of mine own motion only,
but he sent me; nor is coming out from the Father necessarily understood, of
coming out from the Father, and coming into the world by local procession; but
the coming out from the Father may be meant of receiving commission from his
Father, or his original being, and his coming into the world either of his
humane birth, or as the allegation expresses it, his treating with men in the
Name of God, and performing a public office among men, unto one of which, the
Texts produced lead us, and not to the sense of local procession in his humane
body, nor does the opposition prove it, for the sense may be right thus: I came
out from the Father by generation, and taking my commission from him, and came
into the world by humane birth, or as it is, John 12. 46. A light into the
world by my preaching the Gospel, and again, or on the contrary, I leave the
world by death, or removing from the Earth, and go by my bodily ascent to the
Father: As for John 3. 13. neither is the coming down from Heaven, nor his
being in Heaven necessarily understood of removal from Earth to Heaven, and
back again by bodily motion, but may be meant of his being in Heaven in his
Divine nature, and coming down from Heaven by being made flesh, or receiving
his commission from God, in respect of one or both of which he is said, verse
31. to come from Heaven, from above, in opposition to being of the Earth by
humane generation, or authority. And verse 32. he is said to have seen and
heard by his intimacy with his Father, and the communication of the Spirit.
verse 34. not by his bodily eyes or ears upon a supposed personal humane
presence and conference with God in Heaven.

4. The Apellation of God given to the Word, Job. 1. 1. is not from his Office
as altogether Divine, as being above Prophets, whose Office, if compared with
Christ's, was humane; For Moses was a Prophet of whom God said, Numb. 12. 8.
With him will I speak mouth to mouth, even apparently, and not in dark
speeches, and the similitude of the Lord shall he behold: and St. Paul was rapt
into the third Heaven, and heard words unspeakable, 2 Cor. 12. 4. and yet
neither of them termed God; yea, St. Paul abhorred it with indignation, Acts
14. 11, 15. such persons may be (...) Divine men, not (...) Gods: nor is the
Word termed God, as endued with Divine Power: For then Moses might be so
termed, for he was a Prophet endued with Divine Power and Empire, so as to
control Pharaoh and to work Miracles: But Moses is not termed God, though God
said to him, I have made thee a God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 1. and thou shall be
to Aaron (...) for or instead of God, that is, as a Prince or Master to command
or direct him Exodus 4. 16. But the Word, it is said, John 1. 1. was God
absolutely, noting what he was in himself, not relatively what he was to
another, showing what he was in nature and power, not what he was designed for,
or what his employment or work should be, or what he was in Office, no whit
expressing from whom, to whom, for what he was sent, or what he did, but what
he was: And his being God is said to be in the beginning, not in the progress
of his preaching in which he did Miracles, nor after his Resurrection when all
Power was given him in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28. 18. nor after his
ascension, when he was exalted by the right hand of God, Acts 2. 33. God made
him both Lord and Christ, verse 36. But in the beginning of the Creation, when
he made all things, and therefore was God the Creator, as the Author to the
Hebrews chapter 3. 4. asserts, He that built, or framed all things is God: where it
may be observed, that (...) God is put without the article (...), and yet by
God is there meant not a substituted God by Office, but God the Creator, and
John 1. 6, 12, 13, 18. and in a great number of other places it is likewise
used; and therefore notwithstanding this exception the Word is to be believed
to have been God Creator, very God of very God in the beginning of the
Creation at first, as v. 3. is asserted.

5. That the making of all things by the Word is not meant of the new Creation
is proved before Psalm. 148. 5. (...).
Sect. 13. and that the words (...) and (...) used John 1. 3; 10. translated by
us made, are used of the first Creation is manifest from the use, Heb. 4. 3.
and 11. 3. 1 Cor. 15. 45. as Genesis 2. 7. and Genesis 1. 3, 6, 9, 11, 14, 15, 20,
24. and 2. 4. and therefore the creation of all things of the world at first,
is fi^ly expressed by those words, John 1. 3, 10. and so the universal Creation
at first ascribed to the Word: Nor is it any deminution to Christ, that it is
said, all things were made by him, and without him was nothing made which was
made, and the world was made by him. For the expressions by him, not without
him do not note always an instrument, even Romans 11. 36. It is said, all things
are of him, and by him, and for him, who is the Lord, to whom glory belongs for
ever; but shows the order and cooperation of the Father and the Word in the
Creation. As for the passage, 2 Cor. 5. 17. it is granted to be meant of the
new state of things by Christ's reconciling the world to God, verse 18. but it
is not like the words, John 1. 3, 10. where all things are said, to be made,
not made new by him, and old things past away, and all things are said to be
made by him in the beginning; Whereas the making all things new by reconciling
the World to God, was by Christ's being made sin for them, ver. 21. by his
death, and therefore not in the beginning of his preaching the Gospel, and
therefore cannot be meant of the same creation, Ephesians. 2. 10. The Ephesians are
said to be created in Christ Jesus unto good works, not by Christ Jesus, but to
be Gods Work. The words Ephesians. 3. 9. may be more rightly understood of the
first Creation, in which Christ was co-worker, which the words from the
beginning of the world seem to intimate; however they are not like John 1. 3.
in expressions, and therefore evince not, that they are to be both understood
of the same thing.

6. The term (...) can signify no other than either the frame of Heaven and
Earth, or the Inhabitants in it, as John 17. 5, 17. John 1. 9, 29. and 3. 16.
and many more places, and (...) can have no other signification, than was made
by him, at the first creation. For the World was made by him before he was in
it, and it knew him not, it being put as an aggravation of their perverseness,
that the world that was made by him, knew him not, which can be verified of no
time, but the first creation; which is confirmed by the two next verses: For
verse 9. Coming into the World is meant, of appearing among men, whether by
birth or other manifestation, and therefore the world must signify, verse 9.
the Earth or Men, and so, verse 10. which is apparent in that, when it is said,
the world knew him not, it must be expounded, men knew him not, and the words
following, he came unto his own, and his own received him not, verse 11. must
be understood of men, whether his own be meant of men simply, or men that he
had special relation to as Country men, or Kinsmen. And for the word (...)
which we translate [was made] as here put, it never signifies any other thing
than was, or was made, or was begotten, not revealing, preaching, or renewing.
Nor does the Word [(...) the World] signify, being put without any further
addition or expression, heaven, or immortality, or eternal life. The place,
Romans 4. 13. that Abraham should be heir of the World, if meant of his own
natural posterity inheriting, is to be conceived meant of the Promised Land; if
of Christ, of the Empire of the world, as Psalm. 2. 8. is foretold; if of his
seed by Faith, to be coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. if (as it is most likely
from the connection with the 11th. and 12th. verse) of the world of Believers
Jews, and Gentiles of whom he is Father, still it is meant of men's persons, not
their mere state and condition, Heb. 10. 5. the coming into the world, is
coming among men, and that to offer himself in Sacrifice, and the preparing of
his body is not making it immortal, but fitting it for death, as verse 10, 12.
do plainly show; Neither of the places, Heb. 2. 5. or, 6. 5. have the word
translated World, John 1. 10. in the one the word is (...) opposed to (...)
desert, in the other (...), and notes the course of time, place, or generation
future; neither the state it self of eternal life, which is distinct from the
world to come, Luke 18. 30. and cannot be meant of the world made by Christ,
John 1. 10. which is not future, but was existent when Christ was in it. For
the same reasons, by the world made by Christ, cannot be meant the Church
reformed by him; For if by the world be elsewhere meant the Church of the
Elect, or world of Believers reconciled to God (as is conceived to be meant,
John 6. 51. 2 Cor. 5. 19. etc.) yet here it cannot be meant, because it is
said, the world knew him not, received him not, even that world which was made
by him; but the Church of the Elect, or, Believers reconciled to God, knew him,
and received him: Nor does any where the word [was made] put as here, signify
was renewed, enlightened, reformed; nor if it were so used, could it be here,
since the world knew him not, nor received him, which is said to be made by him:
And to say that the meaning is, the world was made by him, that is, the world
was so far as concerned his action, as much as in him lay, enlightened, renewed,
reformed, though not in the event, so as to note Christ's study and endeavor,
not the effect, is without all example; since the word (...) does note being,
and effect of the thing, not intention or action of the agent, and so the
Church of Elect would be no more made by him than others, and it would be clean
contrary to the Apostles intention to show the event of his being in the world,
that notwithstanding the world was made by him, yet they were so averse from
him, as not to know him, and so perverse as not to receive him; understanding
Synecdochically, the greater part (as 2 Pet. 2. 5. and elsewhere the world is
put for the multitude, or greatest part) distinct from them that received him,
verse 12, 13.

7. The life which is said was in the Word, was in him in the beginning, not
restored to him at his Resurrection, and it is said was in him, not as John 11.
25. and 14. 6. he was the life causally and relatively to others, but in him,
that is in himself, and so notes what he had in respect of his Essence, and
natural Being, not by his Office, or communicated Power in that respect. And
when it is said, the life was the light of men, it is not said, the life shall
be the light of men, but was so in the beginning; Nor is it said, it was the
light of men as dead or fallen, but of men simply as men, and so cannot be
understood of the light infused by regeneration, or restored by raising from
the dead, but communicated by Creation, and notes the natural light of reason
and understanding wherewith Christ inlightens every man which comes into the
World, verse 9. of which more may be seen in my Book of The true old Light
exalted, Sermon. 1. on Joh. 1. 9. Nor is it to the contrary, that ver. 5. it is
said, and the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended it
not: For taking the shining by enallage of tense (as it must be, whether it be
meant of shining by creation or Preaching) for the time past, and the sense be,
and the light shined in the darkness; it may be meant of the beginning of the
Creation allusively to Genesis 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and in the sense of the Apostle,
2 Cor. 4. 6. God spoke, to wit, by the Word, that the light should shine out of
darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it; or if the sense be, Christ
the true light when he came into the world, shined among dark men, and they did
not comprehend him, or his Doctrine which he taught; it proves not that verse
4. is not meant of Christ's life by nature, and his life being the light of men,
by creation of them with understanding in the beginning. For as ver. 9, 10, 11.
the stupidity and perverseness of men is showed, that notwithstanding Christ
made the world, and enlightens all men, yet when he was in the world, and
preached to them, they knew not, nor received him; so in like manner, v. 4. 5.
to the same purpose with good congruity of sense and reason the Evangelist, to
show the great alienation of men from their Creator, says, that though in the
Word was life in the beginning, and his life was the cause of men's natural
light in the creation of Adam, and Eve the Mother of all living, yet when he
the true light shined by his preaching among men, who were by sin and ignorance
in darkness, and the shadow of death, the dark Spirits of men did not
comprehend, understand, and receive him and his Doctrine.

8. That Flesh is as much as a man simply as man, is obvious out of many
passages in holy Scripture, and particularly, John 17. 2, etc. and that it
notes Christ's humane nature or humane body as such is manifest from John 6. 51,
52, 53, 54, 55, 56, etc. and that (...) is to be rendered was made, as John 1.
3, 10. and the sense, as in Romans 1. 3. Gal. 4. 4. Heb. 2. 14. and such places,
is, that he was incarnate or made a man, and that this was a voluntary act in
taking a humane nature, not a part of his sufferings is manifest from what is
added, he was made flesh, and dwelt among us, which notes an act of his will or
choice, and imports his assumption of a humane body, that it might be an
everlasting habitation for his Divine Majesty, and therein converse with man;
And that he was made flesh, not under the notion of weakness but humane nature,
is evident from the words following, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of
the only begotten of the Father, which shows that in his flesh, which he was
made, his glory, that is, his Divine Majesty was beheld in the great works he
did in his humane body, and that he dwelt in or among us, full of grace and
truth; which show [that he was made flesh] notes not his weakness but humane
Nature having Power and Excellency. Add hereto that the Being of the Word was
expressed before, John 1. 2, 3, 4, 9, 10. by (...) he was, therefore (...),
verse 14. must be meant of his being made a man besides his being the Word. And
to say the Word, who was a man, was a man; had been to trifle, to say nothing
but what might be said of every man; yea, and that which was discernable by
sense, and so needless to be testified by John, who intended to express Divine
Mysteries concerning Christ in things that were singular and excellent, and
could be known but by revelation from God: and this reason overthrows this
sense, the Word that is the Interpreter of Gods Will, was flesh, that is, a man
of infirmities; for then no more had been said of him, than might have been
said of John Baptist, and other prophets; The sense then must be this and no
other, The Word which was in the beginning, was with God, was God, by whom all
things were made, and without whom nothing was made that was made, in whom was
life, and the life was the light of men, enlightening every man that someth into
the world, by whom the world was made, was in the fullness of time made a man in
a humane body having his Divine Majesty dwelling in him full of Grace and
Truth, so that we beheld his Glory in his Miracles, his Grace and Truth in his
Holy and Wise Doctrine such as manifested him to be the only begotten of the
Father.

9. The terms, John 1. 15. the only begotten of the Father, verse 18. the only
begotten which is in the bosom of the Father, must be understood of Generation,
before the World was made, of the substance of the Father. For the term notes
Generation, and so subsistence from his Substance, not Creation out of nothing,
or created matter as Adam, nor can he be said to be the only begotten Son of
the Father, from his peculiar forming as man, expressed Luke 1. 35. for Adam
who was formed without the help of man, and called the Son of God, Luke 3. 38.
was so, as much the only begotten Son of God, as the Word, or Jesus Christ. Nor
is he said to be the only begotten of the Father by reason of his peculiar
love: for the peculiar love is from his peculiar Sonship, not that the form or
cause of it: nor is he said to be the Son of God by regeneration, as they that
believe in Christ are the Sons of God, John 1. 13. for so many are Sons of God;
nor from his peculiar mission, resurrection or exaltation. For though these
proved him the only begotten of the Father as evidences thereof, yet not as
causes of his Sonship. But he is entitled the only begotten Son of the Father
from his proper generation and Sonship, whence he is styled his Son, Romans 8. 3.
his own proper Son, verse 32. not adopted but natural, otherwise Adam might be
from his original as well styled his own proper Son. That Christ Jesus is in
respect of his natural generation, before the world was, the only begotten Son
of God may be evinced, 1. From Mat. 16. 13, 16, 17. Christ asking, whom do men
say that I the Son of man am, it being answered, verse 14. Some say John the
Baptist, others Elias, others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets; our Lord Christ
further presses them to tell him, whom they said him to be, verse 15. plainly
intimating, that these opinions of him were short of what they were to esteem
him, whereupon Simon Peter answered and said, verse 16. Thou art the Christ the
Son of the living God, to whom Christ replies, verse 17. Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-Jona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father which
is in the Heavens. which plainly shows, 1. that the confessing him to be the
Son of God, was more than to be the Son of Man, John Baptist, Elias, Jeremiah
or one of the Prophets. 2. That this being the Son of God, was such a thing as
was not to be revealed by flesh and blood, but by his Father in Heaven,
therefore it was not his being Gods Son, by the supernatural conception of the
blessed Virgin, for that she could tell, both by her own knowledge of her
Virginity, and the Angels revelation; nor by special mission, for that had
been, but as one of the Prophets, as Moses, and had been discernable by flesh
and blood upon the sight of his great works, to which he often appealed, as
demonstrating him to be sent of his Father as the Messiah, John 14. 10, 11. nor
as Mediator only; for then there had been no more acknowledged by Peter's
confessing him to be the Son of the living God, than by confessing him to be
the Christ, therefore he was the Son of the living God by generation of his
Fathers Substance before the world was, which his Father only could reveal. 2.
This is further proved from these Texts of Scripture which make it the
demonstration of the greatest love of God in giving his only begotten Son, John
3. 16. not sparing his own Son, but giving him up for us all, Romans 8. 32. But
this had not been such a commendation of his love, if Christ had been only a
supernaturally conceived man specially commissionated as Mediator, if he had
not been the Son of God by generation before the world was, of his Fathers
substance, it had not been more than the not sparing holy Angels but giving
them for us; therefore he must be the Son of God, by such generation of the
Fathers substance, as he had before the world was. 3. Heb. 3. 4, 5, 6. our Lord
Christ is preferred before Moses, as being a Son over his own house, and this
house built by himself, who built all things, and therefore God, whereas Moses
was but faithful as a Servant in Gods house, not his ow^, therefore Christ is
the Son of God, as he is God with his Father, building or framing all things,
and consequently the Son of God by generation of his Fathers substance, before
the World was. 4. It is said Heb. 5. 8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he
obedience by the things which he suffered, which showed a singular demission of
himself in his obedience; but if he had been only a Son by creation as the
Angels, or as a mere man, by supernatural conception in the Virgins womb, there
had been* no such demission of himself by agreement or accord as here, and Heb.
10. 7. is set forth; his subjection had not been free but necessary as being
Gods creature, if he had not been the Son of God by natural generation of his
substance before the world was. If he had been the Son of God, only as sent by
God, to be Mediator, there had been a tautology, to say, although he was sent
by God to be Me^ia^our, yet he did obey as Mediator, and being consecrated or
perfected became Author of salvation to them that obey him; which is as if he
had said, though he were Mediator, yet he was Mediator, which had been
^ugatory.

As for that which is chiefly objected, that the reason of this title [the Son
of God] given to Christ is from the peculiar Generation he had by the operation
of the holy Ghost: Besides that which is already said, that such a forming was
of Adam at first, who was not the Son of God in that singular manner that
Christ was, and if there were no other reason of his being the Son of God, but
this, he should be termed peculiarly the Son of the Spirit, whereas he is
styled the only begotten of the Father, it is said, that holy thing which shall
be born of thee, intimates that what should be born of her was holy, and had
being before that birth of the Virgin, and that his being called the Son of
God, was not for that as the cause, at least not the sole cause, and that his
being called the Son of God, was a consequent of being that holy thing, God
with us, as it is Mat. 1. 23. The other Texts, John 10. 36. Acts 13. 33. Heb.
5. 5. etc. do only prove, that his singular mission, resurrection, and
Priesthood demonstrated him to be the Son of God, not made him such; for then
he had not been the Son of God before these, whereas the Angels words show,
Luke 1. 35. and the Adversaries yield, he was the Son of God from his
Generation and Birth of the blessed Virgin.

10. It is true the speech John 1. 15, 27, 30. (...) being translated, is
prefered before me, may be well conceived to be the same, or to answer to that
which is Mat. 3. 11. Mark 1. 7. Euke 3. 16. (...), is stronger than I, or is
more prevalent, or more powerful than I: But the words, (...), for he was
before me, must note priority of time: For 1. The word (...) was, notes his
actual Isa. 43. 10. (...) notes priority of duration.
existence, what he was in Being, not what he was to be in Gods Intention. 2.
Though (...) first, note not only priority of order, but also of rule and
power, and is sometimes as much as the chief, yet it cannot be so meant, John
1. 15, 27, 30. For 1. That was before expressed by (...), rendered well, was
preferred before me, noting chiefdom, pre-eminence or power, and therefore must
note something distinct from it, otherwise it would be a tri^ling tautology,
and therefore it must be understood of priority of Essence, in duration and
excellency of being before him, which alone may well be conceived as the cause
of his praelation. 2. If Christ had not being before John Baptist, it could not
be well said as it is, v. 16. by him including himself, And of his fullness we
all have received, and grace for grace, since John had his being as man before
Christ, and was filled with the Holy Ghost from his mothers womb, Luke. 1. 15.

SECT. 7.
Christ's Generation before the world was, is proved from John. 8. 58.

Christ's being the Son of God before his incarnation is proved from his words,
John 8. 58. verily, verily I say unto you, Before Abraham was I am. The
occasion of which words was from that which our Lord Christ in the Temple,
spoke to the Jews, ver. 51. verily, verily, I say unto you, if a man keep my
saying he shall never see death: Which the Jews conceived so notorious an
untruth, that they inferred he must be possessed by the Devil, since Abraham,
was dead, and other holy men. To which our Lord Christ replied, that he
honored, not himself, but his Father honored him, that Abraham rejoiced to
see his day and saw it and was glad, which did intimate that he had seen
Abraham, and Abraham him, else how could he say, he rejoiced to see his day and
saw it, and was glad? This was accounted by the Jews for a greater untruth, so
that they reply to him, thou art not yet fifty years old, and have thou seen
Abraham, dead near two thousand years before? to whom Christ returns this
constant asseveration no whit revoking or mincing his former speech, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am; which both the occasion, the
manner of expression, and the words plainly show to have this sense, Before
Abraham was a man in rerum natura, before Isa. 46. 10. (...).
Abraham was conceived in the womb, or born, I am, that is, have and had a
being; which can be understood of no other than his divine Nature, far
exceeding the time of Abraham's being; which the Jews conceived, he meant as
they did, when he said, John 5. 17. My Father works hitherto and I work; that
he said also that God was his Father, making himself equal with God, ver. 18.
and when he said John 10. 30. I and my Father are one, that being a man he made
himself God, ver. 33. which they accounted Blasphemy, and would have stoned him
for these sayings: Yet did not Christ revoke his speech, but hid himself, and
after went out of the Temple, going through the midst of them, and so passed
by, verse 59. and therefore his words have this assertion, that he had a Being
before Abraham, which can be no other than his Divine Nature by Generation, of
the substance of his Father before the world was.

The exceptions against this inference, are 1. That it should be read, being in
the Aorist. before Abraham, is to be, or shall be, or is made Abraham, that is,
the Father of many Nations by the calling and graffing in the Gentiles, into
the true Olive: I am as it is ver. 12. the light of the world, or the Messiah;
as when he said, verse 24. If ye believe not that I am, that is, the Messiah,
ye shall dye in your sins; and verse 28. when ye have lift up the Son of man ye
shall know that I am, that is, the Messiah. 2. That Jesus was before Abraham by
Divine constitution, which Grotius annot. on John 8. 58. makes the sense as
John 17. 5. Apocal. 13. 8. 1. Pet. 1. 20. and Dr. Hammond in his Paraphrase of
John 8. 58. thus expounds it: Jesus answered that objection of theirs; You are
much mistaken in my age. For 1. I have a being from all Eternity, and so before
Abraham was born, and therefore as young as you take me to be, in respect of my
age here, I may well have seen and known Abraham. But then 2. In respect of my
present appearance here on Earth, though that be but a little above thirty
years duration, yet long before Abraham' s time, it was decreed by my Father,
and in kindness to Abraham revealed to him, while he lived; in which respect it
is true that he knew me also.

To which I reply. 1. That the words either way expounded had been impertinent,
as not answering the objection, verse 57. of Christ's age not exceeding fifty,
and therefore he could not see Abraham; For his being a man before the Gentiles
were called, Gods Constitution and Decree, and the Revelation of it to Abraham,
that in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be blessed, was altogether
besides the thing Christ was to do, to wit, the verifying of this, that he had
seen Abraham, Abraham being a person, not signifying any where the calling of
the Gentiles, and Christ's seeing him, an Action, which presupposes an existent
substance, in which it must be. And therefore if Christ's words had imported no
more than this, that before the Gentiles should be called, Christ was the
Messiah, or God had decreed and revealed his being the Messiah to Abraham,
Christ's speech might have been false, that he had seen Abraham: Yea, it had
been nugatory, for Christ had said no more of himself than might be said by any
of the Jews, that he was in Gods Decree before the calling of the Gentiles; and
it had been also false, that before Abraham was Father of many Nations, Christ
had a being, or was the light of the world, if he had no being before his
Incarnation, since Abraham was Father of many Nations, Israelites, Ishmaeli^es,
Edomites, and in some sort a spiritual Father of many Nations, by the adjoining
themselves to the people of the God of Abraham, Psalm. 47. 8, 9. before Christ
was born. And it had been delusory, and aenigmatical to understand the words
before Abraham's being of the future time, when the objection was of his being
long before; and to make the answer to be of Abraham under a spiritual
consideration, when the objection was of him as the natural Progenitour of the
Jews, and of Christ in respect of his Office or Employment, when the objection
was of his natural duration, which had been contrary to Christ's manner of
teaching, averring and vindicating his speeches: For though sometimes he answer
obliquely, and teach by consequences, leaving his auditors to consider his
words, yet still his replies are solid, pertinent and convincing. And though
the Exposition of some of them have no small difficulty, yet his speeches are
not in such an aenigmatical and dark manner as this, by allusion to the
Etymology or derivation of a Name, when other expressions were obvious:
Besides, if Christ did at any time use such dark expressions or manner of
answering, yet he cannot be conceived rightly to have done so in this answer,
in which his preface, Verily, verily I say unto you, shows his answer to have
been direct and plain, and was taken by the Jews in the sense importing his
priority of Being, which Christ gainsaid not, and all Interpreters till this
last age, have so expounded them.

2. The words cannot by any instance of the like use of them be showed to have
the sense put on them. For however the Aorist may signify the future time, yet
as the occasion, so also Christ's averring his own Being, antecedent to
Abraham's, shows it must be understood here of the time past, and be read
before Abraham was, not Abraham shall be. And if he had alluded to Abraham's
Name changed, he should have said, Before Abraham, shall be Abraham: And the
objection being about Christ's age, and so the impossibility of his seeing
Abraham, the answer is an assertion of his existence, without any thing added:
It is granted, that the words, verse 24, 28. need a supply, yet neither there,
nor ver. 58. can the supplement be conceived to be taken from, verse. 12. so as
that the meaning should be, unless ye believe that I am the light of the world,
ye shall know that I am the light of the world; Before Abraham was, I am the
light of the world. For the words, v. 20. do show that the speech he made
before was interrupted, and he began a new conference with them, verse 21. and
therefore the supplement to be added, v. 24, 28. is more likely to be from
verse 23. Unless ye believe that I am from above, ye shall know that I am from
above, in which verses the particle (...) that shows it to be an object of
Faith, which requires something to be known and believed besides his Being,
which was obvious to their senses; But ver. 58. the particle is not, nor any
thing required of them; but there is a plain and direct assertion of his Being
without any other supplement; Nor is there any difficulty in expounding I am,
by I was, the present tense being like manner used for the time past, John 6.
24. and 14. 9. and 15. 27. and, as Grotius well observes, there is the like
expression in the Greek, Psalm. 90. 2. Before the Mountains were brought forth
(...) thou art, that is, thou wast, noting time past continued, and therefore
by the Syriack Interpreter, and No^^us his Paraphrase, rightly it is rendered
John 8. 58. Before Abraham was born I was; Nor is it unlikely that he used this
expression in the sense in which it is said by God, Isa. 43. 10. (...) I am he,
to which John 13. 19. is consonant: The word (...) is neither Joh. 17. 5. nor
Revel. 13. 8. and that neither are understood of Gods Decre^, is showed in the
next Section, Vide Plac. disp. 11.. 21. etc.

SECT. 8.
Christ's being before the World was, is proved from John 17. 5.

TO these passages in the Gospel of St. John for confirmation of the same
thing, I shall add the words of Christ in his prayer to his Father, John 17.
5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory
which I had before the world was with thee; which words do evince, that Christ
had glory with his Father before the world was, which is the description of
Eternity, Psalm. 90. 2. Prove. 8. 23, 25. whence it follows, that before the
world was, Christ had a Being in glory with his Father, which could be no other
than his Divine Nature, as he was Son of God, and therefore is to be
acknowledged to be begotten of the substance of the Father before the world was.

To this it is answered, that the glory here is not Divine Majesty, but glory
of immortality and honor to him as man, such glory as was given to him, verse
24. and which he says he had given to his Disciples, ver. 22. as it is said, 2 Timothy 1. 9. that God had saved them, and called them with an holy calling, not
according to their works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given them in Christ Jesus, before the world began; to wit in Gods
predestination. And in the same respect the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We have
a building of God, an house not made with hands eternal in the Heavens, Heb.
10. 34. That they had in Heaven a better and enduring substance, in the sense
in which Christ is said to be foreordained before the foundation of the world,
1 Pet. 1. 20. to be the Lamb s^ain from the beginning of the world; So
Believers are said to have everlasting life, John 3. 36. and 5. 24. 1 John 5.
12, 13. not in possession but predestination.

To which I reply that it is somewhat difficult to explain what the glory is
with which Christ prays his Father to glorify him, and how he would have him
glorify him, by reason of the various meanings of the term glory and ways of
Gods glorifying. The Petition implies it was such glory as he had before the
world was, now had not: This may be best understood by considering how he had
it with the Father before the world was? Two ways are conceived, one by actual
possession, the other by predestination or fore-ordaining: For the former, and
against the latter are these Reasons. 1. From the tense, [which I had] in the
preterimperfect tense, which if meant of having in purpose only it should be,
which I have with thee, since Gods purpose or fore-appointment was still the
same. 2. Which reason is strengthened from the time, now glorify me, which
intimates he had it not then; but he was then glorified in purpose. 3. Before
the World was, which shows when he had it, and how he would have it again, but
he does not petition to have it again only in purpose, but in actual
possession. 4. He desires that he may have that glory with his Father's own
self. which he had with him: Now with his Father's own self, in the one part
must be meant of his Presence, and that in Heaven, as when it is said, 1 John
2. 1. We have an Advocate with the Father, that is, in his presence in Heaven,
therefore also in the other part, with thee, cannot be meant, in thy Purpose,
(...), Deuteronomy. 15, 16. is spoken of a Servant cohabiting. (...), Numb. 22. 9. 1 Samuel 22. 3. (...), ver. 23. (...).
but in thy Presence in Heaven. 5. Christ had the glory with his Father before
the world was in a peculiar manner, such ^s none of the Elect have, with such
love before the foundation of the world, as was singular, verse 24. But, if it
were no more than in purpose had by him, it was no otherwise, then all the
Elect had it before the world was, therefore he had it in actual possession
with peculiar embracing and delight, as John 1. 18. and 3. 35. Prove. 8. 30. 6.
There is no place of Scripture, wherein such an expression of our having, as
here, is meant of having only by Gods purpose for the future in predestination.
The giving, John 17. 24. is not to be understood of an intention for the
future, but a present actual collation. Grot. Annot. ad Romans 16. 26. (...) id
est longissimo tempore, ut 2 Timothy 1. 9.
The giving, 2 Timothy 1. 9. of grace is not meant of Gods purpose but donation
according to his purpose, which donation was by grant, or promise as it is
expressed, Tit. 1. 2. where and 2 Timothy 1. 9. (...) is not well rendered before
the world began, but before the times of ages, noting the times of the ages
following the creation, and should be so rendered, Romans 16. 25. as the parallel
places, Ephesians. 3. 9. Col. 1. 26. do show, and so the giving of the grace, 2 Timothy 1. 9. is most likely meant of the Promise made, Genesis 3. 15. as Dr. Twisse
conceives Vindic. great. l. 1. part. 1. sect. 4. digress. 2. c. 5. However
though the grace of God might be said to be given in Gods purpose, yet not
Christ be said to have had glory in Gods purpose, because giving notes only the
act of the donor, but having the act of the possessour, 2 Cor. 5. 1. the having
a building not made with hands, cannot be meant of having in Gods purpose, for
it is consequent on the dissolving of the earthly house of this Tabernacle, to
which, having in Gods purpose is antecedent, and therefore notes actual
possession, the present tense being put for the future, as Grotius rightly
notes, Heb. 10. 34. The having, cannot be meant of having in God's purpose, it
being having in your selves, or your selves, and therefore must be understood
of possession for the future, by the same enallage, or of right, or assurance
for the present, or of present possession, though not full possession, John 3.
36. and 5. 24. 1 John 5. 12, 13. Believers are said to have eternal life, not
by predestination only, before the person is in being, but by real actual
possession, inchoate and continued, though not consummate, as appears by the
expressions John 5. 24. and comes not into condemnation, but is passed from
death into life, 1 John 3. 14. We know that we have passed from death to life,
opposite to verse 15. We know that no murderer has eternal life abiding in
him, and John 3. 36. shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him, 1
Pet. 1. 20. shows not what Christ had, but how he was fore-known, Revel. 13. 8.
From the beginning of the world may as well or better be joined to written as
it is Revel. 21. 27. than to s^ain, John 17. 24. does not prove, that Christ
had the glory mentioned, verse 5. only in purpose before the foundation of the
world, but rather the contrary. For the love there is a love not only of
benevolence, but also of complacency and delight, as John 1. 18. and 3. 35.
Prove. 8. 30. and so supposes his being before the world was, and the
possession of his glory, which he now desires to repossess; which cannot be his
Divine Essence, for that he was never emptied of, nor his Humane Excellency,
for that he had not in being before the world was; but the state and condition
of a Son, of which he emptied himself, taking the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.
7. that riches which he had before he became poor for our sake, 2 Cor. 8. 9.
which was not the relation of Sonship to God, for that he still had in his
lowest debasement, but the enjoyment of the pleasure he had with his Father in
his Presence, which was in some sort withheld from his person while he was on
Earth, and the exercise of command and empire over Angels before the world was
completed (if the Angels were created in any of the former days of the first
Creation) and which he now laid aside, and was to pray to his Father for the
Angels Ministry; Either of which, or any other (which we know not of)
communicable in its proportion to our condition with him, according to the
words, John 17. 22, may be the glory which he prays for, John 17. 5. to
repossesse, and enjoy with his Father after the finishing of the work he gave
him to do on Earth, verse 4. into which he came to glorify his Father,
humbling himself therein really, and therefore would be really re-glorified
with his Father's own self; and not only in manifestation to men, as he had it
really with him before the world was.

SECT. 9.
Col. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Is urged to prove the Godhead of Christ.

TO those foregoing Texts in the Gospel of St. John, I shall next adjoyn the
words of the Apostle Paul, Colos. 1. 12, 13, 14. 15, 16, 17. where he mentions
his thanksgiving to the Father, who had translated the Colossians into the
Kingdom of his dear son, or of his love, who is the image of the invisible God,
the firstborn of every Creature. For in or by him were all things created that
are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by
him, and for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist.
Whence I thus argue:

He who is the Son of the Fathers love, the Image of the invisible God, the
firstborn of every creature, in or by whom all things were created that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or
Dominions, or Principalities or Powers, by whom, and for whom all things were
created, who is before all things, and by whom all things consist, was before
any creature, was made, begotten of the substance of his Father, not made of
nothing; very God of very God, of the same substance with the Father, by whom
all things were made. But such was Jesus Christ: Therefore, etc. The minor is
the express words of the Text: But the major proposition is denied: and for a
reason of the denial, it is said;

1. That he is termed the Image of the invisible God, not as a Child that is
begotten by natural generation is the substantial Image of his Father of the
same substance; But as he resembles God in his Wisdom and Power, and excellent
Holiness of Life; wonderful Revelation of the Mysteries of his Counsel, and the
great works he did, as the man, in respect of his Superiority and Authority
over the woman, is said to be the Image and Glory of God, 1 Cor. 11. 7. or as
Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase is, in whom God who is invisible is to be seen, and
his will clearly declared by the Gospel (so that ^e that sees him, sees the
Father, Joh. 14. 9.) which is confirmed by the words following, ver. 10, 11.
Believe thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? the words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in
me, he does the works: Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in
me; or else believe me for the very works sake: Which words make Christ to be
in the Father, and the Father in him, whereby the Father is to be seen, and so
he is his Image, in his Words and Works. Conformable to the same sense are the
words of Christ, John 5. 19, 20, 30, etc.

2. That he is termed the firstborn of every creature, and therefore is of the
rank of creatures, as the firstborn is taken, Heb. 11. 28. as man, the
firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. or as it is Rev. 1. 5. the
firstborn from the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth. The first
(says Grotius annot. on the place) in the Creation, to wit, the new, of which,
2 Cor. 5. 17. Rev. 21. 5. Heb. 2. 5. more amply Dr. Hammond in his annot. on
Col. 1. 15. says thus: The word (...), beside the ordinary notion of
firstborn (which cannot so well here refer to Christ's eternal generation,
because of that which is added to it, the firstborn of every Greature, which
only gives him a precedence before all other Creatures, and does not attribute
eternity to him) is used sometimes for a Lord, or person in power, who has the
privilege of the firstborn, dominion over all his brethren, and according to
this notion '^is used commonly in Scripture, for a Prince, or principal person,
So Psalm. 89. 27. David is called the firstborn of the Kings of the Earth, i.
e. the most glorious among them; and Job 18. 13. we have the firstborn of
death. And so among the Civilians, haeres, Heir, signifies dominus, Lord,
Justinian Instit. l. 2. tit. 19. de hae^^d. qualit. and diffe.. ult. And thus
may it fitly be a title of Christ in^arnate, in respect of his power over his
Church, the key of the house of David is laid upon him: But it is possible it
may peculiarly refer to his Resurrection, in which he was the firstborn from
the dead, verse 18. the first which from the grave was raised and exalted to
Heaven, and being so risen, all Power was given unto him, in Heaven and in
Earth.

3. That Thrones and Dominions, Principalities and Powers, things Visible and
Invisible, in Heaven and Earth; all things may be meant of Jews and Gentiles:
These several titles here rehearsed, says Dr. Hammond Annot. on Col. 1. 16.
may possibly be no more but the expressions of several degrees of dignity among
men; So Thrones may denote Kings, or Monarchs and Princes, Dominions (or
Lordships) may be the Reguli, the honors (whether of Dukes or Earls) next
under Princes; Principalities, the praefects of Provinces and Cities; and
Powers, inferior Magistrates; and if so, then may they be here set down to
denote all sorts and conditions of men in the Gentile world, by the chief
dignities among them here on Earth. And Annot. on Col. 1. 20. And in the like
phrase verse 16. All things that are in the Heavens, and on the Earth, shall
signify no more than what is in other places expressed by the world, as 2 Cor.
5. 19. The creation, the whole creation, or all creatures, the whole world of
creation, or the whole world without restriction, which signify all the
Gentile world in opposition to the Jewish enclosure; not all the creatures
absolutely, but all men of all Nations.

4. That verse 16. is to be understood of the new Creation mentioned, 2 Cor. 5.
17. Ephesians. 2. 10, 13. and 3. 9. and 4. 24. Jam. 1. 18. The things which go
before, says Grotius Annot. ad Col. 1. 16. show these things meant of Christ,
which is the name of a man; more rightly is [were created] here interpreted
were ordained, go^ a certain new state; Angels to Men, Men among themselves
were reconciled under Christ; Others that Angels were reformed as being brought
to a new state of acknowledging the Lord Jesus Christ as their Lord, and acting
at his beck as being Gods instrument for the bringing of that reformation to
pass, and therefore it is said they were all created in him and by him, as the
mediate cause.

5. That Christ is said to be before all things, is meant of the new Creation,
and that in respect of Dignity, not of Time.

6. That in him all the new Creation consists, or are reformed.

SECT. 10.
The proof of Christ's Godhead from Col. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. is
vindicated from exceptions.

1. I Reply, It is true that in respect of other resemblances than of his
Father's person according to his Divine Nature Christ might be termed the Image
of the invisible God, yet in this place he is not said to be the Image of the
Invisible God in respect of his Office as declaring his Counsel, or
representing his Power and holy Qualities by his Conversation and Works; but as
Adam's Son is said to be begotten in his own likeness after his image, Genesis 5.
3. may be proved by these Reasons. 1. Because his being the Image of God is
an^ecedent to the Creation; verse 16. therefore he was the Image of the
invisible* God before it, and consequently, in respect of his Divine Nature. 2.
What Christ was to his Church is expressed after ver. 18, 19 20. therefore v.
15. 16, 17. what he was and did in respect of his Divine Nature, it being not
to be conceived that he would repeat that ver. 18, 19, 20. which he had said
before, ver. 15, 16, 17. 3. An Ambassador, though he represents his Princes
Counsels, yet is not said to be his Image, an Image being a resemblance of a
Person, not of his Counsels. 4. It is not said, that Christ was the Image of
the invisible God to us, but is the Image of the invisible God absolutely and
simply even then when he was not on earth to declare Gods will, and therefore
shows what he is in himself throughout all Generations. No^ is it of any force
which is urged: that because he is said to be the Image of the invisible God,
therefore he must be a visible Image; For man that was made after the Image of
the invisible God, and is renewed after his Image, as Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3, 10.
is not after Gods Image in respect of any visible Resemblance, but in respect
of Wisdom, Holiness and Righteousness of Truth, which are invisible qualities.

2. If the reading which Isidor Pelusiota insists on Epist. l. 3, Epist. 31. be
right, that it should be read (...), the first bringer forth of every creature,
not (...) the firstborn of every creature, which may seem probable, because it
is said verse 16. For by him were all things created, and so it should note not
passively his birth, but actively his causality, in which he is said to be the
beginning of the Creation of God, Rev. 3. 14. where (...) princip^um, or the
beginning notes not termination of time, or initiation, but signifies
^fficiency; as when we say from the Latins, the principle of a thing. as Col.
1. 18. the word is used (of which more may be seen in Sixtin^s Amama Antibarb.
Biblic. l. 3.) the answer were easy, that though he be said to be (...) yet he
is not in the rank of creatures, which the Arians did object from this place.
But however Erasmus like it, yet Beza rejects it, for reasons set down by him,
Annot. ad Col. 1. 15. which though they be not all allowed by Heinsius Exercit.
sacr. l. 12. c. 1. yet the reading not agreeing with most Copies, nor
necessary, that answer is not to be insisted on. That other sense which Beza
and others embrace, [he is said to be the firstborn of every creature; that
is, he that was born before any creature, conceiving in answer to the Hebrew
verb, (...), it may be as well applied to the Fathers generation as the Mothers
bearing, and so it be all one, as the begotten before all the creatures] would
pass for current, if there were an example of so using the word as including
the preposition governing the Genitive Case, and referring to the Fathers act
of generation: In which methinks there should not be much difficulty, since
James* 1. 18. the word (...) which we render has begotten, and is the act of
the Father of lights, verse 17. and so notes the Fathers act of generation
usually, and most properly signifies the act of the Mother bringing forth, who
is said therefore to be (...), Luke 2. 5. when she is great with Child, and is
used James 1. 15. as of the same sense with (...), brings forth and so
rendered. And when Christ is said, Col. 1. 18. to be the firstborn from the
dead, or Revel. 1. 5. the first-begotten of, or from the dead, the act of the
Father in raising him from the dead is implied, to which his resurrection is
ascribed, Acts 2. 30, 32. and 3. 15. and 4. 10. and 5. 30. and 10. 40. Romans 6.
4. 1 Cor. 6. 14. Ephesians. 1. 20. Gal. 1. 1. and herein St. Paul does in some sort
place his ^egetting of Christ, when he said, Acts. 13. 32, 33. God has
fulfilled the Promise made unto the Fathers unto us their Children, in that he
has raised up Jesus again; as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou ar^
my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And although the preposition from, be in
those places because of the change or translation from the dead, yet the term
first noting priority must needs include also the preposition before, as it
does manifestly, John 1. 15. so that it is easy to conceive this to be the
meaning, he was the first begotten before all the creation, or every creature,
and therefore the Image of the invisible God, and he by whom, and for whom all
things were created; which cannot be meant of his rising from the dead, since
that is mentioned ver. 18. and this title is put before his creating of all
things, ver. 16. and as the reason of it: But must be meant of his generation
before all times out of the substance of the Father, by which eternity is given
to him, the precedence in being before all the creation, being in Scripture
language all one with Eternity. And so Christ will not be put in the rank of
creatures made out of nothing, but the word is to be taken negatively, as the
word first applied to God, Revel. 1. 11. which is expounded, Isa. 44. 6. I am
the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God, or Isa. 43. 10.
Before me there was no God formed, neither shall there be after me. And when
the Law appointed the firstborn male to be Gods, Exodus 13. 2. Numb. 8. 16. by
the firstborn was understood that which opened the womb though no other were
born after, as the Mother of Christ understood the Law, Luke 2. 22, 23. who is
called her firstborn, notwithstanding she had-no other, Mat. 1. 25. But if
this exposition of the Title [the first born of every Creature] be not
received, but that it note only Christ's dominion or inheritance of every
creature, yet will this sense prove his Generation before all Creatures, and
his being exempt from the rank of creatures, since the reason of his being the
firstborn of every creature, and so Lord or Heir of them, is ver. 16. Because
by him and for him they were all created, which must needs prove that he is not
one of the creatures, since he created all things, therefore not himself
created, and he must needs have a being before every creature by whom, all were
created, and confequently was begotten before all time. Nor can this title be
applied to Christ as man or incarnate as if it, noted that he was first in the
new Creation or* in respect of his power over his Church: For* John Baptist,
Luke 1. 15. was before him in the New creation in time, and it is no^ said he
was designed or appointed to be the firstborn of every creature, but that he
is the firstborn, not made the firstborn of them, but he by whom all were
created; nor can the Church peculiarly be meant by every creature, or the new
Creation, since it is not said of the Creation, or of the new Creation, but of
every Creature, even those that are invisible, as verse 16. shows; And
therefore he cannot be said to be the firstborn of every creature as the
firstborn of man is, because the Angels are some of the creatures, verse 16.
but not of the same kind with man.

3. That by Thrones, and Dominions, and Principalities and Powers, verse 16.
are not meant several degrees of dignity among men, and no more, may appear,
not only as Dr. Hammond says, because they may also signify the several
degrees of Angels, and because there follows mention of visible and invisible,
and the Angels may most probably be contained by the latter of them, as this
lower world of men by the former, and because it is the creation that is here
referred t^, and the creating of Angels as well as men, etc. belongs truly to
Christ as God, therefore it will be most reasonable in this place to interpret
it in the greater extent to comprehend Angels and Men too, the highest and most
eminent of both sorts: But also because it is necessary for these Reasons.

1. Because these terms do elsewhere signify in the same Apostles writings,
invisible beings, powers of the world to come, Ephesians. 1. 21. Principal^ties and
Powers in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 3. 10. Spiritual beings in High or Heavenly
places, opposed to flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6. 12. Angels, Principalities and
Powers, are reckoned among the most potent beings of most force to separate us
from the love of God, Romans 8. 38. Angels, and Authorities and Powers are said
to be subject to Christ now on the right hand of God, 1 Pet. 3. 22. Nor can the
spoiling of Principalities and Powers be understood otherwise than as Dr.
Hammond's own Paraphrase of Col. 2. 15. explains it, of devesting the evil
Spirits of their power, Grotius Annot. ad Ephesians. 1. 21. Intelligunt quidam de
imperiis terrenis. Sed locus Col. 1. 16. and quod in his infra est, 3. 10.
evincit agi hic de eximiis Angelorum clasibus. Similis ordinum distinctio etiam
in Satanae Regn^ infra, 6. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 24. Romans 8. 38.

2. If by them Angels were not meant, there should be no invisible beings said
to be created, Col. 1. 16. whereas the distributive particle [whether] is put
next after invisible, to show the Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers to
be invisible beings.

3. Several degrees of Dignity and Rule among men, neither in this Epistle, nor
elsewhere, are said to be things in Heaven, or Invisible.

4. Angels may be said to be reconciled, Col. 1. 20. and gathered together into
one with the Church, Ephesians. 1. 10. Christ's blood reconciling the Gentiles to
God by expiating their Idolatry, and so reducing them to God, and thereby to
the good Angels, who rejoice at their conversion, Luke 15. 7, 10, observe their
order in their Church meetings, 1 Cor. 11. 10. are their Angels, Mat. 18. 10.
But it could not be said in S. Paul's time, when he wrote to the Colossians,
that the Rulers on Earth were created by, and for Christ, that is, reformed and
made new creatures in Christ, they were not brought to the obedience of the
Gospel by Christ, but were enemies to it, Acts 4. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 26. James 2. 6,
7* nor were they ordered by Christ according to the meaning of the word (...)
by us translated Ordinance, Heb. 9. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 13. that is, constituted or
appointed by Christ as Mediator in order to his Church for their help, in St.
Paul's time; and therefore cannot be said to be created in the sense some would
expound creation, Col. 1. 16. and meant by Thrones, Dominions, Principalities
and Powers.

4. Hence also may appear that no other sense but of the Creation at first out
of nothing, can be rightly meant by the creating, Col. 1. 16. For the words are
general, including all things simply, and that twice expressed, which shows it
comprehends all things universally that were created; and left any thing should
be excepted, there is a threefold division. 1. Of things in Heaven, and things
on the Earth. 2. Of visible and invisible. 3. Of the invisible Thrones,
Dominions, Principalities, and Powers. Of which Principalities, the unclean
Spirits are a part, Col. 2. 15. Ephesians. 6. 12. who cannot be said to be
reformed, or constituted, or appointed by Christ in the sense, in which
creation is taken, either Ephesians. 2. 10. Jam. 1. 18. (...) Cor. 5. 17, Gal. 6. 15.
or Heb. 9. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 13. In the good Angels nothing was to be reformed, or
new created; in the evil nothing was, nor were they, o^ other things
constituted, or ordained by Christ as man; nor is it true, that all things in
Earth were reformed, or constituted for the Church. And for the New Creation,
which consists in renovation of mind, it was done in many before Christ's
Incarnation, Ezekiel. 36. 26. Psalm. 51. 12. and therefore that Creation cannot be
meant, when it is said, All things were created by Jesus Christ, by them who
suppose him not to have been before his Incarnation. Lastly, Neither is there
any place brought by them, by which it may be proved, that the work of Creation
absolutely put is meant of renovation, or reformation, meant by the New
Creation: Nor do the particles (...) and (...) translated by him, prove Christ
only a mediate or instrumental cause of the Creation. For it is said of him,
who is the principal cause, Romans 11. 36. All things are of him, and by him, and
for him, as Col. 1. 16. and therefore the particles note a principal concurrent
or consociate cause: And the particle (...) by or through is applied to God the
Father, Gal. 1. 1. Heb. 2. 10. and in is used as by, Heb. 1. 1. and applied to
God, Acts 17. 28. yet it is not to be denied, that there is a priority in the
Father to the Son in respect of being, not of time, but original, as Bishop
Davenant says, Com. on Col. 1. 15. Christ has principium originis, a
beginning of original, to wit, his Father from whom he was begotten, but not a
beginning of time, or to use Dr. Pearsons words in his Exposition of the first
Article of the Creed, p. 36. of the second Edition, the Father has that
essence of himself, the Son by communication from the Father. From whence he
acknowledges that he is from him, John 7. 29. that he lives by him, John 6.
57. that the Father gave him to have life in himself, and generally refers
all things as received from him; so as that the Father is by the Ancients
termed the fountain, root, author, origin, head, cause of the Son and the
whole Divinity, p. 41. whence the Son is termed in the Nicene Creed; God of
God, very God of very God, light of light, and this origination in the Divine
Paternity, has anciently been looked upon as the assertion of the Unity: and
therefore the Son and Holy Ghost have been believed to be but one God with the
Father, because both from the Father, who is one, and so the Union of them. For
if there were more than one, which were from none it could not be denied, but
there were more Gods than one, p. 44. And answerably here^o there is an order
in the operations of the Father and the Son, so as that there is a priority, if
not in some sense a majority in the Father, whom some of the Ancients, cited by
Dr. Pearson, p. 37. understand to be greater than Athanasius, Bazil, Nazianzen,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Hilary, Augustine, etc. John 5. 19. 30.
Christ as the Son of God, John 14. 28. with reference not unto his Essence,
but his Generation, by which he is understood to have his being from his
Father, who only has it of himself, and is the original of all Power and
essence in the Son, and consequently some pre-eminence in working* whence
Christ says, I can of mine own self do nothing; The Son can do nothing of
himself, but what he sees the Father do: for what things soever he does, these
also does the Son likewise, which intimate a priority of order in the Fathers
operation, if not a dependence of the Son on him therein. And so as Mr. Gataker
in his Advers. mis^el. c. 17. says from Col. 1. 16. Christ both in making the
world, as also in instructing his Church is said to exhibit ministry to God
the Father, and the Father by him to have performed and to perform both those
things, Heb. 1. 2. in which place he is said to have spoken to his people (...)
by his Son, (...) by whom also he made the worlds.

5. Christ's priority in dignity is expressed before verse 15. where he is said
to be the firstborn of every creature, and in respect of the Church, verse. 18.
where he is termed the head of the body the Church, that in a(...) things he
might have the pre-eminence: therefore he is said to be before all things, ver.
17. in time, and that not only before Angels, but all things created, it being
(...) of the same latitude with all things, v. 16. and that not only in the New
Creation, for so he was not in time before David, Psalm. 51. 10. John Baptist,
who was filled with the Holy Ghost even from his Mothers womb, Luke 1. 15. but
in respect of the first Creation.

6. The consistence of all things by Christ, is to be understood of all things
created, ver. 16. and not only things belonging to the new Creation, and of a
consistence by sustaining and preserving all things simply by his power and
providence, as it is said, 2 Pet. 3. (...). By the Word of God the Heavens were
of old, and the Earth (...) consisting, which is no where meant of Evangelical
reformation, but of powerful sustentation, as Heb. 1. 2, 3. To which I pass

SECT 11.
Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, are urged to prove the assertion
of Christ's Godhead.

THe same Articles of Faith concerning Christ are confirmed from Heb. 1. where
Christ distinct from the Prophets, is termed the Son of God, whom he appointed
Heir of all things, by whom also he made the Worlds, verse 1. 2. being the
brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his person, and upholding all
things by the Word of his power, verse 3. by so much being more excellent, or
better than the Angels, by how much he inherited a more excellent name than
they, verse 4. of whom God said that which he said not of the Angels, thou art
my Son, this day have I begotten thee; And again, I will be to him a Father,
and he shall be to me a Son; And again, when he brings in the first-begotten
into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him, verse 5,
6. Unto the Son, or of the Son he says, thy Throne O God is for ever and ever:
a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom, thou have loved
righteousness and hated iniquity; therefore God even thy God has anointed
thee with the oil of gladness above thy follows: And thou Lord, in the
beginnings have laid the foundation of the Earth; and the Heavens are the work
of thy hands: They shall perish, but thou remainest, they all shall wax old as
does a garment, and as a vesture shall thou sold them up, and they shall be
changed, but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail. But to which of
the Angels said he at any time, sit on my right hand, until I make thine
Enemies thy Footstool? verse 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Whence I argue, He, of whom
all these things are said, was before any creature was made, begotten of the
substance of the Father, not made of nothing, very God, of the same substance
with the Father, by whom all things were made: But of Jesus Christ all these
things are said, therefore, etc. The minor proposition is the express words of
the Text, but the major is denied; and as a reason of the denial, it is said.

1. That Christ is said to be the Son, the first-begotten, this day begotten in
respect of his Incarnation, Resurrection, Exaltation as before.

2. That he was the brightness of his glory, Ray or Beam of Gods Majesty, that
in Christ men might have a kind of sight of Gods Majesty, that he was the
express Image of his person in respect of his qualities resembling his Father,
the latter words interpreting the former. For God did as it were imprint his
person on Christ, that Christ might be his Substitute upon earth to personate,
represen^ and resemble the person of God; to be in wisdom as God, by publishing
the Mysteries and secrets of God, and by knowing the thoughts of men, and
discovering them; to be in holiness as God without all stain of sin, to be in
power as God, having dominion over all Gods Creatures, over Winds, Seas, Devils.

3. That he was brought into the world, not as being before the world, but
being in the world was sent as the great Prophet of the Church among men, or at
his Resurection he was raised from the dead, and brought into the world, or it
is to be applied to his great exaltation at the last day, when he shall be
brought into the world to come, as it is termed, Heb. 2. 5. which refers to
Heb. 1. 6. and so without trajection the word [again] shall be read as it
stands in the Greek Text, and the verb of the second Aorist of [bringing into]
be read as of the future time, not as the vulgar, Beza, our translation, of the
time past, and [again] noting another citation out of the Psalms: And therefore
Mr. Mede in his opus^ula Latina in answer to Ludovicus de Dieu, would have our
English version corrected thus [And when he brings again the first-begotten
into the world] or shall bring, etc. For what things are from thence cited out
of the Book of Psalms to the end of the Chapter [concerning the adoration of
Angels, the Scepter of the rectitude of God, the changing the World, the
treading of enemies under his feet] all, if we believe the Apostle, are to be
referred to the second coming of Christ. To which agree Cameron resp. ad
quaest. in Heb. 1. 6. Heinsius exercit. sac. l. 16. c. 1. Dr. Homes Resur.
revealed. l. 3. c. 2. etc.

4. That he inherited or possessed a more excellent Name than the Angels by
grant from his Father, being appointed Heir of all things, not by virtue of his
generation before the world, but because of his office, by reason of which the
Angels were to worship him, as Peter did Christ as man, Luke 5. 8. and all the
Disciples, Luke 24. 52.

5. That he was God by Office, and not by Nature; as it appears in that God is
said to be his God, he to be anointed by God with the oil of gladness, and
others his fellows, ver. 8, 9.

6. Grotius would have, ver. 2. read, (...) for whom, not (...) by whom; But if
it be to be read by whom, it is meant of the new world, not of the Heavens and
Earth, or Ages, or Times of this world: And v. 10, 11, 12. are but accommodated
to him in respect of his dissolving the world, and duration of his Kingdom, not
in respect of the Eternity of his person, or operation in the first Creation.

7. That (...) which is translated upholding is to be translated ruling with
the word, that is at the command of his Father, mannaging all things as
personating his Father, and following his command. Gr(...) in his Annotation on
the place, says thus: The manuscripts in which those Grammatical spirits are
distinguished, have also (...) (his, the Fathers, not (...) his own, as we read
it) and so reads Cyril in his 8th. against Julian; The sense is, Christ governs
all things by the Word of his Fathers Power (that is Command) (...) is often to
govern, and which Chrysostom here adds, with some easiness. (...) appears to be
put for command, Luke 5. 5. and Heb. 11. 3. So also 1 Kings 1. 27. more to the
same purpose has Heinsius Exercit. sacr. l. 16. c. 1. and Dr. Hammond in his
annot. on Heb. 1. 3. The Hebrew (...) signifies two things, fero to bear, and
rego to rule, and from the latter of them it is, that (...) is the ordinary
word for a Prince; Agreeably to this (...)] which is sometimes the rendering of
the Hebrew (...), as Numb. 11. 14. Deuteronomy. 1. 9. may accordingly signify, to
Rule, to Govern, (...) to Administer, as a Commander, or Governor, or
Procurator of a Province, and so it is here taken, to denote the Regal Power of
Christ, to which he is advanced by his Resurrection.

8. That verse 13. is spoken of Christ as man exalted to sit on Gods ^igh^-hand.

SECT. 12.
The Argument from Heb. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. is vindicated
from Exceptions.

TO the first I reply, that none of those reasons are sufficient to verify the
titles given to Christ, Romans 8. 32. where he is termed Gods own Son (...)
proper or peculiar to him. John 3. 16. his only begotten Son, and here the Son,
verse 2. as is before showed Sect. in reply to the 9th. Exception: By the same
Arguments the Reasons also of the nameless Author of the Commentary on the
Epistle to the Hebrews, entitled The expiation of a Sinner are showed to be
short of what the appellation of the firstborn or first-begotten, Heb. 1. 6.
imports, whereof the first is, Christ is the first-begotten Son of God, because
God begot him before all his other Sons, who are called the Brethren of Christ;
for God first begot Christ, in that manner wherein God is said to beget Sons;
for those he begets whom he assimilates and makes like unto himself, and so
Christ was the first that was assimilated, or made like unto God in holiness;
in such holiness as he require in the New Covenant.

I reply. 1. This Reason is given without proof, and if allusion be to Romans 8.
29. neither is it said there that Christ is the firstborn by reason of his
assimilation to God in holiness before others, nor is the Image of Christ, to
which others are conformed, expressed to be in qualities, it is more likely to
be in estate and condition, to wit, of glory.

2. Nor is it true, that Christ in this respect is the first-begotten, John
Baptist was before him made like unto God in such holiness as he requires in
the New Covenant, he was great in the sight of the Lord, and filled with the
Holy Ghost, even from his Mothers womb, Luke 1. 15. that I omit to say any
thing of Abraham, David, Mary, Simeon, Anna, etc.

2. Secondly, says he, Christ is the first-begotten of God by his
resurrection, because by the power of God he was raised and brought in again
from death to an immortal life; for which he is called the first begotten from
the dead, and the first fruits of them that slept, 1 Cor. 15. 20.

I Reply. 1. It is true, Christ is said to ^e the firstborn, or begotten from
the dead, Col. 1. 18. Revel. 1. 5. But Heb. 1. 6. he is termed the
first-begotten simply without relation to the dead, and Col. 1. 15. the
firstborn of every creature, and the reason thereof is, because all things
were created by him, verse 16.

2. If this reason were sufficient, Enoch might as well be termed the
first-begotten, of whom the Scripture says, Heb. 11. 5. By Faith Enoch was
translated that he should not see death, and was not found, because God had
translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony that he
pleased God.

Lastly, Says he, he is the first-begotten in all things, whereby the faithful
of Christ become the Sons of God: For Christ has preceded them all, that (as
St. Paul speaks) he in all things might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1. 18.

I Reply. 1. What those all things are, in which Christ preceded all the
Faithful, whereby they become the Sons of God, is not expressed, not do I think
he can give an instance distinct from his Holiness, and Resurrection, except
his preaching or fullness of the Spirit; wherein and in other things it is true,
Christ exceeded all the Faithful of Christ; but no where is he said to be
begotten, or the first-begotten by reason hereof, or any other thing besides
his generation before the world: Sure Col. 1. 18. there is no such thing said;
though it be true that he is said to be the Head of the Body the Church, who is
the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things, or among all
he might have the pre-eminence; Yet not that therefore he is the
first-begotten, but he is termed ver. 15. the firstborn of every creature; and
the reason is given, ver. 16, 17. because all things were created by him and
for him, and he is before all things, and by him all things consist; which
she(...)s his generation before the Creation, and so no time wherein he was
not. The reasons of Christ's Sonship from the begetting him the day of his
Incarnation, Luke 1. 32. his Sanctification, John 10. 36. his Resurrection,
Acts 13. 33. his having all power in Heaven and Earth given him, Mat. 28. 18.
his Exaltation to be an immortal and universal Potentate; though they may be
reasons of his Appellation [the Son of God] as showing it, and being consequent
on it, yet there is an higher reason showed before, and confirmed from the
titles given him, Heb. 1. 3.

2. The term [the brightness of Glory] does not express what Christ was to
others as a Looking-glass; that had been better expressed by (...), than (...),
but what he was in himself, and from whom, to wit, his Father, as the Beam from
the Sun. And in the same term wisdom is termed in the Book entitled the Wisdom
of Solomon, chapter 7. 26. the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted
myrror of the Power of God, and the Image of his Goodness: And thence it is to
be conceived that in the Nicene Creed Christ is termed light of light: (...),
says Sr. Norton Kna^chbul in his animad version on Heb. 1. 3. is as it were
(...), in Phavorinus (...), the shining out brightness, or splendour, relucency,
or as it were beam of Gods Glory, that is his Substance, Nature, or Being, who
is light, 1 John. 1. 5. and Glory is often put for Light, 1 Cor. 15. 41. Mat.
17. 2. compared with Luke 9. 32. 2 Pet. 1. 17. which shows that he is said to
be the Acts 22. 11. (...).
brightness passively as receiving it from his Father, and brightness of his
Glory, as having his Glory communicated to him; not actively, as shining to
others: And the same is to be conceived of his being the character of his
person passively, as having it engraven on him, not ingraving it on others. The
Metaphor is most likely to be from a Seal of a Ring or some other thing by
which there is an ingraving of a figure. Now we shall best understand what is
meant here by it, if we know what it is that is meant by his Hypostasis, and
when it was that he was the character of it: The word comes from a verb that
signifies to stand under, or to be settled, and so notes some settled thing,
that does not flinch or vanish, opposed to emphasis or appearance, as Aristotle
in his Book of the world (if it be his) So the cloud is said to be an
Hypostasis, the bow in the cloud but an appearance. Physicians use it for the
sediment, or that which settles in the bottom, as in Urine, for the
consistence, state or concretion of humors that should be purged. In the Greek
of 1 Samuel 13. 21. (...) verse 23. (...)
the old Testament it has many significations, as Deuteronomy. 1. 12. your burden is
your Hypostasis. Deuteronomy. 11. 6. Job 22. 20. that which we read substance, Jud. 6.
4. (...) Sustenanc^. So Eze(...) 26. 11. The Greek has (...) o^rs; thy strong
Garrisons. Wisd. 16. 21. (...), Substantia tua, Grot. natura mannae Junius,
s^^stantia man a te crea^^: Sic m^lim ac^iper^ quam refer ad naturam Dei.
that is goods, is in Greek Hypostasis: A military station, rendered by us a
Garrison, is in Aquila's translation, says Grot. Annot. ad* 1 Reg. 13. 4.
Hypostasis. In the Psalms it has various acceptions, as Psalm. 39. 5. my age,
verse 7. my hope. Psalm. 69. 2. there is no standing. Gr. Hypostasis. Psalm. 89.
47. Remember how short my time is, Gr. what my Hypostasis is. Ps. R(...)th 1.
1(...) (...) Gr. (...), hope, (...). 10. 17. (...) Gr. (...), ^e^. 23. 22.
(...) Gr. (...), junius* in consilio meo. Ezekiel. 19 5* (...), her hope. Job 22.
20. (...). Ezekiel. 43. 11. (...)
139. 15. the LXX. reading as it is likely, instead of (...), which we render
was curiously wrought, the word signifying to be wrought with a Needle, either,
(...) as Grotius conceives, or as to me seems likely, (...), have rendered it
by (...), the (...). Nahum 2. 7. (...). Latin Et substantia mea, and my
substance. In the New Testament it is only 2 Cor. 9. 4. and 11. 17. where it
is rendered by this confidence, that is, subsistence, settledness, or
fi^mitude, which being applied to the mind, notes confidence, unshaken
boldness, or security, Heb. 3. 14. where we read the beginning of our
confidence, used as it is likely, as in the Greek, Psalm. 39. 7. Heb. 11. 1.
where it is rendered the substance of things hoped for, by others, the ground,
or confidence, I conceive, the assurance or security meant by it: And here,
Heb. 1. 3. In none of which places, or any other that I can find, Hypostasis
signifies wisdom, power, and holiness, of a person; and therefore I see not how
it can be expounded the character of his Hypostasis, that is the resemblance of
his Fathers attributes, or his supremacy or sovereign Majesty; But that he is
as it were the Print, Impression, stamp, or as we translate it, express Image
of his Person, or Subsistence, or Substance, which comes nearest to the use of
the word, as it is in the Greek version, Psalm. 139. 15. and that by reason of
his being his Son by whom he made the worlds; which will be better understood
by considering when he was the brightness of his glory, and the express* Image
of his person: The participle we translate [being] cannot be expounded of being
such consequently to his sitting on the right hand of the Majesty in the
heights, but antecedently thereunto, and to his bearing or upholding all things
by the Word of his Power in order of nature at least, and to his purging our
sins in time; which appears, 1. From the order of the words, he is first said
to be the brightness of Glory, the character of his Person, next to bear all
things by the Word of his Power, than to have purged our sins by himself, and
then to have sat on the right hand of the Majesty on high, therefore he was
a^^ecedently to all the rest the brightness of Glory, and character of his
Person. 2. The connection between being the character of his Person, and
up-holding all things by the copulative particle shows these were together, but
the up-holding all things was before his sitting on the right hand, therefore
also the being the character of his Person. 3. Then he was the character of his
Person when he purged our sins, but that was before his sitting on the right
hand, therefore also was his being the character of his Person. 4. From the use
of the participle which is to be interpreted, either of the present or past
time, as Heb. 5. 8. (...) although he were, Philem. 9. (...) being such with
many more: whence it follows that these things cannot be said of Christ as man,
^ith as such he up-held not all things by the Word of his Power, but of his
Divine Excellency in which he is a radiature from God, and is the character or
print of his Person, before his ascension, or executing his office on Earth:
Besides the titles are so transcendent as exceed the Excellency of the Angels,
and therefore express the Divine Nature: And the Emphasis is put in them that
being so excellent he purged our sins; And if he had been termed the brightness
of Glory, and character of his Fathers Person, only in executing the office of
Mediator, and representing God to us by his preaching, no more had been said,
than was verse 2. That God had spoken to us by his Son, and might be said of
some of the Prophets, specially Moses who did reveal Gods mind to the people of
Israel, with whom God spoke face to face, his face did shine and was glorious,
represented Gods Majesty, Power, Wisdom, Goodness in bringing Israel out of
Egypt, doing Miracles, whence he is said to be made a God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.
1.

3. Notwithstanding the opinion of so learned men, yet I conceive the bringing
into the world is not a thing fu^ure to be done at the last day for these
reasons. 1. Because if the verb (...) migh be expounded as of the future time
(the contrary whereof seems true to me) yet the verb (...) says must be
expounded of a time past, and the sense be this, when he did bring his
first-begotten into the world he said; And let all the Angels of God worship
him. 2. Because a determination or purpose concerning a thing future had not
been a fit argument to prove his present meliority or superiority above Angels.
3. If it had been meant of a future bringing into the world I conceive he would
have said, into the world to come, as he speaks, Heb. 2. 5. and 6. 5. 4.
Because where he u^eth the like expression, though not the same words, to wit,
Heb. 10. 5. when he comes into the world he says, it is meant of the time
when he had a body prepared for him, which was at his birth: For which reason,
and because we find not any mention of the Angels of God worshipping after his
Resurrection, as we find done, Luke 2. 13. it is ^o be applied to the time of
his Birth; and if it be objected that he was not to be worshipped by the Angels
till his exalting at the right hand of God, as Rev. 7. 10, 11. the contrary is
to be held, ^ith the Wisemen, Mat. 2. 11. Peter, Luke 5. 8. the Apostles, Mat.
28. 17. Luke 24. 52. worshipped Christ; and no doubt but the Angels did and
were to do the like. As for the words Heb. 2. 5. that they refer to Heb. 1.
6. and so Heb. 1. 6. meant of the world to come, because no where else had he
spoken of the world to come, I conceive they do not evince what is gathered
from them. 1. Because he does not say, Heb. 2. 5. of which we have, but of
which we do speak. 2. If he did say, of which we have spoken, it might very
well refer to Heb. 1. 12. which mentions the change of the Heavens and Earth,
which are the same thing with the world to come, though the same word be not
used in both places: For which reasons I conceive it better to make a
transposition in the word again, and to expound the words thus; Again he says,
when he did bring his first-begotten into the world, using again as he did
verse 5. to express another citation; Nevertheless, were Mr. Medes reading
yielded, it must show a former bringing into the world, and so a being of
Christ before his coming into the world, and consequently his being the Son of
God begotten before the world began.

4. It is true Christ had a more excellent name by grant as appointed Heir of
all things, yet was not the Son of God because Heir of all things, but Heir of
all things because his Son, by whom he made the worlds, v. 1. 2. which is the
reason also given, Col. (...). 15, 16. as the particle (...) because shows: It
is true the Angels were to worship Christ, because of his office, and his
exaltation, yet not barely because of his office and exaltation, but also
because of his generation, as the Son of God, and the union of his two Natures
in one Person, by reason of which he was worshipped before his Resurrection,
Mat. 2. 11. in his minority.

5. Jesus Christ is not termed God in respect of his office, but nature, as
being the Son of God the Creator, by whom he made the worlds, ver. 2. and in
respect of his generation, God the Father is said to be his God, and he God of
God, as in the Nicene Creed. And being made a man was anointed, and other men
were his fellows, or Partakers with him, though not in the same measure as he,
who had the Spirit without measure, Job. 3^ 34.

6. Grotius his change is without any warrant of Copy or Example, and therefore
is too bold an alteration to be allowed; nor had the Apostles assertion of
Christ, that for him he made the worlds, been so full to his purpose to set out
Christ's Excellency, as to say, that by him he made the worlds: Besides, since
Col. 1. 16. it is said, by him were all things created, and for him, and that
made the reason of his being the firstborn of every creature, ver. 15. it is in
like manner to be conceived, Heb. 1. 2. that (...) appointed his Son Heir of
all things, because by him he made the worlds: By the worlds is not meant the
future world, or blessed immortality, not the making them, the renewing of
them; But the worlds signify either the frame of Heaven and Earth at first
Creation, or the times and generations of men, and their making the creating at
the beginning of time, or the forming and continuing of them in their
successions. The former sense of making Heaven and Earth, and their
Inhabitants, as it is confirmed by the parallel place, Col. 1. 16. so it is put
out of doubt by the words of the same Author, Heb. 11. 3. By Faith we
understand that the worlds (the word used, Heb. 1. 2.) were framed by the Word
of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things appearing, which
does evidently refer to Genesis 1. 1, 2. and Heb. 9. 26. the end of the worlds,
(...) is opposed to the foundation of the world; and in conformity to this
sense (...) John 9. 32. is as much as from the beginning of the world: nor can
it be meant of a future world, since the word of making notes a thing already
done, and to say he made that which was not yet in being, or which was not yet
made, had been to say, that he made that which he did not make, and to say, he
made by him the worlds, if he were not then existent had been to say he made
the worlds by a not being; Nor can it be showed that making, that it have
various senses, is put for revealing, or that said to be made, which is only
made known.

Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. are a testimony cited concerning Christ, as verse 8. the
words (...) unto, or of the Son, show as v. 7. (...), he says of the Angels,
and the copulative conjunction (...) verse 10. shows it to be a distinct
testimony from the former, and the words cited together show all meant of
Christ* Ifs the latter part of them belong to Christ it follows, that also the
former belongs to him: for it belongs to the same person and power which
dissolves or changes the Heavens to lay the foundation of them: Nor is there
an instance produced either, Mat. 12. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. or Acts 2. 17, 18,
19, 20, 21. in which words are cited, whereof part only belong to the matter
for which they are cited, although Mat. 12. 19. alone had fitted the occasion;
Nor are there, or any where else words cited as spoken part of one person, part
of another, as they would have them, who use this evasion: Nor are the words,
Heb. 1. 10, 11, 12. cited only to prove ver. 4. that Christ was made so much
better tha^ the Angels, as he has inherited a more excellent Name than they;
But to prove, that by him God made the worlds, verse 2. Nor can there be good
sense in making the first part, verse 10. to be directed to God, and the other
ver. 11, 12. of Christ, when it is the same Lord who is spoken to ver. 10, 11,
12. Nor can that which is spoken of an eternal duration, a part ante, on the
part before, as well as a part post, the part after, be applied only to the
duration of his Kingdom which is only eternal a part post, on the part after,
and which is also to be resigned to the Father, 1 Cor. 15. 24.

7. Grotius is still too bold to put (...) his meaning the Fathers Word or
Power, instead of (...) his own, me^ning the Son without any extant Copies
named by him, and clean against the Apostles scope to set out Christ's
Excellency: Now to Rule at his Fathers command had noted his obedience, and
subserviency, not his excellency; For so do all holy Angels and good
Magistrates, they rule at Gods command: Nor is the expression, suitable to his
sense: If he had meant, as Grotius conceives the sense, he should have said,
ruling all things at the command of his Fathers authority (...), rather than
(...) Power, and not have said (...) by the Word; which notes the means of
effecting, as Heb. 11. 3. but (...) according to his Word, as the rule of
administration, or as it is Luke 5. 5. (...) at thy command: Besides, Heb. 11.
3. (...) by the Word of God, notes not a command to the Son to do it, but the
powerful word to the world, by which it was made, Genesis 1. And the all things he
upholds, Heb. 1. 3. comprehend not only the Church, but the worlds made by him,
or all creatures, as Heb. 2. 8, 10. Col. 1. 16, 17 must be understood.

It is true, that (...) signifies a Prince, nor will I deny that (...) (as
Grotius, Dr. Hammond, Heinsius exercit. sacr. l. 16. c. 1. conceive) signifies
to rule or Govern, Numb. 11. 14. Deuteronomy. 1. 9. yet it signifies not only to
Govern, or Order them, but also to sustain them by provision, as both the
occasion of the peoples desire of flesh, and the words of Moses, ver. 11, 12.
[Wherefore host thou affl^cted thy Servant? And wherefore have I not f^und
favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people upon me?
Have I conceived all this people? Have I begotten (or born, as the Greek has
it) them, that thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom (as a
nursing Father bears the sucking Child) unto the Land which thou swarest ^^to
their Fathers?] show; It is true, Deuteronomy. 1. 9. bearing notes rule, but not it
only, but also provision and sustentation, as the words verse 12. show; How can
I my self alone bear your ^^mbrance, or wearisom molestation, trouble, as Isa.
1. 14. and your burden; Greek, and your Hypostasis, that is your subsistence or
sustentation by provision, and your ^trif^, in Greek, your antilogies,
gain-sayings or contradictions. And v. 31. In the wilderness the Lord thy God
bare thee, as a man does bear his Son, in all the way that ye went until ye
came to this place: Where says Ainsworth, in his Annotation, this word means
not the bearing of the body only, but bearing of their infirmities, and
suffering the evils and troubles in the education of them, as a Father does in
his children which the Greek explaineth by etrophophorese a word that Paul
uses in Acts 13. 18. Where the Syriak expounds it nourished: or, as some
copies have it, Etropophorese, he suffered their manners: Dr. Hammond Ann^t* on
Acts 13. 18. carried as a Nurse: Whence I infer, that if Heb. 1. 3. the word
bearing be used as Numb. 11. 14. Deuteronomy. 1. 9. yet it does not signify mere
ruling or ordering the Church by wisdom and authority, but up-holding,
sustaining, maintaining the worlds, or ages which he made, or all things
created by the Word of his Almighty Power, by which they were framed at first,
Heb. 11. 3. which bearing or upholding all things is not limited to the time
after Christ's Resurrection, but is antecedent to his death: For so the words
are, He by whom God made the worlds, being the brightness of his glory, the
character of his subsistence, and bearing all things by the Word of his Power,
having by himself made purgation of our sins, sat at the right ^and of the
Majesty in the heights: This order of words shows that he was the brightness of
Glory, and character of Gods subsistence, and bare a(...) things by the Word of
his Power, and made purgation of our sins by himself before ^e sa^^ at the right
hand of the Majesty or greatness in the heights.

8. It is true that Heb. 1. 13. is spoken of Christ as man exalted; yet as
Christ argued against the Pharisees from the same passage of Psalm. 110. 1.
(which the Chaldee renders, the Lord said unto his Word, meaning Christ, says
Ainsworth Annot.) Mat. 22. 42, 43, 44, 45. that Christ must be a greater person
than David's Son, because David in spirit calls him Lord, and therefore to have
an higher nature than himself being then his Lord; so we may argue from Heb. 1.
13. The Scripture proves Christ to be Lord of Angels, because God said, Sit
thou on my right hand till I make thine enemies thy footstool, therefore he had
a nature above Angels, and consequently Divine: For Christ supposes in that
place, that Christ (...) (...) be David's Lord, which was not denied, and
thereby p^oveth that he must be denied than David, and of another nature than
his* ^orasmuch as he that was no more than his Son, could not be his Lord, the
Father being Superior to the Son in Nature, who has no other Nature than what
he derive^ from himself.

SECT. 13.
Heb* 7. 3. Is urged to prove the Eternal Sonship of Christ.

TO what is said, Heb. 1. I shall add what is said Heb. 7. 3. concerning
Me^chizede^, that he is mentioned without Father, without Mother, without
Genealogy, that is without speech of his descent or pedigree, neither having
beginning of days, nor end of life; but made like unto the Son of God,
remains a Priest for ever: Which intimates, that the Son of God, was without
Father, without Mother, without Genealogy, neither having beginning of days,
nor end of life, that is, as he was the Son of God he was Father or Mother
among me^* in which respect there is no Genealogy of him, that he is without
beginning of days, or end of life, therefore he was before any creature was
made, begotten of the substance of his Father, not made of nothing, very God of
the same substance of the Father, by whom all things were made: For as the Son
of man and according to his office he had beginning of days, and had a Mother:
Nor can the sense be right, that the beginning of days is meant of the
Priesthood of Melchizedec, for the other part, nor end of life, is to be
expounded of his Being, not of his Priesthood; and therefore also his not
having beginning of days must be meant of his Being, as the Son of God, not of
his Priesthood.

SECT. 14.
Christ's Kingdom is the Kingdom of the Son of Man so termed, according to his
Excellency above all men.

THe Kingdom we are to seek is termed sometimes the Kingdom of the Son of man,
Mat. 16. 28. Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall
not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his Kingdom: which
title Christ often takes to himself, Mat. 16. 13. whom do men say, that I the
Son of man am? and upon this consideration, he has the Kingdom given to him,
according to what our Lord Christ says, John 5. 27. That the Father has given
him authority, and to do judgment, because he is the Son of man: Accordingly,
where Christ fore-tells his chief act of reg^lity he uses this title, Mat. 25.
31. When the Son of man shall come in his glory, and all the Holy Angels with
him, then shall he sit upon the Throne of his glory, and ver. 34. 40. terms
this Son of man the King. Whence it is apparent that this title of the Son of
Man is to be considered, that we may have right intelligence of this Kingdom.
Now this title of the Son of man may be understood. 1. As noting him to be a
man of the same kind with other men: And in this sense ^he Son of man is no
more than a man, as Numb. 23. 19. Psalm. 4. 2. and 144. 3. and 146. 3. Ephesians. 3.
5. etc. In which sense it is conceived, that Ezekiel is often spoken to by the
title of the Son of man, as Ezekiel. 2. 1, 3, 6, 8. not importing any excellency
above other men, but nature and infirmities common to other men: Mr. Gataker in
his Cinnus, l. 2. c. 12. whereas it was said by Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 3. 25. as
we read it; Lo^^ see four men loose walking in the (...)idst of the fire, and
they have no hurt, and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God, it* being
(...) some will have it translated a Son of the Gods, as meaning by it an
Angel, as verse. 28. or a man of excellency and dignity, who were usually styled
Sons of the Gods, as Psalm. 89. 7. according to P^gni^, concludes, that
according to the profa^e Kings mind in our language, if we would rightly render
it, we should say, not like the Son of God, but like a Son of the Gods, that
is, a person of a most beautiful, and as it were divine form: Also in like
manner when it is said, Daniel 7. 13. Behold one came with the clouds like the
Son of man, it is no more than a certain person endued with human^ form, and
should be termed like a Son of man; not as it is commonly rendered, like the
Son of man: as if Christ were designed man as well as God, as Junius in
explaining has noted; Because he is in the New Testiment most frequently named
the Son of man: For how ^ould the form of the Son of God, to be represented in
our flesh be then set before Daniels eyes, that whom he had seen descending
from heaven, he should declare him seen as like to him, whom it is not probable
that himself foresaw of what shape ^e should be? For although it may seem in
very deed that he was the Son of God, whom the Prophet had beheld in that
vision to have approached to God the Father, the ancient of days; yet
nevertheless it should not be therefore said he was like to the Son of man, to
wit Christ; For this had been as if it were said he was like to himself, but
like to a Son of man, that is to a man, as Ezekiel is often termed Son of man,
and sons of men for men, then which nothing is more frequent. So also the
Apostle, made in the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man, Philip. 2.
7. saving that these things are said of him according to what he was, that
according to what was represented. In like sort that of the Evangelist John is
to be taken, which is Rev. 1. 13. like to the Son of man; which also the most
famous man Theodore Beza saw, when he turned it, I saw (some one) like to a Son
of man, and in his notes, to a Son of man, that is to a man, or who resembled a
man; after the Hebrew Idiotism. For although he was Christ, yet that this is to
be taken in general concerning the shape of a man, appears from hence, that the
Article is not added: Also from Daniel 10. 5. Where a vision altogether like is
described: So ^e: To which may be added the parallel place respecting the same
person in the same book, c^. 14. ver. 14 One sitting on a cloud like to a Son
of man, that is a man*

2. He may be said to be styled the Son of man by excellency, as when the
Philosopher a common name to many is by excellency appropriated to Aristotle,
or the Orator to Cic^ro, or the Poet to Homer; In which sense Christ is termed
the seed of the woman, Genesis 3. 15. the Son of David, Mat. 20. 30. and 22. 42,
And in this sense he is termed the second Adam, because as the first earthly
Adam was a common person, comprehending all that from him are propagated by
natural generation; so Christ is the second, heavenly Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45. the
second man, verse 47. because all are comprehended in him,, that are by
spiritual regeneration the Sons of God. And in this respect it is said, that
Adam was the type, or figure of him that was to come, Romans 5. 14. and hereupon
the parallelism of one to the other is made by the Apostle, ver. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 21. and 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. and all the members of the Mystical body
termed Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12. and of Christ it is said, Ephesians. 2. 15. that he
might make, or create in himself two unto one new man making peace; which new
man is said to be put on, Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. as elsewhere Christ is to
be put on, Romans 13. 14. Gal. 3. 27. and Christ is said to be all things, and in
all, Col. 3. 11. without discrimination of Greek, and Jew, circumcision and
uncircum^^sion, Barbarian, Scythian, bond and free, and all the members of
Christ, when they meet together are a perfect man, according to the measure of
the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13. which is expressed to be
his body, verse 16. and this is called the Church, which is his body, the
f^lness of him that fills all in all, Ephesians. 1. 22, 23. In like manner Christ
is termed the seed of Abraham, Gal. 3. 16. Now to Abraham and his seed were the
Promises made; he says not, And to his seeds, as concerning many, but as of
one; And to thy seed, who is Christ: Which is meant of Christ personal
primarily, and secondarily of Christ Mystical; to wit, all Believers, who are
termed, verse 7. Abraham's Children, and verse 26, 27, 28, 29. Ye are all the
Sons of God through Faith in Christ Jesus: For as many as have been Baptized
into Christ have put on Christ: There is neither Jew, nor Greek, nor is there
S^rvant, nor free, nor is there male and female, for ye are all (...) one man
in Christ Jesus, and if ye be Christ's then are ye Abraham's seed, and Heirs
according to the Promise. And thus it is more probable to me, that Daniel 3. 5.
is not to be read a Son of the Gods, to note only a person of a more excellent
visage, as the Gentiles called men of rare Beauty and Majesty; but the Son of
God, whom he calls the Angel, verse 28. who was known in the Church of God by
the title of the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. the Angel of Gods Presence,
Isa. 63. 9. on which Mr. Gataker in the Annotations of sundry Divines in
English has this note: Certain it is that this Angel here spoken of, is that
Angel, of whom God spoke unto Moses, Exodus 23. 21, 23. termed both Jehovah,
Exodus 13. 21. and 14. 10, 24. and his Face or Presence, Exodus 33. 14, 15. and
an Angel, Exodus 33. 2. who that he was no other, than the Messiah Jesus Christ,
the conducter of them in the Wilderness, holy Stephen informs us, Acts 7. 38.
the eternal Son of God, the resplendency of his Fathers Majesty, and exact
Image of his Person, Heb. 1. 3. in whom therefore his Name is said to be, Exodus
23. 22. he that appeared unto Moses in the bush, Exodus 3. 2. Styled Jehovah
there, verse 4. and by Jacob, the Angel that delivered, or rescued him out of
all evil, Genesis 48. 16. and by Malachy lastly, Jehovah, the Angel of the
Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. termed an Angel, or Messenger, in regard of his
Mediatourship, Heb. 8. 6. of Gods face; either because he does exactly resemble
God his Father, John 14. 9, 10. Col. 1. 15. or, because he appears before the
Face, or in the Presence of God, for us, Heb. 9. 24. See Romans 8. 34. Revel. 8.
3. this Angel secured and safeguarded them all the way through the Wilderness,
from Egypt to Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 4. and 32. 10, 12. which it is not unlikely
Nebuchadnezzar somewhat understood, as well as that God sent an Angel to
deliver his Servants that trusted in him, verse 28. by Daniel, whom God used to
reveal to Nebuchadnezzar the succession of the four Monarchies, whereupon he
acknowledged Daniels God to be a God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings, and a
Revealer of secrets, Dan. 2. 47. And I judge the opinion of Cameron in his
praelection on Mat. 16. 27. to be right, that the term Son of man, Dan. 7. 13.
notes the Messiah, and that the title of Son of man is given to him, not as
importing any diminution, but his excellency, and that in allusion to that
place in Daniel, Christ, when he speaks of himself, Mat. 16. 27. Mat. 25. 31.
John 5. 27. uses that title of the Son of man to show, that he was meant
therein, and that we need not either alter the pointing, as some of the
Ancients, nor make that the reason of committing judgment to him, John 5. 27.
because he only of the three Persons in the holy Trinity is man; as Dr. Pearson
conceives in his Exposition of the seventh Article of the Creed, but that
Christ intimates, that all judgment was committed to him, because he was the
son of man meant Dan. 7. 13. which is also the opinion of Grotius Annot. ad
Johan. Evang. c. 5. 27. because he is that Son of man, of whom Daniel foretold,
that to him should be given dominion and a Kingdom over all Nations without
end. Dan. 7. 13, 14.

Nor is it of force to enervate this opinion, that it is said, that he who came
before the Ancient of (...). Chrysostom. hom. 12. in Jo. 1. 14. Annot. on Job 24.
14. (As) sometimes in Scripture language sets not out the similitude, but the
thing it self, Hos. 4. 4. and 5. 10. John 1. 14.
days, was as the Son of man: For the particle (...) signifies not only the
likeness of a thing, but also the verity of it, as (...) does, John 1. 14. 2
Cor. 2. 17. And if it should note only likeness and not identity, both there,
and Revel. 1. 13. and 14. 14. it should intimate as if he whom Daniel and John
saw were not Christ, but one like him, and so the person to whom dominion was
given, and the person described should not be Christ: But the words being
conceived aright, Daniel saw Christ the Son of man in the apparition; Nor is it
absurd to say so of Daniel, though Christ were not then Incarnate. For he had
by the Spirit Christ represented to him, as he was to David when in Spirit he
called him Lord, Mat. 22. 43. And Abraham rejoiced to see his day, and saw it,
and was glad, John 8. 57. And if in the apparations of the Angel, that spoke to
Abraham about Sodom, to Joshua about Jericho it were Christ that appeared, and
so at other times Christ appeared in humane shape, as sundry Arguments evince;
then Daniel could not be ignorant, who the Son of man was* Nor is the defect of
the Article, Rev. 1. 13. and 14. 14. a sufficient reason to show the Son of man
there to be no more than a man; For the Article is also wanting, John 5. 27.
and yet the Son of man is meant peculiarly of Christ: And so is Dan. 10. 5.
though it be only read a man.

It is to be considered that the term Son of man is still given by Christ to
himself, not as Maldonat the Jesuit conceived, as debasing himself, or
speaking of himself diminutively, as Psalm. 22. 6. But I am a worm, and no man:
a reproach of men and despised of the people: For he does give himself the
title of the Son of man not in his prayer to God, as Psalm. 22. 6. but in his
speeches to the people, and then when he expresses his Power, Mat. 9. 6. Mat.
12. 8. Mat. 26 64. and 13. 37, 41. nor do the places alleged prove that the
title of Son of man is taken by Christ to himself, to show his debasement by
it, but to imply, that though he were that Son of man to whom dominion over all
Nations did belong, yet he had not then where to lay his head: And the like is
to be said of that Mat. 12. 40. that even he who was the Son of man by
excellency, should be three days and three nights in the heart of the Earth:
Nor is there Mat. 12. 32. a lessening of Christ's person below the Holy Spirit
implied by the title Son of man; the sin is less which is against the Son of
man, than the Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit, not because of the excellency
of the Spirits Person above the Person of the Son of man, but because of the
property of that sin, being against the conviction of the Spirit by his
operation, John 12. 34. The Jews enquire, Who is this Son of man? not meaning,
that the Son of man was a diminitive term, but doubting how that Son of man
should be the Messiah, of whom he had said that he should be lifted up, verse
32. And for that place, Psalm. 8. 6. Heb. 2. 6. the Son of man does not express
an abject condition, though an inferior low nature in comparison of Gods, but
rather Christ's high dignity; the Author of that Epistle proving, that to no
other man were all things made subject, but to him, who being made little lower
than the Angels, (...) for a little time; to wit, the time of his suffering,
verse 9. (as Cameron expounds it, praelect. in Mat. 16. 27.) was made Superior
to Angels, and had all things subjected to him.

SECT. 15.
Christ's Consubstantiality with the Father according to his Deity, with us
according to his Humanity, as the Chalcedon Council determined, is asserted and
proved from John 1. 14. Acts 2. 30. Romans 1. 3, 4. and 9. 5.

HOwever, whether the reason of the appellation be this latter or no, it is
certain, that thereby is signified, that Christ has an Humane as well as a
Divine Nature; and according to the Doctrine of the Council of Chalcedon I
determine, that the Son of God our Lord Jesus Christ, is truly God, and truly
man, the same, of a reasonable soul and body, (...), consubstantial with the
Father, touching the Godhead, and consubstantial, or of one essence or
substance with us, according to the Manhood: Which it were unnecessary to
prove, since his composition of Body, Birth, Growth, Properties, Actions,
Sufferings, and what ever else prove a Person to be a man, as we are, as
plainly are related, and were as fully manifested to have been in Christ Jesus,
as in any other man; but that as of old Valentinus, Marcion, and some others
denied his body to have been of humane seed as the matter; holding it to have
been imaginary, not real, or Celestial, and to have passed through the Virgins
womb: So others of late have denied the truth of Christ's Incarnation, and the
reason of his being termed the Son of man, contrary to the holy Scriptures, as
shall be showed by these Texts following, which ascribe both a Divine and
Humane Nature to one and the same Person, the Lord Jesus Christ, both while he
was on Earth, and as he is now in Heaven, and shall appear at his future coming
to Judgment.

To this purpose are the words alleged before, out of John 1. 14. which show
that the same Person who is the Word, was Flesh; which, because I have before
vindicated Sect. 6. I shall not insist on here, nor on such proofs as may be
made from Col. 1. 18. or Heb. 1. 3. in which that is ascribed to the Son (whom
I before proved, Sect. 9, 10, 11, 12. from those chapters to be God) which
proves him a man, to wit his being head of the body the Church, the firstborn
from the dead, who by himself purged our sins, and is sat down on the right
hand of the Majesty in the heights: But consider other places, where both
natures in one Person are declared: Among which I shall choose to insist on
first, those places, which speak of Christ as descending from the Fathers
according to the Flesh, as Acts 2. 30. Therefore David being a Prophet, and
knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the fruit of his loins,
according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne. Romans 1.
3, 4. Concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of
David according to the flesh, who was declared or determined the Son of God,
in, or with Power according to the Spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection of,
or from the dead. Romans 9. 5. Whose are the Fathers, and of whom Christ
according to the flesh, who is over all, God blessed for ever.

Which Texts do expressly teach, that Jesus Christ had a humane nature, which is
termed the flesh, as it is frequent by [Flesh] to understand a man or Humane
Nature, Romans 3. 20. and 11. 14. Isa. 58. 7. Gal. 2. 16. For he was of the fruit
of David's loins* according to the Flesh, which being a restriction cannot limit
[raising up] but [Christ] and so notes another part, according to which Christ
was not raised up out of the loins of David, which must be understood of his
Divine Nature; according to which he was David's Lord, Mat. 22. 44, 45. He was
of the seed of David, and of the Fathers (...), as to that which was according
to the Flesh; restrictively after it, implying another Nature, according to
which, he is of an higher original, even the Son of God, Romans 1. 3, 4. God over
all, blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. Whence it is inferred:

He who is so David's Son according to the flesh, raised up out of the fruit of
his loins according to the flesh, made of the seed of David according to the
flesh, of the Fathers according to the Flesh, as that he is also David's Lord,
the Son of God, God over all blessed for ever; is consubstantial with the
Father as touching the Godhead, and consubstantial with us as touching his
Manhood: But such is Jesus Christ. Therefore, etc.

SECT. 16.
The Exception against the Argument from Acts 2. 30. Romans 1. 3, 4. Romans 9. 5.
is set down.

AGainst this it is thus excepted: When the Apostle says, that Christ came of
the Fathers according to the flesh, who is over all a God blessed for ever; the
opposition is not entire and exact as wanting the other Member: What that
Member is, another passage of the Apostle, wherein you have the same opposition
in describing Christ, will inform you; It is Romans 1. 3, 4. concerning his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord, who was made (or rather born) of the seed of David
according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with Power (Gr.
determined, or ordained Son of God in Power) according to the Spirit of
Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead: Here you see that to those words,
according to the flesh, are opposed these, according to the Spirit of Holiness:
Again, What this Spirit of Holiness is, will be no hard matter to find out, if
we consider that as the flesh signifies a constituting part of Christ, namely
his fleshly body; so also must the Spirit of holiness, opposed thereunto,
signify a constituting part: If so, then it is not the holy Spirit, as every
one will confess, nor the reasonable soul of Christ, because he is intimated
to have had this Spirit by means of the resurrection from the dead, whereas he
had a reasonable Soul before his death: Nor the Divine Nature, for that is no
where in Scripture designed by the name of Spirit, or Spirit of holiness:
Besides, the adversaries hold, that Christ had the Divine* Nature, whilst he
was yet clothed with flesh. It remains therefore that by the Spirit of
holiness, which Christ had by means of the resurrection of the dead, and is a
constituting part of him, is to be understood his Holy, Spiritual Body, whereby
he is excepted from other men, being the firstborn from the dead, or the first
that so rose from the dead, as that he never dyed again, but was clothed with
a Spiritual body, and made like to God, who is a Spirit. And now the sense of
that passage begins to appear, Heb. 9. 14. How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit (Gr. through an eternal Spirit, for no
Article is prefixed) offered himself without spot to God; Purge your
consciences from dead works to serve the living God? By eternal Spirit is here
meant the spiritual body of Christ, which lasts to all eternity; and this
expression is opposed to what the same Divine Author speaks of Christ, Heb.
5. 7. who in the days of his flesh, etc. For eternal is contrary to days, and
spirit to flesh: Neither will that which we have here spoken seem strange to
him, who having penetrated into that profound Epistle to the Hebrews, knows
(what is there frequently intimated) that Christ then made his offering for our
sins; when, after his Resurrection, he entered into Heaven, and being endued
with a spiritual and immortal Body, presented himself before God: For so the
Type of the Levitical High Priest making the yearly Atonement for the si^s of
the People (Levit. 16.) did require: For as the Atonement was not then made,
when he slew the Beasts, but when having put on his linen Robes, he brought
their blood into the Sanctuary before the Mercy-Seat: So neither did Christ
offer his sacrifice for our sins upon the Cross, but when after his
Resurrection, being clothed with Robes of Immortality and Glory, he entered
into Heaven, the true Sanctuary, and presented himself to God. (Wherefore to
return to the foresaid passage, Romans 9. 5.) When it is there said, of whom
according to the flesh (for so the Greek has it) Christ came, who is over all
a God to be blessed for ever; we ought (by the authority of the Apostle
himself) to supply in our mind the other member of the opposition, and to
understand the place, as if it had been said; who according to the Spirit of
holiness by the Resurrection from the dead, is over all a God blessed for ever:
But if Christ be according to the Spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection from
the dead (that is) according to his spiritual Body, which he received by means
of the Resurrection from the dead the Son of God in Power, and accordingly a
God over all; he is not the Son of God in Power, and accordingly a God over
all, by having the Divine Nature personally united to his Humane Nature, but by
the Glorification and Exaltation of his v^ry Humane Nature.

SECT. 17.
This Exception against the Argument is refuted.

I Reply, that in this passage there are many errors.

1. That Romans 1. 3. (...) is to be rendered [born] rather than made: For though
I deny not that the Participle (...) may signify [born] yet here it is not so
fitly thus rendered, as [made] because it is not (...) or (...) commonly used
for birth or generation, as Mat. 1. 16. Luke 1. 35. 57. and 23. 29. Joh. 3. 41.
and 18. 37. Romans 9. 11. but (...), as Gal. 4. 4. nor is it said born of the
Mother, or Woman, as in expressions of birth is usual, Job 14. 1. Mat. 11. 11.
Luke 7. 28. and the Preposition (...) does note, not the womb from whence he
came, but the matter out of which he was formed: For doubtless [of the seed of
David according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3.] is the same with [of the fruit of his
loins according to the flesh, Acts 2. 30.] now [of the fruit of his loins
according to the flesh] notes the matter out of which he had flesh or a humane
body; and therefore the Father or ancient Progenitour David is mentioned, and
his seed, and the fruit of his loins; as the Jew is said to come out of the
loins of Abraham, and Levi to be in his loins, Heb. 7. 5, 10. in respect of the
matter out of which they came, not the Mother or her Womb, as the place from
whence: And (...) notes the Act of God answerable to (...) Acts 2. 30. raise
up, not the act of the Mother in bringing forth, and therefore Romans 1. 3. it is
rightly translated [made] or as Piscator [orti raised] answerably to (...)
sprang up, Heb. 7. 14.

2. It is granted, that [according to the flesh] notes a constituting part, but
that it notes a constituting part, which Christ had only before his
Resurrection, and not after his Resurrection, is not to be granted: For as it
is now, the humane body of Christ, or humane nature is made of the seed of
David, and raised of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, since it is
the same numerical body, and Christ is still the same man which was made, or
descended, or sprang out of David, notwithstanding any alteration in the
outward estate, or inherent qualities in his humanity or humane body; it does
not become a constituting part in its humiliation, and not a constituting part
in his exaltation: That very being which was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, which was raised of the fruit of his loins according to
the flesh, was to sit on his Throne, Acts 2. 30. and to reign, Luke 1. 32, 33.
And therefore as the Exceptor argues, that by the Spirit of Holiness cannot be
meant the Soul or Divinity of Christ, because he had both (in our opinion at
least) in the days of his flesh, though the Soul were not then glorified; I
may argue, by the Spirit of Holiness is not meant his glorified body, because
he had it, though not then glorified, even in the days of his flesh.

3. Which is more amply confirmed by showing, that [according to the flesh]
notes not his fleshly body as he speaks, that is Christ's humane body in its
debasement only, but his humane nature: For according to the flesh, Romans 1. 3.
signifies by the same Authors opinion, and the evidence arising from comparing
the place, the same that it does, Romans 9. 5. now it signifies Rom, 9. 5. the
same which it does ver. 3. where Paul calls the Israelites his Brethren,
Kinsmen, according to the flesh, but he means not, they were his Brethren or
Kinsmen according to the flesh, that is restrictively to their weakness,
debasement, or mortality, in opposition to their glorification, and excluding
that as inconsistent with their being his Brethren or Ki^smen according to the
flesh: But he means by according to the flesh, their humane nature as men, and
as men descended from the same Ancestors, and so in like manner, when it is
said, Christ was from the Fathers according to the flesh; the meaning is not,
according to his weak, or inglorious condition precisely, and exclusively to
his glorified condition, but simply according to his humane nature, as
descended from them, whether in the days of his flesh, or exaltation, without
any discrimination: Which is confirmed by our Saviors own speech to his
Disciples, Luke 24. 39. Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my self;
handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have;
Therefore Christ supposed atter his Re^urrection that he had flesh, that his
humane Body was a fleshly Body, the same according to the flesh that it was
before; which is also strengthened by the expressions, Acts 2. 3 (...). that
God raised him ^p of the fruit of David's loins according to the flesh bu^ God
did not raise him up of the fruit of Dav^ds loins according to the flesh,
barely ^s weak, mortal, and deb^sed, but simply as man descended from him,
therefore [according to the flesh] imports Christ's humanity or humane body as
from David without restriction to his low estate: And v. 31. when it is said,
his flesh did not see corruption; his body is still termed flesh, the same
flesh, and not considered as weak, for as such it saw a change (which may be
termed in some sort a corruption, to wit, a change from that weakness it had to
a better form, but as the constituting part of his humane nature.

4. By [the Spirit of Holiness Romans 1. 4.] whether (...) note a constituting
part, or an efficient cause, cannot be meant Christ's holy Spiritual Body in the
Exceptors sense. For 1. It would imply that his Spiritual Body were another
constituting part than his fleshly* body, which is already refuted. 2. It would
imply that his fleshly body were not his holy body; whereas that which was born
of Mary was that holy thing, which should be called the Son of God, Luke 1. 35.
3. No where is the body of Christ termed a Spirit, or the Spirit of Holiness in
any estate: For though it be true, that 1 Cor. 15. 44. mentions a Spiritual
body; yet 1. That is there contradistinguished not to (...) fleshly, but to
(...) natural, or ^oulary. 2. No where termed (...) a Spirit. 3. Nor (...) the
Spirit of Holiness. 4. After his Resurrection Christ denies his body to be a
Spirit, as having flesh and bones, Luke 24. 39. and he is said to enter into
the holy place by his own blood, Heb. 9. 12. and to have consecrated for us a
new and living way to enter into the holiest by his blood, through the Veil,
that is to say his Flesh, Heb. 10. 19, 20.

It is an error, that by the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. is meant Christ's
Eternal Spiritual Body; For [the Eternal Spirit] there must be of something
distinct from himself; Else the meaning should be, he offered himself by
himself, which is tautological and absurd; but by himself must be meant his
body, as Heb. 1. 3. Having purged our sins by himself, is by his own body: For
the thing offered was his own Body, or his Life or Soul, Isa. 53. 10. In the
Type, the thing offered is some body, gift or sacrifice Heb. 5. 1. and 8. 3.
and 9. 7. 9. and 10. 1. and 11. 4, 17. whence the body offered is termed the
oblation, Heb. 10. 5, 8. In the antitype Christ is said to offer himself, that
is, his body called his oblation, Heb. 10. 10. and this offering is termed,
Heb. 9. 25, 26. the Sacrifice of himself for the putting away of sin, and this
to be not often, but once in the end of the world, ver. 26. he was once offered
to bear the sins of many; verse 28. He needed not daily, as those Highpriests,
to offer up sacrifice first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: For
this he did once when he offered up himself, Heb. 7. 27. By the which will we
are sanctified, by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Heb.
10. 10. But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat
down on the right hand of God, verse 12. which must be before he sat down on
the right hand of God, and therefore on earth, and this was by his suffering or
dying, Heb. 9. 26, 27, 28. and therefore cannot be referred to his appearing in
Heaven, but to his bloodshedding, Heb. 9. 22. in the days of his flesh:
whereby it appears to be false, that Christ did not offer his Sacrifice for our
sins, on the Cross, there being no other time meant by that once when he
offered up himself for the sins of the people, Heb. 7. 27. and whereas it is
sa^d, Heb. 9 28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. St. Peter
tells us, 1 Epistle 2. 24. Who his own self bare our sins in his own body on
the tree, that we being dead to sin should live unto righteousness; by whose
stripes ye were healed: Which does evidently refer to Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6. whence
the last clause is taken, and shows the bearing of our sins by the offering of
himself to have been on the Cross or at the time of his suffering on Earth. And
hereby it appears to be false, that Christ made not atonement till he came to
Heaven: For Col. 1. 20. It is said, And having made peace through the blood of
his Cross he reconciled all things to his Father, ver. 21, 22. Now has he
reconciled in the body of his flesh through death. Romans 8. 3. God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin (or by a sacrifice for
sin, as Heb. 10. 8.) condemned sin in the flesh, which is all one with making
atonement. That which is alleged, that the atonement was not then made, when
the High Priest slew the Beasts, but when having put on his linen Robes, he
brought their blood into the Sanctuary before the Mercy-Seat, is partly false,
there being atonement made for himself and his house, Levit. 16. 5, 6. before
he entered into the holy place; and partly impertinent, since the point in
question is not where the atonement was made, but where Christ offered himself,
Heb. 9. 14. though both the offering and the atonement are resolved to have
been before his sitting at the right hand of God, Heb. 1. 3. and 10. 12. Nor
does it appear, that [Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14.] is put in opposition to the
days of his flesh, Heb. 5. 7. For it is not said, Heb. 5. 7. flesh that has
days, as if it noted a distinction of his body mortal, from his Spiritual
Immortal Body* but days of his flesh, only to note the time of his offering
prayers, not the quality or adjunct of his body: Nor is it said, he offered by
the days of his flesh, as here by the Eternal Spirit, but in the days of his
flesh, to note the time, which is not intimated, Heb. 9. 14. by that term, by
the Eternal Spirit, for then it should rather have been said, by or in the
Eternity of the Spirit: The offering being an act of Christ on Earth, is no
other than the act of his Deed and Will, whereby he did present himself as a
Sacrifice to God, as the phrase is, Romans 12. 1. or as it is Ephesians. 5. 2. Gave
himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor;
by reason of such acts Abraham is said to offer up Isaac, Heb. 11. 17. and we
are said to offer the Sacrifice of Praise, Heb. 13. 15. Spiritual Sacrifices, 1
Pet. 2. 5. which is plainly expressed, Heb. 10. 10. By which Will we are
sanct^fied by the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once, or for once; which
was no other than that which he expressed in that prayer, which Armi^^^^ termed
rightly the Canon or rule of Christ's Sacrifice, John 17. 19. And for them I
sanctify my self, that they also may be sanctified in truth: Which being
considered, I see not what good sense can be made of it, as many Divines
expound it, of the Divinity of Christ making the Sacrifice of Christ of value
to satisfy for sins: For the words [through the Eternal Spirit] have not
respect to himself, who was offered, as enhauncing the price of the thing
offered, by reason of the union of it to himself, neither the place of it
before himself, nor the Preposition used, being (...) through or by, not (...)
with or in conjunction, do suit with such a sense; but it is in construction
annexed and referred to the offering, and notes the cause and means of
offering: Besides the reason of Piscator is good in his Scholie on the Text,
that it belongs not to the Deity to offer Sacrifice, but that is it to which it
is offered by a man as a man: And indeed it is not good sense to say, Christ
offered himself by his Godhead to God, it being not easily conceivable what
notion the Godhead should have in such a speech, which is not absurd or inept:
Nor do I think Piscators opinion good, that by the Eternal Spirit is meant
Christ's Immortal Soul, partly because no where is Christ's Humane Soul called
the Eternal Spirit, partly because I think it should rather be said in than
through the Eternal Spirit, if Christ's Immortal Soul were meant by it, the
particle (...) noting the efficient cause, not the subject in which the act of
offering was: And therefore I rather pitch upon it to understand by [the
Eternal Spirit] the holy Spirit answering to the fire, which kindled the
Sacrifice, and moving or inflaming the heart of Christ with love to us and
obedience to God, to give himself an Offering and a Sacrifice to God for us,
Ephesians. 5. 2. The holy Spirit is fitly resembled by fire, Mat. 3. 11. and he
well termed the Eternal Spirit in opposition to the temporary fire kindling the
legal Sacrifices: But if the allusion be not thereto, yet the sense is good and
right: For as it is said that Christ had not the Spirit by measure, John 3. 34.
and that he was full of the Holy Ghost, Luke 4. 1. that the Spirit of the Lord
was upon him, that it anointed him, verse 18. So it is said, that he was moved
by the Spirit to be Tempted to Preach, in the same places, and to cast out
Devils by the Spirit of God, God putting his Spirit on him he showed Judgment
to the Gentiles, sent forth Judgment to victory, Romans 15. 16. The Offering of
the Gentiles is sa d to be accepted being sanctified by the Holy Ghost.
Man. 12. 18, 20, 28. gave Commandments through the Holy Ghost, Acts 1. 2. And
accordingly here is said to offer himself to God by the Holy Eternal Spirit:
Nor is the want of the Article any more against the expounding the Eternal
Spirit, of the Holy Ghost, than against the expounding it of Christ's Spiritual
Immortal Body, it being as requisite in respect of use to design the one as the
other; But the truth is, it is not requisite, that it should be prefixed to
show it to be meant of the holy Spirit, since it is omitted Romans 9. 1. and 14.
17. etc. and even in this E^^stl^ H^b. 2. 4. and 6. 4. So that the sense may
be, notwithstanding any thing I find to the contrary that Christ willingly,
obediently offered, or yielded, through the holy Spirits incitation or
operation in him, himself a Sacrifice without spot or blemish to God: And as
executing the function of Priesthood to which he was anointed above others,
Heb. 1. 9. And this sense is most agreeable to the Apostles intent, which is to
set forth the efficacy and validity of Christ's Sacrifice above the Legal; which
he does here from the obedience and readiness of will to offer himself as he
does. Heb. 10. 10. and the holiness of his person, or his being without spot or
blemish, as he does Heb. 7. 26, 27. 1 Pet. 1. 19. no where that I find from the
Hypostatical Union, or the spirituality, immortality, and glory of his humane
body, or the immortality of his Soul.

5. The term [(...) Romans 1. 4.] is not rightly rendered [determined or ordained
Son of God in Power] For though it be true, that the verb signifies
appointment, ordination, or predestination, and that this last is used by the
Latin vulgar translation, and by sundry of the Ancients, and the verb is used
so in the New Testament, Luk^ 22. 22. Acts 2. 23. and 10. 42. and 17. 26, 31.
in which places the appointment, or determination is by God of a thing future:
yet that cannot be the meaning, Romans 1. 4. For then the sense should be, that
Christ should be appointed, or ordained, or determined by God, either that by
power, according to his Spiritual body by the resurrection of the dead he
should be the Son of God; Or else that his appointment, ordination or
determination that he should be the Son of God, was by power according to the
Spirit of holiness, that is his holy spiritual body, by the Resurrection from
the dead. This latter sense is most absurd; it would intimate, as if Gods
determination were in power according to Christ's Spiritual body by the
Resurrection of the dead; whereas the determination of Gods purpose, or his
ordaining of things future, has no cause but his will, his ordaining is not an
act of power, though the execution of it be; Nor is the former sense true: For
then the meaning should be, that Christ's being the Son of God was consequent on
the power, the spirit of holiness, and resurrection of the dead, since ordaining
or foreappointing his Sonship to be thereby supposes them to be before, as the
cause is before the effect, and his Sonship to be future to them, or after
them: But this is contrary to what is confessed by the adversaries, that he was
the Son of God before his resurrection, and is proved from, Luke 1. 35. Mat.
16. 16. John 6. 69. and Heb. 5. 8. Although he were a Son yet learned he
obedience by the things which he suffered, which shows he was a Son before he
learned obedience by the things which he suffered: For which reasons I like not
to say as Dr. Pearson does in his Exposition on the second Article of the
Creed, that he was defined, or constituted, and appointed the Son of God in
Power by the Resurrection from the dead; Nor that of Grotius, that he was made
a celestial King after his Resurrection, and also before destinated to that
Kingdom by so many Miracles done by Divine Power proper to him and dwelling in
him, where the term Son of God standing in contradistinction, to being of the
seed of David, according to the flesh, is as much as a Celestial King, and the
Participle determined is expounded by two other, made, and before destinated,
the one noting a thing past, the other a thing future, so as that the same word
in the same place shall signify being made a Celestial King after Christ's
resurrection, and being aestinated before to that Kingdom, and in Power
according to the Spirit of holiness, shall be Divine Power proper to him* and
inhabiting in him by that Spirit of holiness, that is force of Divinity by
which from the beginning of his conception he was sanctified, and by which he
did Miracles, and (...), shall be after the Resurrect on from the dead: None of
which are made good by Heb. 5. 9. Acts 2. 30. or Acts ^6. 23. or any other
which he produ^eth in his Annot. on Romans 1. 4. Nor do I conceive can be; Nor do
I think D^. Hammond his Paraphr^se right [but according to the Spirit of
holiness, or in respect of that other Nature in him, called his Eternal Spirit,
Heb. 9. 14.] (far above all that is flesh and blood) that, I say which shone in
him most perfectly, after, and through, and by his Resurrection from the dead,
2 Cor. 13. 4. was set at Gods right hand, the Son of God in Power, to whom
accordingly as to a Son, all Power was given by the Father] For besides what
before and after is, or will be said about the Spirit of holiness, and Eternal
Spirit, there is nothing of Gods right hand in the Text, nor does [set at Gods
right hand the Son of God in Power] well explain [determined the Son of God in
Power] nor is he rightly said to be set at Gods right hand according to the
Spirit of Holiness, or in respect of that other Nature in him, called his
Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. For his being set at the right hand of God is not
precisely according to that other Nature, but rather according to that which he
had of the Seed of David according the flesh: Nor is it fitly said that other
Nature did shine most perfectly after, through or by his resurrection from the
dead, 2 Cor. 13. 4. For though his being the Son of God was proved by it, yet
how the Divine Nature did shine in him through, by, after his Resurrection from
the dead is hard to understand, nor do any words in the Text countenance such a
Paraphrase: Wherefore not mis-liking Dr. Hammond's translation* demonstrated or
defined the Son of God i^ Power; Nor that of the Syriak Interpreter who turns
(...) by, who was known; I stick to that sense, which our Translators have
chosen, declared, or as Chrysostom, In(...)ts it [shewed, demo^strated or
manifested to be the Son of God over and above what he was of the seed of David
according to the flesh] and sundry others with him: And so [determined] notes
not an act of the Will of God concerning the futurity of a thing, but Gods
sentence as it were, settling the understanding by way of certification of what
was surely so, or evidence of it as of a thing already, being to take away
doubting, in the sense in which in the Schools their resolutions concerning
things in question, are called their determinations: In which sense I conceive
it taken, Heb. 4. 7. where (...) by our Translators rendered [limiteth] is the
same which he expresses, verse 8. he had not spoken of another day: And
likewise that which declares what a thing is, in Logic is termed Job 22. 28.
(...) or a definition of it, and the Mood which Additions to Esther chapter 14. 9.
(...), Numb. 30. 8. Exodus 8. 12. 2 Mac. 12. 25. Prove. 16. 30. Epiphan. panar.
l. 1. tom. 1. impress. 19. (...) Petav. istud diserte significat.
is Indicative, is termed by Grammarians (...), and the boundaries of Lands are
called (...), because they show what is belonging to a person, and in
composition Hyppocrates his Determinations, or Declarations about Medicines are
entitled his Aphorisms, and (...) a distinct explication of a thing: According
to which Exposition the meaning is, Romans 1. 4. that God had determined as it
were by sentence in the Resurrection of him from the dead, that Christ Jesus
had another nature above that he had of the seed of David, to wit, that he was
the Son of God.

6. The Resurrection of the dead cannot be meant of the general Resurrection,
as if the sense were, he is predestined or fore-appointed that he shall be
the Son of God in Power when he shall raise the dead, but of Christ's particular
Resurrection: For though the general Resurrection shall most fully demonstrate
the glory of Christ, yet the determination being of a thing past, must be
understood of his own Resurrection: Nor is it a sufficient exception against
this, that the Apostle says (...) not (...), the Resurrection of the dead not
from the dead, and that it is not by his Resurrection from the dead, but the
Resurrection of the dead: For Acts 26. 23. there is in St. Paul's speech the
same expression, where speaking of what the Prophers foretold of Christ's
Resurrection, he uses this expression (...), word by word, that he the first
by rising of the dead, that is as he should suffer, so he should be the first
or chief risen from the dead, who should show or publish light to the people
and the Gentiles.

7. In Power, Romans 1. 4. cannot be referred to the Power of Christ, whereby he
did Miracles, but to the Power of God by which he was raised from the dead, of
which the same Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 13. 4. For though he was crucified
(...) through, or by reason of weakness, yet he lives (...) because of, or by
the Power of God, 1 Cor. 6. 14. And God has both raised up the Lord, and will
also raise up us by his own Power, Romans 6. 4. like as Christ was raised from
the dead by the Glory (that is the Power) of the Father: Which is confirmed in
that he is said to be determined the Son of God in Power, which determination
is referred to the Fathers, and therefore the Power is the Fathers by which he
is determined to be the Son of God.

8. I confess the Divine Nature of Christ is no where that I find, termed the
Spirit of holiness, or the holy Spirit, nor the glorified body of Christ,
although God be termed a Spirit, John 4. 24. and 2 Cor. 3. 17. the Lord is that
Spirit, which to me seems most likely to be meant of Christ, who is in the
Epistles of Paul most commonly meant by this title [the Lord] and in the verse
before meant, where it is said [Nevertheless when it shall turn to the Lord]
that is Christ; and the next verse following [But we all with open face
beholding the glory of the Lord] that is Jesus Christ distinguished in the same
verse from the holy Spirit, termed the Spirit of the Lord, if it be not to be
read, as from the Lord the Spirit, and so applied to Christ: It is said that
Christ knew in his Spirit, Mark. 6. 8. that he grew, and waxed strong in
Spirit, or was strengthened by the Spirit, Luke 2. 40. that he groaned in
Spirit, Joh. 11. 33. which may, or are to be understood otherwise than of his
Divine Nature, John 6. 63. It is the Spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits
nothing, the words which I speak unto you are Spirit, and are life, are meant
otherwise than of Christ's Divine Nature, and 1 Timothy 3. 16. Justified in Spirit,
or in the Spirit may be meant otherwise than of his Divine Nature, and so may
quickened by the Spirit, 1 Pet. 3. 18. of which in that which follows: The
Spirit of Christ is, Romans 8. 9. termed the Spirit of God, and if the Holy
Ghost, 1 Cor. 2. 13, 14. and 12. 3. And that which was born of Mary is said to
be that Holy thing, which shall be called the Son of God, Luke 1. 35. and Dan.
9. 24. he is termed the Holy of Holies, or as we read, the most Holy, but no
where the Spirit of Holiness. And therefore if the Spirit of Holiness note not
the Divine Nature of Christ, because it is no where in the Scripture designed
by the name of Spirit, or Spirit of Holiness, the reason is as good against the
interpretation of [the Spirit of Holiness] by [the Holy Spiritual Body of
Christ:] Nor is there likelehood that by [Spirit] should be meant [Body] since
Spirit and Body are opposed, or contradistinguished, 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 7. 34.
James 2. 26. 1 These. 5. 23. etc. as well as Flesh and Spirit: And if by [Spirit
of Holiness] be meant a constituting part of Christ distinct from Flesh, which
he had by means of the Resurrection, it cannot be meant of his body, which is
the same in substance it was in the days of his flesh, and so the same
constituting part, differing only in quality and external condition, as having
an alteration, not another Generation or Creation, and therefore cannot be
rightly termed another constituting part: And this reason with the Texts
alleged do better countenance the understanding the Deity of Christ by [the
Spirit of Holiness] than his Holy Spiritual Body: Yet for my part, I incline to
neither, but rather to the opinion, that conceives by [the Spirit of Holiness]
is meant the Holy Ghost, or third Person of the sacred Trinity, and that for
these reasons. 1. Because the term [Spirit of Holiness] is all one in sense
with [the Holy Spirit] which is the usual title given to that person, Mat. 28.
19. 2 Cor. 13. 13. 1 John 5. 7. and is according to usual manner of expressing
the Adjective by the Genitive case of the substantive, as the Children of
Wisdom are wise Children, Children of obedience, 1 Pet. 1. 14. obedient
Children, the Children of l(...), enlightened Children, Ephesians. 5. 8. 2. Because
the Resurrection is ascribed to the Spirit, Romans 8. 11. If the Spirit of him
that raised Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, be that raised Christ from the
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwells in you,
1 Pet. 3. 18. Being put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the Spirit. 3.
Because the sense thus seems to be easiest, and most agreeable to the Apostles
scope, who having said, that the Son of God was made of the seed of David
according to the flesh, noting a being beyond this, adds, that he was declared,
determined, defined or resolved to be the Son of God beyond his being the Son
of David with power, by his rising from the dead, which was by Power, according
to the Spirit of holiness, that is the holy Spirit, to whom acts of power are
usually ascribed, as Luke 1. 35. Mat. 12. 28. which was an undoubted evidence
of his being the Son of God, or having a Divine Nature, since he foretold it as
a thing to be done by himself, John 2. 19. and 5. 25, 26. and 10. 17, 18. Nor
is it necessary that (...) should note a constituting part, Romans 1. 4. For it
may note an efficient cause mediate, as when it is said Mark. 1. 27. (...) with
authority he commands the unclean Spirits, which is, Luke 4. 36. (...) with
Grot. in Romans 2. 7. (...) hic idem est quod (...). Solent enim ist^ particulae
permisceri, ut 1 Cor. 12. 8. ubi (...) habetur. Ephesians 3. 3. and alibi in 1.
Cor. 12. 8. Idem ^i^ valet (...) quod (...) in sequentibus.
Authority and Power, so (...) is by might, or mightily, Heb. 7. 16. (...)
according to the power, is by virtue or reason of the power or proportion and
congruity to the agent, as when it is said, Romans 1. 15. (...) as much as in me
lies, and the sense be, in power according to the Spirit of Holiness, that is,
with or through the holy Spirit, or congruously, proportionably to the holy
Spirit; which if it do not so fully answer the use of the preposition, yet we
may say as Dr. Hammond in a like case, Annot on Mark. 9. 3. though the
preposition do not favor this Interpretation, yet the promiscuous uncertain
use of prepositions among sacred Writers is so observable, that it may take off
much of that one objection. So far as my observation has hitherto attained in
the Apostles and other Writers Greek Expressions, if the Apostle had intended
that the Spirit of Holiness should note another constituting part, he should
have put next to [the Son of God] according to the Spirit of Holiness, as he
did ver. 3. according to the flesh next to of the seed of David, but being put
between with Power and the Resurrection of the dead, it seems not to note a
constituting part, but the efficient cause of the Resurrection, or subject of
that power, by which Christ was raised.

9. The distinct mention Romans 9. 5. of Christ's being of the Fathers according
to the flesh, that is his humane nature, and then adding, who is over all God
blessed for ever, shows that he is over all God blessed for ever, according to
his Divine Nature or deity: Nor is the defect of the Article a sufficient
reason to the contrary, since it is very frequent to put (...) without the
Article, where it is meant of God in Nature, as 1 Cor. 3. 16. 23. and 1. 24.
and 2. 5. 7. etc.

10. In that God said to Christ, Psalm. 110. 1. and he was then David's Lord,
Acts 2. 34. when he knew, verse 30. that God had sworn with an oath to him,
that of the fruit of his loins he would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne,
it proves that Christ was in being and was his Lord before he was his Son, and
so had a Divine Nature, though he was his Son according to the flesh.

SECT. 18.
The consubstantiality of Christ with the Father and us, is proved from 1 Timothy
3. 16.

THe next Text of Scripture I shall insist on to prove the consubstantiality of
Christ to God and us, is 1 Timothy 3. 16. where St. Paul says, And without
controversy great is the Mystery of godliness; God was manifested in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, received up into Glory: This passage is undoubtedly meant of
the Lord Jesus, since of no other are these things true, that ^e was manifested
in the flesh, etc. And they are true of him: He was manifested in the flesh
being made flesh, justified in, or by the Spirit at his Baptism, by his
Miracles, and at his Resurrection to be, that which he said himself to be, the
Son of God, against the false accusations of the Pharisees as a Deceiver,
confederate with Satan; seen of Angels at his Birth, Temptation in the
Wilderness, Agony in the Garden, Resurrection from the Grave, and Ascension
into Heaven, Preached to the Gentiles by his Apostles, believed on in the World
even by the Gentiles, and received up in, or into Glory at his Ascension into
Heaven: Now he of whom these things are said is God, therefore the same Person,
Christ Jesus is both God and Man; or consubstantial to the Father in respect of
his Godhead, to us in respect of his Manhood.

SECT. 19.
The Exceptions against this Proof.

THe Exception against this Argument is:

1. That the reading God was manifested in the flesh, is suspected to have been
altered by Nestorians, because the vulgar Latin, the Syriak, Arabian
Interpreters, and Ambrose all read [which was manifested] and refer it to the
Mystery of Godliness, and so this sense is given of it, that the Gospel was
first made known not by Angels, but by mortal men, and according to their
outward appearance weak, Christ and his Apostles, as flesh, Col. 1. 26. notes a
mortal man, 2 Cor. 2. 16. 1 John 4. 2. was justified in Spirit] that is, that
truth was approved by many Miracles, for Spirit is Miracles by a Metonymy,
which is, 1 Cor. 2. 4. and elsewhere. And to be justified here is to be
approved, as Mat. 11. 19. so he is said to be justified, who in a contention is
a Conqueror, because his cause is approved, Deuteronomy. 25. 1. add Psalm. 21. 6. (I
imagine Grotius means, Psalm. 51. 4.) [Seen of Angels] to wit, wi^h greatest
admiration: Angels le^rned this secret by mortal men, Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1.
12. To see with the Hebrews is translated to all manner of knowing: Was
preached to the Gentiles] that truth was not only declared to the Jews, but
also to the Gentiles, who were most estranged from God, Ephesians. 2. 12. Col. 1. 21.
believed in the World] that is in a great part of the world, Romans 1. 8. Col. 1.
6. received up in Glory] it was very gloriously exalted, to wit, because it
brought much more holiness than any Doctrines formerly: To be taken up is to be
lifted up on high, and answers to the Hebrew Verbs (...) and (...) in glory
gloriously, Phil. 4. 19. Col. 3. 4. See al^^o, 2 Cor. 3. 8. so they glorified
the word of the Lord, Acts 13. 48.

2. Others thus: God the Father was manifested, that is, his Will made known in
the flesh, that is, with or by the infirmity of Christ and his Apostles,
justified in Spirit, taken or acknowledged for true by Divine virtue which
shined in Christ as well as his Apostles, or put forth it self powerfully by
them; was seen of Angels, the good will of God toward men, was revealed to
Angels, received up in glory, the will of God was by many cheerfully received
and constantly retained, or the holy Religion of Christ was gloriously admitted
and received.

SECT. 20.
These Exceptions are refelled.

TO which I Reply: 1. That the reading of [which] instead of [God] should be
followed against all Copies of the Original now extant is unreasonable, and not
to be yielded to: The Syriak, Arabian, and Latin are not to be put in the
balance with the Greek Copies: The Latin translation is found and confessed
even by Romanists to be so faulty, as that it is not of itself to be rested on,
much less are Ambrose and Hin(...)arus, who were misled by it: That Nestoria^s
should foyst in (...) God is not likely, since it is against their opinion, and
was used by Chrysostom before Nestorius, and by Cyril against the Nestorians,
as Dr. Pearson shows in his Exposition of the Creed, Artic. 2. page 142. of the
second Edition.

2. By [God] cannot be meant, either God the Father, or his Will, or the
Gospel, or the truth of it. 1. Because the words cannot be expounded so in
either of the senses given: Neither is God the Father any where said to be
manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, received up in Glory: Nor
does God manifested in the flesh signify God, or his Will, or Gospel, or truth
manifested in infirmity, or Christ and his Apostles in their infirmity, nor
justified in, or by the Spirit approved by Miracles, nor seen of Angels,
learned by them from mortal men, nor received up in Glory, admitted or received
in men's minds: None of all the Texts alleged countenance these Expositions;
Though flesh sometimes signifies mortal weak man, it being a word of very
various acceptions, and the Gospel is said to be manifested as Col. 1. 26. and
2 Cor. 2. 14. and Gal. 4. 13. St. Paul says, he preached the Gospel at first
to the Galatians through the infirmity of the flesh, yet no where is the Gospel
said to be manifested in the flesh, or flesh put simply for infirmity. That 1 John 4. 2. that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is against his sense of
preaching the Gospel in infirmity, it plainly noting his coming into the world
in a humane nature, in the sense in which he said, John. 1. 14. The Word was
made flesh, and dwelt among us. Though I deny not, that words of sense do often
note other knowledge than by sense, yet these words (...) are scarce ever found
to be applied to any thing but that which is descernable by sight: However if
they were, yet the sense imagined has no color, since it is not said, seen of
Angels by the Church: (...) signifies not receiving by men that glorify it,
but the glory of the person or thing manifested, Phil. 4. 19. Col. 3. 4. are
not meant of such glory, or alacrity, or rejoicing, as is made the meaning of
Glory, 1 Timothy 3. 16. Nor do we find in the Greek Bibles such language as
answers to the pretended Exposition of it in that place: And for receiving the
Gospel, the usual word is (...), 1 These. 1. 6. and 2. 14. Acts 2. 41. not the
word there used. 2. According to that Exposition it would be an in^pt tautology
to say, he was believed on in the world, and received up in glory if meant of
receiving in men's hearts: For what is it to be believed on, but to be received
in men's hearts? which is not to be conceived of the Apostle in these concise
Aphorisms. 3. There would be no Mystery much less a great Mystery without
contradiction in that which the Apostle says, if the meaning were as it is
made, since Gods will was often manifested by mortal men, even by all the
Prophets, who testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory
that should follow, 1 Pet. 1. 11. and approved by Miracles done by Moses,
Elias, Elisha, known by Angels who brought Messages to Daniel and others,
preached to the Gentiles by Jonah at Niniveh, believed in the world by the
Ninivites, received with alacrity; as by David and others.

3. The words in the plain obvious sense, are truly and rightly expounded of
Jesus Christ who is said to be God, John 1. 1, 2. to come in the flesh in his
humane nature, to be made flesh, John 1. 14. to be manifested in his works,
John 2. 11. and his preaching, Mark 1. 27. Luke 7. 16, 22. justified in the
Spirit, or by the Spirit, either by the Spirits descent on him at his Baptism
John 1. 33, 34. whereby he was proclaimed and proved to be the Son of God, or
by his Miracles, as Mat. 12. 28. against the accu(...)on of colluding with the
Devil, or at his Resurrection as I conceive, Romans 1. 3, 4. or by giving the
Holy Ghost, Acts 2. 33. Seen of Angels, Luke 2. 11, 12. Mat. 4. 15. Luke ^2.
43. and 4. 4, 5. Acts 1. 10. Preached to the Gentiles, 1 Cor. 1. 23. 2 Cor. 1.
19. Believed on in the World, Romans 1. 8. 1 T(...). 1. 7, 8. received up, the
word used 1 Timothy 3. 16. in glory, Acts 1. 2, 11, 12. Mark 16. 19. Luke 9. 51
and 24. 26.

4. It being said God was manifested in the flesh and this meant of Jesus
Christ proves he was (before) God, and then he had flesh, and therefore a
Humane and Divine Nature, and consubstantial to the Father and to us

SECT. 21.
The samething is confirmed from 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 10. Gal. 4. 4. Romans 8. 3. 1
John 4. 2. Heb. 2. 14. and 10. 5. John 16. 28.

TO this I shall subjoyn for Confirmation and Explication, 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19,
20. where Christ is said to be put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
Spirit: Where flesh must note a constituting part, and yet the Spirit note the
efficient: For quickened noting his Resurrection, cannot note his Eternal Holy
Spiritual Body, as was conceived meant by the Eternal Spirit, Heb. 9. 14. and
the Spirit of Holiness, Romans 1. 4. For that was not till he was quickened, and
therefore he not quickened in or by it; nor his Humane Soul, for that dyed not,
and therefore the Spirit must note an efficient, and that must be either the
Divine Nature of Christ, or, as I conceive, the Holy Spirit, to whom his
Resurrection is ascribed, Romans 8. 11. called the Power of God, 2 Cor. 13. 4. as
what is done by the Spirit; is said to be done by the Power of God, Luke 1. 35.
Mat. 12. 28. Luke 11. 20. and he was quickened by the Spirit by which he
preached, verse 19. which was the Holy Spirit, Genesis 6. 3. in the preaching of
Noah, 2 Pet. 2. 4. and this was the Spirit of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 11. the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. In that Spirit he went and preached to the spirits in
Prison, which were sometimes disobedient in the days of Noah, which those that
deny Christ's Divine Nature, will not say to have been done in the th^ee days
of his death before his Resurrection, therefore in the da^es of Noah, and
consequently he had then a being, to wit a Divine Nature, otherwise he could
not be said then to go and preach by the Spirit by which he was quickened, nor
the spirits in prison to have been disobedient, when once the long-suffering of
God waited in the days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing.

To these Scriptures I add, Gal. 4. 4. Romans 8. 3. The sending his Son supposes
the Sons being before, and so his Divine Nature, Made of a Woman, in the
likeness of sinful flesh his Humane, therefore he had both. To the same effect
are those Texts which speak of his coming in the flesh, as 1 John 4. 2. his
taking part of flesh and blood, Heb. 2. 14. where he that was Superior to
Angels antecedently, was made little lower than the Angels, or debased below
the Angels, partaking flesh and blood, not ashamed to call them Brethren, ver.
7, 11. whom in respect of his native greatness he might have been ashamed to
own as such, and therefore is supposed to have a being above man, before he was
a man: His coming into the world with a body prepared for him, out of obedience
and compliance of will to his Fathers, Heb. 10. 5. John 16. 28. shows his being
with his Father before he was a man, and so a Divine Nature antecedent to his
Humane.

SECT. 22.
Christ's consubstantiality with the Father and us, is proved from Philip. 2. 5,
6, 7, 8.

THere yet remains that Text, which is, Philip. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. where the
Apostle speaks thus: Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus,
who being in the form of God, thought, or counted it not robbery, or a spoil,
or prey to be equal to God, or as God: But made himself of no reputation, or
emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the
likeness of men, or when he had been made like to men (as Meric. Casaubon
diatriba de usu Verborum p. 66.) and being found in fashion, or habit as man or
a man, and became obedient, or rather being or becoming obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross: In which I confess are sundry unusual expressions
needful to be cleared, yet sufficient to prove him to have a Divine and Humane
Nature, since he is said to have been in the ^orm of God first, and then to
empty himself, to take on him the form of a Servant, to be made in the likeness
of men, to be found in fashion as a man, to humble himself to death, whence I
may argue: He who being in the form of God, counted it no robbery or prey that
he was as God, emptied himself, taking the form of a Servant when he was made
in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, humbled himself,
becoming obedient unt^ death, had a Divine and Humane Nature; But this is true
of Jesus Christ, therefore he had both Natures.

SECT. 23.
The Exception against this Argument is recited.

TO this Argument the Exception is thus made: The words and sense being thus:
Let this mind be in you, which was in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of
God (for the exercise and demonstration of Divine Power, whereby he wrought
Miracles in as free and uncontrouled a manner as if God himself had been on the
earth) thought it not robbery (or a prey) to be equal with God (that is did not
esteem this equality of his with God, consisting in the free exercise of Divine
Power, to be a prey, by holding it fast, and refusing to let it go, as Robers
are want to do when they have got a prey or booty) but (Gr.) emptied himself
(in making no use of the Divine Power within him to rescue himself out of the
hands of the Officers sent to apprehend him) and took upon him the form of a
Servant (in suffering himself to be apprehended, bound and whipped as Servants
are wont to be) being made in the likeness of men (that is ordinary and vulgar
men, who are endued with no Divine Power) and being found in fashion (or habit)
as a man (that is, in outward quality, condition and acting, no whit differing
from a common man) he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross.

SECT. 24.
The Text is explained in order to the refelling of the Exception.

TO clear this Text, and Argument, and so to refel the exception, it will be
necessary to enquire what is meant: 1. By the form of God. 2. By being in the
form of God. 3. By (...). 4. By (...). 5. By (...). 6. By (...). 7. By (...).
8. By (...). 9. By (...). 10. By (...). 11. By (...). 12. By (...). 13. By
(...). 14. By (...). 15. By found. 16. By humbled himself. 17. By becoming
obedient. 18. When he was in the form of God. 19. When he emptied himself* 20.
When he took the form of a Servant.

1. It is true that form (...) is most commonly applied to signific something
outward which is the object of sight, and therefore Grotius conceives, that by
the form of God is meant the glory of his Miracles. But as Dr. Casa^bon in the
place before cited, rightly observed, where it is used for something which
appears to the sight, it is never used for Excellent Power, or Divine Power in
working Miracles, but for the outward visage, when it has splendor, beauty
and excellent luster, attractive of the eyes, and moving desire or lust, or
giving occasion to conceive in the person Majesty, or an heroical Spirit
within, and so awing others, or procuring dread or reverence of him. Now it is
certain Christ had not in the days of his flesh such a form, but as the
Prophet foretold, Isa. 53. 2. He grew up before God as a tender plant, and as a
root out of a dry ground: He had no form nor comeliness: and when he was seen
there was no beauty that they should desire him, but in outward appearance he
was poor and despicable; Nevertheless the verbs simple and compound do signify
something inward and not conspicuous to the eyes. Thus it is meant when St.
Paul says Gal. 4. 19. My little Children of whom I travail in birth until
Christ be formed in you, Romans 12. 2. Be ye transformed in the renewing of your
mind, 2 Cor. 3. 18. we are transformed after the same image. And if in the Holy
Scripture the word (...) form signify not that which is inward and hidden, yet
in Aristotle and other Authors, the word signifies Vide Danielis Heinsij Arist
sac. in Non. c. 19.
the essence or that constitutive essential part of a substance, which
differenceth one substance from another, which is defined by Aristotle 2d.
Physic. (...) the reason of its being such a thing: And indeed many understand
by the form of God, the essence or nature of God. But to the contrary is. 1.
That form has the same notion, Phil. 2. 6. in the term form of God, as it has
verse 7. in the term form of a Servant; But in that notion of the essence or
nature of a Servant, it cannot be said Christ took the form of a Servant, for
that is a m^er relation, and if he had taken the essence of a Servant by being
incarnate it had been the same with being made in likeness of men, and so he
could not have put off the essence of a Servant, no more than the essence of a
man, if his taking the form of a Servant had been by being made a man: Besides
the nature of man is not the essence of a Servant; man may be Lord as Christ
man is Lord of all, Acts 10. 36. and yet has the essence of man, and Angels
are Servants and yet have not the essence of man. 2. It is said, Christ emptied
himself, to wit, of the form of God in which he was, which notes some lessening
or laying aside of the form of God, in which he was; But that could not be the
Divine essence, therefore it is not here meant.

Nor is it to be conceived, that by the form of God is meant the power of doing
Miracles: For neither is the power of Miracles any where termed the form of
God, and if that were all that is meant, it might be said of Moses and Elias
that they were in the form of God: Besides he did not empty himself of the
power or exercise of it whereby he did Miracles at any time, no not when he was
apprehended, for even then the Soldiers at his word went backward and fell to
the Earth, John 18. 6. and he restored Malch^s his ear cut off by Peter, Luke
22. 5^. although he did not use his power to rescue himself.

Therefore it is more likely that by form of God is meant the state or Majesty
of God, that glory which he had with his Father before the world was, John 17.
5. the Exercise of his Empire, which he had opposite to the state of a Servant
which he took, and to the obedience which he yielded to his Father, ver. 7, 8.
For the estate of God is an estate of Empire and Command exercising Power and
Dominion, giving of gifts to friends, helping Subjects, subduing Enemies, which
Christ did with the Father before he took flesh, but emptied himself of it in
his humiliation: which is the more confirmed in that his superexaltation, verse
9. restored that which he emptied himself of: Now that was his Glory and
Majesty, all things being made subject to him. And this seems best to agree
with the use of the term form, as here it seems to be used: For as the form of
a Servant notes that which made him appear to others to be under the command of
another, to wit, of his Father, which was that he should lay down his life and
take it again, John 10. 18. which was undoubtedly conspicuous to the Angels,
and also to those who knew him to be the Son of God; So the form of God notes
that Majesty, Glory, exercise of Empire which he had with his Father, which was
apparent to the Holy Angels, and to Abraham who saw his day, and to Jacob and
other holy persons before his Incarnation, and is the same with his being as
God, or equal to God.

2. From hence then we may understand what is meant by his being in the form of
God, to wit his possession and enjoyment of that glory he had with his Father
before the world was, John 17. 5. (...) notes the subsistence or being of his
person, and the form of God notes his estate of Glory and Majesty, which I
conceive expressed by that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8, 9. Ye know the grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he were rich, yet for your sakes he became
poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.

3. (...) may be expounded either as an adjective as our translatours render
it, equal with God, or as an adverb, and so it is used twelve times in the
Greek ve^sion of the Book of Job, Wisdom 7. 3. in Homer, and elsewhere, and
answers to (...) in the Hebrew, and notes likeness, and may be translated, as
God: Now whether of these two ways it is to be read, is in my apprehension
difficult: I incline to the latter. 1. Because nothing is expressed that may be
as a substantive to it, whereas if it were an adjective, either (...) himself,
used ver. 7* or as Came^arius in his note observes (...) his things, should be
added: As for that which is by Pasor in his Lexicon voce (...) from Zanch. de
incarnatione Filii Dei, lib. 1. c. 2. imagined, as if there were an ellipsis of
(...), and the sense were, that he was equally God, as God, that is the Father;
it is a bold supplement, that has not any thing to countenance it in the Text,
and gives much advantage to them that say, he is not the same God. In that
which he mentions out of Posselius his Syntaxis, p. 134. [that it is an
Hellen^sm, and it is put for the noun substantive equality, as if by the
Article (...) the Infinitive Mood were turned into a Noun, and the sense were
as in the word (...) he gives it, he did not snatch, or catch by rapine
equality with God] the interpretation does suppose, that he counted it not
rapine, is all one with, he did not take by rapine, and the verb substantive of
the Infinitive Mood, to be turned into a Noun, whereas it is drowned in his
sense, and if it were made a Noun, it should be thus read, he did not take by
rapine being equality with God, which has no good sense, and the Adjective or
Adverb is made a Noun Substantive, not the Infinitive Mood, and the Noun of
equality is made to govern a D^tive case without any Example, when according to
that sense by rule God should be in the Genitive: I confess where (...) is used
adverbially it does most commonly note simili^ude of action, yet similitude of
being is sometimes expressed by it, as (...) Gr. (...), ^ob 13. 12. (...). ^sa.
51. 23.
Job 11. 12. in the Greek, and elsewhere, and though it note equality, yet also
it notes likeness; and in the same chapter, v. 20. (...) is translated like
minded, and this does best answer to the use of (...) and (...) and (...), ver.
6, 7, 8. which note likeness of estate or condition, yet comprehending withal
reality of Nature. 2. If it were to be read to be equal with God, it would
intimate, that he emptied himself of it as the adversative; But verse 7. shows,
and the phrase, he counted it not a prey, do evince; but equality with God he
could not empty himself of, but must hold it as a prey not to be let go, the
contrary whereof the Text does propound for our imitation.

4. Whence it seems most likely, that the thing he means by his being as God,
was his commanding as God, his like doing with his Father mentioned, John 5.
17, 19. which he did in his presence, and such glory as he had then, and now
had not as before, but prays for its restitution, John 17. 5. Of which see
what is said before, Sect. 16. Zanchius part secunda de tribus Elo^im, l. 3.
c. 2.. 4. quasi filius hominis cum nubibus C^li venit, hoc est Christus
pervenit ad gloriam De^tatis post resurrectionem, sicut ego cum m^gnis viris
intelligo.

5. (...) is a rare word, yet seems to have the same sense with (...), etc. and
notes either rapinam or raptum, the act of taking or carrying away, or the
thing taken, or ca(...)d away, both which are expressed by the Greek word, and
by the word [robbery] which our t^anslators use to answer it, yet I rather
render it prey, or spoil, as expressing only the thing gotten, not the act of
getting. 1. Because (...) cannot be meant of the acquisition, but the thing
possessed. 2. It is more agreeable to the phrase of emptying himself, which
presupposes a thing had or possessed, which was the form of God, and being as
God, and the thing possessed as Robbers or Beasts of prey get what they have.
3. the word (...) is so used by the Greek Interpreters, Job 29. 17. Isa. 42.
22. Isa. 61. 18, etc. for the thing gotten, although in the latter place it be
translated robbery, and the term robbed is as well meant of the person from
whom, as the thing gotten by robbery: So also it is used Levit. 6. 4. (...),
that which he took violently away, Ezekiel. 19. 6. Ezekiel. 18. 7, 13, 16, 18. Ezekiel.
23. 25, 27. (...).

6. (...) translated by the vulgar Latin arbitratus est, by Beza duxit, by
ours thought, may either note an act of judgment, or affection, or purpose, or
use: In the first sense to think it not a prey is as much as he did not judge,
that the being as God was a thing stolen or gotten by any force or fraud,
usurped, or plundered from another, but his own whether by inheritance or free
donation: But this is not likely, partly because the inward act of judgment or
cogitation is not here propounded to be imitated, but some act of will or
affection manifested by outward action or patent fact, which is apparent by the
Exhortation, verse 5. where the Apostle says, (...), Let the same mind be in
you which was also in Christ Jesus, that is have the same will, purpose,
resolution, action as he had, who was so far from doing any thing through
st^^fe and vainglory, that he preferred others before himself, not looking at
his own things, but the things of others, which he showed by his not holding
fast his Excellency, but emptying himself; partly also because the act of
thinking here denied must be opposite to his emptying himself: For the particle
[but] being adversative shows the thinking it robbery to be equal with God, or
to be as God to be contrary to the emptying; Now if the not thinking were as
much as not judging, then the emptying must be an alteration of his thoughts,
or a privation of it, which has no congruous sense: For the emptying was of
himself, or that which he was in being, not of his thoughts of himself, or
having other thoughts of himself: Besides the not thinking it robbery or a prey
is not an act of sentence determining what was his own or right he had to a
thing, but an act of purpose, that notwithstanding his right or possession, yet
his resolution was not to retain it, but (as the emptying, verse 7. shows)
tending to a dereliction of it for a time in obedience to his Father whom he
would glorify on earth, by finishing the work he gave him to do, though by
abasing himself, as he says in his prayer to his Father, John 17. 4. where he
relates the event of his errand and business for which he came into the world,
and for which he took on him the form of a Servant: which ^eason evacuates that
sense which is given by Grotius, Heinsius, and if there be any other, that
imagine the sense to be according to a speech of John Baptist in the Syriak
Liturgy, that he would not assumere rapinam, that is, do such an injurious
thing as to pretend to have greater authority than Christ, that Christ did not
think it a wrong to his Father that he was equal to him, or had power of
Miracles, and was beheld as God, as Grotius his phrase is: For his act did
suppose his ^ight, but expresses his intent notwithstanding his right, and
this antecedent to his emptying himself, taking the form of a Servant, being
made in the likeness of men, and ^ending thereto removendo prohibens by
removing that which might hinder his emptying himself, not disclaiming his
right, but relinquishing his possession of what he had, not doing as Robbers or
others, who hold what they have gotten by violence as long as they have any
power to keep it, but freely and voluntarily in dutiful subjection to his
Father, yielding it up to his hands from whom he received it, in order to the
accomplishment of his Will, as it is expressed, Heb. 10. 9. And this also helps
to show that Piscator and those who follow him do mistake in the notion of this
phrase, as if it were, as if the Apostle had said, he did not as men that have
gotten a spoil by victory, triumphantly make show of it, but did rather
conceal, or hide it at least, for the greatest part of his life forbidding the
divulging his Miracles, and that confession which Peter made, Mat. 16. 20. and
the Vision in the Mount at his transfiguration, Mat. 17. 9. For then his not
thinking it a spoil should be after his emptying, which was when he took the
form of a Servant, being made in the likeness of men, whereas it was before,
and in his not thinking should be no act of obedience, whereby he took the form
of a Servant, nor can be rightly made as tending to the act of emptying
himself, which was not in the opinion of others, but in his own diminution, nor
did he conceal or hide himself, but both by Miracles and express speeches show
himself to be the Son of God, John 1. 14. and 2. 11. and 10. 30, 32, 36, etc.
although for some time he inhibited his Disciples to divulge some peculiar
Revelations, that no impediment might be to the great design of his suffering
and rising from the dead, which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, according to
Moses and Elias their conference with him, Luke 9. 31. nor could these
inhibitions to some persons be indeed his emptying himself, or making himself
of no reputation, or not thinking it robbery or spoil gotten by conquest that
he was as God, by not triumphantly boasting of it, but concealing it: For in
the event notwithstanding those prohibitions his glory was so known, that
immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the Region round about
Galilee, Mark 1. 28. and he who was forbidden to speak of his curing him, yet
went out and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the matter, insomuch
that Jesus could no more openly enter into the City, but was without in desert
places, and they came to him from every quarter, Mark 1. 45. Wherefore I
conceive, that (...) notes a denial of an act elicite of the mind and
affections, in esteeming, valuing, affecting, or making account of his being as
God, as men do of a prey gotten by violence, which they do so affect or rejoice
in it that they cannot part with it. 2. Of an act imperate of the members in
retaining it by claiming or asserting of it, and contending to keep it as a
thing which they will not yield up but by force; and the sense is, Christ being
in the form of God, that is the glory of his Father as associate with him in
his Empire, did not esteem or hold that his being as God, as if it had been a
prey gotten by violence, which he would not relinquish without force; But etc.
Which importance of the word (...) is agreeable to the use of it in this
Epistle, Philip. 2. 3. and 3. 7. 8. where his accounting all things as loss and
dung notes his esteem and Job 13. 24. (...) Job 19. 11. (...).
dereliction of them as such, and the like use is elsewhere, 1 These. 5. 13. 2
These. 3. 15. 1 Timothy 1. 12. and 6. 1. Heb. 10. 29. and 11. 26. James 2. 1.
besides what occurs in other Authors. And hereunto I may accommodate some of
the words which Dr. Merick Casaubon cites in his Diatriba de usu verborum p.
52. out of Cornelius a lapide the Jesuit, As Chrysostom and Vatablus observe,
rapere to catch or take by violence signifies by a Metalepsis studiously and
contentiously to retain something as if it were snatched or caught by violence
(...) rapine, as if he said, Christ did not catch, nor ambitiously sought, as
Lucifer, Isa. 14. 13. the equality of God, not as Robbers are wont (while they
being guilty of their evil doing, fear least they should lose it) studiously
ke^p and ambitiously defend the thing caught by them; but rather of his own
accord as a lawful Lord deposed it, or let it go and emptied himself: For the
adversative particle [but] which follows, when he says, but he emptied himself
requires this: Otherwise it will not be so much an adversative as an
explicative, and will be taken improperly, sed, pro, veruntamen, but, for,
nevertheless: which leads us to the consideration of verse 7.

7. Where I take (...) as an adversative rightly rendered [but] not [yet] or
[nevertheless] to which answers (...) in the Greek, and it notes something
contrary to what it is said he did not, verse 6. which being the holding of his
being as God, that which he did is to be conceived contrary to it, expressed by
(...), which our Translators render made himself of no reputation, and that is
by many conceived to have been by concealing or hiding from men his being as
God; But this, as I showed before, is not right, since Christ did manifest his
glory so as that they beheld his glory as of the only begotten Son of God full
of grace and truth, John 1. 14. and by his words and works did indeed what did,
and might make him of great reputation, so that he was a Prophet mighty in deed
and word before God and all the people, Luke 24. 19. and is contrary to what is
said, 1 John 3. 5, 8. 1 Timothy 3. 16. God was manifested in the flesh; and also
must restrain this act to the time of his converse with men, whereas the Text
makes it to have been either antecedent or coincident with his taking the form
of a Servant, being made in the likeness of men: Nor is it said, he diminished
his esteem, or begat in others a low opinion of him, but he emptied or
evacuated himself, that is, became less full than he was; which is not rightly
referred by Grotius, to his living a poor life, but notes some act antecedent
to his conversing with men: Heinsius likes it better to render it humbled, than
emptied himself, alleging Chrysostom Exercit. Saer. l. 11. c. 2. But since the
Apostle uses that word, verse 8. as a further act of Christ's submission of
himself beyond that of emptying, verse 7. they are not rightly confounded, but
the emptying is to be taken as an act of privation in some sort of somewhat he
had, and the humbling to subjection to what was appointed him to suffer.
Rightly says Dr Hammond in his Annotation on Philip. 2. 7. Psalm. 137. (...).
Ez^k. 5. a. 12. Hebrew (...). Gr. (...), Ezekiel. 28. 7. (...) Isa. 51. 7.
(...) signifies to lessen, diminish; so Pharorinus (...) to suffer or undergo
diminution, so the Hebrew (...) which Jerem. 4. 4. (it should be 2.) and 15. 9.
is ^rendered (...) to empty, is Joel 1. 10, 12. Nehem. 1. 4. (mis-printed for
Nahum 1. 4.) (...) to diminish, and Hos. 4 3. (...), to make little: A
diminution then or lessening, or priva(...) is expressed by it, which is to be
conceived to be the form of God, his being as God, the glory he had in
possession with his Father, when he commanded with him, but now in respect of
use and enjoyment laid it aside, lessened himself from the condition of being
Lord of all, to that of a subject and ordinary man, as Dr. Hammond speaks in
his Paraphrase, which is confirmed in that it is expressed in the words
following, Taking the form of a Servant, being made in the likeness of men,
wherein this emptying of himself did consist.

8. The form of a Servant cannot be interpreted merely of Christ's v^sage or
outward aspectable form: For 1. There is no such outward form which does
distinguish a freeman from a Servant or Slave, but that the one is often as
comely and beautiful as the other. 2. Though it be true that by reason of his
suffering, his visage was so marred more than any man, and his form more than
the Sons of men, as the Prophet foretold, Isa. 52. 14. yet he took not this
form, but it was put on him by his enemies: His whipping, binding and leading
away was not the form of a Servant, but of a Prisoner, and he took not these,
but under-went them when they were inflicted on him: His Crucifying it is true,
was Servile supplicium, the punishment of Slaves, but it was inflicted on
others also; even then when he was Crucified others were Crucified with him,
not as Servants, but as Thieves and Robbers, and upon him it was inflicted as
on a Malefactor, so that it was written in the title of his condemnation, The
King of the Jews, and he was numbered with the Transgressors, Mark 15. 26, 28.
and he was made a curse for us, as it is written, Cursed is every one that
^angeth on a Tree, Gal. 3. 13. Nor is taking of the form of a Servant referred
only to his outward poverty, as Grotius conceives, that he took on him the form
of a Servant, in that he had nothing of his own, as he said of himself, Mat. 8.
20. For that is not the form of a Servant, it may be the estate of a Son in
minority, Gal. 4. 1. And though it were true, that he had no certain dwelling
place, yet he had a Bag kept by Judas, out of which distribution might be made
to the poor, John 13. 29. Nor is it his Humane Nature, for then it had been the
same with being made in the likeness of men: Nor are all men's Servants, and he
by his super-exaltation, verse 9. left the form of a Servant, not his Humane
Nature: Besides the form of a Servant which he took was not to men, but to God,
as appears, from verse 8. where it is said, he became obedient unto death: His
obedience was to God his Father, as appears from verse 9. therefore God, that
is God the Father, verse 11. highly exalted him, for his obedience to him, Heb.
5. 8. Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he
suffered, Now Romans 6. 16. his Servant any one is to whom he obeys: And
therefore Christ obeying his Father is often styled his Servant, Isa. 52. 13.
and 42. 1. Mat. 12. 18.

9. His taking then the form of a Servant was his submission of himself to his
Fathers command, according to that which he says, John 6. 38. I came down from
Heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me, and this was
his emptying himself: For it is rightly observed by Dr. Pearson Explic. of the
Creed, art. 2. p. 135. of the second Edition, that the Apostle explains the
emptying of himself, by adding the taking the form of a Servant, not by way of
conjunction, but by way of apposition, though I do not conceive, that signifies
a clear identity, as he speaks: But that which follows is right, that it is
necessary to observe, that our translation of that verse is not only not exact,
but very dis-advantagious to that truth which is contained in it: For we read
it thus: He made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant, and was made in the likeness of men: Where we have two copulative
conjunctions, neither of which is in the original Text, and three propositions
without dependence of one upon the other; whereas all the words together, are
but an expression of Christ's exinanition, with an explication showing in what
it consists: And this also shows what was the form of God, and his being as
God, like, or equal to God, to wit his Dominion and Empire with his Father,
that fullness which he emptyed himself of by taking the form of a Servant, which
was restored to him when he was highly exalted, made universal head over all,
Ephesians. 1. 20, 21, 22, 23. 1 Pet. 3. 22. Heb. 1. 13, 14. and by his being made
universal Judge, Philip. 2. 9, 10, 11. compared with Romans 14. 9, 10, 11.

10. (...), by us translated of men, is without ground conceived to note, not
the Nature of man simply considered, but the state of men in an abject
condition: For, 1. There is no example in the Apostles writings of the use of
it in that notion. 2. (...) the likeness of men, is the same with (...) the
likeness of flesh, Romans 8. 3. and (...), fashion or shape as a man, which notes
humane nature or feature simply considered: Nor do the two Texts alleged for
the interpreting of men as noting an abject condition, serve for that purpose:
Psalm. 82. 7. where it is said, ye shall dye (...) as men, is so far from noting
an abject condition that it plainly notes the condition of mortality common to
all; and the Emphasis is, that though God said, verse 6. they were Gods, and
all the Sons of the most High, in respect of their office and dignity, yet they
should dye as common men, and fast as one of the Princes; Ainsworth's note is
[as earthly men] as Adam; Vide Gatakeri Cinnum l. 2. c. 10. p. 288, etc.
that is as any other mortal man: So after, as one of the Princes, that is, of
the other Princes of the world: See the like, Judges 16. 7, 11, 17. which also
shows us how to understand the expression, Judges 16. 7, 11. that Sampson said
of himself, that he should be weak and be as one of men, where men notes not
the state of abject serv^le men, debassd below other men, or peculiar to some
men in such a rank or estate, but a state common to other men, not elevated
above ordinary men by an heroical Spirit, and excellent strength, which is
apparent from the expressions, verse 13. I shall be weak as one of men, and
verse 17. I shall be weak and be as all men, or as Tremellius reads it, sicut
unus aliquis homo, as some one man, and so notes this, that then he should have
but the strength of one man: Nor is that conceit of Grot^us in his note on
Philip. 2. 7. any better, made in the likeness of men] when he was like to men,
to wit, those first men, that is without sin, 2 Cor. 5. 21. which has no
example of using [men] for [the first men] and the Apostles expression like to
that here, Romans 8. 3. rather ins^nuates the contrary, that he was like to
sinful men, when he said, God sending his own Son, is the likeness of sinful
flesh and for sin condemned sin in the flesh: Therefore in the likeness of men
is to be expounded of them as men according to their humane nature.

11. Likeness of men notes not a bare image or representation, or resemblance
as in a vision or picture, but as a Child is said to be begotten in his Fathers
likeness, Genesis 5. 3. And so the Author to the Hebrews, chapter 2. 17. says, in
all things it behoved Christ (...) to be made li^e unto his brethren, that is,
to have the same humane nature in all parts that they have: Thus it is said,
Romans 9. 29. And as Esaias said before, except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a
seed, we had been as Sodom, and been made like as Gomorrah, from Isa. 1. 9.
where to be, and to be like are the same: More to the same purpose may be seen
in Heinsius Aristar. sac. in nonnum c. 19.

12. (...) is well rendered made in the likeness of men, but it is without
Example or reason referred to an act of men, as if they by their injurious
usage had thus made him to be as ordinary and vulgar men, who are endued with
no Divine Power, or he had by an act of will made himself in his sufferings as
such, but it was by the act of Gods Power, that he was made in the likeness of
men, and it was when he assumed a humane Nature, or to use the same Apostles
words, Gal. 4 4. But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son,
made or born of a Woman made (the same word which is used, Philip. 2. 7.) under
the Law, or as it is Luke 1. 35. The Holy Ghost shall come upon the^, and the
Power of the most High shall over-shadow thee: And therefore it is expounded as
expressing the time of his taking the form of a Servant, and to be read, when
he was made in the likeness of men, or as Dr. Pearson's Exposition has it, he
took the form of a Servant by being made in the likeness of men, that is as he
after expresses it, when Christ's body first was framed, even then did he
assume the form of a Servant: In which expression he does rightly make this
place parallel to that of Heb. 10. 5. A body have thou prepared me, which
answers to Psalm. 40. 7. concerning which I shall use the words of Mr. Gataker
in his Cinnus l. 2. c. 11. Junius, and after him Pis^ator would have the Kingly
Prophet to have had respect to that right of boaring the Servants ear, and
fastening it to his Masters post, who was willing to be still a Servant,
mentioned Exodus 21. 6. when under the person of the Lord Christ, he said, Psalm.
40. 7. Thou have boared mine ears, as if he had said, thou have addicted me to
service and perpetual Ministry: Whence Isa. c. 42. verse 1. Behold my Servant,
etc. For which the Greeks, and the Apostle following them, Heb. 10. 5. but a
body have thou made up for me, because to wit, then he put on the form of a
Servant, when he assumed humane flesh, and even the likeness of sinful flesh,
Romans 8. 3. Philip. 2. 7. So that the Apostle shows not the identity* but the
coincidency of these, the taking the form of a Servant, being made in the
likeness of men: Nor can the taking the form of a Servant be referred either to
the servile or mean condition he had, when he conversed among men; or his being
made in the likeness of men to any subjection of himself consequent on his
Apprehension, Binding and Scourging.

13. The word we translate in fashion, signifies the outward habit of the body,
in Aristotle's Categories the shape or figure of it, in Geom(...) the various
sc(...)uations of lines and angles, in Rhetoric the various modes or manners
of expressions in speech, the gestures of the body, the affections of the mind,
the accidents, occurrences, order of things subl^nary, 1 Cor 7 31. Here it
notes the shape or fea^ure of a man, and that with reality of humane nature, as
form and likeness were also used.

14. A man notes not either a man in his dejected (...), so as that the sense
should be, being found in fashion (or habit) as a man (that is in outward
quality, condition, and acting, no whi^ differing from a common man) it being
the same with the likeness of men, verse 7. nor as Grotius in his Note, Schema
is here axioma, conspicuous dignity, as often with the Greeks, which word also
the Syriak Interpreter here used: And (...) is (...) was seen, As a man, as
Adam, that is with dominion over all the creatures, the Sea, Winds, Bread,
Water: For which cause that which was said of Adam in Psalm. 8. is applied
mystically to Christ: For neither is [man] put any where in the New Testament
that I find, for [Adam] but still either Adam, or the first man, nor is it here
put with the article (...), as if it noted a special or singular man by
excellency, but (...) a man, that is a man simply considered according to
humane nature: Nor is the particle (...) as here used as noting only likeness
without reality of Nature, but as Sect. 22. is showed it to be used, John 1.
14. and elsewhere, as a confirming and assuring particle noting certainty: And
surely where that in Psalm. 8. is applied to Christ mystically, Heb. 2. 6. it
notes not man in conspicuous dignity, but rather as contemptible, as the words,
what is man that thou art mindful of him? and thou have lessened him for a
little time below Angels show, nor is it peculiarly meant of Adam, but of men,
as men, as the word Son of man shows, although it be mystically fulfilled in
Christ alone, and he be by excellency styled man, or the Son of man.

15. Found notes not apprehension of him, when he was betrayed by Judas, and
laid hold on by the Soldiers; for it was before his humbling himself and
obedience to death, and if the form of a Servant did note his whipping, and
servile usage which was after his apprehension, and yet is set down by the
Apostle as antecedent to being found in fashion as a man; his finding cannot be
referred to his apprehension: Nor is his being found appropriated to the time
of his conspicuity in the exercise of his Dominion over the creatures, but the
fashion as a man being the same with the likeness of men, it notes only Vide
Gataker ad Antonin. l. 9. Sect. 9. (...) Philip. chapter 2. ver. 7, 8. (...) idem
valent.
his appearing or being as a man, simply considered among men, the word found
frequently noting only being or appearing to be, Phil. 3. 9. Gal. 2. 17. 2 Cor.
5. 3. and 11. 12. 1 Pet. 1. 7. Romans 7. 10. Luke 17. 18, etc.

16. That of Grotius, he humbled himself] he did not behave himself according
to that dignity, but very humbly, so as to wash his Disciples feet, John 13.
12, 13. As he emptied, so he humbled, are of the form Hiphil, but signify to
exhibit or show himself such: So also the Latins say, to make himself
courteous] is not right, the humbling noting not an exercise of the virtue of
humility, but patient subjection to affliction, and that not by showing
humility only but by patient undergoing of it: And thus is it used, Phil. 4. 8.
I know how (...) to be abased or humbled, as appears by the oposite term to
abound, and by other places, where he uses the same of himself, 2 Cor. 11. 7.
and 12. 21. and is apparent in that the humbling himself is in the Text
opposite to his superexaltation, verse 9. Now that does not oppose the virtue
of humility and the exercise of it, which consists with his exaltation but the
state of a person debased, which is removed by his superexaltation: Besides
this very place is parallel with that, Acts 8. 32. out of Isa. 53. 7. where of
Christ, Philip expounds the words of that Prophet, He was led as a Sheep to the
slaughter, and like a Lamb dumb before the shearer, so he opened not his mouth*
in his humiliation (the Noun in the Greek derived from the verb Phil. 2. 8. and
so explains it) his judgment (or right) was taken away, and who shall declare
his generation? For his life is taken away from the earth. Lastly, the Text
shows wherein his humiliation consists, which was in his being obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross, which is not rightly translated by our
Translators, and became obedient, putting a conjunction copulative without
cause as they did, verse 7. and so obscure the meaning of the Apost^e, but it
is to be read by apposition, becoming obedient, and so showing wherein the
humbling of himself was.

17. Grotius his note here is not right: He was made obedient to wit to men,
Jews as well as Romans: He opposed not that Divine Power to them that took him,
condemned him, slew him: So great injuries he patiently underwent for the good
of men; For it was showed before that the obedience was to his Father,
otherwise there had not been such reason of his super-exaliation, as is
expressed, verse. 9, 10, 11.

18. By this which has been said, it may appear, that Christ's being in the
form of God; and not accounting it as a prey to bb equal or as God was before
his being a man, and consequently, that he had a Divine Being as God before he
was incarnate, and therefore consubstantial to the Father as touching his
Godhead.

19. It may appear that then Christ emptied himself, when he took the form of a
Servant, who was antecedently in the form of God, when he came not to be
ministered to but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Mat. 20.
28.

20. That then he did this when he was made in the likeness of men, had a body
prepared for him, which proves him to be consubstantial to us according to his
Manhood, which thing was to be demonstrated.

SECT. 25.
Some Objections against the proof from Philip. 2. 5, 6, 7, 8. are answered.

NEvertheless I meet with some Arguments to the contrary, which I think fit to
set down in the Authors words.

1. He sets before them Christ's Example exhorting to humility, and therefore
the act of Christ which he does exemplify must be manifest: But to whom was, or
could that incarnation, which Christians commonly talk of, be manifest, when
they themselves say it passes the understanding of Angels to comprehend it?

To which I answer: It was manifest by the Angels and others Revelation, and
the (...) that it was so was comprehensible, as is proved before, although the
(...) or manner how it was be incomprehensible, we are to imitate God in many
of his works, the manner of which is incomprehensible by us, as being performed
immediately, or by invisible Agents, in secret manner; As Magistrates are to
imitate God in his righteous judgment, though it be unsearchable in respect of
the manner; Parents are to imitate God in his providence for his Creatures,
though the manner of doing it be indiscernible, and therefore the
incomprehensibleness of the incarnation hinders not, but that it being revealed
may be propounded as an imitable pattern: Yet in this of our Apostle it is to
be observed that he propounds not only Christ's incarnation, but also his
humiliation in becoming obedient unto death, as an example to be imitated by
the Philippians.

2. The Apostle speaks of our Lord as a man, in that he gives him the Titles
of Christ Jesus, both which agree to him only as a man: For he is called Jesus
as he was a child conceived of the Holy Spirit in the Virgins womb, and brought
forth by her, Luke 1. 27, 30, 31, 35. and Christ signifies the anointed, John
1. 41. and accordingly Jesus is expressly called the Christ of God, Luke 9. 20.
But he was anointed (as the Adversaries themselves will confess) as a man, and
not as God; See Acts 10. 38.

Whereto I answer, The Title Philip. 2. 5. is given to him, who being in the
form of God, took on him the form of a Servant, being made in the likeness of
men, and therefore as God-man: And though the name Jesus was given to him upon
his conception, or birth, yet it follows not, therefore only as a man: Yea the
Exposition of the Appellation as the same with Immanuel, Mat. 1. 23. the Son of
God, Luke 1. 35. does intimate the Title given to him as God, rather than only
as man: It is true, his anointing was as man, and that it may be gathered from
Acts 10. 38. yet he who was anointed had a Divine Nature, and under both these
is considered, Philip. 2. 5. where he is propounded for an example, to wit, in
that being in the form of God, he emptied himself, being made in the likeness
of men: He who is propounded as an example, was a Savior, and anointed, but
yet not to be imitated in his saving and anoi^ting, but in his obedience to his
Father and condescension to us, by laying aside his Glory and Majesty, and
becoming as a Servant to his Father for us, in which God was with him, and he
also God with us, consubstantial with his Father before, with us at his
Incarnation.

3. Had the Apostle here spoken of an assumption of the Humane Nature, he would
not have said, that Christ became in the likeness of men, and was found in
fashion as a man: For if men (as the Adversaries must hold, when they allege
this place to prove that Christ assumed a Humane Nature, and became man) be
here considered according to their Essence and Nature, this would imply that
Christ had not the Essence and Nature, but only the likeness and fashion of a
man, and so was not a true and real man: By men therefore are here meant vulgar
and ordinary men; for so this word is elsewhere taken in the Scriptures, as
Psalm. 82. 6. I have said, ye are Gods; and all of you are Children of the most
High: But ye shall dye like men, and fall like one of the Princes: and Judges
16. 7. Then shall I be weak, and be as one of men (So the Hebrew Ekadh Haadam
signifies;) See also ver. 11. of the same chapter.

I answer hereto, that likeness agrees to substance or essence, and not only to
quality or condition, and that in neither of the places alleged men is taken
for men as abject, is showed before: If this objection were of force it would
prove Christ was made not a really weak man, but in the likeness or fashion of
weak men, if [men] be considered not as men, but as weak and abject men,
Philip. 2. 7, 8. which it concerned the Objector to have heeded as well as the
Adversaries: Notwithstanding then this Objection men and man, Phil. 2. 7, 8.
may and must be understood of humane Essence and Nature, not restrainedly as
applied only to men of a vulgar, ordinary, low or weak condition, and Christ
hence proved to be Incarnate, and to have both Natures, Divine and Humane.

Other Arguments against the understanding by the form of God the condition or
state of Empire, which Christ had with his Father before his Incarnation are in
the first part of the disputation of Josue Placeus of Saumur concerning the
Arguments by which it is evinced Christ to have been before his conception,
disp. 5th. out of Philip. 2. 6.. 18. in these words, yet in very deed the form
of God seems not to us to be placed in commanding: For we dare not affirm that
God was not in that infinite time, in which he lived blessed before any
creature was made, in the form of God; But neither also dare we deny that he
shall be in the form of God after the last day, in which time perhaps there
will be no need, that he command the creatures: He is no less in the form of
God when he cease from commanding, then when he commands as a King sitting on
his Throne attended by his Guard, Crowned with Majesty and Glory, is in the
form of a King, even when he commands nothing.

To which I answer, if [the form of God] noted only the essence of God, not the
state and appearance, it might as well be said of Christ, when he did not rule
as well as when he did, when he shall not as well as when he shall, that he was
in the form of God: But since the term emptying himself notes a diminution in
something of what he was, and this is expressed ^o be the form of God, in which
he lessened or emptied himself, and that was by taking the form of a Servant,
and that as a Servant to his Father, to whom he was obedient, it seems plainly
to be intimated, that his being in the form of God, or as God, was his
commanding as God with his Father: Now as the form of a Servant notes not the
essence of a man, but the state and appearance of a Servant, though it
presuppose the being of a man, he taking the form of a Servant being made in
the likeness of men: so the form of God also is to be conceived to note not the
essence of God, but the state and appearance of being God as God, or equal to
God in his Rule, though it presuppose the essence of God which he had; And he
might empty himself of the form of God in this sense, it being only a relative
condition supervenient to his essence from the respect to subjects to be ruled,
which might be taken or laid aside without alteration in essence: As the
assumption of an humane body, contract with his Father, Heb. 10. 9. are
ascribed to the second Person in the Godhead peculiarly without subtraction
from, or addition to his essence as God: So we say, that Christ is Mediator
according to both Natures, so as to interceed with his Father according to his
Divine Nature, and this had a beginning and shall have an end, and yet his
Divine Essence invariable. As for the similitude of a King as it is used, it is
not apposite to the point: The King on his Throne that is guarded has some to
command; Yet if he do not Rule, but only be in the Gesture, and wear the Habit,
and hold the Ensigns of a Ruler, may be said to be in the Habit, not in the
Form of a King; as he that has the Place and Clothes of a Servant does not
take the Form of a Servant, without taking the Work of a Servant, although he
be in the Habit of a Servant.

It is added. 19. It is indeed Divine to command, not to command simply, but
effectually to rule all things: For Masters, and Lords, and Magistrates command
also: Yea to command seems not to belong to God as God, but as he is Lord:
There is some difference between God and Lord; For from all Eternity God was
actually God, but he seems not to have been actually Lord, but when he had
Servants or Subjects, to wit Creatures: For it is known that a Lord and a
Servant are relatives, whose nature is that they exist together in time; But
although it be a Divine thing to command, yet not whatsoever is Divine is the
Form of God.. 20. For Form is conceived as some permanent thing to command as a
transe^nt action: Form as something absolute inherent in the thing informed, to
command as an action passing from the Commander to another: Form as that by
which the thing is that which it is; Inward indeed as that by which the thing
is such essentially, but outward as that by which the thing is what outwardly
appears: But to command neither is that by which God is God, neither as that by
which he is such as he appears to be. Lastly, a form is conceived as that which
is before action, for the inward produces action, the outward the manner of
the action: For each thing acts according to its form, and the actions of a
King are wont to be agreeable to the form of a King, of a Servant to the form
of a Servant, of a Merchant to the form of a Merchant, and so in others: To
command therefore is an action agreeing to the form of God, not the form of God
it self: Otherwise Christ had in like sort taken and deposed the form of God;
taken it as often as he commanded either Diseases or Devils, or the Sea, deposed
it as often as he ceased from commanding: To end, Is it not manifest, that the
Apostles words (...) existing or when he was in the form of God, signifies a
state or condition, not action; a state I say in which he then was when he
emtied himself, and which by emtying himself either he deposed or hid, the form
of a Servant being taken?

To which I answer, If the word [Form] note a state or condition, as it is
granted, and the term [form of a Servant] also implies; and it be a Divine
thing to command or rule all things, then by these grants it may well be
expounded [he was in the form of God] that is, in the state or condition of an
Emperor, or co-ruler with his Father; which being a relative state, he might
empty himself of, as he may of the state of Mediator (which yet belongs to his
Divine Nature) as being a distinct Person from the Father, although
consubstantial or co-essential; And this state and condition he actually had as
soon as any creature was made, the Divine Essence he had before any creature
was, but the form of God, when there was; and it might be termed the form by
which he appeared to be God, by whom and for whom all things visible and
invisible were created, Col. 1. 16. though not a permanent or absolute form, as
the form of a Servant is so termed though not a permanent, or absolute state,
or the form of a King or Merchant, as he speaks: Which being rightly understood
answers the four things, by which. 40. he takes it that he has proved the form
of God to be the Divine Essence.

For, 1. Says he, In what form of God could he be Lord before he was made a
man, but in the very Nature and Divine Essence?

To which I answer, In none, yet the form notes not the Essence of God but the
State or Condition of a Lord or Commander, as the form of a Servant notes not
the Essence or Nature of a Man, but the state or condition of a Servant,
although he were so in no other Nature, than that of a Man.

2. Says he, In the Nature of God it self since he is most simple, the external
form cannot be separated from the internal.

Answ. This I suppose is not true, he had the internal Form or Essence of God
before he was Creator, and shall have it when he shall cease to be actual Judge
of all.

3. Says he, The truth of this form proves it: For that form of God in which
Christ was, was either the true form of God, or the false: If the false, Christ
was a false God, which even to pronounce my mind abhors: If true, it was not
severed from the internal, and essential Form of God: For what the external
form of any thing as of Gold or Silver without the inward, that is commonly
called false.

To which I answer; It was the true form of God, and yet might be severed, as
the form of a Mediator or actual Judge of all: Nor is his proof right; For
though that which has the outward form without the inward be alse, yet that
which has the inward without the outward may be true, as Gold and Silver
covered with dirt or dross, as it is in Mines before it is refinened, is true
Gold or Silver, though the outward form be wanting.

4. Says he, The equality of Christ with God proves it: For the external form
of God separated from the internal, if any can be, makes him not equal to God,
as neither the outward and appearing form of a King alone, makes one equal to a
King.

Answ. That being in the form of God, Christ was equal to God, or as God, may
be gathered from the Text, Philip. 2. 6. But not, that the form of God makes
him equal to God, which therefore may be though the form of God be laid afide
for a time. Plaeceus himself in the same place, Sect. 24. says, when therefore
Christ was in the form of God, equal to God, ^e emptied himself by taking the
form not of an inferior simply, but of a Servant; So as that whether you look
on his Humane Nature, or his condition, or manner of living, or his Office, or
Obedience, he plainly se^med not equal to God; not the Son of God, but the
Servant, no otherwise than if as heretofore, when there were two Emperors at
the same time, one the Garment of a Servant being taken, and Commands being
reco^ved from the other, should apply all his endeavor in executing them, it
might be al^owable to say, that he when he was in the form of an Emperor
emptied himself, the form of a Servant being taken; which is the same with the
sense I give: More to the same purpose he wri^es in his second Book, Disp. 9.
Sect. 15, 16. where he makes his obedience mentioned Philip. 2. 8. to have been
in his Divine Nature voluntary and undue, and his superexaltation answerable.

By this explication the form of God, Phil. 2. 6, 7. and Christ's exi^an^tion,
and the glory he had with his Father before the world was, John 17. 4, 5. may
be understood without that imaginary pre-existence of Christ's Soul united with
the Word and resplendent with celestial Glory and Beauty among the Angels in
Heaven, fancied by Dr. Henry Moor in his Mystery of Godliness, first Book,
chap. 8. p. 23. which would infer that Christ was not made an entire man at his
Incarnation, but only imbod^ed or clothed with flesh, which is inconsistent
with that which is said in the same place, (...) emptied himself, being made in
the likeness of men, so that he was the second Adam, or second Man, or Son of
man, the man Christ Jesus. And how those expressions of Christ's coming down
from Heaven, John 3. 13, 31. John 6. 38. where he was before, ver. 62. coming
forth from the Father, and coming into the world, John 16. 28. may be
understood without a bo^ily descen^ before his public Preaching, or
pre-existence and descent of the soul of the Messiah from Heaven into an
earthly body is showed before Sect. 14.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 14. read said. p. 11. l. 5. r. C^zicenus, p. 14. l. 5. r.
eq^ivalence, p. 17. l. 5. 1. of, I. ult. (...), p. 19 l. 1. dele which, p. 17.
l. ult. r. being, p 19. l. 16. r. Am^tius, p. 29. l. ^3. read (...), p. 32. l.
2. r. Christ, l. 20. r. (...), P. 34. l. 6. r. is the being, p. 35. l. ul^ r.
imagined, p. 36. l. 17. 1. subsistence, p. 39. l. 18. r. (...) p. 66. 1. 26. r.
asser -- p* 88. l. 26. r. ^lassibus, (...). 122. l. 1. r. without, p. 148. l.
21. dele or.


