AMYNTOR: OR, A DEFENSE OF Milton's Life. CONTAINING I. A general Apology for
all Writings of that kind. II. A Catalogue of Books attributed in the Primitive
Times to JESUS CHRIST, his Apostles and other eminent Persons: With several
important Remarks and Observations relating to the Canon of Scripture. III. A
Complete History of the Book, Entitled, Icon Basilike, proving Dr. GAUDEN, and
not King CHARLES the First, to be the Author of it: With an Answer to all the
Facts alleged by Mr. WAGSTAF to the contrary; and to the Exceptions made
against my Lord ANGLESEY's Memorandum, Dr. WALKER's Book, or Mrs. GAUDEN's
Narrative, which last Piece is now the first Time published at large.


DI quibus imperium est animarum, umbraeque Silentes,
Et Chaos, and Phlegethon, Loca N^cle tacentia late,
Sit mihi fas audit a loqui; Sit numine vestro,
Pandere res alta terra and caligine mersa^.
Virg. Aen. 6. London, Printed, and are to be Sold by the Booksellers of London
and Westminster. M.DC.XC.IX.

Errors. Amendments. Page 5. line 1^. hose those 20. 5. Christ his Christ, his
21. 4. Ceretum Ceretium 37. 19. Cophtic Coptic ^8. 3. of of the 53. 15.
Mat^hies Matthias 57. 15. Ex mple ^xample 65. 15. may be be any 66. 17.
^ittgius ^^itigius 101. 23. hoped o hoped to 105. 5. Consciences Conscience
113. 20. sometime Some time 131. 16. this his 137. 8. Mediations Meditations

*In the Margin of Page 57, after Eus^bius, (...) lib. 3. and (...) of first
read fifth.

THE AUTHOR TO A FRIEND.
THE Public is so seldom interested in the Debates of private Men, and I am so
little concerned at the Malice or Mistakes of my Adversaries, that, without some
better Motive, I would never presume to trouble the World with any thing merely
personal. But if the Subject in question be of extraordinary Weight and
Consequence, and that on the certain Decision of it should depend the
Tranquillity of a considerable number of People, then I think a Man is
indispensably obliged to appear for the Truth; and so, while he is endeavoring
to serve others, no body will say he ought to neglect his own Defense. Whether
the Treatise I now send you be of this Nature, is submitted to your equal
Judgment: And unless I really designed a Nobler End by it than the
Justification of one Person, neither you nor any body else should lose your
time in reading, no more than I my self would be at the Pains of writing it,
which yet I Will count the highest Pleasure if I understand it has never so
little contributed to the Satisfaction of a Gentleman of such undisputed
Learning and Merit.

March 30. 1699. J. T.

AMYNTOR: OR, A DEFENSE OF Milton's Life.
WHEN I undertook to write the Life of the most celebrated MILTON, I was far
from imagining that I should ever (much less so soon) be obliged to make an
Apology in justification of such a Work, both harmless in it self, and greatly
desired by the World. There was no positive Law or Custom against publishing
the particular History of this extraordinary Person, considered in any respect
whatsoever: for the Lives of Good Princes and Tyrants, of Orthodox and
Heretical Divines, of Virtuous and Wicked, of Public and Private Men, are
indifferently perused by every body; of which it would be superfluous to alledg
Examples, the thing being so commonly known by all that have learnt to read.
Nor without such a Liberty could we possibly form a true Taste, or have any
certain Knowledge of Affairs, since the Excellence or Imperfection of all
Matters best appears by opposing 'em to one another. And I was sure (which I
find was no Mistake) that the Learning and Sentiments of JOHN MILTON were too
considerable not to deserve the highest Commendation or Dislike, according to
the Judgment or Affection of the Readers.

SINCE therefore it was equally lawful for me to write whose Life I pleased
(when my Hand was in) the first Charge against me, one would think, should have
bin, that I had not fairly represented my Hero. But, very far from that, the
great Crime whereof I am arraigned, consists in telling more than some People
would have me; or discovering Truths not fit to be known; and the Manner of my
Relation is to them altogether as offensive and displeasing as the Matter of
it. It Is strange that Men should be found of a Judgment weak enough to make a
Crime of such Proceedings in a Writer, who labors to keep himself wholly
independent from the Fears or Eng^^^ments of any Party; and who ^^ofess'd in
the very beginning of his Book, that being neither provoked by Malice, nor
bribed by Favor, he would as well dare to say all that was true, as scorn to
write any Falsehood. But the rude Opposition with which I have met,
notwithstanding such plain Declarations, convinces me more than ever how much I
was in the Right by following the peculiar Method I proposed to my self in
compiling MILTON's Life, and which I partly declared in these Terms: In the
Characters of Sects and Parties, Books or Opinions, I shall produce his own
Words as I find 'em in his Works; that those who approve his Reasons, may owe
all the Obligation to himself; and that I may escape the Blame of such as may
dislike what he says. Now, what could be more impartial than this? or more
likely to secure me from all Imputations, whatever should be the Reception of
MILTON from the Public? Yet if by adhering religiously to this Rule so loud a
Clamor was raised against me, it is apparent how much worse I might expect to
be treated, had I trod in the common Road. For if, like most Historians, I had
in my own Words (though with never so much Candor) related the Actions or
Sentiments of my Author, my Adversaries would presently have told the World
that this was not the true MILTON, but one of my own Creation, whom I promted
to speak what I durst not own; and by whose Mouth I had published all hose
Opinions which I would recommend to other People. Well knowing therefore the
ordinary Temper and Artifices of these Men, I did partly on that Account
produce his own Words to obviat their Sophistry and Calumnies, their two
principal offensive Weapons; and also to spare my self the Pains of Quotations
afterward, to prove I had neither injured him nor abused my Readers. Besides
this particular Regard to them, I am also of opinion that this is the best and
only good way of writing the History of such a Man. And had the Ancients always
followed it, our Modern Critics would have been less exercised to discern their
real Sentiments; nor would they be so often obliged to examine whether they
understood or misrepresented their Authors.

BUT instead of any Objections like these, I am expressly told that I ought not
to meddle with MILTON's Books, nor to revive his Sentiments, or the Memory of
those Quarrel's wherein he was engaged; which is only, in other Words, that I
ought not to write his Life at all. For what, I pray, is the principal Part of
a Learned Man's Life, but the exact History of his Books and Opinions, to
inform the World about the Occasion of his writing, what it contained, how he
performed it, and with what Consequences or Success? I have no Reason from my
own second Thoughts, the Opinion of better Judges, or the Fortune of the ^^ok,
to be dissatisfied with my Conduct on this Occasion. And had this Method, as I
said before, been strictly observed, we might have more Knowledge and fewer
Critics.

AY but, say these Gentlemen, you have made an Inroad on our Persuasion, and
directly attacked the sacred Majesty of Kings, the venerable Order of Bishops,
the best constituted Church in the World, our holy Liturgy, and decent
Ceremonies, the Authority of Councils, the Testimony of the Fathers, and a
hundred other things which we profoundly respect and admire: nor are we the
only Sufferers; for almost all other Sects and Parties have equal Reasons of
Complaint against you. Well, be it so then; but, good Sirs, betake your selves
for Reparation to JOHN MILTON; or, if he is not to be brought to easy Terms,
defend your Castles and Territories against him with all the Vigor you can.
For, I assure you I am no further concerned in the Quarrel than to show you the
Enemy, and to give a true Account of his Forces. And all this, if you were of a
peaceable Disposition, you might learn from these plain Words in the Conclusion
of the Life: It Is probable that you (as well as I, or any other) may disapprove
of MILTON's Sentiments in several Cases; but I Am sure, you are far from being
displeased to find 'em particularized in the History of his Life: For we should
have no true Account of Things, if Authors related nothing but what they liked
themselves: One Party would never suffer the Lives of TARQUIN, or PHALARIS, or
SYLLA, or CAESAR to appear, while another would be as ready to suppress those
of CICERO, of CATO, of TRAJAN, or BRUTUS. But a Historian ought to conceal or
disguise nothing; and the Reader is to be left to judge of the V^tues he should
imitat, or the Vices he ought to detest and avoid.

THIS might serve for a sufficient Answer to all that has bin yet objected to
MILTON's Life, if any Reply were thought necessary: For the trivial and
scurrilous Libels of mercenary Fellows I shall never regard, they being already
sufficiently neglected by the World, and making themselves as little by this
Practice, as any of a more vindictive Temper could desire: Besides, that to
answer 'em in their own Dialect, I must first learn to speak it; which is
absolutely contrary to my Genius, and below the Dignity of Human Nature, since
no body openly approves it even at Billingsgate. I shall as little consider the
censorious Tongues of certain more Zealous than Religious People, who judge of
others by their own narrow Schemes, and despise all Knowledge in comparison of
their private Imaginations, wherein they exceedingly please themselves; a
Happiness no body envies them. Nor should I, if that were all, think my self
concerned in making any Return to the obliging Complements of those Gentlemen
who (as Father PAUL formerly said of himself) remember me oftener in their
Sermons than in their Prayers; though some of them are apt to say, that when they
mention Turks, Jews, In^idels, and Heretics, they do not forget me. But when I
am openly accused before the greatest Assembly in the World, the Representative
Body of the People of England, let the Charge be never so frivolous in it self,
or to be slighted on any other Occasion, yet such a Respect is due to the
Dignity of those to whom it was exhibited, that I hold my self obliged to
convince 'em of my Innocence; and to remove all Suspicion far from me, of what
in its own Nature is acknowledged to be Criminal, or by them might be reputed
Indecent.

THE Matter of Fact is this* On the Thirtieth of January, Mr. OFFSPRING
BLACKHALL, who styles himself Chaplain in Ordinanary to His Majesty, Preached a
Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons; wherein, after exclaiming against
the Author of MILTON's Life, for denying Icon Basilike to be the Production of
King CHARLES the First, he pursues his Accusation in these Terms. We may cease
to wonder, says he, that he should have the Boldness, without Proof, and
against Proof, to deny the Authority of this Book, who is such an Infidel as to
doubt, and is shameless and impudent enough, even in Print, and in a Christian
Country, publicly to affront our Holy Religion, by declaring his Doubt, that
several Pieces under the Name of Christ and his Apostles (he must mean those
now received by the whole Christian Church, for I know of no other) are
supposititious; though through the remoteness of those Ages, the Death of the
Persons concerned, and the decay of other Monuments which might give us true
Information, the Spuriousness thereof is yet undiscovered. Here is indeed a
Charge of a very high Nature, I will not say in his own mean Language, an
impudent and a shameless one; though if it be not better proved, I cannot hinder
others from calling it what they please, or the thing deserves. But before I
proceed to make Observations on it, I shall insert the entire Passage of my
Book, which he has taken the liberty of abridging, and so joining the Words of
two widely different Assertions, as if they were but one. About this little
Artifice however I shall make no difference with him; for I can easily determine
our Controversy, without using all the Advantages I might otherwise take.

AFTER stating the Proofs therefore that Dr. GAUDEN, and not King CHARLES, was
the true Author of Icon Basilike, I added a very natural Observation in the
following Words. When I seriously consider how all this happened among our
selves within the Compass of Forty Years, in a time of great Learning and
Politeness, when both Parties so narrowly watched over one another Actions,
and what a great Revolution in Civil and Religious Affairs was partly
occasioned by the Credit of that Book, I cease to wonder any longer how so many
supposititious Pieces under the Name of CHRIST, his Apostles, and other great
Persons, should be published and approved in those Primitive times, when it was
of so much Importance to have 'em believed; when the Cheats were too many on
all sides for them to reproach one another, which yet they often did; when
Commerce was not near so general as now, and the whole Earth entirely
overspread with the Darkness of Superstition. I doubt rather the spuriousness
of several more such Books is yet undiscovered, through the remoteness of those
Ages, the death of the Persons concerned, and the decay of other Monuments,
which might give us true Information. Here then in the first place it is plain,
that, I say, a great many spurious Books were early fathered on CHRIST, his
Apostles, and other great Names, part whereof are still acknowledged to be
genuin, and the rest to be forged, in neither of which Assertions I could be
justly supposed to mean any Books of the N. Testament, as I shall presently
evince. But Mr. BLACKHALL affirms. That I must intend those now received by the
whole Christian Church, for he knows of no other. A cogent Argument truly! and
clearly proves his Logic to be just of a Piece with his Reading. I admire what
this Gentleman has bin doing so long at the University, that he should be such
a great Stranger to these things. But now I find a Man may be a very good
Divine without knowing any thing of the Fathers, though a Layman is always
referred to 'em when he starts any Difficulties, which makes him sooner
acquiesce and swallow what he cannot chew than get Information at so dear a
rate. But had Mr. BLACKHALL been disposed to deal ingenuously (...) me, he
might see, without the help of the Fathers, that I did not mean the Books of
the New Testament, when I mentioned Supposititious Pi^ces under the Name of
CHRIST, since there is none ascribed to him in the whole Bible; nor do we read
there that ever he wrote any thing, except once with his Finger on the Ground,
Joh. 8. 5.
when he acquitted the Woman taken in Adultery: And, for ought appears to the
contrary, Mr. BLACKHALL may deny that to be any Writing, because he knows not
what it was; yet some German Divines, as well read as himself, have presumed to
tell us the Contents of it, and came almost to excommunicating one another in
their solemn Disputes about this weighty Affair. To this Negative Argument from
the Silence of the New Testament, we may add the Positive Testimony of St.
AUGUSTINE and St. JEROME, whereof the former affirms, That the Lord himself wrote
Dicit Augustinus (de Consensu Evangel. l. 1. c. 7.) quod ipse Dominus ni^il
scripserit, ut aliis de illo scribentibus necesse sit credere.
nothing, which makes it necessary we should believe those who have written of
him: And the latter says, That Salvator nullum volumen doctrinae s^ae
proproprium dereliquit, quod in plerisque; Apochryphorum deliramenta
confingunt. Hieronym. in Commentar. ad Ezechielis, cap. 44.
our Savior left no Volum of his own Doctrine behind him, as is extravagantly
feigned in most of the Apochryphal Pieces.

NOW to convince all the World that I did not intend by those Pieces the Books
of the New Testament, as well as to show the Rashness and Uncharitableness of
Mr. BLACKHALL's Assertion, I shall here insert a large Catalogue of Books
anciently ascribed to JESUS CHRIST, his Apostles, their Acquaintance,
Companions, and Contemporaries. Of these some remain still entirely extant,
which I shall mark in their Places. We have several Fragments of others
preserved by the Fathers; and all that is left us of the rest are only their
bare Titles. I constantly refer to the Books wherein they are quoted, that
every body may inform himself of the Fact. And after the Catalogue is ended, I
shall distinguish the Books which the Ancicients alleged as the genuin Works
of the Apostles or Apostolic Men, from those that they rejected as the
Forgeries of Heretics; which is a good Argument however, that they were
received by some Party of Christians to countenance their Opinions. Next I
design to name those Pieces of whose Spuriousness I doubted, though their
Authority is still received; and so conclude this Point with some material
Observations.

A Catalogue of Books mentioned by the Fathers and other Ancient Writers, as
truly or falsely ascribed to JESUS CHRIST his Apostles, and other eminent
Persons.
I. Of Books reported to be written by CHRIST himself, or that particularly
concern him.
1. HIS Letter in answer to that of Abgarus King of Edessa. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 13. You may also consult Cedrenus, Nicephorus, Constantinus
Porphyrogennetus in the Manipulus of Combesisius, p. 79, etc. extant. 2. The
Epistle of Christ to Peter and Paul. Augustine. contra Faustum, l. 28. c. 13. 3.
The Parables and Sermons of Christ. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 39. 4. A Hymn
which Christ secretly taught his Apostles and Disciples, Augustine. Epist. 253.
ad Ceretum Episcopum. 5. A Book of the Magic of Christ, Augustine. de consensu
evangelico, l. 1. c. 9, 10. If it be not the same with the Epistle to Peter and
Paul. 6. A Book of the Nativity of our Savior, of the Holy Virgin his Mother,
and her Midwife. Gelasius apud Gratianum, Decret. 1. part. Did. 15. c. 3. But
I believe this is the same with the Gospel of James; whereof in its due Order.
II. MARY.
1. An Epistle to Ignatius: Which is now extant among his Works. 2. Another
Epistle to the Inhabitants of Messina: To be read among the same Ignatius's
Works. 3. A Book of the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, Usually publish^d with St.
Ierome's Works. 4. Another Book about the Death of Mary, is said by Lambecius
to ly unpublish'd in the Emperor's Library, T. 4. p. 131. 5. We shall not
insist on the Book of Mary concerning the Miracles of Christ, and the Ring of
King Solomon.
III. PETER.
1. The Gospel of Peter. Origin. T. 11. Comment. in Mat. Hieron. in Catalog.
Scriptor. Eccles. c. 1. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl^s. l. 3. c. 3, 25. Idem, l. 6. c. 12.
2. The Acts of Peter. Euscb. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 3. Hieronym. in Catalogo.
Origin. Tom. 21. Comment. in Joan. Isidorus Pelusiota, l. 2. Epist. 99. 3. The
Revelation of Peter. Clem. Alex. in Epitom. Theodot. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3.
c. 25. l. 6. c. 14. Idem, l. 3. c. 3. Hieron. in Catalago, c. 1. Zozomen. Hist.
Eccles. l. 7. c. 19. 4. The Epistle of Peter to Clemens, is still shown in the
Aethiopic Language by the Eastern Christians. Tilmont, Hist. Eccles. Tom. 1.
part. 2. page 497. And he has it from Cotelerius. The Epistle of Clemens to
James, is published in the Clementines. 5. The Doctrine of Peter. Origin, in
praefat. ad libros principiorum Gregor. Nazian. epist. 16. Elias Levita in
notis ad Nazianzeni Orationem ad cives trepidantes. 6. The preaching of Peter
(if it be not the same with his Doctrine) Origin. Tom. 14. in Joan. Idem, in
praefat. ad Libros principiorum. Clem. Alex. Stromat. l. 1. and l. 6, etc.
Lactant. l. 4. c. 21. Author libri de baptismo Haereticorum inter opera
Cypriani. Joan. Damascen. l. 2. parallel. c. 16. 7. The Liturgy of Peter,
published by Lindanus at Antwerp in the Year 1588, and at Paris, Anno 1595. 8.
The Itinerary, or Iournys of Peter (mentioned by Epiphanius, Haeres. 30. n. 15.
and by Athanasius in his Synopsis of the Scriptures;) I believe to be the same
with the Recognitions of St. Clement still extant, wherein we have a very
particular Account of Peter's Voyages and Performances. 9. The Judgment of
Peter. Hieronym. in Catalogo, c. 1.
IV. ANDREW.
1. The Gospel of St. Andrew. Gelasius in Decreto, etc. 2. The Acts of St.
Andrew. Euscb. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 25. Epiphan. Haeres. 47. n. 1. Item, 61,
63, 47. Philastrius in Haeres. 8. Gelasius in decreto; and Turribius
Asturicensis apud Paschasium Quesnerum inter epistolas Leonis magni, p. 459.
V. JAMES.
1. The Gospel of St. James, or his Protoevangelion. Origin, Tom. 11. Comment.
in Mat. Epiphan. Haeres. 30. n. 23. Eustathius Antiochen. Comment. in Hexaemer.
Epiphanius monachus in notis Allatii ad Eustathium. Multa ex hoc Evangelio
mutuasse Gregorium Nyssenum, tacito Jacobi nomine, monet Allatius ibid. This
Book is now in Manuscript in the Library of Vienna, as is said by Lambecius, l.
5. p. 130. Father Simon says, he has seen two Manuscript Copies of it in the
Kings of France's Library. Nouvelles Observations, etc. p. 4. It was printed by
Neander and also by Grynaeus in the first Volum of his Orthodoxographs. 2. The
Liturgy of St. James is printed in the second Tome of the Bibliotheca Patrum,
at Paris, Anno 1624. 3. We mentioned before The Book of St. James concerning
the Death of the Virgin Mary; but there want not Reasons to believe John, and
not James, to be the Author of it.
VI. JOHN.
1. The Acts of St. John. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 25. Epiphan. Haeres.
47. n. 1. Augustine. l. 1. contra adversarios legis and prophetarum. Turribii
Scriptum inter Epistolas Leonis magni; and Phot. in codice 229. 2. Another
Gospel of John. Epiph. Haeres. 30. n. 23. 3. The Itinerary, or Voyages of St.
John. Gelasius in decreto. 4. The Liturgy of St. John. It was together with
several others printed in Syriac at Rome. See Father Simon in his Supplement to
Leo of Modena. 5. We spoke twice before of St. John or St. James's Book about
the Death of the Virgin Mary. 6. The Traditions of St. John. Eusebius. Hist.
Eccles. l. 3. c. ult.
VII. PHILIP.
1. The Gospel of St. Philip. Epiphan. Haeres. 26. n. 13. Timotheus Presbyter a
Combefisio editus in tomo secundo Auctuarii. 2. The Acts of St. Philip.
Gelasius in Deceto.
VIII. BARTHOLOMEW.
2. The Gospel of St. Bartholomew, Hieronym. in prolegom. Com. in Mat.
Dionysius Areopagita de Mystica Theologia, cap. 1.
IX. THOMAS.
1. The Gospel of St. Thomas. Origin. in Homil. ad Luc. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l.
3. c. 25. Nicephor. in Stichometria. Ambros. in Comment. ad Luc. Augustine.
contra Faustum, l. 22. c. 79. Cyril. Hierosolym. Catech. 4. 6. Gelasius in
decreto. 2. The Acts of St. Thomas. Epiphan. Haeres. 47. n. 1. Idem, Haeres.
61. n. 1. Augustine. contra Adimant. Idem, l. 1. de sermon Dei. Idem, contra
Faustum, l. 22. c. 79. 3. The Revelations of S. Thomas. Gelasius in Decreto. 4.
The Itinerary of St. Thomas. Gelasius in Decreto. Nicephor. in Stichometria. 5.
The Book of the Infancy of Christ by St. Thomas. Epiphan. Haeres. 34. n. 18.
Nicephor. in Stichometria. Gelas. in Decreto. Lambecius says, that this Book
lies in Manuscript in the Library of Vienna, Tom. 7. p. 20. Father Simon writes
that there is a Manuscript Copy of it in the French King's Library; Nouvelles
Observations, etc. It was printed two Years since in Latin, and Arabic with
learned Notes by Mr. Syke at Vtrecht.
X. MATTHEW.
1. The Liturgy of St. Matthew. Tom. 27. Bibliothecae Patrum Lugdunensis.
Natalis Alex. in saeculo 1. part 1. c. 11. art. 1. Gerardus, tom. 1. Conf.
Cathol. There is also a Liturgy attributed to St. Mark.
XI. THADDAEVS.
1. The Gospel of St. Thaddaeus. Gelasius in Decreto.
XII. MATTHIAS.
1. The Gospel of St. Matthias. Origin. Homil 1. in Luc. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles.
l. 3. c. 25. Hieronym. in prolegom. ad Comment. in Mat. Ambros. in Comment. ad
Luc. Gelas. in Decreto. 2. The Traditions of St. Matthias. Clem. Alex. Stromat.
l. 7.
XIII. PAVL.
1. The Acts of St. Paul. Origin. l. 1. c. 2. de Principiis Idem, tom. 21. in
Joan. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 3. Hist. Eccles. c. 25. Philastrius, Haeres. 88. 2. The
Acts of Paul and Thecla. Tertullian. de Baptismo. c. 17. Hieronym. de Script.
Eccles. in Paulo and Luca. Augustine. l. 30. contra Faustum, c. 4. Gelasius in
Decreto. Nuper Editus est hic Liber Oxonii. Epiphan. Haeres. 78. n. 16. Extant.
3. The Epistle of Paul to the Laodiceans. Tertullian adversus Marcion. l. 5. c.
17. Hieronym. in Catalogo, c. 5. Philastr. in Haeres. 88; Theodoret. tom. 8.
Haeres. 47. n. 9. and alibi. Legatur etiam Theophylactus. extant. 4. A third
Epistle of Paul to the Thessalonians. 2 These. 2. 2. 5. A third Epistle to the
Corinthians, and a second to the Ephesians. 1 Cor. 5. 9. Ephesians. 3. 3. 6. The
Epistles of Paul to Seneca, with those of Seneca to Paul. Hieronym. in
Catalogo, c. 12. Augustine. de Civitate Dei, l. 6. c. 10. Idem, in Epist. 54. ad
Macedonium. extant. 7. The Revelation of St. Paul. Epiphan. Haeres. 38. n. 2.
Zozomen Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 19. Augustine Tract. 98. in Joan. Theophylact. in
Schol. ad 2. ad Corinth. Mic. Glycas. annal. part 2. Gelas. in Decreto.
Zozomen. Hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 19. 8. The Preaching of St. Paul. Clem. Alex.
Stromat. l. 6. Lactant. l. 4^ c. 21. Author etiam Anonymus de non iterando
Baptismo, a Rigaltio in observationibus ad Cyprianum insertus. 9. Saint Paul's
Narrative concerning the charming of Vipers, revealed to him by St. Michael in
a Dream. Lambecius says, that there is now a Manuscript of this Book in the
Library of Vienna, Tom. 5. p. 103. 10. The Anabaticon of Saint Paul, wherein he
relates what he saw when he was snatched up into the third Heavens. Epiphan.
Haeres. 38. n. 2. 11. Some would infer from his own Words, that he wrote a
Gospel; In the day, says he, when God shall judge the Secrets of Men by Christ
Jesus according to my Gospel. Romans 2. 16.
XIV. Of the Gospels of Judas Iscariot, of Eve, and Abraham, etc.
1. That none of the Apostles might be thought unable to write a Gospel we find
one alleged by the Caianites, a Sect of the Gnostics, under the Name of Judas
Iscariot. Epiphan. Haeres. 38. Theodoret. l. 1. de Haeret. Fabul. c. 15. 2. Nor
should we wonder at Iudas's being an Author, when we read of the Prophetical
Gospel of Eve, whom the Gnostics reckoned a Patroness of their Opinions, and to
have received extraordinary Knowledge and Light in her Conference with the
Serpent. Epiphan. Haeres. 26. n. 2. 3. The Sethians, another sort of Gnostics,
showed an Apocalypse under the Name of the Patriarch Abraham; not to mention
his learned Pieces of Astrology, nor the Books of Adam believed by the Jews.
Epiphan. Haeres. 30. n. 16. Isidor. Pelusiot. l. 2. Epist. 99. 4. The Prophecy
of Enoch, which St. Jude quotes, is for the most part still extant, and was
believed to be Genuin by several Fathers, who alledg it in defense of the
Christian Religion. Origin. contra Cells. l. 5. Idem de Principiis. Tertullian.
de habitu Muliebri, c. 3, etc. 5. The Testament of the twelve Patriarchs, the
Assumption of Moses, the Book of Eldad and Medad, the Psalms of King Solomon,
the Revelation of Zachary, and the Vision of Isaiah; but I forget that I am
reciting the spurious Books of the Christians, and not of the Jews, who, when
there is occasion, will afford as large a Catalogue.
XV. Of the Gospels of the Hebrews and the Egyptians, with some general Pieces.
1. The Gospel of the twelve Apostles. Origin Homil. 1. in Luc. Ambros. in
Prooem. Commentar. in Luc. Theophylact. Comment. in cap. 1. v. 1. secundum
Lucam, etc. But this Piece was, I believe, Originally the same with 2. The
Gospel of the Hebrews. Ignat. in Epist. ad Smyrnaeos. Clem. Alex l. 1. Stromat.
Origin. tract. 8. in Matt. Idem, Homil. 14. in Jerem. and in Comment. ad Joan.
Epiphan. Haeros. 30. n. 13, 22, etc. Hieronym. in Catalogo Script. Eccles. c.
4. and alibi Passim. This Gospel several have maintained to be the Original of
St. Matthew. 3. The Gospel of the Egyptians, Clem. Romans Epist. 2. ad Corinth.
c. 12. Clem. Alex. l. 3. Stromat. ld. ibid. Origin. Homil. in Luc. Epiphan.
Haeres. 62. n. 2. 4. The Apostles Creed, though of late Years it begins to be
called in question. 5. The Doctrine and Constitution of the Apostles. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 25. Athanas. in Synopsi. Epiphan. Haeres. 80. n. 7. 45.
n. 5. 70. n. 10. 75. n. 6. Idem in Compendiaria fidei expositione, n. 22.
Incertus de Aleatoribus inter Scripta Cypriani. There are (...), and (...) or
Doctrines, both attributed to every one of the Apostles singly, and also to
their Companions and immediate Successors, too long to insert particularly.
These Doctrins were bound with the other Books of the New Testament, as appears
by the Stichometry of N^ephorus and Anastasius; though it was not always
pretended, that they were Original Pieces, but rather Collections of what the
Companions and Successors of the Apostles either heard, or pretended to hear
from their own Mouths. 6. We need not produce our Authorities for the Canons
and Constitutions of the Apostles, since so many learned Members of the Church
of England have written large Volums to prove 'em genuin. 7. The Precepts of
Peter and Paul. This Book lies in Manuscript in the Great Duke's Library in
Florence, if we believe Ludovicus Iacobus a Sancto Carolo in his Bibliotheca
Pontificia, l. 1. page 177. 8. The present Cophtic Christians have a Book of
Doctrins, which they believe was composed by the twelve Apostles, with the
Assistance of St. Paul, etc. 9. The Gospel of Perfection. Epiphan. Haeres. 26.
n. 2 10. The Acts of all the Apostles, written by themselves. Epiphan. Haeres.
30. n. 16. Isidor. Pelus. l. 2. epist. 99. Varadatus in epist. ad Leonem Imp.
Tom. 4. Council. Labbaei. col. 978. Io. Malala, Chronograph. l. x. 11. The
Itinerary of all the Apostles, as well as of every one of ^em singly, was
formerly extant.
XVI. Of the Writings of the Disciciples and Companions of the Apostles.
OF the Books ascribed to the Disciples and Companions of the Apostles, and
which are still extant, some are thought genuin and of great Authority at this
time: Every one were approved at some time, or by some Party: And yet I am of
Opinion, that it is the easiest Task in the World (next to that of showing the
Ignorance and Superstition of the Writers) to prove them all Spurious, and
fraudulently imposed on the Credulous. Those I mean, are the Epistles of
Clemens Romanus to the Corinthians, his Recognitions, Decretals, and other
Pieces bearing his Name: All the Epistles of Ignatius; the Epistle of
Pol^carpus to the Philippians, with his other Writings; The Acts of the
Martyrdom of Ignatius and Polycarpus; The Pastor of Hermas; The Epistle of
Barnabas; The Works of Dionysius the Areopagite; The Epistle of Marcellus,
Peter's Disciple, to Nereus and Achilleus, and his Treatise of the Conflict of
Peter and Simon Magus; The Life of Saint John, by Prochorus; The Petition of
Veronica to Herod on the behalf of CHRIST; The Passion of Timothy by
Polycrates; The Passions of Peter and Paul in two Books by Linus; The two
Epistles of Martial of Limousin, and the Life of the same by Aurelianus; The
Gospel of Nicodemus; The History of the Apostolical Conflict by Abdias, who is
said to be appointed first Bishop of Babylon by the Apostles; The Passion of
Saint Andrew written by the Presbyters of Achaia; The Epistle of Evodius,
entitled the Light; the Altercation of Jason and Papiscus; The Acts of Titus
composed by Zena, St. Paul's Companion, with a multitude of other Acts and
Passions. The Gospel of Barnabas, the Revelation of Stephen, the Passion of
Barnabas, and the Epistles of Joseph the Arimathean to the Britons are quite
lost; and were they extant, would probably appear to be as foolish and fabulous
as the rest.
XVII. Of Pieces alleged in favor of Christianity, which were forged under the
Name of Heathens.
1. The Works of Trismegistus and Asclepius, extant. 2. The Books of Zoroaster
and Hystaspes. 3. The Sibyllin Oracles cited so frequently, and with such
Authority by the Primitive Fathers, that Origin. contr. Cells. l. 5.
Celsus takes occasion from thence to nickname the Christians Sibyllists.
extant. 4. The Letter of Pontius Pilat to Tiberius, with the Speech of Tiberius
to the Senate. extant. 5. The Epistle of Lentulus, giving a Description of the
Person of CHRIST. extant. 6. The Epistles or Orders of Adrian, Antoninus Pius,
and Marcus Aurelius, in favor of the Christians. extant in Justin Martyr, etc.
etc. etc.
HERE IS a long List for Mr. BLACKHALL, who, it is probable, will not think the
more meanly of himself for being unacquainted with these Pieces; nor, if that
were all, shoul'd^ I be forward to think the worse of him on this Account: but
I think he is to blame for denying that there were any such, because he knew
nothing of 'em; much less should he infer from thence, that I denied the
Scriptures; which Scandal however, because manifestly proceeding from
Ignorance, I heartily forgive him, as every good Christian ought to do.

TO explain now therefore the several Members of the Passage in MILTON's Life;
In the first place, by the spurious Pieces I meant, though not all, yet a good
parcel of those Books in the Catalogue, which I am persuaded were partly forged
by some more zealous than discreet Christians, to supply the brevity of the
Apostolic Memoirs; partly by designing Men to support their private Opinions,
which they hoped to effect by virtue of such respected Authorities: And some of
'em, I doubt, were invented by Heathens and Jews to impose on the Credulity of
many wel-dipos'd Persons, who greedily swallowed any Book for Divine Revelation
that contained a great many Miracles, mixed with a few good Morals, while their
Adversaries laughed in their Sleeves all the while, to see their Tricks succeed,
and were rivetted in their ancient Prejudices by the greater Superstition of
such Enthusiasts.

IN the second place, by the Books of whose Spuriousness I said the World was
not yet convinced, though in my private Opinion I could not think 'em genuin, I
meant those of the other great Persons, or the supposed Writings of certain
Apostolic Men (as they call 'em) which are at this present, as well as in
ancient times, read with extraordinary Veneration. And they are the Epistle of
BARNABAS, the Pastor of HERMAS, the Epistle of POLYCARPUS to the Philippians,
the first Epistle of CLEMENS ROMANUS to the Corinthians, and the seven Epistles
of IGNATIUS. These are generally received in the Church of Rome, and also by
most Protestants; but those of the Church of England have particularly
signalized themselves in their Defense, and by publishing the correctest
Impressions of them. The Ancients paid them the highest Respect, and reckoned
the first four of 'em especially, as good as any part of the New Testament. The
Epistle of BARNABAS is by Stromat. l. 2. and 5. Contra Cel^. l. 1. de Princip.
l. 3.
CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, and ORIGIN, not only reckoned genuin, but cited as
Scripture; though he says in express Terms, That the Apostles, before their
Conversion, were the greatest Sinners in Nature; which, if believed, would rob
us of an Argument we draw from their Integrity and Simplicity against Infidels,
to say nothing now of the many other ridiculous Passages in BARNABAS. The
Pastor, or Visions, Precepts, and Similitudes of HERMAS (who is supposed to be
the Person mentioned by PAUL in his Epistle to the Romans) is cited as
Canonical Scripture by Advers. Haeres. l. 4. c. 3* Stromat. l. 1. 2. 4. 6.
princip. l. 1. c. 3. l. 2. c. 1. Homil. 10. in Hos. and (...) pa^sim.
IRENAEUS, CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, ORIGIN, and others, and was for such received
by several Churches, though I think it the sillyest Book in the World. The
Epistle of POLYCARPUS (the supposed Disciple of St. JOHN) was read in the
Churches of Asia, and is quoted by L. 1. contr. Haeres. Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l*
4. c. 14. Phot. (...) 126.
IRENAEUS, EUSEBIUS and others. The Epistle of CLEMENS ROMANUS (whom they would
have to be the same that is mentioned by PAUL in his Epistle to the Philippians)
is cited by Contra Haeres. l* 3. c. 3. Stromat. l* 1, 4* 5, 6. De Princip. l.
2. Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 16, 36. l. 4. c. 22, 23.
IRENAEUS, CLEMENS ALEXANRINUS, ORIGIN, EUSEBIUS, and others. The Epistles of
IGNATIUS are quoted by Contra Haeres. l. 5. c. 28. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 26.
IRENAEUS, EUSEBIUS, with several more; but particularly by Hom^l. 6. in Luc.
ORIGIN, who says, that in one of 'em he found it very elegantly written, That
the Virginity of MARY was a Secret to the Devil; which (...). Ep. ad Ephesians.
Virginity, with her Delivery, and the Death of our Lord, IGNATIUS says, were
Three famous Mysteries wrought in the Silence of God. These Words may be now
read in the Epistle of IGNATIUS to the Ephesians. Now these are the Books of
whose Genuinness and Authority I took the Liberty to doubt, notwithstanding the
better Opinion which is entertained of 'em by others. My present Business is
not to insist on this Subject, but to clear my self of an Imputation, which I
thought no body could infer from my Words. Yet since many were less knowing
than I imagined, though Mr. BLACKHALL alone has the Candor of publishing his
Weakness to the World, I assure 'em all that I alluded to these Books; and I
hope they will be just enough in allowing me best to explain my own meaning,
and prove so tender of their own Reputation, as to consider well of it, before
they censure me another time.

BUT though I will not, as I said, enter now into a particular Discussion of
these Writings, yet I shall offer one thing to the Consideration of their
Defenders. Either they really believe the Epistles of BARNABAS and CLEMENS (for
Example) to be theirs, or to be supposititious. If not theirs, there is a speedy
end of the Dispute, and I have attained my End without more Argumentation. But
if they think 'em genuin, why do they not receive 'em into the Canon of
Scriptures, since they were the Companions and Fellow laborers of the Apostles,
as well as St. MARK or St. LUKE? If this Quality was sufficient to entitle the
two last to Inspiration, why should it not do as much for the two first? And if
this be not all the Reason, pray let us know the true one, having never heard
of any other. To say, that though the Books are authentic, yet they ought not to
be received now into the Canon, because the Ancients did not think fit to
approve 'em, is but a mere Evasion: For it is well known, that till after
EUSEBIUS'S time, neither the second Epistle of PETER, nor that of JAMES, or
JUDE, with some others, were approved as Canonical; and yet they were afterward
received by the whole Church. Wherefore then may not we as well at this time
establish the Epistles of CLEMENS and BARNABAS, if they be undoubtedly theirs,
which I shall be persuaded their Patrons believe, when they quote 'em as
Scripture, and then I know where to have them, and how to deal with 'em. But of
this enough.

I SAID above, that by the spurious Pieces I meant only a great part of the
Books which are recited in the Catalogue; for others of 'em do not seem to
deserve so mean a Rank: and I am so far from rejecting all those Books of the
New Testament which we now receive, that I am rather solicitous lest, as in the
dark Ages of Popery, those we commonly call Apochryphal Books, were added to
the Bible, so at the same time, and in as ignorant Ages before, several others
might be taken away, for not suiting all the Opinions of the strongest Party.
Nor is it unworthy observation, that most of these Books are condemned by the
Decree of Pope GELASIUS. How many true and spurious Gospels or Histories of
CHRIST were extant in St. LUKE's time, God knows; but that there were s^veral
may be evidently inferred from. his own Words, who tells TH^OPH^LUS, Luc. 1. 1,
2, 3.
that many had undertaken the same Work before him, and, as if he alluded to
some spurious Relations, assures him, that he will write nothing but what he
received from such as had a perfect knowledge of th^se Matters from the
beginning. That there should be first and last, but just the number of Four, I
never heard of any that w^nt about to demonstrat, except (...) the sam'd
Successor of the Apostles; and he positively (...) personas Evangel^i. (...)
Haeres. l. 3. 11.
affirms, that there cannot be more, nor fewer than Four Gospels: Fo* says he,
there be Four Regions o^ this World wherein we live, with Four principal Winds,
and the Church is spread over all the Earth: But the Support and Foundation of
the Church is the Gospel, and the Spirit of Life: Therefore it must follow,
that it has Four Pillars, blowing Incorruptibility on all sides, and giving
Life to Men. Then he corroborats his Argument from the Four Cherubims, and the
Four Faces in EZE^I^L's Vision, Ezekiel. 6, 6, 10.
to wit, of a Lion, an Ox, a Man, and an Eagle; which is the Reason, by the
way, why the Four Evangelists are painted with these Emblems in the Mass Book
and in our Common Pray^r-Book. So he concludes at last, That they are all vain,
unlearned, and impudent, who after this would assert, that there were more or
sewer than 4 Gospels. Where we may observe, that Mr. BLACKHALL has the Warrant
of an ancient Father for giving hard Names to such as contemn precarious
Reasoning: And indeed it is but too manifest to be d^ny'd, that no Order of Men
have more violated the Rules of D^cency and Civility in their Writings, than
those whose Business it is to teach others Moderation, Patience, and
Forgiveness; nor was there ever any Cause more defended by the Dint of Calumny
than that of Religion, which least needed it of any other.

SEVERAL of these Books whereof I now treat, are quoted to prove important
Points of the Christian Religion by the most celebrated Fathers, as of equal
Authority with those we now receive; and the Testimony of these Fathers was the
principal Reason of establishing these in our present Cannon, and is still
alleged to that purpose by all that write in defense of the Scriptures. Of so
much weight is this Testimony, that EUSEBIUS (...). Hist. Eccles. l. 3. c. 3.
rejects the Acts, Gospel, Preaching, and Revelation of PETER from being
Authentic, for no other Reason, but because no Ancient or Modern Writer (says
he) has quoted Proofs out of them. But herein EUSEB^US was mistaken; for the
contrary appears by the Testimonies ma^kt in the Catalogue, and which any body
may compare with the Originals. In another place he (...). (...) c. 25.
says, That the Gospels of PETER, THOMAS, MATTHI^S, and such like, with the
Acts of ANDREW, JOHN, and the other Apostles are spurious, because no
Ecclesiastic Writer from the time of the Apostles down to his own, has
vouchsafed to quote them, which is absolutely false of some, as we have already
shown. So that Mr. BLACKHALL is not the only Man, I find, who makes his own
Reading the Measure of all (...)* and a Thousand to One but now (...) justifies
this Practice, since he can prove it from Antiquity, (...) he (...) got the
Authority of (...). Had (...) Piec^s (...) by (...) Orthodox Writ^^s, he would
have owned them as the genuin Productions of the (...), and admitted them (as
we say) into the Canon; but having m^t no such Citations, he presently (...)
there were none, which made him reject those Books: And, I say, what I have
already (...), that Proofs (...) quoted out of some of 'em long before, so th^^
they might still (...) to the Canon for all (...).

TO these Considerations two Objections may perhaps be made. First, It is
unlikely, they^ll say, that EUSEBIUS should not have read the Ancients; nay,
that the contrary appears by his many Citations out of them; and that
consequently those Works of the Fathers, which we have now in our Hands, are
not the same which were read in his time, or that at least they are strangely
adulterated, and full of Interpolations. With all my Heart: But then let us not
be urged by their Authority in other Points no more than in this, since in one
thing they may as well be alt^r'd and corrupted as in another; and indeed, by a
common Rul^ of Equity (being found charged in some places) they ought to be So
reputed in all the r^st, till the contr^ry be evidently proved.

THE (...), Objection (...) That although (...) have bin (...) the Writings of
those Apostles whose Names they bear, at certain times, and in some Churches,
yet they were expressly rejected by others. To this I answer, That there is not
one single Book in the New Testament which was not refused by some of the
Ancients as unjustly fathered upon the Apostles, and really forged by their
Adversaries; which as no body thinks it now a good Reason to disapprove them,
so I see not how it should any more conclude against my Opinion. But because
the various Sects of those early Days did, like us, condemn one another for
damnable Heretics; and the admitting or refusing, the framing or corrupting of
certain Books, were some of the Crimes which were mutually imputed, I shall n^w
insist only on the Epistle to the Hebrews, that of JAMES, the second of PETER,
the second and third of JOHN, the Epistle of JUDE, and the Revelation. These
seven Pieces were a long time plainly doubted by the Let the third and twenty
first Chapters of the Ecclesiastical History of Eusebius be consulted, with
what St. Jerome has written on the same Subject.
Ancients, particularly by those whom we esteem the soundest part; and yet they
are received, (not without convincing Arguments) by the Moderns. Now, I say, by
more than a Parity of Reason, that the Preaching and Revelation of PETER (for
Ex^mple) were received by the Ancients, and ought not therefore to be rejected
by the Moderns, if the Approbation of the Fathers be a proper Recommendation of
any Books.

THE Council of Laodicea, which was held about three hundred and sixty Years
after CHRIST, and is the first Assembly wherein the Canon of Scripture was
established, could not among so great a variety of Books as were then abroad in
the World, certainly determine which were the true Monuments of the Apostles,
but either by a particular Revelation from Heaven, or by crediting the
Testimony of their Ancestors, which was always better preserved and conveyed by
Writing than by Oral Tradition, the most uncertain Rule in Nature, witness the
monstrous Fables of Papists, Rabbis, Turks, and the Eastern Nations both
Christians and Idolaters. But of any extraordinary Revelation made to this
Council we hear not a Word; and for the Books I defend, I have the same
Testimony which is usually alleged in the behalf of others. However, I shall
not be too hasty to make a final Decision of this (...) with my self, least I
incur the (...) Curse which the Auth^r of the Revelation pronounces (...)
(...) such as shall add or take away from that Book. Let Mr. BLACKHALL be
assured, that if he must needs have me to be a Heretic I am not unteachable,
though I would not have it reputed Obstinacy if I should not surrrender without
satisfactory Reasons. Instead therefore of censuring and calumniating (which
ought not to be reckoned Virtues in any Order of Men, and least of all in the
Ministers of the Gospel) let such as are better enlightened endeavor to
extricat the Erroneous out of these or the like Difficulties, that they may be
able to distinguish truly, and that in such an extraordinary number of Books,
all pretending equally to a Divine Origin, they may have some infallible Marks
of discerning the proper (...) they unhappily mis^^ke the false one for the
true.

HOW necessary it is to have the Canon of Scripture s^t in its due light, we
may (...) from the Ancient as well as our Modern Unbelievers. CELSUS (...)
Origin. l. 2 contra Ce^^.
exclaims against the too great Liberty which the Christians (as if they were
drunk, says he) took of changing the first writing of the Gospel three, or
four, or more times, that so they might deny whatever was urged against 'em as
retracted before. Nay, as low down as St. AUGUSTIN's time, was there not a very
considerable Sect of the Christians themselves, I mean the Manichaeans, who
showed other Scriptures, and denied the Genuinness of the whole New Testament.
One of these called FAUSTUS, after showing that his Adversaries disapproved of
several things in the Old Testament, thus pursues his Solius hilii p^tatis
testamentum non potuisse corrumpi; solum non habere aliqu^d quod in se debea^
imp obari: p^aesertim q^o^ n^c ab ipso scriptum constat, nec ab ejus apostolis:
sed lonpo post tem^^^e a quib^idam ince^ti nominis viris, qui, ne (...) non
(...) scribent^bus qu^^ (...) Apos^olo^um nomina, partim eo^^m qu^ (...)
Scriptorum suorum (...), a^^eve^anies ^ecundum ^os se scripsisse quae sc
ipserint. Quo magis mihi videntur injuria gravi affe^^sse discipulos Christi,
quia quae dissona iidem and repugnantia sibi scriberen^. ea referrent ad ipsos,
and secundum eos hae^ scribere se promitterentur Evangelia, quae tantis ^int
reserta erro^ibus, tantis contrarietatibus narrationum simul a^ ^^ntentiarum,
ut nec sibi pro^sas, necinter se conveniant. Quid ergo aliud est quam
calumnia^i bonos, and Christi Discipulorum conco^dem c^tum in crimen devocare
discordi^^. Augustine. contra Faust. l. 32. c. 2.
Argument: You think, says he, that of all Books in the World, the Testament of
the Son only could not be corrupted, that it alone contains nothing which ought
to be disallowed; especially when it appears, that it was neither written by
himself nor his Apostles, but a long time after by certain obscure Persons,
who, lest no Credit should be given to the Stories they told of what they could
not know, did prefix to their Writings partly the Names of the Apostles, and
partly of those who succeeded the Apostles; affirming that what they wrote
themselves was written by these: Wherein they seem to me (continues he) to have
bin the more hainously injurious to the Disciples of Christ, by attributing to
them what they wrote themselves so dissonant and repugnant; and that they
pretended to write those Gospels under their Names, which are so full of
Mistakes, of contradictory Relations and Opinions, that they are neither
coherent with themselves, nor consistent with one another. What is this
therefore but to throw a Calumny on good Men, and to fix the Accusation of
Discord on the Unanimous Society of CHRIST's Disciples? The same FAUSTUS a
little after accuses his Adversaries, who had Power enough to be counted
Orthodox, in these express Words: Multa a majoribus vestris eloquiis Domini
nostri in^erta verba sunt, quae (...) signata ipsius cum ^jus f^de non
congr^unt (...) sertim quia, ut jam saepe pr^batum a nobis (...) nec ab ipso
haec sunt, (...) sed mu^^a post (...) quibus, and ipsis inter (...) judaeis,
per sama^ (...) Qui tamen omnia eadem in Apostolo^um Domini conserentes nomina,
vel ^orum qui secu^i Apostolos viderentur, errores ac mendacia sua secundum eos
^escripsisse mentiti sunt. Augustine. ibid. l. 33. c. 3.
Many things were foisted by your Ancestors into the Scriptures of our Lord,
which, though marked with his Name, agree not with his Faith. And no wonder,
since, as those of our Party have already frequently proved, these things were
neither written by himself nor his Apostles: but several Matters after their
Decease were picked up from Stories and flying Reports by I know not what Set
of Half- Jews; and these not agreeing among themselves, who nevertheless
publishing all these Particulars under the Names of the Apostles of the Lord,
or of those that succeeded them, have ^eign'd their own Lies and Errors to be
written according to them.

Since therefore the Manichaeans rejected the whole New Testament, since the
Ebionites or Nazarens, (who were the oldest Christians) had a different Copy of
St. MATTHEW's Gospel, and the Marcionites, had a very different one of St.
LUKE's; since St. JOHN's was attributed to CFRINTHUS, all the Epistles of St.
PAUL were denied by some, a different Copy of 'em shown by others; and that the
seven Pieces we mentioned before, were rejected a long time by all Christians,
almost with universal Consent, it had much more become Mr. BLACK^ALL's
Profession to appear better acquainted with these things, and commendably to
spend his time in preventing the Mischievous Inferences which Heretics may draw
from hence, or to remove the Scruples of doubting but sincere Christians, than
so publicly to vent his Malice against a Man that never injured him, and who
appears so little to deserve the Imputation of Incredulity, that his Fault (if
it may be) does rather consist in believing more Scripture than his Adversaries.

WHAT need had Mr^ BLACKHALL to inform that August Assembly how little he kn^w
of the History of the Canon? A History of the greatest Importance, as well as
containing the most curious Enquiries; and without an exact Knowledge whereof
it is not conceivable that any Man can be sit to convince Gainsayers, or to
demonstrat the Truth of the Christian Religion, which, I suppose he will not
think fit to deny is one of the principal Duties of a Minister. How little
soever he knew before, he cannot be ignorant any longer that there were a
Multitude of other Pieces attributed to CHRIST and his Apostles, besides those
now received by the whole Christian Church. He might at his Leisure have learnt
so much from the Fathers, or at least from others that had studied 'em; such as
RIV^T, Father SIMON, DU^PIN, ^ITTGIUS, Dr. CAVF, ERN^STUS GRABIUS who has
lately published some of those Fragments at Oxford, and several others; though he
has occasion^d me to pr^sent him now with a much larger Catalogue than was
published by any of these. I could add more not there mentioned, and other
Authorities for those which are there: but I have already don more than enough
to prove a thing, whereof, till the last thirtieth of January, I thought few
Laymen wholly ignorant, much less any one of the Clergy. Indeed I never thought
the History of our Canon so impartially handled, or so fully cleared as a
Matter of such great Importance deserves; and I despair of Mr. BLACKHALL's
giving the World any Satisfaction in their Doubts concerning it. But I hope some
abler Person of his Order may particularly write on this Subject; which, if I
see neglected also by them, I shall think it no Intrusion on their Office to
undertake it my self: and if I ever write it, I promise it shall be the fairest
History, and the only one of that kind that ever appeared; For I shall lay all
the Matters of Fact together in their natural Order, without making the least
Remark of my own, or giving it a Color in favor of any Sect or Opinion, leaving
all the Word to judge for themselves, and to build what they please with those
Materials I shall furnish 'em.

I CONCLUDE this Point with one Observation, to show with what Malice I am
treated by some People, while others pass with them for the most Orthodox Men
in the World, who have said infinitely more in plain and direct Words, than they
could infer with all their Art from a few Expressions of mine, and which the
most ignorant of my Adversaries could make no more than Insinuation at the
worst. I talked of spurious Pieces, and have now as well shown what those Pieces
were, as put a Distinction between 'em, and such as I thought genuin. But let
us hear what a Person says, who, were he as much given to the World as many of
his Friends, would make a more considerable Figure, considering his great
Services to the National Church, and the Respect he reciprocally receives from
it; I mean the famous DODWELL, who alone, though a Layman, understands as much of
Ecclesiastic History as the Divines of all Churches put together. His Words are
these: Latitabant usque ad recentiora illa, seu Traj^ni, seu e^iam fortasse
^^driani tempora, in privata^um ecclesir^m, seu e^iam hominum S^r^niis scripta
illa Canonica, ne ad Ecclesiae Catholi^^ notitiam perveni^ent. Aut si in
publicu^ ^ortasse p^odi^^sent, adhac tamen tanta Scripto^^m Apo^^yphorum,
Pseudepig^aphoru^^^e turba obru^ bantu^, ut ab iis internosci non possent, quin
novo opus esset examine, novoque Tef^^monio. Et ab illo novo testimonio, q^o
^actum est ut ab Apocryphis falsoque Apostolorum nomine insigni^is Scripta
eorum genuina dist^^guerentu^, pendet omnis iila quam deinceps ob^^ne^an^, and
quam hodieque obtinent in Eccl^sia Catholica Scripta vera Apostolica,
Auto^i^as. Atqui recen^^or ill^ Canonis attestatio iisde^^ erat incommodis
obnoxia quibus and nost^^e (...), quos vid^t lren^^^^ audivi^que, Traditiones;
erat enim illa tanto intervallo ab origin remota, nec plurium esse poterat
quam eorum qui etiam remotiora illa tempora attigerant. Atqui certe ante illam
Epocham, quam dixi Trajani, nondum constitutus est libro^um Sacrorum Canon, nec
receptus aliquis in Ecclesia Catholica lib^orum cutus numerus, quos deind^
adhibere oportuerit in sacri^ fidei causis dijudicandis, ne^ rejecti
Haereticorum Pseudepigraphi, monitive ^idel^s, ut ab eorum usu deinde caverent.
Si^ autem vera Apostolorum Scripta cum Apochryp^^^ in iisdem Volaminibus
compingi solebant, ut nulla pro^sus no^a aut censura ^cclesiae publica
constaret q^^a quibus essent antefetenda. Habemus hodi^que horum tem^orum
Scriptores Ecclesiasticos luculentissimos Clementem Roman^m, B^rnabum, Hermam,
^gnatium, Polycarpum, qui hoc nimirum scrip^^^t, quo illos nominavi ordine,
omnes reliquis ^^^^i Test (...). Sc^iptis (exceptis Judae, and J^annis
utriusque) (...) At novi Testamenti in H^^ma ne qu^dem unum locum inveneris.
Apud reliquos ne unum quidem Evangelistam nomine suo compellatum. Et ^i quos
loeos fo^^e proserant quibus similia i^ nostris leguntur ^vangeliis; ita tame^
ill^s mutatos ut plurimum interpolatosque reperies, ut seiri nequeat an e
nost^is illos, an ex aliis produxe^int Apocryphis Evangeliis. Sed and Apocrypha
adhibent iidem aliquoties, quae (...) est in ho^iernis non hab^i Evange^^i. Vt
inde con^^et nullum adhue inter Apocryp^^os Canonicosque novi Testamenti libros
constitutum esse ab Ecclesia discrimen, praesertim si and illa quoque accedat
observatio quod censuram nullam Apocryphis adjungant; ^ed nec aliam aliquam
notam unde possit lector colligere minus illos Apocryphis tribuisse, quam veris
tribuerint Evangeliis. Inde prona est suspicio siqua forte lo^a produxerint cum
nostris consentientia, nullo ^amen certo id factum esse consilio, quo
cons^itutum fuerat res dubias e Canonicis esse confirmandas; fierique adeo
posse ut and illa similia ex aliis tamen, quam quae habemus, deprom^a fuerint
Evangelii^* Sed quid ego libros memo em minin e Canonicos? Ne quidem e Cano^^
is (...) constat Ecclesiae inpotu^s^e Evangeli^, atque Ecclesiasticis in usu
^uisse vulgari. Non ^olent ill^us aevi Scriptores ^ovi Test^menti locis Scripta
sua velut opere (...), qui tamen recentiorum mos est, qui and suus erat in
illis quas agnoscebant ipsi Scriptu^is: Veteris enim Testamen^i libros
proferunt saepissime, pro^^^ i procul^ubio and no^i Testamenti Scripta, si and
illa (...) in Canonem recepta. Essatum Domini nostri profort Sanctus Paulus,
Act. 20. 35 (...)* Scripto al^quo produxit, non (...) Evangelio. Sic lat^^rant
in (...) ^^rrarum angulis. in quibus Scripta fuera^^, Evang^lio, ut ne quidem
re^cive^int recentiores Evangeli^ quid scripsis sent de i^^dem rebu^
antiqu^o^^s Aliter foret ne tot essent (...), quae fere a prima usque Canonis
constitutione Eruditorum H^minum ingenia exercuerint. Ce^^e Sanctus Lucas si
Genealogiam illam Domini in Matthaeo vidisset, non alia^ ipse, nihilque fe^e
habentem commune, produxisset, ne quidem minima consilii tam diversi edita
ratione. Et cum novae Scriptionis edit in praesatione causam, quod ipse (...)
narrationibus adjutus eam fue^it aggressus, id plane innuit desti^utos hoc
subsidio suisse visorum a se Evangeliorum auctores, ita nimirum non fuisse ipso
(...) ut ne quidem (...) cum cura aliqua and se sulitate consuluerint,
vacil^are proinde merito ^ue dubiam eorum fuisse fidem; ut plane alios fuisse
necesse sit Evang^licae H^storiae Scritores a Lu^^ visos, a nostris, quos
habemus, Evangelistis. Dissert. 1. in Iren. 99. 38, 39.
The Canonical Writings lay concealed in the Coffers of private Churches or
Persons, till the later Times of TRAJAN; or rather perhaps of ADRIAN; so that
they could not com to the Knowledge of the whole Church. For if they had bin
published, they would have bin overwhelmed under such a Multitude as were then
of Apocryphal and Supposititious Books, that a new Examination and a new
Testimony would be necessary to distinguish 'em from these false ones. And it
is from this New Testimony (whereby the genuin Writings of the Apostles were
distinguished from the spurious Pieces which went under their Names) that
depends all the Authority which the truly Apostolic Writings have formerly
obtained, or which they have at present in the Catholic Church. But this fresh
Attestation of the Canon is subject to the same Inconveniences with those
Traditions of the Ancient Persons that I defend, and whom IRENAEUS both heard
and saw: for it is equally distant from the Original, and could not be made,
except by such only as had reached those remote Times. But it is very certain,
that before the Period I mentioned of TRAJAN's time, the Canon of the Sacred
Books was not yet fixed, nor any certain number of Books received in the
Catholic Church, whose Authority must ever after serve to determine Matters of
Faith; neither were the spurious Pieces of Heretics yet rejected, nor were the
faithful admonisht to beware of them for the future. Likewise the true Writings
of the Apostles used to be so bound up in one Volum with the Apocryphal, that
it was not manifest by any Mark or public Censure of the Church, which of 'em
should be preferred to the other. We have at this Day certain most authentic
Ecclesiastic Writers of those times, as CLEMENS ROMANUS, BARNABAS, HERMAS,
IGNATIUS, and POLYCARPUS, who wrote in this same Order wherein I have named
'em, and after all the other Writers of the New Testament, except Iu^^ and the
two JOHN'S. But in H^RM^S you shall not meet with one Passage, or any mention of
the New Testament: Nor in all the rest is any one of the Evangelists called by
his own Name. And if sometimes they cite any Passages like those we read in our
Gospels, yet you will find 'em so much changed, and for the most part so
interpolated, that it cannot be known whether they produced them out of ours,
or some Apocryphal Gospels: nay, they sometimes cite Passages, which it is most
certain are not in the present Gospels. From hence therefore it is evident,
that no difference was yet put by the Church between the Apochryphal and
Canonical Books of the New Testament; especially if it be considered, that they
pass no Censure on the Apochryphal, nor leave any Mark whereby the Reader might
discern that they attributed less Authority to the spurious than to the genuin
Gospels: from whence it may reasonably be suspected, that if they cite sometimes
any Passages conformable to ours, it was not don through any certain design, as
if dubious things were to be confirmed only by the Canonical Books; so as it is
very possible that both those and the like Passages may have bin borrowed from
other Gospels besides these we now have. But what need I mention Books that
were not Canonical? when indeed it does not appear from those of our Canonical
Books which were last written, that the Church knew any thing of the Gospels,
or that Clergymen themselves made a common use of 'em. The Writers of those
times do not chequer their Works with Texts of the New Testament, which yet is
the Custom of the Moderns, and was also theirs in such Books as they
acknowledged for Scripture; for they most frequently cite the Books of the Old
Testament, and would doubtle^^ have don so by those of the New, if they had
then bin received as Canonical. St. PAUL cites a Saying of our Lord in the Acts
of the Apostles; Act. 20. 35.
which, if he had it out of any Writing, was not certainly out of these we now
have. The Gospels continued so concealed in those Corners of the World where
they were written, that the latter Evangelists knew nothing of what the
Precedent wrote: Otherwise there had not bin so many apparent Contradictions,
which, almost since the first Constitution of the Canon, have exercised the
Wits of learned Men. Surely if St. LUKE had seen that Genealogy of our Lord
which is in St. MATTHEW, he would not himself have produced one wholly
different from the other, without giving the least Reason for this Diversity.
And when in the Preface to his Gospel he tells the occasion of his Writing;
which is, that he undertook it, being furnished with the Relations of such as
were Eyewitnesses of what he writes, he plainly intimats, that the Authors of
the Gospels which he had seen, were destitute of this Help: So that neither
having seen themselves what they relate, nor with any Care or Diligence
consulted such as had seen them, their Credit was therefore dubious and
suspected; whence it must necessarily follow, that the Writers of those
Gospels, which LUKE had seen, were not at all the same with our present
Evangelists. So far Mr. DODWELL; and (excepting the Genuinness of the Epistles
of CLEMENS, BARNABAS, and the rest; for they are incontestably ancient) I agree
with him that the Matters of Fact are all true; though I am far from drawing the
same Inference from 'em as he has don, that there is an equal Proof for
Episcopacy as for the Canon of Scripture, which is the Testimony of the Fathers
of the Second and Third Centuries; and that the Discipline was better known, and
preserved than the Doctrine of the Apostles. Whoever has an Inclination to write
on this Subject is furnished from this Passage with a great many curious
Disquisitions, wherein to show his Penetration and Judgment, as how the
immediate Successors and Disciples of the Apostles could so grossly confound the
genuin Writings of their Masters, with such as were falsely attributed to them;
or since they were in the dark about these Matters so early, how came such as
followed 'em by a better Light; why all those Books which are cited by CLEMENS
and the rest should not be counted equally Authentic; and what stress should be
laid on the Testimony of those Fathers, who not only contradict one another,
but are often inconsistent with themselves in their Relations of the very same
Facts; with a great many other Difficulties, which deserve a clear resolution
from any capable Person, though none may safely propose 'em but Mr. DODWELL, who
I heartily wish were always as free and unprejudiced as he is really learned.

THUS have I defended and explained my self against Mr. BLACHALL's Accusation:
nor do I question but I have given entire Satisfaction to all impartial Men,
and lovers of Truth. But there is another sort of People whom I despair of ever
contenting. These never fail of finding in the Writings of their Adversary, not
what is there, but what they have a mind should be so, to represent him odious
or dangerous. All the Protestations in the World can signify nothing with
them; nor is it more safe than otherwise to prove the contrary of what is laid
to one's Charge; for they are sagacious enough to discover the hidden Poison of
every Word, and will be sure to give loud warning of the Danger, to show where
the Snake lies in the Grass, and to tell what is in the Belly of the Trojan
Horse. But I shall not be in great pain how such People apprehend me, if I have
the Happiness to please the moderat and discerning part of Mankind.

The Complete HISTORY OF Icon Basilike.
MR. BLACKHALL, who, by a public Provocation, would needs engage me in a
Controversy about spurious Books, has not confined me to expose the Impostures
of Antiquity alone, though it be pretty plain, that this is Employment enough for
one body; but he likewise accuses me of not being more favorable to a Modern
Saint, as he is pleased to style King CHARLES the First. That excellent Book,
which, he says, was composed by himself in the time of his Distresses, will, he
supposes, be an everlasting Evidence of his profiting under his Sufferings to
after Ages, notwithstanding the Endeavors that have bin formerly used to prove
it spurious, and the Confidence of a late Writer (the Author of MILTON's Life)
asserting it to be so, without either producing any new Evidence for the Proof
of his Assertion; or offering one Word in answer to those just and rational
Exceptions that had bin made before to those only Testimonies which he insists
upon to prove it a Forgery; or making any Exceptions to those later Evidences
that have bin produced to prove it Authentic. Whether this Book was composed by
himself is our Business at present to enquire, and shall be quickly determined:
for as to his improving by his Sufferings I will not deny what I hope, and
Charity commands me to believe. The Reason why I produced no new Evidence to
prove the spuriousness of Icon Basilike was, because I thought the old ones
sufficient. I vouchsafed no Answer to the Exceptions made to those Testimonies,
because I neither thought 'em just nor reasonable. And I would not discuss the
Facts that have bin since alleged to prove the Book Authentic, because I
intended not before to write a just Dissertation on this Subject, and so was
not obliged to mention all the Particulars relating to it. If Mr. BLACKHALL
does not think this Answer satisfactory, I shall make amends now for all former
Omissions; and, being very desirous to content him, will follow that same
Method he was pleased to chalk me out in his Sermon.

IN the first place therefore, to make this Discourse complete, and that the
Evidence of the several Parts whereof it consists, may the better appear by
laying 'em all together, I shall here insert the Abstract which I made of Dr.
WALKER's Book in MILTON's Life, with ANGLESEY's Memorandum, and the other
Testimonies; I shall secondly give particular Answers to the Exceptions that
have bin made to all these Pieces: And lastly, show the invalidity of the Facts
which are alleged to prove King CHARLES the First was the true Author of Icon
Basilike. I have not undertaken this Work out of Affection or Opposition to any
Party, nor to reflect on the Memory of that unfortunat Prince, whose officious
Friends are much more concerned; but to clear my self from a public Charge, and
to discover a pious Fraud, which deserves not to be exemted from Censure for
being the Contrivance of a Modern Bishop, no more than those of the ancient
Fathers of the Church.

THE Relation of the whole Fact in MILTON's Life is after this manner.

In the Year 1686, Mr. MILLINGTON hap'ning to sell the late Lord ANGLESEY's
Library by Auction, put up an Ikon Basilike; and a few bidding very low for it,
he had leisure to turn over the Leaves, when to his great Surprise he perceived
written with the same noble Lord's own Hand, the following Memorandum.

KING CHARLES the Second, and the Duke of York, did both (in the last Sessions
of Parliament, 1675* when I showed them in the Lords House the written Copy of
this Book, wherein are some Corrections and Alterations written with the late
King CHARLES the First's own Hand) assure me, that this was none of the said
King's compiling, but made by Dr. GAUDEN Bishop of Exeter; which I here insert
for the undeceiving of others in this point, by attesting so much under my own
H^nd.

ANGLESEY.




This occasioned the World to talk; and several knowing the Relation which the
late Dr. ANTHONY WALKER, an Essex Divine, had to Bishop GAUDEN, they inquired
of him what he knew concerning this Subject, which he then verbally
communicated to them: But being afterward highly provoked by Dr.
HOLLINGSWORTH's harsh and injurious Reflections, he was obliged in his own
Defense to print an Account of that Book, wherein are sufficient Answers to all
the Scruples or Objections that can be made, and whereof I here insert an exact
Epitome. He tells us in the first place, that Dr. GAUDEN was pleased to
acquaint him with the whole Design, and showed him the Heads of diverse
Chapters, with some others that were quite finished: and that Dr. GAUDEN asking
his Opinion of the thing and he declaring his Dissatisfaction that the World
should be so imposed upon, GAUDEN bid him look on the Title, which was the
King's Portraiture; for that no Man is supposed to draw his own Picture. A very
nice Evasion! he further acquaints us, that some time after this, being both in
London, and having dined together, Dr. GAUDEN took him along with him to Dr.
DUPPA the Bishop of Salisbury (whom he made also privy to his Design) to fetch
what Papers he had left before for his perusal, or to show him what he had
since written: and that upon their return from th^^ place, after GAUDEN and
DUPPA were a while in private together, the former told him the Bishop of
Salisbury wished he had thought upon two other Heads, the Ordinance against the
Common Prayer Book, and the denying his Majesty the Attendance of his
Chaplains; but that DUPPA desired him to finish the rest, and he would take
upon him to write two Chapters on those Subjects, which accordingly he did. The
reason, it seems, why Dr. GAUDEN himself would not perform this, was, first,
that during the Troubles he had forborne the use of the Liturgy, which he did
not extraordinarily admire; and secondly, that he had never bin the King's
Chaplain, whereas Dr. DUPPA was both his Chaplain, his Tutor, and a Bishop,
which made him more concerned about these Particulars. Thirdly, Dr. WALKER
informs us that Dr. GAUDEN told him he had sent a Copy of Icon Basilike by the
Marquess of Hartford to the King in the Isle of Wight; where it was, we may be
sure, that he made those Corrections and Alterations with his own Pen,
mentioned in my Lord ANGLESEY's Memorandum: and which gave occasion to some then
about him that had accidentally seen, or to whom he had shown the Book, to
believe the whole was his own. Fourthly, Dr. GAUDEN, after the Restoration,
told Dr. WALKER, that the Duke of York knew of his being the real Author, and
had owned it to be a great Service; in consideration of which, it may be, the
Bishopric of Winchester, though he was afterward put off with that of Worcester
was promised him. And, notwithstanding it was then a Secret, we now know that
in expectation of this Translation, the great House on Clapham Common was built
indeed in the Name of his Brother Sir DENIS, but really to be a Mansion^house
for the Bishops of Winchester. Fifthly, Dr. WALKER, says, that Mr. GAUDEN the
Doctor's Son, his Wife, himself, and Mr. GIFFORD who transcribed it, did
believe it as firmly as any Fact don in the place where they were; and that in
that Family they always spoke of it among themselves (whether in Dr. GAUDEN's
Presence or Absence) as undoubtedly written by him, which he never
contradicted. We learn, Sixthly, that Dr. GAUDEN, after part of it was printed,
gave to Dr. WALKER with his own Hand what was last sent to London; and after
showing him what it was, sealed it, giving him cautionary Directions how to
deliver it, which he did on Saturday the 23d of December, 1648. for Mr. ROYSTON
the Printer, to Mr. PEACOCK Brother to Dr. GAUDEN's Steward, who, after the
Impression was finished, gave him, for his Trouble, six BOOKS, whereof he
always kept one by him. To these Particulars Dr. WALKER adds, that the Reason
why the Covenant is more favorably mentioned in Ikon Basilike, than the King or
any other of his Party would do, was because Dr. GAUDEN himself had taken it:
That in the Devotional part of this Book there occur several Expressions which
were habitual to GAUDEN in his Prayers, which always in private and public were
conceived or extemporary; and that to his Knowledge it was Dr. GAUDEN, being
best acquainted with the Beauty of his own Sayings, who made that Collection of
Sentences out of Ikon Basilike, intitul'd, Apophthegmata Caroliniana. These and
some Observations about the same individual Persons variation of Style on
different Subjects, with the facility and frequency of personating others, may
be futher considered in Dr. WALKERS Original Account. In this condition stood
the Reputation of this Book, till the last and finishing discovery of the
Imposture was made after this manner. Mr. ARTHUR NORTH, a Merchant now living
on Tower hill, London, a Man of good Credit, and a Member of the Church of
England, married the Sister of her that was Wife to the Doctor's Son, CHARLES
GAUDEN, who dying, left some Papers with his Widow, among which Mr. NORTH, being
concerned about his Sister in Law's Affairs, found a whole Bundle relating to
Ikon Basilike: These Papers old Mrs. GAUDEN left to her darling Son JOHN, and
he to his Brother CHARLES. There is first a Letter from Secretary NICHOLAS to
Dr. GAUDEN. 2. The Copy of a Letter from Bishop GAUDEN to Chancellor HYDE,
where, among his other Deserts, he pleads that what was don like a King, should
have a Kinglike Retribution; and that his design in it was to comfort and
encourage the King's Friends, to expose his Enemies, and to convert, etc. There
is, 3. The Copy of a Letter from the Bishop to the Duke of York, wherein he
strongly urges his Services. 4. A Letter under Chancellor HYDE's own Hand,
dated the 13th of March, 1661. wherein he expresses his uneasiness under the
Bishop's importunity, and excuses his inability yet to serve him: but toward
the Conclusion it contains these remarkable Words: The Particular you mention
has indeed bin imparted to me as a Secret; I am sorry I ever knew it: and when
it ceases to be a Secret, it will please none but Mr. MILTON. There are other
Papers in this Bundle, but particularly a long Narrative of Mrs. GAUDEN's own
writing, irrefragably showing her Husband to be Author of Ikon Basilike. It
entirely confirms Dr. WALKER's Account, and contains most of the Facts we have
hitherto related, with many other curious Circumstances too long to be here
inserted, yet too extraordinary not to be known; wherefore I refer the Reader to
the Original Paper, or to the faithful Extract made out of it before several
learned and worthy Persons, and which is printed in a Paper intitul'd, Truth
brought to Light Thus came all the World to be convinced of this notorious
Imposture; which as it was dexterously contrived, and most cunningly improved
by a Party whose Interest obliged 'em to keep the Secret, so it happened to be
discovered by very nice and unforeseen Accidents. Had not GAUDEN bin
disappointed of Winchester, he had never pleaded his Merit in this Affair; nor
would his Wife have written her Narrative, had King CHARLES the Second bestowed
one half Years Rent on her after her Husband's decease; which, upon her
Petition, and considering her numerous Family, none could imagine should be
refused. It was a slighter Accident that begot a a Confession from two Kings,
and CHARLES's own Sons. And I doubt if any other than one of Mr. MILLINGTON's
great Curiosity, and no Bigotry, had the disposal of my Lord ANGLESEY's Books,
we should never have heard of the Memorandum. Had not Dr. HOLLINGWORTH's
indiscreet Zeal provoked the only Man then alive who had any personal knowledge
of this Business, Dr. WALKER had never published his Account; nor would the
whole Discovery be so complete, without the least Intricacy or Question,
without Mr. NORTH's Papers.

THIS is the complete History of Ikon Basilike, as it is supposed to be a
Forgery; and we must next proceed to examine the Exceptions made to it, as they
are collected by Mr. WAGSTAF in his Vindicatiof King CHARLES the Martyr. To
begin with my Lord ANGLESEY's Memorandum, it is urged, that it does not
particularly express by the Date whether it meant the last Session of
Parliament before the writing of it, or the last Session of the Year 75. when
it is plain that he meant the last or Winter Session; and that it was therefore
the immediate Session preceding the writing of this Memorandum. To say that
there is no Witness to it is a very singular sort of Objection, when his
Lordships Relations, and all that have seen this and his other Writings, own it
to be his Hand. It is not likely that there were any Witnesses of the Royal
Brother's telling him their Opinion of Icon Basilike: Nor is there any thing
more common than for learned or great Men to leave such Memorandums in a Book
concerning the Author of it when it was a Question, or about any other Secret
relating to it, which they thought they had discovered; and yet it is a thing
unheard till now, that they were denied to be theirs whose Names they bear,
because the Day of the Month was not mentioned, nor the Names of any Witnesses
added, when the Hand was confessed to be the same with their other Writings. Many
instances of this kind appear in the Books of Mr. HAMDEN lately sold, and
whereof I have some to show, as in the Book intitul'd, Apollonii Grallae, he
writes, that LANSBERGIUS was the Author of it, of whom he there gives a
Character.

IT is no just Exception to this Memorandum, that my Lord ANGLESEY did not
communicate the Contents of it to any of his Friends or Relations: for though the
Two Royal Brothers imparted the Secret to him, it does by no means follow, that
they intended he should publish it to the World. And supposing they did not
oblige him to silence, yet it is probable that his Lordship was not very fond of
being disturbed by the Clamors of some Churchmen, who carried things so high at
that time, that I do not believe they would pardon such a Discovery to either
of the Brothers themselves. There was never any poor Prince more notoriously
abused by many of those he took for his best Friends than CHARLES the First.
They put him on all those unhappy Measures which proved his Ruin in the end.
And as they made use of his Temper to serve their own Purposes when he was
alive, so they did of his Name for the same Reason after his Death. They were
not concerned so much for his Honor, as their own Interest; and having
contrived this Forgery to carry their Cause, they thought themselves afterward
obliged to support it. Mr. WAGSTAF affirms that there is no presumtion that the
Royal Brothers communicated this Affair to any other Person besides my Lord
ANGELSEY, which is a negative Argument, and proves nothing. It Is possible
enough that my Lord ANGLESEY himself told of this to others, though they may be
since dead, or are not willing to tell it again. If the Royal Brothers had
spoke of it to no body else, it follows not that a Secret was never committed
to one, because it was not to more; as if it were necessary for a Man to call
Witnesses that he imparted a Secret to his Friend. But we shall presently
allege more than a Presumtion, that both King CHARLES the Second and the late
King JAMES declared their Opinion to other People besides my Lord ANGLESEY,
that Icon Basilike was not their Father's Book.

By such nice Cavils against the Memorandum we can easily judge of the
Exceptions we may expect to Dr. WALKER's Account. That GAUDEN hoped o make a
Fortune by this Book, as well as to promote the Cause of the Church, ought by
no means to be counted strange; for who is it, pray, that serves the King any
more than God, for naught? Have not most of the Bishops and other Clergymen of
those times, that either lived deprived here in England, or that accompanied
CHARLES the Second in his Exile, pleaded their Loyalty, and magnified their
Services at the Restoration, as many others would questionless do, if King
JAMES should ever return again? Were not great Persons employed to solicit and
make an Interest for them? And, in a Word, are not Divines observed to make the
same Steps, and take the same Measures that all other sorts of Men do to get
Preferment. I should rather doubt that Dr. GAUDEN was not the Author of this
Forgery, if he had not expected a Reward for it from CHARLES the Second; for
it is certain, that the Credit of Icon Basilike contributed more to his
Establishment than any other single Motive whatsoever. But it is well known that
this Prince was not the kindest in the World to his Father's Friends, who would
too often forget his own; and that it was not the Interest of some People to
have this business unravelled, though their impolitic Conduct has bin since the
occasion of divulging what every body suspected before.

THE Immorality of this Forgery is urged as an Argument against it; and, if it
could by any means hold Water, is indeed an Argument worth a Million. Then it
would clearly follow that because it was a most immoral thing to ly for God,
and to forge Books, Epistles, or the like, under the Names of CHRIST and his
Apostles, there were therefore never any such Pieces; and that because it was
an ill thing to feign Miracles, or to destroy Men's Lives for the Advancement of
Religion, there never was therefore any Priestcraft, nor any of these infamous
Practices known in the World. But if the contrary be as clear as the Day, I
believe Men might be found that would make as bold with the Name of King
CHARLES, as others have don with that of King JESUS. Mr. WAGSTAF knows, though
Mr. BLACKHALL does not, that TERTULLIAN De Baptismo, c. 17. etiam Hiero^ym. in
Catalogo Scriptor. Eccles.
tells us of a certain Presbyter of Asia, who when he was accused of having
forged a Book containing the Travels of PAUL and THECLA, confessed the Fact, and
alleged that he did it for the love of PAUL, and I say, that Dr. GAUDEN wrote
Icon Basilike for the Church's sake, the King's, and his own.

AS for the plausible Accounts given in that Book of the King's Secret
Intentions, his particular Trobles, his Remorses of Consciences, and the like,
it is very ridiculous to allege 'em as an Argument of the Genuinness of it,
when the Book was written for that very end. For the Design of the Author was
to give such a Color to all the King's Actions, and to tell such fine things of
his gracious Purposes, as would beget a better Opinion of him in the Readers
Mind, and move his Indignation against the Parliament, or Compassion of his
Misfortunes. But that Dr. GAUDEN has frequently made the King's Thoughts to
contradict his Actions, is evident to any Man that has both read Icon Basilike,
and the History of those times: And this Subject is thro'ly handled by JOHN
MILTON in his Iconoclastes, to which I refer those who want Satisfaction.

BUT there is an Objection still behind, and as strong, be sure, as any of the
rest, which is that Dr. WALKER did not see Dr. GAUDEN write this Book, nor
tells us that it was in his own Hand. But I believe Mr. WAGSTAF is the only Man
living that questions whether Dr. WALKER meant Dr. GAUDEN's own Writing, when
he says, that before the whole was finished Dr. GAUDEN was pleased to acquaint
him with his Design, and show him the Heads of diverse Chapters, with some of
the Discourses written of them, and that Mr. GIFFORD transcribed a Copy of it.
This is all that can be said of any Author in the World: and if Dr. WALKER had
said more expressly, or rather superfluously, that it was likewise D. GAUDEN's
Handwriting, we should then have bin told, that it was a Transcript from the
King's Copy in the Hands of Mr. SYMMONDS, of which more hereafter.

WE proceed now to those Pieces commonly called Mr. NORTH's Papers, he being
the Discoverer. Chancellor HYDE in his Letter to Dr. GAUDEN, tells him, as was
said before, That the Particular he mentioned had indeed bin imparted to him as
a Secret, which he was sorry he ever knew; and that when it ceast to be a
Secret, it would please none but Mr. MILTON. Was there no other Secret in the
World but this, says Mr. WAGSTAF, that the divulging of it would gratify Mr.
MILTON? Yes doubtless; but I believe not one that would please none but Mr.
MILTON, as the Chancellor expresses it: For he having particularly questioned
the Genuinness of this Book, and offered a fair Proof of the Spuriousness
thereof from intrinsic Evidence only, without any further Light; would be
extremely pleased to find his Reasonings and Judgment confirmed by undeniable
Matters of Fact. Nor does any indifferent Person in the World understand this
Passage otherwise that weighs Dr. GAUDEN's Pretenses with Mr. MILTON's Concern,
and considers that Mrs. GAUDEN put this and the other Papers relating to Icon
Basilike in one Bundle, together with her own Narrative, for the Information of
her Son. Besides that all those who ever saw other Writings of the Chancellor
own this to be his Hand, and particularly his eldest Son, the present Farl of
CLARENDON, as Mr. WAGSTAF himself acknowledges.

BUT he says, That my Lord CLARENDON, (from whom he had it in a Letter) by
leave of the King and Queen preparing to attend his Father in France in the
beginning of the Summer, 1674. his Lordship went first to Farnham to the late
Bishop of Winton the 14th of May, and among several things he had in Charge
from the Bishop to his Father, he bad him tell him, that the King had very ill
People about him, who turned all things into Ridicule; that they endeavored to
bring him to have a mean Opinion of the King his Father, and to persuade him
that he was not the Author of the Book which goes under his Name. And (when
after his Lordship's Arrival in France, the 30th. of the same Month, he had
delivered his Father these Particulars among others) to that concerning the
Book, his Father replied, Good God! I thought the Marquess of Hartford had
satisfied the King in that Matter. From hence Mr. WAGSTAF would infer, that my
Lord Chancellor did not believe any other besides CHARLES the First to be the
Author of Icon Basilike, and that he wondered any should go about to induce
CHARLES the Second to question it. But for my part I think it very plain on the
contrary, that he believed King CHARLES the First not to be the Author of that
Book, and wondered that King CHARLES the Second should not understand so much
from the Marquess of Hartford, who, as Dr. WALKER, and Mrs. GAUDEN inform us,
was the Person that carried the Manuscript to the King in the Isle of Wight,
and so next to Dr. GAUDEN himself, was best able to convince his Son of the
Truth. Moreover, how could the Bishop of Winton imagine that the ill People
about CHARLES the Second could bring him to doubt of his Father's being the
Author of Icon Basilike, if he really knew it to be written by him? when upon
this Supposition he was rather capable of satisfying all those who had any
Scruples in this Affair.

AS for Dr. GAUDEN'S great Services, and his saying in a Letter to the
Chancellor, That what was don like a King, should have a Kinglike Retribution,
Mr. WAGSTAF says that those are Mystical Expressions, and that by them he might
probably mean a Book he wrote against the Covenant, and a Protestation he
published against the King's Death, neither of which could be termed such
extraordinary Services, when many others had don the same, and more: much less
could it be said that either of these Books was don like a King, or deserved a
Kinglike Retribution; whereas Mr. WAGSTAF, and those who are of his Opinion,
maintain that the the Style and Matter of Icon Basilike are so like a King's,
that no Subject could possibly write it: but a Multtiude of others agree with
me, that the Style is infinitely liker that of a Doctor than a King.

LASTLY, It is objected that Dr. WALKER's and Mrs. GAUDEN's Testimonies
contradict one another. But how? Dr. WALKER says, that Dr. GAUDEN told him he
did not know if CHARLES the First had seen the Book: but Mrs. GAUDEN affirms,
that the Marquess of Hartford told her Husband the King had seen and approved
it, both which Assertions are consistent enough together. For Dr. GAUDEN might
be ignorant that the King had seen it, when Dr. WALKER asked him that Question,
who perhaps never mentioned it to him again in their Discourses about this
Matter, or might easily forget it, as he says he did several other Particulars,
little foreseeing he should ever be obliged to make this Discovery: and besides
we must upon all Accounts allow his Wife to know more Circumstances of th^s
Business, as of most others, than his Friend. The next supposed Contradiction
is, that Dr. WALKER says Dr. GAUDEN once told him, after the Restoration, that
he did not positively and certainly know if King CHARLES the Second knew he
wrote Icon Basilike, though he believ^d he might, because the Duke of York did,
who owned it to have bin a seasonable and acceptable Service. But Mrs. GAUDEN
affirms, that her Husband acquainted the King with it himself, which is very
true. But pray let us examine at what time. After his Discourse with Dr. WALKER
most certainly: For does she not in clear and direct Terms say, that it was in
his last Sickness, which proved Mortal to him; and that the Reason of it was,
because he saw some Persons who were privy to it desire nothing more than to
have it concealed, which he was not willing it should be in consideration of
his numerous Family, to whom it might sometime or other do seasonable Service?

NOW that no Mistakes may be occasioned hereafter by imperfect Fragments of
Mrs. GAUDEN's Narrative, and that this Affair may be set in the clearest Light,
I shall, before I proceed to the Examination of the positive Testimonies
produced for the King, insert the Narrative here at large, as it was exactly
copied from the Original, to which the curious are referred.

Mrs. GAVDEN's NARRATIVE.
MY Husband understanding the great Value and Esteem the People had of CROMWELL
and of others in the Army, occasioned by the high Opinion which they had of
their Parts, and Piety; he being also well assured, that one of the main
Designs of those wicked Politicians, was to Eclipse his Majesty that then was,
as much as might be, and to give a false Misrepresentation of him to the World;
he, that he might do his Majesty right, did pen that Book which goes by the
Name of the King's^Book. The Title which he gave it then was Suspiria Regalia;
and the Design was to have it put forth as by some Person who had found the
Papers in his Majesty's Chambers at Holmeby, being by chance left or scattered
there. And to this purpose he had prefixed an Epistle, which might be supposed
to be written by that Person, who having found them by that Accident, thought
it not fit to conceal them. His Design also in the Book, was to give such a
Character of her Majesty to the World, as her great Worth, extreme Merits, and
admirarable Endowments deserved. when my Husband had writ it, he showed it to
my Lord CAPEL, who did very highly approve of it; and though he thought it
would do very well to have it printed, yet he said it was not fit to do so
without his Majesty's Approbation; and to come to speak to his Majesty in
private was then impossible, in regard of the strict Guard which they kept
about him. Immediately after this there was a Treaty with his Majesty at the
Isle of Wight, whereupon my Husband went to my Lord Marquess of Hartf^rd that
then was, and to him delivered the Manuscript, and he delivered it to the King
at the Isle of Wight, and likewise told him who the Author was. When my Lord
Marquess returned; my Husband went to him, to whom my Lord said, That his
Majesty having had some of those Essays read to him by Bishop DUPPA, did
exc^edingly approve of them, and asked whether they could not be put out in
some other Name. The Bishop replied, that the Design was, that the World should
take them to be his Majesty's. Whereupon his Majesty desired time to consider
of it; and this (says my Lord) is all the Account I can give of it: What is
become of the Manuscript I know not, and what will become of his Majesty God
knows. Upon this my Husband told my Lord Marquess, That, in his Opinion, there
was no way so probable to save his Majesty's Life, as by endeavoring to move
the Hearts and Affections of the People as much as might be toward him; and
that he also thought that that Book would be very effectual for that purpose.
Then my Lord bad my Husband to do what he would, in regard the Case was
desperate. Then immediately my Husband resolved to print it with all speed that
might be, he having a Copy of that which he sent to the King, and that he
printed was just the same, only he then added, the Essay upon their denying his
Majesty the Attendance of his Chaplains, and the Meditation of Death, after the
Votes of the Non-addresses, and his Majesty's close Imprisonment at Carisbrook
Castle. Now the Instrument which my Husband employed to get it printed, was one
Mr. SIMMONDS, a Divine, and a great Sufferer for his Majesty; and he got one
Mr. ROYSTON to print it; which ROYSTON never knew any thing but that it was of
his Majesty's own penning: my Husband did then alter the Title of it, and
called it Icon Basilike. Now when it was about half printed, they, who were in
power, found the Press where it was printing, and likewise a Letter of my
Husbands, which he sent up to the Press; whereupon they destroyed all that they
then found printed, but could not find out from whence the Letter came, in
regard it had no Name to it. Notwithstanding all this, my Husband attempted the
printing of it again, but could by no means get it finished till some few Days
after his Majesty was destroyed. When it was com out, they who were then in
Power were not only extremely displeased at it, but also infinitely solicitous
to find out the Author of it, thinking it very improbable that his Majesty
should write it, in regard of the great Disturbances and Troubles which for
many Years he had suffered: or at least impossible that he should have writ it
all; for after the Attendance of his Chaplains was denied him and he a close
Prisoner, they well understood that he could not write any thing without their
Discovery. They also took that very Manuscript which my Husband had sent his
Majesty, and saw that it was none of his Majesty's Handwriting. Upon this they
appointed a Committee to examine the Business; of which my Husband having
notice, he went privately in the Night away from his own House to Sir JOHN
WENTWORTH'S, who lived near Yarmouth, and him he acquainted with the Business,
and the great Danger he was then in: when Sir JOHN did not only promise to
conceal him, but also to convey him out of England, it being in his Power to
give Passes to go beyond Sea. About this time Mr. SYMMONDS was taken in a
Disguise; but God in his Providence so ordered it, that he sickned immediately,
and died before h^ came to his Examination: nor could the Committee find out
any thing by any means whatever; which altered my Husband's Resolutions of
going out of England. Now, besides these Circumstances, to a^^ert the Truth of
what I say, I can produce some Letters, which, I am sure, will put it out of all
Dispute. My Husband contin^^d at Bo^king till the return of his Majesty King
CHARLES the Second; and upon his Restoration, knowing his Princely Disposition,
did not unjustly expect a suitable Reward for his Endeavors to serve his
Majesty's Father and himself in that Book. And meeting with Dr. MORLEY, he fell
into Discourse how sensible he was of the great Service which he had don his
present Majesty and the Royal Family, in composing and setting forth that
excellent Piece, called the King's Book; and also assured him, that it had bin
very effectual not only at home, but abroad, to move the Hearts and Affections
of People toward his Majesty, instancing in several Persons who were most
exceedingly affected with it; and so advantageous he said it had bin to his
Majesty, that according to his great Merit, he might have what Preferment he
desired. Dr. MORLEY also told him, That he had acquainted Sir EDWARD HYDE with
the Business, and that he did very much commend and admire it: but we have not
(said he) acquainted his Majesty with it, but did assure him, that his Majesty
did set a high Value upon the Book, and had commanded Dr. EARL to translate
into Latin; some having taken the Pains to put it into other Languages before.
My Husband being encouraged by this Discourse of Dr. MORLEY'S, and shortly
after meeting with Dr. SHELDON (who he knew was not ignorant that he was the
only Author of the forementioned Book) he told Dr. SHELDON, that since he had
bin informed that his Majesty, out of his Princely Disposition, would (without
doubt) when once acquainted with it, reward that Service which he had
endeavored to do his Father and himself; he thought it most convenient for
himself, and also that he might be serviceable to his Majesty in the Diocese of
London (a Place where he was well known) if it would please his Majesty to make
him Bishop of that See. Dr. SHELDON was pleased, with a great deal of Gravity
to tell him that was a great Leap at first. Whereupon my Husband desisted, and
was resolved to leave his Preferment to God's dispose. Soon after this, the
King being still ignorant of what he had done, he was by the Mediation of a
Person perfectly ignorant of his Merit as to this Matter, made Bishop of
Exeter; all the considerable Bishoprics being otherwise disposed of. Not long
after this it pleased. God to visit my Husband with an Infirmity, which he had
great cause to fear would (as it did) prove mortal to him. This made him
resolve to acquaint the King with the whole Matter, and the rather, because he
saw some Persons who were privy to it, desired nothing more than to have it
concealed, and buried in Oblivion: but my Husband was not willing it should be
so, in regard he had at that time four Sons living; and they (he thought) if he
should die, might be capable of his Majesty's Favor. Besides, the Duke of
Somerset was dead, and the Bishop of Winchester (the Person who was best able
to attest it) was very ill. These Considerations made him go to his Majesty;
and having the Opportunity of discoursing privately with him, he told him the
whole Matter as I have related it, and for the Truth of it, appealed to Dr.
DUPPA, then Bishop of Winchester, and formerly his Majesty's Tutor. The King
then was pleased to entertain some Discourse with my Husband about it, and said
that he did often wonder how his Father should have gotten Time and Privacy
enough in his Troubles to compose so excellent a Piece, and written with so
much Learning.

BY the Extract that was published of this Narrative it would seem as if it
were somewhat longer; but this is all that came to my Hands, two Witnesses
attesting. that as far as it goes, it is exactly conformable to the Original.
What Accident hindered the rest (if there be any) from being copied, I cannot
certainly tell; though, when ever I com by a true Information, I shall (if
Occasion be) publish my Knowledge of that Particular, in an Appendix to this
Book. The Substance of what remains in the Abstract, is, That when King CHARLES
the Second (as we saw but now) was made acquainted with this Mystery, he gave a
Promise to Dr. GAUDEN of the Bishopric of Winchester; and that the Duke of
York had also assured him of his Favor: That upon Dr. DUPPA'S Death, though Dr.
GAUDEN put the King in mind of his Promise, he was only made Bishop of
Worcester, Dr. MORLEY having obtain^d the Sea of Winchester: That her Husband
dying soon after, Mrs. GAUDEN petitioned the King, showing that she was left a
Widow, with four Sons and a Daughter; that it cost her Husband 200l. to remove
from Exeter to Worcester; and prayed his Majesty to bestow the half years Rents
upon her, which he denied, and gave then to another.

WE learn further from Dr. WALKER, that immediately upon Dr. GAUDEN'S Nomination
to the Bishopric of Worcester, he told him, that waiting upon the King the
next Morning after the Bishop of Winchester's Death, he found a remarkable
Alteration in him, his Majesty being pensive and out of Humor; in which Temper
he still found him for two Mornings after: But having learnt the third Day that
my Lord Chancellor had by all his Interest pressed the King to bestow
Winchester on Dr. MORLEY, he presumed to tell his Majesty how uneasy he
perceived him to be between the Honor of his Word that he should succeed his
Friend Dr. DUPPA, and the Importunity of those who solicited for Dr. MORL^Y;
and that therefore he most willingly released his Majesty of his Promise. Here,
continues Dr. GAUDEN, the King stopped me, and vouchsafed to embrace me in his
Arms, with these Expressions; My Lord, I thank you; and it may not be long ere
I have Opportunity to show you how kindly I take it. And in the mean time you
shall have Worcester; and, to make it to you as good as I can, all the
Dignities of that Church (I know not how it comes to pass) being in my
Disposal, I give you the diposing of them all during your time, that you may
prefer your Friends, and have them near about you.

IT was an ordinary thing with King CHARLES the Second thus to forget his
Promises, which made him frequently uneasy, and occasioned Sir WILLIAM TEMPLE
(whom he had served after this manner) to fay of him in his incomparable
Memoirs, That this Temper made him apt to fall into the Persuasions of whoever
had his Kindness and Confidence for the time, how different soever from the
Opinions he was of before: and that he was very easy to change Hands, when
those he employed seemed to have engaged him in any Difficulties; so as nothing
looked steady in the Conduct of his Affairs, nor aimed at any certain end.

THUS we have don with the Narrative of Mrs. GAUDEN, who was often heard to
relate the substance of it to her Friends and Relations, and who, when Dr.
N^CHOLSON, then Bishop of Gloucester, did, on her receiving of the Sacrament,
put the Question to her, affirmed, that her Husband wrote that Book, which
several now living in that City do very well remember.

WE come at length to the last Period of our Labor, and that is to show the
Invalidity of the Facts which are alleged to prove CHARLES the First was the
true Author of Icon Basilike. And the first Evidence we shall hear is his own
Son and Successor, CHARLES II. who granted his Letters Patents to Mr. ROYSTON
for printing all his Father's Works, and particularly this Piece, which, says
Mr. WACSTAF, contratradicts what he is believed to have said to my Lord
ANGLES^Y. But with his good leave the Conclusision does not follow: for these
Letters were issued out in the Year 60, before Dr. GAUDEN gave the King true
Information; and it was in 75, that he told his Opinion to my Lord ANGLESEY
long after he was convinced that his Father had not written the Book. But if
King CHARLES the Second had dissembled his Knowledge of this Affair, it had not
bin at all a thing inconsistent with this Character, but a Piece of his
Grandfather's boasted Kingcraft, and which he practiced on many less pardonable
Occasions. Have not Princes in all Ages, as well as other Men, bin allowed to
keep things secret which it was not their Interest should be known, and which
are commonly called by the Name of State Mysteries? How many Juggles are used
by the Eastern Princes to beget an extraordinary Opinion of their Persons in
the Minds of their Subjects, who, by the force of such fantastical Stories,
carry their Respect even to Adoration? But what need I go out of England for
Examples? When our own Kings have for so many Ages pretended to cure the King's
Evil, by m^erly touching the affected Part; and this Power of Healing is said
to be communicated to them by the Blessing of King EDWARD the Confessor, one of
the weakest and most Priest ridden Princes that ever wore a Crown. All the
Monkish Historians, and particula^ly the Abbot of Rievalle, who wrote his Life,
have given us a large Catalogue of his Miracles: but I wonder why our Princes
have not also pretended to restore Sight to the Blind; for this is also
affirmed of King EDWARD'S Wonder working Touch. It Is strange, that a Protestant
Bishop, should compose a Form of Divine Service to be read on this Occasion,
when he might as warrantably believe all the other Legends of those dark and
ignorant times. If I did persuade my self that King CHARLES the Second (who is
said to have cured very many) was a Saint, it should be the greatest Miracle I
could believe. But King WILLIAM, who came to (...) us from Superstition as well
as from Slavery, has now ab^lisht this Remnant of Popery: For it is not, as his
Enemies suggest, because he thinks his Title, which is the best in the World,
defective, that he abstains from Touching; but because he laughs at the Folly,
and scorns to take the Advantage of the Fraud. So much for the Letters Patents
of CHARLES II. and we shall consider those of the late King JAMES in their due
order.

THE next Witness shall be Major HUNTINGTON, who (as Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE
relates in his P. 380.
short View of the Troubles of England) did, through the Favor of General
FAIRFAX, restore to King CHARLES the First, after he was brought to
Hampton Court, the Manuscript of Icon Basilike written with the said King's own
Hand, and found in his Cabinet at Naseby Fight. By the way, they should have
said, for the Grace of the Story, part of the Manuscript; for a good deal of
the Book was written afterward, be the Author who you please. And they should
have told us likewise how General FAIRFAX durst send one part of his Papers to
the King, when he sent the rest to the Parliament; or, since they would make us
believe he was so kind to the King, why he did not restore him all the Papers,
when it is very evident, that those which the Parliament ordered to be published
were infinitely of greater consequence, and made him a world of Enemies, which
obliged the Author of Icon Basilike to write a Chapter on this very Subject;
whereas the Papers in question would probably mollify some of his Opposers. But
now when all is don, though General FAIRFAX was afterward against putting the
King to death, yet he was not at that time disposed to grant him any Favors,
and acted with as hearty Zeal against him as any in the Nation, which appears
by all the Histories of those times, as well as by his own and the Memoirs of
the Lord HOLLIS. As for Major HUNTINGTON Dr. WALKER assures us, That he told
him, when he heard such a Book was published and confidently reported to be the
Kings, all he said was that he surely believed those were the Papers he saw him
so usually take out of his Cabinet, and that he never read one Line or Word of
them. This and Sir WILLIAM DUGDAIE'S Testimony are diverse from that of Mr.
RICHARD DUKE, of Otterton in Devon, who writes the following Letter to Dr.
GOODAL, famous for his Zeal on the behalf of Icon Basilike. Sir, I confess that
I heard Major HUNTINGTON to say more than once, that whilst he guarded CHARLES
the First at Holmby-House (as I remember) he saw several Chapters or Leaves of
that great King's Meditations lying on the Table several Mornings, with a Pen
and Ink with which the King scratched out or blotted some Lines or Words of some
of them. Upon which I must also confess that I concluded they were originally
from the King; but others have drawn a contrary Argument from the King's
correcting the Papers. Yet I put this under my Hand, that the Major told me,
that he did suppose them originally from that learned Prince, which is the
Totum that can be intimated from, Sir, your humble Servant RICHARD DUKE. Then
one Mr. CAVE BECK writes to Dr. HOLLINGWORTH That Major HUNTINGTON at Ipswich
assured him that so much of the sa'd Book as contained his Majesty's Mediations
before Naseby-^ight was taken in the King's Cabinet; and that Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX delivered the said Papers to him, and ordered him to carry them to the
King; and also told him, that when he delivered them to the King, his Majesty
appeared very joyful, and said he esteemed 'em more than all the Jewels he had
lost in the Cabinet. This Major HUNTINGTON was a strange Man to vary so often
in his Story, and to tell so much more or less to every body that enq^^r'd of
him; but indeed it is no great Wonder that these Gentlemen should so widely
differ from one another, both as to Time and Place, as well as to Matters of
Fact, when Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE has printed under Major HUNTINGTON's Name quite
another Story from the written Memorial out of which he had it. In his short
View he positively says, as we read before, that the Manuscript was written
with the King's own Hand: But in his Warrant for this, it is only said, as Mr.
WAGSTAF himself acknowledges, that all the Chapters in it were written by the
Hand of Sir EDWARD WALKER, but much corrected with Interlineations of the
King's Hand, and that the Prayers were all so.

NOW, to show further how cautiously People should rely on Sir WILLIAM DUGDALE,
and Historians like him, we shall produce another remarkable Instance. In the
Book before-quoted, he expressly writes, That Mr. HERBERT did often see the Icon
Basilike while he waited on the King in the Isle of Wight; whereas all that Sir
THOMAS (for he was Knighted after the Restoration) has said in the Manuscript
which Sir WILLIAM perused, and whereof Mr. WAGSTAF has printed an Abstract, is,
that he had there the Charge of the King's Books; and that those he most read,
after the Sacred Scriptures, were Bishop ANDREWS's Sermons, HOOKER's
Ecclesiastical Policy, VILLALPANDUS on EZEKIEL, SANDY's Paraphrase on the
Psalms, HERBERT's Poems, the Translation of GODFREY of Bulloign by Mr. FAIRFAX,
of ORLANDO FURIOSO by Sir JOHN HARRINGTON, and SPENCER's Fairy Queen (to which
he might have added PEMBROKE's Arcadia.) And at this time it was, as is
presumed, (continues Sir THOMAS) that he composed his Book, called Suspiria
Regalia, published soon after his Death, and entitled, The King's Portraiture
in his Solitudes and Sufferings: which Manuscript Mr. HERBERT found among those
Books his Majesty was pleased to give him, those excepted which he bequeathed
to his Children hereafter mentioned. In regard Mr. HERBERT, though he did not see
the King write that Book, his Majesty being always private when he writ; and
those his Servants never coming into the Bed Chamber when the King was private,
til he called; yet comparing it with his Handwriting in other things, he found
it so very like as induces his Belief that it was his own, having seen much of
the King's Writings before. Here Sir THOMAS only presumes the King might write
the Book in the Isle of Wight, and directly says he never saw the King write
it, nor the Book it self till after his Death; but Sir WILLIAM affirms from
these very Papers (for they are said to be written at his Request by Sir
THOMAS) that he often saw it in the Isle of Wight when he waited on the King in
his Bedchamber. It Is to be observed, that the Title of Suspiria Regalia is as
agreeable to Mrs. GAUDEN's Narrative, as the rest of the Particulars are
different from Sir WILLIAM's Relation.

BEFORE we examine the Force of Sir THOMAS's Testimony, we must first consider
what is said by Mr. LEVET, who attended the King at the same Time and Place. In
short, he says, That of his own certain Knowledge he can depose the Book was
truly the Kings, having observed his Majesty oftentimes writing his Royal
Resentments of the bold and insolent Behavior of his Soldiers when they had him
in their Custody: That being nominated by his Majesty to be one of his Servants
during the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, he had the Happiness to read the same
oftentimes in Manuscript under his Majesty's own Hand, being pleased to leave
it in the Window of his Bedchamber: And that when the King was removed to
Hurst-Castle, he had the Charge of this Book, and a Cabinet of other Papers,
which at the said Castle he delivered again to his Majesty; where, by the way,
he does not inform us if the Book was distinctly given him from the Cabinet, or
that he only concluded it was in it. Here are several very observable
Circumstances: As, First, that although Mr. HERBERT who was of the King's Bed
Chamber, never saw him write a Syllable of this Book, his (Majesty, he says,
being always in private, when he wrote, and his Servants never coming into his
Bedchamber till he called;) yet Mr. LEVET, a Page of the Back Stairs, often
saw him write, knew what he wrote, and could read the Book when he pleased.
Then that the King, who is said to value this Book more than all his Jewels,
should so carelessly leave it in his Bedchamber when he was abroad, and where
Mr. HERBERT and others, nay the very Soldiers might see it as well as Mr.
LEVET, is not very likely. And lastly, that the King should have so much
leisure to mind this Book during a Treaty with his Subjects, or would lose any
time in writing of it, when the Business in agitation concerned no less than
his re-establishment or Abdication, is not credible; besides, that there is
nothing particularly written concerning the Insolence of the Soldiers in all
Icon Basilike. And I have talked with Persons of Quality and good Reputation
now alive, who had much more of his Majesty's Company and Confidence in the
Isle of Wight than Mr. LEVET either shared, or could reasonably expect; but yet
they neither dreamt of this Business then, nor believed a jot of it afterward,
as well knowing how the King spent his time in that place. But now supposing
Mr. LEVET's Relation to be all true, yet it is very from amounting to a Proof,
that King CHARLES the First was was the real Author of Icon Basilike, which is
the Point in question; and not whether he interlin'd or transcribed it, which
he ought to have don, if he had a mind it should pass for his own: besides that
Dr. GAUDEN sent it to him for that very purpose, to be corrected, allowed, or
laid aside, as his Majesty should think fit. But though the King in all reason
might, and I really believe did, correct or interline a part, and perhaps
transcribe the whole Book; yet I can by no means be persuaded that he could
find Leisure enough to write so many Copies of it in his Solitudes and
Sufferings, in the midst of Treaties, in the Hurry of Removals, while he
meditated his Escape, and was strictly observed by his Guards. But these
Gentlemen tell us of as many Copies, as the Papists show Heads of St. JOHN
BAPTIST, or Quarts of the Virgin MARY's Milk. Mr. HERBERT had one left him by
the King for a Legacy; CHARLES the Second (as Dr. CANARIFS writes to Mr.
WAGSTAF) showed another to Mr. WOOD, a Commishoner from the Scottish Kirk at
Breda; and who knows which of these, or whether it was either of them, that Mr.
LEVET delivered to the King at Hurst-Castle? But why, in the Name of God, is
none of these ever since produced? How came this Prince's Autographs to be thus
neglected, when his Day is so strictly observed? This is a Piece of Respect
that is usually paid to less considerable Persons; and I believe either of the
Universities, would readily give Five Hundred Pounds to have such a Copy placed
in their Library, though if they had the Manuscript, it would make nothing at all
for their Purpose.

NOW let us consider the the Force of all those Testimonies joined together,
which is, that one saw the King write he knew not what, but believed it might
be this Book; another observed him writing his Resentments against the rude
Behavior of the Soldiers, and so was ready to depose of his certain Knowledge,
that Icon Basilike was his own; a third presumes the King might write it,
because he read a great many Books; and they unanimously conclude, that he was
the genuin Author, because the Book was written with his own Hand; all which
Testimonies, considering the Promises, prove no more nor less than that the
King could write and read, which was never denied by any that I know.

IT is further urged by the Admirers of this famous Book, that Mr. ROYSTON had
it to print as from the King, in which all sides are agreed, and signifies
nothing to the Merits of the Cause; for, be sure, the Bookseller was not made
privy to the Secret. And as for the Anonymous Authors of two Books which are
alleged by Mr. WAGSTAF, we shall hear and examine them when they will please to
tell us their Names, though all they have to say is answered already. When Dr.
HOLLINGWORTH tells us who are his sufficient Witnesses, we shall likewise
consider their Evidence; for such Affirmations must go for nothing in proving a
Fact of this Nature, and may well serve for a Flourish, but not for an
Argument, no more than several more Assertions of his concerning this Ma^ter,
which were exploded by other Hands, and not defended by Mr. WAGSTAF.

MR. LE PLA Minister of Finchingfield writes to Dr. GOODAL, that one WILLIAM
ALLEN, who collected his Tithes for two Years, and was formerly a Servant to
Dr. GAUDEN, affirmed to him, That the Doctor told him he had borrowed the Book,
and was obliged to return it by such a time; that (besides what other time he
might employ in it) he sat up one whole Night to transcribe it; that he sat up
in the Chamber with him, to wait upon him, to make his Fires, and snuff his
Candles: and Mr. LE PLA thinks (for he is not positive) it was from Mr. SYMMONDS
of Rain that he said the Doctor had borrowed the Book. Dr. HOLLINGWORTH has
formerly affirmed this Story of SYMMONDS's, who indeed assisted afterward in
printing the Book at London; but was so far at this time from living at Rain
in the Neighborhood of Bocking where Dr. GAUDEN dwelt, that as Dr. WALKER
shows, Mr. SYMMONDS was long before sequestered for his Loyalty, fled to the
King's Quarters, and one Mr. ATKINS placed in his room by the Parliament. Nor
is it credible that Dr. GAUDEN, whether he meant a a Fraud or not, should give
an Account of his Studies, much less discover the Secret of this Book for no
Reason in the World, to never so trusty a Servant, especially to one that was
to look after his Fire and snuff his Candles.

NOW we com to the late King JAMES's Letters Patents to Mr. CHISWEL for Liberty
to print his Father 's Works; for they are urged as an Argument that he thought
Icon Basilike genuin, though this Book be not specially mentioned in these
Letters, which are general, and refer not to those of his Brother in 60. But
here I must beg Leave to relate a Story that will give some Light to this
Matter. In the Year 1677, the House of Commons having voted two Months Tax for
the more dccent Interment of CHARLES I. and to raise a Monument for him, Mr.
CHISWEL, being Mr. ROYSION's Son in law, thought of a Project that would answer
the End of the Parliament, and not be unserviceable to his Father, with whom he
was concerned in Trade: and it was, that a Part of that Sum might be
appropriated toward bearing the Charge of an Impression of the King's Works,
whereof every Parish in England should be obliged to have a Copy, and to chain
it in the Church; which, in his Opinion, would prove a more glorious and
lasting Monument than any could be framed of Brass or Marble. This Thought was
very well liked by several great Men of the Church and State, who showed
themselves ready to promote it; and he did not, we may imagine, spare any Cost
or Labor to have it succeed, though it is well known how little CHARLES the Second
himself encouraged it. But the Distrusts arising afterward between the King
and People, the Heats in Parliament, and particularly the Popish Plot, broke
this, and all such Designs to Pieces: So that there was no farther Mention of
any Monument for his Father. But when the Duke of York mounted the Throne, and
had given Assurances of his Favor to the Church of England, Mr. CHISWEL thought
again of rev^ving his Project, and employed Sir ROGER L ESTRA^GE to procure him
only King JAMES's recommendatory Letter; for he did not expect any thing from
Parliament as before, only (...) how agreeable this would seem to the King's
Design (if it were real) of bege^^ing a Confidence of himself in the Church.
This Request the King Icon, giving for his Reason, that (...) Basilik^ was not
his Father's Book, and he could not therefore in Conscience recommend it as
his. Mr. CHISWEL being informed of this Resolution by Sir ROGER, answered, that
he thought he could accommodat the Matter: For since the publishing of the rest
would signify nothing without the Addition of Icon Basilike, he would remove
it from the Front where it stood in the former Edition, and place it in the
Rear after Finis, as Books of uncertain Authority use to be printed. To this
the King consented, on condition some Expressions which he thought injurious to
the Monarchy should be left out: with which Mr. CHISWEL said he could by no
means comply, as being a disingenuous Practice toward any Author, and a great
Abuse on the Public; but proposed, as another Expedient, that those Words
should be put within Crotchets. And thus Icon Basilike stands now printed after
the End of the second Part of the King's Works of the Edition of 86, by Mr.
CHISWEL, who told me this Story himself, not to gratify or injure any side,
but as a Matter of Fact, wherein he was personally concerned; and from whence
he draws no manner of Inference. The Royal Brothers said the same to several
others besides my Lord ANGLESEY, and particularly to some eminent Persons now
living, who told me so much themselves, with a Liberty of mentioning their
Names, which, after all that has bin offered, I see no Necessity of doing.

THAT nothing may be wanting I shall in the last place consider what is
objected to the Prayer used by the King as his own in the time of his
Captivity; but is, with very small Variation, the same that is said by PAMELA
to a Heathen Deity in Sir PHILIP SYDNEY's Arcadia. This Discovery, as we said
before, was first made by MILTON in his Iconoclastes. But Dr. GILL affirms,
That his Patient HENRY HILL the Printer said it was put in by a Contrivance of
MILTON, who catching his Friend Mr. Du GUARD printing an Edition of Icon
Basilike, got his Pardon by BRADSHAW's Interest, on Condition he would insert
PAMELA's Prayer to bring Discredit on the Book and the Author of it. I wonder
at the Easiness of Dr. GILL and Dr. BERNARD to believe so gross a Fable, when
it does not appear that Du GUARD, who was Printer to the Parliament, ever
printed this Book, and that the Prayer is in the second Edition published by
Mr. ROYSTON, whose Evidence is alleged to prove the Genuinness of the Book.
And if the King's Friends thought it not his own, what made them print it in
the first Impression of his Works in Folio, by ROYSTON in 62, when MILTON could
not tamper with the Press? Or why did they let it pass in the last Impression
in Folio by Mr. CHISWEL in the Year 86, when all the World knew that it was
long before exposed in Iconoclastes? After this I need not go about to show
that Dr. GILL had no Reason for the great Opinion he entertained of HENRY HILL,
and how little he consulted his own Reputation by asserting that no Man was
better versed in the secret History of those times; that he was entrusted with
Intrigues by the great ones of that Government, who, as all the World knows,
managed their Affairs after another rate. Nor will I insist upon his turning
Papist in King JAMES's time to become his Printer, as he was OLIVER's before, or
any other Circumstance to lessen his Credit, since it appears that what he
averred is inconsistent with Matter of Fact, Mr. ROYSTON, and not Du GUARD,
having published the Celebrated Prayer which I add in this Place laid Parallel
with the Original.

The Prayer of King CHARLES, styled A Prayer in Time of Captivity, Printed in
page 94. of his Works, 1686; and also in Icon Basilike.
O Powerful and Eternal God, to whom nothing is so great that it may resist, or
so small that it is contemned, look upon my Misery with thine Eye of Mercy, and
let thine infinite Power vouchsafe to limit out some proportion of deliverance
unto me, as to thee shall seem most convenient. Let not Injury, O Lord, triumph
over me, and let my Fault by thy Hand be corrected; and make not my unjust
Enemies the Ministers of thy Justice. But yet, my God, if in thy Wisdom this be
the aptest Chastisement for my unexcusable Transgressions, if this ungrateful
Bondage be sit for my over-high Desires, if the Pride of my (not-enough
humble) Heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield unto thy Will, and
cheerfully embrace what Sorrow thou will have me suffer; only thus much let me
crave of thee (let my Craving, O Lord be accepted of, since it even proceeds
from thee) that by thy Goodness, which is thy self, thou will suffer some Beam
of thy Majesty so to shine in my Mind, that I, who in my greatest Afflictions
acknowledge it my noblest Title to be thy Creature, may still depend considently
on thee: Let Calamity be the Exercise, but not the Overthrow of my Virtue. O
let not their prevailing Power be to my Destruction; and if it be thy Will that
they more and more vex me with Punishment, yet, O Lord, never let their
Wickedness have such a Hand, but that I may still carry a pure Mind and
sledfast Resolution ever to serve thee without Fear or Presumtion, yet with
that hum-Confidence which may best please thee; so that at the last I may com
to thy Eternal Kingdom, through the Merits of thy Son, our alone Savior, JESUS
CHRIST. Amen.

The PRAYER of PAMELA (to a Heathen Deity) In Pembroke's Arcadia, page 248,
1674.
O All-seeing Light, and Eternal Life of all things, to whom nothing is either
so great that it may resist, or so small that it is contemned, look upon my
Misery with thine Ey of Mercy, and let thine infinite Power vouchsafe to limit
out some Proportion of Deliverance unto me, as to thee shall seem most
convenient. Let not Injury, O Lord, triumph over me, and let my Faults by thy
Hand be corrected, and make not mine unjust Enemy the Minister of thy Justice.
But yet, my God, if in thy Wisdom this be the aptest Chastisement for my
unexcusable Folly, if this low Bondage be fittest for my overhigh Desires, if
the Pride of my not-enough humble Heart be thus to be broken, O Lord, I yield
unto thy Will, and joyfully embrace what Sorrow thou will have me suffer; only
thus much let me crave of thee (let my Craving, O Lord, be accepted of thee,
since even that proceeds from thee) let me crave even by the noblest Title
which in my greatest Affliction I may give my self, that I am thy Creature, and
by thy Goodness, which is thy self, that thou will suffer some Beams of thy
Majesty to shine into my Mind, that it may still depend confidently on thee.
Let Calamity be the Exercise, but not the overthrow of my Virtue; Let their
Power prevail, but prevail not to Destruction; Let my Greatness be their Prey:
Let my Pain be the Sweetness of their Revenge; let them (if so it seem good
unto thee) vex me with more and more Punishment; But, O Lord, let never their
Wickedness have such a Hand, but that I may carry a pure Mind in a pure Body;
and pausing a while; and O most gracious Lord, said she, whatever becomes of
me, preserve the Virtuous MUSIDORUS.

CONCLUSION.
I HOPE by this time I have satisfied Mr. BLACKHALL, since I have not only laid
together the first Testimonies concerning this Matter, but also answered the
Exceptions that were made to those Testimonies, and disproved the fresh
Evidence which was produced no the behalf of Icon Basilike. But if he is
offended at my Performance he may thank himself; seeing without his causeless
Provocation I had never written a Word more on this Subject, as I shall not do
hereafter, unless for as justifiable a Reason: For notwithstanding I may not
answer every Scribler, yet I Will be misrepresented and abused by no body worth
my notice.

INDEED Mr. BLACKHALL is not the first who has occasioned Controversies by a
Thirtieth of January Segmon. Every body knows how much the Observation of that
Day was abused in the two last Reigns by servil Flatterers, who, not content to
run shameful Parallels between the Sufferings of our Savior and the King
(wherein the latter was often made to exceed) they taught the People the
ridiculous Doctrine of Passive Obedience, as they allowed the Prince an
Unlimited and Despotic Power. This rendered those Persons justly odious to the
Nation, and made sober Men frequently wish that such an Opportunity of doing
Mischief might be taken away from those who failed not to improve it to the
utmost. It was likewise observed how much these Sermons contributed to raise
Animosities and Feuds in the Kingdom, and to continue the fatal Distinctions of
Names and Parties, which every good Man should desire might be abolished, or
buried in eternal Oblivion. Besides that for many weighty Reasons such Days
ought not to be perpetuated, or otherwise in a little time ours will be as full
as the Roman Calendar: wherefore I readily approve of the learned Bishop of
Salisbury's Opinion, That our Deliverances should wear out the Memory of such
tragical Accidents, which no body pretends to justify; and indeed I think it
very reasonable (if our Legislators be of the same Opinion) that the
Commemoration of his present Majesty's Landing to deliver us from Slavery on
the Fifth of November, should hereafter take place of the Thirtieth of January.
Other Holydays have bin recommended to a constant Observation, though they are
since grown into disuse, or are legally abolished, which the best Friends of
the Clergy desire may be the Fate of that Day out of their respect to the
Church: For these Sermons do constantly put the People in mind of that Set of
Men who preached 'em out of their Liberties in former times; and the honest
Clergy themselves are still under an unhappy Necessity of saying many things,
that (let 'em think what they will) are not extremely pleasing to the Body of
the Nation. The Descendants of those concerned in that Act, and many of 'em far
from approving it, conceive themselves unkindly used in most of those
Discourses; nor are the Posterity of the greatest Royalists in a better
Condition, if that be a National Guilt that is never to be expiated, though
neither they nor their Ancestors consented to it; to say nothing of the
frequent Intermarriages and other Ties between both the Parties.

IF the Extravagancies of those Sermons had terminated with the late Reign, few
People, perhaps, would trouble themselves now about what is past, unless
constrained to it by some officious Chaplain: But they cannot endure to hear the
Members of the Parliament of 40 so infamously branded, considering how lately
they were obliged themselves to assert their Laws and Liberties against the
Martyrs Son, who violated and broke them at his Pleasure: And in this Sense
many were of Opinion that King CHARLES's Blood lay heavy on the Nation, which
made them for the ease of the same to shake off the Burden of King JAMES.

SOME, who otherwise Honor the Memory of King CHARLES the First, are angry to
hear him, in Mr. BLACKHALL's Language, called the best of Kings, and the best
of Men; when they consider especially, that the Apostles were Men, and that
several Persons among the Greek and Roman Heathens, did infinitely excel him in
all Moral and Heroic Virtues. As for Princes, if good Manners could not make
Mr. BLACKHALL except the present King, Justice at least might well oblige him
to do it. King WILLIAM has never dispensed with express Laws in favor of Popish
Recusants. He never protected any of his Chaplains against the Parliament for
preaching up Arbitrary Power. He never required Soldiers to be tried by Martial
Law in time of Peace; nor levied Loans or Ship money contrary to Law, much less
imprisoned, fined or banished such as refused to pay those illegal Taxes. He
does not countenance any SIBTHORPS, MANWARINGS, or MOUNTAGUES to teach his
Subjects Non-Resistance, or to compliment himself with Arbitrary Power. He is
so far from sending for Foren Troops to enslave the Nation, that he readily
sent those away which he kept here by Law, as soon as he understood the Kingdom
had no further need of their Service. He does not use to imprison Members of
the House of Commons for using that Freedom of Debate which is Essential to
their Constitution. He never threatened to betake himself to other Councils
than his Parliament (as CHARLES the First did) saying that Parliaments were in
his Power, and that he might grow out of Love with them. Nor is it known that
he went into the House of Commons to demand any of their Members; no more than
he has seized the Customs without any Act to empower him. He never promised (as
King CHARLES did in a Letter to his Queen) that he would take away all the
Penal Laws against Roman Catholics as soon as he should be able, nor any thing
else of this nature: For these are only a few Instances, not to blacken that
Prince, but to show how little some sort of People seem to value his present
Majesty for generously restoring the Constitution, and for so willingly passing
many excellent Laws for enlarging or securing the Liberty of his Subjects; as
well as for always paying such a Deference to Parliaments, which he not only
assembles willingly, but likewise, according to ancient Custom, annually. In
short, if King CHARLES the First was the best of Kings, the late King JAMES is
not half so bad as I think him: Nor is there any Doubt, if a second Restoration
(which God and all Freemen forbid) should ever happen, but that the
Abdication-Day would be appointed as a perpetual Fast. What Mr. BLACKHALL
thinks of dispensing with the Laws and acting without, or contrary to them, we
may guess, when he says, That King CHARLES's greatest Enemies could not charge
him with any Vice or Immorality; as if only Whoring, Drinking, or Swearing were
immoral Practices.

SINCE this King (who truly was not the worst) must needs be counted the best
of Men, I do not much wonder that Mr. LONG of Exeter was for having some
Portions of his pretended Book read in the Church for the further enlightening
of our Understanding: Nor that Dr. PERINCHIFF should tell us in his Life how
some purchased Chips of the Block on which he was beheaded, and Parcels of the
Sands discolor'd with his Blood, as also some of his Hair, Hoping, continues he,
they would be a means of Cure for that Disease, which our English Kings,
through the Indulgence of kind Heaven, by their Touch did usually heal: And it
was reported that these Relics, experienced, failed not of the Effect. Now
who can laugh at the Popish Legends, and be serious when he reads this Passage?
Whereas, if there was ^ver any Power in England of curing the King's Evil, it
was plainly lodged in the People.

BEFORE I conclude, I must remark, that tho his pretended Friends were so ready
to father such Books on CHARLES the First wherein he had no Hand, yet they
industriously left out of his Works a Letter to Pope GREGORY XV, whereof I can
prove him as evidently to be the Author as CICERO or VIRGIL may be entitled to
the Philippicks and the Aeneids. There is an interpolated Copy of it in the
first Volum of RUSHWORTH's Collections: It is rightly inserted in the Quarto
Edition of a Book called Cabala, or Mysteries of State: It is also in the
Italian Mercury of VITTORIO SIRI: in Du CHESNE's French History of England,
Scotland and Ireland: and in several Spanish and Italian Authors. Pope URBAN
VIII mentions it in the Letter which he likewise sent this Prince, with another
to his Father King JAMES; both which may be read in RUSHWORTH's Collections.
Now was not the omitting of this Letter a notorious Fraud, since that it alone,
with those Letters which the Parliament published to disgrace him, and a few
Pieces besides, make up all his genuin Writings; For as to those Messages,
Propositions, Declarations, Treaties, and other public Papers, which fill that
bulky Folio they call his Works, whoever takes them to be his, is likewise
capable of believing he was the true Author of Icon Basilike.

THIS is all I had to write concerning this famous Book, not to reflect on the
Memory of CHARLES the First, but in my own Vindication; being a Liberty not
denied me by Equity or Law, and which, if I neglected to improve, I should be
more unjust to my self than my Adversaries, whose Malice I shall readily
forget, and heartily pray God to forgive.

FINIS.

