A Faithful WARNING TO ALL BACKSLIDERS Who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness,
FOR To return to the Lord and cleave to the Light which leads out of Darkness.
IT is now in my heart to discover unto you the manner of my falling from the
Truth, notwithstanding I had tasted of the Lords Love and did come in measure
to see what was laid up for them that love him in his appearance.

VVH^n the time of Trials came on that the Lords People were carried to Prison,
the reasoning part got up in me, the which the Enemy soon joined with; showing
me the danger that might happen if I went to Meetings that then I should or
might be put into a Prison: then, as I said, the reasoning part got up;
insomuch, that I began to take care for my Wife, and Children, and Family,
considering the weak capacity of my Wife, she being altogether incapable of
mannaging my Trade, it must of necessity fail; which Friends, I would have you
to take notice, this was whilst the reasoning part was gotten up, which, when
that began first to enter, if I had stood in that which did discover it not to
be of God, my heart had been kept clean; but joining to the evil, that caused
the Lords Presence to be withdrawn: then did the Devil transform himself into
an Angel of light, showing me, that Friends did not do so well as the Infidels
did; for they took care of their Families: then the thoughts of this began to
minister to me a false peace; insomuch, that I became one that did weaken the
weak, and to lay a stumbling block in their way: so then, when I had done this,
yet had I no peace, but was still condemned in my Conscience: then the
transformed Angel had another way signifying to me, that I might be serviceable
in my b^^ng forth of Prison, for I might go and serve the Body of Friends,
which did for a little while satisfy; but yet the Lords Love was such, that he
showed me that was not enough, but had I should go to the Meetings, and bear my
Testimony for God, who caused the Light to shine, and had shined into my heart,
which gave me to understand my duty toward God and man and walked in it and
obeyed it. But when I had thoughts of obeying the Will of the Lord, then would
my Wives tears flow from her eyes, which drew me to be tender to her; and not
standing in the Cross, I came more and more to lose my portion: Then the Devil
drew me to acquaint my self with those that did also flee the Cross, and we
began to daub our selves with untempered Mortar, and so grew light and vain,
and so come to speak our own words, and to think our own thoughts, and to do
our own work, and so become rebelious Children unto him that was our Father
whilst we obeyed the Light in our hearts, which showed our duty toward God;
but we re^using to obey it, the Enemy came amongst us, and sowed his seed; and
so here was a waring in us for victory: insomuch, that we, or I had no peace,
but continually filled with trouble at the very time when I was jesting and
jearing, the Light in my heart did condemn me; and at my lying down, or at my
rising up I was so condemned; that I had some breathings toward the Lord for
to desire forgiveness, and was ready to cry unto the Lord, Father, forgive me;
but before the word [Father] was uttered, the Lords Witness would arise in my
heart, and show me that I was not to call God Father, for I had done the will
of the Devil; which caused me to remember what was said of some that was
calling God Father, and was doing the works of the Devil, and I was out of the
redeemed state, as well as they: but as for my dealing amongst men, I have very
little to charge my self with, but can truly say, as to that point, I kept my
self very much unspotted of the World; and ^isplaid had some respect for the
same of the Truth, and could not endure to hear the Truth evil spoken of,
although I was in a great measure departed from it.

So by my plain dealing among men I was esteemed with many up and down the
Country, my name was famous; insomuch, that my Trade did much increase, so that
I came to be very much hurried in the World, which did choke the Seed more and
more, and so became worse and worse; so the god of the World blinded the mind,
that when I would have done the will of God, something or other lay in the way
which did hinder; so Death and Darkness came to reign and to rule and have the
pre-eminence; insomuch, that the Light which did shine once in me, came to be
darkened: so then that wicked Prince began to reign over the Seed, and kept it
in bondage, which would have reigned over the Devil, had it been obeyed as it
ought to have been; for I could, and did witness it so once, but by
disobedience I became a Captive to the Devil, to do his will in a great
measure. But yet, had there not been a Seed, (I may say) I might have been as
Sodom, or made like unto Gomorrah; but I can say I was kept out of the practice
of many things, which at some times was almost or altogether concluded in my
mind to act: therefore who is like unto the God of Abraham, and the God of
Isaac, and the God of Jacob, who left us a Seed, or else what had become of me
in this apostatising state.

When I was first convinced of the Truth and Living Way, then accounted I all
but dross and dung in comparison of Christ, the Way, the Truth, and the Life;
insomuch, that the Lord was pleased to manifest himself unto me in his Way,
which was by Christ the Light that lights every one that comes into the
World; so as I come to the Light of Jesus, I come to see that I had done amiss
in giving money to the Parish Priest, whose Doctrine I could not own. I had
been a hearer of those people called Baptists, before I came to hear Truth
declared by the Servant of the Lord Edward Borough; at which time when I went
to hear him, I went not to hear (the despised people, called Quakers) so as to
receive their Doctrine, but rather gaze at them to see their manner: when I
first came in he that went with me seemed to be very much dissatisfied with
what my dear Friend laid down, for which cause he spoke unto me; my answer was
to him, I had heard nothing but what was truth, at which time I come away when
the Meeting was parted (or the Friends one from each other) with joy, which I
knew not how to express; but coming to a Relations house, I declared to the
Woman that I had heard the Truth declared, and that I did never know the way to
which I could witness satisfaction, but in this Way; which was, that there was
the Light of Christ in the Conscience which did discover to man his thoughts;
(with many words more used) insomuch, (in the time that I was speaking) she was
in the mind to hear them, but after I was gone her own wisdom got up, and so
could not become a Fool that she might be wise: So after a little time, as I
came to depart from committing of some sins I became a prey; he that was like
to begin with me first was the Priest of the Parish, whose name was Cooper, a
Presbyterian counted; his threats caused some fear to arise in my wife, who did
make it known to her Sister, on which they considered a way how to keep me from
suffering, which was, they would pay the Priest, and my Wife should pay them
again; which thing did continue obscure for a time hid from me; but my
Brother-in-law buying some Goods of me, did (when I came to reckon with him)
stop some of my money, which it is like I might dislike; but at last it become
customary to me to do it for a time; but in the performance hereof I found my
strength decay, more lighter and vain I grew; and at last upon some difference
he refused to pay the Priest any longer; insomuch, the Priests man (who
gathered money for the Priest) came unto me, and did acquaint me what this
person had said, which was, that he would not pay the Priest for me; when that
this come before me, in have, (being led captive at the Enemies will) he
quickly transformed himself into an Angel of light, and did signify to me that
it was but underhand dealing, and that I might more lawfuller do it with my
own hand; also the Devil, to cause me to perform this work, showed me the
actions of some (that were esteemed Friends) in that business, and in other
things also, the which ought not to have been minded; for he that leads out
the mind is the Enemy, the same that showed me, that it did appear the more
lawful in doing it with my own hands; but as Friends are kept to the true
Light, even the Light of Jesus, they will come to see, and to divide between
spirit and spirit, that is to say, between the Spirit of Christ and the Spirit
of Antichrist, as they continue faithful to the measure of Light they have
received; but if that any grow weary of well doing, and so become slothful
and sluggish, then comes the Enemy and sows Tares; which if I had continued
in diligence to have made my calling and election sure, then had I answered the
will of the Lord; for the end of Gods Love in giving his Son a Light into the
World, was, that all men through him might be saved: Therefore I warn all to
follow the Light, that ye may become children of the Light.

Yet more I am to acquaint ye with, as touching the former, how, the Lord did
appear unto me at last after I had resisted his Will for years past, yet the
Lord who is full of compassion, whose mercy endures, whose Love is never to be
forgotten by me; if ever forgetfulness should enter again, I must never look
God in the face more, who has helped me when I saw no helper in the Earth,
then did the Lord appear in two of his Stewards whom he had committed this
charge unto, for to speak unto me, and to lay this before me, that I did not do
the thing that was right in paying the Priest; withal signifying unto me, that
I did it through fear of him, the which the witness for God in my Conscience
did bear him record, that what he said was true; also he signified to me the
reason why he said I was afraid, which was true; for I was afraid, otherwise I
had never paid him, but merely for fear of man whose breath is in his Nostrils:
Also my Friend did lay before me, that the Priest was one of those that the
Prophet of the Lord cried out against, that would prepare war against those
that put not in their mouths; the Witness of God in me did bear him record,
that what he said was true; but the Enemy began to rage in me, and (to stand in
defiance of the Friends words) he did advise me, putting me on, and bidding me
to charge him to mind his Trade, and let me alone, for he was worse then he
should be as well as I; the Friend would have known what I had to charge him
with, but away I shuffled; but Gods Witness I could not flee from, but it did
condemn me that night, and in the morning, but still the Devil did strive to
keep the Seed in bondage: I think the day following, or soon after came another
Friend to me in some business, and whilst I was talking with him, the Lord, who
is the Author of all good, from whence it does spring, caused him to open his
mouth unto me charging me concerning paying the Priest Tithes, and said, he was
lately at a Meeting with some Friends, and there he heard them relate things
against me that did grieve his heart, (laying his hand on his breast) which did
smite me; but still the Roaring Lion was ready to act his part, signifying to
me, that I should charge him, and sound him, whether he was not faulty in the
same thing; he replied, he never did pay the Priest a penny, notwithstanding
the Priest (I think) would have received the value of a Pint of Sack; what
then, (said I) have not thou done, as some others have done, given the Jailer a
Bribe to be thy Friend? thus the Enemy did still endeavor to keep me by his
cunning, but the Witness of God in my Conscience he reached, I could not have
any peace, but still was disquieted all that nigh, whilst I was awake, in the
morning I was also troubled, insomuch, that I spoke to my wife, whose love is
great toward me, though not of capacity to determine of many things; the Enemy
caused me to stear a new way, laying before me, and her also, that because she
never had contended for the Truth, therefore she might pay the Priest when the
man come to demand it; this was concluded it should thus be, and this did
minister a false peace, which lasted but a little while; for I hastening to the
Meeting at Devonshire-house, as I was going the Witness of God did awaken me,
and showed me, that I had made a bad mornings work, in making such a conclusion
to pay money to him, when I knew it to be contrary to Truth, and therefore
ought not to have been done; insomuch that I was fain to deal plainly with my
self, the Lord in his Love did appear unto me in his power and might, and
showed me that he was not to be mocked, for such as I sowed, such must I reap;
therefore I found I should not flatter my self any longer, but deal plainly
with my own Soul, that I might not be cheated of the inheritance that is laid
up for all those that love Gods appearance: Then was my hard heart broken,
tears falling from my eyes, and then felt the power of God strong in me, which
did begin to work out the evil thing that was concluded should be carried on in
the Serpents subtilty; there did the Lord work in me just like unto a man that
is removing his household goods, though I had been so traitorous to his Light,
and had cast his counsel behind my back, although he gave me precept upon
precept, and line upon line: Oh, what a God have I, a God full of mercy whose
mercies endures for ever. When the Meeting was over I came home, and as I sat
at dinner with the rest of my Family, I could scarcely for bear weeping, and
fell to admonishing them, bearing my testimony against my self, for being
negligent in the work of the Lord, also did encourage them to go to our
Meeting, and also spoke unto my Wife to go, who soon did submit to my desire,
and did go with me; whilst I was in the Meeting I was very much broken, tears
would have flowed from my eyes, but being among those that knew me, I fled the
cross in that, and did strive very much to forbear, and did all the time of the
meeting with much ado, which did hinder the Lords work which he had begun
afresh in me; but when I came to signify to my wife that I was to go forth,
(along with the Lords people) the garb she was in caused me to be ashamed and
confounded in my self, considering once the hopeful condition that she was in,
which was, she had imparted with her Rings, and plucked of Lace, and laid by
many things; this come to be laid before me, and the Witness for the Lord in
me showed me these things had not been, had I kept faithful to the Lord: So
that this did so work upon me, that though I had resisted the Will of God in
the Meeting, yet when I was coming out of it I could not hold any longer, but
broke forth into tears to the view of some, although I would have hid it. I
could not, but did cry louder then ordinary, and so I continued shedding of
tears as I went along the street, and did strive to hide them from my wife, but
could hardly do it; who is like unto our God, which plucked me as a Brand out
of the Fire? what can I do whereby I may requite his Love? shall not I be given
up in his will to bear my testimony amongst his people, if it be required of
me? yes verily, and shall I sacrifice my self and all that I have unto the Lord
for his Love, which is never to be forgotten; oh, praises and glory be unto him
for ever, and for evermore, who has called me out of Darkness into his
mavelous Light, who did appear unto me in the night, of Darkness, and caused
his Light to shine, in which the power is withessed, in which the victory is
obtained; oh, praises be unto thee my God, who art God of Gods, and Lord of
Lords, who by thy Light, Life and Power did reach unto me in a needful day,
and in a time of trouble; what shall I render unto thee, thanksgiving and
obedience for ever: for thou need not any outward thing that I have;
therefore how shall I answer thy loving kindness? Lord, thou know the
secrets of all hearts, thou know my simplicity, thou know the very end of
my writing it in love to all that have backslidden, to encourage them to return
unto my Father: all that have been Prodigals as well as I, return, I can assure
you, in my Fathers House there is Bread enough, and to spare: I warn all to
return to the Father, who wills not the death of any, but that all might
live; therefore be encouraged whilst it is day, for otherwise the night will
overtake you, when it will be too late; therefore, whilst it is to day hear his
voice, and do not harden your hearts toward to the Lord; why will ye die? I
beseech you, return, put not the day afar off; who knows how short our time
may be here in this World? Seek the Lord while, he may be found, call upon him
whilst he is near; for he has showed us his Servants, that he will not always
strive with man, whom he has given precept upon precept, and line upon line,
here a little, and there a little. Friends all, consider your latter end, and
the length of time that is after we come to lay down the body into the dust:
also consider, that whilst ye do abide here, you have no peace here, but a
false peace, For there is no peace to the wicked says my God: But, ye
Backsliders, I direct my words unto you whom the Lord committed of his hidden
Treasures, whom the World knows not; I say, I direct my words chiefly unto
you, that you might come to answer the Will of the Lord, that so you may come
to have an Inheritance among them that are sanctified; you are often in my
thoughts, a pity does arise in my heart toward you; I beseech you return to
the Light, and walk in the Light, that ye may come to enjoy fellowship with the
children of God; oh, the height, the depth of the Love of God, my tongue cannot
express what is in my heart toward you: return, I beseech you, come to a true
search, do not heal nor cover your selves with false coverings any longer, but
turn your minds inward, and commune with your own hearts, and be still;
separate your selves from those external things, that you may come to inherit a
portion of internal things; that ye may come to enjoy the Crown that is laid up
for all those that fear him: but this is my testimony for the Truth of our God,
that none shall come to enjoy the Crown, but as they come to take up the Cross,
and thy own will deny, and subject it to the Will of God, for that is the way
to obtain a better inheritance then the Kings of the Earth enjoy, which has
not an inheritance that will never fall, a Crown immortal; Earthly Crowns will
fall from the head, but this Heavenly Crown will never fall world without end:
Oh, Friends; do not sell your Crown for a mess of Pottage; do not sell the
Lords Inheritance to Eternity, for an inheritance in the Earth, which none
knows how little while they may enjoy it: Oh, consider, I say again consider,
the Lords Love is to you, the Lord has opened his Treasures of Love unto you
through me his Servant; who am given up in the Will of the Lord to serve him,
and to follow the Lamb whithersoever he leads.

Oh, Lord God of Heaven and Earth, my Soul does praise thee, thy Name is to be
honored by me, who has done great things for me, who was as it were wallowing
in my blood, then did thou appear and showed me, that I was as the Prodigal
was, that had spent his portion upon Harlots in adulterating from the Lord;
also showed me that there was Bread enough in thy House; thou Lord spoke unto
me, to the informing of me, just as a man does his Friend, all but the sound of
the tongue: Oh, what a Father have I, what a God have we that pardons sin and
transgression in us, though we have rebelled and done despite to his Spirit of
Grace in resisting it in its appearance, which would have taught us to have
denied all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to have lived godly and
righteously in this present world: Oh, Lord, thy Love is never to be forgotten;
what shall separate thee from us O Lord? shall tribulation? shall persecution?
nay, Lord, in thee is my strength, thou art my Captain, thou have gathered me
from off the barren Mountains, thou have plucked me out of the horrible pit, out
of the mire and clay, thou have set my feet upon a Rock, thou have established
my goings, this can I say; Lord, thou know the Covenant that I have made
with thee, it is in thy Wisdom I write, and in thy Stength; of my self I cannot
do it; but thou art my chief Captain, thou art my Strength, thou art my
Fortress; therefore I give thee the glory, who is worthy of all thanks, all the
praise for ever.

When thou came unto me as I lay upon my bed, thou did show me that there
was yet a door of Mercy open if I would return, did it not then arise in my
heart, Speak Lord, thy Servant hears; glory be unto thee, who has caused the
Light of thy self to appear in me, who was in bondage to sin, and to the power
of darkness, which is the Devil, who is the God of the World, and rules in the
children of disobedience; praises be unto thee whose presence is with me, who
art my Strength, and do put me upon this great work, which is of weighty
concernment; for there he many Gazers at me, and us, who are wise in the
comprehending part; they would be glad to have me to write my own words; but I
am in the Will of my God, who is my Guide, who leads me into all Truth; not
to write any thing that is in my own will, but what I do is in the will of the
Lord; insomuch, that the mouths of some will be stopped, which otherwise would
be apt to say I did it in my own will, to be seen of men; but the Lord knows
my heart; I have no reservation at all in my mind, but that my God may be
glorified, and my Soul comforted and strengthened, that I may never grow faint
or weary, but still press forward toward the mark which is set before me, which
is the end of Gods calling me out of darkness into his mavelous Light; and
this does arise in my heart, that whither soever these lines may come, which
were written in the fear of the Lord, and in obedience unto his Name, that they
be not read in a mind that is filled with prejudice, let all of that be
removed, as it is out of me at the writing hereof; the Lords Love is raised in
me, which does cause me to write, to inform all, that there is yet a day of
mercy held forth for all that will come out from among those that are resisting
the Counsel of the Lord, yea, those that resists his Will, and are doing the
will of the Devil. I bear my Testimony for the Lord, there is yet a day of
mercy, If you will return unto him, he will return unto you, and he will heal
your backslidings, and remember your sins no more: Therefore be encouraged, for
I was as bad as some of you, yet the Lord has appeared to me by his Light,
which never consents to sin, this, as is heeded and obeyed, it will lead unto
the Father; For none comes unto the Father but by the Son, who is the Way, the
Truth and the Life; nor does any come unto the Son but whom the Father draws;
So in love to all have I took my pen in hand, who am of my self altogether
insufficient; but God has has hid those things from the wise and prudent, and
has revealed them to Babes and Sucklings, that his Name may be glorified, and
your Souls comforted for ever; praises be unto my God for ever and for ever,
world without end, Amen says my Soul. And by me this is written in the
simplicity of my heart, without any self end, the Lord knows my heart;
therefore let all be careful of speaking evil of what they know not, lest in
so doing they should offend: This being all I find of necessity to write at
this time, I rest in the Love of my Father, who has in measure begotten me
again unto himself, and has caused me to make a covenant with him, never to
leave him, but to follow him through good report, and through evil report,
knowing that I shall reap if I faint not; for it is they that endure to the end
that shall be saved.

This in pure love to all who are yet resisting the Light in their Consciences,
to warn them to return, whilst it is day, for it is to day if you will hear the
Lords voice in you, harden not your hearts, as they did in the old World, who
lived in pleasure, marrying, and giving in marriage till the Flood came and
swept them away, all but No^ah and eight persons, as the Scriptures of Truth
does declare. Oh, Father, who is sufficient for these things, I could not do
this without thy Presence, without thy Counsel, without thy assistance; Lord,
take thou the glory, who art worthy of all, (and none besides thee) of all
praises and thanksgiving now and for evermore, Amen.

Written in the true fear of the Lord, by me his Servant, Anthony Tompkins.
The 2d day of the 11th Month, 68.
THE END.

