A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Celebrated Secret OF Mr. TIMOTHY BEAGHAN, lately Killed
at the Five Bells Tavern in the Strand, Famous for Curing the KING'S EVIL.

IN A LETTER TO Mr. William Cowper, Surgeon.

BY MAURICE TOBIN, Apothecary, near the Savoy in the Strand.

London, Printed for the Author, 1697.

A LETTER TO Mr. William Cowper, Surgeon; ABOUT An Effectual Method for Curing
all Scrophulous Diseases, commonly called the KING'S EVIL.
SIR,
YOU will doubtless agree with the rest of the World, that among all the
Diseases within the Sphere of Physic and Surgery, there is not one in which
Physicians and Surgeons have taken more Pains, and have had less Success
than in Curing the King's Evil: For this Disease has been hitherto reckon^d by
Natural Means so Uncurable, that it was thought nothing but a Supernatural
Virtue granted to Kings from Heaven could entirely Cure it, by laying their
Hands upon the Scrophulous Persons; It does not belong to me to dispute whether
even the Hands of Monarchs can Cure this Stubborn Distemper, but I am convinced
by several Experiences, as you your self and Hundreds of other People in this
City know very well, that Mr. Timothy Beaghan, killed of late at the Five Bells
Tavern in the Strand, had almost an effectual Method to Cure this Disease;
which was a Diet Drink and Pills, with the Manual Operation when there was room
for Surgery in the Case. This Secret I have my self now, and do intend to make
the same use of it as he did, knowing already that it has and will have the
same Effect: but to convince your self and the rest of the World of the
Efficacy of these Medicines, and of the Certainty that they are in my
Possession, I thought it necessary to acquaint you how Mr. Beaghan himself got
it, how he came into Reputation and Practice, what remarkable Cures he has
performed, and how he came to communicate his Secret to me.

Mr. Beaghan was bred a Soldier, and was for several Years heretofore a
Sergeant in the Earl of Litchfeild's Regiment, wherein he lost his Leg, for
which he carried a wooden Leg; His Wife had this Secret first, and she lived of
it; Dr. Horneck, of the Savoy, lately deceased, recommended her to several
Persons Infected with the King's Evil; she did work great Cures, and died about
Nine Years ago, and left her Secret to her Husband. Mr. Beaghan being disabled,
and made incapable to serve by the loss of one of his Legs, and being
consequently reduced to great Extremities, he undertook to make use of this
Secret for his Livelihood; But having no Experience in the Secret, no Skill in
Medicines, nor in their Preparations, and not knowing by sight the very Drugs
he was to make use of, and being besides too poor and despicable to be
believed, or to be thought capable to Cure such intricate Diseases; he came to
me about Seven Years ago, and acquainted me of the Misery he was in, and of the
goodness of his Secret; he desired me, since he could not be Credited himself,
to recommend him to any Persons, Rich or Poor, that had the King's Evil, and he
would infallibly Cure them, for any Gratuity they would be pleased to give him.
Suspecting the good Success he promised with such assurance, I was very
backward and cautious to recommend him to any of my Acquaintance, for fear by
any ill Management I should be blamed, and reflected upon for recommending a
Man so illiterate; knowing besides that most Secrets are violent Medicines,
which disturb the Humors, and disorder the whole Economy of the Body:
Notwithstanding, pitying the poor Man's Condition, I promised him if he showed
me his Receipt, and if I found nothing in it Pernicious, I would do him all the
Service I could (my own Reputation being safe;) And I assured him at the same
time, that I would not whilst he lived make any use of his Secret my self, nor
disclose the same to any Body else. And accordingly he showed me his Receipt of
the Pills and Diet Drink, of which I took a Copy, and finding nothing in them
dangerous, but rather a very exact Proportion of wholesome Ingredients, I
recommended him to several; I bought the Drugs for him, and put him into a
Method, little expecting the wonderful Effects which those Medicines wrought
afterward; for I was surprised to see Ulcers and Fistula's healed, most
obstinate Tumors dissolved, the Mass of Blood sweetened and rectified, corroded
Bones cleansed and made sound, little Scrophulous Children, all Emaciated and
at Death's door, miraculously Recovered, and such Incredible Cures performed of
the King's Evil, that this poor Soldier got in a small time a vast Reputation,
as well as a great deal of Money, and the People styled him Doctor. And to
satisfy you that he has done unexpected things, I thought fit to let you know
the Names of some of the Persons he Cured of the King's Evil, as Mrs Lowfield
on Ludgate Hill, Mr. Bridger's Daughter and Son in Durham-Yard, Mr. Hornby's
Child in Lombard street, Mr. Hunt of Worcestershire, Mr. Goulding's Child of
Clare-Market, Mr. Edmond's Daughter of London, My Lord Dundonnell the Earl of
Arran's Nephew, Sir Michael Cole's Child in Pallmall, Mr. Dewy of Greenwich,
and many others, which would be too tedious to relate. Since therefore, Sir,
Mr. Beaghan is now Dead, and since I was instrumental to bring him into
Business, and did him no Prejudice while he lived, I think I have Reason enough
and Right to turn this Secret communicated to me to my own Advantage, as well
as to that of the Public; yet that the College of Physicians, for which I have
a great deal of Respect and Veneration, should not think that I intend to do
more than becomes an Apothecary of the Hall, I thought it necessary to
communicate this Secret to some Discreet and Skilful Doctor of the said
College, that would have Judgment enough not only to manage safely these
Medicines in all the dangerous Symptoms of the King's Evil, but likewise to
improve it further for the Benefit of the Public; Wherefore Doctor Connor,
Fellow of the Royal Society, and one of the College of Physicians, being an
expert Anatomist, and well versed in Medicines, and in the Practice of Physic,
and having Experience my self of his Skill in Curing often Intricate Diseases,
I have communicated this Secret to him, and desired him to appear in it; He
liked mightily the Ingredients, the nice Proportion, and the exact Composition
of the Pills and Diet-Drink; but he desired, before he would appear, to be
further convinced that these were the very same, and the only Ingredients the
Deceased made use of; Wherefore, to satisfy the Doctor, I went to Mr. Head, a
Druggist in the Strand, near Bull-Inn-Court, who was the only Person Mr.
Beaghan bought his Drugs of these several Years; and Mr. Head will justify
that the Drugs in my Receipt are the very same which Mr. Beaghan used to buy of
him, and I my self have a Note under Mr. Beaghan's Hand to confirm the same: To
convince the Doctor further, I made some Bottles of the Diet Drink, and sent
them to some of Mr. Beaghan's Patients, namely to Mrs Lowfield, who Certifies
it has the same Taste and the same Effect with her as it used to have in the
Deceased's life time. The Doctor also drank a Bottle thereof, and I drank
another my self, and we found it very agreeable. Seeing therefore it is
undeniable and certain, both by Experience and Reason, that this was the very
same Method the Deceased followed in Curing the King's Evil, I thought fit in
this Letter to acquaint the Public as well as your self, that all Persons
Infested with the King's Evil, may repair to Doctor Connor in Bowstreet for his
Advice, for I will do nothing without his Direction in those intricate
Scrophulous Diseases, he being a proper Judge of the different Constitutions of
Mankind; also when convenient to to call in a Surgeon for outward
Applications: For my part I will make it my Business, that what relates to me,
I mean the making up of the Medicines thus prescribed, shall be performed with
such Care and Watchfulness as will be for the Doctor's Reputation and mine, as
well as for the Benefit of the Public. Excuse, Sir, my Trouble and
Tediousness, and believe me,

Your very Obedient Humble Servant, Maurice Tobin.
London, the 25 th of August, 1697. From the Three Black Lions in the Strand,
near Dutchy-lane.

