THE Modern Pleas FOR COMPREHENSION, TOLERATION, AND The taking away the
Obligation to the Renouncing of the COVENANT, Considered and Discussed.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty. MDCLXXV.

A SCHEME OF THE CONTENTS.
How little Cause our Dissenters have, either for Separation or Alteration page
1, 4. An Account of the Design of a Book entitled, Of the Religion of England
p. 4 The Design of it inconsistent and unpracticable p. 7, 9 The Terms of
Communion, which the Church of England imposes, are not sinful in the opinion
of the most learned among the Dissenters p. 11 There is no sinfulness objected
by them as to the 1. Articles p. 15 2. Liturgy p. 17 3. Canons or Ceremonies p.
23 It is no sufficient objection against our Ceremonies, that they are not by
God commanded p. 25 Nor, that they are significant p. 26 Nor, that they grieve
a pievish sort of men p. 29
There is no sinfulness, in that the Church imposes new Bonds and Terms of
Communion p. 36 Of the Assent and Consent ibid. Of renouncing the Covenant p.
40 Certain Articles of the Covenant, that make it dangerous not to be renounced
p. 41 Artic. 1. p. 42 Artic. 2. p. 45 Artic. 3. p. 48 Artic. 4. p. 56 Artic. 5.
p. 59 Artic. 6. p. 61 Of the Conclusion of it p. 63
An Instance in a known Presbyterian who did renounce publicly the Covenant,
as to the most meritorious part of it, voluntarily, long before the Kings
Restoration p. 69 How it comes to pass, that the Presbyterians and other
Dissenters, whose Opinions and Pleas are mutually so inconsistent, do agree in
their clamours for Liberty of Conscience p. 72 They themselves cannot agree,
what Liberty of Conscience is, and what are its true bounds p. 74 Of
Comprehension, and how little will be gained by granting it p. 77 Of unlimited
Toleration p. 78 The Dissenters own Testimony against Toleration p. 81 Of
Comprehension without Toleration p. 92, 135 What the Presbyterians ought to do
before they be admitted into the Church by Comprehension p. 94, 140, 178 What
shall be done with the private man's Conscience, when it is inconsistent with
that which the Conscience of the Governor dictates, whether of the two shall
overruled p. 98 Religion has very great influence upon the Peace of any
Government. 101 Magistrates, not alone in point of Interest but Conscience, are
to have great care of Religion. p. 102 Objections and Authorities against this,
answered. p. 105 Of the use of force in propagating Religion. p. 107 Of that
Text, 2 Cor. 10. The Weapons of our Warfate are not carnal. ibid. That
Objection, Force may not be used in pulling down Antichrist, therefore not in
propagating Religion, retorted. p. 109 Of the Argument drawn from the Example
of the Kings of Israel or Judah. p. 112 Testimonies out of Scripture for the
Magistrates Authority in using force for the propagating Religion. p. 104, 105
The Apostles when they were brought to to answer before the Governors of that
time, did not deny their Authority. p. 118 Universal Toleration contrary to
Scripture. p. 121 The Magistrate by becoming Christian, if he has no addition,
has yet no diminution of his power. p. 131 Of that smalness of Difference,
that is pretended between us and the Presbyterians. p. 136 A Comparison between
the Severities used now against the Covenant, and those used by them in
imposing it p. 142 How far they approve of Episcopacy and Liturgy p. 144 The
Inconveniences that attend Liberty of Conscience p. 146 How much Toleration is
better than Comprehension p. 149 Conscience absolutely taken, no safe Rule
either of Actions or Tenets. p. 152 Of the Mischiefs Liberty of Conscience is
like to bring to Religion p. 153 Of new Light p. 159 Government p. 162 By what
means this Liberty is dangerous to Government p. 166
The private Consciences of men are not ordinarily trusted in their common
dealings p. 169 What ends they propose to themselves, that promote Liberty of
Conscience p. 177 Their unwillingness to renounce the Covenant, shows how
little they repent of it p. 180 Objections answered p. 183 taken from their 1.
Number Ibid. 2. Merit p. 189 3. Assistance against Popery p. 190 4. Their
hindering Trade p. 196 5. France and Holland have good experience of it. p. 218
6. Civil Penalties in Religion, make men Hypocrites p. 232
An Apostrophe to the Dissenting Brethren p. 235 A Postscript p. 247
ERRATA.
Page 71. line 25. for what may the meaning, r. what may be the meaning, p.
120. l. 14. for into his, r. in this.

CONSIDERATIONS Concerning Comprehension, Toleration, AND THE Renouncing the
COVENANT.
HE who endeavors to make any Alteration in a settled Government either of
Church or State, is obliged by all the Rules of Justice and of Prudence to
allege some very good cause, why it is that he does do so; Alteration being in
it self so great an Inconvenience, as that it ought not by any means to be
attempted, but for some weighty Reason.

Now as to the Church, as it is by Law established (not withstanding all the
fearful Outcries which of late have been made against it) I would fain have any
of our Dissenting Brethren to answer directly, Whether there be any one thing
sinful in her Communion, or only some things (as they conceive) inexpedient? If
only inexpedient (as there is good cause to believe, that the most considerable
Persons, and those in no small numbers among them, do suppose no more) then I
would fain know, whether inexpediency alone is a sufficient and just cause of
Separation? And how well soever any particular man among them may think of the
Grounds of his own Separation; there is very good evidence, that there are
abundance among themselves who do plainly perceive, and much lament it, that by
the means of this present Separation, there has been an entrance made for such
Doctrines and Practices into this Nation, which are chargeable with (to phrase
it modestly) the very highest degrees of inexpediency. When the rule and
measures of inexpediency are well considered of, and regard is had to that
great variety of Respects in which one and the same thing may be both expedient
and inexpedient; it will then be found, that inexpediency is a thing, which
private persons cannot easily determine, indeed are no competent Judges of:
Besides if it were a clear case, that in the present settlement there were
something not altogether so expedient as were to be wished: Is this a
sufficient warrant for any not only to mislike so much of the Law as they think
capable of being mended, but withal openly and avowedly to separate, to unite
and join in great Combinations against the Public Constitutions, only because
they are not arrived, in their esteem, at all possible degrees of perfection?
He who can submit to no Law but such a one as is exactly made to his own mind
in all particulars, must resolve, for any thing I know, never to obey, as long
as he lives, any Law which is not of his own making; and not only so, but he
will find that he must not obey many Laws of his own making for any long time
neither: If therefore a supposed inexpediency be the utmost of the charge, as I
suppose in the end it will appear to be, then all wise men should consider with
themselves, Whether any fancied Alteration can be secure from equal, if not
greater dangers? And before that any such Alteration be made, it seems to be
but just and equal that the New Model be agreed upon by those who do design it,
and that it be proposed either to our Governors, or to the public view, that
it may be examined, before admitted; and seeing that it is to be of lasting
Consequence, it is to be hoped that it will not be too hastily concluded upon.

A late ingenious Person set forth an handsome Discourse upon this Argument,
entitled, Of the Religion of England, asserting, that Reformed Christianity
settled in its due Latitude is the Stability and Advancement of this Kingdom.
Wherein he has attempted something like a Model of a future Settlement; his
Discourse is plausible, and desires seem to be bent on Peace, and many of his
Principles look as if they did seem to tend much that way, but there seems to
be this one thing very observable in his whole way of Writing, that with great
Art he does very dexterously take care not to come too close up to the
Argument, and he brings his Reader even to the very Point where the business
lies, and almost unperceivably steals by and passes on to something else; and
to a narrow view it will appear plainly, that he keeps himself within the
compass of such wide Generalities, that he leaves the Reader in the same
uncertainties in which he found him. The Draught of his Design is to be seen,
Sect. 14. page 28. which does consist in these three Contrivances. First, That
there is to be an established and approved Order: But, because that this alone
he finds not to be sufficient; therefore in the second place, there is to be a
Provision for a sort of men who cannot come within the establishment, and they
are to be tolerated under certain Restrictions: Nor is this all; for neither
the establishment alone is sufficient, neither will a Toleration of Dissenters
from it suffice; and therefore in the third place, there are another sort of
men, who must be only connived at. Each of these Particulars are afterward
considered: The establishment has the honor of the first place, and has, as
it well deserves, incomparably the greatest part of the pains bestowed upon it,
and of this he tells us, Sect. 15. That it must not be loose and in^^herent,
but well compacted, that it may attain the ends of Discipline, which are to
promote sound Doctrine and Godly Life, and keep out Idolatry, Superstition, and
all wicked Error and Practice that tends to the vanquishing of the power of
Christianity: Now these things do not require a constitution of narrower bounds
than things necessary to Christian Faith and Life, and godly Order in the
Church,

Now is it not very plain, that such a Comprehension as is here described, that
it shall be enabled to attain all these great and public ends here provided
for, has left no place for Toleration or Connivance? and accordingly both
those things are hudled together, and in a very few words dispatched, Sect. 18.
page 38. I shall lay them down and leave the Reader to judge upon them: As for
others that are of sound Belief and good Life, yet have taken in some
Principles less congruous to National Settlement, I would never be a means of
exposing them to oppression, Contempt and Hatred, but would admit their Plea as
far as it will go, etc. Nevertheless, their Liberty pleaded for is not to be
inordinate but measured and limited by the safety of true Religion in general,
and of the public and established Order, etc.

And now I shall take leave to desire those Persons, who cannot come within the
Comprehension, to consider with themselves, how very little they are beholding
to this their Advocate; he has not in the least intimated to us what kind of
Principles those are which he would have connived at, as being only less
congruous to a National Settlement; nor given us any manner of mark whereby to
know them: Besides, whatever Favor he does intend for these dissenting
Brethren, he has so clogged it with many Qualifications and Limitations, that
he has rendered it so plainly useless, that I much doubt whether he did ever
really intend them any favor at all. First, They must be of sound Belief and
good Life, Secondly, Their Plea must be admitted as far as it will go; Now how
far that is he has not told us: Thirdly, Their Liberty must not be inordinate,
but must have two measures; First, The safety of Religion in general: Secondly,
The safety of the public established Order. Upon these Terms, and upon the
whole matter, I think, that it is no easier a thing to understand the Nature
and Bounds of that Settlement which our Author is here designing, by the
placing of several sorts of men in the three Ranks of, First, an establishment;
Secondly, a Toleration; and thirdly, a Connivance, with this Reason, for the
two latter; For if God has received them, why should their fellow servants
reject or afflict them causlesly? Every true Christian should be tender of all
that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity; I understand, I say, as little by all
this, what those Particulars are which he would have from us, as if he had
contented himself with Mr. Sterry's three Forms of Believers; and methinks the
one Harangue is as edifying and intelligible as the other: Let us receive one
another into the Glory of God, as Christ receives us, though that clothing of
the outward form be not on the same fashion in all, nor on some so well shaped
as on others, to the proportion of the Body, which is Christ. The Lord Jesus
has his Concubines, his Queens, his Virgins; Saints in remoter jorms, Saints
in higher forms, Saints unmarried to any Form, who keep themselves single for
the immediate embraces of their Love, in his Epistle before England's
Deliverance from the Northern Presbytery.

Now In these two Gentlemen of very differing Dispensations, there are three
sorts of People proposed to our Care, and it is not unlikely that they may be
suited each to one another: But this one thing is remarkable in that Discourse
of Mr. Sterry, that the Presbyterians can, at the very best, hope for no higher
Rank than that of Christ's Concubines, as being according to the tenor of that
Sermon, if at all Saints, at the very best, Saints in the remoter Forms. The
more moderate sort of Independents may indeed by him be accounted Queens, as
being Saints in higher forms, but for Christ's Virgins, who are unmarried to
any form, and keep themselves single for the immediate embraces of their love;
I cannot imagine who these should be, unless those Saints who are above
Ordinances: And for my own part, I must freely profess, that for all the
account which our Author has given us of his three Contrivances of
Comprehension, Toleration and Connivance, I cannot at all perceive but that Mr.
Sterry's way of sorting out the several Ranks of Saints, does well suit with,
and is proportioned to it: And here let any sober man judge, whether the
Settlement pretended for in the first of these three Proposals be not
absolutely unsettled again in the two other.

But in the next place I must go on to consider a Pretense, much oftener
supposed than owned, and that is this; Suppose that the Terms of the Communion
of the Church are not only inexpedient, but really sinful; if so, then I shall
readily grant, that the Church ought not to be communicated with, while the
Terms of her Communion are such. But in this part of the Argument I shall
presume to say with some confidence, and I hope without offense, that however
the Teachers of the separated Congregations may sometimes slily insinuate some
such Jealousies into the Heads of their unwary Hearers; yet it is not easy to
find a considerable man amongthem, who will not be ashamed to own it publicly,
or who does himself really believe it.

Now though this Assertion may seem to carry something of uncharitableness in
it; because that the Separation from the Church is so avowed and pressed upon
the People, as if that it were highly necessary, and that Communion with the
Church was highly criminal* at least in the Opinion of the Teachers. It being a
plain case that the People are wheedled into Separation, upon the account that
they suppose their Teachers know it to be unlawful: Now as to this, I must
needs say, it is shrewdly to be suspected, that there is in this case a very
great Cheat imposed by the Preachers and the People upon one another, and by
both upon the whole Nation; because that it is as often evident as there is
occasion for making it so, that among the Pastors and the Flock there are not
many, who in a time of Trial approve themselves to be in good earnest; I have
been credibly informed (not to say that I am able to make it good) that Mr.
Calamy did before His Majesty, and diverse Lords of the Council profess, that
there was not any thing in the Constitutions of the Church to which he could
not conform, were it not for the scandalizing of others; so that in his Esteem
the Constitutions of the Church were in themselves Innocent, and the whole
Objection against them lay in the mistakes of other men. Mr. Tombs the Leader
of the Anabaptists, has writ a Book to show the lawfulness of resorting to the
Public Congregations. The Author which I before mentioned assures us in behalf
of the Presbyterians, that they not only maintain the Doctrine of the Church of
England, but likewise communicate in her Public Worship, in his second
Discourse of the Religion of England, page 17. By which acknowledgment we may
take an estimate of the Honesty of their Separation.

Nay, I shall venture to say thus much farther, that the lawfulness of joining
in the Public Worship is understood by the Layety as well as Clergy amongst
them, is evident from these three Things: First, that there are those Persons
to be named, who came to Church before the Act of Oblivion, who never did
since: Secondly, that immediately after the Act of Uniformity, whilst the Hopes
of Toleration were very uncertain, there was a much greater Conformity both in
the City of London, and over the whole Nation than ever has been since:
Thirdly, that I have enquired and could never learn that there was so much as
one example to be given of any one of all the Patrons or Proselytes of the
Conventicles who did leave the smallest Office whatever, rather than he would,
in obedience to a late Act of Parliament, join in the Prayers and receive the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper according to the Order of the Church of England:
From which it does appear plainly, that in these men's esteem, either there is
no sin in communicating with the Church of England, or else, that these
Gentlemen of so extremely tender Consciences, can deliberately commit a sin,
and that when they are performing the most solemn Act of Adoration of Almighty
God, and with all the shows of Devotion imaginable: And seeing that these
things are so, is it not huge pity that a settled Church, and a Church in great
Reputation over all the Reformed Parts of Christendom, should be run down by a
mere noise of Conscience, when it is very plain that when ever there is a real
Case put, where Conscience ought to show it self, that then no such thing
appears, neither is there the least evidence that it is so much as thought upon.

If there be any Objection against the present Constitution; it must be either
against the Articles, the Liturgy, the Canons or the Ceremonies; As to the
Articles, there is scarce so much as one Objection pretended against them,
farther than as they relate to the following Heads; and if there were, such an
Objection could not easily be alleged by the People as a just excuse for
their Nonconformity, because they are not at all concerned for to subscribe
them, unless they bring upon themselves a voluntary Obligation by some Act of
their own, as taking a Degree in the University: But in this Point many words
are needless; for besides the Testimony of all Churches abroad, we have at home
two Witnesses beyond all exception to the Innocence and Honor of the Articles,
even the two late celebrated Advocates, the one for Comprehension, the other
for Toleration: The former assures us in the behalf of those whose Cause he
pleads, that they do receive the Doctrine of Faith contained in the Articles of
Religion, page 2. and again page 22. That they heartily embrace the English
Reformation established by Law, etc. and that they do assent to the Doctrine of
Faith contained in the Articles of the Church of England, and worship God
according to that Faith, page 22. The Peace Offering does likewise bear witness
for us of that great esteem which is bore unto the Articles of the Church of
England in all the Reformed Churches abroad, and withal does assure us in
behalf of the Independents at home, that as to all which is purely doctrinal in
them they do fully embrace and constantly adhere to, etc. And accordingly he
undertakes to profess in the name of them all; We have no new Faith to declare,
no new Doctrine to teach, no private Opinion to divulge, no Point or Truth do
we profess, no not one, which has not been declared, taught, divulged and
esteemed as the common Doctrine of the Church of England, ever since the
Reformation, page 13.

Thus far therefore our way is clear, that the Doctrine of the Church is sound
and esteemed to be so in the Opinion of its greatest Adversaries. In the next
place therefore we are to consider, whether any reasonable Plea for Separation
can be drawn from any just Exception which may be taken against the Liturgy;
and here there are two sorts of men to be considered: First, those who dislike
all Forms of Prayer in general: Secondly, those who are only disgusted at some
particular things in ours.

As to those who are against all Forms of Prayer; I believe that the number of
them, among considering Persons, is not so great, as that any great regard
ought to be had unto them; and this must needs be so, for a reason which can
never fail; For it cannot choose but seem strangely absurd and infinitely
unbecoming the great distance which is between us and Almighty God, and that
great awe which we ought to bear unto him; that all the Expressions of the
Public Devotion of every Congregation in the whole Nation should be left to
the arbitrary, and especially the extemporary conception of each single Person,
who is bold enough to venture upon the taking so much upon him. It were very
strange if this Kingdom should at this day be ignorant, how very frequently
Folly, Heresy, nay and Blasphemy, has been uttered in such kind of Prayers;
and it is utterly impossible, that upon the indulgence of any such Liberty,
such Extravagancies, can with any security be provided against; And it is not
unlikely that the greatest Pretenders to the highest Seize in that way
would be not a little out of Countenance; If so be that their own Prayers were
faithfully taken from their Mouths, and after some reasonable space of time,
when they might be supposed to have forgot them, presented to their view. And
that which renders this evil utterly intolerable, is this, that these Prayers
which either really are extemporary else only pretended to be so) are under
that pretense recommended and regarded by the People as the only way of praying
by the Spirit; and by that very means the ever blessed Spirit is, as far as
these men's endeavors can be succesful, entitled to all the Follies, Vanity,
and Weaknesses, all the Sin and Error, and even those very Blasphemies which
are every day committed against him. And I think all good Christians are
concerned to endeavor, that if a Liberty must be given to these Persons to go
on and to abuse the People, yet however that it may be done some other way, and
they not permitted to belly the Holy Ghost.

As for Forms of Prayers, the great reasonableness and even necessity of them
is very apparent, and in Scripture it self there are Examples enough to be
produced; and if any man pleases to enter upon that Argument, I no way doubt
but there will be those found who will debate it with him. It shall suffice at
present only to say, that our Savior Christ did compose a Form of Prayer, and
gave it to his Disciples to use: Now if, as great numbers of the People are
brought to believe, that there is no praying by the Spirit, besides praying Ex
tempore, then no man ever did, or ever could say Christ's Prayer by the Spirit
of Christ.

Now, as to the other sort of Persons, who have some exceptions against some
expressions in our Liturgy; those things have been so fully examined, that of
late we have heard very little of them: And the matter of it is all along so
clearly unexceptionable, and so fitted for the common use of all Christians,
that all controversial Expressions were designedly avoided: Insomuch that I do
not know of any considerable Sect amongst us which may not join with us in
every expression in it, except the Socinians. Now here perhaps some Jealousies
may arise in the minds of men, that if there were not some real exception
against the Liturgy, then so many good Teachers would not lay it aside; nay,
and not only so, but, as far as men's Intentions can be guessed at by their
words and actions, very much abhor it.

Now, as to the behavior of our dissenting Brethren in this particular, I
shall desire their admirers to remember this one thing, that His Majesty not
long after His Happy Restoration did put ^orth a Declaration concerning
Ecclesiastical Affairs, wherein He did very graciously indulge, much to the
dissatisfied Part of the Clergy, in hopes thereby to win upon them; and in that
Declaration He did propose this unto them, as a way whereby they might show
their Gratitude for so great a Condescension, That they would read so much of
the Liturgy as themselves had no exception against: But with many of them He
could not prevail for so much as one Syllable, not one Collect, no nor so much
as one Chapter according to the Rubric; So much does yielding work upon that
good-natured Generation. Now whether this Refractoriness, as to the whole Book,
and every part and parcel of it, could possibly proceed solely and altogether
from Conscience, and not very much, if not altogether, from Design or Humor,
let their best Friends speak.

In the next place, now as to the Canons, I do not know that there does or
can^ly any Objection against them which our present Debate is concerned about;
because they are no immediate Parts of the Public Worship, and therefore can
be no cause of the present Separation, especially as to the People. As to the
Canons made in the year 1640. I must needs confess, that the Scotch
Commissioners did complain much against them, and some English Gentlemen made
witty Speeches upon them; but they had both of them the ill luck to confess the
real cause of the Pique which they had against them, viz. The acknowledgement
of His Majesty's Authority as being Independent, and above all Coercion, either
Papal or Popular. A Doctrine which I must needs say was very inconsistent with
those Designs which those angry Patriots were at that time carrying on. And I
am very much mistaken if, at this very day, a great part of that Quarrel which
is taken up against the Church be not founded upon this, that it is too
faithfully devoted to the Interests of the Crown; and that many Persons are
Presbyterians, Independents, Fifth-Monarchy-men, etc. as so many sanctified
disguises under which they act the Part of Common-wealths-men.

In the next place come we therefore to the Ceremonies; and there indeed the
noise is very great. An Excellent Person, who for his pious labors upon a
noble Argument, and much more worthy of his Pen, deserves much honor, has in
this part of the Question expressed much more Concern, than, I hope, himself upon
a serious review will admit the Cause to bear, in a Book entitled, Liberty of
Conscience upon its true and proper Grounds asserted and vindicated, etc. has
thus expressed himself, p. 49. How may we lament over the present Imposition of
the Ceremonies now enjoined among us in England, which are no part of divine
Truth, nor any of Christ's Institutions, but things perfectly Humane in their
Creation; and yet are enforced by the Civil Power upon the Practice and
Consciences of men. Now here, with all due respect to that Learned Gentleman, I
shall desire him to take notice, whether it be not an Excellency and a Felicity
almost peculiar to the Church of England, that in all her Constitutions, her
greatest Adversaries are forced to betake themselves to the scanning of a few
Ceremonies, to find a cause, or, to speak more properly, a show of
Controversy; and that himself in his own great Judgment has not been able to
find out any other flaw in the Matter of all her Laws, as much soever as he
does mislike the Imposition of them. As for the Cermonies themselves, the
Exceptions, or at least the Clamours are very many; That they are uncommanded
by God; that they are significant; that they are Will Worship; that they are
teaching for Doctrines of God the Commandments of men; and lastly, that they do
give scandal.

As to the Ceremonies being uncommanded by God, I never heard of any man who
pretended them to be otherwise; and therefore it is most clear and certain,
that that Church does not teach for Doctrines of God the Commandments of Men,
which does own publicly, that these are not the Doctrines of God, but only the
Commandments of Man: And if any man does mistake in this Case, which is a thing
incredible that any should do so; but if there be such a one, I am sure that
the mistake is his own and not the fault of the Church: For she has taken care
to prevent it, in the Chapter of Ceremonies before the Common Prayers, wherein
she declares that the Ceremonies which are retained, are retained for
Discipline and Order, which upon just Cause may be altered and changed, and
therefore are not to be esteemed equal with Gods Law. But however, this is
plain in the nature of things, that although among the Ceremonies no one in
particular is necessary, yet in general it is necessary, so far as Order and
Decency is necessary, that some such there should be.

But in the next place there is an Objection, supposed to be of much greater
force, and that is this; That the Ceremonies are significant: And here I must
needs confess, that if they could have alleged, that the Ceremonies had been
insignificant, the Objection had been much more worthy of having some notice
taken of it; because that the very nature and whole use of Ceremonies does
consist in being significant. And in this I appeal to all Mankind, whether in
any one Action Sacred or Civil, any one Ceremony was ever instituted, unless it
were in order to the signifying, denoting or expressing something by it. Nor is
thisall; for the Church has taken care not only to vindicate the Innocence,
but withal to declare the usefulness of the significancy of her Ceremonies in
the forementioned Preface; That they are neither dark nor dumb Ceremonies, but
are so set forth that every man may understand what they mean and to what use
they do serve: so that it is not like that in time to come they should be
abused.

And after all this, methinks, our Brethren of the Presbytery should for their
own sakes have had a great care of making use of this Objection, as being
themselves as liable to it as any other Persons. The Authors of the Admonition
to the Parliament in Queen Elizabeth's days, Part 2. have recommended Sitting at
the Sacrament, upon this very superstitious score of Significancy (as in our
Case they always call it) in these words: As in the Old Testament eating the
Paschal Lamb standing, signified a readiness to pass; even so in the receiving
it now sitting, after the example of Christ, we signify Rest, that is, a full
finishing thorough Christ of all the Ceremonial Law, and a perfect Work of
Redemption wrought, that gives rest for ever.

And in our own days, in that which by them was looked upon as a considerable
Act of Divine Worship and Religious Adoration, the entering into a Public
Solemn National Covenant with Almighty God, as they phrase it: The doing of
this was prescribed with several Ceremonies uncommanded in Scripture, and by
themselves intended to be very significant; as it to be found by every one who
pleases to look in the Ordinance of Febr. 2. 1643. In this Case without
referring us to any Book, Chapter, or Verse; they thought it sufficient to say,
That it is ordered and ordained by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that
the said Covenant be solemnly taken in all places, and for the better and more
orderly taking thereof, that these Directions ensuing are appointed and
enjoined to be strictly followed: Of which Directions the thirteenth is this,
the manner of taking it to be thus; The Minister to read the whole Covenant
distinctly and audibly in the Pulpit, and during the time of reading thereof
the whole Congregation to be uncovered (which by the way is a much greater show
of Reverence than they have taken care for, either at the reading of the Ten
Commandments, or our Savior's Sermon upon the Mount) and at the end of
reading thereof all to take it standing, lifting up their Right Hand bare. Now
I think that it is highly requisite for these men to consider with themselves,
whether every one of all their own Pleas of the Purity and Simplicity of the
Gospel way of Worship without the mixture of humane Inventions, and their bold
surmises of invading the Throne of Christ by determining those things which
Christ has left free, have any the least force against the Ceremonies of the
Church, which they have not against this prescribed Formality of their own, in
taking the Covenant.

But after all which is possible to be said in order to the clearing of the
mistakes about the Ceremonies, there is an Objection which is supposed not to
be capable of any answer to be made unto it; and that is this, That be they
what they will in themselves, good men are offended at them, they grieve
thousands of the Godly Brethren, and though we should grant such men to be
mistaken, yet we must not offend our weak Brethren.

The Case of Scandal has been so often and so clearly stated, that I shall say
the less upon it; and therefore, instead of the Argument, I shall rather choose
to say something to the Persons who use it. In the first place I shall readily
grant, that if any Persons are really offended at the use of the Ceremonies, in
their own way of understanding that word, they must needs be very weak
Brethren, and I shall only ask them the old Question, How long they will be
weak? And I shall profess my self to have no very honorable Opinion of the
means of Knowledge, the Opportunities of choice Seize which are to be had
in the Conventicles: If so be that those, who are such weak Brethren as not to
be got above such silly Scruples, are looked upon to be sufficiently gifted to
be Public Teachers amongst them.

In the next place I shall ask, who taught the People to be offended at a few
harmless Ceremonies? Who raised all their causless Scruples, infused so many
senceless Jealousies, and not being content to have at first infused these
needless fears, do still go on to nurse up and cherish them? Who first betrayed
great numbers into folly, and ever after continued to humor them in it? He who
can conform himself, and yet refuses to do so, for fear lest his Auditory and
Acquaintance should abate in their esteem or contributions toward him; If he
means sincerely, and to show himself an honest man, he ought to deal faithfully
with his Admirers, and tell them really what himself thinks, communicate the
Satisfaction which he has received, and persuade them not to be longer
needlessly afraid where no fear is: It is very plain that the generality of
Dissenters do entertain wild suspicions about the Service of the Church, upon
no other ground than an implicit faith which they have in the skill and
honesty of their Teachers. Such and such a one is a very precious and knowing
man, and do you think that he would not conform, if he did not know Conformity
to be a sin? The Pastor and his Flock in this Case do mutually guide and are
guided by each other; he makes it his business to please and humor them,, and
they look upon it as a great mark of their Judgment, and an infallible token of
their Election to admire him.

But if the weakness of these our Brethren has so great a privilege entailed
upon it, as that we must do nothing which they have taken a fancy against; a
thing in it self lawful and imposed by lawful Authority, must immediately
become unlawful, if so be that any scrupulous man can be brought to entertain a
foolish jealousy about it: Then is this kind of weakness endued with a very
strange degree of Omnipotence; because that upon this supposition, the very
mistakes of men are able to alter the Nature of things; A thing in it self
innocent, does according to this Doctrine, immediately become unlawful, as soon
as ever that any fanciful deluded man does erroneously conceive it to be so;
But methinks that those who pretend to be such eager asserters of Christian
Liberty, as this sort of men have always done, should, of all other persons,
the least endure to have it thus trifled with; as to have it believed to be
openly exposed to lie perpetually at the mercy of all the Humor, Melancholy,
Artifice, Cheat and Discontent in the whole Nation.

But if this be the meaning of those Texts of Scripture, where we are commanded
to avoid the giving of Scandal (as most certainly and evidently it is not) That
the Actions of all Private Men, and the Authority of all Public Constitutions
must be as often overruled as any single Person is, either by his own Folly or
by the Arts of other men, imposed upon to believe evil of them; then can no man
tell in any matter of Action Sacred or Civil (except in the Matters of
immediate and plain divine Precept) what one thing shall be lawful for him to
do in the very next moment.

But if it be thus appointed by the Apostle, That the mistakes of other Men,
though we should suppose them to be well-meaning ones, are to have so
uncontrollable an influence upon the Actions of all private Persons, and the
Decrees of all Public ones; If it be thus, I say, it will thence follow very
apparently, that there is a great necessity lying upon the Government, of
taking care what kind of Persons are entrusted with teaching the People. For if
Conscience, though never so erroneous, are of right, and by Apostolical
appointment to have so great a regard had unto them; then of all things great
circumspection should be used, and security taken, for the Understanding and
Honesty of all those who are entrusted to be Guides of Consciences. For if the
Errors of Conscience are things of so great Authority, as to be an immediate
Supersedeas to our whole Christian Liberty, to all sorts of Humane Laws, then
it is the greatest Phrenzy imaginable, to grant a promiscuous Liberty to
whoever pleases to teach and instruct the People. Alas! the Vulgar are easily
imposed upon; and it is not impossible but that we may find in our days, what
St. Paul did in his, That there are those who will speak lies in hypocrisy
because of advantage; and bring their Auditories to admire those very Doctrines
which themselves do heartily despise; outwardly court their Hearers, and
inwardly laugh at them. And in the mean time, are not Religion and Government
like to be at a very fine pass? when who so pleases shall have the Privilege
of making all possible advantages of that very Scruple which himself was Author
of; and, when all other Objections fail, shall be allowed to plead his own
exemption from all Obedience to the settled Constitutions, from the
dissatisfaction of other men, who, if it had not been for him, had never
entertained the least thought of being dissatisfied.

But in the next place it is frequently urged, That those Terms of Communion
are not looked upon as sufficient, which were always looked upon as such in
former days; but there are newer and straiter Bonds added to them; a new
Declaration of Assent and Consent: And besides all this, the Consciences of men
are provoked, which otherwise would have remained silent, if not satisfied; new
Scruples are raised in the Minds of Men, which before lay buried, and which
would otherwise have been quite forgot; in that it is not thought sufficient
that the Covenant should be laid aside, but that it should be formally
renounced; and not only so, but it is required that men must swear not only for
themselves, but that no man else is obliged by it.

Now after all this wonder, there is not any one Thing which is not very easily
accounted for: For surely it has been among men not at all unusual, nor in it
self strange, that where former securities have been found too slight, to add
others to them. As for the Declaration of Assent and Consent, the addition
which it does make to the former Subscriptions is not so considerable, as to
raise a scruple in the mind of any man who was real in them. And I suppose that
the great Mystery which is pretended to lie in the terribie sound of Assent and
Consent, which the People are taught to be affrighted at, as if some dismal
meaning were hid under it, is nothing else but an Art to raise their Jealousy,
that so they might be the better prepared for the finding out some plot or
other in the following Renunciation of the Covenant. A thing which was ordered
not without great cause; and it is very suspicious that that Cause does not
only continue, but increase, as appears but too plainly from this, That there
is so great a Clamor raised upon it. And this Cause did in a great measure
proceed from themselves, and that great stir which they made about the
Obligation of the Covenant, in the first and second year immediately after the
Restoration of his Majesty, both from Press and Pulpit: Parties were made in
the City, and endeavored to be made in Parliament, for the owning of that
Obligation. It was with great confidence urged, that it was A Public and
National Oath, binding all Persons of this Nation, whether they did swear it
personally or not, and all Posterity after us in their particular places; and
all that shall succeed into the Public Places and Politic Capacities of this
Kingdom, to pursue the things covenanted for: And this Obligation is for ever
to remain and abide, and by no Humane Act or Power to be absolved or made void;
as, amongst others, Mr. Crofton has endeavored to prove at large in his
famous Writings on that Subject. And, to speak the truth, if we once admit the
Grounds which this Party of Men do go upon, what he does allege has great
reason in it; it being very evident, that those Clauses which he does produce
out of the Covenant, do suppose all Posterity to be involved in them: And this
he urges not as his own single Opinion, but as the Sense of his whole Party;
and, besides the Evidence of the thing, he alleges, The Testimony to the
Truth of Jesus Christ and the Covenant, by the London Ministers, Dec. 14. 1647.
several of which are at this present Preachers to the separated Congregations;
In which it is plainly declared, That it is not in the Power of any person or
persons upon Earth to dispense with or absolve us from it. Nay, the Power of
Parliaments, which in other cases is allowed to be large enough, is in this
bound up, as Mr. Cr. tells us, p. 139. That the Parliament consisting of Lords
and Commons, and that in their Public Capacity as a Parliament, the House of
Commons assembled in their House, and in formality of the Body of the Nation,
with their Speaker before them, went unto St. Margarets Church in Westminster
with the greatest Solemnity imaginable, did, as the Representative Body of the
Kingdom, swear this Covenant: which, as a farther Testimony that it was a
National Covenant, they caused to be printed with their Names subscribed, and
to be hanged up in all Churches, and in their own House, as a Compass whereby
(in conformity to right, Reason and Religion) to steer their then Debates, and
to dictate TO ALL THAT SHOULD SVCCEED IN THAT PLACE AND CAPACITY what
obligation did before God ly upon the Body of this Nation.

Those who plead for the removal of the Renunciation of the Covenant, either
they do believe, that the Covenant does oblige at this time, or, that it does
not oblige; if they do believe that it does not oblige, why may they not
declare that they do believe it not to do so? One Reason may indeed be given,
why the Preachers themselves may believe the Covenant not to oblige, and yet
that they should by all means avoid the declaring that they do thus believe;
and that is this, that they would have the People believe it to have an
Obligation, although themselves believe it to have none. A Persuasion this,
which, in some juncture of Affairs or other, they may chance to make very great
use of; and that this may not be altogether incredible their Procedure has not
been one jot honester than this amounts to in another part of the Controversy
between us. It is well known that there are among them, and not among the
meanest of them who have believed the Liturgy and Ceremonies to be very
Innocent, and yet could be never brought to say one word to the People of this
their belief; But on the other side now, if they are really persuaded that the
Covenant does carry a lasting Obligation along with it: In that Case I shall
not, during that Persuasion of theirs, desire them to renounce it; but withal
I must crave their leave to add this further, that during that Persuasion of
theirs, I think it but reasonable, that the Government should cast a very
watchful eye over them. And of this I shall give an account from the Covenant
it self, wherein there are so many things, and of such fatal and universal
consequence, covenanted for, that the whole Nation is highly concerned that no
considerable Part of it should look upon themselves, and every Body else, as
lying under the Obligation of the Oath of God, to watch all opportunities
wherein they may accomplish such great and public mischiefs, as will appear by
a particular Consideration of the Thing it self.

ARTICLE 1.
That we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several Places and Callings the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government against our Common Enemies: The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches: And shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, in Confession
of Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing;
That we and our Posterity after us, may as Brethren, live in Faith and Love,
and that the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

In which Article it is easy to observe many things liable to very just and
material Exceptions; as first, By what Authority can any private man in
England, if he keeps himself within his own Place and Calling, intermeddle
either in the Preservation or Alteration of the Religion and Government of the
Church and Kingdom of Scotland? Nay, by what Authority can any Person in this
Kingdom whatever, be he in what Public Capacity he will (His Majesty only
excepted, or those who act by Commission from Him) have any thing to do with
the Concerns in that Kingdom? And secondly, this first Part of the Article may
upon very good Grounds be supposed to be inconsistent with the remaining Parts
of it: For we are sworn to preserve the Doctrine, Discipline, etc. of Scotland,
and withal, to bring the three Kingdoms to the nearest Uniformity in Religion,
Confession of Faith, form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and
Catechizing; So that Scotland must necessarily be our Pattern; and yet in the
same breath we are sworn to reform England and Ireland, according to the Word
of God, and the Example of the best Reformed Churches: And it is more than
possible, that our own Church, as it is already by Law established, or at least
some other Church beyond the Seas, may come altogether as near the Word of God,
as that of Scotland: And what is to be done in that Case? And in the third
place, all the other Dissenters whatever, besides the Presbyterians, are highly
concerned to see that the Covenant is not looked upon as a thing of any
obligation; because that that is express for Uniformity, and as such, is not
less than absolutely inconsistent with Liberty of Conscience; and as hard
thoughts soever as the smaller Sects have entertained concerning the Bishops;
they are much more concerned to secure themselves against not a few, nor the
least Considerable, among their own dear Brethren,

ARTICLE 2.
That we shall in like manner, without respect of Persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy; that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellors, and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy;
Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found
contrary to sound Doctrine, and the Power of Godliness, lest we partake in
other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their Plagues; and that
the Lord may be One, and his Name One in these Kingdoms.

As to the former part of this Article, that which concerns the overthrow of
the established Government of the Church, I shall only say this, that the
Modesty of these men is in this case very admirable, and there is no doubt to
be made, but that in any other Kingdom it would be thought to be so; in that
they do expect to be admitted into the Preferments of the Church, and to be
allowed to be public Preachers in it; and yet at the very same time, they do
desire to be excused from declaring, that they are not of a Persuasion, that
there does ly an obligation by Oath upon them themselves, the whole Nation, or
(to say no more) at least upon some other Person, who ought to be nameless, to
overthrow the whole frame of the Government of that Church, which they desire
to be admitted into the Preferments of, and particularly of that Bishop by
whose hands they are admitted. I would fain know whether there be any other
Part of the World, where any Persons dare to demand of the present
establishment, that it would for their sakes so far relax it self, in order to
their admission into it. Sure these menimagine, that the Church is in a very
great necessity of them, that it cannot stand one moment without them; when, in
the very Terms of their Admission, they do demand no less than this, that a new
Law should be made on purpose, whereby they may be privileged from declaring,
whether or no it is lawful for them to suffer the Church to continue two
moments longer than there shall arise an opportunity, wherein they may be able
to overthrow it.

As for the remaining Part of the Article concerning Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine
or the Power of Godliness, etc. I shall leave that to our Friends of the
Presbytery and their Separating Brethren to dispute about it: And it is clear
enough, that they are altogether as unlike to agree in those Particulars, as I
am with either of them: As lovingly as ever they may look upon one another at
present, I am sure that the Covenant, when opportunity serves, will be found to
be levelled as directly against the Conventicles, as against the Cathedrals. I
shall observe no more in this Article besides the great Charitableness of the
Conclusion, That the Lord may be One and his Name One in the Three Kingdoms: As
if the Church of England followed after strange Gods, and that those ordained
by her were really no other than, as they are often styled according to the
good manners which the People learn of too many such Preachers, the Priests of
Baal.

ART. 3.
We shall with the same Sincerity, Reality and Constancy in our several
Vocations, endeavor, with our Estates and Lives, mutually to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliament and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; and
to preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
Preservation and Defense of the True Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom:
That the World may hear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts and intention to diminish his Majesty's Just Power and
Greatness.

This Article has been very much and very much insisted on and gloried in for
the seeming Loyalty of one Expression in it: But, in order to a right
understanding; let us consider how Affairs stood at that time: It is well
known, that the Compilers and Enjoyners of this Covenant were, at that very
time, in actual Arms (I hope that it is no offense, if I say in actual
Rebellion) against the King. This very Covenant was a great Instrument by which
they did carry on their Design then on foot against Him: The King was betrayed
and sold by one part of the Covenanters, those from Scotland, he was bought,
imprisoned, and in effect deposed by another part of the Covenanters, those in
England, and by the most Loyal of them, even the Lords and Commons Assembled at
Westminster; who by their Votes of Non-address, Febr. 17. 1647. (which, let us
note, was long before the Seclusion by the Army) did declare, First, That they
will make no farther Addresses or Applications to the King: And in the fourth
Vote, That they will receive no more Messages from the King, and do enjoin that
no Person whatever do receive or bring any Message from the King to Both or
either Houses of Parliament, or to any other Person; which Votes they published
with a Declaration, wherein they lay down some few of those many Reasons (as
they express it) why they cannot repose any more Trust in Him.

Nay, long before that time, when the Scots complained of some rigours used
toward His Majesty, as being contrary to the Covenant, the House of Commons
did return them this Answer, November. 18. 1646. We observe that you mention the
Defense of the King twice, from the Covenant; but in both places you leave out,
in the preservation of the true Religion, etc. A main Clause without which the
other ought not to be mentioned. Which very Answer themselves did afterward
receive from their own Army, in a Declaration from St. Albans, November. 18.
1648. Where they reminded their Masters of their own Doctrine, The Defense of
the King, say they, is to be understood with this restriction; In the
Preservation of, etc. or otherwise the whole Proceedings of Both Kingdoms in
making and maintaining War against Him in Defense of Religion and Liberties
are questionable for breach of Covenant; since that way of preserving did
probably tend to the destruction and was without any safe provision, either for
his Person, or that Authority which can properly be called His, or understood
in Conjunction with His Person; but that therein His Person might probably have
been destroyed under the Sword or by a Bullet, yea was ordinarily endeavored
to be so, as well as the Persons of others in Arms with Him; and that Authority
of His was certainly opposed and endeavored to be destroyed thereby, instead
of being defended. Remonstrance from St. Albans, P. 55.

Indeed, about the time of the King's Murder, many of the Covenanters did
declare themselves a little dissatisfied with that way of Proceeding against
Him; and did (how reasonably upon their own Grounds, I know not) urge the
Covenant for His Preservation: But of their Behavior in this Case, I shall
give only the Account of an Author, who lived in those times when they had
opportunities enough to have taken what account of Him themselves pleased. His
Words are these, in a Book entitled, A short View of the Life and Reign of
King Charles the First, Monarch of Great Britain, page 94. The Presbyterians
carried on this Tragedy to the very last Act, from the first bringing in of the
Scots to the beginning of the War, and from the beginning of the War till they
had brought Him Prisoner to Holmby-House, and then quarrelled with the
Independents for taking of the Work out of their hands, and robbing them of the
long expected fruit of their Plots and Practices. They cried out against them
in their Pulpits and clamoured against them in their Pamphlets for that, of
which themselves were at least parcel-guilty, Et si non re at voto saltem
Regicidae, etc. On the other side, the Independents, who washed their hands in
the blood of the King, seemed as desirous as the Presbyterians to wash their
hands of it: By them it was alleged more calmly, that they had put Charles
Stuart to death, against whom they proceeded as the Cause of so much bloodshed;
but that the King had been muthered a long time before by the Presbyterians,
when they deprived Him of His Crown, His Sword, His Scepter; of His Crown, by
forcing from Him those Prerogatives which placed Him in a Throne of Eminency
above His People; of His Sword, by wresting the Militia out of His hands, by
which He was made unable to protect them; and of His Scepter, in divesting Him
of His Power of calling Parliaments, and of His Negative Voice in making those
Laws by which He was to govern all Estates of Men under His Dominion: And more
than so, they had deprived Him of His Natural Liberty as a Man; of the Society
of His Wife, as he was a Husband; of the Conversation of His Children, as He
was a Father; of the Attendance of His Servants, as He was a Master; and in a
word, of all those Comforts which might make Life valued for a Blessing: So
that there was nothing left for the Independents to do, but to put an end to
those Calamities into which this miserable man, this Vir dolorum, as He might
very well be called, had been so accursedly plunged by the Presbyterians.

To which I shall only add this farther, that notwithstanding all that Loyalty
which the Covenanters have so often boasted of, from the Obligation of the
Covenant; yet it is well known, that the Covenant was placed by themselves as a
bar between him and his Throne, that without submitting to this, they could not
endure to think of His Restoration to that; and this to so high a degree, that
even in January, 1648. Notwithstanding the apparent danger which the King's
Life was known to be in, yet even then, the General Assembly of Scotland did
violently oppose all courses thought upon for His Relief, and pressed
earnestly, That His Majesty's Concessions and Offers concerning Religion may
directly and positively be declared unsatisfactory to the Parliament, and that
there shall be no engagement for restoreing His Majesty to one of His Houses
with Honor, Freedom and Safety, before Security and Assurance be had from His
Majesty by His Solemn Oath under Hand and Seal; that He shall for Himself and
His Successors consent and agree to Acts of Parliament enjoining the League and
Covenant, and fully establishing Presbyterian Government, Directory of Worship,
and Confession of Faith in all his Majesty's Dominions; and that his Majesty
shall never make opposition to any of these, or endeavor any change thereof.
Vid. Declar. of Jan. 10. 1648.

Now therefore, seeing it is so plain a Case, that in the Opinion of the
Compilers and Enjoyners of the Covenant; all the forementioned Violences both
might and ought to have been used against the King, by virtue and in pursuance
of the Covenant: It thence follows unavoidably, that His Majesty is not a
little concerned to be very watchful over all those Persons who are so tender
of the honor of the Covenant, that they demand it as the Condition of their
Admission into the Church, that they may by no means be questioned concerning
their Opinion about its Obligation.

ARTICLE 4.
We shall with all faithfulness endeavor the discovery of all such as have
been or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants or evil Instruments, by hindering the
Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from His People, or one of the
Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties among the People
contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to public
trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their offenses shall
require or deserve, or the Supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms respectively,
or others, having power from them for that effect, shall judge convenient.

It is very well known what the meaning of Incendiaries and Malignants is, in
this Article: And it is shrewdly to be suspected, That those who are persuaded
of the Obligation of this Oath, are likewise persuaded, that those Incendiaries
and Malignants, have not as yet been brought to condign punishment; and
whatever benefit the Covenanters themselves may receive by an Act of Oblivion,
it is much to be suspected, that those who are covenanted against are looked
upon as not capable of receiving any advantage by it: And there is reason to
believe, that those who scruple the Validity of that Act of Parliament which
declares against the Obligation of the Covenant, are by no means to be trusted,
lest, if opportunity should serve, they would not likewise scruple the Validity
of that Act of Parliament which gave them Indemnity. For thus, according to
their own Grounds, they may argue, The Act of Oblivion is against the Covenant,
and then it follows in the next place, that it is against their Consciences;
It is against the Oath of God lying upon themselves and upon the whole Nation
and upon all Posterity, and no humane Act or Power can absolve them or any one
else from it; and every thing done against the Covenant is null and void, the
whole Nation being bound up by it to all Ages. For therefore it was That the
Covenant was hung up in the Parliament, as a Compass whereby to steer their
Debates, and to dictate to all, who shall succeed in that place and capacity,
what obligation does before God lie upon the Body of this Nation, as I have
before observed. Now upon these men's suppositions, there is no Security to be
had, but that they who passed an Act of Oblivion, to pardon any thing done
against the Covenant, are involved in guilt and liable to punishment for so
doing; and are upon those very accounts to expect, when Providence shall put an
opportunity into the hands of these Zealots, the very same Return which the
Prophet made to Ahab, 1 King. 20. v. 42. Thus says the Lord, Because thou have
let go a Man whom I have appointed to destruction, therefore thy life shall go
for his life, and thy people for his people.

The next thing which I shall observe in this Article is this, That those
Persons who covenanted together, among other things, to maintain the Liberties
of the Kingdom, have so far forgot themselves, as that in that very Covenant
they have set up an Arbitrary Government: The Rule of condign punishment here
set down, is not any known Law, no, not so much as a new one of their own
making; but, as the degree of their offenses shall require or deserve, or the
Supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms respectively, or others having power from
them for that effect, shall judge convenient. By which words it is plain, that
they did not look upon it as sufficient to take an arbitary Power into their
own hands, but likewise did delegate it to as many else besides as they pleased.

ART. 5.
Whereas the happiness of a blessed Peace between the Kingdoms, denied in
former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of God granted to
us, and has lately been concluded and settled by both Parliaments; we shall
each one of us, according to our Place and Interest, endeavor that they may be
conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to All Posterity, and that Justice may be
done upon all wilful opposers thereof, in manner expressed in the precedent
Article: According to the preceding Article, i. e. as shall be judged
convenient.

The Modesty of these men is very admirable, in that they would outface the
World, that England and Scotland were never at peace in former times, or,
rather their Language is something mysterious, that the Two Nations were never
at Peace till they had involved them in a War. But as in the former Article
they were, as I have showed, tender of the Liberty of the Subject; so in this
they have been very careful of the Authority of his Majesty, in that they have
taken upon them to make peace with another Kingdom without him; and withal when
that very Peace was nothing else, besides their joining Forces against him.

ART. 6.
We shall also according to our Place and Calling, in this Common Cause of
Religion, Liberty and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof;
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever
Combination, Persuasion or Terror to be divided and withdrawn from this
blessed Union and Conjunction; whether to make defection to the contrary Part,
or to give our selves to detestable Indifferency or Neutrality in this Cause,
which so much concerns the Glory of God, the Good of the Kingdom, and the
Honor of the King: But shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power against all Letts and Impediments whatsoever: And what
we are not able of our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented and removed: All which we shall do in
the sight of God.

From which Article it it is plainly to be seen, That those who do believe
themselves to lie under the Obligation of this Covenant, are and ought to be
looked upon as a Party already formed and combined together against the whole
Nation besides, having a common Band to unite and tie them fast together: And
this is such an Union as they look upon as sacred and indissoluble. And the
Ends, in order to which they are thus combined, are in their esteem such, as
that nothing can excuse the least intermission in their pursuance after them,
besides an absolute Impossibility, and even in that case it is lawful for them
only, to delay so long, as to expect a more favorable season: For they are
according to this Article, Never to be wrought over to so much as a detestable
Indifferency or Neutrality in this Cause of God; but zealously and constantly
to continue therein against all opposition, all letts and impediments
whatsoever.

And having now laid down the Six Articles of the Covenant, I shall only add a
few of the last words of the large and solemn Conclusion of it; wherein they
pray God to bless their proceedings herein with such success as may be an
encouragement to other Churches, groaning under, or in danger of the Yoke of
Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same or like Association or Covenant, to
the Glory of God, the Enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, and the Peace
and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths.

It has been often said in the behalf of the Presbyterians, that they did not
engage in the late War under a less Authority than that of the Two Houses of
Parliament: What Authority the Two Houses of Parliament have in raising a War
against the King shall be no part of this Enquiry, nor whether the Lords and
Gentlemen who at that time staid at Westminster were the Two Houses of
Parliament? Be these two things as they will, although it is not unknown what
may be said as to both those Cases; yet however the Covenant, has informed us
of another sort of Authority under which a War may be raised at any time
against all the Kings in Europe: Because in these words is held forth a public
Invitation to all Subjects whatsoever, who do either really groan under, or are
in any danger of any thing, which our folk have pleased to call, or themselves
shall chance to fancy to be a Yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to enter either
into this or the like Association or Covenant. Now I suppose, that it is no
easy task to make out, that all Kingdoms have Parliaments endued with so large
a share of the Sovereignty, as that they have Authority to take up Arms against
their respective Princes: And if there were such Parliaments every where, this
Invitation is only made to the Christian Churches, without taking the least
notice of Parliaments; nay with a full assurance that there were no such
Parliaments to be taken notice of. So that by this Doctrine the Church alone
may enter into association against the State upon the score of Religion
(especially if it can but cry out Antichrist) may engage the Subjects of all
Europe against their Sovereigns, be they Princes or Commomwealths.

I know very well that those who urge the taking away of the Declaration
enjoined concerning the renouncing of the Covenant, have one evasion whereby to
avoid entering into the merits of the Cause, and that is this, The seeming
unreasonableness of that Clause; Also I hold that there lies no Obligation
upon me, or any other Person from the Oath commonly called the Solemn, etc. Is
it not unjust that one man should be bound to swear to the Obligations of
another? As plausible soever as this may seem, no doubt it is but an evasion;
for it is well known whom they mean by that other Person whom they suppose to
be obliged; and besides to make this Case seem much harder than it is indeed;
They endeavor to persuade us, that this renunciation is what really it is not;
for it is plain, that this Declaration is not an Oath, nor any thing like one,
only we are called upon to declare what our Opinion is in a Case there put to
us; we are so far from being required in this Case unto the swearing for any
one else; that we are not called upon to swear for our selves, we do not swear
that there does ly no Obligation either upon our selves or any other Person,
but only that we do not believe that there does.

And after all this, the pretense of being scrupulous about declaring any thing
concerning the Obligation of any other Person has one great reserve in it:
For, the very supposal of the possibility of that is in effect to say, that the
Covenant as to the matter of it is in every particular respect lawful; for
unless it be lawful in every particular respect, no Body can be obliged by it;
and if once it be granted to be a lawful Oath, it will be very easy thence to
deduce that it is obligatory to more Persons than one.

And thus I have taken a short review of the Covenant, wherein it is very plain
that there are many things of such universal and dangerous Consequence therein
Covenanted for, as do render it not altogether unworthy the care of those who
are in Public Places to consider a little with themselves, what the meaning of
it is, that so many men do profess themselves to have so deep a sense of the
Obligation of the Covenant, as that a Law must be made on purpose to gratify
them in that humor: The Public Constitutions must veil to their unknown
Scruples, and with the Honor of having the Wisdom of the whole Nation confess
it self to have been all along mistaken, they expect to be admitted Public
Preachers; This Plea is such a one as does look as if it had some deep meaning
in it, and ought to be thoroughly understood before admitted; I shall end this
Argument as I did begin it* Either these men do believe that the Covenant does
oblige, or, they do not believe it, if they do not believe it to oblige, I
cannot see what Honest Reason can be given why they should scruple to declare
this their Belief; But on the other side, if they do really believe that the
Covenant does oblige them, it is much more advisable, that this Persuasion
should keep them out of the Church, than that they should bring this Persuasion
into it: And whereas the Lawmakers hoped that the Peevishness of this sort of
People would within some reasonable compass of time have grown weary of it
self, and accordingly had provided that the Declaration against the Covenant
should, within a few Years, of course have become antiquated; the Clamours of
these men have given so reasonable a Jealousy about their retaining their old
Principles, as may well serve to awaken the Caution of those in Authority, so
far as to put them in mind of giving New Life to their Old Act, and enlarging
the terms of its Duration: For seeing that the Dissenters do value themselves
so much upon their remembering the Covenant; our Governors have no small
Concern to let it be seen, that neither do they forget it.

To all which has been already said, I shall add this one Thing; It may not
unjustly seem a Cause of much wonder how it should come to pass, that the
Covenant should be looked upon as a thing much more sacred and indissoluble now
than it was in former Days; That Correspondence which Mr. Ienkins, and a great
many other London Ministers held with the Scots, for the sake of which he and
others were cast into Prison, will not be denied to be in pursuance of the
Obligation of the Covenant, and of that Part of it which they are always
glorying in, the Loyal and Meritorious Part, as to the Authority of His
Majesty: Now I dare appeal to any Member of his present Congregation, whether
he has not renounced this part of the Obligation of the Covenant, in these
following Words.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND. The
Humble Petition of William Ienkin Prisoner.
THat the Providence of God has in the Judgment of your Petitioner as
evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and investing your Honors
with the Government of this Nation, as ever they appeared in the taking away or
bestowing of any Government in any History of any Age in the World.

That he apprehends that a refusal to be subject to this present Authority
under the pretense of upholding the Title of ANYONE upon the Earth is a refusal
to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of God; such an opposing of the
Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can have
peace either in acting or suffering for: And that your Petitioner looks upon it
as his Duty to yield to this Authority all active and cheerful Obedience, even
for Conscience sake, etc.

Here is a plain Renunciation of all the Obligation of the Covenant, so far as
respects the King; the good man is quit by Providence, nay did not that whole
Party, as scrupulous as ever they may now seem, from that time forward ever
afterward till the laying aside the Family of Cromwels, absolutely lay aside
all thought of any manner of Obligation either to King or Covenant.

And now after all these dangers which will be perpetually impending over us
from the Covenant, and which we can never be secure from, so long as there is
the least pretense remaining among us, that that Oath is at all obligatory;
there is another thing which may justly raise our wonder, and may concern us
much more than the generality of us are aware, to enquire what may the meaning
of it; and that is this, to consider how it does come to pass, that the
Presbyterians and the other Sectaries do all at present unite in the Common
Plea of Liberty of Conscience; For it is very plain that in this part of the
Debate between us, their Inclinations, Judgments and Interests are very
different, and their Pleas utterly inconsistent. It is not so long ago, but
that some alive remember it, that the sweet noise of Liberty of Conscience made
a very pleasant sound, and the Dissenters from the legal Establishment were all
for a while hugely taken themselves, and did endeavor to charm each other with
it; but within the compass of a very little time, they themselves could not
tell what to do with it, fell out with one another about the Nature, Bounds,
and Limits of it; and even at this very day it is a clear Case, That any
Private Person, without the least entrenching upon the Authority of his
Superiors, may sa^ely undertake, that all the Pretenders to Liberty of
Conscience in the whole Nation, shall every one of them have their utmost wish,
in the very same moment that they themselves shall all agree about it; I must
needs say that this Plea is at the first view something specious, and has some
shows of reason in it; But if it be a little narrowly looked into, it will be
found to be a fine word, which no body knows the meaning of, a thing which
looks prettily, but is of no manner of use, which very many Persons do admire,
and very few if any at all will in the least endure.

And to make this evident, let us consider that this Liberty of Conscience must
be either limited, or unlimited; If limited, it is by no means to be called
Liberty of Conscience; nay, it is a plain giving up of the Cause, for it is an
actual granting, that Conscience is neither so sacred, nor has any Right to
be looked upon as so tender a thing, but that it both may and ought to have
bounds and limits set unto it; and I believe that there are Few men who are not
of this mind, or, if they are not at present, a little experience will quickly
bring them to be of it.

Now if Conscience be to be limited, then they who do not like those limits
which the Law has already set unto it should do well (when they have obtained
lieve for their so doing) to propose those other Limits which they see cause to
desire; and after they are agreed themselves about those Limits, let them in a
dutiful manner offer them to their Superiors, allege their reasons, and among
them, let them by no means omit this one, which they so often boast of and
triumph in, the great numbers, and Quality of those Persons who are agreed upon
those Bounds and Limits, who will acquiesce and rest satisfied in them: And
without the doing of this, the Raisers of all these Clamours do nothing else
but put an intolerable affront upon the Wisdom and Authority of the Nation, to
demand so importunately the Alteration of the settled Constitution, in order to
the Gratification of no Body knows whom, why, or in what, either how far the
Alteration is desired, or what is designed to be the effect of any such
Alteration. Let, I say, the Dissenters, who take themselves to be considerable
enough to expect a public Change for their sakes, declare concerning
Themselves and their Intentions, We are they who do desire an Alteration; we do
desire it to be made only thus far, and then we will acquiesce in it, and in
our several places and Callings (according to a known reading) will endeavor
to make all others to acquiesce in it; and we know, that all the Sober,
Serious, Peaceable, Godly, Knowing, Conscientious Part of the Nation will join
with us in it.

When the Noise-makers have done this, then, and not before, it will be
seasonable to harken unto them: Upon these Terms, I say, and only upon these,
their Proposals will be in a condition to be taken into Consideration: When it
is once known what the desires of any Party are, then there is room for
enquiry, whether or no, or how far they carry Reason in them. And it may
sometimes so chance, that such demands as are not altogether reasonable in
themselves, may yet in some sort be thought fit to be complied with in regard
of the Number, Quality, Merits or Interest of those Persons who appear to be
fond of them. In a Debate about the alteration of a Legal Establishment, there
are Two things highly considerable; 1. The Nature of the Alteration it self; 2.
The Nature of those who desire it, who they are, how many, and what kind of
People. Now these are things which themselves alone are qualified to make out
unto us; and till they have done that, Authority is scarce in a Capacity to
concern it self about it: For it can have no Measures to take, nor propose to
it self any End; it can neither know what Concessions to make, nor to whom; can
have no way the least assurance, either what will satisfy, or who they are who
are to be satisfied.

And as for the late device of Comprehension, the nature of of it is as yet
unknown, and he must be a bold Man who will undertake for the Event of it. As
to that which is by ordinary Persons to be understood of it, it amounts to no
more than a pretty artifice of saving the Reputation of about a dozen Persons,
who are sick of their present Separation from the Church, and stand in need of
a plausible Pretense under which to return unto it: Their credit will not
suffer them to renounce their old Principles, and they are weary of sticking
longer to them. Now if the Pride of these Men should be thus far gratified, who
can secure us of any great Effect from it? Will their Hearers imitate their
Teachers in their compliance upon these Terms or abhor them for it? And if we
had any assurance in getting above these Difficulties, yet however, as to all
those who do not come within the Comprehension, every one of all the Pleas of
Liberty of Conscience and Persecution remain as they were before, so that such
a Purchase will be upon no prudent estimate worth the price we pay for it.

These Two things therefore I take to be very clear; First, that Liberty with
Bounds and Limits set to it, is not Liberty of Conscience: 2. That if any other
Bounds and Limits are to be set besides those which the Law has already set,
it is very requisite, indeed necessary, that those Limits should be known
before admitted, agreed upon among themselves before they be desired from their
Superiors. But because I very well know that how reasonable soever this way of
procedure is in it self, yet that the concerned Gentlemen will find more than a
few difficulties in it; I shall therefore enquire a little into the other
Member of the forementioned Division, and that is, such a Toleration as is
unlimited.

And here I do freely confess this, that all the Pleas which pretend to show
the reasonableness and usefulness of Liberty of Conscience do plainly prove
this, if they do prove any thing at all: And the late Author of Humane Reason
has been so much honester than many of the Writers upon this Argument, that he
has fairly owned the Conclusion which his Premises naturally do tend unto. Now
that which here does first offer it self to our Consideration, is this: How it
does come to pass that in this Part of the Argument the Presbyterians of late
have observably been very silent? There was a time when in this Case their Zeal
was as warm as any man's, and nothing in the whole World was in their esteem
more frightful, more intolerable than Toleration. In the year, 1644. This Point
of Indulgence was a matter of high Debate, and the Dissenters from the
Presbyterian way did desire the same Liberty from their Impositions which they
had both of them before joined in des^^ing from the National Settlement; their
Pretenses were at least equal, they had the same natural right to Freedom which
any other men had, they had the same Pleas of Christian Liberty, and besides
all this they had another very good title upon which they might expect
Indulgence from the Presbyterians in Point of Merit; the same Arguments the
Sectaries showed to be in common between them both, and withal had this to add
farther, that their Arms added that assistance, without which the Presbyterians
could never have been able to have brought themselves into a condition, to have
enjoyed that Liberty as to themselves, which the other Sects by their joint
concurrence did put them into a condition to grant, and therefore very well
deserved to have received from them. But in those days, their dear Brethren,
to whom they were much beholding for their joint concurrence in Prayers and
Arms; their mutual Contributions of Blood and Treasure, and whom at present
they smile most sweetly upon, did receive the harshest usage which was in their
Power to give them, and it was no small matter of public complaint, that they
were not permitted to handle them with much greater roughness: To omit many
others there then came out a Book entitled, Wholesome Severity reconciled with
Christian Liberty, Licensed by Ia. Cranford, wherein we are told, that Liberty
of Heresy and Schism is no part of the Liberty of Conscience which Christ has
purchased for us, but that under these fair Colors and handsome Pretexts
Sectaries infuse their Poison, their Pernicious, God-provoking; Truthdefacing,
Church-ruinating and Stateshaking Toleration.

To which Author I shall only add the more Public Testimony to the Truth of
Jesus Christ, and to our Solemn League and Covenant, as also against the
Errors, Heresies, Blasphemies of these Times, and the Toleration of them,
subscribed by the Ministers of Christ within the Province of London, December
14. 1647. Which I have already mentioned, but in this part of the Argument
shall insist something more largely upon; because they were such a Body of men
as were looked upon as very considerable, and sufficiently qualified to speak
the sense of their whole Party to great advantage: And besides that some of
them are yet living and Preachers at this day to the separated Congregations
about the Town. Now I would ^ain know of these Gentlemen, whether they are of
the same Judgment now about Toleration, as they were then? if they are, then
methinks they should do very well to declare it, and so much the rather,
because that by their behavior one would guess that their minds were altered;
in that they do so far comply as to join Counsels and Interests with those whom
formerly they bore testimony against: Again, if they are of the same mind about
Toleration now as they were formerly; then all the under Sects have great Cause
in time to beware of them, ought to look upon them as very false brethren, who
want nothing but opportunity to take away that Liberty which now indeed is
common to them with the rest of their Brethren, but they never intended it for
any but themselves. And on the other side, if they are not of the same mind
about Toleration now as they were formerly; then they ought in all Honesty to
declare to the World how much they were formerly mistaken, in that they raised
such fearful Outcries against that Toleration which is an innocent and an
useful thing; the giving of which is (as it is now said) the Duty and Interest
of all Government, is indeed no other than the permitting to us that Liberty
with which Christ made us free, or rather, which is the Right of Nature, the
Common Birth right of all Mankind.

In the Preface to the aforesaid Testimony they tell us of the spreading
Heresies and cursed Blasphemies of those Times, which had born down the
Authority of the Scriptures and our Solemn League and Covenant (very fitly
joynned:) And then they add, But above all our Souls are wounded to think with
wha^ hope and industry, a Toleration of all these Evils is endeavored, and
with what a wellcomed boldness sundry odious Heretics, which in other places
have been banished and branded with infamy, do vent their poisonous Opinions
amongst us; as if they intended to make England a common receptacle of all the
sinful Dregs of Foreign Countries as well as former Ages, page 29. As if all
the Errors, Heresies, Sects, Schisms, Divisions, Looseness, Profaneness, and
Breach of Covenant among us, were small matters; what secret and public
Endeavors, Projects, Methods and Practices are there amongst us to bring in an
universal, boundless, lawless, abominable and intolerable Toleration, to the
filling up of the measure of our Iniquities, and the pulling down God's fierce
indignation upon this Nation, and page 30. Instead of Unity and Uniformity in
Matters of Religion, we are torn in pieces with destructive Schisms,
Separations, Divisions, and Subdivisions, etc. and instead of Extirpation of
Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, we have such an impudent and general inundation
of all these Evils, that Multitudes are not ashamed to press and plead for a
public, formal, Universal Toleration. And having thus showed how great their
Zeal was in this Case, I shall likewise lay down their Reasons for it, which
with great earnestness they did express in these following Words, page 32. A
public and a general Toleration will prove an hideous and complexive evil of
most dangerous and mischievous Consequence, if ever (which God forbid) it
should be consented to by Authority, for hereby, First, the Glory of the most
high God, will be laid in the very dust; Secondly, the Truth of Christ, yea all
the Fundamentals of Faith will be r^^ed to the very ground; Thirdly, all
Christ's Ordinances, Offices, Worship, Religion, yea and the very Power of
Godliness will be utterly overthro^^; Fourthly, thousands, and ten thousands of
poor Souls which Christ has ransomed with his own blood, shall be hereby
betrayed, seduced, and endangered to be undone to all eternity. Fifthly,
Magistracy and Ministry, and with them all Religious, and comely Order in the
Church and Commonwealth will be plucked up by the very roots. Sixthly,
Reformation in Religion, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government shall
be utterly made void. Seventhly, England shall be swallowed up with Sects,
Schisms, Divisions, Disorders, and Confusions, and become an odious sink, and a
common rec^ptacle of all the prodigious Errors, Lies, Heresies, and
Blasphemies, Libertinism and Profaneness in the World; so that Rome it self
shall not be a more odious puddle and cage of all abominatio^s and
uncleanness. Eighthly, the Godly shall sit down and lament among us.
Ninethly, the wicked shall rise up and insult over us. Tenthly, all the Nations
about us shall be amazed at us. Eleventhly, all the Reformed Churches shall be
ashamed to own us, they shall all cry out against us; Is this England that
Covenanted and swore to the most High God such a Reformation and Extirpation of
Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatever
shall be found contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness, and
after so long a travel has she brought forth an hideous Monster of Toleration?
And again, page 33. Has England heretofore had such a large share of
Gospel-Enjoyments; and does she now render to the Lord for all his Benefits a
detestable Toleration? Do thou thus reward the Lord, O foolish England and
unwise? Twelfthly, and to conclude, seeing we have just cause to fear, that if
this Toleration be entertained among us, the Righteous God of Heaven and Earth
will be provoked to plague us yet seven times more, and at last to translate
his very Gospel and Kingdom from us unto another Nation: Therefore upon all
these Considerations, we the Ministers of Jesus Christ do hereby testify to
all our Flocks, to all the Kingdom, to all the Reformed Churches, as our great
dislike of Prelacy, Erastianism, Brownism and Independency; so our utter
abhorrency of AntiScripturism, Popery, Arri^nism, Socinianism, Arminianism,
Antinomianism, Anabaptism, Libertinism, and Familism, with all such like, now
too rife among us.

It were endless to transcribe all which has been said by the Presbyterians
against Toleration; and therefore it is not a little strange, how much for some
years they have endeavored after it: But sure their separating Brethren cannot
be so forgetful of what has been but so very lately past, as not to cast a
very watchful Eye over them, to suspect their kindness, and be hugely jealous
of their present Concurrence with them; it being not very credible, that their
Moderation is greater than formerly, and that which makes all the difference is
no other thing than this, That their Power is not altogether so great. It has
been no unusual thing in the World for men to unite in their Endeavors in
order to very differing Ends; to dissemble for a while their mutual
Resentments, and to have less kindness for those very Persons they do cabal
with, than for those whom they do cabal against. A Common Interest for a while
keeps them close together, and out of that they each hope for their particular
Advantages; and both sides hug and applaud inwardly their own Arts and
Dexterity, in that they see the way chalked out how they shall be able to
supplant their Friends, as well as ruin their Enemies. Thus the Presbyterians
may at present join their endeavors in attaining that Liberty, which they hope
in time to take away, not only from those whom they at present desire to grant
it, but likewise from those who now enjoy it together with them: The
Independents, Anabaptists, etc. must needs remember how the Presbyterians bore
testimony against that Toleration of them which they could not hinder: They
could no more endure those who fought on their side to dissent from them, than
they could those who fought against them. Remember (Gentlemen) you all fought
for Liberty of Conscience; and yet your Fellow Soldiers would not allow you
that which you shed your Blood for, and for their own obtaining of which, they
were much more beholding to your Arms than to their own.

The Pretenses of all the differing sorts of Dissenters are so vastly distant,
as to be utterly inconsistent; and whatever Correspondence is between them at
present, it ought not to be looked upon, either by themselves or any one else,
as any Union or Agreement which is of late made between them, but merely as a
Combination against that Settlement which they are all weary of; and as soon as
ever that is again overthrown, we shall then see that all their old Quarrels
will return as formerly: The tender Consciences of diverse sizes will immediately
fall as foully upon one another as ever they did: Presbytery will be styled the
Yoke of Antichrist, and Independency the Mother of Confusion; the one will be
styled Egypt, and the other, Babel.

If any Particular Sect among them does desire Indulgence, and means nothing
else besides a bare Permission to serve God in its own way: If there were
nothing else but this in the Case, its Request then would with all Submission
be put up single and by it self; that so an account might be taken both of the
Principles and of the Persons, how innocent the one, and how peaceable the
other; and what Influence either of them are like to have upon the present
Settlement either of Church or State: And surely it ought not to be looked upon
either as unreasonable or assuming, if the Government does look upon it self as
concerned to have a great regard to it self both in point of Duty and in point
of Safety. And in such an Enquiry as this, the Quality, Numbers, and Temper of
the Petitioners for such Indulgence are of no small Consideration. And this way
of Procedure, that each single Sect should speak by and for its self, and state
its own particular Case, is methinks the fairest Course which can be taken; and
such a one as those Dissenters, who are conscious to themselves of no ill
meaning, should look upon as highly advisable for their own sakes: It being
very obvious to the most ordinary Prudence, that it may be frequently advisable
upon diverse particular and material Considerations, to indulge some kinds of
Liberty to such and such sorts of Dissenters, which is by no means fit to allow
to others; much less to allow promiscuously to all. But to take that course
which they have always done since his Majesty's Restoration, that they should
all join in a common Cry, as if they had one common Cause, is very suspicious;
especially considering that they are divided among themselves in this very
point of Liberty of Conscience, notwithstanding their Unanimity in calling for
it.

Some Rumors have of late been spread indeed all over the Town concerning such
a kind of Comprehension as should leave no room for Toleration: how well
grounded such Reports have been I will not undertake; it is but in vain to make
an uncertain guess at what kind of Proposals may possibly be offered by some
Persons; and to fancy at all adventures who they are or may be who are in any
likelihood to be concluded by them. But because it is said publicly enough and
by no mean Persons, That the Presbyterians, at least the chief and leading Men
among them* are ready now to enter into the Church, upon some reasonable
Abatements to be made unto them: And when they are once gained, the other Sects
will not be considerable enough to expect, that any Toleration should be
allowed unto them. If this be the Case, as it is by some of themselves
pretended to be, then the Case is much altered from what it lately was:
Reformed Christianity in its Latitude, which came out in 1667. and the Defense
of it in 1668. are express, not (...) only for Comprehension but likewise for
Toleration, and besides that for a Connivence also. And a later Treatise
entitled, Indulgence not to be refused; Comprehension humbly desired, which
came out 1672. is express for Toleration; and against that part of his Design
he makes this Objection: The Presbyterians in former times wrote and preached
against Toleration and Indulgence, and if they do now fall in with it, they
contradict themselves. To this he answers, That some did, some did not; and
there was a Reason then which cease now: and besides, many of those who
declared against such a Toleration are dead and gone, and there are others
postnati to those times who now suffer, p. 11, 12. So that it seems, these Two
Advocates for the Comprehension were for a Toleration. If the minds of these
men be changed since that time, it were not unfit that they should give Public
notice of it, especially for this Reason: It is well known, that in the private
Discourses and in their printed Books, the People have been moved to express
much pity toward the Dissenters, and not a few exasperated against the
Government by the perpetual noise of Persecution, Liberty, Conscience,
Moderation, Forbearance, Tenderness, Compassion, Indulgence; and that this has
not been the peculiar Phrases of such or such a particular Sect, but the common
language of all of them. Now if this device of Comprehension do take place,
then all those Pleas as to all Parties but one will remain as formerly

But if the Presbyterians do really intend to come into the Church now, upon
such and such abatements to be made unto them, and finally and for ever to
shake Hands with their old Brethren; it were but reasonable to expect that they
should do these two things: First, that in their present Meeting Houses they
should use so much of the Common Prayer as they can lawfully, and mean
hereafter to use, and observe so many of the Orders and Ceremonies of the
Church, as they are persuaded of the Innocence of; and take the first
opportunity of declaring to their Hearers their Resolutions of Conformity,
thereby to prepare them to conform likewise: Secondly, they should declare, as
formerly, against Liberty of Conscience, as a thing which they do by no means
approve, and are resolved never hereafter to have any thing to do with. If, I
say, these men do desire that any public distinction should be made between
them and other Dissenters, they themselves should do well to own such a
distinction; if we go into their Conventicles we cannot find any such great
difference in the way of Worship between the Presbyterians and others, as
thence to be able to distinguish them. If we go into their Company their
Complaints are much of the same strain, and not seldom in the same Syllables.

If there are any among them (as it is to be hoped there are) who are sincere,
modest, and peaceable, who mean better than their Neighbors; The Law cannot
help it if they suffer for being taken in bad Company: It is not unlikely that
they might have fared much better themselves if they had not had such
Partakers; their own Case might have been looked upon as pitiable, if they had
not joined with such dangerous Adherents. If this Course (I say) were taken,
that each Sect did urge its own Plea single, by and for it self, there were
then some ground for Charity, and we might possibly have some hope, that their
aims looked no higher than an Indulgence: And by so inoffensive a way of asking
favor, Authority would have some ground whereupon to be persuaded, that they
would use any favor which they could obtain with the very same Modesty with
which they do desire it: But when they shall all unite with a joint Consent in
one and the same Clamor for that very Demand, about which themselves neither
ever did, nor ever can agree; and within which Pretense no one name is wide
enough to comprehend them, besides that of Nonconformity, viz. Dissenters from
the present Constitution: Of which dissent it is more than possible to allege,
not only diverse, but contrary Reasons, and does only tell us what it is they
would not have, but not at all what they would have. It is but too evident,
that Indulgence is not the only thing aimed at, but is only proposed in order
to something else; and the plausible name of Conscience may upon these terms be
suspected to be only a handsome Artifice whereby to disguise that Combination,
which no other word is solemn enough to authorize, or of compass large enough
to be a sufficient shelter for; and by which they hope to become a Match for
some common Enemy: And accordingly as their success does chance to happen in
that, each Sect does flatter it self with the particular Advantages to be
reaped from it. And in this I am the more confirmed, because that the late Act
of Parliament against Conventicles, which has been the matter of so much
Lamentation and Complaint, has been so tender, even of the needless Scruples
of Conscience, as to allow these men their own Fancies in their way of Worship
in their own Families, and four of their Neighbors to join with them: But
these Good men are persecuted, if they are only tolerated; they lose their ends
unless they make Proselytes, and have opportunities to form themselves into
Parties.

But if this Plea of Conscience be so very Omnipotent, as that it must bear all
things down before it, and no other Consideration whatever must in the least
presume to stand in its way: Suppose the Case should so happen, as that this
Plea should become so utterly inconsistent with it self, as that it is
impossible but that in one respect or other, it must necessarily be overruled;
and this is a Case which may occurr very frequently: As for Example, suppose
that my Conscience tells me, that I ought to be of this or that Opinion, and
not only so, but that I am obliged not only to entertain it my self, but
withal to vent and propagate it to others; and on the contrary, the
Magistrates Conscience tells him, that he is appointed by God to be a Keeper of
both the Tables, and that it is his Duty to take care not only of Peace, but
Truth; and the Doctrines which I am so very fond of are not only erroneous, but
likewise of very ill consequence, both as to the Souls of men and to the
public Peace; and that to so high a degree, as that he is firmly persuaded,
and as he really believes and thinks himself able to give a very good account
upon weighty grounds, that he should be much wanting, both to the Duty which he
owes to God, and the Care which he ought to take of his People, both as to
their Temporal and Eternal Welfare, if he does not make use of his Authority in
the restraining me from venting any such pernicious Doctrines within his
Dominions.

What now is to be done in this case? My Conscience tells me, that I am obliged
to preach such and such Doctrines, as being precious and soulsaving ones, the
Truths of God and Gospel-discoveries; the King's Conscience tells him, that
they are the Doctrines of Devils (as Saint Paul did upon occasion declare some
Doctrines to be) and that he ought not to give me Liberty to preach any such in
his Kingdom: What now is to be done in this Case? Here is Conscience on both
sides; the King is as firmly persuaded as I am, and thinks himself as well
informed as I either am or can be; If the King restrains me from preaching
after my own way, then I cry out that he is a Persecutor: He replies, that I am
a Seducer, nay, a Blasphemer, and he neither will nor ought to suffer any such
in his Countries; either his Conscience or mine must overruled; Both cannot be
satisfied; one or other must necessarily either yield or alter; or else I must
Preach, and he must Punish, and the Almighty must at his own time be Judge
between us; and in the mean time as to all the purposes of this World, the
King's Conscience has reason to expect to be more Authoritative than mine, and
withal he is concerned to take care both of himself and all other men, to
Judge both as to his own particular, and likewise as to the Concerns of His
whole Nation.

If it be replied in this Case, that the King's Conscience ought to yield,
because it is an Error in Him to think that He is at all concerned in Points
of this Nature; that Religion is no part of His Care, His business is only to
look after the Civil Government, and the Public Peace (a Pretense frequently
insisted on:) The Answer to this is very plain, and might easily be enlarged
upon, as to many Particulars, I shall only mention these two Things; First,
that Religion has a very great influence upon Civil Government, and the
Public Peace; and therefore if so be, that the Civil Government and the
Public Peace be within His Care; then Religion ought by no means to be
excluded from it, as having so great an influence upon it. In the next place,
as to the Pretense that the Magistrate is in an Error, if he looks upon
himself as concerned in this Particular; it is more than possible, that that
very Pretense will upon Examination appear to be the greater Error: And in
general the Subject is no more free from Error than the Sovereign. And this
need not seem News to us of this Age and Nation; and to speak the Truth, it is
no easy matter to find out any Age or Nation, where it has not been sadly
evidenced, that Seducers will quickly be found in great abundance, where
Liberty has been given for the People to be seduced by them: And after all
this, it will be no impossible Task to make out, that Magistrates are obliged
not only in Interest, but likewise in point of Conscience, to have a great Care
of Religion; and to use that Authority which they received from God, so far to
the honor of him who gave it, as by no means to suffer his Truths to lie all
openly exposed to all the Lusts, Designs, and Mistakes of Men; to all the
Knavery and all the Folly of Every one who is either willing to deceive, or
liable to be deceived. And of this I shall now endeavor to give a brief
account both from Reason and Scripture, the Necessity of the thing, and the
Authority both of the Old and New Testament.

But here a great many Rubs are thrown in our way, by the forementioned Author
of Liberty of Conscience upon its true and proper Grounds asserted and
vindicated: Proving that no Prince nor State ought by force to compel men to
any Part of the Doctrine, Worship or Discipline of the Gospel. London, Printed
in the year 1668. Which methinks is not very different from the Doctrine of the
Blody Tenent dedicated to both Houses of Parliament in the year 1644. It is the
Will and Command of God, that (since the coming of his Son Jesus) a Permission
of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian Consciences and
Worships be granted to All men in all Nations and Countries. But whatever the
Assertion of our Author is either in it self, or in its Consequence, I shall
briefly enquire into the Arguments he brings for it. Page 25. That the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Power are things perfectly in themselves distinct, and ought
in their Exercise to be kept so, etc. And, The Magistrate has ways, such as
Christ thought sufficient, to promote the Good of Religion, and propagating the
Growth of the Gospel, without drawing the Civil Sword, which will make no more
Impression in spiritual Concerns, than it will do upon a Ghost which has no
real Body, etc. And p. 28. To use force in Religion is wholly unlawful in any
hand whatever; because it is by no means appointed by Christ to bring about any
Gospel-End: For the Magistrate to enforce the Laws of the Gospel by Temporal
Power, or to compel Men into the Gospel by such a Power, is to act without the
least Precept or Precedent; to induce an Engine to execute the Gospel contrary
to the nature of Christ's Kingdom (which is not of this World) and contrary to
the nature of all Gospel-institutions. Does not Paul positively deliver this,
That the weapons of the Gospel are not carnal but spiritual, and mighty
thorough God: The Sword of the Spirit is the Weapon by which Christ does all;
yea, by which he will destroy Antichrist, the greatest Gospel-enemy the World
has produced. The Sum of which is briefly this: 1. That Force is a very
incompetent Method to be used in matters of Belief and Persuasion: 2. That it
is unlawful. 1. Because Christ has no where commanded it, we have neither
Precept nor Precedent for it: 2. Because St. Paul has plainly forbid it, where
he says that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal.

Now, as to these Suggestions which do frequently recurr in this Question, I
shall at present only briefly touch upon them, premising this, That our Author,
like to all the rest who have dealt in this Cause, is as much concerned to
answer these and all the rest of his Arguments against using the Secular
Interposition in matters of Belief, as any of those he writes against; because
he himself does very much approve and commend such Interposition where he likes
the Cause in behalf of which it is made use of. Now, though this may seem
strange, because it is directly contrary to his whole Book, yet it is very
plain; and I shall not expect to be believed upon my bare word, but desire the
Author himself, or any one besides who makes a doubt of it, to consider these
words which we have page 24. Constantine and the Christian Emperors after him,
till the Church of Rome had cheated them into subjection, took upon them the
care and oversight of all Religious things: among our selves we reap the
advantage of our Kings and Princes care and Concern in that enjoyment we have
of the Protestant Religion. Now this Assertion of that learned Gentleman is
evidently true; but then it happens here as it uses in the other Discourses
for Toleration: When the Evidence of Truth has forced from them one reasonable
Concession, that one Concession does plainly give away from them nothing less
than their whole Cause: For, pray tell me, Constantine and the Christian
Emperors are here commended for their care and oversight in Religious things;
and so our own Kings for securing to us the Protestant Religion: Now was not
all this done by Laws and Penalties, and the Civil Sword, and was there any
possibility of having it done any other way?

This being premised, as to the Exceptions themselves, I briefly say this; If
no force is to be used in matters of Religion, because it is an incompetent
Method, as being able to reach only to the Body and Estate, but is by much too
weak to reach unto the Mind; this is a Difficulty not at all peculiar to the
Gospel, but common to that with all other Dispensations. The Mind of a Man was
as much a Spirit under the Law as it can be now; and the Sword was made of as
mere Matter in those days, as it can be in these: and therefore thus far the
Case is one and the same. As to the Second Exception, That all Force is now
unlawful, because Christ has not commanded it, they have been told, and have
had it proved to them too in many parts of the Puritan Controversy, that many
things are lawful which there is no particular Command for; that a thing
becomes unlawful, not by being not commanded, but by being forbidden: And this
leads me directly to the Third Exception, That all Force is plainly forbidden
by St. Paul, when he says, 2 Cor. 10. v. 4. that The weapons of our warfare are
not carnal. Now this saying of the Apostle is so far from being a hibition of
all Coercion in the Affairs of Religion, that it does plainly refer to a very
great Coercion, which himself did in these very words threaten for to use, viz.
the Censures of the Church in such a manner as to carry temporal Penalties
along with them, in manner miraculous, visible and extraordinary: And therefore
it follows in the next words, that those Weapons which in themselves might be
supposed weak, yet if they were better looked into would be found to have a
strength from God, which they had not from themselves; for they were not merely
carnal, but mighty through God for the bringing down strong holds: And to
render it clear that these words have a penal meaning in them, it follows, that
these Weapons are able to cast down imaginations, and every high thought that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity
every thought to the Obedience of Christ: And to put it out of all doubt, that
those Weapons had a coercive power in them, the Apostle adds, in a style much
beyond exhortation and advice, nay, much beyond a bare reproof, that in the
strength of them he would revenge all disobedience. And as for the last most
pressing and convincing Consideration, That if Force was to be used in any
affair of Religion at all, it was of all others the most to be justified in
order to the pulling down of Antichrist, the greatest of all other
Gospel-enemies: But even in that Case it ought not to be used, and therefore
most certainly not in any other; The Sword of the Spirit being the only Weapon
by which Christ will destroy Antichrist, the greatest Gospel-enemy which the
World has produced. I shall not here take an advantage which I have already
mentioned, that the Sword of the Spirit does in Scripture signify something
which carries Coercion along with it; but shall be contented that that word be
understood in the common meaning of it: And upon that Supposition I believe
that this Assertion of this learned Gentleman will scarce pass for true
Doctrine in the Separated Congregations; I am sure that there was a time when
it would not have done so, and I never yet heard that in this Point their Minds
were altered: How unlawful soever it may be for the Magistrate to make use of
the Civil Sword in a Cause of Religion; I am sure that it has been often
preached as a great Gospel Duty, though in a Rebellion, to make use of the
Military one. We have not forgot how often the Zeal of the Common People was
inflamed against the King, by telling them that the Cause then fought for was
the Cause of God, that their Persons and Estates were all too little to be
sacrificed in this Concern of Religion, and the question really was, whether
Christ or Antichrist should be King? And so I return to our Author.

Amongst all the Arguments which are brought to prove the Compulsory Power of
the Magistrate under the Gospel, the greatest weight is laid upon the practice
of the Kings of Israel and Judah, and what they did under the Law in compelling
men to the Worship of God then established. In the due Consideration whereof we
shall find the truth in hand no ways invalidated, and that what was then done
by the Kings of Israel and Judah, cannot reasonably be now made a Rule to
Magistrates under the Gospel: And that the Analogy will no way hold, may be
made appear both from the different station and posture those Kings were in
from all Magistrates now, and also from the different Condition of the Church
then and now, and many Circumstances peculiarly relating to both. First, the
Worship and Policy of the Jews, being in it self Typical, and representative of
what was to come hereafter, their Government was likewise so, and in their
Kings very eminently. Secondly, God was pleased in those Times upon all eminent
Occasions of Reformation in his Worship and Proceedings of that Nature to send
Prophets to declare his positive Mind, and to put an end to all Doubts, that
could be about such things: Nay, some of the Kings themselves were Prophets
immediately inspired, and did not only take care of the Worship established by
Moses, but did themselves by Divine Authority bring in things of a new
Institution into the Worship of God. Thus David did, and Solomon in bringing
Music into the Temple, and settling the Courses of the Priests, and were
divinely inspired to write part of the holy Scriptures: No Magistrate now can
pretend to any such power in themselves, nor have they any such extraordinary
direction to guide them; but are punctually obliged to whatever Christ has
revealed in the Gospel: And therefore in this respect the Analogy holds no way
good.

The sum of all which is, that no Argument ought to be drawn from the Examples
of the Kings of Israel or Judah, whereby to prove the Power of any present
Magistrates over the Affairs of Religion; by reason of the great difference
between those Magistrates and ours, especially in these two respects: First,
that they were Typical: Secondly, that in such Cases they had either Prophets
sent to them, or themselves were divinely inspired.

And in this part of the Argument, if I had a mind to enlarge farther than I
needs must, I believe that I should find it an easy matter, to find our
Author to have committed sundry mistakes in assigning the Difference between
the State of the Church, and the Condition of Magistrates, as it was under the
Law; I shall not dispute whether the Law, fullness of the Magistrate's using
coercive power under the Law was Typical of this, that such coercive power
should not be lawful under the Times of the Gospel: But in the second place I
shall venture to say this, that several of the Constitutions made by the Jewish
Kings, were such as stood in no need either of direction from Prophets
commissioned for that purpose, or any immediate inspiration given in to them
themselves; And in this Part of the Debate I shall go no farther than the
Instances which our Author here lays down, of bringing Music into the Temple,
the settling of the Priests Courses, Two Things certainly which without
inspiration, common prudence would abundantly serve to assist any man in: But
to show how little need there is to insist upon any thing of this, I shall
produce an instance of the Magistrates coercive power in Matters of Religion,
which shall not be liable to any of all these, however frivolous exceptions, as
having in it not any thing peculiar to the Ordinances of Moses. And I shall
fetch it out of the Book of Job chap. 31. v. 26, 27, 28. If I beheld the Sun
when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness, and my heart has been
secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand, this also were an iniquity
to be punished by the Judges, etc. Here now is an offense purely spiritual, a
Crime merely against Religion, not any otherwise at all against the State, or
any particular Member of it; a sin indeed it was against God, but such an one
as did consist in a mere mistake about him, and such a mistake as was in that
Age and part of the World very frequently committed; and yet it is said to be
an Iniquity to be punished by the Judges. So that it seems in the days of Job,
the Civil Magistrate was thought to have in himself a power, and was concerned
to look upon it as a Duty incumbent upon himself, to take care not only of the
safety of Himself and His People, but likewise to look after the Honor of
Almighty God.

Now whatever may be pretended for that Natural Liberty, which every man is now
a-dayes supposed to have a full right to, to be permitted the enjoyment of his
own way of Worship, we do find that things of this Nature were before the Days
of Moses, and without relation to any of his Laws, under the Restraint and
Authority of Superiors, who were to be in this as well as in any other
Affairs, not only Guides but Governors. I suppose that without breach of
Modesty, a man may with some Confidence affirm, that if it had not been within
the due bounds of that Power which of right did belong to Abraham, that it
would never have been recorded for his everlasting Honor by God himself, That
he would command his Children and Household after him to keep the way of the
Lord, not only advise or exhort, but Command, as we have it, Genesis 18. 19. And
Abraham's Family was so large, as that Genesis 23. 6. He is styled a Mighty
Prince. And in this place we are to consider that it is very plain, that every
one of all those Arguments, which do assert Liberty of Conscience by way of
Right so far as to exempt Religion from the Authority of the Magistrate, do,
at least with equal force exempt it from the Authority of Parents, Masters, or
who ever else besides: For this must needs be very evident, that if this
Liberty be such a natural indefeasable right as that no humane power whatever
can take it away from us, then as the Regal Power cannot take it away; so for
the same reason neither can the Paternal or Despotical: Nay farther, if so be
that these Pretenders are in the Right, and that such a Liberty in Matters of
Religion, and the Profession of that Liberty be one part of Liberty, with which
Christ has made us free, and which we are accordingly called upon to stand
fast in, as being purchased for us by our Redeemer's Blood, then the same
Argument does return upon us again at least with equal, if not with greater
force; for as the King ought not to deprive us of any degree of that Liberty
with which Christ made us free; so neither ought any Parent or Master presume
to do any such thing; and Liberty of Conscience must upon these terms receive
as little interruption in Families as in Kingdoms: No imposition must upon
these terms be endured in any House, School, or College, as to Forms or hours
of Prayer, no Words, no nor no Gestures must be prescribed; every Child or
Servant has the free Liberty to remonstrate in behalf of this invaluable and
frequently insisted on Privilege, that no man must dare to determine what
Christ has left free, for in Christ there is no difference of any Age or
Quality, high and low in him are all alike.

The chief, if not only ground of mistake in this particular is this, that in
the New Testament we have not an Example of a Civil Magistrate exercising his
Civil Power in defense of the Gospel: Now that which renders this Exception
utterly insignificant, is this, that in the New Testament we do not read of any
Civil Magistrate who was a Christian. And nothing can be plainer than this,
that the Magistrates which then were did look upon Religion as a thing within
their Cognizance, and accordingly, as they did not believe the Doctrine of the
Gospel to be true, they did call them to account who did either profess or
propogate it: And if this had been one alteration which the Gospel had brought
into the World, that from henceforth Religion, contrary to the Sentiments of
all former Ages, should be absolutely exempt from the Cognizance of any
Magistrate, and that every man's Conscience was so sacred, as that God alone
was fit to be the Judge of it; it is not a little to be wondered at, that in
this new Epoch and strange alteration of Affairs, the Apostles did take no
manner of notic^ of this change, and when they had so fair Opportunities and
proper seasons; as when they themselves were called in Question about Matters
of Religion, did never in the least insert this in their Apologies, that
Religion was no part of the Civil Magistrates business: When St. Paul was
questioned about Heresy, he made no such exception against the Tribunal he was
called before; that Heresy was a thing which they had nothing to do to enquire
about, but gave them an Account that the Doctrine which he preached was not
Heresy.

And that we may root up the very Foundation of all mistakes in this matter, it
is very evident, that among all the Precepts, which we meet with in the New
Testament, concerning Moderation, Condescension, bearing with one another
Infirmities, it is very evident, that not any one of them has any manner of
Relation to our great Idol of Liberty of Conscience; they being plainly given
to private Persons, and many times in relation only to their own passions, and
where not so limited to certain Cases, occasional emergencies, and with a clear
reference to their not having as yet time or opportunity of being sufficiently
instructed: But as for the Governors of the Church they are sufficiently
called upon to watch over their respective Flocks, and to take care that Wolves
do not break in upon them, they are called upon to exercise the whole power
with which they were entrusted, viz. the power of Excommunication, a thing
which comes so near the Question now in Debate, that it was not seldom assisted
with temporal penalties: And though it is often suggested into his Argument,
that the Outward Sword can act no more upon the mind of men than upon a Ghost,
yet St. Paul, 1 Cor. 5. 5. was of the Opinion, that the Destruction of the
Flesh (a Phrase well known to signify Diseases, and such like inflictions on
the Body) was a very likely method by which the Spirit might at length come to
be saved. The Soul and the Body though of a distant Nature have so near an
Union, such Common Interests, and so great an influence one upon another, that
what does affect the one, the other cannot choose but be so far concerned in,
as at the least to consider it: And this is obvious to the most ordinary
Experience, and has seldom failed of a great Effect, whenever it has been
made trial of. And if it were not so, it would not only supercede all
correction in religious Affairs, but in Civil ones likewise.

Now that any such kind of Liberty of Conscience was brought into the World by
the Revelation of the Gospel, as that every one should henceforward without
control profess and propagate what Opinion soever he either did really or would
pretend to believe, I take to be a thing so far from being according to to the
Rule of the New Testament, that I must profess my self to be very much
mistaken, if so be that this thing be not contrary not only to some few Texts,
but to a considerable part of the whole Design of it. In the 4th of the Ephesians.
v. 14. we read of several Orders and Degrees of Men instituted and appointed
for this very purpose, that they might take care of the perfecting the Saints,
the work of the Ministry, the edifying the Body of Christ; that we be
henceforth no more Children tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind
of Doctrine, by the slight of men and cunning crastiness whereby they lie in
wait to deceive. Now is it credible that an unbounded License for all manner of
Opinions, was ever intended by St. Paul to be a thing to be looked upon, as
being according to the mind of Christ; who tells us of a whole Order of Men
appointed by Christ, whose Duty it should be to take care, that men should not
be tossed to and fro, and carried about with every Wind of Doctrine. And this
Consideration will be of so much the greater force both as to the Care which
ought to be taken of Souls, and withal as to the Ends of Government, and all
the purposes of humane Life: If we do but keep in mind the Caution which is
here given us by the Apostle, that every thing is not Gold that glisters; that
fair pretenses may have very ill Designs lodged under them: The being tossed to
and fro with every wind of Doctrine is it self certainly a very great Evil and
of very ill consequence. But the deluded persons themselves have one good
Preservative against it, when they are by such an infallible Authority
forewarned and assured, that this does frequently come to pass by the slight of
men and the cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive: Now in this
Case I would appeal to common Sense, whether it be a thing advisable upon the
scores either of Piety or Prudence, that such deceivers should have an
unbounded Liberty, to seduce all those whom at any time they shall be able to
impose upon? It is plain that St. Paul was so far from being of this mind, that
he calls upon the Ecclesiastical Officers in this case to make use of the
highest Censures which they were entrusted with, I wish they were cut off that
trouble you, Gal. 5. 12. Now I would fain know whether when this which our
Apostle does advise is done, that according to the Rules of Scripture, any one
or more are cast out of the Communion of the Church upon the account of
Corruption either in Doctrine or Manners, it be agreeable to common Sense, that
this Person or Persons, so cast out of the Church according to the Rules above
supposed, should in the same Kingdom, nay, in the same Parish, have a right to
set up another? that being cut off as a rotten Member from one Church, he may
from thence assume the Privilege to create himself the Pastor of another,
which he no doubt will be forward enough to tell us is a much purer one.

Now the want of exercising the Censures of the Church in this very Case of
false Doctrine we find to be a thing highly blameworthy, Rev. 2. 14. where it
is said to the Angel of the Church of Pergamus, I have a few things against
thee, because thou have them who hold the Doctrine of Balaam; and Ver. 15. Thou
have them who hold the Doctrine of the Nicolaitans: Now the Governor of this
Church is not charged in the least that he himself did hold these false
Doctrines, but that there are those within his Communion who do hold them; as
again the Complaint is renewed, v. 20. to another Angel, I have a few things
against thee, because thou suffer that woman Iezebel, which calls her self
a Prophetess, to teach and seduce my servants to commit fornication, and to eat
things sacrificed to Idols. From all which it is very plain, that this Natural
or Christian Right of propagating whatever Opinion men do chance, or fancy, or
pretend to be of, was a thing which St. John was utterly unacquainted with, and
blames the Governors of the Church for suffering a false Prophetess to teach
and seduce the Souls committed to their Charge.

And let any reasonable man consider with himself, whether the condition of the
Common people be not lamentably exposed to innumerable and unaccountable
Dangers, if so be that by public Authority they shall lie exposed to every one
to deceive, who can and will. St. Paul, 2 Ti,. 2. 17. gives us notice of some
Heretics of his time, whose words do eat as does a canker; he names the Men
and the Doctrines, Hymeneus and Philetus, who say that the Resurrection is past
already and overthrow the Faith of some: and this Doctrine of theirs by the
benefit of Liberty of Conscience has been preached since their days; and as
often soever as that time shall come which St. Paul does so much bewail, 2 Timothy
4. 3. That men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own Lusts heap
to themselves teachers, having itching ears. Authority will be found useful as
well as Instruction, and Government be needful as well as Exhortation.

In the Second Epistle of St. Peter, c. 2. v. 1, 2, 3. we read of false
Prophets and false Teachers who shall priv^ly bring in damnable heresies; the
consequence of which is there said to be very dreadful both to themselves and
others, They shall bring upon themselves swift destruction: But this is not
all, for this kind of infection is not only fatal but contagious; as it is
expressed, v. 2. Many shall follow their pernicious ways. Now if errors are so
pernicious to the Souls of men, and withal of a very spreading nature, is it a
thing advisable that there should be an unbounded License for entertaining and
receiving, spreading and propagating them? And this Consideration will appear
evidently to be the more forcible, if we withal remember, that it is more than
possible, that Doctrines in themselves false, may be known to be false by the
men who teach them; and with great art and demureness many may endeavor to
persuade others to those things of which themselves are not really persuaded.
And let no man look upon this as any harsh or uncharitable Censure of mine; for
it is so far from being a suggestion of mine, that it is in express terms
taught by the Apostle, v. 3. Thorough covetousness shall they with feigned
words make merchandise of you: So that Heresy may be a solemn way of setting
up for a Cheat; Separation a very gainful Trade; the getting a Meeting House, a
religious Method of setting up a Shop, where the more numerous and ignorant his
Auditors (otherwise called his Chapmen) are, so much the more it is in his
power to put off what Wares he will, and to set what prices he pleases upon
them.

And thus I think I have made it somewhat plain, from the New Testament, that
that Liberty of Conscience, which of late has so often been called for, is
nothing like any part of that Christian Liberty which the Writers of that Book
did ever think of; that they themselves did exercise, and require of others to
exercise the whole Ecclesiastical Power in points of Doctrine as well as
Manners; and that was the whole Power they were entrusted with; that this Power
of theirs, though in it self wholly spiritual, was yet by an immediate
interposition of God attended upon with Temporal Penalties, and by the Apostles
known and intended so to be. So that in this Case it happened to them in
vindicating their Authority, as it did in another in the exercise of their
Charity; they could not give the poor man who begged at the Gate of the Temple
Money; but they could give him the use of his Limbs; they had no Silver nor
Gold, but what was much better they had; they could say, Rise up and walk: So
in this Case they had not in those days the Sword of the Magistrate; but when
it was seasonable they made it evident, that the want of that was abundantly
supplied by the Sword of God.

Now all this being premised, there is very little need certainly for men to
require a particular express Precept for the Power of the Civil Magistrate in
Matters of Religion; seeing the Authority of the Civil Magistrate over the
affairs which related to the Worship of God was acknowledged and exercised over
all the World; the Original of which practice we find to be of as early Date as
Magistracy it self. It is notorious, that the Kingly and the Priestly Office
was of old in one and the same Person; and when by the appointment of God, they
came to be separated, there is not the least show that this Separation was made
out of any favor to Liberty of Conscience; nor the least in^^^uation that holy
things should for all Ages and Dispensations to come be looked upon as no part
of the Princes care: Nay, this is so far from being any thing like the Case,
that in that very Nation, wherein that Separation was made, the Civil Power did
all along retain the Right and did frequently use that Right of his in
interposing authoritatively in Religious Affairs* And he did do this both by
the appointment of God, and at other times without any especial appointment but
by his original Right of Magistracy, when there was an Exig^^^y of Affairs
which did require it; Nay, and in Matters of outward Order, and the more decent
Celebration of Divine Offices, he did not always tie himself to the express
Rule of the written word, but according to his own Prudence; and what he did
thus without especial Commission is in Scripture recorded with great
approbation. The Instances are too well known to stand in need of being
insisted on.

Our forementioned Author tells us, p. 13. That a Magistrate, by becoming a
Christian, has no addition of power to what he had before, which is readily
granted him; let him have but so much, and he will stand in need of no more.
They who exempt all Affairs of Religion from the Authority of the Magistrate
must prove that Christ did take much from his Authority, viz. the whole
cognizance of Sacred things, a Power known to have been used by Jews as well as
Gentiles. And however the Clergy have been frequently and falsely traduced in
this particular, that in order to Ends of the^^ own they have flattered Princes
with a Power, which really did not belong to them. It is well known that the
Writers of Politics have asserted this Prerogative of Princes as earnestly as
the Divines have done: Instances would here be endless* I shall therefore show
you the thing granted by a known Scholar, but no Divine by Profession, and that
is the Excellent Grotius, Omnes (says he) qui de Republica aliquid lectu
dignum scripsere, hoc jus in sacra non partem summi Imperii, sed etiam
potissimam atque praecipuam vocant, de Imperio, C. 1. p. 14.

Now I must needs confess that our forementioned Author does, p. 22, 23. not
only assert the Princes Power in Matters of Religion, but proves it very well;
and at last concludes, that it is a great weakness to think otherwise: But then
he adds, p. 24. That the Prince must by no means in this case use the Sword;
and having said this, he seems a little suspicious, as if that Limitation had
quite spoiled his whole Concession, as indeed it does. But his wonted courage
does immediately return again; Nor need it see^ strange that the Magistrate
should have the care and oversight of that where he is not to use the Temporal
Power, etc. Now, I think, it is not easy to be imagined what effectual Care
the Magistrate can take but that; our Author tells us indeed of another way,
viz. He is to see it done by the spiritual means which Christ has appointed,
p. 24. But if this be all which he may do, this may be too little: For suppose
those spiritual Weapons do meet with such persons, who do slight, undervalue
and stand in open defiance of them; does all that concern and care, which our
Author, but one page before, asserts the Magistrate to be entrusted with, in
looking after the Honor of God and the Souls of men, amount to no more but
barely this, That he is to see the Spiritual Censures of the Church made use
of; and if men have no more Religion than to despise and laugh at them, he is
to stand still and look on while they are so doing? This Learned Gentleman
confesses and contends for it, that the Magistrate is in his Station bound to
take care of Gods Honor, p. 23. and yet thoroughout his whole Book he is ever
afterward very zealous, that he must by no means use the Sword in order to it:
Now, how a Magistrate can in his station act, where this is interdicted him, is
a thing not easily apprehended. When a Magistrate, as such, declares his
pleasure, common Sense tells us, that the meaning is, that if we do not bear a
fitting regard to that his Declaration, it must be at our own peril; and
without this I do not apprehend how his Authority does appear to be any greater
than that of any other man.

Again, if the King be to govern the People, Religion must then be a very
considerable part of his Care, as being a thing wherein his Government will
find it self to be very frequently and very highly concerned; there being
nothing more evident nor experienced than this, that according to the right or
wrong measures which may be taken of Religion, the People may be wrought upon
to do either very much good or very much evil, even as to the Affairs of this
Life: There are not a few Doctrines, which this Nation is no Stranger to, which
is a Prince has not power to forbid the spreading of, God shall be extremely
dishonored, himself be in a fair way to be deposed* and his Subjects ruined;
and he shall pl^inly see all this, and upon these men's terms not in the least
be able to help it: And this naturally leads (...) to our next Consideration,
the many great inconveniences which attend Liberty of Conscience both in
relation to Religion and Government, the Worship of God, and the Public Peace.

But before I enter upon this Part of the Argument, I must again return so far
back, as to take some notice of that common rumor about the Town, of such a
Project in hand as will (if the Success can be supposed to answer the great
hopes which are conceived of it) make all that Labor needles^ and that is the
forementioned Comprehension: In behalf of which the undertakers are said
usually and openly to allege this, that if that be yielded to, there will be
then no need at all of Toleration; for, by that means the Church will be so
strong by the accession of her new Friend^, that she may safely contemn, and by
their help easily overcome all her other Enemies; and withal they are Persons
already so very near us* that there are none but inconsiderable matters in
debate between us; for they allow Episcopacy, approve the Liturgy, abhor
Sacrilege, believe our Articles, and already can and often do communicate in
our Public Worship.

Now as plausible and taking soever this Plea is, yet methinks that there is no
one part of it which does not carry something of wonder in it. First, it is
well known that there was a time when the Presbyterians did join with, invite,
encourage, and protect all other Sectaries, that by their Assistance they might
be enabled to ruin the Church; and therefore it ought to be well considered
upon, by what means it is brought about, that their Minds come now to be so f^r
altered as that they will now join with the Church in the Suppression of all
the other Sects: Nay, and very lately the leading Persons of that way did join
Interests with the Pap^sts, and mutually engage for assistance to P^^liament
other in stopping of Bills in (...) preparing against Both of them*

In the next place, if the difference between us and them are so
inconsiderable, as they pretend, then surely there was no need of the last War
upon any Religious Account. There was no need of that grievous complaint
against some of those Things which a Preacher at this Day in Aldersgate Street
made before a Mock-Parliament, September 24. 1656. Praised be that God who has
delivered (...) from the Imposition of Prelatical I^novations,
Altar-gen^-flections, and Cri^gings with Crossings, and all that Popists Trash
and Trumpery: And truly (I speak no more than what I have often thought and
said) the removal of those insupportable burdens counter (...) ALL THE BLOOD
and treasure shed and spent in these late Distractions (nor did I as yet ever
hear of any godly men that desired, were it possible, to purchase their Friends
or money again at so dear a rate, as with the return of these, as have those
(...) Antichristian Yokes rei^pos^^ upon us: And if any such there be I am
sure that that desire is no part of their godliness, and I profess my self in
that to be none of the number: Here we see that Mr. Ie^kin is very positive and
express in the Case; that the differences are so great between us, that all the
blood shed, whether in the Field or on the Scaffold, was all little enough to
be shed in order to the removal of so great Evils; and yet there w^^ shed in
this Quarrel the Blood of the King, many of the Nobles and Gentry, and of vast
numbers of all other Ranks, Orders and Degrees amongst (...): If the
Differences between us be so inconsiderable, as it is now said, then methinks
there was but little cause for that great Zeal of Mr. Calamy's, which he
expressed in Guild^Hall, October 6. (...) in order to the persuading the Ci^y
unto a liberal Contribution toward bringing in the Scots, in order to the
preservation of the Gospel, (...) he several times expresses himself in that
Speech, as if the Diffe^ences were in his esteem, and in the esteem of that
Grave and Reverend Assembly of Ministers there present with him, so very
considerable, that the chief concerns of the Gospel did depend upon them; and
accordingly he made use of this pretense as his chief Art, whereby to wheedle
the City out of their money at that time: Let me tell you, if ever (Gentlemen)
you might use this Speech, O happy Penny, you may use it now, happy Money that
will purchase my Gospel, happy Money that will purchase Religion, and purchase
a Reformation to my Posterity; O happy Money and blessed be God that I have it
to lend: So that it seems these Gentlemen have two measures which upon
different occasions they do make use of: When they have a mind to Collogue with
Authority, then the differences between them and the regular Clergy are mere
trifles and very inconsiderable; but when there is a season offered, wherein it
is safe to animate and inflame the People, the^ the differences are of that
moment, that no Treasure, no Blood is sufficient to be laid out in a Debate of
that Concernment, or in the Words of the forementioned Speech; If I had as many
lives as I have hairs on my head, I would be willing to sacrifice all these
lives in this Cause: Lastly, if the Differences between us be so very small,
sure there can be no great cause for their present obstinate Separation.

But if these men are really and in good earnest desirous of coming into the
Church. It is very fit that in order to that they should declare whether they
will leave those Principles which have hitherto divided them from it, or
whether they are resolved to entertain those Principles still, or any of them:
If they will leave their Principles the Churches Arms are open to receive and
to embrace them; but if they mean ^o retain their Principles, or any of them,
their room may be more desirable than their Company; for upon those terms the
difference is in no likelihood to amount to any more than this, that instead of
remaining in a Schism from the Church, they will thereby be enabled to make a
Schism within it; or if they are at length brought to be persuaded to part with
any of their Principles, will they be so Honest as to declare that they have
been so far mistaken, and desire their Followers to get out of those Snares
which they in former Days did lay for them; and particularly will they
renounce the Covenant? It was very good Advice which the Right Reverend Father
in God the Lord Bishop of Winchester gave His Majesty, in his Epistle before
the Coronation Sermon, when he reminded Him of that wise Resolution of His
Royal Grandfather, Henry the Fourth, That he was ready at any time to make a
Peace with any of the Leaguers* but he would never make any Peace with the
League.

Now if they look upon it as any hard measure that they should be called upon
to renounce the Covenant: Let them not at all wonder, if the Regular Sons of
the Church have not forgot those rigours with which it was imposed, the many
mischiefs which have been wrought, and are something apprehensive of those
mischiefs which may at this day be wrought by it; if so be that the
Renunciation of it should be laid aside; which will certainly be interpreted as
at least a tacit Confession, that that Injuction was unreasonable, and such a
one as a man of a tender Conscience could not submit to; and that is a fair
preparation for the Opinion that the Covenant is really a thing which does
oblige us. But because that Moderation is at this time a word much in fashion;
let us compare the Severities used in behalf of the Covenant with this which is
so much complained of as being against it* It is indeed, by reason of the
Clamours by themselves raised about its obligation, established by a Law, that
none shall be admitted to Public Trusts in Universities, Schools, or the
Church, who will not renounce its Obligation; but the Covenanters did not think
this a sufficient security in their Case; Mr. Calamy tells us in his
forementioned Speech, in the name of himself and the Reverend Ministers with
him, with great Joy and Triumph; That there was not one Person in the Kingdom
of Scotland who is not a Covenanter, and the^e shall not one abide among them
who will not take this Covenant. Now this Mr. Calamy, from the beginning of the
Long Parliament till the Day of his Death, was a Ringleader of that Party of
men who do now plead for Comprehension, and do earnestly at this time desire
that they may be dispensed with, for renouncing the Covenant. And if the
Counsel of these Divines had been of as great Authority in the Army, as it was
with the Two Houses, that which Mr. Calamy does magnify in Scotland would have
been a pattern for the same course to be taken in England.

But seeing that the Covenant is more sacred with them than the Oaths of
Alleagiance and Supremacy, will they, if they should be thus far condiscended
to, be so grateful to His Majesty as to declare their Opinions against the War
raised against His Father? will they in lieu of renouncing the Covenant take an
Oath wherein they will assert, that the War raised by some Lords and Gentlemen
sitting at Westminster, under the Name of the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, by a Commission granted to Robert Earl of Essex, was unlawful, as
being against the known Laws both of God and of the Nation? If they refuse
this, seeing that we know that many of these very men for whom Comprehension is
desired did preach up the War, if they will not declare against it, it is
shrewdly to be suspected that their mind is the same as formerly, and the only
change which is, is in the posture of Affairs.

But because it is now said in behalf of these men, that they allow Episcopacy,
and approve of a Liturgy, nay of ours: That we may not be imposed upon by any
ambiguous generality of Words; it is but requisite that in this they would
declare particularly in what sense it is that they allow and approve both these
Things; for if by things past we may guess at things present; by Episcopacy
they may mean but Presbytery; by the Bishop may be understood a kind of a
Prolocutor. Every assuming Presbyter may at any time say as one of them lately
did, that he is as good a Scripture Bishop, as he w^o sat upon the Bench; or
perhaps look upon a Bishop only as a Civil Officer in order to some legal
purposes: and by a Liturgy they may mean only such a ^orm of Prayers which may
be either used or le^ alone, or rather a thing which is (if ever to be)
permitted only to those who are Persons of such small sufficiency as not to be
able to pray without it, and so instead of being a Duty is intended merely as a
disparagement: Or it may be the Common Prayer may be allowed as a way of
spending the time till the Company is got together, and then comes the Prayer
which the Spirit is the immediate Author of, and which alone has the promise
of any blessing made (...) it.

Unless, I say, that these Persons be required to express their Minds very
particularly in these and all other Matters of Debate between us, we shall be
alway^ a^ a loss, how much of the Good Old Cause they resolve to stick to; and
without some satisfaction in these things we have reason to be jealous, that
they have, after so many other disappointments, pitched upon this Contrivance,
as a very likely one, whereby the Church may, by their admission, become
divided against it self: The Pulpits may quickly be brought to speak in very
different Languages, and the Hearers strangely distracted between the several
abettors of the very distant Measures of the old and new Conformity.

They who have kept out of the Church thus long, rather than they would not
have their Wills in such and such Matters in debate between us; it is scarce to
be hoped, that when they are brought into the Church, by being yielded to in
them, that they will not with the same Art and Industry keep up in the Minds of
Men a good opinion of that Cause which they have so long contended for: At the
least they will take what care they can, that those of their former Hearers
whom they shall be able to bring along with them, (if they shall be able to
bring any store of their Hearers along with them, which is no small question)
shall for ever be kept under bondage to every one of all those scruples, by
which they have been able to retain dominion over them: And they who have all
along been, observably upon all occasions, admirably expert at interpreting all
things to the utmost possibilities of all advantage, as to themselves and their
Cause, it is not to be expected from them, that they will not interpret this
Condescension as a complete Justification. And unless the Modesty and Gratitude
of these men be strangely increased of late, beyond what it has used to be,
our Governors are not like to receive any other return than this; That God
has at length begun to return again, and in some sort to own his People and
his Cause: He has now opened the Eyes of the Parliament, and let them see
their Error in imposing the renouncing the Covenant; and who knows what more a
gracious God may do for so gracious a People? And that Reputation which has
thus long engaged them to pretend their Cause of Separation to be just, can do
no less than continue to engage them to avow its having been necessary. So that
the Church will by this means be weakened by having one great Security taken
from her; those Men will be admitted into her, of whose Affections and Designs
she has abundant cause to be highly jealous; and who, by obtaining their
present Demands, will, according to their old Customs, be thereby emboldned
with the like restless importunity to make more demands, and perhaps in a
little time be enabled to take what farther they please, without so much as
asking it: And by this means the People will become extremely divided, both
amongst themselves and from the Government. And when that is done, there will
be so many left out of this Comprehension, that the noise will not be much less
than it is already: And whatever accession can be supposed to be made to the
Church by the coming in of her new Friends, will be more than over-ballanced by
the loss she will receive in the stability of her Principles and the Unity of
her Children: She will be the less able to defend her self against the
Exceptions of the Romanists, and be at no small loss for an answer to the
Clamours of other Sectaries, who can pretend as great grievances, and allege
as plausible Reasons why they should be gratified; so that the Work of
Coalition (as it is called in the newest word) as often soever as it is done,
will be just as often to begin again.

As to any other Particulars of that Comprehension which is now so much
endeavored, seeing they have not thought fit to let us know them, I shall not
venture to make a guess at them, but shall go on to another Contrivance, and in
the Opinion of many a more promising one, and that is, Toleration, which is
frequently said to be an Expedient which will gratify many more, and more
Considerable Persons than can be hoped to be brought within the Compass of any
one Comprehension.

Now it is by no means a thing to be wondered at, if so be that the proposal of
Toleration be in it self at the first view very plausible, and in the eyes of
very many Persons exceeding acceptable: It looks like a Privilege which every
man has an interest in, which, seeing it is enjoyed by all alike, no man should
take himself to have any cause to envy it to any other. Now this Liberty of
Conscience, however it has obtained to be the general Darling, yet, methinks,
in the very name there is something which offers it self to our Consideration,
which is at least worth our Enquiry; Whether the very demand does not carry in
it an Exception against it self? How does it appear that Conscience has any
such absolute Right to Liberty? Has it no Rule which it ought to walk by? has
it no obligation to follow any besides its own Light? If this be not the Case,
then Liberty and Conscience are two words, which are very unfit in great
variety of Cases to be joined together. I shall readily grant, that to act
against our Conscience is always a sin; but then I shall add this further, That
it is very frequently a grievous sin to act according to it: Conscience may in
some cases condemn, but there are very many cases wherein it cannot justify. I
know nothing by my self (says St. Paul) yet am I not hereby justified; and
farther, I may self thought verily that I ought to do many things contrary to
the name of Jesus, etc. The Scripture tells us of seared Consciences, Reprobate
Minds, Men whose minds and Consciences are defiled. From all which Expressions,
it is very clear, That Conscience is not a safe Rule for any man to act by in
his private Capacity.

And in the next place, as Conscience is very far from being a safe Rule for
any man to act by in his private Capacity; so it is by no means advisable, that
men should be so far trusted, as to teach according to it in any Public
Places: St. Paul assures us, that by this permission dangerous Contentions
shall arise, by reason of the perverseness of men, when in the nature of the
things there was no real Cause for them, ^ Tim. 2. 14. They will strive about
words to no purpose, to the subversion of the ^earers. And, ^ Tim. 4. 1. he
tells us of seducing spirits, who teach the doctrine of devils: Tim. 3. for
many Verses together, he describes a sort of very wicked men, of whom in the
close he gives this Character, That they have a form of godliness, but deny the
power thereof; that they creep into houses and l^ad captive silly women laden
with diverse lusts: And again we read of those who bring in damnable Her^sies;
and again, which directly comes up to the point in hand about Toleration,
whose mouths must be stopped. Thus far therefore our way is clear; 1. That
according to the Doctrine of the New Testament, Conscience is not its own Rule,
is not entirely left to it self in its own way of acting: 2. That those who are
allowed to be public Preachers are not to be entrusted with an absolute
Liberty of propagating whatever Opinions themselves either really are or shall
pretend to be of; of which I have already spoke, and therefore shall add no
more upon that point besides the laying down some of the many Inconveniences
which will unavoidably arise upon the granting of any such Liberty in these Two
Respects, 1. Of Religion, 2. Of Government.

First, as to Religion; and here the Case is very clear, that such a Liberty is
the most ready way in the World to make Religion weak and despicable, by being
crumbled into an unaccountable and every day increasing variety of Sects and
Schisms: What one other Contrivance can possibly be thought upon, whereby to
expose Religion to the frequent and seemingly just scorn of Unbelievers than
this? That it should by public Authority be openly exposed to all manner of
ridiculous and incongruous pretenses unto it, to all kinds of dotage and
imposture, to all the folly and all the falseness which is to be met with among
the sons of men: That every one who has but a Freak in his Brain shall have
free Liberty, if he pleases, to Christen it a motion of the Spirit, and every
humor though never so unheard of and extravagant, shall have by Law a
Privilege (if it will but claim it) to recommend its self as a degree of
further Light: Here we shall see men shaking all day, as if the Spirit came to
them in Convulsions, and as the humor increases we shall see them run naked
about the Streets, as if with the Old Man, they had put off all degrees of
Modesty: The Scripture shall be frequently so interpreted, as that no man in
his Wits can possibly understand it, it both has and may be allegorized so far
as to leave no manner of Sense or Truth in any one Word of all the History of
it; its Laws may be so commented upon, as to carry in them no manner of
Obligation: Among our selves the Family of Love had gotten a Fancy that Christ
was not any one Person, but a quality whereof many are partakers, that to be
raised is nothing else, but to be regenerated or endued with the said Quality,
and the separation from them which have it, and them which have it not, is
Judgment^ Now where ever this Liberty is indulged, the Grand and concerning
Articles of our Faith, our Saviors taking Humane Nature upon him, the
Resurrection from the Dead, and the last Judgment, are all given away in
Exchange for two or three fanciful Expressions. The History of the Creation
has of old been made but an Allegory; the Garden of Eden a (...) Trope; it is
to little purpose to allege that with equal Reason it might be said, that by
the whole Race of mankind was not to be understood any real Beings, but only so
^any handsome Figures, and by the Universe is not to be understood a Creation,
but a Strain of Wit, for Reason in such like Cases will be no more harkned to,
than Scripture: So likewise it (...) been taught, that Christ shall descend
from Heaven in a Metaphor, and we be catched up into the Air in a Moral way;
The New Heavens and the New Earth are nothing else but the World changed by
their Example into their Opinions: And if this Liberty be allowed, all Miracles
and all Mysteries will be quickly changed into so many Whimsies; for what is it
which self-conceit cannot inspire, or madness prove, or that man admit, who
cares not to know what himself means; or whether he does or not, if he be once
got under the plausible shelter of Liberty of Conscience himself, what is it
that he may not impose upon vast multitudes, who though never so well meaning
in themselves, are yet liable to be overreached by the Arts of other men: The
dangers of this kind are not possible to be reckoned, because they increase and
vary at their own pleasure; neither is there any man living, who can possibly
tell us how many and how gross absurdities such a Liberty as this may bring
into the Nation in the very next moment.

This very Devise of Liberty of Conscience, which many, who look upon
themselves as wise men and no ill Christians, are fond of, is the very same, by
which one of its shrewdest Adversaries did hope to drive Christianity out of
the World, and that too by its own assistance; and to that end he granted a
promiscuous Liberty for all dissenting Christians to enjoy the public exercise
of their several ways, in hopes thereby to engage one of them against another,
and by that means to make his advantage upon all of them: For so we read of
Julian, that when his long contrived project of restoring Heathenism began to
be put in effectual execution, that this was the Course which he pitched upon,
as that which was most likely to bring his Design about, to grant Liberty of
Conscience to all dissenting Christians, as Ammianus Marcellinu^ has it Lib.
22. Vtque dispositorum roboraret effectum, dissidentes Christianorum Antistites
cum plebe discissa in palatium intromissos monebat, ut civilibus Discordiis
consopitis quisque nullo vetante religionisuae serviret intrepibus* Here was a
man very tender of Consciences, but what think we was his Reason for all this
Indulgence and Moderation, we may read it in the next Words, Quod agebat ideo
obstinate, ut dissentiones augente Licentia non timeret, unanimantem postea
plebe^^ nullas infestas hominibus bestias ut sunt sibi ferales plerique
Christianorum expertus. This wise and subtle Adversary knew very well that this
was a ready way to destroy Christianity, to give a free Liberty and a full
opportunity for every one who pleased to divide it: So that this sage
Contrivance of ours is but the Christianity of an Heathen, the taking up the
Moderate Counsels of a professed Apostate; and our Wisdom in preserving Religion
does express it self in those very ways, by which as wise men as our selves
have thought the ready way to overthrow it. Indeed it is hardly credible, that
any Person who understands Humane^Nature, who considers how many are its
Weaknesses, and how violent its Passions, who is a Judge of Consequences, or
has at all observed the course of Affairs, can in the least be fond of any
such device as this kind of Liberty, who has not within himself a very great
Design against the present Religion of that Kingdom where he does propose it.
But, alas! that is but a small part of this evil, even our common Christianity
will be hard put to it, if it must wrestle with all the difficulties which
Toleration will immediately bring upon it: That Faith is in no great likelihood
of remaining long pure and sound, which is exposed to whosoever pleases to
corrupt and to defile it

There is one Principle well known amongst us, which wherever it is admitted,
there is no Doctrine of Faith whatever, nor Rule of good Life which can be able
to stand before it, and that is the Doctrine of New Light, or private
Illumination: This is an Evil which cannot be watched with too much Care,
because it always has it in its own Power to occasion how many and what kinds
of mischief soever it self pleases; and withal it is with great ease
pretended to by every one who will; and there are every day to be met with too
many persons too readily disposed to be imposed upon by such pretenses. Some
Romanists have with great scorn insulted over the Reformation, upon the account
that this evil has made a shift to creep into it; whereas this is a difficulty
which all Religions are liable to be abused by; a folly with which the Church
of Rome does exceedingly abound, and to which she is indebted for some of her
chief Orders, as being plainly founded in it. The Quakers in England are
neither more ridiculous, nor as yet so impious as the Al^^brados were in Spain,
nor do the blasphemous Phrenzies of David George exceed those of Evangelium
Aeternum. This is an ill Weed which will grow in all Soils, and spread
exceedingly; and Infallibility it self is but an equal Plea, and therefore is,
upon such occasions, glad to call in to its assistance its Temporal Advantages.
This very Pretense does scarce leave a man within the possibility of being
confuted; what Authority is ^here to be produced which is fit to come in
competition with this Persuasion, That I have an immediate suggestion from the
holy Ghost: The Scripture it self has but one and the same Original, and is of
an elder Date, and, if I please, is as imperfect in respect of my Revelation,
as that of Moses was in respect of that of Christ. This Evil is liable to to be
as endless as Thought or Art can make it, as boundless as Imagination, and has
as great variety of shapes to appear in, as there are possibilities in the
World for any man to be either willing to deceive or liable to be deceived.

What a fatal Influence the now contended for Liberty of Conscience had upon
the most considerable Articles of Religion, within a small compass of time, we
may learn from the forementioned Testimony of the London, and the Attestation
of the Cheshire-Ministers. I shall set down some of the Articles against which
those Errors were, but will not defile my Paper with the Errors themselves.
Against the Divine Authority of holy Scriptures; against the Nature and
Essence; against the Being of any God; against Christ as Mediator; against the
Obligation of the Moral Law; against Ordinances; against Lawful Oaths, against
the future State of Men's Souls after this Life, denying the Immortality of
them. But besides Religion, such a Liberty will be quickly found to have a sad
Influence upon Government and the public Peace.

And as this sort of Liberty will expose Truth to perpetual and unavoidable
Dangers, and withal has left it no possibility of a sufficient Defense against
them; so it has a natural tendency toward destroying the public Peace: And
not only so, but to the disturbance of all Societies, and even of every private
Family. Opinions have a great Influence upon Actions, and engage men not only
upon good, but upon very bad practices. He who is allowed to raise a Sect, has
a very fair opportunity put into his hands of making himself the Head of it, as
being such a Party; and by being permitted to have their Consciences, will have
but too many opportunities of having their Persons and Purses at his disposal
likewise. Hence it is, that though some Princes have been sometimes forced to
suffer Dissenters from the established Profession (by reason that they were so
numerous, or so subtle, that they could not go about to suppress them without
discovering how unable they were to do so;) yet they always looked upon such
Dissenters as the next door to Enemies; and accordingly had a perpetual Eye and
Guard upon them, as those who of all other were the most likely to be the
Authors or occasion of the next disturbance. It is a great mistake, though it
be often found amongst the greatest Persons, That Sects are things fit only to
be despised, because that men of Parts and Fortune are neither easily nor
usually seduced by them: but it ought likewise to be considered, that Ambition,
Revenge, Covetousness, Humor and Discontent may engage those who are not in
earnest themselves seduced, to appear in all seeming earnest to seduce others.
I shall readily grant, that both the Beginning and the greatest Growth of Sects
are amongst the meanest people, those whose Fortunes are as low as their
Understandings; but then they do not stay altogether among them, but spread
farther; like a Pestilence, which may begin in an obscure Alley, but in a
little time no part of the City or Kingdom may be free from it. Besides, are
not the Vulgar People the hands, the Tools, the Instruments which the Greatest
must always make use of? And is it not known by frequent experience, that a
Deception once got among them, may by a little Connivence thrive so far, as to
be able to dispute for Superiority, and instead of demanding an Indulgence,
refuse to give one? And, by how much the ordinary sorts of people are less
Masters of Reason than others, with so much the greater ease they may be
wrought upon to engage in those Courses; which by men who understood better,
would be looked upon as evidently unreasonable. Now this is an Error which has
been frequently committed by wise men in great places: They look upon the
Errors and Follies which the common People are drawn into, as things very fit
to be indulged, as being only so many occasions for themselves to droll upon;
but by their so doing they have often found the return, which Abner did of
sporting himself with Lives, as these mighty Sages do with Lives and Souls, 2 Samuel 2. 14. Let the young men arise and play before us; but with him they are
at last convinced, that, Ver. 26. it is bitterness in the latter end.

The safety of all Government does depend upon this, that it is certainly
stronger than each single person, and in taking care of this, That as to any
kinds of Union or joining Forces together, that there may be no such things but
under the guidance of the Magistrate, and by his appointment; and so long as
this is taken effectual care of, though the discontented persons be never so
many, yet because they have no way of uniting; they are but so many single
persons, scattered, weak and insignificant, having no opportunities of any
Common Council, they can never join in any Common Design. But let them once
have but so much as any one Phrase to know one another by, any settled place for
their constant Meetings, and a set and known company for them to meet with, and
any Bond whatever which does unite them, and they presently become a distinct
People, and begin to be dangerous, as having an Interest, Counsels and Body of
their own, which the Government is not manager of, nor privy to, but shall
quickly find it self highly concerned by all means to provide against.

Let it once be permitted to crafty, active, talking, lying and designing men,
to instill into the minds of all sorts of People, the necessity, usefulness,
piety, or rare excellency of any one thing or Contrivance whatever, beyond that
which the present Laws and establishment does provide for; and is not here a
most readily prepared matter for any bold Boutefeu to work upon, who will take
upon him to help the Nation immediately to so fine a thing? Has not any such
Undertaker a vast and already formed Party in all Parts of the Kingdom? Let him
but represent to them, that the present Government is the only rub in their
way, between them and their so fancied happiness; and is it not very likely
that this will be the very next Consequent Resolution; let us remove that
Obstacle, so public a good is much to be preferred before any particular Form
or Family; the welfare of the Nation is the great End, and Governors
themselves were created but in order to that, and consequently are to cease as
often as that End can be better attained without them.

Though the pretense be nothing but Conscience, yet every discontent will join
to make the Cry both loud and general. Schisms do of themselves naturally grow
into Parties, and, besides, are most plausible Occasions for any else to join
unto them; the gathered Churches are most excellent Materials to raise new
Troops out of, and when they are thus fa^ prepared, they are easily persuaded
to be at the Service of any one who will attempt to lead them on.

If all men were wise and honest, if every one understood well, and would act
accordingly; upon that Supposition Conscience might have a much greater trust
reposed in it than can be now advisable: And if we could flatter our selves so
far as to take that to be the Case, this would no more supersede the necessity
of the coercive power of Laws in Religious matters, than it would upon the same
grounds supersede it in Civil ones. For no Laws which ever were or can be in
the World can possibly provide in any Degree for those large measures of
Justice, Equity, Mercy, and all kinds of fair dealing, which would infallibly
every where be met with, if all men did take Care to keep a good Conscience;
Truth, Justice, Temperance, etc. are things which every man's Conscience does
and must needs tell him that he is obliged to, yet were it not for fear of the
Law, we should find that Conscience is not alone to be trusted in these which
are her Natural and familiar Ojects: And this is a thing so known and granted
on all hands, that it is not usual with men in their dealings among one another
to trust purely, in matters of any moment, to one another Conscience. And
seeing we acknowledge that Conscience may so often prevaricate in these plain
and obvious things, where she is so easily found out; we have no great cause to
trust to her fidelity, that she will not also dissemble in those things which
are more remote and obscure, and hidden from the very best of our discovery.
Let those therefore, who plead for Liberty of Conscience, consider; that there
are two sorts of men, which ought to be provided against, to keep this
contrivance of theirs from being absolutely the most senceless and dangerous in
the whole World; and upon their Grounds it does not appear to be so much as
possible to provide against them: First, those who are not honest, and these
may pretend Conscience if they will, and in that Case Religion and Government*
Truth and Peace are like to be most admirably secured, when they are
authoritatively permitted to the arbitrary Management of every designing
Atheist, who will but take upon him to be an Enthusiast: And in the second
place, as all men are not honest, so all men are not wise, and as the former
sort may pretend Conscience, so the latter are perpetually liable to be imposed
upon by the innumerable, however absurd pretenses unto it: Those Laws are not
fitted for the Temper of this World, which are made upon this supposition, that
every one who looks demurely is presently in good earnest, that men say nothing
but what they think; let us but consider that it is very possible for men to
personate, and then we shall not be very eager to desire a general License for
every one who has a mind to become a public Cheat.

And then from these diversities of Judgments, and many times when they are
only different forms of speaking, there will immediately arise great Distances
of Affection: For these Divisions, of Reuben there will be great thoughts of
heart, sur^^zings, censures, jealousies, raylings, evil speaking, animosities,
peevishness, malice, perverse disputings, and every evil way: Each Congregation
will have at least some one little Proposition peculiar to its self, which all
its Proselytes must be known by, which all their Thoughts must be perpetually
running upon, and every one else must be called upon to come up to: the
smallest gathered Church cannot hold its Members together, unless it has some
particular thing to engage them upon, and to have them known by, for they
cannot with any face separate from all mankind, but they must have something to
say for it,

This contrivance however it be absurd and dangerous will notwithstanding that,
have always many who will be very fond of it; for it is a most ready way for
every forward Fellow to think himself some body, because he has adopted
himself into such a Sect; and then the next thing which he is to think upon is
to try if he can improve the Notion a little farther; for if so, he shall be
the more taken notice of: And if he finds that his addition is but a little
taking, he will then forsake his Masters, to set up for himself, divide from
that Church of which he has been long a precious Member to gather a purer of
his own. And so his New Light will serve most bravely for himself to shine in.

But if this had been a new and unheard of Invention, the Contrivers might then
have been allowed to entertain vast hopes of it; but alas, it has been often
tried, and has always brought Confusion along with it: And is it to be
wondered at, that in variety of Worships the one does look upon the other as
erroneous, and perhaps impious? And then how lamentably must that City be
divided whose Inhabitants think themselves bound, as they love God to hate one
another; and it has been often seen, that a Common Enemy has crept in at
these intestine Divisions, and destroyed both, while the one, by reason of
different Communions, did not enough care to help the other.

Be our apprehensions about divine Matters never so different, I grant that we
ought not for the sake of them to be wanting in the common Duties of Humanity
to one another, or in our mutual Endeavors after the public Good. I readily
grant, that to be wanting in our assistance in either of these Cases, is a
great error; but alas! it is too general an one, and Lawmakers are to consider
not only what men ought, but what they use to do. Why shall I fight (says one)
for a Prince who is an Idolater? and why should I (says another) take any care
to relieve that City which is only a Bundle of Schismatics, the greatest part
whereof are in my esteem Blasphemers likewise? Jeroboam understood this very
well, he did not cast off the true God, but only set up another way of Worship,
as easily concluding that by persuading them to be of another Religion, he
should easily keep them to be another Kingdom; when their Faiths were once
divided, the Nations would never care to unite again.

And pray, tell me, what shall a Prince do in that Case, where are diverse ways
of Worship allowed and frequented in the same Nation? Shall he discountenance
the Professors of any one, by keeping them out of all Office and Employment? If
so, he disobligeth that whole Profession, loses so many hearts; who sure will
think themselves to be very hardly dealt with, in that they are disrespected
only out of their zeal for God, and because they follow the best of their
Light. And what are they like to think of such a State, which does refuse to
employ them merely upon this account, because they have tender Consciences, and
dare not be present where the Gospel is de^iled by a profane mixture of humane
Inventions? Or, Secondly, shall the Prince carry himself equally and
indifferently toward all Persuasions, countenance and prefer them all alike?
This can hardly be, because that he himself must be of some one, and that will
think it self not fairly dealt with, if it have not some preeminence: And when
he endeavors to show himself indifferent to all Persuasions, there will enough
be immediately ready to give it out, that he makes use of all Religions for his
own ends, but himself is really of none; and so perpaps none of them will be
really for him: And thus by endeavoring to displease neither Party, he shall
certainly displease them both, at least the Zealots of all sides will represent
him at the best as one lukewarm, and as such, only fit to be spit out of all
their Mouths.

Men may talk of their fine projects as long as they please; but surely where
the Church is already so settled, as that it has a great dependence upon the
Government, and the Government has a standing Influence upon that, those
Politics must needs be very strange, which go about to alter or unsettle or
put any check upon such a Constitution: And in opposition to a Clergy thus
regulated, it is no kindness sure to the Monarchy, to to go about to set up
such a Ministry (...) depends purely upon the People: And when the whole Method
of the Preachers Maintenance and Reputation must consist in the various Arts by
which he can either guide or follow the several Humors of each of his
Congregation; no man can tell what it is possible for a good Crafts-master to
persuade the Multitude unto.

But this Danger, how great and plain soever it be, yet in the opinion of the
great Promoters of the desired Ecclesiastical Confusion, is so far from being
looked upon as any Inconvenience, that it is in all likelihood the true and
real and only Reason which makes them to be so very fond of it, to desire it
with so great earnestness, and never to be put off by never so many denials and
disappointments. The Church is one great rub in their way between them and the
Crown; and therefore because they find that they cannot directly demand the
present removal of it, they have bethought themselves of two plausible Methods
whereby to prepare the way for doing it another time: First, to open the door
to let the Churches old Enemies in upon her, and for all the care which shall
be taken to give them Liberty, to bring their old Enmities along with them; and
by that means the Church will be not only weakened, by being divided within her
self, but besides there will be a part of her self always ready to betray her,
and give her up. One sort of the Projectors desire only thus much, and that
will satisfy them: Another sort there are, who think it not sufficient that
the Church be only weakened within, unless there be a free Liberty for whosoever
pleases to train up as many as he can prevail with to come and learn of them
the several ways by which the Church, when occasion offers it self, may be set
upon from without: And it is well known, that these Gentlemen are not
unacquainted with new Models of Civil as well as Ecclesiastical Administration.

And having thus pointed at some few of the innumerable Inconveniences of
Toleration, I shall add once more, that some care ought to be taken of the
present Device of Comprehension; that if it be thought fit to be granted, it
may be upon this Condition, That all who receive benefit by it, should be
obliged publicly before their Congregations to declare their Approbation of
the Liturgy, in a Form to be appointed by Authority for that purpose, and to
renew that Declaration on certain Days to be likewise appointed, and to read
the Common Prayer themselves, and not to leave it always to mean Persons, who
shall only be appointed to slubber it over, to spend the time till the Company
is got together; and then one of the Precious Men shall come and put himself in
all the most solemn Postures imaginable, and in fact say to the People (as Dr.
Heylin's Chamber-fellow was served after a short Grace) Dearly Beloved, let us
praise God better: And withal, that Security should be taken, That this
Conformity of theirs be not used merely as an Expedient to keep them in public
Employment; that so they may be the more ready, when opportunity offers it
self, to assist Providence in carrying on the great Work of a thorough
Reformation. And this Advice is by no means to be despised, as a thing
perfectly needless, because that as great a Conformity as for ought appears is
now intended, has been formerly advised and submitted to upon this very
account, to prepare Matters the better for an intended Change. This Mr. Calamy
(in his Apology against Mr. Burton, 1646 quoted in the Collection called
Evangelinur Armatum, p. 47.) alleges for himself to have been one of his own
old Arts: As for the Service Book, let Mr, Burton know, that at a meeting at my
House, it was resolved by above a hundred Ministers, after a long debate, upon
diverse weighty Considerations, That all that could in their Judgments submit to
the reading of some part of it, should be entreated for a while to continue so
to do. To this our dissenting Brethren then present did agree, and one of them
made a Speech to manifest his Concordance. This is enough to give any man
satisfaction for the late laying it down. And proportionably to this, it is a
thing well known, that some very well affected to the Good Old Cause, do for
all that conform to the use of the Ceremonies of the Church, under the
sanctified Excuse of submitting to them as Burdens. Now these, I think, are
competent fore-warnings to Authority to take care to secure it self against any
ill use which is possible to be made of any abatements toward that sort of
People, who in this very Case do profess themselves to act without sincerity,
and to make use of all the Arts which they can think of.

And in the next place their great earnestness in desiring to be dispensed with
for renouncing the Covenant, does in them plainly show a very great fondness
remaining toward it, and if yielded to, would in Authority appear more than a
tacit Confession, that it had hitherto been to blame in its Zeal against it.
Their restleness in this is not to be wondered at, because they are sworn never
to be wrought over to an Indifferency or detestable Neutrality: But that
Authority should be wrought over to show kindness to such a Combination against
it self, or that any should propose it to the old Cavaliers to give leave to
their old Persecutors to believe themselves under the Oath of God, to bring
every one of them to condign punishment, is a thing which may justly raise all
men's wonder.

I confess indeed, that by the last Bill of Comprehension it was provided (and
so perhaps it may in this) That no man should dare to say, that the Covenant
does oblige under such a Penalty, etc. But it is much to be doubted that such a
Provision may not be sufficient; for let us consider this one thing: Those
Persons, concerning whom our present Debate is, are such as are to be entrusted
to be Guides of Consciences, and if this Renunciation be once taken off, then
they have Liberty enough to insist upon the Obligation of the Covenant amongst
their Confidents, without coming within the danger of the Law. Let us remember
that the Holy League in France was taken by above half the Kingdom, before the
King did ever so much as hear of it.

But, to make this Matter plain, I shall propose a Case very like it in our own
Kingdom. Suppose that any man out of the great Tenderness which he pretends to
have for the Consciences of Men, should propose that the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy should be by Act of Parliament taken away, upon this very
pretense, That Oaths are not to be multiplied but upon great necessity; that
the Consciences of Men are nice and tender things, and ought not to be
disquieted by being pried into; and disputable Points of Government are not fit
matters to be put into an Oath: Ought not such a Person to be looked upon with
a very jealous Eye, as being ill affected to his Majesty's Person, his Crown
and Dignity? He himself and all his Favorers will, no doubt, reply, no;
because he does at the same time offer a Security in it self as Good and more
fit to be taken, and that is this, That it shall be very punishable for any man
to say, That our Sovereign Lord King Charles is not lawful and rightful King of
these Realms, etc. and that the Pope has any Power or Authority to depose the
King, etc. He, I say, who should propose this Alteration, ought in all reason
to be looked upon as a better Subject to the Pope than to the King. And so
likewise, and for the same Reason, those, who with so great Eagerness and
Importunity have so often endeavored the taking away the Renunciation of the
Covenant, ought to be very much suspected, lest they have in their Eye
something which is of much higher Consideration with them, than either the
Settlement of the Church or the safety of his Majesty.

It now remains that I consider the great Objections which are urged against
all which is already said, which are these, That Comprehension, say some,
others Toleration, others both, are fit to be granted; 1. By reason of the
great Numbers who do desire it: Secondly, in respect of their great Merit, they
being Persons in whom does consist a great part of the Sobriety, Industry,
Frugality and Wisdom of the Nation, and particularly the Presbyterians have
deserved well of His Majesty. Thirdly, it is very advisable to grant a Liberty
at this time to these Persons by reason of the great assistance which they are
able to afford us against Popery; and Fourthly, that if a Liberty be not given,
it will be a very great Inconvenience to Trade. Fifthly, Toleration of several
Forms of Religion, is a thing which we may see a good effect of among our
Neighbors in France and Holland: Lastly, Civil Penalties are of no use in
Religion, but only to make Hypocrites. To all which pretenses I return this.

First, that the Numbers of these men are not in any degree so great as they do
pretend; It is indeed one of their great and old Arts to make all the show they
can possibly, and to boast of those Numbers which they cannot show; one who is
as well acquainted with the Muster Rolls of these Parties as any man, does
plead for an Indulgence by this very Argument, that they are not so
considerable as that any danger needed to be feared from them. Peace Offering,
p. 8. What are we that Public Disturbance should be feared from us, nec
pondera rerum nec momenta sumus; by what way or means, were we never so
desirous, could we contribute any thing thereunto? What Designs are we capable
of? etc. So that it seems this is an Argument which they can either use or lay
aside, as occasion offers it self: They can either wheedle Authority into pity
and forbearance upon the account that they are so inconsiderable, as that no
danger can possibly be feared from them; Or otherwise they can Hectour
Authority, as being so considerable, as that there is no danger so great, but
if they are disobliged, it may reasonably be feared from them.

In the second Place, is it any wonder that these men do appear in some
Numbers, considering how easily many honest well-meaning Persons may be seduced
by the Zeal and vehemence of some who are seduced themselves, and the various
Arts of others whose great design is to seduce as many as they can possibly:
And again, are there not some Remainders of the Old Army yet alive,
Committee Men, Sequestrators, Purchasers of Crown and Church Lands, and
otherwise interested in the late Rebellion? besides vast Multitudes of the
Common People depending on them, who must needs be glad of so many Solemn
Occasions of meeting one another, by which they keep up their Acquaintance and
Correspondence, and put a very serious face upon their goad old Cause, and find
many opportunities to he mutually serviceable to one another in their private
Affairs, and of joining Counsels against the Public. And do they not breed up
their Children and Relations in the very same Principles with themselves? Now
the greater Numbers there are of such People so much the greater care there
ought to be taken that they be not permitted to meet together. The
Meeting Place is very well fitted for a Religious Rendevouz, and the Spiritual
Master of the Camp may not only deliver out his Orders at the same time with,
but may stamp upon them the Authority of the Oracles of God.

But in the next Place, if the Government would please but to own it self, the
Numbers of these men would presently appear to be very inconsiderable; and this
has no oftener been tried than it has been found to have been accompanied with
good effect. In Queen Elizabeth's Days, these men's Predecessors were very
troublesome, made great noise with their great Numbers, and the great dangers
which would arise by disobliging them; and they had some great Favorers in
Court upon some accounts, which were not very Religious; but when by reason of
their Insolent Provocation in the Year 1588. When the Queen was in all her
Fears from the Spanish Armado, and in a condition, as they thought to deny them
Nothing; they so far provoked Her, as to alienate Her Mind for ever from them:
Their boasted of Numbers did immediately abate, and the Laws were immediately
submitted to, as soon as ever they did perceive that it was but in vain to
think of longer triffling with them: So likewise it happened in King James His
Days, their loud Clamours were presently silenced, as soon as ever the King
declared Himself resolute at the Conference at Hampton Court: Nor would the Act
of Uniformity have had any less effect, if it had not been accompanied with a
general Discourse at the same time of a Toleration to follow immediately upon
it. And I appeal to the Consciences of several of the Preachers in the
Separated Congregations, whether they did not leave their Livings upon this
very hope, which without it they would have never done?

Besides, the Numbers of the Dissenters ought by no means to be looked upon, as
an Argument for Toleration by any, because, it is not looked upon as such by
themselves: This very Point being a thing about which themselves are highly
divided, and would by no means if they could help it grant to one another.

But besides their Numbers, they are now to be considered in point of Merit;
but this is a part of the Argument in which I do delight so very little, as
that I must gratify my own temper so far, as to say very little in it. The
Faults of other men are things which I by no means delight to dwell upon, even
when it is necessary, I take it to be very irksome: As they are particular
Persons, I have nothing to say to any one of them, and whatever Degrees any of
them have attained to in Piety and Virtue, in any kind of Intellectual, Moral,
and Religious Accomplishments, I pray God that they may every day increase more
and more in them, and that both here and hereafter they may receive the comfort
and reward of whatever is truly good in them. But as they are a Party, I take
it to be very clear, that their Merit has not been very great, either to the
Crown or Nation, and in this it were easy to be very large, for one who
delights in that which to me is a very ungrateful Employment. In the Histories
of Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the First; there is too much to be
found on this Argument, and His Majesty which now is, when He was in the Hands
of these men, what Usage He did receive from them, though His Royal Clemency
has been graciously pleased to pardon, yet His Loyal Subjects have not quite
forgot it.

As to the next Pretense, that it is advisable to grant these men an
Indulgence at this time, by reason of the great assistance which they are able
to afford us against Popery: This is such an Objection which the Regular Sons
of the Church will scarce be able to refrain themselves from looking upon
without some Indignation: The Writings of the Bishops and Episcopal Divines
have hitherto been had in great Esteem over all the Reformation; no men thought
to have had a better Cause to defend; no men looked upon as better able to
defend it: Not to mention the many Worthies in Queen Elizabeth, and King James
His Days, whose Names are, both at home and abroad, had in great and deserved
Honor: I shall only mention some few who since the beginning of the present
Controversy have wrote against the Puritans as well as Papists, and
accordingly have fell under the Indignation of both Parties, viz. Archbishop
Laud, Archbishop Bramhal, Bishop Tailor, Doctor Hammond, and Mr.
Chillingworth. How many Ages will the Nonconformists take to breed up a man
equal to any one of these? Bishop Sanderson, a Person of known Learning and
Judgment, in a Preface to a Body of Sermons, Printed some Years before His
Majesty's Return, takes occasion to declare his Opinion concerning the
Controversy between the Church of England, and Church of Rome, as it uses to
be handled by the Non-Conformists; his Words are these: That they preach
against Popery, I not at all mislike, only I could wish that these two Cautions
were better observed served than (as far as I can conjecture of the Rest by the
proportion of what has come to my Knowledge) I fear they usually are by the
more zealous of that Party: First, that they do not through Ignorance,
Prejudice, or Precipitancy, call that Popery which is not, and then under that
name and notion preach against it; and then Secondly, that they would do it
with less noise and more weight* etc. Now it is well known, that Bishop
Sanderson was a Person of great Learning and Judgment, and withal a Person of
very great Humility and Modesty, and who did very little delight in
undervaluing the meanest Person living; and yet he expresses his Thoughts
concerning the Writings of the Non-Conformists against the Church of Rome, to
be liable to these two not inconsiderable Defects: First, that they did not
understand the Question; Secondly, that they did not know how to pitch upon
such Arguments as were fit to be made use of. And withal some Pages afterward
he adds this, That even in these times of great Distraction, and Consequently
thereunto of so great advantage for the Factors for Rome, none have stepped into
the Gap more readily, nor appeared in the face of the Enemy more openly, nor
maintained the Fight with more stoutness and gallantry than the Episcopal
Divines have done, as their late Learned Writings testify: yea and some of
them such (as beside their other sufferings) have layen as deep under the
suspicion of being Popishly affected a^ any other of their Brethren whatsoever:
That by the Endeavors of these Episcopal Divines some that were bred Papists
have been gained to our Church, others that began to waver, confirmed and
settled in their Old Religion, and some that were fallen from us recovered and
reduced, notwithstanding all the disadvantages of these confused Times; and of
each of these I am able to produce some Instances. But I profess sincerely, as
in the presence of God, and before the World, that I have not known (at least I
cannot call to remembrance) so much as one single Example of any of this done
by any of our Anti-Geremonian Brethren, whether Presbyterian or Independent.

Now whether our separating Brethren have been improved in their Abilities, or
have been more fortunate in their successes in their disputings with the
Romanists since that time, it lies upon them to make out; I am sure that the
Writings of the most eminent Persons now among them were then extant: Since
which time there has indeed appeared a Body of Sermons, being the united
Labors of sundry of them, but of any Miracles which either have or are likely
to be wrought by them, the World both is, and it is to be feared will be for
ever silent.

If therefore we take these men into the Church, our Church will be so much the
less defensible, as having admitted into it Persons whose Principles are no way
justifiable; and withal with express leave not to renounce the most
unjustifiable of all their Principles. And for their Assistance against the
Romanists, it does not as yet appear, that it will be so valuable as to
countervail the Advantage we shall give the Church of Rome by taking these into
our Church. If we suffer them to remain in Bodies distinct from the Church,
then the Romanists have an Advantage, if they please to use it, to take up what
disguise themselves shall suppose to be fittest for them. How easy a thing is
it for a Priest to set up for a gifted Brother! And what one Opinion is there
imaginable, which may not be brought in under the pretense of a farther degree
of New Light? Whether all the stories be true of Friars who have preached in
Meeting Houses, I have not had an opportunity of being so well informed, as to
venture to say any thing; but I am sure, if they will, they have there fair
opportunities offered: And if it be not as yet seasonable to set up directly
for their own Church, they may however prepare the way by pulling down of ou^s.

And notwithstanding all the Zeal which the Non-conformists do declare against
Popery, it is well known that they know very well how to join both Counsels and
Arms together: The leading Men of both Parties in Ireland were wonderfully
great together, all the while that the Design was managing against my Lord of
Strafford; and here in England, in the Declaration which the King set forth
concerning the Success of the Battle at Edgehill on October 23. 1643. He has
left this Memorial to all Posterity; All men know the great numbers of Papists
which serve in their Armies, Commanders and others; the great Industry they
have used to corrupt the Loyalty and Affection of all our loving Subjects of
that Religion; the PRIVATE PROMISES and UNDERTAKINGS THAT THEY HAVE MADE TO
THEM, that if they would assist them against Us, ALL THE LAWS MADE IN THEIR
PREIVDICE SHOULD BE REPEALED, etc.

As to the next Objection, That the suppressing of Conventicles will be a great
hindrance to Trade: I must needs confess that this is a thing which would have
great weight, if it had any truth in it. That Trade is a thing of great and
general Concern, is so plain and confessed a thing, as that there is no need of
spending many words whereby to prove it: Our wisest Kings have always thought
themselves concerned to make Laws and all manner of provisions whereby to
promote and encourage it; and there is scarce any man so mean, but that he does
in one degree or other receive some benefit by our Commerce with other Nations.
Not to enter into particulars, I shall only name one, which is indeed the
Measure of all the rest, and that is Money; which is not a thing of our own
Growth, but it is a thing without which those things which are of our own
Growth, cannot without great difficulty pass from one hand to another. Our
Ships are our Bulwarks, nay, they are more than so; for they not only keep
other Nations from coming to us, but they carry us to them: They make the Sea
to be our Earth, the whole World to be as it were our native Soil, by bringing
home to our doors whatsoever grows in any Corner of the Universe. It was
Trade which brought Tire to be called The City of Joy, the crowning City, whose
Merchants were Princes, and whose Traffickers the honorable of the earth, Esaias
22. 7, 8. It was by the benefit of Trade that this City is again said to have
heaped up silver as dust, and fine Gold as mire in the streets, Zech. 9. 3. It
is absolutely necessary for us, if we will be secure of our own Land, to keep
up a proportionable strength at Sea. And besides this necessity in point of
Safety, it brings innumerable advantages in point of improvement; carrying from
us our own Commodities which we can spare from our own use, and in return
bringing us whatsoever the World does afford, for Use, Delight, Strength or
Ornament. It is a thing by which vast multitudes do alone subsist and
altogether depend upon, which great numbers do thrive and flourish by; by which
his Majesty has a brave Addition to his Revenue, and every man besides does in
his degree find many comforts and conveniences in his way of Living: It is the
great Employer and Rewarder of all sorts of Ingenuity and of Industry; by means
whereof we every day see men advanced to Wealth and Honor, to live comfortably
to themselves, and with great benefit to their Country. It is a thing in it
self clear, that Trade is very highly and universally beneficial, and those who
are but ordinarily versed in it are able to reckon many admirable Advantages
which I cannot so much as think upon. It remains now that I enquire whether
there be any such Inconsistency between Trade and Uniformity in Religion, as is
generally (though without any Ground which I could ever hear) pretended? These
Two things have in their nature no manner of Repugnancy, and if there be any
Repugnancy, between them, it does not proceed from them themselves, but from
something else, which it is to be hoped may be removed, and neither of these
Two things the worse for the removal of it; and what that is I shall now
enquire.

It is well known that this Argument from Trade has been used in former days,
when there was no manner of occasion for it; but however it served as a
pretense, whereby to amuse the People, and make them clamor against the
Government. I instance in the Case of my Lord of Strafford: What a noise was
raised all over the Town, that there could be no Trade in the Kingdom till
Execution was done upon him: And whosoever raises any such Cry shall have
always some ready to join with him in it, because there will be always those
who will want Trade: And let him but tell them that the Court and the Bishops
are the only Causes of this their want, and it is no wonder if they cry out
with the loudest, Down with them, down with them to the ground. Indeed if the
Bishops in England did pretend to the same Power with the Presbyteries in
Scotland, then indeed it might so happen that the Traders might have some cause
to be jealous of them; for those Gentlemen did at the Assembly at Glascow,
1638. pass an Act concerning Salmon-fishing; another about Salt-pans, Roger L'
Estrange, p. 330. By Act of Assembly at Dundee 1592. they prohibited all
Trading with any of the King of Spain's Dominions, and they put down the
Munday-market at Edinburgh, Spotswood, p. 393, 394. But in this Case the
Shoo-makers thought fit to assert their Christian Liberty against the
Impositions of the Presbytery, and tumultuously gathered together, and
threatened to chase the Ministers out of Town; upon which the Market continued:
Which, as that grave Historian tells us, did cause much sport at Court, where
it was said, That Rascals and Soutars could obtain at the Ministers hands what
the King could not in Matters more reasonable.

That Trading has, ever since the Restoration of his Majesty, been very high,
notwithstanding the many complaints about it, it is very evident to any man who
is never so little acquainted with the Custom-house; but that it has not
answered to the height of all men's hopes, is not to be wondered at, if we
consider some things which have happened, which the Act of Uniformity was no way
concerned in: First, there was a War with France and Holland, by which it was
not to be avoided, but that many Merchants must needs become very great
Sufferers: Secondly, At the very same time there was a raging Plague, not only
in London but in most of the other Trading places of the Nation; which did not
only sweep away great numbers of our Trading People, but may easily be supposed
to have had an unhappy influence upon Trade it self: Thirdly, To accompany
these Two great difficulties there came a dreadful Fire, the loss by which is
inestimable: And Fourthly, there has been a Second Dutch War. Now there are
none of all these things can happen to a Nation, but Trade must unavoidably
suffer by, and feel it; and then the wonder will be very little if we consider
that we have suffered by them all. And these are things so publicly known,
that it is to be admired, that men should have the confidence to take no notice
of any one of them; but if they hear of any Difficulties which the Trading
People do wrestle with, presently overlook all these notorious Causes, and
enter into long Harangues about Common Prayer and Ceremonies. I may add that
besides the forementioned Calamities; If we are outdone in point of Trade by
our Neighbors in Holland, it is not to be wondered at, if we consider the
Nature of our Country, and the Manners of our People.

Our Country has in it self a great plenty of all things necessary for the
life of men, which Holland has not; they must trade or they cannot live, which
is not our Case: And if necessity makes men expert, and their being expert
brings them to thrive; it is not to be wondered at: It is this very necessity
which every day makes vast Numbers among them, glad to submit to all the
Labors and Hazards of all the Seas in the World, and all this purely to
support their Lives with very course fare, and very small wages; now the
goodness of our Country affording to our People a more comfortable subsistence
upon much easier terms than is to be had among them, is one plain cause why our
People are not easily to be brought to take that pains, run into those dangers
and submit to those severe terms, which with them is not less than absolutely
necessary: Not to say any thing of the return of their long Voyages, what vast
advantages do they make by Fishing upon our own Coasts, which we always
complain of, but will by no means betake our selves unto. Again he who has got
a vast sum of money by trading, has here in England a perpetual convenience of
purchasing Land with it, and by that means he himself or his Son does become a
Country Gentleman, which in Holland is not to be done; by which means Trade is
amongst us given over, when men come to be Masters of such great sums of Money
as to be best able to command it, and to reap the most considerable advantages
by it: In Holland because Trade is the thing which every one is to trust to,
their Wives and Children are all instructed in the Mysteries, and inured to the
business of it, and so the Stock and Experience of a Family descends from
Father to the Son, and increases from Generation to Generation: Now it is far
from being a Miracle, that their Merchants should be able to outdo ours, who
are frequently left by their Parents as large or larger sums of Money to begin
with, as ours take themselves to be very well satisfied with and give over:
They go on and improve what we look upon as more advisable barely to enjoy,
and by that means prevent an increase which would have come easily, and too
often waste and consume what they in a few Years are by reason of their great
Stocks enabled without difficulty to treble. And besides that different way of
disposure of the plenty of the Rich which is between them and us: They make
another and greater advantage of the necessities of the Poor, than we either do
or can do, or it is fit for us to do: They make their People to work harder,
fare harder than any of ours will do, to take smaller wages, and by that means
they are something helped in being able to under-sell us: And besides the
Masters of Trade do themselves live much more frugally than we do in point of
Diet and Apparel, and other heights of living, and studiously avoid many
unnecessary ways of Expense, which we are (perhaps too apt) to be fond of. And
whatever is expended must needs take off so much from Improvement; which
Consideration prevails with them to be very sparing till they are very Rich,
and not to pretend to any of the ways of Vanity, till they have brought
themselves into a condition to carry on their material Concerns with the best
advantage. Now is it any wonder, if there were nothing more in the Case than
this, that in Trade they should much outdo us? And there is little doubt to be
made of it, that he who is better acquainted with that People than I am, will
be able to reckon many other particular things wherein they differ from us in
order to this great Design, which have no manner of relation to Liberty of
Conscience, and which would have the same effect without it, as they can
possibly have by it.

As to our selves and our present Case, there are but three Things (which I can
learn) pretended, by reason of which it is possible to be supposed, that the
putting the Act against Conventicles in Execution can draw any prejudice upon
Trade: First, that Merchants who are not willing to conform, will not come over
and settle in England: Secondly, that the most eminent Traders being
Non-conformists, they will either forbear Trading to the utter undoing of all
such Workmen (as Weavers, etc.) who do depend upon them, or leave the Kingdom
and carry their profitable Trades along with them; which will bring a great
decay of Trade here, and carry away that benefit, which England might have
received, to that, whatever Country they shall please to settle in.

Thirdly, That Merchants beyond Sea (as Roman Catholics, etc.) will not be
easily persuaded to trust their Estates in the hands of those who are not of
their own Religion, and they who are, being liable to such Prosecutions as by
our Laws they are liable unto, will be fearful of having any Estates in their
own hands, and look upon it as more advisable to forbear Trading, rather than
to be liable to so many Difficulties; These are the three most considerable
Objections which I have hitherto been able to meet with, and to each of these I
have this to offer by way of return.

As to the first, that this severity will discourage Foreign Merchants from
coming over to us: It is a mistake to think that the Church of England is such
a Bug bear to the rest of the Reformation, as that the Religion of that is
looked upon as sufficient Cause to hinder any great Numbers of valuable Persons
from coming over to dwell in the Nation. It is by no means clear that any store
of them do at this time desire to transplant hither, and if they did, it is
more than possible that some other of our Civil Constitutions may be greater
bars in their way, than the Act against Conventicles, and particularly the want
of a Register: And that Person must have more than ordinary Intelligence, who
can be able to secure us, that there are such Numbers of considerable Merchants
at this time designing to come over, and are diverted only by the News of the
Bill against Conventicles going to be put into Execution; as that the advantage
and addition of those Persons, and that Trade to the Nation should be (...)
great, as to overbalance those many and unavoidable Inconveniences which I
have already showed, that Religion and Government must be exposed to, by the
grant of Liberty of Conscience. It does not remain in our Memories that in
Cromwell's time, when there was Liberty given to all except Papists and
Prelatists, that any were by that Liberty encouraged to come over, at least not
any such number as to be considerable. But suppose it should so happen, that
some Eminent Merchants should design to come over; I could never yet hear, nor
am I wise enough to think upon any reason, why the Act against Conventicles
should more fright them from England, than the Inquisition does from other
Countries, as Spain, Italy, and Portugal; and yet in those Countries Merchants
have their Factories, and drive their greatest Trade: Besides strangers
Merchants have as much encouragement in this particular, as can reasonably be
desired; the French have their Church, the Dutch theirs; nay, even the Jews
have theirs, and all Aliens of (...) Reformation have even by the very Act of
Uniformity an express provision made for them, as to the enjoyment of their own
way of Worship at the pleasure of His Majesty; and if they do meet and keep to
their own Language, they need fear no more in this Country than in any other.

As to the second Thing alleged, that if the Act against Conventicles be put
in Execution, the most Eminent Traders being Non-Conformists, they will leave
off Trading, and by that means undo all sorts of Workmen who do depend upon
them, and not only so, but leave the Nation, and carry their Trades away along
with them.

Now that this is a thing of more Noise than Weight, will appear if we examine
it with a little Care. That some eminent Merchants are Non-conformists is
undoubtedly True; but that the most eminent are so, I am sure is not true, and
could easily make it appear, if it were fit to mention the Names of particular
Persons: But so far as it is true, does any man in his wits imagine, that the
Act against Conventicles will make them either quit their profitable. Trades,
or fright them out of the Kingdom? It does neither condemn them to be hanged
nor burned, neither does it so much as touch their Persons or Estates for being
Non-conformists, but permits them to be of what Religion they please, and
allows them the free exercise of their Religion in their Families: It cannot
therefore be easily imagined, that People will be so far out of their wits
(though I must confess that Fanaticism will go a great way toward putting them
out of them) as to leave their settled and profitable Trades, their Native
Country, Relations and Friends, only because they cannot publicly show the
exercise of their Mode of Worship; whereas they may freely enjoy it in their
own Families, and be known to do so, without the least interruption in any of
the forementioned Conveniences: Especially considering, that Merchants of that
Eminency, that their Case deserves to be taken notice of in a case of this
Public concern now under debate, are very well able to keep Ministers in their
own Houses, and may do it with far less charge and prejudice, than either going
into some other Country, or the forbearance of their Trades will put them to.
But I shall for once suppose two Things, whereof the first is evidently not
true; the second not at all likely, That the most Eminent Merchants are
Non-Conformists, and that upon that account they will forbear Trading: But even
upon these Terms it is to be hoped that those they deal with will not be
utterly undone, whatever may be pretended: For put the Case that three or four
of the most Eminent Merchants should die, or (which I wish did never happen)
break; every days experience shows us, that the Clothiers they deal with, and
consequently the Weavers, and other Workmen depending upon them, are not
presently ruined, or so much as out of employment, but do immediately find
other Merchants to deal with; the Trades of those who either give over Trading,
or die, being always continued by their Sons, or Partners, or shared amongst
those who have been their Servants, or other Merchants who deal in the same
Commodity, and to the same Places. But suppose that the putting the Laws in
Execution should so far distract any Numbers, as to make them run out of the
Kingdom: Let it be considered whither they will run, only into Holland, where
they cannot more freely enjoy the exercise of their Religion in their own
Families, nor converse more freely with one another about it, than they may do
here in England. All the difference is, that here they cannot meet in great
Numbers, and I leave it even to the Non-Conformists themselves to Judge,
whether that one Convenience of Meeting in great Numbers be a sufficient
enticement to any rational man to exchange England for Holland?

But put the Case, that they do go into Holland, or into some other Country; I
did never yet meet with any man who could demonstrate to me how they could
carry away their Trade of Merchandising, though they were never so willing;
live in Holland they may, and drive their usual Trades here in England by their
Correspondents, in which Case the Nation will only loose the common profit of
their eating, drinking and wearing: But to carry away the Trade of the Nation
with them, is not possible, if they leave any Merchants behind, as I am sure
they will many more, and more considerable than any who will go away; and by
withdrawing themselves into other Countries, they will but leave their Trades
to be shared amongst better men and better Subjects; so that by leaving the
Kingdom, instead of prejudicing, they would occasion a very great blessing unto
it, by carrying away with them the Divisions, but not at all the Trade of the
Nation.

When the Act against Conventicles was first made, this Argument against it
from Trade was much insisted on, and I remember a Story was raised about some
great Dealers in the West, who had withdrawn their stock, left off all
business, by which means vast Numbers of poor People, who did depend on them,
were utterly undone: This Matter seemed so considerable, as that several of the
most Eminent Persons in the Nation did meet together to consult about a remedy
for so great, and as it was said, so growing an evil. But when this Matter came
to be enquired into, I could never learn that it had any thing more than a
great deal of noise in it.

There is an eminent City in this Nation, inferior perhaps to none except
London, wherein this Artifice was made use of to fright the Magistrates from
suppressing the Conventicles: A great rumor was spread up and down, that if
they might not have Liberty to meet as formerly, then they would all withdraw
their Stocks, which would be a great detriment to His Majesty, and a vast loss
to the City, and leave the Poor to be provided for by their respective
Parishes. But the Raisers of all this Clamor did quickly find that they had to
do with those who were at least as great Masters of Trade as themselves, and
accordingly it was undertaken by those who were very well able to make it good;
that if the Dissenters did think fit to withdraw their Stocks, there should
immediate care be taken that the Trade of the City should be carried on to the
very same height which it was at, without the least abatement, or leaving any
one Workman out of as good an Employment as he had before: It was so far from
being feared, that it was desired that they would withdraw their Stocks, and
that they may be the better encouraged to the so doing, provided that they
would give Security that they will not Trade at all, neither by themselves, or
others for them, nor in other men's Names, they shall at any time have a good
sum of money given them, if that may move them to it.

Let us not be vainly afraid, where no fear is: Do we know the Non-Conformists
no better than so, that we should suspect them of being apt to give over their
profitable Trades? It had been a more rational Jealousy to have looked upon
them as more intent upon any imaginable way of getting of Money, than on any
Settlement of Religion, of what sort soever: And perhaps it would be not only
no ill Experiment to destroy this Argument, but withal as likely a way to
reduce them, as any which can be thought upon; if there were a Law, That those
who refuse to conform, or at least who meet at Conventicles, should not be
permitted to Trade: Such a Law indeed would be terrible to them* and I hope the
bare mention of it will make them forbear to use this kind of threatening us
with that, which to themselves alone will be, if at all, dreadful.

As to the third Objection, That Merchants beyond Seas (as Roman Catholics,
etc.) will be afraid to trust their Estates in the hands of those who are not
of their own Religion, etc. It is of so little weight as to require but a very
few words; it being evident that all kinds of Merchants at this day do
correspond, and always have corresponded with others not of their own
Religion, Papists with Protestants, Protestants with Papists, etc. What other
Pretenses there are in this Case, wherein Trade may seem concerned, I do not at
present call to mind, and therefore shall go on to the next suggestion why a
Toleration of several ways of Religion may not do as well here as it does
amongst our Neighbors in France and Holland.

As to France, the different Professions of Religion there, has not been
without many sad effects upon both Parties, and has so sanctified the
Animosities on each side, that it has prevailed upon both, out of Zeal to God,
to let Aliens and Enemies into the Bowels of their Native Country. But their
Case and ours is vastly different; the Hugonots, who are there tolerated, have
those Merits to plead which our Non Conformists have not; and besides, they do
not divide into several Communions among themselves, neither would any such
thing be permitted either by the Government, or by the Reformed Church it self.

As to Holland, Liberty of Conscience is a thing which they were not brought to
admit of by second Thoughts, and after mature Deliberation, but were
necessitated upon by the Nature of that Cause upon which they first united
among themselves, and the Constitution of that Government they fell into. One
part of their Cause was a Deliverance from the Impositions of the Church of
Rome, as exercised after the imperious manner of the Spanish Government: Now
Liberty in matters of Conscience was the most natural Word in the World in this
Case to be made use of; Freedom from the present Pressures was the thing
immediately in their Eye, and many of their Neighbors at the same time had the
same Aim: And as they were then only agreed what they would not have, but not
at all what they would have, they invited all, that all might come to their
Assistance. But besides this, one Religion was not easy to be brought into so
many several Independent Governments, as go to the making up of those States.
For as Sr. William Temple tells us, Chap. 2. of their Government, p. 75. They
are not a Commonwealth, but a Confederacy of seven Sovereign Provinces united
together for their common and mutual Defense, without any dependence one upon
another, etc. Nay farther, That each of these Provinces is likewise composed of
so many little States and Cities, which have several Marks of Sovereignty
within themselves, and are not subject to the Sovereignty of the Province; not
being concluded in many things by the Majority, but only by the universal
Concurrence of Voices in the Provincial States. To this let us add the great
Variety of Persons which by reason of the Wars and Persecutions of those times,
came into, and embodied with them, out of France, Germany, England; and is it
to be wondered at, if not knowing how to agree in any one way they permitted
diverse?

Such a kind of Liberty therefore as is now contended for amongst us, cannot so
properly be said to be given by these States, as to have grown up with them;
and though it be a part of their Nature, is one of their Inconveniences; and
this has not been unperceived by them. In the Affair of Barnevelt it was found
that Religious Differences could find a way of intermingling themselves with
State-quarrels, and the States did then think fit to make Laws about what they
called erroneous in point of Doctrine. As to Religion the Effects of Liberty of
Conscience are in those Countries plainly to be seen in the daily growth of
Popery and Socinianism, and of men altogether indifferent, as to all kinds of
Articles of Belief; things which by the same means may be brought into England,
and indeed upon the admittance of which, are not to be kept out of it. The
States of the United Provinces may indeed keep themselves safe from all
Disturbances which may arise from Enthusiastic Lunacies, by reason of their
Garrisons and standing Army, without which no security can be had against the
dangers of Toleration. And seeing that the Case of England is in both these
Respects very different from that of Holland, and it is to be hoped is intended
so to continue, an Argument of this nature taken from them ought by no means to
be looked upon as what ought to conclude us by it.

Now that the Argument from Holland ought by no means to be looked upon as
conclusive to us, either as to Comprehension or as to Toleration, does appear
in these Two things: 1. In the Constitution of our Government, as being very
different from theirs; 2. in the Condition of those People amongst us who
dissent from the Government. 1. As to the Constitution of our Government,
Comprehension is with us much more unsafe than the same thing would be in
Holland; because the Preachers do there depend altogether upon the States Pay,
and have no other Tenure but during pleasure; whereas a Beneficed Man with us
has a Freehold, and is not to be turned out but by a legal Way: By which
advantage he may fence with Authority, and may publicky deliver such things
which the people may very well understand, and yet the Law may not be able to
take any hold of him. And of this, I doubt, we should have sudden experience,
if these men could be admited by Law into sure and certain Possessions upon
their own Terms; and I am the more apt to suspect this, because I could never
yet hear that this sort of men was ever wrought upon by being yielded to: And
if their Gratitude and good Nature should upon this occasion begin, it will be
so much the more welcome as it is less expected.

But as Comprehension among us, considering the Persons who do desire it, and
their declared Principles, is much more unsafe than the same thing would be in
Holland, by reason of the Constitution of our Government in reference to the
Clergy; So likewise for the same reason is Toleration more unsafe here than it
would be there, if we do consider the Temper of those People who dissent from
us. Holland, as I have already mentioned, has a standing Army, and so
considerable a one, that the Public Peace shall infallibly be secured by it,
whether their Preachers, or whoever else can be persuaded by them, will or no.
And how confidently soever the Argument from Holland is now adays made use of,
to induce us to grant the like Liberty, there was a time when this very
Argument was looked upon with great scorn: The Author of Wholesome Severity,
etc. does censure the States of the United Provinces with great sharpness upon
this occasion, p. 30. and compares the Toleration there given to differing
sorts of Dissenters, to the Toleration given by the Pope to Courtizans.

And besides, the various sorts of Persuasions there do not use to question the
Lawfulness of Tolerating one another, as ours have always done. I have already
showed, that the Presbyterians would by no means tolerate the Independents, if
they knew how to help it; and I shall now in a word show, how unwilling the
Independents are to tolerate the Presbyterians, or other Sects which in their
Inclinations they do not favor.

And this is no new discovery of mine, but a thing which did discover it self
as early as there was occasion for it, as we read in teh forementioned Book
called Wholesome Severity reconciled with Chistian Liberty, p. 19. In New
England there has been Severity enough (to say no worse) used against
Heretics and Schismatics. And here I must appeal to the Consciences of those
who now plead so much for Liberty of Conscience and Toleration in this Kingdom;
were they able to root out the Presbyterians and their way, and could find
Civil Authority inclinable to put forth the Coercive Power against it, Whether
in that case would they not say, That the Magistrate may repress it by strong
hand, if it be not otherwise to be repressed? It is not without Cause that I
put this Quaere to them; for M. S. p. 50. does allow of the Magistrates
fighting against a Doctrine which is indeed Superstition, Heresy or Schism,
and only pretends to be from God, when it is indeed from men. Also that
Pamphlet called, As you were, p. 3. tells us, that it was neither Gamaliel's
meaning, nor Mr. Goodwins, That every Way pretending to be from God must be let
alone; but that only we are to refrain and let it alone till we are out of
danger of fighting against God, while we endeavor to overthrow it. Now I
assume that there are some who plead for Liberty of Conscience, who profess
that they are certain, and fully assured upon demonstrative proofs, that the
Presbyterial Way is not from God nor according to the Mind of Jesus Christ:
Therefore according to their Principles, they must allow of the putting forth
of the Civil Coercive Power against the Presbyterial Way, etc.

Mr. Sterry likewise, who was the great Preacher at Whitehall in the days of
Mr. Oliver Cromwell, in a Sermon preached, Nov. 5. 1651. called England 's
Deliverance from the Northern Presbytery, compared with its Deliverance from
the Roman Papacy, upon Ier. 16. 14, 15. It shall no more be said, The Lord
lives that brought up the Children of Israel out of the Land of Egypt; But the
Lord lives that brought up the Children of Israel out of the Land of the
North, etc. Which Sermon was Printed by Order of those Gentlemen who pleased to
call themselves a Parliament, gives us such an account of the Presbyterians, as
was very grateful to the Powers then in being (though it was to the
Presbyterians that they owed their very Being;) I shall lay down his very
words: In his Epistle he says thus; Right honorable, I have desired in my
Preaching, in my Prayers, to work with God even for the opening of the eyes of
men, to see that the same Spirit which lay in the polluted Bed of Papacy may
meet them in the perfumed Bed of Presbytery, etc. To which purpose I have in my
Sermon represented the same Spirit which dwells in the Papacy, when it enters
into the PVRER FORM OF PRESBYTERY, as FVLLER OF MYSTERY, so FVLLER OF DESPITE
AND DANGER, etc. In the Sermon it self; Many daughters have done virtuously,
but thou excellest them all: So may England now say to the Lord, In many
Mercies, as especially that in saving us from this bloody design of the
Egyptian Papacy, thou have done graciously and wonderfully; but this last
Mercy, by which thou savest us from the black Plots and bloody Powers of the
NORTHERN PRESBYTERY has exceeded them all. And in that Sermon he does all
along prefer the Papists before the Presbyterians, the Consequence of which
does not amount to Toleration of them: Nay, our Brethren in New England, though
their Constitution has as much of Liberty of Conscience in it, as any Place in
the World, yet have found it to be a thing so very troublesome, as that they are
grown quite weary of, and have put very severe Restraints upon it: Of which in
the Second Part of the Excellent Friendly Debate, p. 227. and the Third Part,
p. 224. any man may be abundantly satisfied; and it is well known that Quakers
were hanged in New England, which was a severity they did not meet with, either
at Rome or at Constantinople.

Mr. Edwards in his Answer to the Apologetical Narration, p. 244. draws an
Argument against Toleration from the Judgment of the Divines in New England,
who are against the Toleration of any Church Government, or way but one. For
the Discipline of Jesus Christ (as we have it in Church Government and Church
Covenant discussed (Question 31.) is not arbitrary, that one Church may
practice one Form, and another another Form, as each one shall please, but is
one and the same for all Churches, and in all the Essentials and Substantials
of it unchangeable, and to be kept till the appearing of Jesus Christ: And if
that Discipline which we here practice be (as we are persuaded of it) the same
which Christ has appointed, and therefore unalterable, we see not how another
may be lawful: Upon which account they will not in New England tolerate
Brownists, Anabaptists, Antinomians, Quakers, and so careful they are in this
matter, that they make such enquiries into the inward Sentiments of the Minds
even of the Laity, as among us are not usual; and in such Points too wherein
the Public Government is not concerned. Mr. Cotton the greatest Divine in
New England, and a precious man, is against Toleration, and holds that men may
be punished for their Consciences, as appears by his Letter to Mr. Williams,
and Mr. Williams his Answer, both Printed, and his Exposition on the Vials,
Vial. 3. p. 16, 17. and Vial. 4. p. 17. Where he Answers this Objection,
Conscience should not be forced, and this is his Answer; Why do you think that
Heretics were not as conscionable in the Old Testament as now? If any man had
a Conscience to turn men from God, he would have men of as much Conscience to
cut them off: So that upon the whole matter it does appear that this loud
demand of Toleration is a very disingenious, nay a dishonest one; because it is
asked by those who (if the Power were in their hands) would neither allow it to
those they now ask it of, no nor so much as permit it to one another. One
Instance of their Barbarity in this kind will not be tedious; the Presbyterians
denied His late Majesty the Attendance of His own Chaplains in His own Family,
for the Exercise of His own Devotion; and as the Presbyterians denied Him the
use of the Common Prayer whilst he was alive, the Independents would not allow
Him to be buried by it after he was dead. Let them reflect a little upon their
own demeanor in this Case, and then be as loud as they please in crying out
for Moderation; Tenderness, Forbearance, Condi^cension.

And so I go on to the last Objecti^n, that Civil Penalties do only make
Hypocrites. This were an Excellent Argument against all Laws whatsoever if it
were well pursued; but on the other side I take it to be a very clear Case,
that Toleration makes Hypocrites; for it renders it safe for any man, in order
to whatever end, to pretend some dissatisfactions against the present
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, when in his own Mind he has none: And this
effect it has had from the first moment of His Majesty's Restoration, unto
this time: Many preachers then possessed of Benefices went away from them,
because the Right Owners returned to them again, and yet these men pretended
Scruples against the Common Prayer and Ceremonies, and so were looked upon as
sufferers for their Conscience, and have ever since subsisted upon the strength
of such pretensions: Of those who by the Death of the Right Incumbents
continued in their ill-got Possessions till the Act of Uniformity: How many
refused to conform more out of shame than Conscience? They could not without
blushing practice those things which they formerly preached against, especially
in the same place where they had done so; and accordingly some have conformed
in other Countries than where they lived before, and more did proffer it, if
they could have obtained to have been provided for: And of those who did go out
at Saint Bartholomews Day, 1662. How many were there who went out upon the
great assurance which they had from their Agents in London of returning again
in a few Weeks with Honor? And among the People how many are there who go to
Conventicles merely to get Custom, as finding it to be a succesful way, by
becoming Members of such a Church, to get the Trade of such a Party.

I have now considered the Inconveniences of that Fine Project called Liberty
of Conscience, and the various pretenses by which of late it has been
recommended to us: How much soever these imperfect Reasonings of mine may have
fallen below the dignity of the Argument, I shall be so just to my Cause, as to
refer the Reader where he may receive complete and abundant satisfaction, viz.
to those Excellent Votes of the Honorable House of Commons, February 25. 1662.
where there is a full State of this Affair drawn up with an equal height of
Piety and Wisdom; the Reasons full and clear, carrying in them all the
Advantages of Strength and Evidence: Those Renowned Gentlemen did then show
that they were able with their Pens to give an account of that Cause, for which
very many of themselves, and, Fathers did honorably draw their Swords, and
knew very well how to assert that Church by all the Rules of Christian
Prudence, as well as they did formerly set inimitable Patterns of Christian
Courage in suffering for it. There we may see and admire how those Glorious
Worthies came up to the greatness of themselves, and of the Argument; and
indeed they were both worthy of one another, they to defend, and that to be
defended; and as nothing was ever better penned than those Reasons, so there
was scarce ever a better Occasion; the best Church in Europe, was then bore
witness to by the best House of Commons which ever sat in this Nation: Those
Votes shall for ever remain as a lasting Monument as of the Zeal and Religion,
so of the incomparable Endowments and Abilities of those who drew them up.

And now I shall presume to offer a few words to our dissenting Brethren, that
they would seriously bethink themselves what the Causes of their Separation
are, how few, how slight; that they would with them compare the Effects of it,
what they have been, what they are, what they may come to be: Such things have
already been brought about in Church and State (by means of those Divisions
which the soberest among you did begin and foment, and none but they were
valuable enough to give Support and Countenance unto) as they themselves (we
are persuaded) did not intend, nor would foresee till they found it too late
for to prevent them: Alterations are things which the Generality are naturally
apt to be very fond of, but it is very seldom, and for a very little while,
that they are found to answer the hopes conceived of them: Indeed if it were
once agreed upon what those things were which would give a general
satisfaction, and put an absolute end to this long and uhappy Controversy,
such a Proposal were at least worth a Consideration: But if there be as great
variety of Demands as Persons, and if it be as earnestly desired among great
Numbers, that their Neighbors should not be indulged, as that themselves
should, and we have for many years found it by a dear bought Experience, that
when men are once gone beyond the Rule, they wander every where, and without
end; why should you not at last look upon it as advisable to return to the
Rule again? Especially considering, that those of the greatest Consideration
among you are not against the having any Rule at all, neither as yet have you
been able to agree upon any other.

If it be to be wished that there should be any Church at all, that Church must
have Articles, and must have Canons; there is not the smallest Society in the
World can be kept together in order to the meanest end, but there must be some
Rules which all its Members must submit unto, and be guided by: If therefore
there ought to be kept up among us any such thing as the Assembling our selves
together in order to the Public Worship of Almighty God, then this must be
done at some time, in some place, and after some manner, in some words, and by
some Person appointed to attend upon the doing it: Now if there be nothing of
all this left to be determined by humane Wisdom and Authority, but that this
whole Thing with every one of all the Circumstances of it are already
determined in Holy Writ: The Church of England would be so far from opposing
any thing of this, that she would gladly conform in all particulars to these
divine Establishments, and would be hugely thankful to any of our dissenting
Brethren, if they will please to show her whereabouts she may read the Form of
public Worship, and withal the precise Method of that Order and Decency which
ought to be used in it: For she has been hitherto so unhappy, as not to know
of any but general Directions, which she has endeavored with all Faithfulness
to pursue: But after this Discovery she will take care, that her Children shall
serve God in no other way than that of his own immediate appointment, if she
can but once learn Directions where to meet with it. But if there be no such
way of Worship, both for the thing it self and all its Circumstances,
prescribed by God; then so much of it as is not done by God, must unavoidably
be done by such men whom God has set over us, and who in such Cases are to be
to us instead of God.

And let us consider, that the Ceremonies which are retained are very few, very
ancient, and very becoming; and to prevent all jealousies of the least manner
of Superstition in the retaining them, the Church has taken care to declare
against all the Abuses which they were liable unto in the times of Popery. You
value your selves upon being Successors to the old Puritans; but do you imagine
that they would in the least have allowed many of those things which you have
been the Authors of, or at least of which you have been the Instruments, and
into which we hope you were not brought by any formed Resolutions of your own,
but driven upon by those necessities in your affairs which your Zeal had
unawares drawn you into? Instead therefore of being jealous of any concealed
mischiefs in a few decent Rites and comely Usages, you are highly concerned to
remember what have been the Evils of your own Schism, which you know your
selves to have begun, and we are willing to believe did not see to the dismal
end of; and which upon your own Principles you will never be able to provide
against: The Liberties which you take, have encouraged and defended others in
taking such Liberties, as no doubt you have been often sorry to see your selves
undeniably alleged as Patrons and Examples of. And unless you can allege some
more necessary Causes of Separation than you hitherto have been able, you must
be very partial Judges in your own Case, if you do not look upon your selves as
responsible for the Consequences of all those Separations, which by your Arms
and Authority any else was enabled to make, first with you and after from you.
Whatever suspicions you may entertain concerning Conformity, you will never be
able to make a Bar strong enough to keep out the dreadful Effects of
Nonconformity. If no Settlement is to be complied with, but such a one which
each particular Man does in his own private thoughts take to be the most
advisable in all respects as to Matter and Circumstance, and no longer than it
does appear to be so, then there is never like to be any Settlement in the
World, at least not of any long Continuance. I shall in this Case make use only
of the words of an eminent Nonconformist, in a Treatise which I have already
mentioned, entitled, Of the Religion of England, asserting, That the Reformed
Christianity settled in its Latitude is the stability of the Kingdom, p. 28.
Such is the complicated condition of humane Affairs, That it is exceeding
difficult to devise a Rule or Model that shall provide for all whom Equity will
plead for: Therefore the prudent and sober will acquiesee in any Constitution
that is in some sort proportionable to the Ends of Government. And again, p.
38. Nevertheless, if, when all is said, some dissatisfaction does invincibly
possess the Judgment, in that Case Christian Humility and Charity as well as
Discretion advises such Persons to acquiesoe in their private security and
freedom, and not to reach after that Liberty that may unsettle the public
Order, and ^^dermine the common Safety.

Although it be a great, a seasonable and a concerning Truth, That it is more
glorious to confess an Error than to continue in one, yet because it may seem a
severe Truth, I shall no more than barely mention it: If in earnest you are at
least weary of divisions, do all which in you lies on your part to put an end
to them; and this you cannot pretend to have done, till you have complied with
the Public Order as far as you believe you may lawfully, and where you cannot
obey you may yet be silent. If there be a Ceremony which any one among you
believes that he ought not to conform to, does it thence follow, that he is
obliged to make Parties against it, and for the sake of that one to abstain
from all the rest, and to avoid all those other parts of the ChurchService and
Communion, where the Rite which he scruples has no manner of place?

Again, when from the Cause you fly into great Commendations of your Party, you
should do well to avoid such expressions as, instead of tending to bespeak the
Favor and Compassion of Authority, do rather tend to awake its caution and to
raise its jealousy: That which does but look like a Threatening is by no means
fit for an Inferior to put into his Supplication. Not only the Honor, but the
Safety of all Government does depend upon this, to demurr at least upon the
granting of that Request, which he who puts it up does actually take before he
asks, and in the very form of his asking it, does more than insinuate the great
danger which may be in denying him. And this methinks does appear to have been
an Indecorum in your eminent Advocate in His Discourse of the Religion of
England, p. 23. Sect. 11. How momentous in the balance of the Nation those
Protestants are that dissent from the present Ecclesiastical Policy: Where he
tells us of their great number, their great Interest, their great Commerce,
their many Relations, their great Understandings and Discretion; and in the
close of all he adds, NOR DO THEY WANT THE RATIONAL COURAGE OF ENGLISH MEN The
meaning of which Words are at least very suspicious, as to the King, and as to
the Church: Since the late Discourses of their Endeavors after an Union, their
former Separations do not only continue, but are managed in the same manner as
formerly: On their Parts we do not hear of any beginnings toward a Compliance:
One man indeed there was who made a Profession of something of this, but what
reserves he had in his mind, whereby to render that Profession of his
insignificant, let his after-Practises teach us, and withal give us warning
what trust to repose in any general though never so fair Promises.

And thus I have briefly and plainly laid down some of the most obvious
Exceptions against the late much discoursed of Projects, Comprehension,
Toleration, and a third made up of both them: Comprehension may indeed proceed
from an Excess of goodness in those who are ready to grant it; but it is not
very clear that those who are the most likely to desire it; will be most ready
to make a good use of it: Indeed as to the thing it self, it is kept so much in
the dark, that it is not, except by some very few, if by any, understood, who
they are who either do desire or would accept it, or upon what terms it would
be either given or taken; and as the nature of this thing is unknown, so will
the Issue be most uncertain. As to those two abatements which are usually
mentioned, the taking away of Assent and Consent, and dispensing with the
Obligation of Renouncing the Covenant; they are things which carry great and
apparent dangers in them. He who desires to be excused from giving his Assent
and Consent, can hardly be able to give any other account of that his desire
than this: That he does not believe the Doctrine of the Church, or does not
mean to conform to the orders of it. As to the other Particular, the Dispensing
with the Renouncing of the Covenant; the very Proposal is methinks a very bold
one, if we consider what was the occasion of the Covenant; who were the
Authors; the Time in which it was entered into, the ends in order to which, what
are the Contents of it, and how perpetual and indispensible they have all along
declared the Obligation of it to be, what Effects it has had already, and at
any time may have upon the King, the Church, the Nation, and in an especial
manner, upon the Old Cavaliers. And then as to Toleration, I have showed the
Inconveniences to be innumerable and unavoidable, which it may at any time
bring upon either of them; there is no Imposture which at this door standing
always open, may not enter into the Church: No Danger which by a dexterous
management of such an unbounded License, may not have a very fair and easy
passage made for it into the State. And as for any mixture of these two
Contrivances, it will be so long before the Bounds and Limits can be agreed
upon to be set between them; so many things are to be considered of, before
these two can with any satisfaction to either be suited to one another, that an
Enquiry may I suppose be safely put off until a time of greater Leisure.

The End.
A Postscript to the Reader.
WHen I had put an End, as I thought to your Trouble (Good Reader) and my own,
there came to my hands a new Pamphlet, entitled, Certain Considerations
tending to promote Peace and good Will amongst Protestants, very useful for the
present times: The Design of which is to promote the forementioned
Comprehension, which the Author does endeavor to put a very good color upon
by laying down several Propositions; the Third of which is this, That the late
Civil Wars in England were not begun for the Extirpation of Episcopacy and
Liturgy, or to settle the Presbyterian Government here, but merely for Civil
Rights, as he adds afterward. Now if this Gentleman only means, that the
Grandees of the Party had in their Hearts no manner of zeal for or against any
Form of Religion, any farther than as their other Ends and Designs were carried
on by it, I shall readily grant it him; ^ay, I shall say this farther, That,
besides Religion, the Civil Rights of the Nation were but plausible Colors, by
which the Leading Men of that Party did set off their other Ends; such as
Revenge, Humor, Discontent, Covetousness and Ambition. And this they were told
publicly by one whom they knew to be able to make it good, in the excellent
Declaration of Aug. 12. 1642. Themselves know what Overtures have been made by
them, and with what Importunity for Offices and Preferments, what great
Services should have been done for us, and what other undertakings were (even
to the saving the Life of the Earl of Strafford) if we would confer, such
Offices upon them. But that Religion was the thing which they did make show of,
and by which they drew abundance of well meaning but deluded People to their
assistan^^, is so plain, and known so publicly, that it is no little wonder,
that any should offer to outs^^^ the Nation in so no^^^ious a Case. Did not
every Press and every Pulpit declare against Episcopacy, Liturgy and
Cere^onies? Did not the Lords and Commons, by their Votes of March 12. 1642.
resolve upon the Question, That an Army be forthwith raised for the Safety of
the Kings Person, etc. and PRESERVING THE TRUE RELIGION? etc. Did they not in
July following put forth a Delaration concerning the miserable Distractions and
Grievances this Kingdom now lies in, by means of JESUITICAL and wicked
Cousellours now about his Majesty? wherein they tell us over and over again of
the Protestant Religion, a great Change of Religion; That they should be for
ever earnest to prevent ^ Civil War and those miserable Effects which it must
needs produce, if they may be avoided without the Alteration of RELIGION, etc.
And in their Resolutions to live and die with the Earl of Essex, they tell us,
That their Army was raised, for the MAINTENANCE of the TRUE PROTESTANT
RELIGION. The Pla^e, Wedding-rings, Thimbles and Bodkins had never been brought
in, if it had not been that the Cause was so often called, the Cause of God.
Let any man read the Remonstrances and Declarations of the Two Houses, and then
see whether Religion was not one of those things which they all along declared
their Zeal for; and accordingly in all the Parliaments Quarters, the poor
Surplice, the Organs and the Common Prayer Book were the first Objects of all
their Fury. But because this present Design of Comprehension is particularly
intended to gratify some Clergymen, let us enquire under what name they
recommended the War unto the People: Was it not under the name of Gods Cause;
the setting Christ on his Throne; fighting the Lords Battles? There is a
Collection of their Sermons Printed, which will not suffer any Man to doubt of
this; out of which there is enough gathered to this purpose in, Evangelium
Armatum. And This Mr. Baxter has in a late Book confessed as to himself: When
the Wars began, though the Cause it self lay i^ Controversies between King and
Parliament; yet the thoughts that the Church and Godliness it self was deeply
in danger by Persecution and Arminia^is^ did much more to bias me to the
Parliaments side, than the Civil Interest (which at the heart I little
regarded.) This Author likewise confesses, That whatever was the Cause at the
first, it soon became a War for Religion. And Mr. Love, a Person mentioned by
this Author as one of great Merit, in his Sermon at the Vxbridge- Treaty
complains of the so long letting alone the Two Plague-sores of Episcopacy and
Common Prayer Book.

The Seventh Proposition is this, That the Parliamentarians in the beginning of
our Troubles declared, to abhor and detest all Designs of deposing and
murdering his Late Sacred Majesty. That they did declare against any such
thing I readily grant, and, amongst other Reasons, for this, laid down by our
Author, That it had been else impossible for them to have gained the people as
they did. But that there were among the chief Contrivers of the Wars, Those who
had a design upon the Kings Crown and Life, is a thing where of there is great
Evidence. If it be lawful to fight with a King, why is it not lawful to kill
him? Swords and Bullets are Things which are by no means to be used against
that Person which we think we ought not to destroy: And of the great danger
which his Majesty's Person was in at the Battle at Edgehill, himself has
informed us in a Declaration on that Subject. And in the Remonstrance of May
26. 1642. the Lords and Commons did plainly assume to themselves a Right to
depose the King, in these words; If we should make the highest Precedents of
former Parliaments our Patterns, there would be no cause to complain of want of
Modesty and Duty in us, when we have not so much as suffered those things to
enter into our thoughts, which all the World knows they put in act. In which
words there is thus much plainly contained, That whatever former Parliaments
have done, they take themselves to have a Right to do; Now former Parliaments
have been overawed into the deposing of Kings: Now that they had their Eyes
upon those particular Proceedings of former Parliaments, appears by those
Words, All the World knows what they put in act: His Majesty in His Answer to
that Declaration of theirs, tells us of two Gentlemen who said publicly,
unreproved in the Parliament House, one, That the H^ppiness of this Kingdom did
not depend upon Him, or upon any of the Royal Branches of that Root; Another,
That He was not worthy to be King of England: And as for the Royal Power it was
plainly demanded from him in the Nineteen Propositions.

The Eighth Consideration is this, That the Nonconforming Presbyteri^^^ had
both their hearts and hands in the Restoration of His Majesty to His Royal
Throne, for which Mr. Love, and Mr. Gibbons lost their Heads.

Of all things I should least have e^pected, that the Advocates for the
Presbyterians should have insisted upon their Merits to His Majesty, or the
Royal Family, for which their best Apology is the Act of Oblivion; and if they
would have insisted, yet however methinks they should of all men not have made
Mr. Love the Person to have insisted on: As for that Party of the Scots, which
he corresponded with; it is no Part of their Wisdom to remind His Majesty of
the Usage which he found from them. As to Mr. Love, the Learned Author of
Sa^aritanism has informed us; p. 152. That at the Execution of Archbishop
La^d, he uttered these Words with great Triumph, Art thou come Little Will? I
am glad to see thee here, and hope to see the nest of the Bishops here e're
long; and having dipped his Handkerchief in his blood, he rode with it to
Vxbridge, and used these Words; Here is the Blood of that Proud Prelate, I hope
for more of their Bloods e're long. And this does against my will lead me to
the consideration of his Sermon at Vxbridge, at the time of the Treaty. Amongst
many Scandals cast upon the King, he herein compares Him to Charles the Ninth
of France, who after a Treaty of Peace made the Massacre, and to Antiochus, of
whom we read, Dan. 11. 23. That through his Policy he shall cause Craft to
prosper i^ his hand, and by Peace shall destroy many, and, after the League
made with him he shall work deceitfully: After these great Complements toward
the King, he tells us in his Preface; It Is the Sword, not Disputes or Treaties
which must end this Controversy, wherefore turn your Plowshares into Swords,
and your Pruning Hooks into Spears to fight the Lords's Battles, to avenge the
Blood of the Saints which has been spilt, it must be avenged either by us, or
upon us: Let me but quote the Words of the Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 48. verse.
10. Cursed be he that does the Work of the Lord negligently: Cursed be he that
keeps his Sword from Blood, etc. And I will be bold to say this, that the
most malicious suggestions which are insisted upon in the Votes of Non-Address
are to be met with in one Page of that Sermon, p. 32. We read 'Twas the Lord
who troubled Achan, because he troubled Israel. O that in this our
State-Physicians would resemble God, to cut off those from the Land who have
distempered it. Meli^s est ^t per^at Vnus quam Vnitas.

He tells us, page 36, 37, of three sorts of Persons, with whom Peace is not to
be made: First, Truce Breakers: O what deceitful Work has our Parliament met
with on the very nick of Treaties for Peace, etc. Secondly, Idolaters are not
meet Persons to have a Peace with, Jehosaphat was checked for having an
Affinity with Ahab an Idolatrons King, because he loved him that hated the
Lord, therefore wrath was upon him from the Lord: But Asa ^as commended because
he removed Maachah from being Queen, because she was an Idolatress: I may say,
what Jehu said to Joram, what Peace can there be so long as the Whoredoms of
Jezebel THE QUEEN are so many, we may make Peace with Papists now, but who will
give us assurance that they will keep their Covenants: Thirdly, men wholly
under the guilt of much Innocent blood are not meet Persons to be at peace
with, till all the guilt of blood be expiated and avenged, either by the Sword
of the Law, or the Law of the Sword, else a Peace can neither be safe nor just,
and page 42. Are Peace and Truth the Ingredients which must heal us? O then
dote not too much upon this Treaty of Peace, which is this day beginning: And
again, Will the Blood-thirsty Rebels of Ireland, the Idolatrous Papists of
England, the Pompous Prelates, the rest of the corrupt Clergy, and the profaner
sort of the Nation, who join hand in hand together: Are these likely to be
Patrons of Truth? Deceive not your selves, there is little likelihood of Peace
with such: What I said before, I say again, Either they must grow better, or we
must wax worse, before we can agree.

I should willingly have suffered these Things to sleep, but that our Author
forced me upon it, by insisting upon the Merits of Mr. Love, and Mr. Love
himself in his Speech upon the Scaffold justifies himself as to all that he had
done in relation to the Public Differences; I bless my God, I am free from the
Blood of all men, etc. I do declare that I die with my Judgment set against
Malignity, I do h^^e both name and thing, I still retain AS VEHEMENT A
DETESTATION of Malignant Interest AS EVER I DID: And again, I die cleaving to
all those Oaths, Vows, Covenants, Protestations, that were imposed by the Two
Houses of Parliament, as owning them, and in dying with my Judgment for them.
To the Protestation, the Vow and Covenant, the Solemn League and Covenant.

This Author cannot deserve any way so well of the Party he pleads for, as not
to give us occasion to enquire into past Matters: For whatever Inconveniences
may be expected from Comprehension or Toleration, by the nature of the things
themselves, they will be found to be very much ascertained and increased, if we
consider the Persons who do desire either of them: I suppose we shall hear no
more of the Merits of Love, and if this Gentleman does think fit to change him
for any other Instance: I shall advise that he would pitch upon such a Person
as has wrote nothing, nor been in any Public Employment, lest otherwise he
should force us upon those Enquiries which will be, it is to be doubted little
for the credit of him whose name is brought in Question, and which I shall take
very little delight in.

The End.
A Brief Catalogue (...) Books newly Printted and Repri^ted for R. Royston;
Bookseller to His Most Sacred Majesty.
ANtiquitates Christian, or, The History of the Life and Death of the Holy
Jesus, as also, The Lives, Acts, and Martyrdoms of his Apostles. In two Parts,
the first Part containing the Life of Christ, Written by Jeremy Tailor, late
Bishop of Down and Connor; The second, containing the Lives of the Apostles, by
William Cave, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to His Majesty.

The Second Part of the Practical Christian, consisting of Meditations and
Psalms, illustrated with Notes, or Paraphrased; relating to the Hours of
Prayer, the ordinary Actions of Day and Night, and several Dispositions of Men.
By R. Sherlock, D. D. Rector of Winrvick.

A Serious and Compassionate Enquiry into the Causes of the present Neglect and
Contempt of the Protestant Religion and Church of England, etc. The Third
Edition.

A Collection of several Treatises concerning the Reasons and Occasions of the
Penal Laws. Viz. I. The Execution of Justice in England, not for Religion, but
for Treason: written by the Lord Treasurer Burleig^, 17 Dec. 1583. II.
Important Considerations, by the Secular Priests: Printed A. D. 1601. III. The
Jesuits Reasons Unreasonable: 1662.

The End.

