THEODVLIA: OR, A JUST DEFENSE Of HEARING the SERMONS And other Teaching of the
present Ministers of England. Against a Book unjustly entitled, (in Greek) A
Christian testimony against them that serve the Image of the Beast. (In
English) A Christian and sober Testimony against sinful Compliance. Wherein the
unlawfulness of Hearing the present Ministers of England is pretended to be
clearly demonstrated by an Author termed by himself Christophilus
Antichristomachus.

By JOHN TOMBS, B.D.

Luke 9.49, 50. And John answered and said, Master, We saw one casting out
Devils in thy name, and we forbade him, because he follows not with us.

And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not, for he that is not against us is for
us.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Eversden under the Crown Tavern in
West-Smithfield. 1667.

PErlegi hunc librum, cui titulus Theodulia, in quo nihil reperio doctrinae,
disciplinaeve Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis morihus contrarium.

Joh. Hall S. T. B. Rev. in Christo Patri Humfredo D. Episc. Land. a sac. dom.
Ex aedibus Fulhamiens. Calend. Maii, 1667.

To the Right Honorable EDWARD EARL of CLARENDON Lord Chancellor of ENGLAND.
THE great favor your Honor has vouchsafed me, and the great Candor your
ingenuity has showed in accepting some former Writings, have imboldned me to
present this also to your hands, not only that it might be some part of a plea
for my self as not averse from Union and Peace, but also that it may somewhat
conduce to a closing of that miserable breach, which that (...), as St. Basil
termed it, the unmeasurable drawing things in contrary ways has made among us,
as hoping that though difference of Opinions should be incurable, yet the
discords of Protestants of the same Faith are not incurable. To the remedy of
which no person, after his Majesty, by reason of your eminent authority and
prudence, is likely to contribute more than your self. Whereto if the Lord make
your Lordship instrumental, it may be so blessed a work, as may tend much to
your Honor, and comfort in the day of the resignation of your spirit into the
hand of him that gave it. The sad face of things in Europe, chiefly by reason
of differences about Religion, makes it seem a deplorable thing, and should
move every right-hearted Christian to endeavor the composing of Differences (
salva veritate) that a deluge of Popery or Mahometanism may not overwhelm us.
As for my self I expect no other event than obloquy from persons of this
Authors mind, and such like; it being the usual lot of men that seek to part a
fray to displease both parties, though I am not conscious to my self, that I
have herein written or done any thing which might be a just grievance to any,
my study being neither to uphold a rising party, nor to depress the dejected,
but to promote Truth and the public Peace, to which I have addicted my self,
and in order thereto, subscribe my self,

Your Honors devoted and deeply obliged Servant in our Lord John Tombs.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READERS. Especially those to whom at any time I have Preached
the Word of God.
Sect. 1. Prefaces needful by reason of Readers prejudice.
IT was the Order of the Court of Areopagites at Athens, that Pleas before them
should be without Proems, lest their passions being stirred by Oratory, their
judgment should be perverted; and favorable inclination to a person, should
cause a sentence to be passed by them, not congruous to the merit of the cause.
And it were well, if in all Controversies about matters of Religion, there were
so strict a Law observed; that in all disputes, whether by Writing or
Conference, all such Prefaces or Expressions be severely prohibited and
restrained, as tend to create prejudice and partial propension to one part more
than to another. But experience too much informing us, that even in Morals and
matters of Religion, though the consequent be their Peace, or undoing, the
guiding aright, or misleading their Consciences; yea, the salvation, or
perdition of their souls; Treatises have their fate pro captu Lectoris, as the
Readers or Hearers are affected, each thing is received secundum modum
receptivitatis recipientis, as the quality and mind of the Receivers disposes
them; insomuch that any corrupting error from some whom they affect, is
received by many, and the clearest truths are rejected by persons preoccupated
with prejudice either against the thing, or person that does deliver them.
Which makes it very necessary to blow away such du^^ out of the balance of
men's minds, as might mak^ the Scales of their Understanding unequal, what they
are to weigh what is presented to it. I list not to give instances by
mentioning such experiments as either former, or this present Age have yielded,
of the ill effects that debates have had through prejudices on both sides,
against persons and things, caused by such preconceits as either education,
relations, advantages, or engagements forestall men with; being unwilling to
rake out of the Grave again such Occurrences of this kind, as I hope are
buried, and wish they may not be revived. Nevertheless, (since I have too much
intelligence, that personal exceptions have caused such misprisions, as are
likely to hinder the equal judging of the present controversy, whereby as the
Writer is wronged, so the Reader is much more wronged by himself, when he
refuses to examine the matter, though of much concernment to him, because he
is by fame or other motive dis^ff^cted to the Author) I am induced to speak
something of my self, and the occasion of this Writing, and the History of this
Controversy, being necessitated thereto by the strange Title, and Preface of
the Book, I am now to examine.

Sect. 2. Prejudice against the Author, as favoring Separation, causless.
I find by very many evidences, that my Writings about a point, which few can
concoct, have caused such an aversness in the spirits of a great number, even
of those that seem to be inquisitive into truth, that my later Writings, even
those which have been recommended to the World by the chief of my Antagonists,
though not much contradicted, yet have not found such receptions, as such
arguments were deemed to require. Which had discouraged me from this kind of
employment, did not the expectation of my giving account about the improvement
of the talent committed to me by my Lord and Master, make me judge, that being
restrained from public Preaching, I ought to use it in this way, out of hopes
of serving my generatian therein. Being busied in some other Arguments, I met
with the Book which I here examine, and not long after with another, having
this Title [Prelatical Preachers, none of Christ's Teachers] whereby I
perceived, that the seeds of most rigid separation were sown, and did spread
themselves much among many, whose good I conceived my self bound to endeavor;
and not only for their sakes, but also for the public Peace, (as much as in me
lies) to pluck up such roots of bitterness; Which I rather thought did
appertain to me to do, because I found that many that had heard of my judgment
in another point, did imagine, that I must needs be also a Separatist from the
Church and Ministers as now they are; and where my practice is known to the
contrary, I have been censured as acting against my own tenet, yea, and my own
light, and taken to be, and shunned as a deserter of that Cause for which I
have appeared: notwithstanding in many places of my Writings I have disclaimed
Separation, for that, wherein I was dissenter from others, always foreseeing,
that a groundless Separation would be endless, and therefore have still
professed my desire of such a Reformation as might be without Separation from
Brethren, who are not heretical in the doctrine of Christian Faith, nor
Idolatrous in their Worship; nor impose that on me for communion with them,
which I cannot yield to without sin against God, and accordingly did in express
words in the Addition to my Apology, Sect. 4. declare my willingness to join
with any Churches of Christ, and unwillingness to be a Separating Member in any
Church, being willing to be a conjoined Member with all the Churches of Christ
in general and each in particular. Apol. p. 5. I abhor Separation from my
Brethren in this regard: p. 10. I durst not gather a separated Church, as not
knowing how to justify such a practice. In refutatione positionis Dr. Henrici
Savage, Sect. 15. Sanctissime in conspectu Domini corda scrutantis possum
profiteri me in animo semper habuisse, ut si fieri posset, esset reformatio
absque separatione and animorum exacerbatione. Praecursor. Sect. 15. I am
conscious to my self of using what means I could for Reformation without Schism
if possible. Yea, when some of those who agreed with me in that tenet, which my
Writings held forth differently from others, were moved to admit me to their
Communion, and they excepted against it, because I did not disclaim the Church
of England, nor renounce Ordination by a Bishop, nor desert my standing as a
Parish Minister, nor my maintenance by Tith or Augmentation, nor my hearing
with the World, as they used to speak, nor some such like practices as were
inconsistent with the principles of the Separatists: I refused many years ago
to join with them that would not otherwise admit me than upon such terms; but
did answer their exceptions against me, and persisted in my refusal unto this
day. And how averse my spirit and ways have been from division, that
Antagonist of mine whose former Writings had given occasion to men to conceive
of me as a Sect-master; yet has in his two Epistles Printed before my two
Books, one against the Quakers about the insufficiency of each man's Light
within him for his guidance to God* being Nine Sermons on Joh. 1.9. and the
other, entitled, Romanism Discussed, against the Papists assertions about
their Church and Pope, declared his opinion of my inclinableneness to brotherly
Communion and agreement, notwithstanding our dissent. They to whom I was a
Teacher, even in the times of our greatest Liberty, can bear me Witness, that I
always withstood by Writing and Conference such insinuations as tended to
alienate their minds from Dissenters, and always advised conjunction in Church
Communion, and hearing such as taught the truth of the Gospel in respect of the
foundation, though in their Worship and Preaching, some Hay and Stubble were
superadded: And therefore to show my constancy in the same opinion and
practice, I have conceived my self obliged to appear in this matter at this
time.

Sect. 3. The evils consequent on the tenet of Separation, urge to an
examination of it.
Which I conceived my self the more urgently provoked to, by the direful
imputation of serving the Image of the Beast, which the Title of the Book
charge on the Hearers of the present Ministers; and the terrible predictions
which in the Epistle to the Reader seem to be levelled against compliance in
hearing the present Ministers; as if it were likely to meet with the same
judgment in the day of Gods wrath with the Antichristian Beast; and seeming
commiserations of such as did join in Communion with the public Church
Assemblies, in praying and preaching, as worshipping with the Nations, waiting
at the Posts of an Antichristian Ministry, and through the power of temptation
turned aside by the flocks of the Companions; and expostulating with such as
forsaking the fountain of living Waters, for broken Cisterns that will hold no
Water; changing their glory for that which will not profit, leaving the bread
in their Fathers house, and going a begging to the doors of Strangers; casting
contempt upon the pure Institutions of Christ, and thereby provoking the Lord
to send leanness into their soul, giving occasion of grief and stumbling unto
their Brethren, pouring contempt upon the Offices, Wisdom, and Faithfulness of
Christ, hardening persons in a false way of worshipping of God to their eternal
ruin, disobeying the heavenly voice calling aloud to them to come from the
Lions dens, and Mountains of the Leopards, to come out of Babylon; admonishing
them to arise, depart hence, this being not their rest, but polluted, to hasten
their escape, and be like the He-goat before the Flocks in their retreat from
the Tents of these false Worshippers, lest being partakers of their sin, they
receive of their plagues that are even ready to be poured forth. Which is
further pressed by intimating as if this may be the last warning such may have
from God. Which passages if I should my self read without commotion of mind, as
if they were brutum fulmen, a great Thunderclap without any Thunderbolt; yet I
doubted whether they might not have such operation on many well-meaning
persons, as to affright them from any hearing or Communion with the present
Church or Teachers, as judging such compliance a damnable sin, such as the
Scripture makes drinking of the cup of Fornication of the Whore of Babylon,
receiving the mark of the Beast in their forehead, and in their hand and in
some an irremissible sin; like that of blasphemy against the Holy Ghost; which
must needs produce these woeful effects, an irreconcilable enmity between the
Separatists and such as hold Communion with the present Churches and their
Pastors; and if the Law should not be mitigated, the utter ruin of many
thousands, in respect of their Liberties, Estates, and perhaps Lives; or else
the violation of their Consciences, if being possessed with these notions out
of fear, or secular hope they yield to things of so direful an aspect; which
things have appeared to me of so great importance, that I conceived both
prudence and charity bound me to examine these pretenses, and to inform my self
and others of what I found conducible to the preventing of those sad
consequences which attend the compliance, if it it be such as it is pretended
to be; and the unyieldingness to what Laws enjoin, if it be not such an evil as
it is accused to be. That which Dr. John Burges in his Rejoinder, said p. 629.
is to be considered. As under the name of Christ and pretense of advancing his
honor, Antichrist was set up; so it is possible that under the name of
Antichrist, and under the opinion of only opposing him, even the Kingdom of
Christ may be pulled down: and in part already is so, and men scarcely feel or
fear it.

Sect. 4. The motive and end of this Writing.
Whereunto I have been further incited by the relations I have met with; of the
practices and success of Separatists of elder and later times: which have for
the most part ended in some prodigious errors, or endless brawls, and other
effects as have caused great hinderance to the progress of the Gospel, and the
disturbance both of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Peace in those places where
they have had any considerable duration. Nor do our own times want such
experiments of the discords which have fallen out by such separation; the
factions that have been in the Congregations of men of that persuasion, the
many, not only vain fancies, but also opinions destructive of true Religion and
Christian Faith, as have been vented through a promiscuous liberty of so called
Prophesying, and adhered to by many of the weaker s^rt of those of that way, as
have caused many both learned, godly, and considerate Divines, even of those
who were Non-Conformists, to account the way of Separation as a very pernicious
evil; and accordingly have by Preaching, Writing, and Conferences, opposed it
to the uttermost of their power. The sense of which moved me to look upon the
Book here examined, together with the other forenamed, of the same kind, and
some such as have been divulged to the same purpose, as blazing Stars
portending some such danger, as we all may have cause to rue; tending to keep
open, yea, and widen our breaches, which the Romanists foment, and hope thereby
in time to make advantage of for their own designs. Hoc Ithacus velit, and
magno mercentur Atridae. For preventing of such malignant influence as that
Treatise may have on many souls who are well affected, but not so cautelous as
were requisite, chiefly those to whom heretofore I have been a Teacher, I have
composed this Writing, which I advise and request the Reader to peruse without
any such prejudice, or preingaged partiality, as the Epistle of this Author
tends to beget in the Readers of his Work, seriously considering that the right
regulating of his own judgment and practice, and the promoting of the public
peace, are of more value than either his own credit, or the contenting of those
that are otherwise minded; and that in all enquiries for the satisfaction of
our conscience, and doing our duty truth only is to be sought after, which has
been, and still is the aim of,

Your Brother and Servant in Christ Jesus John Tombs.

The Contents.
In the Epistle to the Readers
Sect. 1. Prefaces needful by reason of Readers prejudice. Sect. 2. Prejudice
against the Author, as favoring Separation causless. Sect. 3. The evils
consequent on the tenet of Separation urge to an examination of it. Sect. 4.
The motive and end of this writing.
In the Answer to the Preface.
Sect. 1. Of the Worship of God, and how hearing is worship of him. Sect. 2. Of
hearing how instituted worship, and to be devolved on the Scriptures of the New
Testament. Sect. 3. Hearing not a mere positive or ceremonial worship. Sect. 4.
The judgment of the Ancients not useless in this controversy Sect. 5. No
approved practice of the Saints before the Law countenanceth Separation from the
present Preachers in England. Sect. 6. Jewish Laws admitted some dispensation
and addition. Sect. 7. The Election or Ordination of Levites is no rule for
election or Ordination of Ministers now. Sect. 8. The texts injoyning the
things appointed, prove not that some things undetermined might not in Gods
Worship be ordered by men. Sect. 9. The defection of the Jews to Idolatrous
inventions of men, is of a more heinous degree, than the use of humane
Ceremonies with us. Sect. 10. Such testimony as the Prophets gave against the
Jewish defection, is not now to be given against the Conformists. Sect. 11. The
Conformists not chargeable as the false Prophets of the Jews. Sect. 12.
Invectives against Teachers and Worship now, may be from another spirit, than
that of the Prophets. Sect. 13. The forsaking of false Prophets and worship
among the Jews, is no justification of Separation from the present Teachers and
Worship. Sect. 14. The arguing by analogy in positive rites, not rational.
Sect. 15. The first Querie about a National Church instituted, answered. Sect.
16. National Ministers may be Ministers of Christ, and National Churches true
Churches. Sect. 17. Mr. Parkers arguments that the form of Churches is of
Divine Institution, are answered. Sect. 18. The Ministry of the Gospel is a
true Ministry of Christ. Sect. 19. A true Gospel Ministry may be in a false
Church so deemed Sect. 20. Gods love to us is not less in not determining the
whole of his Worship to us, as he did to the Jews. Sect. 21. Christ designed
Officers and Offices for his Church (not as were in the Jewish) which are the
same while their work is the same, though some titles be new. Sect. 22. The
solemn deputation of Ministers, is not the peculiar privilege of Saints. Sect.
23. Corruptions in Non-fundamentals unchurch not. Sect. 24. Every error makes
not a false Prophet. Sect, 25. Separation by reason of some corruptions
unwarrantable. Sect. 26. It is prudence to join in worship and hearing, where
some errors and corruptions remain.
Chap. 1. Arg. 1.
Sect. 1. Some scruples of Conscience are of ill consequence. Sect. 2. There is
warrant in Scripture to hear the present Ministers of England. Sect. 3.
Accidentals of Instituted Worship warranted without command in Scripture. Sect.
4. Prejudice is no argument, nor personal motives good proof.
Chap. 2. Arg. 2.
Sect. 1. Preachers may be heard as teaching truth. Sect. 2. They may be heard
as Ministers of the Gospel, who are not rightly called. Sect. 3. Preachers may
be Ministers of the Gospel, who are not chosen by a particular instituted
Church. Sect. 4. The present Ministers may be heard as Gifted Brethren. Sect.
5. Tender Consciences may call the Bishops Rev. Fathers. Sect. 6. It is not
proved that the best of the present Ministers are to be separated from as
walking disorderly.
Chap. 3. Arg. 3.
Sect. 1. That which is by some termed Antichristian, is not always unlawful.
Sect. 2. The names given to the Ministers of England prove not their Office not
to be from Christ. Sect 3. The term Priest proves not symbolizing with the
Popish Order of Priests, Sect. 4. The parallel particulars prove not the
English Ministers symbolizing in Office with Popish Priests. Sect. 5. The
Office of Bishops is not proved to be Antichristian, but may be found in
Scripture. Sect. 6. The Office of Lord Bishops is not contrary to express
precepts of Christ in the Scripture. Sect. 7. The Office of Lord Bishops not
from the Papacy. Sect. 8. The Ordination of Bishops is also of Presbyters.
Chap. 4. Arg. 4.
Sect. 1. They that deny not Christ's Offices doctrinally may be heard. Sect. 2.
Every not hearkening to Christ's Order is not a denial of his Office. Sect. 3.
It is not proved that Christ's Sovereign Authority is rejected by the present
Ministers. Sect. 4. Ministers oppose not the will of Christ, by not joining in
the separation pleaded for. Sect. 5. Election and Excommunication by the Church
are not Christ's Institution. Sect. 6. No contempt of the Authority of Christ is
in the Church of England by setting up Officers and Offices. Sect. 7. Election
of Ministers by the common Suffrage of the Church is not proved to be Christ's
appointment. Sects 8. Prophesying is not opposed by the Ministers. Sect. 9.
Ministers service may be Divine and Spiritual in the use of the Liturgy. Sect.
10. Things objected against the Ministers are not such as justify separation.
Chap. 5.
Sect. 1. All owning of orders different from, or contrary to Christ's, proves
not a denial of his Offices. Sect. 2. Ministers submitting to Canons is
unjustly censured. Sect. 3. Making Canons in things undetermined, and
subjection to them, agrees with Scripture. Sect. 4. Its no derogation from
Scripture, or Christ, that such Canons are made and obeyed. Sect. 5. All
particularities of Decency and Order in things sacred, are not determined in
Scripture. Sect. 6. Its not proved that the Ministers of England own
constitutions contrary to the Revelation of Christ. Sect. 7. A prescript Form
of words in Prayer devised by man is not contrary to Romans 8.26. 1 Cor. 14.15.
Sect. 8. The admission of vicious persons to Communion, justifies not
separation. Sect. 9. Receiving of the Lords Supper kneeling, is not directly
opposite to Christ's practice or precept of abstaining from appearance of evil,
1 Thessalonians. 5.22. Sect. 10. Forbidding to Marry or eat Flesh at certain times are
not Characters of Apostates, as 1 Timothy 4.3. is meant. Sect. 11. No such
headship is owned by the present Ministers as is a denial of Christ's Offices.
Sect. 12. Conformity to Laws opposite to Christ's, proves not owning another
King coordinate to him. Sect. 13. Headship of the Church under Christ not
monstrous. Sect. 14. The Kings Supremacy is such as was allowed the Kings of
Israel.
Chap. 6. Arg. 5.
Sect 1. False Doctrine only makes a false Prophet not to be heard. Sect. 2.
The Ministers not false Prophets, because not sent, as Jer. 23.21. Romans 10.15.
is meant. Sect. 3. The Ministers not proved to commit Adultery and walk in lies
as Jer. 23.14. is meant. Sect. 4. The Ministers are not proved to strengthen
the hands of evil doers, as Jer. 23.14. is meant. Sect. 5. The Ministers are
not proved such daubers as those, Ezekiel. 22.28. Sect. 6. Ministers changing of
places, sadning some men's hearts, not characters of a false Prophet. Sect. 7.
Pressing rigid Conformity no proof of the Ministers being false Prophets. Sect.
8. The charge, Ezekiel. 22.26. reaches not the Ministers of England. Sect. 9. The
Ministers are not the false Shepherds, meant Ezekiel. 34.4. Sect. 10. The
Ministers of England are not the second Beast, foretold, Rev. 13.11.
Chap. 7. Arg 6.
Sect, 1. All Idolatry is exhibiting Divine Worship to a creature. Sect. 2. All
will worship of God is not Idolatry. Sect. 3. This Authors Argument as well
proves himself an Idolater as the Conformist. Sect. 4. Prayer in a stinted form
may be worship of God of his appointment. Sect. 5. Common Prayer Book worship
shuts not out of doors the exercise of the gift of Prayer. Sect. 6.
Common Prayer Book worship is not of pure humane invention. Sect. 7.
Common Prayer Book worship is the same with the worship of the Reformed
Churches. Sect. 8. No particularity instituted is a mere circumstance; yet
particularities undetermined are. Sect. 9. Praying in a form may be praying in
the Spirit. Sect. 10. The Forms of Prayer imposed are not made necessary
essential parts of Worship. Sect. 11. Acting in the holy things of God by the
Office, Power, and Modes of Idolaters may be without Idolatry. Sect. 12. The
English Ministers oppose Popish Idolatry as other Protestants. Sect. 13. The
Ministers of England act not by virtue of an Office Power from Idolaters. Sect.
14. The Common Prayer Book worship was not abused to Idolatry. Sect. 15.
Kneeling in the receiving the Sacramental Elements is not Idolatry. Sect. 16.
The crimination of the Ministers as Idolaters is not excusable. Sect. 17. The
Martyrs are unjustly made Idolaters by this Author.
Chap. 8. Arg. 7. and 8,
Sect. 1. Every offense of others makes not sinful that which is otherwise
lawful. Sect. 2. Hearing the present Ministers may be the Saints duty. Sect. 3.
Sinful scandalizing is not by hearing the present Ministers. Sect. 4. It is not
scandal given but when the offensive action is done blameably. Sect. 5.
Offending some sincere Christians by hearing the present Ministers, is not the
scandalizing threatened, Matthew. 18.16. Sect. 6. The Separatists give more just
cause of offense to godly sober Christians, than the Conformists do to them.
Sect. 7. Hearing the present Ministers may be without participation with them
in sin.
Chap. 9. Arg, 9, 10, 11, 12.
Sect. 1. Separation of some from other Christians is no institution of Christ.
Sect. 2. Meeting of Christians as a distinct body is not Christ's Institution.
Sect. 3. Separated Congregational Churches in opposition to National, are not
of Christ's Institution. Sect. 4. To attend only on the Ministry of Ministers of
Congregational Churches is not Christ's appointment. Sect. 5. Hearing the
present Ministers casts no contempt on Christ's Institutions. Sect. 6. Hearing
the present Ministers hardens none in sin. Sect. 7. Gods people are not called
out of the Temples in England as places of false Worship. Sect. 8. There is
ground to expect a blessing in hearing the present Ministers. Sect. 9. Hearing
the present Ministers is no step to Apostasy. Sect. 10. Pollution in one part
makes not the whole worship polluted Chap. 10. Fifty Arguments for hearing the
present Ministers. Sect. 1. Christ's direction, Matthew. 23.2, 3. warrants hearing
the present Ministers. Sect. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses his
Chair as Teachers, not as Magistrates. Sect. 3. The Pharisees were not Church
Officers of Gods appointment. Sect. 4. Christ allows hearing the Pharisees
while they taught the Law of Moses. Sect. 5. Hearing Pharisees teaching Moses
Law, not attendance on their Ministry as Pastors is allowed by Christ. Sect. 6.
Christ and his Apostles going to the Jewish Meetings is opposite to the
Separatists opinion and practice. Sect. 7. Paul's rejoicing at the preaching
Christ of contention, warrants hearing the present Ministers. Sect. 8. The
truth Ministers teach, warrants the hearing of them. Sect. 9. Evil persons may
be heard as true Ministers. Sect. 10. It is a sin not to encourage good men in
their Ministry. Sect. 11. The example of the learned godly Non-Conformists is
some inducement to hear the present Ministers. Sect. 12. The Magistrates
command to hear the present Ministers is to be obeyed. Sect. 13. Conformists
Ministry instrumental to convert souls. Sect. 14. To the observation of the
Lords Day hearing the present Ministers, as the case now is, may be requisite.
Sect. 15. An appendix containing forty additional reasons against denying the
lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers. Sect. 16. Some passages in the
writings of Mr. John Goodwin opposite to the Book, entitled, Prelatical
Preachers none of Christ's teachers.
THEODVLIA: OR, A JUST DEFENSE Of HEARING the SERMONS And other Teaching of the
present Ministers of England. In Answer to the Book, entitled, A Christian and
sober Testimony against sinful Compliance.
An Answer to the Preface to the ensuing Discourse of that Book.
HAving premised so much as I suppose may be of use to the Reader, concerning
the Title and Epistle to the Reader of the Book which I intend to examine, I
proceed to a discussion of the Book it self: which is more Scholastical than
the other Treatise. Entitled [ Prelatical Preachers none of Christ's Teachers]
or any other that I have met with of late Composure, and therefore more fit to
be sifted for the bolting out of the Truth by Argument. It is distributed into
a Preface and ten Chapters. I shall follow him in his method as being suitable
enough, and comprehensive of that which may be said in this matter.

S^ct. 1. Of the worship of God, and how hearing is worship of him.
First he conceives it a reasonable Postulatum in the present enquiry
concerning our part of the instituted worship of Christ under the Gospel, with
respect unto the duty incumbent upon the Saints; in order thereunto, that the
whole thereof be divolved upon the Scriptures of the new Testament; and those
Royal Laws, that Christ (the alone King and Law giver of his church) has
given for Saints under the New Testament dispensation to walk by, until they
arrive unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ. Ephesians. 4.13.

Answ. The term [ worship of Christ or worship of God used Chap. 1. etc.]
imports such an action as whereby God is observed, served, or honored as God,
and Christ as Christ. All actions therefore, whereby God and Christ are
acknowledged and glorified under the proper consideration of God or Christ as
God or the Messiah, are meant by worship of God and Christ: Either of which may
be real, or putative and imaginary. They that worshipped the golden Calf did
proclaim a feast to Jehovah, and said, these are thy Gods O Israel that brought
thee out of the Land of Egypt. Exodus 32.5, 8. which shows they intended to
worship Jehovah as God by that feast, and the sacrificing to that Idol, but
this was not real worship of God, but only imaginary and false worship. Real
and true worship is either mediate or immediate. Mediate is when any action of
holiness or righteousness, is done in obedience to God as the motive or
impulsive cause, to glorify God as God, Christ as Christ, as the end or final
cause; yet not without respect to some other. So by works of righteousness,
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, Christ is served acceptably to God, Romans
14.18. Servants that obey their Masters fearing God do it to the Lord and not
to men, and thereby serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.22, 23, 24. Where the Action
of it self is not a worship of God or Christ, but in respect of the motive and
end, though the doing of the thing be not per se of it self a worship of God,
yet it being done by virtue of Gods Command and in reference to him as God, it
is in that respect a worship of God and a Service of Christ. Immediate worship
is that which is directed to God as the sole object of it without the
intervention of any other, as for whose sake, end or use it is done, or upon
whom it is terminated for his honor, though it may be that some other may be
used as the means, by which the action is done. As for instance, offering
Sacrifice to God was immediate worship to God, though it were done by the
Priest: because, though the Priest were used by reason of his office and
dignity, yet it is not directed to, or terminated on him for his honor, nor
out of any such respect of acknowledging superiority or excellency in him, as
in a servants obedience to his Master, nor to benefit him, or gratify him as in
acts of righteousness to men out of obedience to God, but the action is done
entirely, and immediately to and for God his honor, and glory, by testifying
thereby his excellency, worthiness, sovereignty, goodness, or other excellency,
which I conceive agreeable to the notion of worship, which seems to be a
contract of [worthyship] and notes singular respect, esteem, or regard, by
reason of some worth in the thing worshipped conceived in the heart, and
expressed by some sign, the former being inward worship, the other outward,
this] gather from the use of the term Worshipful; your worship given to
superiors by reason of their dignity, and the use of the words in the
solemnity of marriage, [ with my body I thee worship] that is, honor thee in
the sense in which St. Peter 1 Epist. 3.7. requires the husband (...) to
distribute, render, impart or give honor, esteem, price or valuation to the
wife as his own for his use as a helper, or to gratify her as in the old
ritual alleged by Mr. Seldom in his Uxor Ehraica, l. 2. c. 27. was in Latin [
corpore meo te dignor] I bestow on thee, to gratify thee out of singular
regard to thee, my Body. Both which notions seem to be implied in that old
version of the words, 1 Samuel 2.30. mentioned in the Conference at Hampton Court
[them that honor me I will honour] in the old [ them that worship me I will
worship] in the one our worshipping of God importing our glorifying him as God,
as the expression is, Romans 1.21. in the other Gods worshipping of us his
gratifying us as a benefactour, out of that love, favor and esteem he has of
us. Now hearing is worship of God or Christ in the former notion, it being for
enquiry of God or Christ, what is their mind or will toward us, out of
apprehension of our dependence on them or respect to them, as a Servant on his
Master, a Scholar on his Teacher. And then we worship God in hearing when we
hear, as it is said of the Thessalonians, 1 Thessal. 2.13. that when they
received the word of God, which they heard of St. Paul and other Teachers, they
received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth) the word of God,
which effectually works also in them that believe. Hearing then, as it is a
worship of God, is a seeking from God such revelation as may be for our
benefit, arising from the apprehension we have of his omnisciency, goodness,
wisdom, and truth, who neither can be deceived nor deceive, that he only
knows all things, that we are to call no man our Father upon the Earth: for
one is our Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 23.9. As on the contrary when
Ahazias 2 Kings 1. sent to Baalzebub the God of Ekron to enquire of that Idol,
he worshipped Baalzebub, and when Saul enquired of one that had a familiar
Spirit and not of the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. He worshipped that familiar
Spirit. Our Lord Christ is that Prophet whom God requires us to hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto us, Acts 3.22. God, who at sundry times and
in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, has in
these last days spoken to us by his Son Heb. 1.1, 2. And they that hear his
word as the person to whom all things are delivered by the Father, Mat. 11.27.
as he in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, Col. 2.3. as
that great Prophet who was to come into the World, Luke 7.16. do worship Christ
in hearing. As on the other side he that hears any other as Rabbi or master,
in that sense in which Christ asserts himself to be the only Master, Mat. 23.8,
10. (as the Papists do, who enquire of the Pope as infallible, when he speaks
or determins from his Chair) does worship him as his great Prophet, Rabbi, or
Master, which Christ forbids as an usurpation of his prerogative. This worship
of Christ is immediate even when we enquire of his mind by hearing other
teachers who bring his word to us, though not called as the Apostles, and some
others in the first planting of the Christian Churches, as he that attends to a
Kings Proclamation read or brought by never so inconsiderable a person,
declares by his Loyal hearing of it his honoring of his Prince, not of the
reader, C^ier, or messenger. Yea God is worshipped and Christ honored by
hearing the Gospel read as the word of God, as immediately and truly, though
not so solemnly, by a boy at home, as by a Pastor of a Church.

Sect. 2. Of hearing, how instituted worship, and to be devolved on the
Scriptures of the New Testament.
Instituted worship of Christ is such, as is by Christ's institution. Now
institutions, says a civil Lawyer, are praeceptions by which men are
instructed and taught, as the books of Ouintilian inscribed, Institutions of
Orators, of Lactantius Divine Institutions, of Erasmus* the Institution of a
Christian Prince, of Aldus Institutions of Grammar, of Calvin Institutions of
religion. Instituted wo^ship of Christ under the Gospel is that which is by
Christ's praeceptions taught, directed, or appointed in the times of the Gospel
since Christ's coming in the Flesh. Which may be meant of that natural or moral
worship, which belongs to God or Christ, such as are prayers to God, giving
thanks to him, and such like. Of this it is true in respect of the explicit
way of prayer or thanksgiving in the name of Jesus Christ or such peculiar
manner as belongs to the New Testament, the whole thereof is to be divolved
upon the Scriptures of the New Testament, that is, as I interpret his words,
the direction or precept concerning it, is to be taken from the Scriptures of
the New Testament, yet not excluding the directions and precepts of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament, nor the light of nature so far as that worship
is perpetual and general to all people, and times, as being either natural or
moral. Of which sort I take hearing the word of God to be, though some
peculiarities there are which the Almighty has tied us to in the New Testament
in hearing: as Mat. 17* 5. This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased:
hear ye him. Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises
you despises me, and he that despises me despises him that sent me. Yet
these passages do not exclude the precepts or directions of the Old Testament,
but presuppose them to be heard and learned in respect of the matter therein
contained, and the persons that reveal it, so our Lord Christ, Luke 16.29. They
have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them. 2 Peter 1.19. we have also a
more sure word of prophecy; whereunto you do well that ye take heed as unto a
light that shines in a dark place. Nor do I meet with any prohibitions of
hearing any but False-Prophets, Mat. 7.15. deceivers, Titus 1.10. that teach
other doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. 2 John 10 another Gospel, Gal. 1.8, 9. Our Lord
Christ Caveat is Mark. 4.24. Take heed what ye hear, not warning them to avoid
any that preaches the same truth that he delivers; though he more especially
tied his Disciples to hear his Apostles, and such other as were sent by them to
him; yet when all the Church at Jerusalem except the Apostles (which consisted
of many thousands) were scattered abroad by persecution, and went every where
preaching the word, Acts 8.1, 4. It was no sin to hear them, they were not the
strangers meant, John 10.5. whom his Sheep were to flee from, but rather they
were bound to hear them in preaching his Gospel, though not by any peculiar
calling, designed for that work as their function, it being Christ's
declaration, that his Sheep hear his voice, John 10.27. Nor are the many
precepts or directions in the Old Testament about hearing or reading, Isai.
8.20. in the books of the Psalms and Proverbs, and other parts of Holy
Scriptures vacated, but that they remain still rules to us about hearing in the
New Testament times, and therefore it seems not to me to be a reasonable
postulatum or demand, that in the present enquiry of the Lawfulness of hearing
the present Ministers of England, the whole thereof be devolved upon the
Scriptures of the New Testament.

Sect. 3. Hearing not a mere positive or ceremonial worship.
But perhaps the Author means by [ instituted worship of Christ] such as is
merely positive, or as we use to speak, ceremonial; such as are Baptism and the
Lords Supper, which are only worship of God, by institution in the New
Testament, which is probable to be his meaning by what he adds [ not perplexing
our selves, nor the Consciences of any, with what was (or may be supposed to
be) permitted unto the Saints before the time of reformation, whilst the
worldly Sanctuary was yet standing, the carnal ordinances pertaining thereunto,
in being at least by the providence of God not sully dissolved as afterward,
both it and they were, being buried in the ashes and ruins of that Temple, to
which they were inseparably annexed.] But if he make hearing of the present
Ministers, such an instituted worship of God or Christ he seems to me very
inconsiderate, hearing of preachers being a moral and perpetual worship common
to all times and persons, not a mere positive or ceremonial, as being baptized
or receiving the Lords supper are, and therefore by reason thereof it is not a
reasonable postulatum, which he demands to be granted him, that in the present
enquiry the whole thereof be divolved upon the Scriptures of the New Testament.
Yea were it granted him, yet it would disadvantage those separatists, with whom
he concurs in Judgment about Nonconformity and separation from the Church of
England and the Ministers thereof, who use many places of the Old Testament,
not only about the Sabbath and it is observation, but also about Baptism and the
Lords Supper. Churches, ministry, and ceremonies in their enquiries, and
himself also in the present enquiry, who uses about election of Ministers by
the people and other things in this dispute out of the Old Testament, and even
the Levitical ordinances sundry places, and therefore I conceive not any
reasonableness in his postulatum of divolving the whole upon the Scriptures of
the New Testament.

Sect. 4. The judgment of the Ancients, not useless in this controversy.
That which he also speaks [ not perplexing our selves, nor the consciences of
any with the judgments of men in Generations past; (wherein they cannot
acquiesce) though to take of the prejudices of some against truth, upon the
account of its seeming Novelty, we may here and there manifest their harmony
with us, in the main principles of the ensuing structures] may seem to be a
reasonable postulatum, or demand in respect of those who are not able to
examine what is said by Fathers, Councils, Schoolmen, Protestant and Popish
writers, foreign and domestic, and I should have liked it well if he had
wholly omitted any such citations in this book, which has been dispersed so
far as I can learn, chiefly, if not only among such. Nevertheless if we would
intimate as if in this and other controversies of the separatists and others,
there were not use of studying and alleging those writers, I think his
postulatum or demand unreasonable. For as Dallaeus in his Learned Book against
Popish worship has done much service to the truth, in showing out of the
Fathers, that the Popish worship of Saints, Angels, the Host or bread in the
Eucharist Crosses, Images and Relics, according to the tradition of the
Latins, was unknown to the Christians of the three first centuries: so it may
be of good use to satisfy men's consciences, that no such separation as now is
from the present Ministers of England was allowed of by the first Fathers and
Writers, or any approved Council, it being a thing of much moment in the
arguments about the Lords Day; and other Festivals, the Sacraments, Church and
Ministry; to understand what was the judgment and practice of the primitive
Christians: with whom Religion was more pure than in after times, though
corruptions too soon crept in among them.

Sect. 5. No approved practice of the Saints, before the Law, Countenanceth
separation from the present preachers in England.
Yet, says this Author, inasmuch as some Beams of Light may be communicated
unto the present Enquiry, by a retrospection into the state of things in the
time of the Old Law, it shall not be grievous to us (nor will it be altogether
unprofitable to the Reader) briefly to remark, so far as may concern the matter
in hand, the state and management of affairs under that Economy and
Dispensation: Not to mention the Administration of Holy things in the time of
the Antediluvian Fathers; nor the General Apostasy from the pure ways of God,
in the days of Seth; (when according to their duty, the faithful remnant (the
sons of God) separated from the Wicked (or the daughters of men) and solemnly
joined themselves together to worship God according to his holy appointments,
Genesis 4.26.) Let us take a brief view of things, with relation unto the People
of God, after the giving of Moses Law, when a Standard was set up for them to
repair unto, and they became (being gathered into one) as a City on an Hall,
conspicuous unto all.

Answ. How some beams of light may be communicated unto the present enquiry, by
a retrospection into the state of things in the time of the Old Law, will not
be easy to discern, if the whole thereof be divolved on the Scriptures of the
New Testament. Yet it will not be grievous to me to examine what I find
produced for his purpose. I grant that Dr. Owen has in his Book in Latin, of
the nature, rise, progress, and study of true Theology, showed diverse
Corruptions in the Ages before and after the Flood of Noah in Theology; and
the pure Worship of God, unto Moses his time; and that the restitution of true
Theology was sometimes by a separation from the Wicked, when there was a
general Apostasy from the true ways of God, unto a profaning of the Name of
God, (as some conceive Genesis 4.26. is meant) either by blaspheming, or by
setting up of Idol-worship; as it was before Abraham's separation, Josh. 24.15.
But neither by him, nor I think, by any other is it showed, that a separation
was approved from Preachers, that teach no worse Doctrine than is held forth by
the Articles, Homilies, and other avowed Books of the Church of England; or
from a Society or Church that was no more polluted by Idolatry or other
Corruptions in Worship, than are chargeable on the public enjoined Worship of
the Church of England. If Genesis 4.26. be meant of a Reformation, by setting up
separate Congregations (as Dr Owen conceives in that Book, l 2. c. 3.) it was,
that therein they might call on the Name of the Lord; which shows it was from
them that did not call upon the Name of the Lord, not from them that did as in
the Worship of the Church of England is done. And if Noah did reform by
separation, it was from Wicked men, who had filled the earth with violence,
Genesis 6.13. which does indeed make a necessary separation, (though it appear not
but that Noah continued to preach to them, and live among them, 1 Pet. 3.20. 2
Pet. 2.5.) But is not the cause of the separation avowed by this Author from
the Ministers and Church of England. And though it be true, that by the Law at
Mount Sinai, and other acts of Gods providence, Israel became (being gathered
into one) as a City on a Hill, conspicuous unto all, yet how then a Standard
was set up for the people to repair unto, needs some explication, since such as
Job, and such like holy persons (if he or any other lived at that time) seem
not to have repaired to them, nor were bound to repair to them, unless they
would be made Proselytes, which the avoiding Idolatry, of the Gentiles might
require of them; not such Corruptions only as are in the Church of England.
But let us see what beams of light may be communicated unto the present
enquiry, by retrospection into the state of things in the time of the Old Law.

Sect. 6. Jewish Laws admitted some dispensation and addition.
First then, says he, that the Lord gave unto the people of the Jews (whom he
had chosen out of all the Nations of the World, to be a People near to him, his
peculiar Treasure above them all) Statutes and Ordinances to walk by, both with
relation to Civils and Ecclesiastics, which they were indispensably bound to
conform to, without adding to, or detracting therefrom: That the management of
all their affairs was singly to be bottomed upon, and conform to these Statutes
and Judgments is very frequently asserted in Scripture, Exodus 21.1. Lev. 18.4.
and 19.37. and 20.22. and 25.18. and 26.15* 43. Deuteronomy. 4.1, 5, 8. and 5.1. and
7.11. and 11.1, 32. and 12.1. and 26.16. and 30.16. 1 Chronicles. 16.12. and 28.7.
Psalm. 89.30. Ezekiel. 5.6. and 36.27. Dan* 9.5.

Answ. It is granted that the Lord gave unto the people of the Jews Statutes
and Ordinances to walk by, both with relation to Civils and Ecclesiastics, or
(as usually they speak) Ceremonials; and that they were bound to conform to
them, and so much the Texts alleged do prove. But that they were bound
indispensably to conform to these Statutes, without adding to, or detracting
therefrom; and that the management of all their affairs was singly to be
bottomed upon, and conform to these Statutes and Judgments, is not asserted in
those Scriptures, there being not one of them, that says that they were bound
indispensably to conform to them. Our Lord has determined to the contrary in
justifying his Disciples plucking the ears of Corn on the Sabbath; David's
eating the show bread and entering into the house of God, and confirming his
determination by the words of the Prophet Hosea, 6.6. in his dissertation
against the Pharisees, Mat. 12.3, 7. in which there was a dispensation with,
and detraction from the Laws of the Sabbath, and the Shewbread about
Ecclesiastics, for a time in some Case. And for addition to Laws
Ecclesiastical the assemblies keeping other seven days besides those
prescribed in the Law of the Passover, 2 Chro. 30.23. and to civils that
ordinance of David, 1 Samuel 30.25. Show, that in both some additions might be by
the Prince, Captain or private persons to both sorts of Laws with Divine
approbation. And that the management of all the affairs of the people of
Israel, both civil and ecclesiastical, was not singly to be bottomed upon and
conform to those statutes and judgments, but that in both sorts of affairs
humane prudence, and the Rulers Authority might order many things, may be
cleared from sundry instances of David, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah, and others;
which there will be occasion more fully to discuss in examining the
allegations brought by this Author to prove the major of his first argument Chapter
1. of this treatise.

Sect. 7. The election or ordination of Levites, is no rule for election or
ordination of Ministers now.
Secondly, says he, that persons were appointed by the Lord to be chosen by
the Congregation for the public administration of ordinances and worship,
cannot be denied: Thus were the Levites, Exodus 13.2, 12, 13. and 22.29. Numb.
3.12. called therefore the Wave-offering of the Children of Israel, Numb. 8.9,
10, 11. because given up by them to the Lord as their offering, by solemn
ordination, and imposition of hands.

Answer, it is true, that the Levites were wholly given unto God from among the
Children of Israel, to do the service of the Congregation; but it is not true,
that they were appointed by the Lord to be chosen by the Congregation. God
says, Numb. 8.16. in stead of the firstborn of all the Children of Israel
have I taken them to me. And upon what occasion God took the Levites in stead
of the first born, is to be seen in Exodus 32.26, 29. Deuteronomy. 33.9. Says
Ainsworth annot. on Numb. 3.12. So that here appears no choice of the
Congregation, so as that it was left to them to take or to leave those. It is
true also, that Numb. 8.9. it is said, that Moses shall bring the Levites
before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, it was therefore his business to
present them, and that he should gather the whole assembly of the Children of
Israel together, and that he should bring the Levites before the Lord, and the
Children of Israel, that is, some of the chief of them, (as the first born) in
the name of the rest shall lay or impose hands on the Levites, says Ainsworth
annot. on Numb. 8.10. And then it follows, v. 11. Aaron shall offer or wave the
Levites before the Lord, for an offering or wave-offering of the Children of
Israel, that they may execute the service of the Lord. And then Aaron was to
make an atonement for the Levites, and Moses should set the Levites before
Aaron and before his Sons, and offer them for an offering unto the Lord, and
that he should separate the Levites from among the Children of Israel: and the
Levites should then be Gods. v. 13, 14. The reason of the laying on of the
hands of the Children of Israel upon the Levites, was to signify their
obedient yielding them to God in their stead, to do the service of the Children
of Israel, in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and to make an atonement for
the Children of Israel: that there might be no plague among the Children of
Israel, when the Children of Israel came nigh unto the Sanctuary, v. 19. But
these were not the Priests, they were distinct from the Levites, to wit Aaron
and his Sons, who were called of God, Heb. 5.4. without the Prophets laying on
of hands. Now it was the Priests office to do that work, in which was the
worship of God to wit the offering Sacrifice, sprinkling the blood, and such
other duties, the Levites were employed to do other services, as the bearing of
the utesils and such like, in respect of which they were to attend on the
Priests, Deuteronomy. 10.8. and therefore it is said by God, v. 19. I have given the
Levites as a gift to Aaron and his Sons. So that the choice was Gods, the
presenting Moses his act, the yielding them by imposition of hands signifying
their offering them to God, in stead of themselves, was the act of the
firstborn, the wave offering, and cleansing them, Aarons act, which may more
truly be called their solemn ordination than the imposition of hands by the
firstborn. But were it true, that in this act of imposing their hands there
was election and ordination, this wa^ not a successive election or ordination,
as is when one dies and another is chosen and ordained in his room, as often as
there is such vacancy, when one Minister dies and another comes in his stead.
For this election or ordination (if it may be so called) was but once, and of
the whole company together, and so is no pattern for election or ordination of
Elders successively by a particular Congregation, or the major part of them.

Sect. 8. The Texts enjoining the observation of things appointed, prove not
that some things undetermined might not in Gods worship be ordered by men.
Thirdly, says he, that persons thus invested into the office of Priesthood
were not left to the liberty of their own wits, nor have they any dependence
upon the will or Authority of the Sons of men, (one or other of them) either in
respect of the matter or manner of their worship, the whole whereof was purely
of Divine institution and Divine appointment, Exodus 25.9, 40. Numb. 8.5. Heb.
8.5. 1 Chronicles. 28, 11. Exodus 8.27. Levit. 10.1. Exodus 39.1, 5, 7, 21, 26, 31,
43, and 40.23, 25, 27, 29. Levit. 8.9, 13, 17, 21, 29. Numb. 8.3. Exodus 35.10,
29. and 36.1, 5. Isaiah 29.13.

Answer, The Levites were not invested into the office of the Priesthood by
solemn ordination and imposition of hands of the children of Israel, but Aaron
and his Sons, and therefore as it was an usurpation in Uzziah to burn incense
to the Lord, since it appertained to the Priests, the sons of Aaron that were
consecrated to burn incense, 2 Chronicles. 26.18. So it was the sin of Korah that,
not content with that service he was to do, he would usurp the office of the
Priests, to come nigh the Altar and to burn incense, or as it is Numb. 16.10.
to seek the Priesthood, which was in degree above the Levites, who were to
minister unto the Priests, but not to come nigh the Altar, as Ainsworth proves
in his Annot. on Numb. 16.10. out of Numb. 18.2, 3. 1 Chronicles. 6.48, 49. 1 Chronicles.
23.13. It is granted that neither the Levites nor the Priests in their office
or service were left to their own wills, nor had they any dependence upon the
will or authority of the sons of men (one or other of them) either in respect
of the matter or manner of their worship, which was of Divine institution, and
Divine appointment. Every circumstance of time, place, order, habit, and what
ever else was particularly determined, was to be strictly observed under pain
of death, if presumptuously done otherwise; as in the case of Nadab and Abihu,
Hophai and Phinehas, or culpable negligence as in the case of Uzzah, and if it
were by ignorance, yet an offering was to be made for an atonement, and thus
much it is granted the Texts alleged do prove. But neither these texts nor any
other do prove that no circumstances about place, time, order undetermined by
God were left to the liberty of the people, or Prince, or Sanhedrin, or Priests
in and about the worship of God among the Jews, who yet had their service more
fully particularized in all things pertaining to it than we have. The Priests
were invested into the office of Priesthood by Moses, according to the rites
distinctly set down, Exodus 40.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Levit. 8. throughout. The
text, Isai. 29.13. alleged in the first chapter out of Mark 7.7. will there
fitly be considered, that we may discuss, whether the whole of their worship
was purely of Divine institution and appointment in respect of the matter, and
manner of it.

Sect. 9. The defection of the Jews to Idolatrous inventions of men, is of a
more heinous degree than use of humane ceremonies with us.
Fourthly, says he, that this Church gathered by the Lord, and wonderfully
separated from the rest of the world (though they had him nearer to them than
any people had his Law made known amongst them) did notwithstanding quickly
depart from his pure institutions, mingling therewith the inventions of men,
and customs of the Nations (after which they went a whoring) is frequently
remarked in the Scripture: of this the Lord sorely complains, Deuteronomy. 32.18. Jer.
2.32. and 13.25. and 23.27. Hos. 4.6. and 8.14. and 13.6. 2 Chronicles. 13.16. Isa.
1.4. Jer 1.16. and 2.17, 19. and 9.13. and 15.6. Deuteronomy. 29.5. 1 Kings 11.33. and
18.18. and 19.10. 2 Kings 22.17. Ezra 9.10. for this he severely threatens and
punishes them, Deuteronomy. 29.25. Judge. 10.10. 1 Samuel 12.10. 2 Chronicles. 12.5. and
24.20. and 34.25. Jer. 16.11. and 19.4. the very truth is, the contests of God
with that people from first to last, are to be bottomed upon this foot of
account.

Answer, It is true, that Church of Israel was gathered by the Lord, and
wonderfully separated from the rest of the world by great signs, miracles,
providence, and judgments; which he showed against their enemies and toward
them, especially by the hand of Moses, and that he did not, till Christ came,
so gather, and wonderfully separate any Church from the rest of the World, as
he did them. But after the ascension of Christ by the Preaching of the Gospel,
and other ways he has gathered out of all Nations his Church, and wonderfully
separated it from the rest of the world. It is true also, that the Israelites
quickly departed from Gods pure institutions mingling therewith the inventions
of men, and customs of the Nations. But those inventions of men and customs of
the Nations, which the Texts alleged mention, were such as were expressly
forbidden, drew them to serve other other Gods and to forsake the Lord, not
such as are usually by seperatives called inventions of men, to wit humane
ceremonies, confessed out of the case of worship in themselves to be things
indifferent, such as out of pretended prudence at least, or public authority
are imposed for discipline, order, or decency without giving any Divine worship
to a Creature. Let all the Texts alleged be viewed, and there is none of them,
that mentions the mingling such inventions of men, no not those, which our
Savior reprehends in the Pharisees, Mark 7.3, 4, 8. (which are far worse) as
the departing from Gods pure institutions, nor does God contest with the people
of the Jews, in those places alleged for other inventions of men and customs
of the Nations, than such as were Idolatrous, and therefore the threatenings and
punishments in those places are grossly abused, when they are applied to the
imposing or use of such ceremonies or discipline as are (whether rightly or
wrongly) retained in the Church of England.

Sect. 10. Such testimony as the Prophets gave against the Jewish defection, is
not now to be given against the Conformists.
Fifthly, says he, that notwithstanding their dreadful Apostasy from God, they
were usually confident, that they were the only People, had not forsaken the
Lord, nor done any evil, and could not bear the Prophecies, and rebukes of the
Prophets and Servants of the Lord, against their abominations: whom they
persecuted and put to death (as at last they did the Prince of Life and Glory)
for no other cause but for telling them the truth, and bearing testimony
against their Innovations, and Apostasy from God (the usual practice of persons
degenerated from the way and Spirit of the Lord) Mal. 1.6. Jer. 7.4. Luke 3.8.
John 8.39. Mat. 5.12. Act. 7.52.

Answer, All this is granted, and if this Author can prove any such innovations
and Apostasy from God (as the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, and other
Servants of God, rebuked in the Jews) in the People or Teachers, who adhere to
the doctrine, worship, or discipline of the Church of England, this Author with
others of his mind, do well to bear their testimony against them as the
Prophets did, and they that persecuted them for so doing, may expect the like
judgments of God to fall on them, as fell on the Jews. But if it be otherwise,
and the things inveighed against, be not such as they make them, and their
bearing testimony be such as tends to infringe the public peace, but not to
rectify any thing, they are guilty of calumny, and their practice not to be
judged to proceed from holy zeal, but evil passion.

Sect. 11. The conformist not chargeable, as the false Prophets of the Jews.
Sixthly, says he, that they had all along their corruption in worship, and
degeneracy from the worship of God, false Prophets (who ran before they were
sent, prophesying smooth things to them in the name of the Lord, seeing Lying
vanities for them, according to the desires of the hearts of them, and their
Rulers, who were therefore in great esteem amongst them. Isa. 9.15. and 28.7.
Jer. 6.13. and 23.11, 28. and 28.10. Hos. 9 8, Jer. 2.8, 26. and 5.31. and
14.14. and 23.13, 21. Ezekiel. 13.2. and 22.25, 28. Mic. 3.5, 6, 7. Zeph. 3.4. 2
Pet. 2.1.

Answer, All this is granted, and if any of the Preachers in England prophecy
lies in Gods name, or bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that bought
them, or are such as those, whom the Texts alleged describe, let them be
branded as false Prophets. But if they teach the fundamentals of Christian
Religion truly, and in respect of the substance of worship, use no other than
God has appointed, though they may in some points remote from the foundation
err, and use some things in and about the worship of God, which should not be,
yet do not overthrow the worship of God in substantials, then are they false
accusers, who accuse them as if they were such, as those Texts of Scripture
alleged do describe.

S^ct. 12. Invectives against teachers and worship now, may be from another
spirit than that of the Prophets.
Seventhly, says he, that in the height of their Apostasy, God left not
himself without a witness, having one or other, extraordinarily raised up and
spirited by him, to testify for his name and glory, against all their
abominations, and self-invented worship, reserving also a remnant unto himself,
that were not carried away with the Spirit of whoredoms and delusions, 1 Kings
19.14, 18. 2 Kings 17.13. Romans 11.3, 4. Jer. 18.11. and 25.5. and 35.15.

Answer, That self invented worship was bowing the Knee to Baal, 1 Kings 19.18.
Romans 11.3, 4. serving Idols, 2 Kings 17.12. burning Incense to vanity, Jer.
18.15. going after other Gods to serve them and worship them, Jer. 25.6. and
35.15. If there be found any such self-invented worship in the Church of
England, it will do well to testify against it. But if there be not such
abominations and self-invented worship, these texts will not justify Persons,
who have no other than ordinary calling, to testify against them, much less to
censure them as whoredoms and delusions, and they that practice them as carried
away with the spirit of whoredoms and delusions. And though persons may imagine
they imitate Elijah, are extraordinarily raised up, and spirited by God, and
that they testify for Gods name and Glory, when they call the Common Prayer
Book an Idol, the Ministers that conform Baals Priests, the Communion the Mass,
with such like Billingsgate Rhetoric, yet it is not unlikely, but that it may
be truly verified of such, which our Lord Christ said to James and John, when
they would have fire commanded to come down from Heaven and consume the
Samaritans, even as Elias did, ye know not what manner of Spirit ye are of: and
that it may be bitter and not holy zeal which moves them, and their language
judged by God not just reproof, but unjust reviling.

Sect. 13. The forsaking of false Prophets and worship among the Jews, is no
justification of separation, from the present teachers and worship.
Eighthly, says he, that it was the sin of that People to hearken unto the
teachings of such as were not sent by the Lord (though they pretended never so
much to be sent by him) and the unquestionable duty of the Lords preserving
Remnant, to separate from them, as also from all the false devised worship of
that day, though commended by their Kings and Rulers, 2 Kings 17.21, 22. Hos.
5.11. The former is evident, such Prophets were to be cut off from the midst
of them, Deuteronomy. 18.20. and they are expressly forbidden to hear them, Deuteronomy.
13.3. Jer. 27.6, 16. so is the latter, their devised worship being a breach
upon the sovereign Authority of God, must needs be a grievous sin, as the names
of Adultery, Whoredom, Idolatry, Fornication, by which the Spirit of the Lord
does frequently set it forth, abundantly demonstrates; Psalm. 73.27. Isai.
57.3.8. Jer. 9.2. Ezekiel. 23.45. Hos. 3.7. and 7.3. Lev. 20.5. Jer. 13.27. Ezekiel.
16, 17.20.30. Hos. 1.2. Rev. 14.8. and 18.9.19, 20. which without controversy,
the people of God were to separate from, and have no communion with any in,
upon what pretense soever: which is solemnly charged upon them as their duty in
the Scripture, Hos. 4.15. Amos 5.5. Prove. 4.14. and 5.8. Cant. 4.8.

Answer. None are said in those Texts or any other I meet with, not to be sent
by the Lord, who delivered the truth of God, but they only in those places are
denied to be sent by God, who delivered falsehoods, and such falsehoods as were
inciting to Idolatry, or contradictions to the messages of the true Prophets,
and such were not to be heard, though they should be comm^nded by Kings and
Rulers, who ought to cut them off, when they spoke in Gods name a word, which
he had not commanded them to speak, or did speak in the name of other Gods,
Deuteronomy. 18.20. And if they sought to turn them from the Lord to serve other Gods,
they were not only not to hearken to them, but also, if they were never so near
to them, they should not spare them, but kill them, Deuteronomy. 13.9. which I presume
he will not say of the present ministers of England, and therefore me thinks he
should have left out these allegations, if he had well bethought himself how
unfit they were to his present design. That devised worship, which is termed
Adultery, Whoredom, Idolatry, Fornication, is Levit. 20.5. Committing whoredom
with Molech, Psalm. 73.27. being far from God, going a whoring from him, Isaia
57.5. inflaming themselves with Idols under every green Tree, slaying the
Children in the Valleys under the Clefts of the Rocks, Jerem. 9.2. treachery,
Jer. 13.27. abominations on the hill in the fields, Ezekiel. 16.17. making to her
self images of men to commit Whoredom with them, v. 20. Sacrificing their Sons
and Daughters to them to be devoured, Ezekiel. 23.37. Committing Adultery with
Idols, Hos. 1.2. departing from the Lord, Revel. 14.8. and 18.9. such
fornication as Babylon made all Nations, even Kings of the earth to commit, and
from such it is without controversy the people of God were to separate, and
have no communion with any in, upon any pretense whatsoever, nor in any other
sin by joining in the practice, and if the present worship of the Ministers of
England, be any such fornication, or the hearing or joining with them, must be
a partaking with them in any sin, so far at least, they are to be separated
from. But neither the Texts alleged, nor any other do require separation from
the worship of God, or the Ministers that are in some things corrupt, even in
their ministration; when Hophai and Phinehas, did corrupt the worship of God,
yet Samuel did lawfully minister before the Lord, and Hannah did well in
presenting him thereto, and her self at the solemn Feasts, and even-while there
was burning incense, and sacrificing in the High places, those of Judah were
not to separate from the service at Jerusalem, which was to God, and though the
High Priests were unduly set up, and sundry corruptions, and superstitions in
the Pharisees, and the services of the Jews in our Lord Christ's time on Earth;
yet did our Lord Christ join in the public service of the Temple, and
persuaded the cleansed Leper to offer to them the gift that Moses commanded.
Wherefore I infer, that though there should be some degree of Corruption in
Worship, and that this should be a breach upon the sovereign Authority of God,
as every sin is, and a grievous sin it is; yet this might not be a sufficient
cause of separation from the Worship, Church, or Ministers, of it, and that the
allegation of the Texts produced, will not be sufficient for the design of this
Author, in urging separation from the Ministers and Church of England. But let
us further attend his motions. He adds:

Sect. 14. The arguing by analogy in positive rites not rational.
What may rationally be inferred from these positions, so evidently comprised
in the Scripture, and by way of Analogy at least may be argued from them, is
evident to any ordinary understanding; for our parts being resolved (as was
said) to try out the matter in controversy, from such rules and sovereign
Institutions, as our dear Lord has left his New Testament Churches to walk by,
we shall not stand to make that improvement of them as otherwise we might: A
few Queries upon the whole that has been offered, shall put a close to this
Preface.

Answ. Whether the positions before set down, be evidently comprised in the
Scripture, may be perceived by the examination of them; what may be rationally
inferred from them for his purpose of condemning the hearing the present
Ministers of England, is not evident to my understanding, which I do not
conceive to be any other than ordinary. As for arguing by way of Analogy from
the institutions of the Old Testament to those of the New Testament from
supposed parity of reason, how little rationality, or force there is therein, I
presume he may perceive, if he read the second part of the Review of my Dispute
about Paedobaptism, Sect. 2.3. wherein how infirm the way of arguing from such
Analogy is, is so far evinced, that I judge, that if the improvement he thinks
he might make of his positions for his purpose, be by that way of proof, it
will be found insufficient by an ordinary understanding, whether he has kept
to his resolution of tiying the matter in controversy, by the rules and
institutions of the New Testament, will appear by the examining of the ensuing
Discourse. I judge that to be the way whereby to settle men's Consciences about
mere positive Duties, or Sins under the Gospel, and therefore am resolved to
pursue his dispute pede pes, yet clearing the way by considering his Queries in
a velitary Skirmish before I set upon his Triarii or main Battle.

Sect. 15. The first Querie about a National Instituted Church answered.
His first Querie is, Whether since the Apotomy or Unchurching the Nation of
the Jews, the Lord has ever since so espoused a Nation or People to himself,
as that upon the account thereof, the whole Body of that People or Nation may
be accounted his Church? Whether there be any National Church under the
Oeconomie of the Gospel? If so, Let it be showed when, and where it was
instituted by the Lord: What is produced by some to this purpose, is (but upon
a slight view thereof) of no moment, it is Isa. 49.21. Kings shall be your
Nursing Fathers, etc. which Prophecy waits the time of its accomplishment:
hitherto, both before and since the rise of Antichrist (being made drunk by the
Whores intoxicating Cup) they have been, for the most part, cruel Butchers of
the Saints: and were we under its accomplishment, a National Church would be
far enough from being its result. Of a Nations being born at once, we shall not
sure hear pleaded in this matter, it being a Prophecy expressly relating to the
Jews, and their miraculous conversion: if there be no such thing as a National
Church of the Institution of Christ, as most certain it is there is not (the
assertion whereof is wholly destructive of Gospel Administrations) then,

Answ. As King James in his Remonstrance against Cardinal Perons Oration,
says, that the appellation and name of the Church serves in this corrupt Age,
as a Cloak to cover a thousand new inventions; meaning this of the Popish
party: so may we say also of others, that by reason of the ambiguous use of the
appellation and name of the Church, and the dictates of men about it, the minds
of many are perplexed and perverted. Wherefore in answering this first Querie
(which the Separatists do so much harp upon) it is necessary that there be a
distinct understanding of the notion of the Church, and its Institution. The
Greek word (...), which by use is now almost appropriated to the Christian
Church, has been variously used, both in the Greek Versions of the Old
Testament, in the Apocryphal Writings, and in the New Testament. It seems to me
of little concernment in the present question to collect them all, the Queries
to be answered being of the New Testament use. Now in the New Testament,
excepting what I find Act. 19.32, 39, 40. where it is applied to Assemblies of
Unbelievers, whether tumultuary or orderly, and Act. 7.38. where it is applied
to the Congregation of Israel in the Wilderness, in all places in the Acts of
the Apostles, the Epistles of the Apostles, and Revelation of St. John, it is
meant (so far as I discern) of the Christians, or People of God, or their
Meeting or Assembly* As it notes the Christian Believers, or People of God, so
it is taken sometimes for the Universal Church, whether invisible or visible,
as 1 Cor. 12.28. Heb. 12.23. Ephesians. 1.22. sometimes for the visible Church
indefinitely, but not universally, as 1 Cor. 15.9. sometimes for the Church
Topical, and then it is taken for the Church of a City, or Town, or House; and
so we read of the Church at Jerusalem, Act 8.1. of Corinth, Ephesus, etc. in
Philemons house, Philem. 2. or of a Country or Nation, and then it is put in
the Plural number, as the Churches of Asia, Galatia, Judaea. In the Evangelists
History of the doings, sufferings, and sayings of our Lord Christ, I find the
Word [Church] used but in two places, Mat. 16.18. and 18.17. Of the extent and
meaning of both which Texts there is so much controversy, not only between the
Protestants and Papists, but also among the Protestants themselves of different
persuasions about Church Government, that it would require a Treatise by it
self to make a thorough discussion of those two Texts in order to the clearing
of the Controversies that are started about them. That Mat. 16.18. is
undoubtedly meant of the Christian Church, but whether Ecumenical, visible or
invisible, or indefinite, or topical, is doubted. It is without any proof
appropriated to the Church of Rome, or any particular Church as ordered under
this or that peculiar form of Government; but is to be taken for the number of
Believers in Christ, whether of Jews or Gentiles, more or fewer, abstractively
from any political considerations, and such external adjuncts and
denominations, as whereby usually Churches are in common speeches diversified.
In the other place, Mat. 18.17. in as much as it is not said [ tell my Church]
but [ tell the Church] and the term [ thy brother] may as well be meant of a
Brother, as by birth, or proselytism adjoined to the Jews, as St. Paul calls
the Jews by birth his brethren, kinsmen according to the flesh, Romans 9.3. (in
which sense it may seem to be taken in that place, Mat. 5.23, 24. which is a
precept like to this, for the reconciling of particular differences, and
righting of wrongs, and the expression [ let him be to thee as a Heathen] seems
to intimate) as of a Brother in Christian profession; it may not without reason
be doubted whether by [ the Church] there, be meant the Christian Church, or an
Assembly of the Jews in their Synedrium, whether greater or lesser, and if it
be extended as a direction to Christian Brethren; whether it be meant of their
Assembly under an Ecclesiastical Consideration or Political, that is the
Christian Magistrate. Institution of a Church by Preception or Command I find
not: neither Christ nor his Apostles (that I know) have given us any rule or
law of bounding, modelling, or numbering Churches. There is a precept Heb.
10.25. that Christians should not forsake the assembling of themselves
together, as the manner of some was. But none about the defining how many
should go to a Church, or be accounted to belong to one Church; no
determination by any precept concerning Members belonging to a Church, whether
they should be fixed to one Meeting, or ambulatory, and moveable; sometimes
belonging to one Assembly, sometimes to another of the same profession. Nor do
we find any Institution of Churches, whether they ought to be Domestic,
Congregational, Parochial, Classi^al, Diocesan, Provincial, Patriarchical, or
Ecumenical. The ordering of such distinctions Christ and his Apostles (so far
as I deprehend) have left to Divine Providence, and Humane Prudence, allowing
more or fewer to a Church, as the imes will permit, the increase or diminution
of Believers should be, as Pastors may be had, and their Partitions and
Meetings be convenient for their edification and government. It is true, the
Romanists would infer from Christ's promise to Peter, Mat. 16.18. Upon this Rock
will I build my Church, that St. Peter, and after him the Bishop of Rome was
made universal Bishop. But that by [ Christ's Church] is meant the universal
Church, and by [ Christ's building] it is meant constituting an universal
Bishop, is an assertion without proof. In some of the Ancients the Bishops of
Rome have been styled Ecumenical; but so also have other Patriarchs. We
believe one Catholic and Apostolic Church; but so denominated from their
common confession or the same Faith; not from union to, and subjection under
one visible Church head. Mr. Paul Bayne (as I remember) long since disputed
against Diocesan Churches for Parochial: and in the Assembly at Westminster the
dissenters against this proposition, that many particular Congregations may be
under one Presbyterial government, from such distinction of Churches as the New
Testament yields. But the Arguments seem not to me to be cogent, they declaring
only what was done de facto, not what was necessary to be done de jure. That
Text Mat. 18.17. is much urged by sundry sorts of Pleaders, for their several
ways of Church Government. But it is uncertain whether by [ Brother] and [
Church] be meant Christian Believers, and the Christian Church; and if
Christian Believers and Church be meant, whether the Church be meant of the
Christian Civil Judicatory, or Ecclesiastical Consistory, or Congregational
Assembly of Believers of all ranks: or some select Arbitrators, that of which
the Church is to have cognizance, being there no other than the sin of one
Brother against another, which v. 21, 22. Luke 17* 3, 4. show to be meant only
of private trespasses or injuries done by one to another, who might remit or
forgive them; nor is any other act ascribed to the Church, than an admonition
to the injurious Brother, to do right to him whom he has wronged; whereupon it
is then allowed, or appointed upon non-satisfaction to him, or disobedience to
the Church, without any other juridical sentence mentioned, that he that is
thus disobedient should be to him that complained, as a Heathen or Publican,
with whom the Jews would not have familiarity. Nothing is said of being such to
the Church, or by virtue of its sentence juridical, or being excluded a sacris,
which we are sure the Publicans were not, Luke 18.10. These things seem to me
to evince, that neither is here that instituted Church, which the Assertors of
Congregational Churches and Church Government urge, as the only Churches and
Church Government of the New Testament, and inculcate as the pattern in the
Mount, and any other way to be as the setting of man's posts by Gods posts, and
separate from a National Church as a humane Invention. Nor is here that
Church Government instituted (which they make the only Government appointed by
Christ) that the Congregation, or the major part are to cast out, exclude from
Communion in Holy things in every Church, though but of seven or eight, every
member that sins and will not obey the monition of the rest of the
Congregation. These things being premised, I answer to the Questions in the
first Querie forementioned.

1. That it is granted, That since the Unchurching of the Nation of the Jews,
the Lord has not yet (that we know of) so espoused a Nation, or People to
himself, as that upon the account thereof, the whole Body of that People or
Nation may be accounted his. We say that Christ has redeemed us to God by his
blood, out of every Kindred, and Tongue, and People, and Nation, and has made
us unto our God, Kings, and Priests, Revel. 5.9, 10. We own no Church visible
now, but of Believers, by their own personal profession. We approve the 19.
Article of the Church of England, that the visible Church of Christ, is a
Congregation of faithful men, in the which the pure Word of God is preached,
and the Sacraments be duly administered according to Christ's Ordinance, in all
those things that of necessity are requisite to the same. The addition in the
Confession of Faith of the Assembly, Chapter 25. Art. 2. that the visible Church
universal under the Gospel, consists of all those throughout the World that
profess the true Religion, and of their Children, is not found in the Writings
of the New Testament, and those Texts that are alleged for it, Ezekiel. 16.20,
21. Romans 11.16. Genesis 3.15. Genesis 17.7. if they were pertinent, would as well
prove a whole Nation to be Gods visible Church, yea, all mankind descended from
Eve, as the visible Church to consist of the children of them that profess the
true Religion. And the same may be said of them that assert an Ordinance of
Infants visible Church Membership unrepealed, that allege Mat. 28.19. as
proving Christ's appointing Nations as such to be baptized, that allege the
Jewish Proselytism as a pattern to us. How far this Quaerist agrees with these,
may be discerned by other passages. If he concur with those of the
Congregational way about Church Members, and their proof from the Covenant to
Abraham, Genesis 17.7. as made to his natural seed, and so to all Believers
natural seed, I see not how he can avoid the asserting of a National Church
like the Jewish; which I grant is not agreeable to the Gospel, according to
which, the visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, as the
definition of the Church of England, Art. 19. expresses it, and has been
fully proved by me in the third part of my Review, Sect. 52. etc.

2. In answer to the Question, Whether there be any National Church under the
Economy of the Gospel? I say, that though there be no National Church, so as
that the whole Nation, and every member of the Nation be to be accounted of the
visible Church of Christ, by virtue of their Generation, or Proselytism, and
such Covenant as was made to Abraham concerning his natural seed, or to Israel
at Mount Sinai, or elsewhere; yet the whole number of Believers of a Nation,
may by reason of their common profession, be called a National Church, as well
as the whole Body of men throughout the World, professing the faith of the
Gospel, and obedience to God by Christ according unto it, not destroying their
own profession by any errors everting the foundation, or unholiness of
Conversation, are and may be called the visible Catholic Church of Christ, as
the Congregational men speak in their Declarat. chapter 20. Wherefore it is no more
against the Gospel to term the Believers of England or Scotland, the Church of
England or Scotland, than it is to term the Believers throughout the World, the
Catholic Church; nor is it more unfit for us to term our selves Members of the
Church of England in this respect, than to term our selves Members of the
Catholic Church; nor is there need to show any institution of the Lord more
for the one than for the other. Nor is there need to allege Isa. 49.20. or
Isa. 66.8. for such an Institution. Nevertheless, that the Prophecy, Isa
49.23. Kings shall be your Nu^sing Fathers, etc. waits the time of its
accomplishment, is said with more Confidence than Evidence. Many learned
Interpreters think otherwise, among whom Mr. Gataker (in my judgment inferior
to none in his Exposition of Holy Scripture) has these words Annot. on Isa.
49.23. And Kings shall be thy Nursing Fathers, and Queens thy Nursing Mothers]
fulfilled in those Persian Potentates, Cyrus, Artaxerxes, Darius, Aha^uerus,;
with the Queens also of some of them, that patronised and protected Gods
people, and promoted Gods work with them, Ezra 1.1, 4. and 63.12. and 7.12, 26.
Neh. 2.6, 8. Esth. 8.3, 8. and much more in other Emperors and Kings, together
with their Queens; as Constantine, Theodosius, and the like, who both embraced
the Christian faith themselves, and maintained the profession of it. Of some
whereof, see Rev. 17.12, 16, 17. And Mr. Mede on Rev. 16.17. has these words;
For truly out of the same ten horns, or Kings, they shall be, who at length
shall hate the Whore whom they have so long born, (which partly we perceive to
be fulfilled) shall make her desolate, and naked, shall eat her flesh, and burn
her with fire. Nor is it to be denied without ingratitude to God and Men, that
Kings and Queens since the rise of Antichrist (though many of them made drunk
by the Whores intoxicating cup, have been cruel Butcherers of the Saints) both
before the Reformation, and since, even in our days have been nursing Fathers,
and nursing Mothers to the Church of Christ, and that a National Church, in the
sense forementioned, has been the result of its accomplishment; and we hope
in more ample manner, will be the result of its fuller accomplishment. As for
the Text, Isa. 66.8. that it is a prophecy expressly relating to the Jews, and
their miraculous conversion, is not certain. Mr. Gataker in his Annot. on Isa.
66.8. has these words, The most Interpreters, both Jew and Christian,
understand these words, of the strange, sudden, and unexpected delivery of the
remainders of Gods people out of the Babylonian bondage by Cyrus. Howbeit,
diverse Interpreters understand them of the restitution and restoration of the
Church under the Ministry of the Gospel, when so many thousands were so soon,
and so suddenly converted, without any great labor, or pains-taking about
them, of those by whom they were converted, Act. 2.41. and 4.4. and both these
Expositions conceived, as subordinate the one to the other, may very well be
admitted. And therefore if the Author hear it not pleaded in this matter, yet
he may find another Exposition than that which he imagines, that it expressly
relates to a future miraculous Conversion of the Jews. However if it did, since
it is said Romans 11.25, 26. When the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, all
Israel shall be saved; he might find something for a National Church in that
Prophecy, Isa. 66.8. As for those words in his Parenthesis, [ that the
assertion of a National Church of the institution of Christ, is wholly
destructive of Gospel administrations,] they are said with no more truth than
proof, though we should say, a National Church, in respect of its Government,
or Officers, is of the Institution of Christ. For suppose it were asserted,
that Christ had instituted Patriarchs or Archbishops, and Bishops, and the
Government of the Church of England or Scotland under them, yet this might be
without total destruction of Gospel Administrations. The preaching of the
Gospel, administration of Baptism and the Lords Supper with other
administrations of Christian Worship and Discipline, have been, and may be
continued even where Archbishops and Bishops have been over a National Church
as instituted by Christ. But let us attend his motions: thus he goes on. If
there be no such thing as a National Church of the institution of Christ, as
most certain it is there is not; then 2. Whether National Ministers are the
Ministers of Christ, or whether there can be a true Ministry in a false Church,
as a National Church must be, if not of Divine Institution, upon what pretense
soever it be so denominated?

Sect. 16. National Ministers may be Ministers of Christ, and National Churches
true Churches.
To this Querie I answer, 1 That if by [ National Ministers] be meant Ministers
for the Nation, or such as have inspection over the Nation, whether for the
maintenance or propagating of true Doctrine, or Worship, or holiness of life,
they may be Ministers of Christ, though no such thing as a National Church were
of the institution of Christ. As for instance, I conceive Dr. James Usher (when
he was alive) was a Minister of Christ, when he was Primate of Ireland. The
assertion I prove thus, If the Apostles were Ministers of Christ, and National
Ministers, though a National Church were not instituted of Christ, than
National Ministers may be Ministers of Christ, though a National Church be not
instituted of Christ: But the Apostles were such, as for instance, Peter had
the Apostleship of the Circumcision, Paul of the Gentiles, Gal. 2.7, 8. Romans
11.13. 1 Timothy 2.7. Therefore National Ministers may be Ministers of Christ. 2.
Titus was a National Minister of the Cretians, For this cause, says St. Paul,
Tit. 1.5. left I thee in Crete, that thou should set in order the things that
are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I had appointed thee, and yet
a Minister of Christ, St. Paul's partner and fellow-helper concerning the
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 8.23. Ergo: 3. They that may be Ministers of Christ, though
they be Ministers for the Body of Christ, and all the Members thereof, may be
Ministers of Christ, though National; because the denial of a National Ministry
is upon this supposition; that a Minister of Christ is only for one particular
Congregation, but the Pastors and Teachers, as well as Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, are given for the edifying of the Body of Christ, till we all come in
the unity of the faith, unto a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. Therefore, for
all, or any; and consequently, for a Nation, and not only for a particular
Congregation. 4. If any of the Saints, as well as one particular Congregation,
have an interest in all the Ministers of Christ, so as that they are truly
theirs, then Ministers of Christ may be National; yea, ought to be; yea, and
Ecumenical, if they could be serviceable to them in the things of Christ. But
1 Cor. 3.22, 23. Paul and Cephas, and Apollos, were all the Corinthians, and
all others who were Christ's; therefore the same may be Ministers of Christ, and
National Ministers. I know not whether this might be an argument ad hominem,
but this I take to be justifiable, that a man may be a Commissioner for
approbation of public Preachers throughout a Nation, and so a National
Minister, or an Itinerant Preacher to the Nation, and yet be a Minister of
Christ.

2. A National Church, denominated so, either from the agreement of all the
Believers in that Nation, in the same profession, or from their subjection to
some Common Rulers Ecclesiastical or Civil, or Convening by Deputies in some
National Synod, though not of Divine Institution, may be a true, and not a
false Church: which I prove thus. They may be a true Church, who have all
things essential to a Church, and nothing destructive of its being such. But
Believers of a Nation, or a National Church, so denominated any of those ways,
may have all things essential to a Church, and nothing destructive of its being
such; Ergo. The Major is taken from the proper notion of the term [True Church]
or its definition. For the definition of a Church of Christ, or a true Church,
is and can be no other than a Company or Number of persons believing in Christ,
or professing the Faith of the Gospel, and obedience to God by Christ according
unto it, not destroying their own profession by any errors concerning the
foundation, or unholiness of conversation, even according to the expression of
the Congregational men in their Declaration, October. 12.1658. chapter 26. The Minor
is also manifest by Reason and Experience. A National Church, so denominated,
may have the Truth of Doctrine of Faith, the Truth of Worship, the Truth of
Holy conversation; besides which, there is nothing essential to a true Church.
For the defect of outward order, were the order pretended indeed of Christ's
Institution, yet could not nullify the Church, or destroy the Truth of it, but
only the regularity. The Corinthians were a true Church 1 Cor. 1.2. even then
when there were disorders in their Meeting, 1 Cor. 14.26. in their Discipline,
1 Cor. 5.1, 2. in their Communion, 1 Cor. 11.21. in their Faith, 1 Cor. 15.12.
in their Conversation, 2 Cor. 1.1. and 12.2^. As for the outward form of their
Combination by a Church Covenant, or their number, or their habitation, or
their descent; these and such like things, though for convenience they be
requisite, yet not essential to the Church or its Truth. Yea, the having of
Baptism, Organizing by Officers, though more necessary and of Divine
Institution, yet are not essential to a Church or its Truth; but that the
Church without them, may be a true Church, though not so regular and well
ordered as it should be. Nor does the having of National Rulers Ecclesiastical,
either single persons, or in a Synod or Convocation, make a false Church. Those
of the Congregational way have had Synods, and submitted to Courts even in
Ecclesiastical things of larger extent than a Congregation of one Town, and
Churches of a greater number, and at greater distance of habitation than could
meet in one place every Lords Day for all Ordinances, and deny not a Catholic
visible Church, and therefore should not by reason of the number, distance,
want of Officers of Divine Institution, or because modelled by humane prudence,
call a National Church, a false Church. The proofs used by those that held,
that many particular Congregations may be under one Presbyterial Government,
Printed in the Year 1645. from the number of the Church at Jerusalem; yet one
Church, Acts 8.1. under one Government, besides what is found in the Scripture
about the Churches of Corinth, Ephesus, are sufficient to evince, that many
Congregations may be one Church; and that the unity and truth of Churches, is
to be taken from agreement and verity of Faith: and that a National Church, so
denominated, in respect of the agreement in profession, or subjection to
Government, or convention by Deputies or Messengers in one Synod, may be one
National Church, and a true Church of Christ.

But it is objected, That the first Church is of Christ's Institution; and that
was of so many as might meet in one Congregation, even the Church at Jerusalem,
that was numerous before the dispersion, yet might meet together in one
Assembly; as appears, Acts 6.2. When the twelve called the multitude of the
Disciples unto them about the election of Deacons.

To this it is answered, 1. That in St. Luke there are many places where the
multitude with an universal sign] is not to be taken for every one, not one
exempted, as Luke 8.37. Acts 25.24. when it is said that all the multitude of
the Disciples began to rejoice, Luke 19.37. it is to be limited to those that
were present. And so in this place, and Act. 16.12, 30. and 21.22. As in many
the like expressions, all sorts of Authors are to be interpreted, to understand
by the multitude, and all, or the whole multitude, City, Company, of such a
number as might be reputed as the whole. Now it is not likely that there was
one place fit for that business, which could receive the whole number of the
Disciples then at Jerusalem, so as to place them orderly for the hearing and
debate of that business, for which they met, and, the multitudes being of Women
as well as Men, Act. 5.14. it is not likely every Woman was called to that
Meeting.

2. But were it granted that they then met for that business, yet there is no
likelihood they met for all Ordinances. For though it be said, Act. 5.12. that
they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch, and they continued daily with
one accord in the Temple; yet they did break bread from house to house, Acts
2.46.

3. This Church of Jerusalem, though the first Church, cannot be said to be the
pattern of all Churches, since it was not with any distribution of Believers
under particular Pastors, nor at that time had any fixed Officers, but was to
be surcularis Ecclesia, that Church from whence were to be taken such as might
plant other Churches, for which end they were after dispersed, Acts 8.1.4.

4. This disposition of that Church, we find not to have been by any
institution of precept, which should make a certain rule to us about the
fashioning and settling of Churches: But these things came to pass according to
Divine Promises and Providence, which being so various, as that no certain rule
can be accommodated to all times, places, and estates of the Church of God, we
may judge, that Christ has left the shaping of Churches much to Humane
Prudence, the ends of Christian Assemblies and Societies being observed.

Sect. 17. Mr. Parker's arguments, that the form of Churches is of Divine
Institution, are answered.
But this seems to some to be absurd, and thus I find it argued by Mr. Robert
Parker, De Polit. Eccl. l. 3. c. 17. Is not the first Church the Body of
Christ, 1 Cor. 12.27. And he that showed himself an accurate worker in the
determining the dimension and measure of man's body, Genesis 2. so as that nothing
might be added or taken from it by any: may it be thought that he has not
showed himself also an accurate worker in circumscribing the dimension of his
own Body?

Answ. It is true: The Church of Christ, is the Body of Christ. But this is
rather true of the Universal Church, and mystical Body of Christ, as may be
gathered from 1. Cor. 12.12, 13. in that by one spirit Christians are all
baptized into one Body, whether Jews or Gentiles, Bond or Free; and from Ephesians.
1.22, 23. where the Church, which is the Body of Christ the Head, is the
fullness of Him that fills all in all; Ephesians. 4.4. there is one Body, and one
Spirit; then of the first Church, that is the first visible Church, which he
makes a particular Congregation, such as that at Jerusalem was. And it is true
of this Church, he is so accurate a Former, as that he fashions the Dimensions
of it. He is the Head, from whom the whole Body, fitly joined together, and
compacted by every joint of supply, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, makes increase of the Body unto the edifying of it self
in love, Ephesians. 4.15. Yet this is not without the use of men, for the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ; till we all come in the unity of Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son
of God unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, v. 12.13. So that it cannot be said, that no more is left to man about
circumscribing the Dimensions of this Body; much less, that nothing more is
left to Humane prudence about circumscribing the dimensions of the visible
Church, universal, national, or parochial, than was to the making of man's body
in the first creation, Genesis 2. This therefore is but a Rhetorical flourish from
a similitude, in which though there be an agreement thus far, that Christ is
the alone framer of his Church, in respect of its inward form by the operation
of his spirit; yet it is not so in respect of the outward form, but that much
of it is left to the ordering of men, as Divine providence shall guide them,
and circumstances require.

The rest of his arguing is of like sort. Again, Each first Church of God is
the house and building of God, 1 Cor. 3.9. Heb. 3.3.4. 1 Timothy 3.15. And what
prudent householder will permit the figure or quantity of his house, to the
arbitrament, and will of others?

Answer, It is true, the Church of God, not only the universal, or particular
Church, but also each believer is the house of God, not a material, but, as St.
Peter speaks, 1 Pet. 2.5. a spiritual house, and it is true, that it is God
that builds this house, and that Christ is the only foundation, and yet others
are subordinate builders and foundations, whereof some are Master builders, and
wiser than other after workmen, 1 Cor. 3.10. and foundations too in respect of
their doctrine, Ephesians. 2.20. And to these builders or foundations, though the
faith and doctrine, upon, and by which they are to be built, is not left to
men's will and choice, yet many things pertaining to the outward figure and
quantity, that is the distributing of Churches into Ecumenical, National,
Classical, Parochial; and the ordering of meetings for their edifications with
many things pertaining to good order and decent behavior, are left under
general rules to be observed, to the prudence of governors of Gods house.

But we have more of the like stuff. What? The corporal temple had its
dreadth, and its measure described most accurately by God, shall not the
spiritual have its? Wherefore then was that reed given to John? Wherefore a
command to measure the Temple Rev. 11.1:

Answer, Each believer is the Temple of God, 2 Cor. 6.16. 1 Cor. 3.16. and
6.19. and this is as true of each Household Church, as of each Congregational
Church, and it is true, that God has by his providence described the Spiritual
Temple as well as the Corporal, but he has not given to us any such
description of the outward fashion, and order the breadth and measure, that is
the number, situation, disposition of the parts of the Spiritual Temple, as he
did to Moses, David, Soloman, Ezra, or others of the Material Temple. A reed
was indeed given to John, and a command to measure the Temple of God, Revel.
11.1. but not that John should set down the figure or quantity of each
particular visible Church, or the number of persons, that are to belong to one
visible Church, their nearness or remoteness of their dwelling one to another,
the choice of meeting places, and of Ministers to them fixed or unfixed: these
and such like things were never done by St. John, nor do Mr. Brightmans words
cited by Mr. Parker import he did, but St. John's measuring of the Temple was
his understanding the extent of it, that is, how large or how narrow the Church
should be in after times, in what estate of peace or persecution, what
accidents should happen to it, as Mr. Mede, Mr. Brightman and others do
conceive, in order to the fulfilling of that Prophesying, which by eating the
little Book, Rev. 10.10, 11, he was assigned to. As for Mr. Brightmans words,
(though they be not an oracle yet) they may be granted without any detriment to
the thing I assert. For though it be true, as he says, that the true Christian
Church is shadowed by the type of the Old Temple, of which the several parts
were of old most accurately described and measured by the command of God: to
wit that men might know that this house was made by God, that it is not of
humane structure: and therefore that men should not take upon themselves any
whit to change things at their pleasure, as if the Heavenly wisdom had not
sufficiently provided concerning the most commodious manner of each thing; yet
it might be true, which I assert, that God has not determined the distribution
and order of particular Churches so, but that he has left many things therein
to humane prudence. But Mr. Parker adds some thing more. What was the visible
Church of the Jews, when that Nation was called to the faith? Rev. 21.15.
moreover he who spoke with me, says John, had a golden Reed, that he might
measure the City and the Gates of it, and the Wall of it, etc. He that will
neglect no part of the Jewish Church, but design most diligently the quantity,
longitude, latitude, hatr he cast off all care of our Church, so as that he
has negligently left it is dimension to humane pleasure? Further, let it be
marked in this last example of Divine care and wisdom, that the Church is
compared to a City: And is any City so negligently administered by men, that no
regard is had of limits and bounds?

Answer, That the holy City, the New Jerusalem, descending from God out of
Heaven, as a Bride prepared and adorned for her Husband, is the visible Church
of the Jews, when that Nation was, or shall be called to the Faith, or that
the measuring the City and the Gates of it, and the wall of it was to design
the quantity of particular Churches, or the frame and order of a particular
Congregation as the first visible Church, is scarce probable. To me such kind
of arguments as are framed from Jewish Church State, from their rites, and
ceremonial worship to infer duties, privileges, and orders about the
Christian visible Church State, government and rites are of no force, as
savouring more of fancy than of judgment, if Christ or his Apostles have not
made those arguments before us. Yet, if any such argument were of weight, since
the Apostle, Romans 11.25, 26. would not have us ignorant of this mystery, that
blindness in part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and so all Israel shall be saved: as it is written, there shall come
out of Sion the deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, I might
better argue for a national Church of Gods institution from the visible
Church State of the Jews at their future calling, than for a Congregational
Church. But I count neither firm, nevertheless, if God do design more
diligently the quantity longitude, and latitude of the Jewish Church at their
calling hereafter, and leave the dimension of our Church to humane choice, this
may be done out of more special Love to them, who are in a peculiar manner
beloved by reason of the Fathers, Romans 11.28. and not out of negligence, nor so
as to have cast off all care of our Church. And though the Church be compared
to a City, the Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.22. yet it may agree well with Gods
wisdom, and care to leave many things to the prudence of the present
governors, concerning the distincton of Churches, and order of meetings; as it
may suite well with the wisdom and care of a good Prince, who in his charter
of incorporating a City, sets down what Officers they shall have, and what
jurisdiction they shall exercise, yet leaves it to the choice of some one or
more to order their Companies, meetings, and many particularities of their
government as shall be found most Convenient for them. From this disgression in
answer to Mr. Parker, I return to our Author.

Sect. 18. The Ministry of the Gospel is a true Ministry of Christ.
Thirdly, He enquires whether there can be a true Ministry in a false Church,
which he supposes a national Church to be as not of Divine institution, and
consequently the Ministry of the Church of England, in that it is the Ministry
of a national Church, cannot be a true Ministry. Before the query be resolved
it is necessary, that it be considered what is the Ministry of which it is
enquired, whether it be true or false; what is the Ministry in a Church, and
the falsehood of the Church, which may be a cause of the falsehood of the
Ministry. For explication whereof we are to observe. 1 That the Ministry is all
one with the employment of a Minister, and a [ Minister] is a Latin word
answering to (...), from whence comes the English word [Deacon] and notes the
office of one, reaching to another that which he wants, or does any other act
whereby he gratifies or helps another, and it is for the most part the work of
a servant, and implies inferiority, whence those speeches of our Savior, Luke
22.26. he that is chief as he that serves, Mat 23.11. he that is the greatest
of you shall be your Servant or Minister, Mat. 20.29. the Son of Man came not
to be ministered to, but to Minister, sometimes to acts which imply no
inferiority of condition, but freeness or readiness, as it is said, that when
some women ministered to Christ of their substance, Luke 8.3. There is another
word, which is used for the most part of them, that do public offices, (...)
and (...), and so it is said, Phil. 2.25. the minister of my need or, he that
Ministered to my wants, sometimes both are joined, 2 Cor. 9.25. the
administration of this service, or the ministration of this Ministry, and the
higher powers are termed, Romans 13.4. (...) and (...) v. 6. that is, the
Minister or Officer of God. In ecclesiastical matters both words are used, and
are applied to Christ, who is termed the Minister of the Circumcision, Romans
15.8. a Minister of the Sanctuary, Heb, 8.2. and to Ministers of Christ, Acts.
13.2. 2 Cor. 11.23. the word (...) is often restrained to the office of a Deacon,
Phil. 1.1. 1 Timothy 3.8. But the Ministry we are enquiring of, is neither that of
a Servant, that waits on his Master, nor of a contributor that supplieth
another wants of outward necessaries, nor the performing of the function of a
Magistrate, by doing acts of public justice, nor the ministry of Christ,
which was, and is peculiar to him, nor the Ministry of Angels, who are also
termed Gods Ministers and Ministering Spirits, Heb. 1.7, 14. Nor the office of
Deacons as their office is termed serving tables distinct from the Ministry of
the word, Acts. 6.1, 2, 4. But that Ministry to which Matthias was elected,
Acts 1.25. and of which it is said, 1 Cor. 3.5. who then is Paul, and who is
Apollos, but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every one,
and is meant, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. where it is said, that Christ gave some
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers for the work of the Ministry. This Ministry was performed by the
Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists somewhat extraordinarily either in respect
of their gifts or their commission, which are now ceased. That Ministry, we now
enquire of, is that of ordinary Pastors and Teachers as now sent. To these
sundry Ministries are usually assigned, to (...) Ministry of the word, of
Baptism, of the Lords supper, of confirmation, ordination, government by
admonitions, censures, and if there be any other work allotted to those whom
the Scripture terms Bishops or Elders. But our quaerist in this his writing,
meddling only with that part of Ministry in this main question disputed by him,
which is by Preaching I understand his quaerie to be meant of that part of the
Ministry. Now this Ministry is usually expressed by the Ministry of the word,
Acts 6.4. the Ministry of the Gospel of God, Romans 15.16. the Ministry of the
New Testament, not of the letter but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.6, 8. of
righteousness, v. 9. the Ministry of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. Stewards of
the Misteris of God, 1 Cor. 4.1. and sometimes our Ministry without any other
adjunct, 2 Cor. 6.3. and an Economy, or dispensation, 1 Cor. 9.17. more fully,
Acts 20.24. the Ministry, which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the grace of God. Which shows the Author of this Ministry,
whereupon he requires, 1 Cor. 4.1. Let a man so account of us as of the
Mynisters ((...) translated Minister, Acts 13.5.) of Christ, and Stewards of
the mysteries of God. The finis cui, or those, for whom this Ministry is
appointed, are the Saints, and therefore it is said to be for the perfecting of
the Saints, or joynting together of them, and the edifying of the body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4 12. wherefore St. Paul says of himself, that he was made a
Minister of the Church according to the dispensation of God, which is given to
me, for you to fulfill the word of God, Col. 1.24, 25. which shows, that he
was not a Minister for one particular Church, but for any part of it where his
lot was to Preach, and that he was not Minister of the Church by their election
or mission, or direction (for these were of God, and Christ Jesus) but for the
Church, or Saints, as the subjects to and for whom he was appointed to fulfill
the word of God, even the mystery which had been hid from ages and from
generations, but then was made manifest to his Saints, to whom God would make
known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which
is Christ in you the hope of glory, v. 26, 27. to which purpose he speaks also
of himself, Ephesians. 3.6, 7, 8, 9. which yet is not to be restrained so to the
Saints, but that the Ministry of the Gospel was to be to them that were not
Saints, I am a debtor, says he, Romans 1.14. both to the Greeks and to the
Barbarians, both to the wise and to the unwise, and 1 Cor. 1.23. We preach
Christ unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness, and 2
Cor. 2.14, 15. Thanks be to God which always causes us to triumph in Christ,
and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in every place. For we
are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved and in them that
perish. So that the Ministry of the word though it be primarily for the Church
and the Saints, yet is the preaching of the Gospel the Ministry of Christ, even
to unbelievers, as Ezekiel was a Prophet to the rebellious Nation of Israel,
when he spoke Gods word, whether they did hear or forbear, Ezekiel. 2.5. And hence
I infer that there may be a true Ministry not only in, but also out of a
Church of believers.

Sect. 19. A true Gospel Ministry may be in a false Church so deemed.
Secondly, A Church may be said to be false many ways.

1. Because it was irregularly constituted, that is not gathered by consent, or
Church Covenant, or baptism, but by humane Laws, in forcing men to meet
together in one Congregation, or more; because dwellers in such a Precinct, or
born or living in such a Country. In this respect I conceive the Quaerist
makes a national Church a false Church.

2. Because it is an hypocritical company, which does indeed make them a false
Church before God, yet quoad nos they are a true visible Church, if there be no
falsehood in that which is descernible by men.

3. Because it is Schismatical, so as to break off from other parts of the
Catholic Church, without a justifiable cause, whether out of ambition,
passion, misapprehension or any other such like undue motive.

4. Because it is heretical, or Heresy is broached and upheld by a party in it.
Now I confess, that it can hardly be, that there should be a true Ministry in a
Church tainted with Heresy. Yet since our Lord Christ, writes to the Church of
Pergamos, as one of his seven Golden Candlesticks, though there were that held
the Doctrine of Balaam and of the Nicolaitans, Revel. 2.14, 15. and in like
manner the Church of Thyatira, or the Angel of it suffered the Woman which
called her self a Prophetess, to teach and seduce his Servants to commit
Fornication, and to eat things Sacrificed to Idols. I infer those Angels were
true Ministers, though in a Church in some sort false, that is, tainted with
heretical or false doctrine. And since the Church of Corinth was manifestly
Schismatical, 1 Cor. 1.11, 12. Yet Apollos a true Minister to them, or who else
were their Pastors. And since the Church of Sardis is charged, as having a name
that it lived but was dead, yet the Angel of it, one of the seven Stars in
Christ's right hand, then may there be a true Ministry in such false Churches,
Revel. 3.1. that is schismatical, or hypocritical not consisting of real
Saints. And if it be, that what is charged on Laodicea, Rev. 3.15, 16, 17. were
by reason of defect in Church constitution and discipline (as Mr. Brightman
conceived) then also a false Church, in respect of such irregularity may have a
true Ministry. But because this is only an argument ad homines, to such as
concur with Mr. Brightman in his conceit; I will prove, that in a National
Church, or a Church irregular in its constitution or discipline, miscalled
false, may be a true Ministry of Christ.

1. If the truth of the Ministry depend upon the truth of the Church or it is
regularity, then where is no true regular Church, there is no true Ministry.
But that is false, since there may be a true Ministry, where there is no Church
at all, and therefore no true Church. Ergo, the truth of the Ministry depends
not on the truth of the Church: but a true Ministry may be in a false Church.

2. If there be a true Ministry, though to or in a National visible Church or
Catholic, then that extent, which is conceived to be inconsistent with a true
Gospel Church, makes not the Ministry false, but Peter's and Paul's Ministry to
the Jews or Gentiles Churches, were true Ministries, though the Churches were
National or Catholic, even set by God in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.18. Ergo.

3. If Ministry to Churches Hypocritical, Schismatical, and in some sort
Heretical may be true Ministry, much more to a Church National, irregular in
constitution and discipline, those being greater degrees of falsehood than
this. But the antecedent is before proved from the Epistles to the Corinthians,
to the Churches of Pergamos, Thyatira, and Sardis; Ergo the consequent is true.

4. If the regular constitution, discipline of the Church, the election of the
Church or their sending be extrinsecal or accidental, not necessary, or
essential to the truth of the Ministry, then may there be a true Ministry in
such a Church as this Author calls false. But the antecedent is true, since the
Apostles were true Ministers, before the regular constitution and discipline of
Churches, without their Election or mission, therefore the consequent is also
true.

5. If the denomination of true Ministers be from the truth of their Doctrine,
and no other form denominating them, and there may be a Ministration of true
Doctrine in such a supposed false Church, then there may be a true Ministry in
such a false Church, for where the form denominating is, there the Subject is
rightly denominated from it. But the antecedent is true, both from all the
Texts before alleged, which place the truth of Ministry in the Doctrine taught,
and no other thing, and in that the Colossians learned the grace of God in
truth, from Epaphras he is termed St. Paul's Fellow Servants, and for them a
faithful Minister of Christ, Col. 1.6, 7. and reason and experience confirms
the possibility of preaching true Doctrine in a National mis-called false
Church, therefore the consequent is also true.

6. If false Prophets, false Apostles, false Brethren be only denominated from
their false Doctrine, then they are not false Ministers but true, who teach the
truth of the Gospel, notwithstanding their defects, or the Churches in which
they are. But the antecedent is true, as may be evinced from, 2 Pet. 2.1. 2
Cor. 11.13. Gal. 2.4, 5. 1 John 2.1^, 21, 22, 26. 2. John. 7. and many more
places which denominate them false Prophets, false Teachers, false Apostles,
false Brethren, Antichrists, not Ministers of Christ, from their erroneous
Doctrine, therefore from it, and not from defects of Churches, or other things
are they false Ministers, and if they preach true Doctrine, true Ministers
though in an irregular Church. There being nothing offered against this to be
answered, I pass on to this Authors next Quaerie.

Sect. 20. Gods love to us is not less, in not determining the whole of his
Worship to us, as to the Jews.
3. Says he, Whether God does not bear as much love to, and exercise as much
faithfulness over his New Testament Churches, as over the National Church of
the Jews?

Answ. No doubt of it: yet does not God show his love, nor exercise his
faithfulness over his New Testament Churches in the same way or course of
Providence as he did, and perhaps, will do over the National Church of the
Jews. He does not gather the New Testament Churches by a mighty hand, and a
stretched-out arm; as he did, when he brought Israel out of Egypt by the hand
of Moses; but by the calling of his Word, and operation of his Spirit. Nor does
he make them Conquerours by Arms; but they overcome the old Serpent by the
blood of the Lamb, and by the Word of their Testimony, and they love not their
lives unto the death, Rev. 12.11. Nor does God now settle his Church in one
fruitful Land, under one earthly King, as he did the Jews under David, and
Solomon; but in all Countries, where they are called; protects, and feeds them
by the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Spirit, in
that estate and station, wherein they are called. Nor is it improbable, that in
the future calling of the Jews, God will show more remarkable Providence, for
their re-ingraffing into their own Olive, than ever he has yet showed toward
the Churches of the Gentiles,

It is added. If so, then 4. Whether he has not (as of old he did, with
reference unto the then Church) determined the whole of the Worship,
appertaining unto them, to whose Institutions, without any Humane additions, it
is the duty of souls solely to conform?

Answ. The whole of the Worship appertaining to the New Testament Churches, is
either inward or outward. To the New Testament Churches, God has determined
the whole of his inward Worship, as of old he did, with reference unto the then
Church; or rather, he has more fully determined the Worship of himself, by
exercise of Faith, and hope in Prayer and Thanksgiving, having now more (...)
opened the mystery of his Will, in the way of access to him, and accepting of
our service; than he did to the Jews before Christ's coming. But for the outward
Worship, though he have set down sufficiently what we are to place his Worship
in, and wherein he has determined by Precept or Example; that has the force
of a Precept, what is to be done by us; that alone we are to account his
Worship, and to conform solely to it as his Institution, without any Humane
Additions or Alterations; yet in respect of Circumstantials, such as are, Time,
Place, Meetings, Order in Doing, and the like, God has not determined the
whole of the outward Worship appertaining to the New Testament Churches, as of
old he did with reference to the then Church; but has left such things (though
needful to the well performing of the Worship he has determined) under general
rules prescribed in holy Scripture, to be set down by men, who are Governors;
to whom obedience is due in order to the end of their directions, though not
with equal tie of Conscience, as to Divine Institutions. Nor does God hereby
bear less love, or exercise less faithfulness over his New Testament Churches,
than he did over the National Church of the Jews; but rather more:

1. Because the determination of the whole of the Worship of God to the
National Church of the Jews, was the imposing of a yoke on them, which neither
the elder nor later Jews were able to bear, Acts 15.10. and therefore God
showed more love, and exercised more faithfulness over his New Testament
Churches, in not determining the whole of his Worship in Circumstantials, as he
did to the Jews.

2. The determination of the whole of Gods Worship to the Jews, in
Circumstantials of outward Worship, did bring in many things which were
unprofitable, and weak, and made nothing perfect, Heb. 7.18, 19. And if God had
so determined to us, he had commanded things unprofitable, weak, which made
nothing perfect; therefore he showed more love and faithfulness to us, in not
so determining.

3. The things God had determined to the Jews about the Circumstantials and
Rituals of his Worship, were but shadows of good things to come, which were not
fit to be continued, or to be supplied with any other, Christ being come, who
was the Body, or Substance, Col. 2.16, 17. Heb. 10.1. Therefore God in not
determining such things to us, has showed more love and faithfulness.

4 Such Ordinances were carnal, to endure only until the time of Reformation;
therefore it is a part of Gods love and faithfulness, that neither the same in
particular, nor other, are precisely determined to us by God, this time of the
Gospel, being the time of Reformation, Heb 9.9, 10.

5. God so determined the whole of his Worship to the Jews, because they were
in their Minority, and therefore were to be kept under those weak and beggarly
Elements of the World, as under Tutors, and Governors, until the time
appointed of the Father, Gal. 4 1, 2, 3, 9. But the Christian Believers are as
sons come to age, and therefore fit to be released of them, and such like; and
to be at more liberty in these things, than they were before, v. 7.

6. The time before Christ's coming, was an estate under Moses a Servant; but
now the estate of Christians is under Christ the Son, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, 7 Heb
3.5, 6. Therefore our freedom from such determinations as were upon the Jews,
is more congruous, than to have them imposed on us; and consequently, a sign of
more love in God.

7. If such determinations of the whole of Gods Worship had been to us, as were
to the Jews, we had not reaped the fruit of Christ's death, by which he did
abolish them, Ephesians. 2.14, 15. Col. 2.14. and consequ^ntly, had tasted less of
the love of God than we have; if the same, or such precise determinations of
the whole of Gods Worship, had been continued to us.

8. The Apostles judged it a great benefit to the Christian Churches, that they
were exempt from them; and it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to them, to
lay upon the Churches no greater burden, than those necessary things, mentioned
Acts 15.28, 29. therefore they counted it an effect of Gods love, that he had
not determined the whole of his Worship to us, as he did to the Jews.

9. This yields us also another reason why it is an effect of Gods greater love
to the Gentile Churches, that he has not determined to them the whole of his
Worship, as he did to the Jews; because those Gentile Christians being of
diverse Nations and Languages under diverse Governments, used to diverse Customs,
could not conveniently, if at all, practice such an uniformity of
Circumstances, as they must have done if God had determined the whole of his
Worship, as he did to the Jews.

10 To averr that God has determined the whole of his outward Worship in
Circumstantials, as he did to the Jews, is to infringe our Christian liberty,
and to bring us into such bondage as they were in, who were under the Law;
which is not agreeable to that love which God has born to the New Testament
Churches, and the New Covenant, which he has made under the Gospel, Gal. 4.20,
21, 24. This Author adds:

Sect 21. Christ designs Officers and Offices for his Church (not as were in
the Jewish) which are the same, while their work is the same, though some
Titles be new.
Yea, 5. Whether he has not now (as then) designed the several Officers and
Offices, his wisdom thought sufficient for the management of the affairs of his
house; so that the invention of new ones by the sons of men, is not only
needless, but a daring advance against the Sovereignty, care, and wisdom of God
over his Churches?

Answ. 1. God did, besides Moses and the seventy Elders, Joshuah and the
Judges, David and other Kings, for the Government of the People of Israel, and
Prophets raised up, as he thought good, for special purposes; design Aaron and
his sons, and the Levites for the Services of the Tabernacle, and Temple. But
he has not designed such Officers or Offices, as either Moses and the Jewish
Sanhedrin, David or the Judges; or as the Priests and Levites, and their
Services, were for the management of the affairs of his House; that is, the
Christian Church; it being Gods design not to gather this Church, or to form it
in that way and Government, as he did the Jewish. Christ did not gather his
Church, as the Jews were by Moses brought out of Egypt; nor were erected into
the form of a Political Body, but of a School; without either infringing the
power of the Caesar's, and their Officers; or withdrawing the People from the
Officers belonging to the Temple, though corrupt. If any advance themselves, or
others into Offices, from the Pattern of the Aaronical Priesthood or Services;
as the Papists, who will have their Pope to be Universal Supreme Bishop, in
correspondence to the High Priest of the Jews; to be absolutely obeyed, as he
was in the Synedrium; to be infallible in his determinations, to have power of
adjudging to death for Heresy; to make sacrificing Priests for Quick and Dead,
in imitation of the Levitical Priests. I conceive that the invention of such
new ones by Papists, or any other of the sons of men; is not only needless, but
a daring advance against the Sovereignty, Care, and Wisdom of God over his
Churches; the Temple, and the Priesthood thereof, being now by God taken away.

2. God has designed by his Son and his Apostles, the several Officers and
Offices his Wisdom thought sufficient for the management of the affairs of his
House, that is, his Church, as they are such. First, Christ Jesus called his
twelve Disciples together, and gave them power and authority over all Devils,
and to cure Diseases; and he sent them to preach the Kingdom of God, and to
heal the sick, Luke 9.1, 2. After he appointed other seventy also, and sent
them two and two before his face, into every City and place, whither he himself
would come; and these were confined to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
Mat. 10.6. To whom (he says) only he was sent, Mat. 15.24. St. Peter having
confessed him, Christ tells him, Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
will I build my Church; which by reason of the repeating of his Name, and
alluding to it, and thereby minding him of it, is justly to be thought to imply
a promise of a special use of him, in the building of his Church; not barely as
that particular man, but as a foundation of it by his Preaching; as other
Apostles are called Foundations, Ephesians. 2.20. in respect of their Doctrine,
wherein St. Peter had some work before the other in his Preaching, Acts 2. and
3. and 10. And therefore Christ promises to give him the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, Mat. 16.19. So as by his preaching to open the Kingdom of Heaven,
first to the Jews, and then to the Gentiles, when Cornelius was admitted into
the Kingdom of Heaven; and therefore Act. 15.7. he speaks of it as his
pre-eminence, that God made choice among the Disciples, that the Gentiles by
his mouth should hear the Word of the Gospel, and believe; he employing that
key of knowledge, which the Lawyers had taken away; who entered not themselves
into the Kingdom of God, and them that were entering in, they hindered, Luke
11.52. To him our Lord Christ assures, Mat. 16.19. Whatsoever thou shall bind
on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven: and whatsoever thou shall loose on Earth,
shall be loosed in Heaven. Which Phrase seems by the expressions, Mat. 23.4.
Rev 2.24. to import, that what he should command to be done, should be in
Heaven ratified, as commanded by God; as it was Acts 2.38. Acts 3.19, 20. Acts
10.48. and what he should untie, that is, free men from the obligation of, that
should be untied in Heaven; that is, God would not require the observation of
it: which was performed Acts 11.3, 14, 17, 18. Acts 15.10. Which promises,
though personal to St. Peter; and in respect of the first work, peculiar to
him; neither imparted to any other Apostle, nor derived from him to any
successor: yet this last promise was after made to the rest of the Apostles,
Mat. 18.18. and performed when St. Peter, with them, decreed about
Circumcision, Acts 15.24. and the Holy Ghost established it, v. 28. Afterward
our Lord Christ being risen from the dead, finds his Disciples assembled for
fear of the Jews, Thomas being absent, and says, Peace be unto you; as the
Father has sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this, he breathed
on them, and says unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost. Whose soever sins ye
remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain they are
retained, John 20.19, 21, 22, 23. The words of salutation, of mission, the
breathing on them, and imparting the Holy Ghost to them do import, that the
remission and retaining of sins there promised, was a peculiar power given to
them on whom he thus breathed, though also communicated after to other
Apostles, who were in like manner sent, and received the Holy Ghost as they
did. Which remission of sins was accomplished, when by their preaching, persons
repented, and were Baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins,
Acts 2.39, 41. When Aeneas was cured by St Peter, Acts, 9.33. For healing is by
remission of sins, Mat. 9.6. James 5.15. John 5.14. Or by taking off the
sentence of delivering to Satan, by which the Apostles had power to retain
sins, as appears by that speech of St. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.20. That he had delivered
Hymenaeus and Alexander unto Satan, that they might be instructed, or
corrected, (...), so as either to be afraid or disabled from blaspheming any
more as they had done, when Satan should chastise them with bodily punishment,
St. Paul also had determined by his Spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. When the Christians were gathered
together, that they might be witnesses, to deliver him that had his Fathers
Wife unto Satan, for the destruction of the Flesh, that is the wasting of his
body, that the Spirit or Soul being sensible of his sin and humbled for it,
might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5. Which had been
his coming to them with a Rod, 1 Cor. 4.21. and the retaining his sin, had not
his after-sorrow caused S. Paul to forgive him in the person of Christ, 2 Cor.
2.10. which was the remitting of sin, confirmed in Heaven. Other instances
there are of the retaining of sins by Apostolical power, when St. Paul smote
Elymas the sorcerer with blindness, Acts 13.11. and St. Peter inflicted death
upon Ananias and his wife Sapphira, for lying to the Holy Ghost, and keeping
back part of the price of the Land which they had sold, Acts 5.3, 5, 10. After
this mission, commission, and breathing of Christ on the disciples, to
reestablish St. Peter after his fall, Christ injoynes him to feed his Lambs and
his Sheep, thrice charging him, that he might show his love to him, whom he had
thrice denied; whereby he does not make him universal Bishop, or Monarch of the
whole visible Church (as Romanists impiously pervert the Text) but requires of
him diligence in testimony of his love to him, by doing that work which is
expressed in words, which signify teaching (one of them (...) signifies not
ruling) and that Ministry which is common to other Bishops, Acts 20.28. and
Elders, among whom St. Peter terms himself a fellow Elder, and Christ the
chief Shepherd, 1 Peter 5.1, 2, 4. But then Christ did most design the Officers
and Offices, he thought requisite for the management of the affairs of his
house, when being to ascend into Heaven, not long after, in a mountain of
Galilee Jesus spoke to them, saying, all power is given unto me in Heaven and
in Earth, go ye therefore, and teach all Nations, or rather Disciple or make
Disciples all Nations, or, of, or, in all Nations, not the Jews, only, as
formerly, ( Mark 16.15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel, to
every creature, or, to all the creation) Baptizing them, thus discipled, ( Mark
16.16. He that believes and is Baptized shall be saved) into the name of the
the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world, Amen. In which instruction of the Apostles, is founded
the function of the Evangelical Ministry, as Pareus speaks in his Commentary,
consisting in Preaching the Gospel and Baptizing and teaching the
obserservation of Christ's commands; which Offices, the promise to be with them
all days to the end of the World, shows to be perpetual till Christ's second
coming. Who the Officers are of Christ's designing may be best gathered from,
Ephesians. 4.11. Some of which are undoubtedly to continue. And that there should
be a succession by ordination of some for the Churches is apparent from, 2 Timothy
2. 2. Tit. 1.5. and that they should be ordained, may be gathered from, Acts
13.2.3. and 14.23. 1 Timothy 4.14. and 5.22. that there should be some, who should
have inspection over others, that they do not sow errors, or otherwise corrupt
the Churches, may be granted from, 1 Timothy 1.3, 4. Tit. 3.10.11. and by the
things charged on the seven Angels of the seven Churches, Rev. 2.2, 6, 14, 15,
16, 20. Rev. 3.2, 3, 15, 16, 19. To set down the History of Officers and
Offices in after-ages, to determine the disputes, about their several degrees or
orders is full of difficulty, and to our present business unnecessary. This
only is sufficient for present, to say in answer to the question now under
hand, That such as do these works which Christ or his Apostles have appointed
to be performed for his Church are Officers designed by Christ, and their
ordination thereto agreeable to his design, nor are those Officers or Offices
an invention of new ones by the sons of men, not only needless, but a daring
advance against the Sovereignty, care and wisdom of God over his Churches,
though they have other names, and titles, and maintenance, and immunities, and
dignities, and additaments than the Scripture mentions. They that are called
Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, Canons, Prebendaries, Parsons, Vicars, Curates,
Chaplains, Masters of Colleges, Hospitals, Wardens, Fellows, Clerks, Priests
enjoy emoluments by Tithes or other revenues, may be truly Officers of Christ;
if they be ordained to, and do the works or Offices appointed, by Christ and
the Apostles, to the Ministers of the Church of Christ, as well as they who are
termed Presbyters, Presbyteries, Teachers, Pastors, Lecturers, Itinerant
Preachers, gifted Brethren, whether they be chosen by a particular
Congregation, and ordained by an Eldership, and receive maintenance by
Collection, augmentation, stipend or other ways.

Sect. 22. The solemn deputation of Ministers, is not the peculiar privilege
of Saints.
6. Says our Author, whether the privileges of Saints, be not every way as
great and extensive under the Gospel, as those under the Law? If so, then
whether the solemn deputation of men, signally pointed out by the Lord, for the
administration of Holy things in his house, by the body of his Church, be not
now (as then) their peculiar privilege?

Answer, The people of Israel were a holy people to God, and conceived to be
meant by the Saints of the most High, Dan. 7.27. But, that the solemn
deputation of men, signally pointed out by the Lord, for the administration of
Holy things in his house by the body of that Church was their peculiar
privilege, is not proved, but the contrary is manifest, that the Priests and
Levites were by Gods own choice set apart as is before said Sect. 7. Saints
now are either real, or in appearance only. The former as such are invisible,
and it is granted, that they have privileges in spiritual blessings in
Heavenly things in Christ, every way as great and extensive under the Gospel,
as those under the Law; yea in some degree greater, to wit in the clearer
revelation of the mystery of Gods counsel, and accomplishment of Gods promises
by the Prophets, and gift of his Spirit. Saints in appearance only or the
visible Church of the Jews had in some things greater privileges, such as
those mentioned, Romans 9.4, 5. Romans 3.1, 2. Gods revealing his mind by Urim and
Thummim, extraordinary Prophets and many more, than Christians now, and
therefore no good inference can be made from the privilege of the Saints then
in the solemn deputation of Ministers of holy things (if it had been such as
this Author supposes) unto the same privilege to the Saints now. The solemn
deputation of Apostles and other Ministers of the Gospel, we find not to have
been the peculiar privilege of the body of the Church in any part of the New
Testament. Their ordination is no where mentioned as done by the Saints or
brethren, which were not Officers, nor is there any plain proof of their
election by all or the major part of the members of each Church in the
Scripture, And though ther^ be in antiquity in the first ages relations of
their election, yet withal such stories of the tumults, frayes and other
disorders, as necessitated an a teration of that course, are related.
Considering how unquiet, in judicious, deceitful, factious, divided those are
that usurp the name of Saints, and perhaps are, I see not how safe it were to
commit the solemn deputation of Ministers to them without much regulation of
them, and ability of discerning of Spirits, which is not a gift continued to
the Churches, who often are as easily deceived by hypocrites and seducers, as
others, and if it were the peculiar privilege of Saints, it were not to be
denied to women, contrary to the Apostles rule, 1 Cor. 14.33, 34. 1 Timothy 2.11,
12. If it were such a peculiar privilege to Saints, to ordain or choose their
Ministers, so as they were not to own any, but whom they choose, then the
lesser part of a Congregation were not bound to take him for their Minister,
who is not chos^n by themselves, though chosen by the most, each person might
choose his Minister, and withdraw for his Ministry at pleasure, if not chosen
by him, and refuse to contribute to his maintenance, which, with many
inconveniences, too often exemplified in Churches gathered in the
Congregational way, cause such Churches to be often dissolved, or to be
multiplied into so many parties as make them unfit for any good order or use.

Sect. 23. Corruptions in non-fundamentals un-church not.
The Quaerist adds 7. Whether any Church in the world (we speak of a visible
instituted Church) has greater security against Apostasy from God, and that
sore judgment of having its Candlestick removed (and being unchurched) than
that people of the Jews had? if not, then whether, supposing a national Church
to be of the institution of Christ, it may not so come to pass that it may be
so overspread with corruptions, that it may lose the essence of a Church, and
justly be disrobed of that appellation.

Answer, I grant that no particular Church visible, whether National,
Provincial, Classical, Parochial, or Congregational has greater security of
Apostasy from God than the Jewish, and that any such Church may be so
overspread with corruptions, that it may lose the essence of a Church, and
justly be disrobed of that appellation, we justly plead against the Church of
Rome, pleading [that they are the Church built on Peter, against which the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail Mat. 16.18.] that the promise is not to that or
any other particular visible Church, but to the invisible Church of Gods elect,
and we alledg that St. Paul writing to the Church at Rome, tells them, Romans
11.20, 21. well, because of unbelief they were broken off and thou stand by
faith: be not high minded, but fear. For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. But we add, that not every,
nor many corruptions of some kind do unchurch, there being many in faith,
worship, and conversation in the Churches of Corinth, and some of the seven
Churches of Asia, who yet were Golden Candlesticks, amidst whom Christ did
walk. But such general, avowed, unrepented of errors in faith, as overthrow the
foundation of Christian faith, to wit, Christ the only mediator between God and
man, and salvation by him, corruptions of worship by Idolatry, in life by evil
manners, as are utterly inconsistent with Christianity, till which in whole or
in part they are not unchurched.

Sect. 24. Every error makes not a false Prophet.
Our quaerist proceeds, Eighthly, whether the Ecclesiastic and spiritual
rulers, Governors and Officers of such a collapsed Church, may not
righteously, as of old, be accounted and esteemed as false Prophets, that go
about to cause the people to forget the name of the Lord (or his pure worship)
by their Lies (or unscriptural traditions, innovations, and ceremonious
Pageantries.)

Answer, St. Peter foretold, 2 Pet. 2.1. There were false Prophets among the
people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall
bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, Jude 4.
ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into Lasciviousness, and denying the
only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 John 4.1. Many false Prophets are
gone out into the World, 2 John 7. Many deceivers are entered into the World,
who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and
an Antichrist, 1 John 2.22. who is a lier but he that denies that Jesus is the
Christ? He is Antichrist that denies the Father and the Son. If any
Ecclesiastic and spiritual rulers, Governors and Officers of a collapsed
Church do in this manner, go about to cause the people to forget the name of
the Lord (or his pure worship) they are righteously, as of old, to be accounted
and esteemed as false Prophets. But if they hold the foundation, that is Jesus
Christ, and teach the worship of God in the name of Christ, without Idolat^y in
their worship, or heresy in their Doctrine, though they build upon the
foundation laid by the Apostle hay, and stubble, 1 Cor. 3.12. that is some
errors of their own, and some additions to the worship of God from unwritten
traditions, or other supposed power about ceremonies, they are not righteously,
as of old the Prophets of Baal and Balaam, and other seducers, to be accounted
and esteemed as false Prophets, that go about to cause the people to forget the
name of the Lord (or his pure worship.) I add that if the addition of some
humane ceremonies to the pure instituted worship of God, and some errors to
the sound Doctrine of faith, do make the Teachers or Rulers of a Church false
Prophets, in te ipsum haec cudetur faba, neither this Author, nor any of the
Pastors or Teachers of the Congregational Churches, but may be judged false
Prophets.

Sect. 25. Separation by reason of some corruptions unwarrantable.
It is added, 9. Whether separation from such a Collapsed Church in respect of
its worship, Ministers and Ministry, be not only justifiable, but, as of old,
the duty of the Lords faithful Remnant, that desire to worship him according
to his appointments?

Answer, Separation from a Church somewhat erroneous or corrupt in worship or
conversation, yet neither Idolatrous in worship nor Heretical in Doctrine, nor
requiring that to their communion which would be sinful, especially if it be
total from all parts of worship, all attending on Ministers and Ministry at all
times is unjustifiable, utterly dissonant from any of the rules or examples
which either of old the Prophets, or holy men, or Christ and his Apostles have
prescribed, is for the most part the fruit of pride, or bitter zeal, and tends
to strife, and confusion and every evil work, James, 3.16.

Sect. 26. It is prudence to join in worship, and hearing where some errors
and corruptions remain.
Yet once more says the Quaerist, Yea 10. whether, supposing a Church (so
called) thus dreadfully as aforesaid, departed from the pure institutions of
Christ, never to be according to truth, a visible instituted Church of Christ,
and the Lords poor people living in the Nation, never by their free consent
members thereof, as it is on the pretended Churches part, most
unheard-of-cruelty to compel them, so it be not on the part of the free born
Children of God, most stupendous folly and disvaluation of the institutions of
Christ, and ingratitude to God, for the light and liberty from the yokes of
men, received, imaginable, to join affinity with it in worship, or attend upon
the self invented Ministry that appertains thereunto? Many more questions of
the like nature and importance might be added.

Answer, Compulsion of men may be cruelty. But it is neither pendious folly,
nor disvaluation of the institutions of Christ, nor ingratitude to God, but
true Christian prudence warranted by the Counsel of St. James and the Elders at
Jerusalem, by the yielding and practice of St. Paul, Acts 21.18, etc. Acts
16.3. 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21. by Christ's example, Mat. 17.27. for persons living
in a Nation for their peace to join in affinity with such a Church, which has
some humane inventions in worship, and to attend upon that Ministry, which
appertains to it, when they preach the Gospel for the main, though not without
some mixture of errors, and neither require them to practice that which is in
it self evil, nor bind them to assent unto that which is erroneous. What more
Questions of the like nature and importance, this Quaerist might add I know
not: I thought it necessary to answer these as being praelusory to the main
Question, and tending to forestall the reader with unmeer prejudice. Having
removed these stumbling blocks out of the way, I proceed to examine the rest of
the writing.

CHAP. 1. ARG. I.
Sect. 1. Some scruples of conscience are of ill consequence.
AS a preamble to his dispute, the Author writes thus. This is that which the
Lord has said, I will be sanctified in all that draw nigh me, and before all
the people will I be glorified. The great care of Saints in matter of worship,
is to sanctify the name of the Lord therein: This is the great thing that God
looks at, the omission whereof the often severely punishes, he children of men
for: now in order hereunto, it is necessary that in all our approaches to God we
see to the institution of the Lord, both in respect of the matter, and manner
of worship, that it be according to Divine prescript, else we cannot sanct^fy
the name of God therein, nor glorify him before the people.

Answer, This is yielded, that wherein God has prescribed it is necessary we
see to the institution of the Lord both in respect of the matter and manner of
worship, even to determined particularities: but in those things which are not
determined by God, yet it is requisite they should be some way determined by
our selves or others, we and they are not so limited, but that keeping to
general rules there may be liberty of variation, and there may be too anxious
care, tending to beget unnecessary scruples, perplexities, divisions and
censurings, even in and of Saints, which experience has too much proved to
cause fluctuations in men's minds, and inconstancy in their practice; and to
produce a brood of Seekers, Quakers, Ranters, and profane Atheists. For which
reason it is very advisable, that persons of good meaning, but weak judgments
did less busy themselves in questioning such undetermined particularities in
Gods worship, and were received, but not to doubtful disputations, Rom 14.1.
and did satisfy themselves in such things by preferring the judgment of their
faithful, learned, wise and holy Teachers and Rulers before their own, when
their own capacity is insufficient to settle their Consciences. He proceeds
thus, Hearing (as was said, and shall beyond contradictions in its proper place
be evinced) is part of instituted worship, it therefore more nearly concerns
Saints than many are aware of, to have their consciences resolved from the
Scriptures of God, in the matter under enquiry, whether it be lawful for the
Saints to hear the present Ministers of England? It Is the negative, which we
have received under our maintenance, because we are satisfied Christ has so;
to the proof whereof we now address our selves.

Answer, Of hearing, how it is a part of instituted worship, somewhat has been
said in the answer to the preface, Sect. 1.2.3. what more is to be added, will
come in it is proper place. I grant, that it concerns Saints to have their
consciences resolved from the Scriptures of God in the matter under enquiry,
and do therefore join issue with this Author, and whereas he denies it lawful
for the Saints to hear the present Ministers of England, meaning in their
teaching of the Doctrins of faith and holiness according to that which is
authorized in the Church of England, I affirm it, and address my self to the
examination of this Authors arguments.

Sect. 2. There is warrant in Scripture to hear the present Ministers of
England.
Argument 1. Is thus, That which there is no warrant for in the Scripture,
being part of instituted worship, is not lawful for the Saints to practice: but
there is no warrant in the Scripture for hearing the present Ministers of
England, and hearing is part of instituted worship. Therefore.

Answer, The term [warrant] being a Law term, notes not only an injunction
requiring that a thing be done, but also an allowance or permission of a thing
to be done with impunity or without blame, and either way the thing warranted
is lawful. Instituted worship (as is before showed) is either moral or merely
positive and ceremonial. Parts of instituted worship may be either subjective,
if instituted worship be conceived as totum universale, an universal whole, and
so hearing of the present Ministers of England may be conceived either as one
sort of instituted worship, or one individual of that sort, or parts of
instituted worship may be integrant, if instituted worship be conceived as an
integral whole. I do not deprehend hearing of the present Ministers of England,
is to be conceived as an integral part of instituted worship, since it is one
act, which without any other act is worship: or parts of instituted worship may
be essential or accidental, instituted worship being conceived as an essential
or accidental whole. Those are parts essential of instituted worship, without
which it is not or is not rightly called instituted worship, those are
accidental parts which may be present or absent, and yet the Worship be, or
rightly be, so called. These things being premised, for answer to this
Argument, I lay down these Propositions.

1. Every sort or kind of Instituted Worship of God, has warrant in the
Scripture by precept of command if it be lawful.

2. Those things which are determined by God, ^n any part or sort of Instituted
Worship of God, are to be counted Essential parts, so as that the omission or
alteration of them, or any of them, makes the Worship not to be, or to be
rightly so called, Worship of God.

3. Those things which are in this sense Essential parts, must have warrant in
Scripture by precept express, or by just consequence.

4. Accidental parts, or adjuncts of Instituted Worship undetermined are
lawful, if they have warrant in Scripture by permission, so as that they are
not contrary to any precept or rule in Scripture about such Worship.

5. Hearing of the Word of God, is a sort or part of Gods Instituted Worship.

6. It is essential to it, that we hear it as Gods Word, with honest and good
hearts, with attention and reverence, as being determined by Gods command.

7. It is but accidental, as being undetermined by God, that we hear it from
this or that person, and therefore needs not warrant in Scripture by command to
make it lawful.

8. The hearing of the present Ministers of England, Preaching the Word of God,
has warrant in Scripture by permission, as being not contrary to any precept
or rule in Scripture about such Worship. Searching, and reading the Scriptures
as the Word of God, is a part or sort of Instituted Worship, and accordingly
hearing it read. When God commanded the Levites to read the Law, and all Israel
to hear it at the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of
release in the Feast of Tabernacles, Deuteronomy. 31.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. The reading by
such persons, and hearing at that time, was an essential part of Worship; but
Shaphans reading before Josiah, (2 Chronicles. 34.18.) and his hearing of it then,
was a part of Instituted Worship accidental, because not determined by Command,
but ordered by Providence, and yet warrantable by Permission: Gods command
being not exclusive, so as to forbid any other but Levites to read it, or the
Israelites to hear it read by others at other times, there being general
Precepts requiring all to hear the Word of God at all times, Deuteronomy. 5.1. and
even the light of Nature dictating this, That a message from God is to be heard
whoever brings it, of which the King of Moab was sensible, Judge. 3.20. and the
King of Niniveh, Jonah 3 6. In like manner, when Christ tells the seventy
Disciples, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me; he does not restrain
hearers from hearing others who delivered the same truth: but the general
speech, Joh. 8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods words, warrants the hearing
of Gods word. To the Argument I answer, That if the major be meant of warrant
by command, and part accidental of Instituted Worship, it is denied, and the
minor is denied in that branch, That there is no warrant in the Scripture for
hearing the present Ministers of England. But let us view his proofs.

Sect. 3. Accidentals of Instituted Worship warranted without command in
Scripture.
The major (or first) Proposition (says he) is evident, 1. From the nature of
Instituted Worship, which consists in this, that it be of Divine Revelation;
else whatsoever it is, it is not Instituted Worship.

Answ. This is true concerning the kind or sort of Instituted Worship, and
concerning the essential parts, those things, I mean, which are determined and
necessary; but not true of accidentals, parts, or adjuncts of Worship
undetermined; these may be from Men, and yet the worship be of God. If
Jehoiakim had heard and believed the Roll which was dictated by Jeremiah, he
had worshipped God, though Jehudi's reading were by his appointment, Jer. 36.21.

2* From the verdict of Christ, who pronounces all the Worship of Man to be
vain and fruitless, and so unlawful, that is bottomed on any thing but Divine
Revelation, Mark 7.7.

Answ. This is true, that all those actions, in which is placed the Worship of
God, having no appointment from God, but only from men, are vain and
fruitless, and so unlawful, and so much the Text alleged proves: But this
proves not, that the Worship of God appointed by him is vain, fruitless, and
unlawful, because of some adjuncts, or circumstances appointed by men, which
God has left undetermined. So though the receiving to hold Traditions of the
Elders, and Dictates of Pharisees, as if they were of God, and God were
worshipped by them, was vain, fruitless and so unlawful; yet the hearing of the
Law of God read in the Synagogues, which we find not to have been appointed by
God, but by the prudence and authority of Rulers, was lawful and approved, Luke
4.16, 17. Act. 13.15, 27. Act. 15.21.

3. If it be lawful to Conform to any one part of Instituted Worship, without
warrant from Scripture, it is also lawful to Conform to another, a third, the
whole, which would banish Instituted Worship out of the world.

Answ. The first consequence is granted, yet the later is not necessary; for
though it be true, If it be lawful to Conform to any one part of Instituted
Worship without warrant from Scripture, it is also lawful to Conform to another,
a third, the whole; yet this would not banish Instituted Worship out of the
world. For when the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they washed their hands
often, eat not, holding the Tradition of the Elders, and when they came from the
market, except they washed, they eat not. And many things there were, which
they had received to hold, as the washing of cups and puts, brazen vessels and
of tables, Mark 7.3, 4. Yet this did not banish the Instituted Worship of the
Passover, and other worship appointed by God to the Jews out of the world.

4. To assert, that it is lawful to conform to any part of Instituted Worship
without warrant from Scripture, reflects sadly upon the wisdom and faithfulness
of Christ: for either he was not wise enough to foresee, that such a part of
worship was, or would be requisite, or had not faithfulness enough to reveal
it, though the Scripture compares him to Moses for faithfulness, who revealed
the whole will of God to the making of a pin in the Tabernacle.

Answ. It no way reflects, with any disparagement, upon the wisdom and
faithfulness of Christ, to assert, that it is lawful to Conform to accidental
parts, or rather adjuncts, or circumstances of Instituted Worship, without
warrant from Scripture by express command; for though Christ was wise enough to
foresee what parts of Worship were or should be requisite, and had faithfulness
enough to reveal what God did require, and did make known by himself, or his
Apostles, what kind of Worship should be observed by Christians, and what parts
were essential or necessary to be observed, were determined in Scripture: yet
many accidental things, adjuncts, or circumstances of that Instituted Worship,
were left to the prudence, and authority of men, chiefly of Rulers, which the
Lord foreseeing, that his Churches would be gathered out of many Nations of
various Customs, Dispositions, Governments, thought fit to be permitted to
them, though he did restrain the Jews more strictly by Moses, which was their
burden, and it is our ease, that we have more liberty than they had: Christ
was faithful as Moses, in that he revealed to us what was his Fathers will in
spirituals, more clearly than Moses; but for externals, appointed but few
things, and those easy; in what else was to be added, he left it to be ordered
under general rules, as it should be found convenient in after times. And to
argue in this manner, if Christ did not appoint every accidental part of
Instituted Worship, he had failed in wisdom or faithfulness, and had come short
of Moses, seems to me to be like their arguing, who in the Canon Law say, If
Christ had not appointed an Universal Bishop to end Controversies, as there was
an High Priest among the Jews, Non satis discretus esset, He had not been
discret enough, very presumptuously, if not blasphemously, shaping Christ's
wisdom after the model of our understanding; and injuriously to us, in bringing
again Christian believers under that yoke of bondage, from which Christ has
freed them.

5. It pours out contempt upon the care of God over the New Testament Churches
(as if it were less to these, than to those under the Law) and the Economy of
the Gospel, as not so complete as that of old, the whole of whose Worship,
Orders and Ordinances (as was said) was bottomed upon pure Revelation.

Answ. It is before proved, in the Answer to the Preface, Sect. 20. that it
pours no contempt upon the care of God over the New Testament Churches, that
the whole of Gods Worship, Orders, and Ordinances in circumstantials or
accidentals, which are liable to much variation in Churches of different
Nations, are not bottomed upon pure Revelation Divine, but in many things left
to humane prudence: yea it is an effect of Gods love and care over the
New Testament Churches, that he has not tied them in so many things to
external rites and particularities of Instituted Worship, as he did the Jews:
Nor is the Economy of the Gospel less complete, than that of old for this
cause; but if I understand the Apostle, Col. 2.8, 9, 10. this reasoning is
either the same, or every like that of the Philosophical, or Judaizing
Teachers, to which the Apostles caution is opposed, telling them, that all
fullness was in Christ, they were complete in him without the tradition of men,
or rudiments of the world; by which the Jewish Rites to be meant, is apparent
from Col. 2.16, 17, 20. Gal 4 3, 9.

6. Says he, It carries with it a sad reflection upon the authority of the
Scripture, as not thoroughly furnished to make the man of God perfect.

Answ. The authority and use of the holy Scripture is delivered by St. Paul, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. that they were able to make Timothy wise unto salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus, that they were profitable for doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works. Whence is rightly
deduced against the Romanists, the perfection and sufficiency of the Scripture
without unwritten Traditions for all Doctrinals of Faith and Manners, and
Worship, in respect of Essentials. But it is no ill reflection upon its
authority, to say that some accidentals of instituted Worship undetermined in
Scripture, ordered by men according to general Rules in Scripture, are
warranted by permission, without command of those particularities in holy
Scripture.

7. The Lord condemns not only that which is done against the warrant and
direction of the Word, but also that which is done beside it, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and
12.32. Mat. 15.9. Lev. 10.1. ( their sin lay not in this, that they offered
strange fire, which was forbidden, but which God commanded them not) Prove.
30.6. Jer.7.31.

Answ. I suppose that this Author when he says, the Lord condemns not only
that which is done against the warrant and direction of the Word, but also that
which is done besides it, means it of warrant and direction by command, and in
instituted Worship; otherwise he should hold that nothing is indifferent, which
is too absurd; and therefore I shall not charge him with it, till he do
expressly assert it. But if his meaning be, as I conceive, that God condemns all
that which is done besides the Warrant and Direction of the Word, by a command
in the New Testament, even in accidentals of instituted Worship (which must be
his proposition, if he argue to the purpose) his assertion is false, and not
proved by any of the Texts alleged. Not Deuteronomy. 4 2. which is to be understood
of Doctrines, Commands, or Institutions, as from God. Thus Ainsworth in his
Annot. on Deuteronomy. 4.2. not add] Hereby all Doctrines of men are condemned, Mat.
15.9. and the all sufficiency and authority of Gods Word stablished for ever,
Gal. 3.15. 2 Timothy 3.16, 17. Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee,
and thou be sound a Liar, Prove. 30 6. Which place is to be understood not of
particularities of Instituted Worship undetermined; for then the reason should
have been thus, Lest he reprove thee, and thou be found superstitious: but of
Gods Commands, Promises, or Predictions, of which he had said, v. 5. Every Word
of God is pure, he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him; and is
opposed to the practice of false Prophets; who pretended revelations as from
God, which they had not from him; and therefore were reproved by him, and found
Liars. Which is also confirmed by that parallel place, Rev. 22.18, 19. Mat.
15.9. is the same with Mark 7.7. before alleged, and is taken from Isa. 29.13.
and both by the Prophet against the Seers of his time, the Rulers and Prophets
to whom the vision of God was as a sealed Book, and they understood not, or
taught not according to his Law, but made show of drawing nigh to God, whilst
their fear toward him, that is, their Worship of him, or obedience to him, was
taught by the precepts of men, and by our Lord Christ urged against the
Pharisees, who were guilty of the same hypocrisy; and indeed proves, that all
Doctrines are condemned wherein that is taught, or commanded, or urged as Gods
Worship, which is only by the Command of men; but condemns not every
particularity of accidentals in instituted Worship undetermined by God, because
from men, who reach it not, nor observe it as Gods Worship by his Command.
Which Exposition is agreeable with that which this Author puts after in the
Margin, In a Translation of the New Testament in Edward the sixths time, the
Author of the Notes on Mat. 15. says, God will not be wo^shipped after the
Doctrine and Precepts of men, but as he himself has prescribed and taught us
in his Word. The same is to be said of Deuteronomy. 12.32. where God, having warned
the Israelites, that they should not do so unto the Lord their God, as the
Nations destroyed by them served their Gods, adds whatsoever thing I command
you, observe to do it; thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Which
has the same sense as the Words, Deuteronomy. 4.2. well expounded in the English
large Annotations, Deuteronomy. 4.2. shall not add] not as a Comment, or Exposition to
a Text, but man must not add any thing to Gods Word, either for words or
meaning contrary to it; nor as Gods Word, with an intent to make that of Divine
Authority, which is but humane, as the Papists do by Apocryphal Writings, and
unwritten Traditions: See Chap. 12.32. and 18.20. Diminish] by denying any part
of it to be of Divine Authority; or concealing any part of it, either for words
or meaning, or by partial Belief of it, or obedience to it. God is not to be
believed, obeyed, or served in part, and by halfs; but as he is to be loved,
wholly; Chap. 6.5. Which Precept is not to be restrained to immediate Worship,
but to be extended to all other duties enjoined, not only to the Priests, by
whom the solemn Worship of God was to be administered; but also the King, who
was to have a Copy of the Law, and not to turn aside from the Commandment, to
the right hand or to the left, Deuteronomy. 17.20 and yet might make Orders about
Civil Government not expressed in the Law. Yea, were the prohibition Deuteronomy. 4.2.
and 12.32. restrained (as it is not) to worship, it cannot be taken for a
prohibition of all Orders made by men concerning Gods Worship, as might be
proved from Josh. 22.34. 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and 30.23. Esther 9.27, 31. and other
places, if there were need, but such as were different from Gods commands in
things determined by him, or in things indeterminate, when urged as Gods
command, and made his Worship; wherein it is to be considered, that God was
more strict to the Israelites, being more full in Ordinances concerning
Ceremonies Typical, and peculiar to them, than he is to Christians, whom he
has released of their burden of rites. Lev. 10 1. The sin lay in this, that
they offered strange fire, which was forbidden; as even Mr. Ainsworth
acknowledges, Annot. on Lev. 10.1. Strange fire] that is other fire than God
had sanctified on his Altar. As strange incense was expressly forbidden, Exodus
30.9. So strange fire was not commanded, but implicitly forbidden, by Lev.
1.7. and 6.12. as afterward God plainly shows in Levit. 16.12. So that both
the expression there, and Jer. 7 31. of Gods not commanding, must be expounded
by a figure of Speech frequent in Scripture, wherein Words or Phrases often
signify more than is expressed, which must be understood of that place, Jer.
7.31. where the thing God is said not to have commanded, is that which he had
most strictly forbidden, and severely punished; to wit, the building the high
places of Tophet, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their
sons and their daughters in the fire; and therefore is rightly paraphrased by
Mr. Gataker, in the large English Annot. on Jer. 7.31. Which I commanded them
not] or, which I never commanded: but expr^sly forbad, and professed to abhor,
Levit. 18.21. and 20.3. Deuteronomy. 12.31. and 18.10. And therefore these Texts are
ill alleged to prove the Lords condemning of that which is done only beside
the warrant and direction of the Word, and that it is not lawful for the Saints
to practice that which being but an accidental part, adjunct, or circumstance
of instituted Worship has not warrant by command in the Scripture. He adds 8.
of the same mind with us in this matter, are the renowned Witnesses of Christ
in all ages; generally all that write upon the second Commandment, speak fully
hereunto.

Answ. This assertion cannot be proved, nor is it likely to be true, such those
few testimonies alleged of Cyprian, Beza, Luther, and Whitaker, are
impertinent. That of Cyprian, Epist. 63. to Caecilius, is manifestly meant of
that which is prescribed by Christ, and not of adjuncts undetermined; the whole
Epistle being against the Aquarii, who would have water only in the Lords
Supper; whom Cyprian refutes, asserting that Christ used and commanded Wine
mingled with Water, erring therein. Bezas words in his Annot. on Philip. 1.1.
that it is unsafe to decline from the Word of God, though but an hairs breadth,
are to be understood of things determined therein. Luthers words on 1 Pet.
4.11. as they are cited (which I have not the Book to examine) are meant of
Doctrines or Decrees, which he would not have subscribed to, or taught, unless
in the Word of God. The place where Dr. Whitakers words are, is not quoted:
they seem to be against the Popish use of Oil in their Sacraments, which they
conceive to confer grace, and add it to Baptism, in which Christ has appointed
no other Element but Water, and therefore I conceive them not to assert that
which is the Major to be proved, that the practice of adjuncts of instituted
Worship undetermined, is unlawful without a Command in Scripture. That many
others may be added to these, I doubt not; but that they speak home to his
Proposition, I believe not. Voet. Polit. Eccles. part. 1. l. 2. h. 1. c. 7.
sect. 2. Ecclesiae in genere potestatem ceremonias adiaphoras assumendi, and in
cultu divino adhibendi nemo hactenus negarit qui ei tribuit potestatem clavium
and cum ea potestatem regiminis (...) sive (...), etc. The Declaration of the
Congregational Elders, Chapter 1. says, there are some circumstances concerning
the Worship of God, and Government of the Church, common to humane actions and
societies, which are to be ordered by the light of Nature and Christian
Prudence according to the general rules of the Word.

Sect. 4. Prejudice is no argument, nor personal motives good proof.
He adds: The Minor, (or second Proposition) consists of two parts: 1 That
Hearing is part of instituted Worship, one would wonder should it be denied;
however it is evident it is so, from the light of this single demonstration:
That in which we wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance for the Communication
of good, beyond the virtue of any creature to conveigh to us, is part of the
instituted Worship of God (for what I wait for, not being in the thing it self,
in which I am waiting, no ground can be assigned for my expecting good through
it, but Divine Institution) but in the Hearing of the Word, we wait upon God in
the way of an Ordinance, for the Communication of good, beyond the virtue of
any creature to conveigh to us: Therefore.

Answ. I do grant Hearing the Word of God to be one part, or sort of Gods
instituted Worship in the sense delivered by me in the Answer to the Preface,
in the three first Sections; because it is required by God, and tends to show
our subjection to him as our Sovereign Lord, and our acknowledgment of his
transcendent Wisdom and Infallibility; and is for these ends an address
immediately to God, on whom only we wait to know his Will, though brought us by
his created Messenger, whose Doctrine we receive not as his Word, but as the
Word of the living God; nor believe or obey it any farther than it appears to
be his. But I do not take the argument here produced, to be demonstrative, since
there be many things, as Marriage, Eating, Drinking, Ploughing, Sowing, etc. in
which we wait upon God in the way of an Ordinance for the Communication of good
beyond the virtue of any creature to conveigh to us, and yet are not parts of
the Instituted Worship of God.

2. Says he, That hearing the present Ministers of England is not warranted in
the Scripture: This will be manifested when we come to the ventilating and
scanning of those places which are usually produced for the abetting of the
practice of some in this matter: in the mean while, we crave liberty to
profess, that it is not opinionativeness, singularity, vainglory,
uncharitableness, or any thing of that nature (as some are apt uncharitably
enough to censure) but the dread and awe of God (who is a jealous God, and
especially in point of worship) and an holy fear of offending him, that hinders
us from complying in these matters: could but one word, tittle, or iota be
produced from the Scriptures of God, for the warranting the hearing the present
Ministers of England, we should quickly lay our mouths in the dust, confess and
bewail our folly in refusing to conform thereunto: but this we are fully
assured, those that dissent from us are not able to do: what they say therein,
shall (...), be sifted to the uttermost.

Answ. The hearing the present Ministers of England, while they teach the
Doctrine of Gods Word, is warranted in Scripture, which forbids only the
hearing of False Prophets, Mat. 7.15. Antichrists, that seduce, that bring not
the doctrine of the Apostles, 1 John 2.18, 26. and 4.1, 5, 6. 2 John 7.10 which
if he prove the Ministers of England to be, his Minor is proved; but not either
by personal exceptions against their entry on their Ministry, or their sinful
practices; nor by ventilating or scanning of those places which are usually
produced for the abetting of the practice of some in this matter. For though
Ministers be as bad as Judas, yet they may be heard preach the Gospel, as he
was; and though the places alleged should prove insufficient for what they are
produced, yet is not the Minor proved, till the sin be showed, which is
committed by hearing the present Ministers, (for where there is no Law
forbidding, there is no transgression, Romans 4.15.) and not People affrighted,
by filling them with unnecessary scruples; nor divided one from another upon
such suggestions, as this Writing yields; nor drawn to separations and
oppositions, which tend to the undoing of men in their Estates, hinder the
public Peace, and the furtherance of the Gospel. To prevent which it little
avails, that this Author acquaints us with his motive in his writing this
piece. For though all he says of himself were true (as Charity binds me to
believe it to be) yet it serves only to create prejudice in the minds of
well-meaning People, who are led more by the opinion they have of the Writer,
than by the strength of his Arguments; and for the most part hinders the
impartial search for truth, and makes men adhere faster to a party. We know the
opinion that was had of the holiness of the Pharisees, was the greatest
stumbling block to the Jews against Christ's Doctrine; and the opinion of the
holiness of Monks, was the great furtherance of Popish Superstition and
Idolatry; and the opinion of many Teachers, has bred many Errors; of which I
gave warning many years since, in a little Treatise, Entitled, Anthropolatria
on 1 Cor 3.21. foreseeing (as it has come to pass) that glorying in Teachers
would be the mischief of the Churches; from which it is time to take off
People, and to make them more diligent and serious in examining what is said on
both sides; as the Apostle admonishes us, 1 Thessalonians. 5 21. Nevertheless I doubt
not but in the progress of this dispute, I shall show Scripture warrant for
hearing the Ministers of England that preach the Gospel, notwithstanding the
objections against them; and accordingly proceed in answering this Writing,
that I may promote Truth and Peace, which is my aim, however I be censured;
hoping that in time God will direct honest-hearted persons to unlearn that
mischievous course of esteeming res ex personis, things by persons, and give
over that evil custom of too many, who speak for, or against opinions, or
practices, according to the affection they bear to men; and have no other
argument why they refuse a thing, but this; that good people, as they judge
them, are against it; nor why they adhere to it, but because they are for it.
Which is in effect to make them their Masters, contrary to Christ's Prerogative,
Mat. 23.10. and in some sort idolizing of them. Nor do I think it unfit to mind
this Author, that it were advisable, that he did better examine his Tenet and
Arguments, since as, Gisbertus Voetius Professor of Utrecht says, Polit. Eccl.
part 1 lib. 2. Tract. 1. c. 7. Sect. 3. that it is the common opinion of all
the Reformed Divines, who notwithstanding the defect of Reformation of Rites
and Government in the Church of England, under Edward, Elizabeth, James have
held fraternity with it constantly, that consent in Ceremonies, or the manner
or form of Government, is not necessarily required to retain, or restore
fraternity between Churches of the greatest, greater or lesser, diverse union
and correspondence.

CHAP. 2. ARG. 2.
Sect. 1. Preachers may be heard, as teaching Truth.
IF it be lawful to hear the present Ministers of England, it is lawful to hear
them, either as Ministers of the Gospel, or Gifted Brethren: But it is not
lawful to hear them, either as Ministers of the Gospel, or as Gifted Brethren:
Therefore. The major (or first Proposition) will not be denied; That Christ
has appointed some as Ministers, by virtue of an Office-power, to dispense the
Ordinances of the Gospel, until his second coming; is granted by all, that it
is permitted to others, as their liberty; enjoined them as their duty (having
Gifts and Enablements from the Lord thereunto) to improve those Gifts, in
Preaching, Praying, etc. for the edification of the body of Christ, (though not
solemnly invested into Office) is assented unto, at least, by some of those
with whom we have to do; whence a lawfulness to hear them as Ministers, or as
Gifted Brethren, does necessarily arise.

Answ. I deny the Major, or the consequence of the first proposition. 1.
Because the disjunction is of terms not opposite, but coincident; the same
persons may be and are both Ministers of the Gospel, and Gifted Brethren, and
may be heard under both considerations.

2. The disjunction is not full, since a third member may be assigned, that they
may be heard, as preaching, or declaring the Word of God, or speaking the truth
of the Gospel: which is the only consideration requisite to the Hearer to be
respected in Hearing.

1. Because God has forbidden hearing of none, but such as teach falsehoods;
and therefore Hearers are not bound to decline Hearing any, but such as they
have reason to conceive teach contrary to Gods Word.

2. Because Hearers are not all of them at any time, nor any of them at all
times enabled or fit to examine the Office, Power, or Gifts, or Brotherhood of
those they may hear.

3. It is lawful to hear such as are neither in Office, Power, nor Gifted
Brethren; as it was lawful for Apollos to hear Priscilla, Acts 18.26. Timothy
to hear Lois his Grandmother, and Eunice his Mother, 1 Timothy 1.5. 2 Timothy 3.15.
the Iberian Prince, the Captive Maid; the Indians, Frumentius.

4. The Beraeans are commended for their examining St. Paul's Doctrine, without
examining his Office, Power, or his Gifts, or Brotherhood, Acts 17.11.

5. If the Scriptures be the rule of the Doctrine we are to hear, then are we
bound to look to no more for the lawfulness of our hearing, than the congruity
or agreement of what we hear with it; yea, we sin if we do not hear it, whoever
he be that brings it; as on the other side, if any bring it not, though he be a
Minister in Office, Power, or a Gifted Brother; yea, or an Apostle, or an Angel
from Heaven, he is not to be heard, Gal. 1.8, 9.

6. To forbid a man to hear him that preaches, or declares the Truth of God,
because he knows him not to be, or conceives him not to be a Minister in
Office, Power, or a Gifted Brother, perhaps out of partial prejudice against
him, or upon false reports and surmises, or because he is not of his Party, may
be a means to hinder a man's edification, and salvation, and to harden him to
his perdition. Which is not unusual, but too too often; many declining to hear
them that preach sound Doctrine, because they say they rail, when they reprove
their errors, or vices; and choosing to hear those that are of their way, and
preach according to that which they like, or else turn Seekers, denying any to
be Ministers, but such as speak by immediate and unerring motion of the Spirit;
or hearing none at all, because of dissenting judgment from themselves.
Wherefore, though I grant that Christ has appointed Ministers, as is said, and
that it is wisdom to choose and hearken to such, and most of all to the best,
and the most able: and though the reading of Mr. Matthew Pool's Quo Warranto?
might deterr many, who take upon them to preach constantly and publicly in
solemn Assemblies, as Gifted Brethren, from their practice which they use. Nor
do I deny there may be liberty, yea, and duty occasionally, especially when
there is want of Ministers in Office to preach; yet I deny, that a lawfulness
to hear them as Ministers, or as Gifted Brethren, does necessarily thence
arise. For suppose a Minister, or Gifted Brother, should be Heretical, yet he
is not to be heard, but shunned, Tit. 3.10. Here by the way I take notice, that
if it be lawful to others, then Ministers to preach as their liberty permitted
to them. Some practice that is a part of Instituted Worship, is warranted in
Scripture, as the persons liberty by permission without command; and therefore
hearing of the present Ministers may be lawful and warranted in Scripture as
men's liberty by permission without command, which was my answer to this Authors
first Argument against hearing them, and is now confirmed by his Concession
concerning the preaching of Gifted-Brethren.

Sect. 2. They may be heard as Ministers of the Gospel, who are not rightly
called.
It is added: It Is the minor (or second Proposition) that is capable, in the
thoughts of some, of a denial: which we prove per parts, thus. 1. It Is not
lawful to hear them as Ministers of the Gospel: they are not such, therefore
may not be heard as such.

Ans. I deny this consequence, if a man either ignorantly or fraudulently get
into the place of a Minister of the Gospel, or be unduly chosen or ordained;
yet if he have the place of the Minister of the Gospel, and preach it truly he
may be heard as a Minister of the Gospel, though he be not such; that is,
rightly called and stated in that Function.

The reasons whereof are, 1. Because every Hearer is not bound to examine the
entrance of the Teacher into his Function; therefore it is enough to hear him
as such, that there is nothing appears to the contrary.

2. Because it is above the ability of Hearers to judge of the Ministers Call
in many Cases, the resolution thereof depending upon sundry Controversies about
the power of Election and Ordination, which they are not able to discuss; and
there are many proceedings in getting Testimonials, using means for obtaining
Ordination, Institution, (besides what concerns their Baptism) which either
they cannot, or their time and estate will not permit them to enquire into, and
sure Christ has not bound men to impossibilities.

3. In all Governments and Societies, the peaceable Possessour is presumed to
have right till the contrary be evinced, otherwise there would be perpetual
unquietness, and so Societies be dissolved. Nor do I think even in the most
Reformed, no not in the Congregational Churches, it would be permitted to a
Member of the Society to decline the hearing of him, who is taken for their
Minister by the most, though he conceive or know him to be unduely admitted
into the Office. Sure I am St. Paul did apply the Precept Exodus 22.28. to
Ananias as High Priest, Acts 23.5. though it was manifest that he was not such,
by any legitimate succession, but by unrighteous practices, and favor of the
Roman Governor in Judaea. Yea, the Scripture makes Caiaphas to prophecy as
High Priest, though (contrary to the Law) not High Priest for life, but that
year, Joh. 11.51. and if relations of the Histories of those Times be right, no
legitimate Successor in that Office, but an Usurper, and yet our Lord Christ
did not except against him, when he was convented before him, as convented
coram non judice, or any other way excepted against his Office. And therefore I
judge that Christ's example and St. Paul's are sufficient Warrant to us to submit
to, and hear them that are not right Officers, when they peaceably possess the
place; and consequently it is lawful to hear them as Ministers of the Gospel,
who are not such rightly called. But let us consider this Authors Plea against
the present Ministers of England.

Sect. 3. Preachers may be Ministers of the Gospel, who are not chosen by a
particular Instituted Church.
That they are not Ministers of the Gospel (but Thieves and Robbers) is
manifest: such as come not in by the Door, which is Christ, Joh. 10.9. (viz. by
virtue of any Authority derived to them from him) are not Ministers of the
Gospel, but Thieves and Robbers, Joh. 10.1. ( from whom it is the property of
the Sheep to flee, ver. 4) But the present Ministers of England come not in by
the Door: Therefore. That they come not in by the Door, (viz. by virtue of any
authority derived to them from Christ) is evident: If they have received any
such authority or Commission from him, they have received it, either mediately,
or immediately: the latter will not be asserted, nor without the working of
miracles, should it so be, would it to the Worlds end be made good: It Is the
former must be fixed upon, viz. That they have received their Authority or
Commission mediately from Christ, but to as little purpose; for those that
receive authority to preach the Gospel mediately from Christ, have it from some
particular Instituted Church of Christ, to whom power is solely delegated for
the Electing of their own Officers, according to the tenor of the ensuing
Scriptures, Acts 6.5. and 14.23.

Answ. If this could be proved, there need no more to prove, That the present
Ministers of England, are not to be heard, for if they be Thieves and Robbers,
the sheep will flee from them, and ought to do so, Joh. 10.5. But it is an ill
sign of an inconsiderate and audacious spirit, for so high a charge (which he
that fears God, I think, should tremble to bring against so many Preachers of a
Reformed Church) to bring so low a proof; which, if it be well considered, may
be not only urged against Presbyterian Preachers, if he mean by particular
instituted Church (as his meaning appears to be by his Preface) a Church
gathered in the Congregational way by Church Covenant, as they speak, but also
against his gifted Brethren, who have not authority to Preach mediately by
election of a particular Church, but only from their gifts. And if it be said,
They are chosen by the Church; yet this will not authorize them, unless the
Church have power to choose any besides their own Officers, which this Author
does not pretend. Now let it be considered, what a heavy burden is put on the
consciences of hearers. They must hear no Thieves and Robbers, no nor any
Stangers: if this Author argue rightly from this Text, and all are Thieves, and
Robbers, and Strangers, who are not chosen by a particular instituted Church,
who have power only to choose their own Officers, therefore they must hear no
mere gifted Brethren, no Itenerant Preachers, though approved by Tryers, none
but their own Officers, and those rightly chosen; and consequently they must,
before they hear them, know their Election to be right, and the particular
Church electing them to be rightly instituted, which tends to such dictraction
of peoples minds, and alienation of them from hearing, as can end in nothing
but mere Irreligion, and make men Seekers or Quakers, the mischiefs of which
are too too conspicuous. But I shall more directly answer this Argument, and
that so much the rather, because the Text John 10. is abused by Papists, to
prove, that they are not right Shepherds, who have not authority from the Pope,
whom they make the One Shepherd, v. 16. (as Heart in his Conference with Dr.
Rainold, Chap. 6) from whom all Bishop^ derive their power, and all the Sheep
are to hear; and by Quakers and others to prove, that they are not true
Shepherds, nor to be heard, who receive any maintenance by Tithes or other
stipend; because they that do so, are by them judged Hirelings, and not
Shepherds, v. 12. It is granted, that Christ is the door, Joh. 10.9. but it may
be doubted, whether Christ be meant by the door, Joh. 10.1. the reason of which
is, because then Christ should be said to enter by himself, and the door to
enter by the door. To avoid which, Maldonate in his Commentary, conceives the
door, v. 1. not to be the same with the door, v* 9. but the door, v. 1. to be
the Scriptures of the Prophets, wh^^ foretold of the good Shepherd, Ezekiel.
37.24* and 34.23. Jerem. 23.5. and 30.9. Isa. 40.11. by virtue of which
Prediction he entered. And indeed the whole purport of the Parable does tend to
this, that he only was the good Shepherd; that is, the Messiah foretold by the
Prophets; and that all other that pretended to be the Messiah, or good
Shepherd, such as Theudas, and Judas of Galilee, mentioned Act. 5.36, 37. and
if there were any other like them, were but Thieves, and Robbers, Strangers,
Hirelings, though they took on them to be Shepherds; they were but false
Christ's, such as Christ foretells should arise, Mat. 24.24. But let it be
granted, that the door is the same Joh. 10.1. and 9. the entering in, v. 9.
cannot be meant of entering into the Ministry lawful election of a particular
Instituted Church. For then it would follow, that every one that enters into
the Ministry by by election of a particular Instituted Church shall be saved,
and go in and out and find pasture, which is manifestly false. Therefore
entering, is meant of every True believer, and is by faith in Christ, who is the
right door, by whom, that is, by his Doctrine, men come to be his Sheep, and he
is their Shepherd. But be it, that the entering be into the Ministry, and that
entering be by virtue of Authority derived to them from him, how is it proved
they are not authorized by Christ immediately who work not Miracles? Have not
many, especially in cases of necessity, been Ministers of Christ by immediate
inward call, who have not wrought Miracles? It were hard to conclude of Petrus
Waldo, and many other Reformers, that had no power of working Miracles, that
they were not Ministers of Christ (that I say nothing of gifted Brethren) that
they were Thieves and Robbers, because they had no immediate calling by a
particular Instituted Church. Sure this would be to offend against the
generation of Gods children, who in the darkest times of Papal Tyranny, took
upon them to Preach the Gospel, without a praevious election of a particular
Instituted Church. But how does he prove, that those that receive authority to
Preach the Gospel mediately from Christ, have it from some particular
Instituted Church of Christ? He alleges no other but this, that to a
particular instituted Church of Christ, power is solely delegated for the
electing of their own Officers. But what then? may not, for all this, power be
given to some others to choose, send and ordain Preachers for the unconverted,
who yet may be Ministers of the Gospel, and may be heard as such? Yea, may not
some others ordain Elders for particul^^ Instituted Churches? Sure when St.
Paul left Titus in Crete, that he might set in order things that were wanting,
and ordain Elders in every City, as he had appointed him, Tit. 1.5. giving him
direction whom to ordain, he left it to him to choose Preachers for Instituted
Churches, who were to be heard, and this by power delegated by Christ to him,
and therefore power is not solely delegated to a particular Instituted Church
of Christ, for the electing of their own Officers, but that they may be chosen
and ordained by some other for them, by virtue of an authority derived t^ them
from Christ. But how proves he the power for electing their own Officers
delegated solely to a particular Instituted Church of Christ? He says, it is
according to the tenor of the ensuing Scriptures, whereof one is Acts 6.5. and
that relates only one act, of choosing the seven Deacons by the whole
multitude of the Disciples at Jerusalem, who cannot be well counted such a
particular Instituted Church, as made up one Congregation to meet every Lords
day for all Ordinances: they were too numerous to be such, nor were they
organized under fixed Officers with such constitution, as is now made necessary
to a particular Instituted Church: Nor did they choose the Deacons upon any
conceived power delegated from Christ, by virtue of any rule established by
Christ or his Apostles, which should be perpetual in all ages to all Churches;
but upon advice of the Apostles for their more liberty to attend on other work
of more importance, and their own liking: nor, if it were to be a perpetual
rule for all Churches in all ages, can it be any rule for choosing other
Officers besides Deacons, there being a peculiar reason, why they should choose
Deacons, whose honesty, prudence, and mercifulness was to be discerned, and not
other Officers, whose sufficiency to Teach, and Orthodoxie were to be
considered; of which the whole multitude of Disciples then, and the major part
of a particular Instituted Church are rarely now competent Judges. The other
text Act 14.23. has no color to prove such a delegated power, but from one
word (...), which our Translation renders [ when they had ordained.] Beza,
after others, [ Per suffragia creassent, Had created by suffrages;] and because
the word arose from a custom among the Greeks of choosing their Officers by
Suffrages or Votes, signified by the stretching out of the hand, conceives,
that Paul and Barnabas, did not create the Elders in the Churches, without the
Churches election, signified by stretching out of their hands, to show their
consent to the elected; and thence is inferred, that so it should be now. But
this is but one example, (though it is not to be denied, that in after ages,
which were times of Persecution, the Elders were chosen by the Church) and
therefore seems not sufficient to infer a necessary perpetual rule of such
election; especially other passages showing the Constituting or Ordaining of
Elders without mentioning of any such election, as Tit. 1.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. And
though the original and use of the word, were from the custom mentioned, and
did in popular Elections signify Election by suffrages; yet, as in other
words, so in this, use has enlarged its sense, and apples it to other
creating, than by such suffrage, as is manifest by the use of it, even in the
same book, Acts^ 10.41. where the Apostle are termed Witnesses, See Seldom de
Syned* Ebre. l. 1. c. 14.
(...), chosen before of God; who did not choose by suffrages of others; and by
Dr. Hammond, in his Annot. on Act. 14.23. is showed to be used in like manner
in Philo Judaeus, and other Authors, besides Christians; as the same with
Electing, Ordaining, or Constituting without Suffrages of others, and must be
so understood in this very place; because none are said (...), to stretch out
their hand, but Paul and Barnabas; and it is said, they did (...), which cannot
be well translated any other than Ordaining by laying on their hands on the
Elders; not by bare stretching out, or lifting up their hands, as was wont to
be in Suffrages; and it is said, (...), to or for them, manifestly
distinguishing the Disciples from the Electors, or Ordainers, by stretching out
or laying on of hands. So that this place does not prove Power solely delegated
to a particular Church instituted for the electing of their own Officers; and
therefore if all were true, which is added by this Author, [ These men (as its
known) have no such authority, pretend not to it, have it in derision, come
barely with a presentation from a Patron, and Ordination, Institution, and
Induction from a Lord-Bishop (things foreign to the Scripture) and impose
themselves upon the people whether they will or no.] Yet they may be Ministers
of the Gospel, and heard as such, notwithstanding this Argument. Yet I add,
that it will be hard for this Author to prove, that the Parish Churches in
England, are not particular Instituted Churches of Christ; or, that the
Ministers are imposed on the People whether they will or no: the contrary is
true of many places, especially in London, concerning the Incumbents and
Lecturers: Nor is the Ordination of a Lord-Bishop such a foreign thing to the
Scripture, as this Author would insinuate, the Bishop not Ordaining without
other Elders joining with him, and giving him no other authority, than to
Preach the word of God, and to Minister the holy Sacraments in the
Congregation, where he shall be lawfully appointed thereunto. To shut up the
Answer to this Argument: As the Text Joh. 10.16. is abused by Heart, to prove
the Bishop of Rome to be the Supreme Pastor of the Church of Christ, as Dr.
Rainold shows in his Conference, Chapter 6 divis. 1. it being meant only of the
Lord Christ: and the Quakers abuse Joh. 10.12. to cry down Preachers as
Hirelings, because they receive Wages, though it be according to Christ's own
determination, Luke 10.7. the Lords Ordinance, I Cor. 9.14. St. Paul's practice
sometime, 2 Cor. 11.8. and his Precept, Gal. 6.6. and his Approbation, 1 Timothy
5.17, 18. The word [ Hireling] Joh. 10.12. being not used as making it a sin
for a Minister to receive hire; but to distinguish Christ from other Shepherds,
who was not as Hirelings, whose Sheep are not their own, but was a singular
Pastor, owner of the Sheep of whom he was Pastor: and those abuse Joh. 10.5.
who urge it against the hearing of any Preachers, but those of their own Church
or way, calling them Strangers; whereas the strangers there, are such as were
Usurpers of Christ's Office, and were enemies to the Sheep, not feeding them,
but perverting them: So this Author abuse^^ John 10.1, 9. by saying, the
present Ministers of England, are Thieves and Robbers, because they come not
into their Ministry by the door; that is, by any authority to them from Christ;
that is, not by election of a particular Instituted Church; when this is but
from an expression in a parable, in which is not the scope or Doctrine intended
by it, and therefore not argumentative; and neither is it certain, that the
door, v. 1. is the same with the door, v. 9. nor if it were, is the door that
whereby there is entrance into the Ministry, but the Church, nor the entrance
by right election of others, but by the persons true faith, nor is the not
entering in by the door, brought as the reason or form denominating them Thieves
and Robbers, but only as some description of them from a concomitant, nor are
any meant there to be Thieves and Robbers, who do direct to Christ, or receive
him, for defect of regular calling, but such only as obtruded themselves as the
Messiah on the people, with intent to make a prey of them.

Sect. 4. The present Ministers may be heard as Gifted Brethren.
There is yet more of the like stuff; 2. Says he, It Is not lawful to hear them
as Gifted Brethren.

1. The most of them are not Gifted Brethren; Nor,

2. Brethren, being Canonical Drunkards, Swearers, Gamesters etc.

Answ. That any of them are such, it is to be bewailed, and in a Christian way
the persons that are guilty, are to be rebuked, Levit. 19.17. not to be thus
charged in Print, in a Book vented in the dark, tending not to amend them, but
to make them odious; even with them that are too much inclined to censuring and
reviling of those that dissent from them, or are of an opposite party. But how
it appears that the most of the present Ministers of England are such as he
stigmatizeth them, I know not; and I hope it is not true. However, if it were
so, it proves not that others better qualified might not be heard; nor that
these men may not bethren; yea, if he follow St. Paul's rule, 2 Thessalonians. 3.15.
alleged a little after, he is not to account them as enemies, but to admonish
them as Brethren: and were all this, and more true, yet they might be heard
preach the Gospel as Brethren Gifted, as Judas was to be heard, though declared
by Christ to be a Devil, Joh. 6.70. But what says he of the rest?

3. The best of them cannot by Saints, in respect of Gospel Communion, be so
accounted: For,

1. There was never any giving up of our selves each to other, according to the
Will of God and Primitive example, whence such a Brotherhood does result.

Answ. By [ Saints] I doubt not he means such as are members of a particular
Instituted Church Congregational, distinct from Parish Churches, either under
Episcopal or Presbyterial Government. For such only are accounted Saints by
him, as give up themselves each to other, according to the Will of God, and
Primitive example: and by [ Gospel Communion] no doubt he means hearing of them
preach, praying with them, receiving the Sacraments from them, or breaking
Bread in the Lords Supper with them, or submitting to them, or joining in
Ecclesiastical Discipline with them; which is in effect to make an utter
separation from them, as no members of a Christian Church. Now this assertion
shows not a dram of Christian Love, but very much antipathy in him, who denies
not p. 93. but that there are some amongst the present Preachers of this day,
that are good men: and methinks he should tremble to exclude such from Gospel
Communion here, from whose Company he would be loath to be excluded hereafter.
But he does not insanire sine ratione. He implies in his first reason, that
giving up of our selves each to other, (he means by Church Covenant in the
Congregational way) is according to the Will of God and Primitive example;
which is either explicitly or implicitly to engage themselves one to another,
to walk together, and to hold Communion in all Gospel Ordinances. I will not
say this is unlawful, nor at no time necessary; but that it is according to
Gods Will, by way of Institution for Church Communion, or according to any
Primitive example, I do not yet find. Gods Command for such a Church Covenant,
I remember not to have found alleged, nor Primitive example: besides, 2 Cor.
8.5. which is far from the purpose, the Macedonians giving their own selves to
the Lord, and then to Paul and Timothy by the Will of God; being no Covenant
between themselves to walk together in Christian Communion, but a free
addicting themselves to the Ministry to the poor Saints elsewhere in Judaea, by
making a Collection very liberally for them, and urging St. Paul and Timothy to
prosecute the Collection at Corinth, with offer of assistance of some of their
own to that end. And the assertion [ whence such a Brotherhood does result] is
groundless. For though some have made the Church Covenant the Form of a
particular Instituted Church, as Mr. Norton in his Answer to Apollonius, Chapter 2,
etc. and thence deduced the right to Communion, and the relation of
Brotherhood; yet the Scripture makes all who hold the same Faith and are
Baptized into Christ, to be Brethren and Members of all the Churches of the
World, Gal. 3.26, 27, 28, 29. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13. and 10.16, 17. Ephesians. 4.4, 5,
6. whence it follows, that the assertion of the resultance of Brotherhood in
respect of Gospel Communion from such giving up of themselves each to other, is
opposite to the unity of Christians; and does rather tend to make particular
Churches, particular Parties, than to advance the Communion of Saints in the
Catholic Church. Dr. Ames is more charitable, Trip. p. 523. I doubt not to say
(according to my conscience) that among those which live under the tyranny of
the Pope, and do not utterly separate from him through ignorance, there be many
Christians sincere, according to their knowledge, belonging to the true
Catholic Church, and so to be accounted our godly Brethren.

2. Says he, We cannot (as things stand) perform the duties of Brethren to
them, according to Mat. 18. nor will they, or can they in the state in which
they stand, to us.

Answ. This Reason depends upon many uncertainties, if no Errors; of which I
have said somewhat before, in Answer to the Preface, Sect. 15. in the Addition
to my Apology, Sect. 17. and much more is in Grot. Annot. in Mat. 18.15, 16,
17. Seldom de Syned. Ebrae. lib. 1 c. 9. where it is argued, that Mat. 18.17.
cannot be understood of such Ecclesiastical censure, as is now in use.
Certainly without all show of reason, the term [ Church] Mat. 18.17. is
restrained to a particular Instituted Church in the Congregational way, as the
Phrase is, and the term [ Brother] to one, that is a member of such a Church,
and to say, that men of the Principles with this Author concerning the
Independent Discipline, cannot (as things stand) perform the duties of Brethren
to the best of the present Ministers of England; whereof some are by him
confessed to be good men: according to Mat. 18. nor will they, or can they, in
the state in which they stand to them, is in effect to profess the same hatred,
or distance, as the Scripture notes to have been between the Jews and
Samaritans, Joh. 4.9. contrary to Christ's Doctrine in the Parable of the
wounded man, Luke 10.37. in that thereby is denied to one another the greatest
work of Mercy commanded, Levit. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thy
heart: thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon
him* But he goes on.

3. If we acknowledge the best of them for such, we must also acknowledge the
worst of them: For,

1. They are all members of the same Church.

2. Profess themselves to be one Brotherhood; so says their Rhyme upon the
Lords Prayer, Our Father which in Heaven art, And make us all one
Brotherhood, etc.

Answ. Gospel Communion is either private or public: There is private Gospel
Communion in private reproof, and I think (as bad as the worst of the present
Ministers of England be) they are to be accounted by real (though perhaps they
be not by Pharisaically minded reputed) Saints as Brethren in respect of Gospel
Communion. Even toward them is to be that exhortation, Gal. 6.1. Brethren, if
a man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in
the spirit of meekness; considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted, which
sure humble Saints do. There is private Gospel Communion in opening their minds
one to another, as it is said, Mal. 3.16. Then they that feared the Lord, spoke
often one to another: and this St. James requires, James 5.16. Confess your
faults one to another, and pray one for another that ye may be healed. Now
concerning this, it follows not, if we acknowledge the best of the present
Ministers of England as Brethren, in respect of Gospel Communion, we must also
acknowledge the worst of them. Public Gospel Communion may be in hearing them,
praying with him, praising God, receiving the Lords Supper, exercising with
them, or submitting to them in respect of Church Discipline. In some of these
at least, I know no sufficient reason, why the Saints may not account the worst
of the present Ministers of England as Brethren, in respect of Gospel
Communion. Judas might be heard as an Apostle, and if he were a Communicant at
the Lords Supper (as Mr. Seldens discourse in his first Book Chap. 9. de Syned.
Ebraeorum, seems to me to evince) there is warrant to receive the Lords Supper
with the worst of them. We find that those that made acclamation to Christ when
he rode into Jerusalem, were a mixed multitude of Disciples, Children, and such
as came to the Feast; though it is likely they were not Disciples, viz. those
Greeks that desired to see Jesus, as may be gathered by comparing Mat. 21.9,
15. Luke 19.37. Joh. 1.12, 20, 21. Yet our Lord Christ himself justified their
joining together in their praying and praising God, Mat. 21.16. Luke 19.39, 40.
Sure it can be no sin in any person to join in the true worship and service of
God with any, if he have no command to withdraw himself from that service
because of their presence, nor power to exclude them, and yet is bound to the
duties then performed. Believers might prophecy and hear it, though
Unbelievers came in, 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Christians are commanded to separate,
and not touch the unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. But those they are to separate
from, are no other than Unbelievers, and the unclean thing is the Idol, v. 15,
16. not the true service of God, because of the presence of some scandalous
Brother. The people of God are to come out of Babylon, Rev. 18 4. but that is
no other than Rome, and that because of its Idolatry, v. 2, 3. Rev. 17.2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 18. We are not to keep company with a man called a Brother, if he be a
Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer, or a Drunkard, or an
Extortioner, with such an one, no not to eat, 1 Cor. 5.11. But this prohibited
keeping Company, and eating can be meant of no other than arbitrary,
unnecessary society in civil things, and eating common Bread, because v. 10.
that keeping Company which is forbidden to such Brethren, is allowed in v. 9,
10. to the Fornicators of this world; which cannot be Gospel Communion, keeping
company in eating the Lords Supper, but civil eating. The Doctrine of defiling
our selves by the presence of wick^d men at the Lords Supper, has begotten so
much superstition in the minds of many well-affected people, that they can
scarce ever break Bread with comfort, no not in the best Instituted Churches;
there being seldom such an unspotted Congregation but that some or other is
known, or reported, or suspected to be guilty of some sin, or error, which is
made sufficient to exclude themselves from the Communion; so that as they use
to speak, they are not free to break Bread, and that before the fault be
examined, or the person judged upon trial to be guilty and impenitent; which
makes those very Churches, which by themselves are counted purest and best
Disciplined, to be full of Brawls, and rash censures and separations, and
without any regular Discipline of any long continuance. These things being
considered, I answer, that I know no evil in it, to account the worst of the
Ministers of England Brethren, in respect of Gospel Communion, (if not under
regular censure) in Hearing, Prayer, Praising of God, eating the Lords Supper,
nor evil to account them members of the same Church, and of one Brotherhood,
according to the Rhyme, which should not be derided by any holy, sober
Christians, being only the Lords Prayer in Meter. It follows.

Sect. 5. Tender Consciences may call the Bishops Reverend Fathers.
Nay, 3. We cannot so acknowledge them, but we must also acknowledge the
Bishops for our Reverend Fathers (for theirs they are) which how abhorring it
is to any tender enlightened soul, may easily be conjectured.

Answ. The Bishops are acknowledged by the present Ministers of the Church of
England, as their Reverend Fathers, in respect of their Ordination, but as
Brethren only in respect of Gospel Communion. Nor do I think the Bishops affect
the title of Reverend Fathers, as if they were superiors over the Ministers or
People, in respect of the common Faith, had dominion over their Faith, or were
Lords over Gods heritage, or would be called Masters or Fathers in that sense,
in which our Lord Christ appropriates these Titles to himself and his Father,
Mat. 23.8, 9, 10. in which sense I acknowledge any tender enlightened soul
should abhor to give it to them. I conceive they are far from usurping that
Title, as the Bishop of Rome does, who now has engrossed the Title of Pope,
that is Father heretofore given to other Ministers, even to Deacons; and does
claim the Prerogative to be the Ecumenical Bishop, and Universal Monarch, as
Christ's Vicar over the whole Church; as having power to make Laws binding the
Conscience out of the Case of Scandal and Contempt, to determine infallibly in
point of Faith; with much more, wherein he sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. But I conceive the Title of
Reverend Fathers is given to them, and taken by them in no such sense; but that
they account not only the Ministers, but also the meanest Christian, their
Brethren in Christ. Yet may they be called Reverend Fathers, not only in regard
of their Age, and their success in begetting others through the Gospel in
Christ Jesus, as the Apostle of himself, 1 Cor. 4.15. in which respect there
have been, and I presume some of them are rightly termed Fathers in Christ; but
also in respect of their Office and Dignity, according to that of the Apostle,
1 Timothy 5.1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat him as a Father. In which respects
usual Titles may be given, even to the unworthy, as St. Paul did, Acts 22.1.
and 26.25. and such compellations and salutations have been used by holy
persons, Genesis 42.10. Dan. 6.21. as warrantable; which Quakers, and tender
Consciences not enlightened, but darkened by prejudice and undue suggestions
abhor, as giving flattering Titles to men, disclaimed by Elihu, Job 32.22.
whose example and opinions are not imitable: nor does this Author any good
Office to any in such affrightments, whereby our Breach is widened, and our
Wound uncurable.

Sect 6. It is not proved that the best of the present Ministers are to be
separated from, as walking disorderly.
This Author goes on thus: But to hear this Plea speak its uttermost, let it be
granted they are Brethren, and may be so esteemed: They are Brethren that walk
disorderly, or they do not: That they walk disorderly cannot be denied by such
as pretend to Reformation, if submi^ting to Ordination, or Reordination by a
Lord Bishop, covenanting and protesting with detestation against a Reformation
according to the Scripture, and the best Reformed Churches, to own (as
consonant to Scripture) a Lyturgie or stinted Forms of Prayer in the Church,
and read them, to wear the Surplice, etc. be disorderly walking; they are (the
very best of them) beyond contradiction, to be reputed in the number of
disorderly Walkers. And so after due admonition (according to the Scripture)
and a perseverance in their sin, to be separated from, by virtue of positive
and express precepts of Christ, Mat. 18. 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. Now we command you,
Brethren, in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw your selves
from every Brother that walks disorderly, and not after the tradition he
received of us: with what vehemence, authority, and holy earnestness does the
Apostle press separation from Brethren that walk disorderly? We command you,
and we command you in the Name of the Lord Jesus; and we command you Brethren,
by virtue of our relation to each other, and that love and endearment that is
betwixt us as Brethren, that you withdraw your selves, etc. I scarce know any
one thing pressed by the Apostle with greater vehemence, than what is here
instanced in: wherein we have also an undeniable convincing Argument, that the
persons of whom we are treating, walk disorderly: Those that walk not after the
tradition received from the Apostles, (we may add, and from the Primitive
Church for above three hundred years after Christ, but according to the
traditions of the old Bawd and Strumpet of Rome) are such as walk disorderly:
But the present Ministers of England walk not after the tradition received from
the Apostles, but after the traditions of the Whorish Church of Rome: therefore
they are such as walk disorderly. What Apostolical tradition have we for
stinted Forms of Prayer, or Liturgies in the Church? did they frame any? (those
that are ascribed to some of them, are all spurious, as has been over and over
proved.) For Surplice, Crossing in Baptism, and many other Gewgaws used by
them? If they have any Apostolical written Tradition for these things, let them
produce it, and we shall lay our mouths in the dust, and for ever be silent, as
to a charge of this nature. If they have not (as there, is nothing more
certain) they are disorderly walkers, if the Apostles Argument be valid, We
command you to withdraw from such as walk disorderly. But who, I pray, are
these disorderly walkers? how shall we know them? they are (says the Apostle)
such as walk not after the tradition received from us.

Answ. Though it belongs to the persons charged here to speak for themselves,
and not to me, who am not chargeable with the accusation, as here it stands,
yet conceiving they would say the same in effect, which I shall say now, I do,
that the invalidity of this Authors arguing may appear, say thus much for them;
but chiefly for the truths sake.

I conceive they will deny, that they covenant and protest with detestation
against a Reformation according to the Scripture, and the best reformed
Churches, and would challenge this Author to prove it, that he may not be found
a Calumniator; that they would take on them the justifying of their submitting
to Ordination, or Reordination by a Lord Bishop, their owning (as consonant to
Scripture) a Liturgy or stinted Forms of Prayer in the Church, their reading
them, their wearing the Surplice, the Crossing in Baptism (they would say,
after Baptism) and deny these things to be disorderly walking, according to the
traditions of the old Bawd and Strumpe^ of Rome; and I doubt not but that they
would maintain it, that beyond contradiction they are not to be reputed in the
number of disorderly walkers, but that this Author is an egregious false
accuser. However, whether they be faulty or not, this I think I may safely
avouch, that these practices (except the first, which I assure my self they
will deny) whether justifiable, or sinful, are not of so great a degree of
pravity, as that barely for them they should be reputed in the number of
disorderly walkers, and so after due admonition (according to the Scripture)
and a perseverance in their practice, to be separated from, by virtue of
positive and express precepts of Christ, Mat. 18. 2 Thessalonians 3.6. either by a
separation of Saints from them in Gospel Communion, or private familiar
society. For the former precept Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. is only concerning such a
sin, whereby a person sins against his Brother; that is, does him some personal
injury. Which appears both by the constant use of the phrase of sinning against
another, in the New and Old Testament, as Acts 25.8. 1 Cor. 8.12. Genesis 20.9.
and 42.22. and 43.9. and 44. 1 Samuel 2.25. and 19.4, 5. and 24.11. and
particularly in the same Chapter, v. 21. Luke 17.3, 4. which were occasioned
from Christ's words, Mat. 18.15. where Christ commands Peter, and the rest of
his Disciples, to forgive their brother that sins against them seven times a
day, yea, seventy times seven times. Which can be understood of no other sins
than personal injuries; for these alone they were to forgive, as trespasses
against them, as the Parable, Mat. 18. shows v. 32.35. Mat. 6.12, 14, 15. of
which sort those practices imputed to the best of the present Ministers are
not. Yet, if they were, the separation is not to be made without an admonition,
and gradual process, which I think this Author has not used toward them, as I
conceive his own words evince a little before: we cannot (as things stand)
perform the duties of Brethren to them according to Mat. 18. If the sins were
such as Christ means, Mat. 18.15. and their proceeding according to the
direction there; yet the separation, whether enjoined, or permitted rather, is
no other than such as was by the Jews from Heathens and Publicans, which was
not from Communion in Holy things; for the Publicans were allowed to go to the
Temple to pray, even with the Pharisees, Luke 18.10, 11. though they would not
receive them, and eat with them, Luke 15.2. Acts 11.3. Which shows, that the
being to him that is injured as a Heathen and Publican, Mat. 18.17. is no other
than separation from eating and familiar reception; not from Gospel Communion,
as this Author would have it; and therefore the Text Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. is
impertinently alleged to prove his separation from the present Ministers of
England in respect of Gospel Communion.

Nor is 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. alleged more to the purpose. For 1. the disorderly
walking there must be understood of sins of greater pravity than the rest,
besides the first (which they will deny) charged on them (if they be proved
sins) as the vehemence, authority, and holy earnestness the Apostle does press
his command with, does evince. For this vehemence is not an undeniable
convincing argument, that the persons, of whom this Author is treating, walk
disorderly, as he fancies; but that they, that walk so disorderly, as the
Apostle here means, are so corrupt, and their walking so evil, that their
converse with them in a familiar society, as with others, would not be for
their safety, or credit, or the repute of Christianity. Which will the more
appear by the instance that is given, v. 11. where he says, For we hear that
there are some which walk among you disorderly, working not at all, but are
busybodies: which shows, that the walking disorderly, is not being in some
disorder about Church Government, and outward Rites, proper to Ministers (which
are the instances of disorderly walking here brought by this Author) but gross
sins of any Brother (not a Minister) who was bound to work, or else was not to
eat, v. 10. which Ministers were not bound to do, as v. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 2.6. 1 Timothy
5.17, 18. 1 Cor. 9.6, 7, 11, 12, 13, 14. shows; nor were they for this not
working so as not to earn their own Bread, to be noted or signified, and
declined, that they might be ashamed, as is required, v. 12.14. Gross sins then
common to every Brother, such as those 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. not those
practices charged on the present Ministers here by this Author, are meant by
disorderly walking, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. which is also confirmed by 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
where after the Apostle had beseeched them, v. 12, 13. to know them which
labored among them, and were over them in the Lord, and admonished them, and
to esteem them very highly for their works sake, (which shows he expected not
of them other works for the earning of their Bread, than their labor in the
Word and Doctrine) he adds, now we exhort you, Brethren, warn them that are
unruly; the same word which is, 2 Thessalonians. 3 6. translated disorderly, whom he
distinguishes from the feeble minded, and weak; and therefore is meant of
Brethren, who sinned openly and wilfully; and not of Ministers, who do yield to
that which is controverted even by learned and godly men, whether it be evil at
all; and if it be evil, its not of such a kind as the Apostle any where
censures, so as he does this disorderly walking; and its most likely is
practiced out of ignorance, error, fear, or other motive, which may befall an
holy, and upright man. Nor is there any force in this Authors reasoning, that
the practice of the Ministers must be disorderly walking, unless they can show
an Apostolical written Tradition for those things they practice.

For 1. it does not appear, that the Tradition 2 Thessalonians. 3 6. of the Apostle, is
any other than the command, v. 10. that if any would not work, he should not
eat, which is not improbable from the connection of the following verses with
this, which also makes it probable, that the disorderly walking, v. 6. is no
other than being idle, and busybodies; the Apostle acquitting himself from
behaving himself disorderly, v. 7. in that he wrought with his hands that he
might not be chargeable to any of them, v. 8. and then they need to bring no
other tradition to acquit themselves from disorderly walking, than their
laboring in the Word and Doctrine according to 1 Timothy 5.17, 18.

2. If the Tradition be further extended to those mentioned 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. It
will not be necessary that they may be acquitted from disorderly walking, that
they produce for themselves an Apostolical written Tradition for a Liturgy,
Surplice, or Crossing, they think it concerns him that accuses them as walking
disorderly in doing them, that he produce an Apostolical Tradition against the
use of them. For being (as they conceive) in themselves things indifferent,
they think it enough that there is no Apostolical precept forbidding them, and
then they have this Apostolical Tradition for them, Romans 4.15. where no Law is,
there is no Transgression. If it be replied in things that pertain to Gods
Worship, there must be an express Institution, or else the practice of it is
walking disorderly; besides what is said before in answer to the first Chapter,
Sect. 3. it may be retorted, where is your Apostolical written Tradition by
Institution for your Church Covenant, Infant Baptism, Election of Ministers by
most voices, excommunication of members in a Congregational Church by the major
part, with many more? To use your own words, if you have not (as there is
nothing more certain) you are disorderly Walkers, and to be separated from as
well as the present Ministers, if the Apostles argument be valid, We command
you to withdraw from such as walk disord^rly. But who, I pray, are these
disorderly Walkers? how shall we know them? they are (says the Apostle) such
as walk not after the tradition received from us. Eadem in te cudatur saba. As
much may be said of the Separatists, if by Apostolical Tradition be meant an
Institution for every thing used in Worship and Church Government.

3. This Authors Argument, if it proceed thus, Every one that has not a
written Apostolical Tradition for what he does, or that does otherwise than the
Apostles Tradition requires, walks disorderly, which is the force of his
reasoning, then every one that sins in any kind is a disorderly walker, for
sure he has no Apostolical Tradition for any sin; and then this Author, if he
be not a Perfectist, nor thinks himself excluded from the number of those of
whom it is said, James 3.2. In many things we offend all; and 1 John 1.8. If we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, must acknowledge himself a
disorderly walker, and to be separated from.

4. The present Ministers, I imagine, will be apt to allege for themselves,
that they have Apostolical written Tradition, even for those practices for
which they are accused as disorderly walkers, to wit, Romans 13.1. Heb. 13.17.
and be ready to recriminate this Author, and those of his mind, as disorderly
walkers, in separating from their Brethren, disobeying their Ministers, and
Governors, commanding things lawful, and to be separated from as practicing of
division.

To conclude this matter, Were it granted that the present Ministers of England
were disorderly walkers, and that they were to be withdrawn from, yet this does
not prove that they might not be heard as gifted Brethren, or that the best of
them cannot by Saints be accounted as Brethren in respect of Gospel Communion:
Partly, because the withdrawing themselves from every Brother that walks
disorderly, cannot be meant of exclusion of himself from hearing, praying, or
receiving the Lords Supper, if such a one be present; unless it be determined,
that every one must not only examine himself before he comes to the Lords
Supper, which the Apostle requires 1 Cor. 11.28. but also every Brother, even
his Minister with whom he is to join in Gospel Communion; yea, and has power
to excommunicate his Brother, or liberty, notwithstanding the Institution of
Christ, to exclude himself, which sure is no Apostolical Tradition, but a far
more disorderly walking, than most of those things, the practice whereof is
made by this Author the Ministers disorderly walking. Besides the injunction to
every Christian to withdraw himself, not to keep Company, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6, 14.
being expressions which note not acts imposed by Church Governors, but such as
they ought of their own accord to practice, are to be understood of such
familiar, private, arbitrary Communion in entertainments, and other societies,
as they are at liberty to do or not to do, or might do, were it not for this
consideration, not such Communion, as if they omit, they omit the Worship of
God, which he has appointed, and so break his Commandment. Partly also,
because if the withdrawing were upon public censure of the Community, yet it
must not be (according to their own rule) without a gradual proceeding of
endeavoring conviction, and precedent admonition, which being not done to the
present Ministers of England, to separate from them, even the best in hearing,
and other Gospel Communion is irregular, and unjustifiable. I go on to examine
what follows.

CHAP. 3. ARG. 3.
Sect. 1. That which is by some termed Antichristian, is not always unlawful.
THose that act in the Holy things of God by virtue of an Antichristian Power,
Office, or Calling, are not to be heard, but to be separated from: but the
present Ministers of England act in the Holy things of God, by virtue of an
Antichristian Power, Office, or Calling: Therefore. The major is evident. For,

1. The Power, Office, and Calling of Antichrist is opposite and contrary unto
the Power, Office, and Calling of Christ: not to separate from such as act by
virtue of such an Office-power, is to stand by, and plead for Antichrist
against Christ.

Answ. The ambiguity that is in the terms of this argument is that, which
makes this Argument seem to many well-meaning people to be of some force, which
will appear to be a mere fallacy, when the terms are clearly opened.
Concerning which, that which is chiefly to be explained is, who is the
Antichrist here meant, and what is meant by Antichristian, which has been so:
strangely abused, especially of late years, that every thing that has been
m^sliked by an opposite party, is branded with the name of Antichrist, and mark
of the Beast, and made a sufficient cause of utter separation from such as own
any thing so called and of almost Vatinian hatred. The word [ Antichrist] I
find not in any place in the Bible, but in the Epistles of St. John, 1 John
2.18. As ye have heard that Antichrist should come, even now are there many
Antichrists, whereby we know that it is the last time, v. 22. He is Antichrist
that denies the Father and the Son, chapter 4.3. And every Spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: and this is that
Spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come, and even now
already is it in the World, 2 John. 7. For many deceivers are entered into the
World, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a
deceiver and an Antichrist, or the Deceiver and the Antichrist. In which
passages I observe:

1. That Antichrist is described as a Deceiver, as one that opposes the grand
truth of the Gospel, and therefore the word in the Scripture use is not applied
to persecuting Princes and Emperors, as the great Turk, but to false Teachers.

2. That the opposition is by denying, not by making himself Christ, but by
denying Jesus to be the Christ; and therefore the term Antichrist is not one
that sets up himself as if he were Christ, they are expressed by another word [
Pseudo-Christs] Mat. 24.24. but one that is against Christ by teaching contrary
to him.

3. That the term Antichrist is applied to many false Teachers who were in St.
John's time.

4. That yet there was one Antichrist more notable than the rest to come into
the World. About whom has been variety of opinions of old, and of late much
controversy, whether he should be a single person, or a state or rank of
persons succeeding one after another: whether the Antichrist be already come,
or is yet to come: whether the Popes of Rome for some generations, have been
the Antichrist, or they and some other. The opinions of the Fathers were
various as conceiving of Antichrist by conjectures, after the Popes of Rome
began to be so haughty, as to usurp dominion over Emperors and Kings, and to
be tyrannous in cruel persecutions of them that opposed the Papal corruptions,
many pious and learned men stuck not to stigmatize the Popes of Rome as
Antichrists: and since the Reformation begun by Luther, it has been the common
tenent of Protestants, that the later Popes of Rome have been the man of sin
foretold 2 Thessalonians. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. the City of Rome, the Whore of
Babylon; and the Papacy, or Popes, the Beast, described Rev. 17. which is taken
for a Prophecy of Antichrist. And though some have endeavored to apply these
Prophesies to Caligula, Simon Magus, Domitian, Mahomet, the Turkish Sultans;
yet generally not only the French and German Protestants, but also the English,
the most esteemed for learning even of the Order of Prelates, such as Downham,
Robert Abbot, Usher, Bedel, Prideaux, together with King James, and his
Defendant Andrews, and many more have applied the Prophesies in the Revelation,
and 2 Thessalonians. 2. to the Roman Popes, as the Antichrist that was to come. Whence
every thing that is retained in the Protestant Churches, not taught or
exemplified in the Scriptures, according to the use of the Church of Rome, is
usually termed Antichristian, as coming from Rome, and the mark and image of
the Beast, in which sense I conceive this Author uses the term Antichristian,
as being against Christ, and by power Antichristian, he means Authority, and
Rule Prelatical; by Office-Antichristian, the Office of Preaching, reading the
Common Prayer, Administration of Sacraments, and Discipline according to the
Church of England; by Calling Antichristian, he means Ordination by a Bishop.
Now out of this may be gathered an answer to the Argument. If by Antichristian
Power, Office, and Calling, be meant the Papal Power, Office, and Calling, and
the acting in Holy things be by preaching the Doctrine of the Trent Council, in
the points determined therein against Protestants, by administering Sacraments
according to the Roman Missal; and Discipline according to the Canon Law of the
Popes, in which Papal power is established, the major is granted and the minor
denied. For though I deny not that a person Ordained by a Popish Bishop, if he
forsake Popish Doctrine, and preach the Truth taught by Protestants, may be
heard preach the Gospel, though he do not renounce his Ordination, yet while he
holds that Doctrine, he is not to be heard as being an Antichristian Deceiver.
But if by an Antichristian Power, Office, or Calling, be meant by virtue of
Ministry, according to the Liturgy, Articles of Religion and Homilies of the
Church of England, from the Ordination and License of the Bishops, (which this
Author terms Antichristian) the major is denied; and to the Arguments to prove
it, I answer, that that which he calls Antichristian, is not truly such, but
only miscalled such by him; and therefore till he proves that Power-Office and
Calling which he calls such, and means in his major proposition is such: his
major is denied, and it is denied, that what he calls Antichristian, is
opposite and contrary to the Power, Office, and Calling of Christ; or not to
separate from such as act by virtue of such an Office power, is to stand by,
and plead for Antichrist against Christ, until he proves such acting to be
really so. And this answer might suffice to invalidate all the other Arguments
he brings for his major, they all moving upon this unproved Supposition, That
what he calls Antichristian, and standing by and pleading for Antichrist, is in
truth such. But because there are some things to be examined in the other
Arguments also, I shall survey them also.

2. Says he, It Is unlawful to attend upon the teachings of Antichrist,
therefore upon the teachings of such as act by virtue of a power derived from
him.

Answ. If by teachings of Antichrist, be meant, the teachings of the present
Doctrine of the Church of Rome, according to the Trent Council, wherein they
dissent from Protestants; and the power derived from him, be meant, of the
English Bishops Ordination; it is denied, that the Preachers of England derive
their power from Antichrist, Pope or Church of Rome, and I say, that it is mere
impudency to say they do, who renounce the Popes authority by solemn Oath, and
separate from the Church of Rome, and are persecuted, condemned, and put to
death, where the Pope has power, even because they disclaim the Pope and his
Doctrine. Yet if any should act, by virtue of Ordination from the Pope (as
doubtless many did before the Reformation, such as Wickliffe, and many others)
and yet not teach his Doctrine, he might be heard teaching the Gospel, and in
such a case the consequence were not valid; and therefore in this sense it may
be denied, that because it is unlawful to attend upon the teachings of
Antichrist, therefore upon the teachings of such as act by virtue of a power
derived from him.

3. Says he, Christ calls and solemnly charges his, upon the penalty of most
dreadful Judgments, to separate from every thing of Antichrist, Rev. 18.4. and
14.9, 10, 11.

Answ. It is true, Rev. 18.4. we read thus, And I heard another voice from
heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her
sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Which may be understood of a
local departure from Babylon, or Rome, when her judgment of Destruction from
the Kings of the earth draws nigh: but if it be extended further, to a
departure by forsaking communion with her in Worship, and leaving the
subjection which was yielded to her in her Government; yet is it not understood
of every Doctrine the Pope teaches; not of the Bible or Apostles Creed, or any
Doctrine or Service agreeable to these; nor of relinquishing every Rite and
Usage, though undue and illegitimate, which is observed by them; but the
Fornication, that is, Idolatry, Heresy and other wickedness mentioned, v. 3.
Chap. 17.2. Revel. 14.9, 10. it is said, If any man worship the Beast and his
image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall
drink of the wine of the wrath of God. By the Beast and his image are meant,
some Empire or State which promotes Idolatry: Some conceive it meant of the
Pagan Emperors: Others, and those both more and more accurate Commentators
among the Protestants, understand by them, the Roman Papacy, and Latin Empire;
the worshipping of which is undoubtedly the acknowledging of its power, and
subjection to their Idolatrous Decrees and Edicts. The receiving his mark in
the forehead or the hand, is, allusively to the use of marking Slaves in the
forehead, and Soldiers in the hand, to profess themselves servants to the
Popes, and ready to fight for them; which Mr. Brightman makes to be in the
Roman Clergy their indelible character in Ordination; in the Emperors their
Oath of Protection of the Popes; in the Common people their assuming the names
of Papists and Roman Catholics. Mr. Mede more exactly in his Comment on Rev.
13.18. thus, To receive the mark of the name of the Beast, is to subject
himself to his authority, and to acknowledge him to be his Lord; but to receive
the number, is to embrace his impiety, derived unto him from the Dragon, to
wit, the Idolatry of the Latins: whence that happily will not be unworthy
consideration; although no man can receive the mark of the name of the Beast,
or be subject to his authority, but together also he must receive his number,
that is, be must needs be Partaker of his impiety: yet it may be, that one may
admit the number or impiety of the Beast, but yet refuse the mark or name. That
which now long since is true of the Greeks, which does evince, that the worship
of the Beast and his Image, and receiving his mark in his forehead or in his
hand, is not retaining of every usage of the Papists, no not though it be
Corrupt and Superstitious, as many zealous persons against Popery, but
superficially viewing the text conceive, much less such customs as are not
superstitious in their use; but acknowledging the universal Monarchy of the
Popes, and adoring Images, the Host, Relics, Crosses, invocations of Saints,
and such like impieties, which the present Ministers of England do profess to
abhor; and therefore it is without cause, that they are charged with receiving
the ma^k of the Beast; and people are affrighted with the penalty of the
dreadful Judgments, Rev. 14.10. unless they separate from them and their
Ministry as a thing of Antichrist.

4. Says he, There is not a command in the Scripture enioyning Saints to take
heed of being deceived, to try the Spirits, because many Antichrists are gone
abroad into the World: but is an abundant demonstration of the truth of this
Assertion.

Answ. I grant it, if the Assertion were, they that act in the holy things, as
acknowledging the Power, teaching the Doctrine, owning the Calling of him that
is truly Antichrist, are not to be heard, but to be separated from: But being
understood of other things, which the Separatists call Antichristian, it is not
true, nor proved by the commands in Scripture, which forbid only to reject
Antichristian Doctrine and Worship, not every thing said by any without proof to
be a thing of Antichrist. The Baptism given in Popery, is not by all
Separatists rejected as Antichristian; there is less reason to call the
Ministry of England a thing of Antichrist.

5. Says he, The institution of Officers of his own, by Christ, to be
continued in the way appointed by him to the end of the World, Ephesians. 4.11.

Answ. It is true, that Christ when he went up into heaven gave gifts to men;
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and
Teachers, and that some of these are to be continued to the end of the World,
and in that way he has appointed: But that there is any particular way of
Election, Ordination and Mission of ordinary Pastors and Teachers in those
words appears not; nor how the major is proved, those that act in the holy
things of God by virtue of an Antichristian (so called, not proved) Power,
Office, or Calling, are not to be heard, but separated from, I discern not,
unless this be the Argument, Christ has appointed these, therefore no other
are to be heard, but to be separated from, which overthrows the hearing of, and
communion with gifted Brethren (whom he would have heard) for they are no
Officers of Christ's institution.

6. Says he, That there is not one promise of a blessing in the whole
Scripture, upon persons attending on such a Ministry, with innumerable things
of the like tendency and import, that might be produced if needful, are such a
basis upon which the truth of the major proposition stands, as cannot be easily
shaken or removed.

Answ. Though there be no one promise of a blessing in the whole Scripture,
upon persons attending on such a Ministry, as theirs is that act in the holy
things of God, by virtue of an Antichristian Power, Office, or Calling, whether
real or supposed as such; yet if any, that so acts, as suppose a Dominican
Friar, or Jesuit in the Indies do Preach the Gospel truly, there is a blessing
promised in Scripture, upon persons attending on such a Ministry, Christ having
said, Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the Word of God, and keep it; yet
were there no promise of blessing, the major is not proved, unless this were
true, they are not to be heard, but to be separated from, to whose Ministry, as
such a blessing is not promised; which makes unlawful the hearing of gifted
Brethren, unless they can produce such a promise; yea, every action indifferent
should be unlawful, unless it have a blessing promised to it. What more he can
say for his major, yet rests in his breast, and so needs no answer till it be
produced. I hasten to the proof of his minor.

Sect. 2. The names given to the Ministers of England, prove not their Office
not to be from Christ.
The minor (says he) wants not sufficient demonstration. First, the present
Ministers of England, are either from Christ, or from Antichrist. There is no
medium (a Linsey-woolsey-Ministry, that is partly of Christ, partly of
Antichrist, as it is not to be proved by Scripture, so will it not be abetted)
That they are not from Christ, has in part been proved already, and may
further be evinced.

1. Their names are foreign to the Scripture: where read we of Deacons in
their sense, Priests as distinguished from Christians, in the New Testament,
Deans, Cannons, Petty-Cannons, Prebendaries, Archdeacons, Lord Bishops,
Parsons, Vicars? etc. these are only found in the Popes Pontifical, whence they
are derived.

Answ. It has been abetted by Mr Bradshaw in his Answer to Francis Johnson his
second reason against hearing the Ministers of the Church Assemblies of England
(whose Arguments this Author has revived, though answered long since by Mr.
William Bradshaw, and the answers vindicated by Mr. Thomas Gataker, from Mr.
Cans reply) that there is a medium, and that a Ministry may be from Christ in
respect of the thing Ministered, though from Antichrist in respect of the way of
entry into it; yea, he says, It is not necessary, that the Ministry of Priests
and Deacons, though ordained by Antichrist himself, should be the Ministry of
his Apostasy: but notwithstanding his Ordination, their Ministry may be the
Ministry of Jesus Christ as was the Ministry of Luther, Huss, Wickliffe, and
others. I add, that if by being from Christ or Antichrist, be understood of
outward calling (as this Author seems to mean) Ministers may be neither from
Christ nor Antichrist, and yet true Ministers, as those that Preached Christ
even of envy and strife; yet St. Paul says, Philip. 1.15, 18. Notwithstanding
every way, whether in pretense, or truth, Christ is Preached, and I therein do
rejoice, yea and will rejoice.

But let us consider his proofs, that the present Ministers of England are not
from Christ.

To the first I answer, that the term Priests as distinguished from all
Christians in the sense used by the Convocation of the Church of England, is
the same with Presbyters, as appears by the Latin translation of the 39
Articles of the Church of England, Art. 32.36. extant by it self, and in the
Corpus and Syntagma confessionum of the Protestant Churches, and the Letters of
Orders under the seals of Bishops in Latin, and this is sure found in
Scripture, Act. 11.30, etc. The other names note not any Ministry different
from the Ministry of Christ, but are used to signify some difference in their
maintenance, or places, which may be annexed to them, and yet their Ministry
from Christ. If this Authors reason were good, the names are foreign to the
Scripture, therefore the things; it would follow, that Congregational Churches
are foreign to Scripture, Lecturers, Sacraments, Ruling Elders, Itinerant
Preachers, etc. because their names are not there. But this Author adds,

So are 2. Their Officers: Deacons attending tables we read of, but Deacons
Praying, Preaching, Administering Sacraments (so called) by virtue of an
Office-power, an order of the first step to the Priesthood, we find not.
Priests in the Old Testament (both true and false) we read of: In the New,
Saints are so called,

1. In respect of Analogy to the ritual Priest of old, whose prerogative it
was to come near to God, Deuteronomy. 21.5* to whom through Christ, Saints have access
with boldness, Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.19. James 4.8.

2. In respect of their union and engrafture into Christ, the great High Priest
over the house of God.

3. In respect of that analogy there is betwixt what Christ has done for them
as Priest, and by his Spirit works in them: He offered up Sacrifice; so do
they, Psalm. 116.17. and 141.2. Romans 12.1. Heb. 13.14. He was crucified, died;
so are they, Romans 6.6, 7, 8, etc. Gal. 2.20.

4. As Priests, they are anointed to the participation of, do thereby attain
to, a kind of holy and intimate communion with Christ in all his glorious
Offices, Rev. 5.10. But an office of Priesthood in men for the Ministry of the
Gospel, that are to be branded by men in that their Office, must Preach what
they would have them, and cease when they would have them (as is the case of
the present Ministry of England) the Scripture is a stranger to.

Answ. Though the present Ministers of England, men are to hear, be more than
Deacons; yet this may be said, that if it be supposed, that the Office of a
Deacon be not now to attend Tables, as the first seven Deacons were, Act. 6.2.
yet according to the book of Ordination, it is his Office, where provision is
so made, to search for the sick, poor and impotent people of the Parish, to
intimate their Estates, Names, and places where they dwell, unto the Curate,
that by his Exhortation, they may be relieved with the alms of the
Parishioners or others. If they be appointment to Pray, Preach, and Administer
the Sacraments, they have this to plead, that Philip the Deacon did both Preach
and Baptize, Act. 8.5, 12, 38. that St. Paul requires of the Deacons, 1 Timothy
3.9. That they hold the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience, and v. 13.
They that have used the Office of a Deacon well, purchase to themselves a good
degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus, and therefore
may the Deacons Office be well conceived the first step to the Priesthood, that
is, the Office of a Presbyter. As for the word Priest, as it answers to (...)
in the New Testament; if the Saints, as Saints, may be termed Priests, then may
the Elders, or the best of them surely be called Priests; yea, and that in a
special manner, as in respect of their Office drawing near to God, engaged to
offer spiritual sacrifices of Prayer and Praise, which the Apostles conceived
to belong to them in special manner, together with the Ministry of the Word,
Acts 6.4. and 13.21. yea the Apostle Paul Romans 15.16. uses this expression,
that this grace was given to him of God, that he should be (...) (the word
applied to Christ as a Priest, Heb. 8.2. and joined with Sacrifice, Phil.
2.17.) the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, (...) ministering as a
Priest the Gospel of God, that the offering, or sacrificing of the Gentiles
might be acceptable; and therefore in respect of his Office, he might have been
called (...), a Priest, though not properly, yet allusively; and so may
Ministers now, as the Christian Church is called the Temple of God, the Israel
of God, the heavenly Jerusalem, etc. And if, as some conceive, the word Priest
be derived from the Greek (...), or (...), it may be judged the fitter word
than Minister, which is more apposite to signify a Deacon, than an Elder.
Seldom de Syned, vet. ^braeo. l. 1. c. 14. p. 583. Vocem nostram Priest, and
Teutonum Belgarumque Priester, uti and Gallorum Prebstre and Prestre, and
Italorum Prets a Presbytero deformatam nemo puto non concedit. p. 585. Nec
pueruli nesciunt voces istas, Seniorem, Priest, Presbyterum, Elder, ex sui tam
natura Usuque primario and significatione apertissima non magis differ, quam
(...) and consulem, (...) and principem, (...) and Regem, aut quae alia sic
invicem omnino eadem sunt.

As for that which is added, that the present Ministry of England, is bounded
by men in their Office, so as that they must Preach what they would have them,
and cease when they would have them: I think it is not without example in the
best ordered Churches. I do conceive that in the Churches of the Separatists,
they would tie their Ministers to Preach according to their Confession, and
that if any taught otherwise than according to the declaration of the Faith,
and Order of the Congregational Churches, in their meeting at the Savoy, October.
12. 1658. they would restrain him, or withdraw from him. Sure the Apostle would
have Timothy to abide at Ephesus, that he might charge some that they teach no
other Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.3. and Titus to reject an Heretic, Tit. 3.10. and 1
Cor. 14.30. If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first
hold his peace, v. 28. If there be no Interpreter, let him keep silence in the
Church. Which is sufficient proof, that even those that are Gifted
extraordinarily, may be bounded by Order; and they that teach otherwise than
they should, may be silenced. Which if the Prelates, or others do, when they
should not, they are accountable to Christ, who will judge them for it: But it
is no proof, that their Ministry is not from Christ, who submit to the commands
of men, that have power over them, forbidding them to teach some truths, and
forbearing to teach, when it cannot be with safety and fruit to the Church of
God, themselves, and them which are without. It is added:

So is it 3. to their admission into this their office, viz. by a Lord-Bishop
without the consent of the Congregation, in which they are as Officers.

Answ. In the Answer to the second Chapter of this writing, Sest. 3. has been
showed, that the praeelection or consent of the Congregation in which a
Minister is to act as an Officer, is not so necessary to his Office, or to the
communion with him in it, but that he may be owned, and act lawfully as their
Minister in some cases without it. The admission of the present Ministers of
England has not always been by Lord Bishops; some have been made by Suffragan
Bishops, not Lords, and instituted, I think, by Dean and Chapter, and if
ordained or instituted by a Lord Bishop, yet not as Lord, but as Bishop, which
is not always without the election of the Congregation, who are in some
Parishes Patrons; and in others there is supposed in Law, an implicit consent
in their Ancestors, yielding that power to the Patron to present, and an after
consent by receiving him that is instituted as their Minister. In some
Peculiars and Donatives, there is no institution from a Lord Bishop required,
nor always any other than a License to preach from the Bishop. But whether
these usages be right or wrong, notwithstanding them, yet may the Offices of
the present Ministers of England be from Christ, though this Author further
argue to the contrary, thus.

Sect. 3. The term Priest proves not symbolizing with the Popish Order of
Priests.
The very truth is, both in their Names, Office, and Admission thereunto, the
present Ministers of England symbolize not with the Ministers of Christ, but
the Popish Order of Priests: (so that if these do Act by virtue of an
Antichristian Office-power, then do they) as he that runs may read in the
ensuing paralled particulars.

1. They are both called, and own themselves Priests; which though some may
make light of light of, yet considering that it is a term borrowed, either from
the Priests of the Law, the assertion of such a Priesthood, being a denial of
Christ come in the flesh: or from the Priests of the Heathen (in conformity to
whom, as the Druides of old, our Priests wear their white Garment or Surplice)
or from the Antichristian Church (so called) of Rome: such Idolatrous
Superstitious names, being commanded by the Lord to be abolished, Hos. 2.15.
Z^ch. 13.2. wants not it is sufficient weight; the retention whereof, being also
a sore suspicion of too great a compliance with, if not a willingness to return
to that from whence they are derived. Of the same mind with us herein is Hierom
upon the 2. of Hosea, the Hebrew Doctors, Kimchi and Aben-Ezra, the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Ribera ( though a Jesuit) Zanchi, Danaeus, Sanchius, Polanus,
River, and almost all that write upon the said Scripture. The last mentioned,
viz. Learned Rivet, has these words in his Corollaries from Hos. 2.15, 16.
There are many names which in themselves are good enough, and might be used,
but God abhors the use of them, because they have been abused to Idolatry;
he instanceth indeed in the word M^ss: but Priest or Altar being of the same
a^^ay, upon the same foot of account, is to be rejected. The reformed Churches
in Helvetia, in their Harmony of Confessions, are of the same mind, The
Ministry (say they) and the Priesthood are things far different the one from
the other -- he himself (viz. Christ) remains only Priest for ever; and we do
not communicate the name Priest to any Minister, least we should detract
something from Christ.

Answ. Every one, says Mr. Seldom de Syn. Ebrae. l. 1. c. 14. p. 583. yields,
that our English word Priest, and the Dutch Priester, and the French Prebstre,
and Prestre, and the Italian Prete, to be formed from Presbyter. Seldom de Syn
Ebrae. l. 1. c. 14 p. 586* Certa in Ritualibus Anglicanis nostris Priests and
Ministers pro Presbyteris clim semper usurpata. And, besides what I said before
out of the English 39 Articles, and letters of Orders, it does appear from the
very words of the Master of the Sentences, Peter Lombard; cited by this Author
in this Chapter, page 26. out of the Fourth Book of the Sentences, distinct.
24. divis. 9. that the same whom the Papists call Priests, they call
Presbyters; and say, that they have the precept of the Apostle for them, and
that the Order of Priesthood, or Presbytery, the primitive Church had; and
therefore in this the Papists themselves use the word Priest in English, but as
the same with Presbyter or Elder, from the Scripture or primitive Church; not
from either Jews or Heathens, and therefore symbolizing in this name with the
Papists, if men had not mistaken it, and clamourously and ignorantly inveighed
against it; had given no cause of suspicion of compliance, or willingness to
return to the Idolatry of the Mass, as it is used in the Church of England, who
have declared against Transubstantiation, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, in the
Articles 28.31. in the Liturgy, as it has been lately revised, and to which
assent is required by all Ministers; besides other ways, as amply as any other
Protestant Church, and therefore it is very evil, that this Author does
insinuate into the minds of men such a suspicion of the willingness of the
present Ministers to return to Popery, because of retaining the name Priest,
which neither came from the Antichristian Church (so called) of Rome, nor is an
Idolatrous Superstitious name commanded by the Lord to be abolished, Hos. 2.15.
Zech. 13.2. This of Zech. 13.2. is not a command, but a promise, that God would
cut of the names of the Idols out of the Land, and that they shall be no more
remembered, which if it imply a command; yet it is but of the abolition of the
names of Idols, not of the name of Priests, whom I never found to be reckoned
amongst Idols; or that the name Priest is the name of an Idol. The other text,
Hos. 2.16, 17. is thus* And it shall be at that day, says the Lord, that thou
shall call me Ashi, and shall call me no more Baali. For I will take away the
names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall be no more remembered by their
name; which is a Prediction of what should be, rather than a Prohibition; and
the reason of that Prediction seems to be this, God would not be called Baali,
that is, my Lord, because that word noted a Husband as commanding, or dealing
hardly or rigorously with his Wife; but Ishi, according to the first notation
of Ishah, Genesis 2.23. one from whom the Wife comes as bone of his bone, and
flesh of his flesh; and therefore is bespoken as a kind and gentle Husband,
which the words, v. 14, 19, 20. lead to. But if the reason of the not calling
God Baali, be as Grotius in his Annot: Although Baal in common use signify an
Husband, she shall not dare to use that name, out of horror of that name,
which has been imposed on an Idol: it may seem, that the reason of not using,
should be not the unlawfulfulness of bespeaking God by that name, according to
the proper and original meaning; but lest either she should in thought remember
the Idol, or be thought by others to continue that Idolatrous name: For the
words are not, thou shall not use the words at all thy Husband among men; but,
thou shall not call me Baali, that is, in thy Prayers and Confessions of me as
thy God. But if it be understood as a Prohibition, according to the Law Exodus
23.13. which I will not deny the 17. v. [For I will take away the names of
Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall be no more remembered by their name.] to
import, it cannot be conceived, that it forbids any more than the use of those
names with honor, or so as to trust in them, as their worshipers did, when
they applied them to their Idols, as Psalm. 16.4. is meant, when the Psalmist
says, He would not take up the names of their gods within his lips; that is,
as Hos. 14.3. Neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, ye are our
gods. Which sense the words before lead to, that they should not any more
prepare their silver or gold for Baal, as v. 8. and, as in the days of Baalim,
wherein she burnt Incense to them, and she decked her self with her earrings,
and her jewels, and she went after her lovers, and forgot me says the Lord, v.
13. By which name of Baalim, was meant the Sun and other Planets, as may be
proved out of holy Scripture, and is showed by Mr. Seldom in his Syntagma de
Diis Syris. So that the forbidding the name of Baal, or Baalim, does not appear
to be any more than the using of these names, as applied to Idols, with
approbation of the Idolatrous Worship done to them, or giving occasion in
applying the name to God, to conceive, as if he were like the Idols, or allowed
their Worship, even as the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.3. forbids any naming of
fornication, uncleanness, or covetousness, with any show of liking. For that
the Prophet meant not to prohibit the name of Baal to be given at all to God,
much less by a Woman to her Husband, or Lord, as the word did originally
signify, may be gathered from that, Isa. 54.5. (who prophesied about the same
time with Hosea) where what we render [ thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of
Hosts is his name] is in the Hebrew, thy Baal, or Baalim in the plural number:
and Nahum after him, Nahum 1.2. (...) the Baal of wrath, that is, who is a Lord
of wrath; by our Translatours rendered furious, and by God himself after him, as
we now read, Jer. 31.32. I was a Husband unto them, is in Hebrew, I was a Baal
to them, says the Lord. Yea* were the prohibition such, as that we might not
give the names given to Idols to God, we might not give God the title of Melec
or King, because the Idol of the Ammonites was called Molech, Milchom, or
Malcham, that is their King, Zeph. 1.5. nor call God Jehovah, because the
Gentiles termed their God Jove, or Jah, because they termed their God Jacchus,
or Helion the High one, because they termed the Sun Helios, or Adonai, because
of Adonis, all which to have been used in imitation of, and derivation from
these names of God is showed in that imperfect relic of Mr. Hugh Stanford in
the first Book of Mr. Parker, De descensu ad inferos, in Fullers Miscel. l. 2.
c. 6. Dr. Hammond Annot. on Psalm. 68.4. in Mr. Seldom De Diis Syris syntag 2.
c. 1. in Heinsius his Aristarchus sacer on Nonnus, c. 1. If Names abused to
Idolatry or Superstition, might not be used without such abuse, the godly might
not say, as Isa. 63.16. Doubtless thou art our Father, or we cry Abba Father,
or Our Father, or Christ Father; because Idolaters said to a stock, thou art my
Father, Jer. 2.27. or say to the Lord, thou art our God, because Idolaters
said, our Gods, Hos. 14.3. nor Christ be termed a Priest, Lord, Master, because
of the abuse of them to Saints deceased, Popes, Rabbis, or others. Surely the
name Priest being the name of no Idol, it cannot be proved from Zech. 13.2.
Hos. 2.16, 17. that it is commanded by the Lord to be abolished. Nor do I think
any of his Authors say it. Hieroms words are; Though it might well be spoken in
respect of the signification of the word, which signifies in common
application, an Husband as well as Ish; yet I so hate the name of Idols, that I
will not have it said Baali, but Ishi; in ^espect of the ambiguity and likeness
of speech, lest while a man speaks one thing he mind another, and mentioning an
Husband he mean an Idol. What the Hebrew Doctors, and others named by this
Author, say upon this place of Hosea, I cannot examine for want of the Books.
That which he produces out of Rivet, I assent to. That which this Author
says, that Priest or Altar are of the same allay with the word Mass, and is
upon the same foot of account to be rejected, is not true; since Mass does
usually signify not only the Service, but also the consecrated Host, as the
chief thing in it, which is an Idol, and so is not the name Priest. In the
Helvetian larger Confession, chapter 18. it is true they make a difference between
the Ministry now, and the Priesthood in the Old Testament; and it is true, that
they assert Christ's Priesthood as for ever and incommunicable; and therefore
give not the name of Sacerdos, usually translated Priest, to their Ministers;
not because they take the word Priest, as it answers to Presbyter to be evil,
in the sense used in the Church of England, as a Degree or Order above Deacons;
but as it is used in the Church of Rome, as their words show, which are these.
For our Lord himself ordained not any Priests in the Church of the New
Testament, which having received a power from a Suffragan, might offer daily
the Host, I say the very flesh and very blood of the Lord for the quick and
dead, but such as should teach and administer Sacraments. This Author proceeds
in his paralellism thus:

Sect. 4. The parallel particulars prove not the English Ministers symbolizing
in office with Popish Priests.
2. The Priests of Rome must be first Deacons ere they are Priests; so must the
present Ministers of England.

3. The Priests of Rome must be Ordained to their Office by a Lord Bishop or
his Suffragan: so must the Ministers of England.

4. The Priests of Rome must at their Ordination, be presented by an
Archdeacon, or his Deputy, with these Words, Reverend Father, etc. Reverend
Father, I present these men unto thee, to be admitted unto the Order of
Priesthood: so are the present Ministers of England.

5. The Priests of Rome must be Ordained to their Office according to their
Pontifical, devised by themselves: the Priests of England, according to their
Book of Ordering Priests and Deacons (which is taken out of the Popes
Pontifical) as is evident to any that shall compare the one with the other, and
as has been long since confessed by themselves in an Admonition to the
Parliament in Q Elizabeth's days, in their second Treatise.

6. The Popish Priests must kneel down upon their knees at the feet of the Lord
Bishop that Ordains them, and he must say to them, blasphemously enough,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remit or forgive, they are remitted;
whose sins ye retain, they are retained: which exactly accords with the fashion
of Ordaining the Priests of England.

7. The Popish Priests are not Ordained in and before the Congregation to whom
they are to be Priests, but in some Metropolitan, Cathedral City, several miles
from the place: so are the Priests of England.

8. The Popish Priests take the care of souls, though not elected by them, from
the presentation of a Patron, by the Institution and Induction of a Lord
Bishop: and do not the present Ministers of England the same?

9. The Popish Priests wait not the Churches Call to the Ministry, but make
suit to some Prelate to be Ordained Priests, giving money for their Letters of
Ordination: so do the present Ministers of England.

10. The Popish Priests are Ordained to their Office, though they have no flock
to attend upon: so are the Priests of England.

11. The Popish Priests must swear Canonical Obedience to their Ordinary: so do
the present Ministers of England.

12. The Popish Priests may at their pleasure, without the consent of the
People, resign and give over their Benefices, and betake themselves to some
other of greater value: A symmetrie with them herein is visible by the frequent
practice of the Ministers of England.

13. The Popish Priests, though Ordained to preach, must have special license
from the Prelates so ^o do: so must the Priests of England.

14. The Popish Priests are subject to be silenced, suspended, deprived, and
degraded by the Prelates: as are the present Ministers of England.

15. The Popish Priests are not of like and equal power, degree and Authority
amongst themselves, but are some of them inferior to others herein; as Parsons
to Archdeacons, Archdeacons to Lord Bishops, Lord Bishops to Archbishops: so
the Priests of England.

16. The Popish Priests must be distinguished from other people by their
Vestments, as Surplice, Tippet, etc. so must the Priests of England.

17. The Popish Priests are tied to a Book of stinted Prayers, and a prescript
Order devised by man, for their Worship and Administration: so are the
Ministers of England, and that to such an one as is taken out of the Popes
Portuis, as has been proved by diverse. That the Common Prayer Book in Edward
the sixth his time was so, you have his, with his Councils Testimony for it:
thus they write, As for the Service in the English Tongue, it has manifest
Reasons for it; and yet perchance it seems to you a New Service; and indeed
is no other but the Old, the same words in English which were in Latin. If the
Service of the Church were good in Latin, it is good in English. How little
different the Common Prayer Book now in use, is thereunto they that will take
pains to compare the one with the other, may be satisfied. To these parallel
particulars might be added sundry more, wherein there is an exact symmetrie
betwixt the Popish Priests and the present Ministers of England, but ex ungue
Leonem. The sum of what we have been offering in this matter, is this. First
those Ministers that in their Names, Offices, Admission into their Offices, are
not to be found in the Scripture, are not Ministers of Christ, act not by
virtue of an Authority, Office, Power, Calling, received from him. Secondly,
Those Ministers that in their Names, Office, Admission into their Office, are
at a perfect agreement with the Ministers of Antichrist (such are the Popish
Priests acknowledged to be by those with whom we have to do) are not the
Ministers of Christ, have not received any Power, Office, or Calling, from him
to act in the holy things of God: But such (as has been abundantly
demonstrated) are the present Ministers of England: therefore these have
received no Power, Office, or Calling from Christ, and so are Antichristian.
Quod erat demonstrandum.

Answ. Of these particulars the three first are granted, and avouched as not
Popish, but justifiable and agreeable to Orthodox antiquity.

To the fifth, I return the same answer that Archbishop Whitgift gave. Surely
if those things which were good in the Popes Pontifical, and either contained
in the Scripture, or well used before in the ancient Church, or well prescribed
by General Councils, be also in our Pontifical, our Pontifical is never the
worse for having of them: for if the thing it self be good and profitable, it
forces not from whom it was taken, or of whom it was used, so that now it be
rightly used. But it is most false and untrue, that the Book of Ordering
Ministers and Deacons, etc now used, is word for word drawn out of the Popes
Pontifical, being almost in no point correspondent to the same, as you might
have seen, if you had compared them together. But ignorance and rashness drives
you into many errors.

To the sixth, though the English Prelates avouch not the Opinions of the
Popish Writers, of giving grace, ex opere operato, by the Sacrament of Orders,
as they call it, of the indelible character imprinted by the laying on of hands
of the Prelates, with such other of their errors, as wherein they
over-magnifie the power they have in their imposition of hands, yet they plead
that they do use the words Joh. 20.22, 23. in the Ordination of Priests,
without blasphemy or absurdity. Archbishop Whitgift in his Answer to the
Admonition, p. 49. of the Edition 1572. in 40. To use these words (Receive the
Holy Ghost) in Ordering of Ministers, which Christ himself used in appointing
his Apostles, is no more ridiculous and blasphemous, than it is to use the
words that he used in the Supper: But it is blasphemy thus outragiously to
speak of the words of Christ. The Bishop by speaking these words, does not take
upon him to give the Holy Ghost, no more than he does to remit sins, when he
pronounces the remission of sins: but by speaking these words of Christ,
Receive the Holy Ghost, Whose sins soever ye remit, they are remitted, etc. he
does show the principal duty of a Minister, and assures him of the assistance
of Gods Holy Spirit, if he labor in the same accordingly. Mr. Richard Hooker
Eccl. Polit. l. 5. sect. 77. The Holy Ghost may be used, to signify not the
person alone, but the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the very power and authority
which is given men in the Church, to be Ministers of Holy things, is contained
within the number of those gifts whereof the Holy Ghost is Author, and
therefore he which gives this power, may say without absurdity, or folly,
Receive the Holy Ghost, such power as the Spirit of Christ has endued his
Church withal. See Edward Stilling fleets Irenicum, part. 2. c. 6. p. 231.
Bradshaw against Fr. Johnson, p. 65. of Gatakers Rejoinder to Can. Though in
their Ordination of Ministers the Bishops use, as a Ceremonial speech, to say,
Receive the Holy Ghost; and therein peradventure offer some force to the
Scripture, unto which they allude; yet they disclaim all actual power and
authority of giving the person or gifts of the Holy Ghost unto men.

Besides, I add, since the laying on of hands is together with the designation
of the person, a sign of prayer, as Mat. 19.13. Mark 10.16. and in
Confirmation, and the Apostles use Acts 8.15. and in Ordination, Acts 13.3.
those words may be used prayer-wise, and freed from exception. Whereto perhaps
that makes, which Dr. Field l. 5. of the Church, chapter 56, has; The Council of
Carthage 4. Canon. 3. provideth, that in the Ordination of a Presbyter, the
Bishop holding his hand on his head, and blessing him, all the Presbyters that
are present, shall hold their hands by the hand of the Bishop, and the person
Ordained kneeling, joins in prayer for the Blessing. So Dr. Sparks conceived it
might be understood, chapter 15. of Unity and Uniformity. Ecclesiast. disc. of the
French Reformed Churches, art. 8. chapter 1. The Ordained shall kneel when they
impose their hands on him.

To the seventh, Ordination is not always at a Cathedral, and may be before
the Congregation to whom the person is to be Priest.

To the eighth, That it is not always so; nor when so, Popish. See before in
Answer to the Preface, sect. 22. and to chap. 2. sect 3.

To the nineth, To offer a persons self for Ordination, may be no evil, but in
some cases a duty, 1 Timothy 3.1. Isa. 6.8. Giving money for Letters of Ordination
is no simony, but only wages to the Register for his writing; as when the
Register was paid for writing and sealing the Instrument signifying the person
to be an approved Preacher. Against any Bishops taking money for Ordition, and
the Registers exacting overmuch, provision is made Canon 135* Eccl, 1. Jac. and
even in the Council of Trent, Sess. 21. Decr. de reformatione c. 1.

To the tenth, The Priests of England are not to be Ordained without some
title, according to Cannon 33. even the Trent Council, ubi supra c. 2. has
made some provision about it. It is necessary that some b^ Ordained, though
they have not a fixed flock to attend upon Ministers are necessary for Armies,
Navies, and sundry occasions, which continue but for a while. Even the Synod of
Dort made some Orders about such; and the New England Elders that employ
Ministers to teach the Native salvage people, do justify the Ordaining to
Office without a flock to attend upon, unless they would have them employed
without Ordination, which were incongruous to the Holy Ghosts direction, Act
13.2. If Itinerant Preachers should have Approbation, they should have
Ordination.

To the eleventh subscription is required by the 36. Canon. to three Articles
about the Kings Supremacy, the Books of Common Prayer, and Ordination, and the
39. Articles of Religion; at Ordination the Priest promises obedience to his
Ordinary, to follow with a glad mind and will, his godly admonitions, and
submit himself to his godly judgment, by the late Act unfeigned Assent and
Consent is further required, but none of these by Oath; the Oath of Canonical
Obedience is only required at Institutions into Benefices, and is bounded with
such terms as make it not intolerable; sure it is nothing like that which is
required of Papists, according to the Bull of Pope Pius the fourth, supra forma
juramenti professionis fidei.

To the twelfth, The practice of leaving Benefices, is not strange to any
Churches: even from New England some have come into Old England, leaving their
places there; nor are there wanting like instances of Congregational men at
home, perhaps for greater benefit, without consent of the people. The practices
are not on any side justifiable in all: yet we read in Scripture of removals of
Ministers from one place to another upon urgent occasions.

To the thirteenth, The person Ordained has authority committed to him by the
Bishop to preach the Word of God in the Congregation where he should be
lawfully appointed; that is, by License, which is thought needful to be added
besides Ordination, because all persons are not alike fitted for all
Congregations; the Voice, and other abilities not serving for one Congregation,
which will for another.

To the fourteenth, Silencing, Suspending, and Degrading, may be necessary in
some cases, Tit. 1.11. and 3.10. if the Laws entrust the Prelates with it: so
it has been in other Churches besides the Popish. The abuse of it is
justifiable in none.

To the fifteenth, Inequality is judged to have been in the Elders of the
Primitive Churches, by the inscription of the seven Epistles of Christ to the
seven Angels of the seven Churches of Asia; and has been in some sort in all
Churches, which have been well ordered; and too much experience shows, that by
reason of the inequality of parts and minds, it is necessary to settled order.
What is undue in the Popish or Protestant Churches, should be charged on the
Authors, not on the Ministry it self.

To the sixteenth, The Vestments of English Priests are not all the same with
Popish; those that are, it is denied to have the same use, and therefore not to
be charged with the same superstition.

To the seventeenth, Even the late Assembly of Westminster prescribed a
Directory for Worship and Ministration. The Common Prayer Book, that now is
urged, should not be judged the worse in those prayers or portions of
Scripture, which are holy and good, because they were in the Popes Porluis; no
more than the acknowledgment of Jesus to be the Son of the most High God, is
the worse because the Devil used it, Mark 5.7. And therefore King Edward the 6.
his plea for it was good; and the thing not to be misliked, because used in the
Roman Church; who though they have many great corruptions in their Doctrine and
Worship, yet have they retained the Bible, Apostles Creed, many prayers from
ancient Fathers, and some Popes who were holy men and Martyrs in the first
Ages, which are not to be rejected, because continued by later vicious and
Antichristian Popes. That which is insinuated, as if the Common Prayer Book now
in use, were little different from the Popes Portuis or Missal, is very untruly
and unjustly suggested. He that shall impartially, and without prejudice
compare the one with the other, shall find a vast difference in the things
liable to exception. I have made some view of the Roman Missal of Pius the 5.
and Clement the 8. and Breviary of Pius the 5. and Urban the 8. and though I
deny not sundry Collects Prayers, Hymns, Lessons, Psalms, Epistles and Gospels
are the same in the Common Prayer Book in English, with those in Latin, as
being either parts of Holy Scripture, or agreeable to it; yet there are so many
differences in fundamentals of Doctrine, substantials of Worship; and in
Rituals, as the invocation of Saints, and the opinions of Merit, sacrifice for
Quick and Dead, adoration of the Host, virtue of the Cross, half Communion, and
many more things material, that I cannot but judge that either much ignorance,
or much malice it is that makes any traduce the English Common Prayer Book, as
if it were the Popish Mass Book, or as bad as it; and to deterr men from
joining with those Prayers and Services therein, which are good; as if it were
joining with Antichrist the Pope, or receiving the mark of the Beast, when they
can hardly be ignorant that the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days were burnt for
it, is impudent falsehood. By the parallel particulars, and such other as might
be alleged, cannot be inferred an exact symmetrie betwixt the Popish Priests
and the present Ministers of England. In many particulars might there be shown
a parallelism between Ministers of the Congregational Churches, and
Presbyterial, and the Popish; yet an exact symmetrie would not thence be
demonstrated. Few of these particulars alleged, are unjustifiable, those that
are, if not excusable, yet are far from that which is the main thing charged on
the Papists, and disputed against learnedly, by Mr. Francis Mason against
Champney, that they Ordain Priests to offer the unbloody sacrifice of the Mass
for Quick and Dead; which is abhorred by the English Prelates and Ministers,
and they are not to be charged to symbolize in Office with the Popish Order of
Priests, for which this Author has produced nothing, though it were the chief
thing to be proved: and therefore the minor of his Syllogism is denied, and it
is manifestly false which he says, he has abundantly demonstrated it, he
having said nothing to prove it in the main.

Sect. 5. The Office of Bishops is not proved to be Antichristian, but may be
found in Scripture.
It follows, Secondly, Those that receive their Power, Office, and Calling from
a Lord Bishop, and act in the Holy things of God, by virtue of that Power,
Office, or Calling, act in the Holy things of God by virtue of an An^ichristian
Power, Office, and Calling: But the present Ministers of England receive their
Power, Office, and Calling from a Lord Bishop, and act in the Holy things of
God by virtue of that Power, Office, and Calling: Therefore. The consequence of
the major (or first proposition) is manifest, the Office of a Lord Bishop is
Antichristian, therefore those that act by virtue of a Power, Office, or
Calling received from them, act by virtue of an Antichristian Power, Office, or
Calling. That the Office of Lord Bishops is Antichristian, one would wonder
should be denied in such a day as this, after so full a demonstration thereof
by many witnesses of Christ, who have wrote so clearly in this matter, as if
they carried the Sunbeams in their right hand, especially that it should be
denied by persons of Presbyterian and Congregational principles (if indeed any
of them do deny it.) To prosecute this matter to the uttermost, is not our
present intendment, the intelligent Reader knows where to find it done already
to our hand: and if after all that has been said, any through self love, or
fear of persecution, will herein be ignorant, we might say, Let them be
ignorant.

Answ. The Office, Power, and Calling received from a Lord Bishop, is all one
with the Office, Power, and Calling received from a Bishop Suffragan, who is
not a Lord; and therefore the adding of the title Lord to Bishop, being only a
civil title, they being made Barons of the Land by the King, and nothing
pertaining to their Ordination, but only giving them power to vote in
Parliament or Convocation with other dignities, is only brought in here ad
faciendum populum, to create envy or hatred against them in the Common people
or others, who are prepossessed with prejudice against them. What their Office
is, as Bishops, may be best discerned by the Book of Consecration, which I
gather from their promises and the prayers then used, to be the instruction of
the people committed to their charge out of the Holy Scripture, and to teach or
maintain nothing as required of necessity to eternal salvation, but that which
they shall be persuaded may be concluded and proved by the same faithfully to
exercise themselves in the same Holy Scriptures, and call upon God by prayer,
for the true understanding of the same; so as they may be able by them to teach
and exhort with wholesome Doctrine, and to withstand and convince the
Gainsayers, to be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away
all erroneous and strange Doctrine, contrary to Gods Word, and both privately
and openly to call upon, and encourage others to the same, to maintain and set
forward as much as shall lie in them, quietness, love, and peace among men; and
such as be unquiet, disobedient, and criminous within their Diocese, correct
and punish according to such authority as they have by Gods Word, and as to
them shall be committed by the Ordinance of the Realm, to be faithful in
Ordaining, Sending, or Laying hands upon others, to show themselves gentle and
merciful for Christ's sake to poor and needy People, and to all Strangers
destitute of help. These are their Offices which they are required to perform
at their Consecration, whatever their practice be, it pertains not to the
present point; this is the Office they undertake, and it is as much wonder to
me that any sober man should assert this to be Antichristian, as it is to him
that some should deny it. I deny not but there are many that have termed
Bishops Antichristian, nor have there been wanting who have said as much of
persons of Presbyterian and Congregational principles, but such use of this
term I have always condemned, even when Bishops were lowest, as tending to
nothing but to inflame the minds of Dissenters in opinion with hatred one
against another: but I have not met with any sober Writer, or considerate man,
who in conference has judged their Office as it is undertaken by them to be
Antichristian. I deny not that many learned men at home and abroad have
disputed, whether Bishops are by Divine Right an Order above Presbyters, nor
have there been wanting even of the Bishops themselves who have denied it:
Somewhat I have read on both sides, but shall leave that controversy now, and
only examine what this Author says to prove, the Office of Lord Bishops to be
Antichristian.

We shall, says he, propose briefly a word or two in this matter.

1. That Office that is not to be found in the Scriptures of the institution of
Christ, but is contrary to express precepts and commands of his, is
Antichristian: But the Office of Lord-Bishops is not to be found in the
Scriptures, is contrary to express precepts. Therefore.

Answ. I think the Major is not true, if universal. The Office of some
Religious Votaries is not to be found in the Scriptures of the institution of
Christ, but is contrary to express Precepts and Commands of his, and yet may
not be Antichristian, in that special sense in which the Scripture uses the
word Antichrist, nor as I suppose this Author uses it, unless he make every
sin to be Antichristian. But because the Minor is that which he insists on, I
pass to his proof of it.

The minor Proposition consists of two parts.

1. That the Office of Lord-Bishops is not to be found in Scripture of the
institution of Christ: He gave indeed Apostles, Prophets, Pastors, and
Teachers, Ephesians. 4.11. of Pastors and Teachers we read Romans 12.7, 8. Ephesians.
4.8. Bishops also, and Deacons without the interposition of any other Order, we
find 1 Timothy 3.12. Deacons we have appointed, Acts 7. Elders, Acts 14.23. those
who are Bishops we find called Presbyters, Tit. 1.5, 7. and those who are
Presbyters, we find termed Bishops, Acts 20.28. (Gr. (...), Bishops,) but where
the Office of Lord-Bishops was instituted by Christ, we are yet to seek: indeed
some appearances of a spirit striving to ascend into this chair of wickedness,
was seen in Diotrephes, and others, in the Apostles time, but these were the
Antichrists that were then gone abroad into the world. The Scripture before
mentioned, Ephesians. 4.11. speaks as fully to the Officers and Offices instituted
by Christ, as any we meet with: Fail they in their deduction of their Office
from hence, and they will undoubtedly prove successless in their attempts. Let
us then fix here a little; mention we find here of Apostles, Prophets, Pastors
and Teachers, none at all either here, or elsewhere of Lord-Bishops. But
perhaps their Office, though they are called by another name, is comprehended
in some one or other of these, let that then be considered. Are they Prophets?
that (in the sense of the Spirit in this place) they will not pretend to. Are
they Pastors or Teachers? This is too great a debasement of their Lordships,
their Parochial Priests over whom they preside, are supposed to be Offi^ers in
that degree. What then are they? Apostles! Their successors, they do indeed
boast themselves to be, and are so accounted by their abettors (and so does the
Pope himself) but how prove they their Succession from them? if they derive it
through the Papacy, who sees not the invalidity thereof? How lubricous and
uncertain is that their Succession? How do they therein proclaim their shame,
and yield the matter in Controversy? What clearer argument that they are
Antichristian, if the Pope be the Antichristian Head over many Countries, as is
by the generality of Protestants believed, and will not by themselves be
gainsayed? But in what sense do they pretend to be the Apostles Successors? Do
they succeed them as Christians? that is not the thing in question, they stand
or fall, in respect thereof to their own Master; herein we have no controversy
with them, as not willing to judge any thing before the time. Do they succeed
them in respect to their Off^ice? let them prove that, and take the cause. The
Apostles were first immediately sent by Christ; secondly, extraordinary
Officers, Commissionated to the Preaching of the Gospel throughout the Nations
of the World: Are their Lordships such? what can be imagined more frivolous or
false? Where find we any Apostles after the departure of those that were
immediately by Christ called to that Office? Did the Apostles ordain any as
their Successors therein in any of the Churches of Christ? Where read we of
their so doing? yea, are any qualified with Gifts as they, for the discharge of
such an Office? or does Christ indeed send forth servants in any employment,
and not furnish them with Gifts suitable thereunto? Credat Apelles? Apella would
have been printed. What more dishonorable to the Lord Jesus can be asserted? It
remains then, that they being neither Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Pastors, nor
Teachers, that they are not to be found in the Scripture of the institution of
Christ. Nor are they dreamed of in the world of several hundreds of years after
Christ. Clemens in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, takes notice of no
other besides (...), Bishops and Deacons; which Bishops he calls (...),
Presbyters or Elders; yea, Lombard himself confesses, Hos solium Ministrorum
duos ordines, Ecclesiam primitivam habuisse, and de his solis, praeceptum
Apostoli nos habere, Lomb. l. 4. Sen. D. 24. h. 3. Ext. The primitive Church,
he tells you, had no other Order of Ministers, than Bishops (or Presbyters) and
Deacons: Nor did the Apostles give commandment concerning any other. That their
rise and occasion was from the aims and designs of men, to accommodate
Ecclesiastical or Church affairs to the state and condition of the Civil
Government, is ingenuously confessed by one that was looked upon to be as great
an admirer of, and as able a Champion for Diocesan, and Metropolitical
Prelates, as any one of late days; it is Dr. Hammond we mind, who in his
Dissertations about Episcopacy, Sect. 3. has these words, His sic positis,
illud statim sequitur ut (in Imperii cognitione) in provincia qualibet, cum
plures urbes sint, una tamen primaria, and principalis censenda erat, (...)
ideo dicta cui itidem inferiores reliquae civitates subjiciebantur, ut
civitatibus Regiones, sic and inter Ecclesias, and Cathedras Episcopales, unam
semper primariam and Metropoliticam fuisse: So far is the Office of
Lord-Bishops from being of the institution of Christ, that their Primacy and
Supremacy was the result of the designs and contrivements of men to accommodate
the state and frame of the Church, to the state and condition of the Government
of the Nations.

Answ. The thing to be proved was, that the Office of Lord-Bishops is not to be
found in the Scriptures; but the whole Discourse is about another thing, not
the Office, but superiority of Order above Presbyters, Primacy, or Supremacy of
degrees among Bishops, the dignity of their Sees, or Episcopal Chairs, which is
quite another thing than what he undertook to prove; so that we may hereto
apply the Poets words; -- Amphora coepit
Institui currente rota cur urceus exit?
Which were enough to answer this whole passage; yet there are some things to
be animadverted therein:

1. It is true we read of Diotrephes, 3 John 9, 10. and of no other in
Scripture, that he l^ved the preeminence either over or among the Church, or
the brethren and strangers who were to be received, that they might be
fellow-helpers to the truth, v. 5, 8. and that St. John if he came, would
remember his deeds, prating against them with malicious words: and not content
therew^th, neither does he himself receive the brethren, and forbids them
that would, and casts them out of the Church. But this was not the usurping
the Superiority of Order of a Bishop above a Presbyter, but a proud
pragmatique, arrogant practice over the Church, Brethren, Strangers, even St.
John himself, together with very injurious violent proceedings in words and
deeds, which are nothing to the bare challenge by dispute, or assuming by
collation either of the Civil or Ecclesiastical Power, a Superiority of Order
above Presbyters; nor is Diotrephes mentioned as one of those Antichrists that
were then gone abroad into the world, or any mention of Antichrist in that
Epistle.

2. I know not the reason, but I take notice that in this passage reciting
Ephesians. 4.11. twice, he leaves out Evangelists, and concludes thus, It remains
then, that the Bishops being neither Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Pastors, nor
Teachers, that they are not to be found in the Scripture of the Institution of
Christ. Which conclusion might be overthrown, if it were pleaded, that they
were Evangelists, and so successors to Timothy, termed an Evangelist, 2 Timothy
4.5. and to Titus, whose work is alleged for a pattern of Bishops, 1 Timothy 1.3.
and 5.19, 22. Titus 1.5. But since that title is declined by pleaders for
Episcopal Superiority, I let it pass.

3. But the term of Pastors and Teachers, is challenged by Bishops: and what
says he against it? This is too great a debasement of their Lordships: which
is a Satirical Sarcasm, no proof. Did any of them say so, or count it to be so?
If any did so, he showed himself unworthy of the name, yea forgetful both of
what he promised and prayed for, alluding to this very Text, as his
Consecration, and which was expressly charged on him by the Archbishop when he
delivered him the Bible. Nor does it any whit derogate from the congruity of
the titles of Pastors and Teachers as it is given to Bishops, that their
Parochial Priests over whom they reside, are supposed to be Officers in that
degree, than it does from the giving of the Title of Teacher to a Presbyter,
because Assistents or Coadjutors are given them in case age or infirmity hinder
them from the frequent doing of that office. I omit mention of the living, to
avoid imputation of flattery, but I suppose the Author of this Writing is not
ignorant, that Jewel, Usher, and many more, have, when they were Bishops, been
truly termed Pastors and Teachers, and hope well of others.

4. But under the term of Apostles they may not be reckoned. True; they had
extraordinary Commission and Power, yet they may be Successors to them. (Dr.
Owen of Schism, c. 6. sect. 55. Professedly disclaims all thoughts of rejecting
those Ministers as Papal and Antichristian, who yet adhere to this Ordination
in a succession from Popish Bishops, being many of them eminently gifted of
God, to dispense the Word, and submitted unto by his people, in the
administration of the Ordinances, and are right worthy Ministers of the
Gospel.) This Author denies not they succeed to them as Christians. If so, they
may be heard as Gifted Brethren, which was denied by him to the Ministers chap.
2. But why not in Office? was the Apostles Office any other than what Christ
enjoined them Mat. 28.19, 20. Mark 16.15? and therein they must have
Successors, though not in the extent of their Commission, and in their Power;
else, how should Christ be with them all days unto the end of the World? But,
they cannot derive their Succession, but through the Papacy, and then they are
Antichristian. I answer, They may derive their Succession by proving their
consonancy with them in doing the same work after them, and Preaching the same
Gospel. If any, to stop the mouths of the clamourous Papists, have derived
their Succession from the Bishops under the Papacy, by proving (as Mr. Francis
Mason did) the Consecration of the Bishops after the Reformation by three
Bishops allowed by the Romanists themselves after the ancient Canon, though
perhaps more than needs; yea, though they were Consecrated and Ordained by the
Pope himself and some Cardinal Bishops; yet, if they were Consecrated, or
Ordained to no other work, nor in any other manner than Priests and Biships are
Ordained and Consecrated, according to the order of the Church of England, they
would not be Antichristian. For though it be not gainsayed, but that the Pope
is the Antichristian head over many Countries; yet it is gainsayed, that all
that is derived from him, or done by him, is Antichristian. I do not think it
is Antichristian to confess the Apostles Creed, though a person say he believes
it, because it is received from the Pope and Trent Council.

5* That Bishops as a Superior Order or Degree above Presbyters were not
dreamed of in the World, for several hundreds of years after Christ; I think
can hardly be made good: though I will not meddle with that point, which has
been debated so much by men of greatest and most exact skill in Antiquity, with
whom I conceive my self no way fit to be compared: yet this I say, that the not
taking notice of Bishops distinct from Presbyters by Clement in his Epistle to
the Corinthians, published not long since by Patrick Young, is balanced by the
passages in Ignatius his Epistles, if they be genuine, concerning which, the
Reader may judge by what Archbishop Usher has written in his Edition of those
Epistles of Ignatius. As for Lombard* if the Primitive Church, according to
him, extend not beyond the days of the Apostles, as his words import, they
prove not, that the Order of Bishops above Presbyters was not dreamt of several
hundreds of years after Christ. But of this I will not contend, it is enough for
my purpose, if the Office be found in Scripture, though not their Superiority.

6. As for the words of Dr. Hammond, I find them Dissert. 4. de Episcopatu c*
5. sect. 4. though not fully cited by this Author, and I acknowledge, that he
makes the state and frame of the Churches to have been accommodated to the
state and condition of the Government of the Nations in the Empire; yet
withal, he conceives, that the reason of directing seven Epistles to the seven
Angels of the seven Churches was, because they were Metropolitan or
Mother-Churches; and conceives this division into Provinces, Dioceses, and
depending Churches, to have been transcribed from the samplar of the Jews by
Moses Law, Deuteronomy. 16.18. and 17.9. And therefore his words are not to be drawn
to an acknowledgement of Lord-Bishops Primacy and Supremacy to have been the
result of the design and contrivements of men; much less, that the Superiority
of Bishops above Presbyters, had its rise and occasion from the aims and
designs of men, to accommodate Ecclesiastical Affairs to the state and
condition of Civil Government. It is added.

Sect. 6. The office of Lord Bishops is not contrary to express precepts of
Christ in the Scripture.
2. That the office of Lord Bishops is contrary to express Precepts of Christ
in the Scripture; the truth of which, he that runs may read in the ensuing
Scriptures, Mat. 20.25. Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. 1 Pet. 5.3. the English of, vos
autem non sic, but ye shall not do so; neque ut dominantes Cleris, not lording
it over God's Clergy or Heritage; an ordinary Reader may easily conclude to be
inconsistent with their Lordly Dignities.

Answ. This Author still shoots wide from the mark: He undertook to prove, that
the Office of Lord-Bishops is contrary to express Precepts of Christ in the
Scripture; but he concludes against their Lordly dignity; which is no more
their Office, than the honor ascribed to a Preacher, or Reader in the
University by giving them the titles of Master, or Doctor in Divinity, is
their Office. The term Bishops indeed implies their Office appointed by Christ,
to have inspection over the flock; but the term Lord is only a t^tle given them
by the King, when he makes them Barons of the Realm, which may be severed from
the Office of Bishops, as it has been since the Reformation in England, when
Suffragan Bishops have been made without the addition of Lordship. But however
this Author conceives the having such titles as Lords to be contrary to the
express precepts, Mat. 20.25. Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. 1 Pet. 5.3. and he
translates Vos autem non sic, But ye shall not do so. But this is more than
either the words or translations do permit. It is in Mat. 20.26. Mark 10.43.
(...), It shall not be so among you, or to you; which explains best Luke 22.26.
(...), But ye not so; that is, as our translation renders it, But ye shall not
be so; and so notes not a Precept, but a Prediction, and shows Event, not Duty,
which Mr. Gataker thinks in his Cinnus l. 1. c. 3. p. 36. after a discussion of
several Interpretations, to be the genuine meaning of Christ. But granting it
to be a Precept, is it a Precept to the Apostles only, or to others? The former
has countenance from the Text:

1. From the occasion, the request of the Mother of Zebedees children.

2. The indignation of the Ten, by reason of it.

3. Christ's calling of them to him, and no other, in Matthew and Mark.

4. Their contention of St. Luke.

5. Christ's speaking to them who had been with him in his temptations.

6. His allotting to them a Kingdom, and to sit on twelve thrones.

But if it be to others, it is doubtful, whether to all Christians, or only to
Ministers of the Gospel; and, whether it forbid simply Dominion at all, or such
Dominion as the Rulers of the Gentiles exercised; to wit, Tyrannical; or the
affectation and inordinate seeking of it, not the having or the exercise of
Dominion. In my Romanism discussed, Article 7. sect. 8. p. 172, 173. I have set
down ten Reasons to prove, that the Rule meant in those Texts, is not only
Tyrannical Dominion, but also the Dominion of one Apostle over another, and the
affectation and inordinate seeking of that rule, which a person may have, and
lawfully exercise; and this is forbidden not only to Ministers, but also to all
Christians: but not a Christians having or exercising the Office of a King or
Civil Magistrate; nor the Apostles Rule over the Church of God, or Ministers of
a lower Order: For then Christians should be forbidden to exercise that Office
which is Gods Ordinance; and the Apostles did ill in practicing and appointing
Rule over Christians, yea of some Ministers over others in some cases. But the
Rule which is forbidden, is, Rule over the Faith of the Saints, which St. Paul
disclaims 2 Cor. 1.24. and the Popes usurp (whose decrees in points of Faith,
and determinations of doubts of Conscience, and impositions of Laws binding the
conscience are made unerring) such Rule over Princes in secular Affairs with
pomp and outward grandeur, like Gentile Princes, as the same Popes usurp, rule
for themselves, not for Christ, rule by force, not by authority of Gods Word.
If any Lord-Bishop affect, seek, take upon him, or exercise such Lordship or
Dominion, it may be censured for Antichristian, yet not his Office, but his
practice is to be thus censured; and this not to be imputed to his Order, but
his Person. But to judge so of a person barely, because of the Title of Lord,
which was given by Sarah to her Husband, and propounded as meet, 1 Pet. 3.6. or
to deny any liberty to manage any civil business to an Ecclesiastical person,
because of those words of Christ is more than I conceive they have sufficient
ground to do. Sure such Congregational men as have been Heads of Colleges in
the Universities, or Vicechancellors, or Leaders of Forces, have given occasion
to be termed Antichristian, as well as Lord-Bishops, if Lordly Dignity, and
Secular Rule merit that appellation.

As for 1 Pet. 5.3. the Annotation in the Book of the Annotations in English,
termed the Assemblies, is thus, Lords] that is, not imperiously commanding your
own inventions, instead of the Doctrine of the Gospel; nor carrying themselves
insolently and magisterially toward Gods people, 3 John ver. 9. which imports
not an Office forbidden, but the evil practice of them whose Office is allowed;
For this very Exhortation is given to those who were Elders among the
Christians, even St. Peter, who entitles himself a fellow Elder to them, and
therefore contains not a Precept forbidding the Office of a Lord Bishop, any
more than of an Elder, such as St. Peter was, but the abuse of the Office; nor
does it forbid Lordly Dignity, but Lordly Rule; whereas Bishops Rule should be
Pedo non Sceptro, not as Princes, but as Shepherds. If any Prelate use such
Rule, it is not his Office, but his Practice, which is to be termed
Antichristian.

Sect. 7. The Office of Lord-Bishops not from the Papacy.
But this Author proceeds, Not to multiply Arguments in a matter that others
have so largely debated.

2. That Office that is derived from, and is only to be found in the Papacy, is
surely Antichristian (if the Pope be the head of Antichrist, this must not be
denied.) But the Office of Lord-Bishops is derived from, is only to be found in
the Papacy. Which of the Reformed Churches that have separated from the Papacy
have retained it? Did the woman in her flight into the Wilderness carry it
along with her? What more absurd, then to run to the persecuting Whore and
Beast for an Office of Ministry? and what more evident demonstration of its
being an Antichristian Office, than its entertainment only by that false
Antichristian Church, and its utter rejection and detestation by the true
Spouse and witnesses of Christ in all ages? What is delivered over to us in
this matter by some of them; we shall briefly affix hereunto. Hierome in his
Epistle to Evagrius, and in his Commentary on the Epistle of Titus, professes,
That it is more by custom than by any institution of the Lord, that Bishops are
become greater than the Elders or Ministers. Harm. of Conf. Sect. 2. Tit. 11.
So from him do the Churches of Helvetia proclaim; whence they infer (and that
truly according to Act. 4.9.) That no man by any right can forbid, but that we
should return to the old appointment of God, and rather receive that, than the
custom devised by men. Wickliff in his Answer to King Richard the Second,
citing Mat. 20.25. 1 Pet. 5.3. says, Lordship and Dominion is plainly
forbidden to the Apostles, and dare thou then usurp the same? If thou will be
a Lord, thou shall lose thy Apostleship, etc. The University of Geneva say, (
Theses Genev. 71.) These functions following, we hold to be altogether false,
and destitute of all true foundation, viz. the Primacy of the Bishop of Rome
over all Churches; the Cardinalship, Patriarchship, Archiepiscopalship, and
briefly the whole degree of Lord Bishops over their fellow Elders. Marlorat in
his Exposition on the Revel. chap. 17.3. says, That Archbishops, Deans, etc.
are in Office under Antichrist; yea upon Chap. 9. that they are the tails of
Antichrist. Beza says, They could not be brought into the Church, until they
had driven him out, who is the only Master, Christ: and, there is neither holy
Scripture, nor Council, nor ancient Doctors, which ever did know such Monsters,
Beza's Confess. Art. 7.14. The noble ancient Oldcastle, Lord Cobham says, That
the whole Episcopal degree of Lord Bishops over their fellow Elders is
altogether false and destitute of all true foundation -- yea, that all other
Functions and Offices besides Priests and Deacons are unlawful, as being Sects
devised by men destitute of all true foundation. To these we might add honest
Bale upon the Revelation, viz. chap. 17. where he says, Canterbury and York
are the Beastly Antichrist's Metropolitans, and Primates; and upon Chap. 13.
that Archbishop, Diocesan, Archdeacon, Dean, Prebend, Doctors, Parson, Vicar,
etc. are very names of blasphemy: For Offices they are not appointed by the
holy Ghost, nor yet mentioned in the Scripture. Cartwright says of them, that
their Functions are not in the Word of God, but of the Earth, new devised
Ministries, and such as can do no good: that their Office is the neck of the
Popish Hierarchy, come out of the bottomless pit of Hell. Fenner proclaims them
to be no natural members of the body of Christ's Church, as being of humane
addition, not born with her, nor grown up with her from the Cradle. The French
and Belgic Confession says, That they pass not a rush for them. The Church of
Geneva, That the Hierarchy is Devilish confusion, stablished (as it were) in
despite of God, and to the mocking and reproach of all Christian Religion. The
Seekers of Reformation in Q. Elizabeth's time spoke fully hereunto, [2 Adm. to
Parl.] we have an Antichristian* and Popish ordering of Priests, strange from
Gods Word, never heard of in the Primitive Church, taken out of the Popes Shop,
to the destruction of Gods Kingdom -- The Names and Offices of Archbishops,
Archdeacons, Lord Bishops, etc. are, together with their Government, drawn out
of the Popes Shop, Antichristian, Devilish, and contrary to the Scriptures:
Parsons, Vicars, Parish Priests, are birds of the same feather: to whom might
be added many others.

Answ. 1. Though the Pope in these later ages, especially since Boniface the
third, obtained of Phocas the Emperor, more than 600 years after Christ, that
Rome, the seat of blessed Peter the Apostle, which is the head of all Churches,
should be both so called and accounted of all, as Platina speaks, and as
Onuphrius adds, Had the title of Universal Bishop conferred on him; and it was
added, that the name of Pope, which was determined to be the more excellent of
all Episcopal terms, the Roman Bishops should alone retain it, whereas before
it was common to all Bishops, has been judged deservedly the head of
Antichrist, which Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome, had not long before, lib.
7. indict. 2. Epist. 96. made Antichristian, and the Usurper a forerunner of
Antichrist: yet the Bishops of Rome, in the first ages, were not so accounted,
and therefore, it follows not, though the later Popes be the head of
Antichrist, that the Office that is derived from, and is only to be found in
the Papacy, is surely Antichristian; there having been Offices perhaps derived
from good Popes, and continued only in the Church of Rome, which deserve not
that censure, but approbation rather. Nor is it necessary that every thing
derived from Popes, since they have been the head of Antichrist, and continued
only in the Papacy, should be Antichristian: the head of Antichrist may
institute something that is not Antichristian.

2. It is not true, that the Office of Lord Bishops is derived from, and is
only to be found in the Papacy. It is manifest in the first Nicene Council,
Canon 6. that then and before were Patriarchs, Metropolitan Bishops, and Lord
Bishops with their Office; and that Council was in the fourth Century, about
the year 326. And that in the Greek, Eastern, Russian Churches, the same Office
is continued. And therefore though no other of the Reformed Churches had
retained that Office, besides the English, yet there would be no need for the
Bishops of England to run to the persecuting Whore and Beast, for an Office of
Ministry. But it is also pleaded, that the Lutheran Churches reformed, that
have separated from the Papacy in Germany, Denmark, Swethland, have retained
the same Office under the name of Superintendents, which is the same in Latin,
with Bishops in Greek; and that it is false, that the true Spouse and witnesses
of Christ have in all ages utterly rejected the Office of Lord Bishops, and
that it has its entertainment only by that false Antichristian Church. Yea, it
is manifest by the many Epistles written to the English Prelates, by the
reception at the Synod of Dort, and innumerable other ways, that there has
been no such rejection or detestation either by any Church reformed, or Eminent
Writers of them, except those of the Separation, who have been also averse from
the Discipline of the Protestant Reformed Churches beyond Sea, and have given
opprobrious Language to, and of them, as well as the English. As for the
testimonies here cited, some of them, as the Speeches of Hierome, the Helvetian
Confession of the Lord Cobham, are only about the superiority of Bishops above
Presbyters, not of their Office; most of them, as that of Wickliffe used before
by Bernard in his Tract to Pope Eugenius, those of the University and Church of
Geneva; Beza's, the Belgic, French Confessions, Marlorat, Bale, are against
the Popish Hierarchy; those of Cartwright, Fenner, and Authors of the
Admonition, were Speeches of Adversaries, which in no Court pass for
testimonies; to which Archbishop Whitgift and others have given answers long
since. It is added:

Sect. 8. The Ordination of Bishops, is also of Presbyters.
Object. One stone of Offense must be removed out of our way ere we pass on
further; it is this: Though Lord Bishops are Antichristian, yet it does not
follow, that the Office and Ministry derived from them is so: For they are also
Presbyters, and Ordain as Presbyters.

Answ. Give me leave to say, that were not men resolved to say any thing, that
they might be thought to have somewhat to say, we had not heard of this
Objection. For,

1. That they act in the capacity of Presbyters in the matter of Ordination, is
false.

(1.) Contrary to their own avowed Principles; their Lordships think it too
great a debasement, to be degraded from their Lordly dignity to so mean an
Office.

(2.) Contrary to the known Law of the Land, by which they receive power to act
therein; in which they are known, and owned only in the capacity of Lord
Bishops.

(3.) Contrary to their late practice, whereby they have sufficiently declared
the nullity of a Ministerial Office, received from the hands of a Presbytery,
in thrusting out of doors several hundreds of Ministers so Ordained. Strange!
That it should be pleaded they act as Presbyters in the matter of Ordination,
and yet they themselves judge a Presbyterian Ordination invalid. But,

2. What if this should be granted? it would avail nothing, except it can be
proved, that they are, and act as Presbyters of the Institution of Christ,
which (these being only in a particular instituted Church of Christ) will never
be to the worlds end. Thus far of the third argument.

Answ. It Is true, to some that have either renounced Episcopal Ordination as
Antichristian, or refused to hear Ministers Ordained by Bishops, as acting by
virtue of Antichristian Calling, it has been told, that the Bishops were first
Presbyters, and Ordained Presbyters together with Presbyters; and some of them
that held that a Bishop and a Presbyter were not superior in Order, but in
Degree, did Ordain as Presbyters; and that therefore, if the Ordination of
Presbyters be not Antichristian, the Ministers should retain their Ordination
by Bishops, and the people hear them, though that were yielded, that Lord
Bishops Office were Antichristian. Now nothing is here replied to the
allegation, that Bishops Ordain with Presbyters; the Bishop with the Priests
present are to lay their hands on the Ordained, according to the Book of
Ordination: Nor to this, that some of the Bishops have acknowledged Episcopacy
not to be an Order above Presbytery; Nor to this, that though the Bishop
imposing hands, do act as of superior Order, yet being a Presbyter, his act is
valid, as he that conveighs a thing as conceiving himself as Heir, and
Executor, if he be not Heir; yet if he be only Executor, and by that has power
to conveigh it, the grant is good. But he says,

1. It is false they Ordain as Presbyters: it is contrary to their principles.
Answ. Whether it be so in all is uncertain, nor do I know how this Author can
prove it, unless they did declare it, which is more than I have learned. 2. It
is contrary to the known Law of the Land. Answ. 1. It is not true, that the
Bishops do receive power by the Law to act in Ordination, in it are known, and
owned only in the capacity of Lord Bishops: for the Ordination of Suffragan
Bishops, who are not Lords, is valid by Law. 2. The Law which gives power to
act, ties not Bishops to think themselves of a Superior Order to Presbyters,
nor to act with such an intention, or under such a notion. 3. They have
nullified Presbyterian Ordination, and required Reordination by a Bishop.
Answ. They do not nullify Ordination by a Presbytery in foreign Churches; but
in England perhaps, because the Laws require Episcopal Ordination; and it is
conceived necessary to avoid Schism, or some confusion. 2. However those
Presbyters are not of the institution of Christ, these being only in a
particular instituted Church of Christ. Answ. If this be held, no Presbyters in
any Church, but Congregational, are of Christ's Institution; and then all the
Presbyters of the French, Dutch, and other Churches under Presbyterial
Government, are excluded from being of Christ's Institution, as well as these
Ordained by Bishops of the Church of England; and then they by his Argument are
no more to be heard than these* and so Separation avowed from all Churches,
even Protestant, besides those of their own way, which is the pernicious error
to which this arguing tends. But till it be proved I count his dictates fit to
be rejected, and proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP. 4. ARG. 4.
Sect. 1. They that deny not Christ's Offices Doctrinally, may be heard
THus it is argued:

Those that oppugn or deny any of the Offices of Jesus Christ, are not to be
heard, but separated from: But the present Ministers of England oppugn and deny
some of the Offices of Jesus Christ: Therefore. Before we come to clear the
several parts of this Argument, we shall crave liberty briefly to premise. 1.
That there is a twofold denying or oppugning of the Offices of Christ, Verbal
and Professional. Such was and is that of the Jews, the Papists are not guilty
hereof; in words they own, preach up, plead for all the Offices of Christ as
much as any: so do all the present Ministers of England: This is not then the
denial of the Offices of Christ we implead them as guilty of.

2. Real and actual, when persons do that which enwraps in the Bowels of it, an
impugning and denial of the Offices of Christ. This the Romish Synagogue are
eminently guilty of: so are the present Ministers of England, as shall (we
doubt not) be clearly demonstrated in its proper place.

Secondly, That a verbal professional acknowledgment of the Offices of Christ
is nothing, when contradicted in practice: This the Apostle avowedly asserts,
in respect of the knowledge of God, Tit. 1.16. They profess they know God, but
in works they deny him; and may congruously enough be applied to the matter in
hand. This, as applied to the Combination and Synagogue of Rome, some of
themselves have long since ackowledged, whilst they profess Christ to be King,
and submit not to the Laws he has prescribed in his Word, they make him an
Idol and put a Scepter of Reed in his hand: so some of their own. But I
interrogate, What if a man should with the greatest earnestness profess, and in
the height of a confident spirit averr, that he were born again of God, washed,
sanctified in the blood of Christ, and by the spirit of the Lord, that he did
receive and own Christ as his King and Lawgiver, when I see this man at the
same time walking in a way of Rebellion against Christ, in open contempt and
defiance of his Laws and Government subjecting to the yoke of other Lords and
Lawgivers; shall hi^ Plea be admitted? Surely no, Quid verba audiam, cum facta
videam. It Is long since decided by Christ, that false Prophets are to be
descried, not by their words (they may speak like, Angels; cry, Hail Master,
kiss him, yet be false Prophets, yea, Judasses to him) but by their fruits: Let
them profess a thousand times over, that they own all the Offices of Christ, if
they are the mean while found in the practice of those things that are
inconsistent with the truth of such a profession, they are really deniers and
opposers of the Offices of Christ. This is that then we affirm in this matter.

1. That those that do really oppose any of the Offices of Christ, are not to
be heard, but separated from: This carrying a brightness along with it, that is
sufficient to convince all, except such, whose eyes the God of this World has
blinded: that its original is from God, we shall take for granted will not be
denied by a professing enlightened people, though otherwise it were easy to
multiply arguments for its demonstration.

1. To oppose Christ in any of his Offices, bespeaks such as are guilty thereof
to be Antichrists, 1. Joh. 2.22. and 4.2, 3. 2 John 7. (of the same mind with
us herein, is learned Beza upon the forecited Scriptures) and none will surely
be so inconsiderate (not to say worse) as to assert, It is lawful to attend
upon the Ministry of Antichrist.

2. To hear such, is to strengthen and encourage them in that their denial of,
and opposition unto the Offices of Christ; and thereby become partakers with
them in their sin:

The thought of which, cannot but be grievous to the poor Lambs of Christ. But
this will not be denied.

Answ. 1 I allow the distinction of verbal and real oppugning the Offices of
Christ: But it is false, that the Papists are not guilty of a verbal denying of
the Offices of Christ, and that in words they own, preach up, and plead for all
the Offices of Christ as much as any. For though they do acknowledge Christ to
be King, Priest, and Prophet, yet their Doctrine, and not their practice only,
does overthrow all the Offices of Christ. As he that ascribes Kingly power to a
subject, does make another King than the right King, and so does u^king him;
and as he that ascribes to a Creature that which is proper to God, does set up
another God, and so ungod the true God, who can no more be multiplied than the
Heavens can bear two Suns; even so it is with the Papists, while they assert,
that traditions unwritten are to be received with alike affection of piety and
reverence as the written Gospel, when the Pope ascertains them that he is
infallible, that he is judge of Controversies, can determine what is to be held
as an Article of Faith unerringly, can make Laws to bind the Conscience by
virtue of his Authority, without the case of Scandal and Contempt; can dispense
with Gods Laws, lawful oaths, incestuous marriages prohibited by God; by his
indulgences can forgive sins authoritatively and absolutely, that ascribe to
every Priest a power to offer in the Mass a propitiatory unbloody sacrifice for
the quick and dead, to forgive sins in the Sacrament of Penance, to enjoin
laborious works of penance, which shall be satisfactious to God for sins, while
they make Saints deceased, and Angels Mediators between God and Man by their
merits and agency with God for us; they ascribe to Creatures the power proper
to Christ's Offices, and so do make other Prophets and Priests to officiate as
Christ; they do verbally deny the Offices of Christ, and not in words own,
preach up, and plead for all the Offices of Christ as much as any, as this
Author most untruly suggests; but do doctrinally evacuate them all, of which no
such thing can be charged on the present Ministers of England, nor is at all
demonstrated by this Author.

2. I grant, that a verbal professional acknowledgment of the Offices of
Christ, when contradicted by practice is nothing to the salvation of the person
so professing, in the sense in which St. Paul says 1 Cor. 13 2. Though I have
the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all knowledge; and
though I have all faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity,
I am nothing, that is, as v. 3. it profits me nothing; and no further are to
be drawn the words of the Apostle, Tit. 1.16. than that which is expressed in
the Text, that to such persons nothing is pure but their minds and consciences
are defiled; and so to the Interrogation I answer, such a ones plea shall not
be admitted before God, or in an Ecclesiastical censure, or a private judgment,
so as that he shall have the approbation or benefit of a real subject to
Christ; yet all this does not prove that his doctrine impugnes the Offices of
Christ, or that his doctrine may not be heard to the profit of the Hearers. J.
Owen of the duty of Pastors, p. 24. God oftentimes out of his care for his
flock, bestows gifts on some, for the benefit of others, on whom he will bestow
no graces for the benefit of their own souls. P. 43. People must beware of
false Prophets. How shall they do this, but by trying their doctrine by the
rule. Nor is it true that Christ has decided the question as he would have it;
as if Christ had said that false Prophets are to be descried by their virtous
life, not by their doctrine: He says indeed, they are known by their fruits,
but that these fruits are only their evil life, he says not. No where is any
one said to be a false Prophet, that does not take upon him to prophecy; he
may be a bad man, that teaches no false Doctrine, but not a false Prophet.
Judas was a wicked man, a Devil, but no where termed a false Prophet; yea he
was one of those that Christ sent to preach, and one of those of whom he says,
Mat. 10.40. He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me. In the Old Testament, Jer. 5.3. and 23.16, 17, 25,
26. Micah 3.5. false Prophets are said to be such as prophesied Lies in Gods
name and he sent them not; that they taught lying divinations, the Visions of
their own heart, they cried peace when there was no peace, they attempted to
draw them after other gods, Deuteronomy. 13.2. In the New Testament, 2 Pet. 2.1 There
were false Prophets among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers
among you, who privily shall bring in damnable heresies denying the Lord that
bought them, 1 John 4.1. Many false Prophets are gone out into the World, and
they are said to be such as confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,
that they speak of the World, v. 3, 5. That is true which Mr. John Ball in his
Trial of the grounds of Separation, chapter 13. page 312. has, If we look into the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, we shall never find the Prophets
called true or false in respect of their outward calling, (I add, or only their
vicious lives) but in respect of their doctrine. Yea, though a man should by
his doctrine deny the Offices of Christ only by remote consequence; as, by
teaching something as appointed by Christ, which was not; or denying something
to be instituted by Christ, which was so appointed; yet should he not be
accounted a false Prophet, but an erring man, who while he lays the foundation
rightly, yet through ignorance, or inadverrencie builds Hay and Stubble
thereon, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 3.12. And therefore that which this
Author does so confidently pronounce, as if it were as clear as the Sun, and
denied by none, but those whose eyes the God of this World has blinded, [ That
those that do really (that is in their practice, though not in their preaching)
oppose any of the Offices of Christ, are not to be heard (no not when they
preach saving Truths of the Gospel) but separated from, (not only in respect of
private or Church Communion in the Lords Supper or Prayers, but in attending on
the Ministry of the Word delivered by them) which is his major proposition] is
so far from being light, that it seems rather to me, some of that smoke of the
bottomless pit, which the God of this World raises, to hinder many poor souls
from hearing that Word, wherein the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ the
image of God does shine unto men. Nor were not professing enlightened people, as
he calls them, held by prejudice, or guided by affection more than by judgment,
could they grant this proposition. For if according to this Authors dictates,
he that really, that is, in heart or practice opposes any of the Offices of
Christ, is to be separated from: then every one who disobeys his Commands,
believes not his Words, that is an hypocrite; yea, that sins or errs in any
thing Christ has revealed or commanded, is to be separated from, and not to be
heard; and so all must turn Seekers or Quakers, if they do not meet with a
Teacher who is perfect without sin or error. As for what this Author says for
demonstration of it, that such are Antichrists, 1 John 2.22. and 4.2, 3. 2 John
7. and that Beza is of the same mind, and that they that hear them strengthen
their opposition unto the Offices of Christ, and partake with them in their
sin, is false. For neither does St. John, nor Beza in his Annotations count any
for Antichrists there meant, but such as by their doctrine oppugn Christ's
Nature or Office, which he terms the false Doctrine of the Antichrists; nor is
he at all guilty of the sins of the Minister who is evil in his life, by
hearing him preach truth; yea, though he preach some errors, and it be
probable, that when he hears him, he shall hear some error preached by him,
unless some other way he abet his sin or error, or omit his duty in seeking to
amend him. But let us attend the proof of his minor.

Sect 2. Every not harkening to Christ's Order, is not a denial of his Office.
It Is the second thing may sound harsh in the ears of some (as did some sayings
of Christ, but if truth, where God shall give the seeing eye, and hearing ear,
'twill be received,) viz.

2. That the present Ministers of England do oppose and deny some of the
Offices of Christ, viz. His Kingly and Prophetical Office, which we come to the
proof of.

Arg. 1. Those that hearken not to the Revelation Christ has made, and as
supreme Lord and Lawgiver, has enjoined to be observed touching the Orders
and Ordinances of his house, deny the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ,
Deuteronomy. 18.18. Acts 3.22. Isa. 9.6. But the present Ministers of England hearken
and conform not to the Revelation Christ has made touching the Orders and
Ordinances of his house: Therefore.

Answ. Though I doubt not but I could retort this Argument upon this Author,
whom by sundry passages in this Book I judge to be one that hearkens not to the
Revelation Christ has made, and as supreme Lord and Lawgiver has enjoined to
be observed touching the Order and Ordinance of his house, even that most
express, Mat. 28.19. Mark 16.15, 16. one of the principles of the Doctrine of
Christ, and part of the foundation, Heb. 6.1, 2. Yet I shall wave that, and
answer directly by denying the major; of which I give these reasons.

1. Because denial, is more than not harkening to; the one is by positive
contradiction, the other may be only by Omission.

2. The not harkening may be out of ignorance, incapacity to understand,
dullness, slothfulness, fearfulness, mistakes, prevalency of temptation without
any enmity of heart, habitual stubbornness, or willful gainsaying, which are
requisite to a plain denial of the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ.

3. There may be sundry Orders of his House revealed by Christ, which are
controverted, whether they be such or no; there may be some acknowledged to be
Orders of his House, yet thought not of such moment as that the peace of the
Church should be broken by contending for them; or judged not perpetual, but
temporary; or not binding the Ministers to observe, till the Magistrate reform;
as in the case of putting down Images, or conceiving in cases of necessity, or
for avoiding of Scandal, they may not hearken to them; as in David's eating the
Shewbread, the Apostle Paul's not harkening to the Order of discontinuing
Circumcision, and a Jewish Vow and Offering; in these, and perhaps more cases a
person may not hearken to the Revelation Christ has made, and as supreme Lord
and Lawgiver has enjoined to be observed touching the Orders and Ordinances
of his House, and yet be so far from denying the Prophetical and Kingly Office
of Christ, that he may be sound in the Faith, and a zealous and faithful
maintainer of them, by holding forth the truth of the Gospel unto the death.
And therefore I take the major proposition of this Argument to be manifestly
false, which he seems by not proving to take for manifest truth.

Sect. 3. It is not proved, that Christ's Sovereign Authority is rejected by the
present Ministers.
But he goes on thus: It Is the minor (or second Proposition) that in the
thoughts of some is capable of a denial, but the verity thereof shines forth as
the Sun in its brightness, in the review of the Orders and Ordinances of the
House of Christ appointed by himself; and the present frame and deportment of
the present Ministers of England with respect thereunto: which of them have
they not made void by their Traditions? This is that which Christ has said, 1.
That all power for the Calling, Institution, Order, and Government of his
Church, is invested solely in him, as the alone Lord, Sovereign Ruler, and Head
thereof, Mat. 28.19. 1 Timothy 6.14, 15. Joh. 3.35. Acts 3.22. and 5.31. It Is upon
this foot of account that Christ charge his Disciples not to be called of men
Rabbi, nor to call any Father, (viz. not to impose their authority upon any, or
suffer themselves to be imposed upon by any in the matters of their God) Mat.
23.8, 9, 10. because one is their Master and Lord (viz. Christ.) Hence also the
Apostles lay the weight of their exhortations upon the Commandment of Christ, 1
Cor. 11.23. and 14.37. Proclaim all to be accursed that preach any other
Gospel, Gal. 1.8. (yea though Angels from Heaven, should they live and speak as
such) charge those to whom they write not to receive any into their houses that
bring any other doctrine, (much more not to receive them as their Teachers) 2 John 10. Yea, the Spirit of the Lord in the close of the last Revelation of his
Will, it pleased this great King and Lawgiver in such a way to give forth,
testifies that if any man shall add unto these things, the Lord shall add unto
him the Plagues that are written in his Book, Rev. 22.18. Do the present
Ministers of England conform unto this great Institution? in words indeed they
do so. But what means the bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen in
our ears? Do they not own other Lords, Heads, and Governors, that have a
Law-making power, and would enforce the Consciences of the freeborn Subjects
of Christ over his Churches besides him? what does this less than evidently
proclaim their disobedience and rebellion (which is as the sin of Witchcraft)
against the King of Kings, and the rejection of his Scepter and Sovereign
Authority over them! But of this more hereafter.

Answ. It is no strange thing to find in this Author high Charges backed only
with confident assertions, and no proofs; so that men, comparing the one with
the other, may think he wrote his Dreams, rather than Meditations. For what are
we to think otherwise when we read such passages as these: the verity of his
minor proposition shines forth as the Sun in his brightness? Which is no more
than is to be said of the first universal indubitable principles of the light
of Nature or Reason, which are indisputable; and yet he says, in the thoughts
of some it is capable of a denial: and when he should prove it so clear, in
stead of an Argument, proves all with Interrogations, which if the Reader deny,
he is put to a stand. But to show the vanity of his arguings to his Question,
which of the Orders and Ordinances of the house of Christ appointed by himself,
have not the present Ministers of England (he means all, even the best of them,
as his words, ch* 2. and arguings against them indiscriminatim do evince,) have
they not made void by their Traditions? I answer by another Question, Which of
them have they so made void? Sure the Ordinances of searching the Scriptures,
hearing the Word, praying to the Father in the name of Christ, believing on the
Son, with many more (which are the chief Orders and Ordinances of the house of
Christ, appointed by himself) have not been made void by the Traditions of the
Ministers of England that now are, at least not by all or the best of them,
that I know or hear of. But he imagines he can prove it by an induction of
particulars, of which he names only seven; though to make his induction full
(without which it is no good Argument) he should have reckoned seven times
seven. But perhaps he thinks if he can make good the charge in these seven, it
will be without question his charge is true of the rest. Let us then view each
of these in order, and see how well he has acquitted himself therein.

The first of these Orders or Ordinances of Christ is, that all power for the
Calling, Institution, Order and Government of his Church, is invested solely in
him as the alone Lord, Sovereign Ruler, and Head thereof. Which I grant as a
truth, though I assent not to his Paraphrase on Mat. 23.8, 9, 10. as if Christ
did forbid the Apostles to impose their Authority upon any in the matters of
their God; which they did, Act 15.25, 28. But how comes this to be an Order,
Ordinance, Institution of the house of Christ appointed by himself? Such Orders
I took to be Precepts of Christ to us, but this seems to be Gods gift to him,
Mat. 28.18. Joh. 3.35. and 5.22, 26, 27. and 17.2. Acts 3.22. and 5.31. Ephesians.
1.22. etc. no Precept to us. But let it imply a Precept to us; Do not the
present Ministers of England conform to it? He grants, they do so in words, but
not in deeds. Why so? They own other Lords that have a Law^making power, and
would enforce the Consciences of the Freeborn Subjects of Christ over his
Churches, besides him; and thereby proclaim their disobedience and rebellion
(which is as the sin of Witchcraft) against the King of Kings, and their
rejection of his Scepter and Sovereign Authority over them. This is a high
charge, and if true would unchristen them, but I see no proof of it, so that I
take this to be only a piece of Oratory, such as Tertullus used against St.
Paul, Acts 24. which is so much the more venomous in that it is in generalibus
without instancing in particulars, which is the sign of a Diabolical
Calumniatour. Yet I shall not let it pass. The Lords he means are either the
King or the Bishops. The King is owned by the Ministers in the Oath of
Supremacy, the Bishops in the promise at their Ordination, wherein they
promise the Lord being their helper, to obey reverently their Ordinary, and
other Ministers, unto whom is committed the charge and government over them;
following with a glad mind and will their godly admonitions, and submitting
themselves to their godly judgments. The Law-making power of the King is with
the Parliament, of the Bishops in the Convocation, the enforcing of the
Conscience (though it be an uncouth phrase* as supposing the Conscience can be
enforced by man, which is impossible) is meant of Causative Compulsion, by
enjoining men to act or speak according to such Statutes or Canons as are
imposed on them under certain penalties. How many, and which of these Acts or
Speeches are rebellion and rejection of Christ's Authority, is to be
demonstrated; and not persons of place and Authority to be thus criminated
after the manner of Railers and Scolds. And sure it is not easy to prove, that
though such Acts and Speeches were imagined to be such Rebellion; yet that they
are so in them, unless it could be proved they did them presumptuously (...)
with a proud heart and an high hand, which, if this Author has not learned the
Maxim Calumniare audacter, aliquid haerebit, methinks he should tremble to
attempt. But since he tells us of this more hereafter, I intend to observe his
motion. He goes on.

Sect. 4. Ministers oppose not the Will of Christ by not joining in the
Separation pleaded for.
2. Says he, This great Prophet and King has also revealed, and proclaimed,
That it is his Will, that those whom he has called by his Word, should separate
from the World, walk together in particular Societies and Churches, having
given up themselves to the Lord, and one another, according to the Will of God,
for their mutual edification and comfort in the Lord. The truth of this
sovereign Institution of Christ, he that runs may read in the Scriptures
hereunto annexed, 1 Cor. 1.2. and 5.12. 2 Cor. 6.17. Rev. 18.4. Joh. 15.19. and
17.6. Acts 2.40. and 19.9. Phil. 1.5. Acts 2.41. and 17.4. 2 Cor. 8.5. with
many more. In the proof of this we might be copious, but that we study brevity:
The diligent Reader knows where to find this Theme at large, treated of by
learned Ainsworth, Bartlet, Cotton, Rogers, etc. How do the Ministers of
England acquit themselves, in respect of this solemn appointment of the Lord?
alas! who sees not that they are, in their practice, at open defiance
herewith, have it in derision and contempt, making no difference betwixt the
Holy, and Profane; admitting persons led captive by the Devil at his will,
that openly blaspheme the spirit of the Lord, and deride its effectual
operation in the Consciences of men into their society? Are any too vile
(except such as truly fear God* and desire to press after holiness) to be
admitted by them into their Communion? Is not their Church State (so unlike is
it to the Institution of Christ) a very Babel, a Den of Dragons, and Hold of
unclean Beasts?

Answ. This Crimination proceeds on these suppositions.

1. That Christians should separate from the Parish Assemblies, and join
together in the Congregational way by Church Covenant, which they call
separating from the World.

2. That Ministers are bound to reject, and not to admit to the Communion those
that are profane, and to admit only real Saints in the judgment of Charity, and
that by opposing the way of separation, and promiscuous admission to the
Communion, they infringe the solemn appointment of the Lord. For my part having
read somewhat in Mr. Ainsworths and Mr. Cottons Writings, both concerning the
way of the Separatists in the Low Countries, and the Independents in
New England, I do not either in the Scriptures here alleged find such a solemn
appointment of Christ, either that private persons, or Ministers are to make
such a Separation, as these Authors do press upon the Consciences of others:
nor has experience either in the Low Countries, or Old or New England given
such encouragement to sober minded Christians, as to engage them in that way,
but rather many divisions, declinings into error, and other evils, have given
too much cause for men to doubt, whether it were ever a Plant of Gods planting.
It is granted that it is the will of Christ, that those whom he has called by
his Word should separate from the World; And this they are to do in respect of
their Worship, so as not to have Communion with them therein: and this I doubt
not may be proved from 2 Cor. 6.17. and some other of the Texts alleged. But
then by the World, are meant professed Infidels, such as denied the Lord Jesus
and worshipped Idols; or at least such as were professed Unbelievers, as John
15.19. and 17.6. Acts 2.40. and 19.9. the Jews were, and yet the Apostles did
not refuse to go to the Temple to pray, nor to go into their Synagogues, or to
take a Vow and purify themselves at the Temple, notwithstanding the
corruptions of their Priests, Service, and People, and their open opposition to
the Christian Faith. But that ever it was the Will of Christ that Christians
should separate from the true Worship of God, and the Professors of true Faith
in Christ, because of either known evil in the Coversation of those present, or
only suspected, or reported, is without all color of Precept or Example in the
Holy Scripture. It is true, the people of God are invited, Rev. 18.4. to go out
of Babylon: But that their going out is by separation from the Service of God
not Idolatrous, or from a Church not Heretical, by reason of some supposed or
real corruption, or disorder, or defect in Government, Service, Members, or
Ministry, is so far from the meaning of the Text, that it needs no other
refutation, but the looking into the Text and comparing it with the foregoing
Chapter. Of withdrawing from such as walk disorderly, 2 Thessalonians. 3.6. enough has
been said before, chapter 2. sect* 6. Nor is it made any where the Ministers Office
to make such separation as the Separatists require. 1 Cor. 5.12. is not spoken
of Ministers as belonging to their Office to judge them that are within; or if
it be, yet the putting away, v. 13. is not made his act; and how it is to be
done, is best discerned by v. 2. Christians are to walk together in Societies
or Churches, for their mutual edification and comfort in the Lord: and this
they are no doubt bound to do, as occasion is, toward all Christians. And so
much Phil. 1.5. Acts 2.41. and 17.4. may prove: but that they are to conjoyn in
separated Churches by the so termed Church Covenant, as if they were not
Members of other Churches, nor to join in Prayer, Praise of God, hearing,
breaking Bread, but with either that one Church or Company, to which they have
associated themselves, or those that are of the same way of Church Order, is
neither proved from those Texts, or 2 Cor. 8.5. (which mentions no such
Church Covenant, as it is alleged for) nor any other. And therefore the
imputations here used to the Ministers and Churches without distinction, are so
unsavory, and from such an intemperate Spirit, that I had rather cover them,
than rake in such a dunghill. And I think respect to the fraternity this Author
seems to be of, should have made him wary in charging the Ministers with these
things, lest some of his adversaries should throw as much dirt on the face of
the separated Churches out of Bayly's Disswasive, Edwards Gangraena, Welds
History of Antimonianism, yea, the Preface to their Declaration, October. 12.
1658. Besides what particular persons know by experience, and the relations of
the miscarriages of the ancient Separatists would furnish them withal;

Sect. 5. Election and Excommunication by the Church is not Christ's Institution.
Yet this Author cannot hold, but on he goes.

3. Says he, That he has entrusted them, so called and united together, with
Power, and given them Rules for the due and right exerting thereof, for the
carrying on the Worship of his house, to choose Officers over them to act in the
holy things of God, for and to them (of which more shall be spoken in its
proper place) to admit Members, to excommunicate Offenders, etc. all which we
find shining forth in brightness in the ensuing Scriptures, Act. 1.23. and 6.3,
5. and 14.23. 2 Cor. 8.19. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.4. Do the present Ministers of
England conform unto this Institution of Christ? nothing less: is there any
thing like this in the whole Oeconomie invented and practiced by them? Do they
not to the utmost of their power, labor to break this Bond of Christ asunder,
cast away this Cord from them by stirring up the Magistrate to persecute by
Fines, Imprisonments, Banishment, etc. the precious people of the Lord, that
desire to be found in the practice of this Law of Christ, branding them with
the odious names of Phanaticks, Sectaries, Schismatics, etc.

Answ. The Election, Acts 1.23. was of an Apostle, and that by Lot and contains
no Law or Institution of Christ, which we are tied to follow. Of the
impertinent allegation of Acts 6.3, 5. and 14.23. enough has been said before,
chapter 2. sect. 3. The Election 2 Cor. 8, 19. was of a person not to be a Pastor
to themselves, but to travel with St. Paul about the Contribution for the poor
Saints; and though it be a good precedent for the like occasion, yet was but a
Fact, not a Precept, Law, or Institution of Christ, necessary to be observed at
all times, much less binding as a perpetual rule in Election of Pastors or
Teachers. No other Excommunication is expressed, Mat. 18.17. but what is
permitted to the injured person, of which more may be seen in the answer to
this Authors Preface, Sect. 15. The delivery to Satan 1 Cor. 5.5. is argued by
Peter Moulin in his Vates, lib. 2. c. 11. to have been more then our ordinary
Excommunication, to wit, the permitting Satan to cruciate the body of the
person that sinned; which no Church now has power to do, nor indeed was the
Church then to do it, but the Apostle by his power Apostolical as having power
over unclean spirits, though absent, yet with the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ in their presence when gathered together (which being in the Greek in
the Genitive Case absolutely put, notes not their acting but presence) the
Apostles determined to do it; and therefore contains no Institution of Christ,
which Ministers are to practice. What else is charged upon the Ministers, it
concerns them who are guilty to answer; I know he cannot justly charge all with
it. It follows.

Sect. 6. No contempt of the authority of Christ is in the Church of England by
setting up Officers and Offices.
4. That the Officers of his appointment are only such as these; Pastors,
Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Widows, or Helpers: who as they are in one
particular Congregation, so they have not any Lordship, or Lordly Authority
over each other, being all Brethren, Ephesians. 4.11. Romans 12.7. and 16.1. 1 Cor.
12.28. Phil. 1.1. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Act. 6.5. and 15.2. and 20.17. and 28.21,
28. 1 Timothy 3. chap. and 5.9, 10, 17. This Law of Christ so clearly revealed in
the Scripture, they are so far from subjecting to, that they have neither the
name nor thing required by him therein. See up other Officers and Offices, as
if in open contempt and defiance of his Authority; of which it may righteously
be said, He did at no time command them, neither did it ever enter into his
heart so to do.

Answ. It is true, that those whom he calls Officers, are mentioned in some or
other of those Texts he cites, and are some of them termed gifts given by God
or Christ, in, or to, or for his Church or Body: But there are also other, as
Apostles and Prophets, mentioned in some of the Texts as given also by God; and
therefore those whom he reckons are not the only Officers of his appointment,
nor all of them to be in one Congregation. Apostles were certainly to go up and
down, and though they had not Lordship or Lordly Authority over others, yet had
they authority, preeminence, and some kind of superiority over others, and if
not in the same measure, yet some superiority is still allotted to Pastors over
Deacons, which are acknowledged to be Officers to be still continued in the
Church: nor is it unlikely, that those Elders who were worthy of double honor,
1 Timothy 5.17. had some preeminence above the rest; nor does the relation of
Brotherhood hinder, but that though in respect of the common Faith all of them
are equal, yet some may have some Power or Office committed to them, which
others have not, and so may have authority over them. That some Offices or
Services may be added to those mentioned, may be gathered from 2 Cor. 8.19.
whether all the Officers or Offices be rightly ordered in the Church of
England, is not our present enquiry. Much has been said before in answer to
the second and third Chapters of this writing, which need not be here repeated.
That the present Ministers of England, have neither name nor thing required by
Christ in this law, is notoriously false; the names of Pastors, Teachers, or
Doctors, Deacons, or Ministers, and the Office of Preaching the Gospel,
continues therein, both in the name and thing. That they have set up other
Officers and Offices, as if in open contempt and defiance of Christ's authority,
cannot be said but very unrighteously; nor do the alterations or additions, any
more prove it, then the setting up Catechists, or Expositors, or Lecturers in
the primitive or later times, proves open defiance and contempt of Christ's
authority. He goes on in the same vein of crimination thus:

Sect. 7. Election of Ministers by the Common Suffrage of the Church is not
proved to be Christ's appointment.
5. That these Officers be chosen by the common Suffrage of the Church of
Christ, and solemnly set apart by Fasting and Prayer, this is evidently
comprised in the ensuing Scriptures* Act. 1.15. and 6, 1, 2, 3, 5. and 14.23.
and 1.23, 26. and 9.26, 27. In conformity whereunto, we find the Saints for
many centuries of years after Christ, in the peaceable possession of this their
privilege and right. Clemens in his Epistle to the Church of Corinth, p, 57.
says, Our Apostles also knew by our Lord Jesus Christ, that Contention will be
about the name of Episcopal charge: Therefore for this reason, having received
a full predetermination, they constituted such as were forenominated; and in
their instructive distribution delivered, that if they were negligent, other
approved men should receive their Ministration, being ordained by them, or in
the mean time by other choice men, all the Church consenting thereunto. Yea
afterward, let some one among you, Ingenious, Merciful, filled with Love
speak; if through me Faction, and Contention, Schisms, I will depart: Of which
if you are willing, I return, and will do the things appointed by the
multitude. Wherein he fully asserts the privilege of the Church or People of
Christ, we are pleading for: And afterward during the reign of Antichrist,
Christ has not left himself without a witness, nor his people without
Champions to plead their right in this matter. To instance but in a few: That
lively witness of Christ Martin Luther loudly proclaims, That the voice of the
People ought not to be severed from the choosing of Ecclesiastical persons. And
long before him, Cyprian (who lived about 260 years after Christ) says, Plebs
obsequens, etc. The people that obey the commands of God, and fear him, ought
to separate themselves from a wicked Pastor, seeing the people themselves
chiefly, have either power to choose Pastors that are worthy, or to refuse those
that be unworthy, Cypr. Epist. 68. and tells us plainly, That this is bottomed
upon the authority of God: That that is a just and lawful Ordination which is
tried by the judgment and voice of all, viz. that fear and obey God. Of the
same mind, long after, was Francis Lambard, the Companion of Luther in Germany,
in the Preface of his Book, entitled, The sum of Christianity; who says,
Verily every Parish ought to have his proper Bishop, the which should be chosen
by the People, and confirmed by the Commonalty of every Parish, who if they
swerve one jot or tittle from the Doctrine of the Gospel of the Kingdom, ought
to be deposed by the people, and others more fit, to be elected by them. And in
Chap. 5. of the said Book, he professes, That it is the most gievous crime, and
by no means to be suffered, that many children of Perdition do deprive the
people of God of their just right and title, viz. to choose them a Pastor. Peter
Martyr in his common places, refers the choosing and election of Ministers to
the People as their undoubted right: To whom we may join Mr. Bullinger, who
says, That the Apostles exercised not tyranny in the Church, in Ordaining
Ministers without the consent of the People; Bullin. Decad. 5. Sermon. 4. Tit. 1.
1 Timothy 5. Gualter also upon Act. 1.25. says, That those that profess the
Gospel, handle the matter as evil as the Monks and Popish Bishops, in that they
restore not again to the Church, the liberty of choosing Ministers, which by
tyranny they took from them. Of the same mind is Zanchie, Calvin, Beza,
Danaeus, Tilenus. Tyndal (the Martyr) with many others, as Mr. Fox, Cartwright,
Mr. Jacob, etc. We cannot omit the famous case of the united Brethren of
Bohemia, who concluding the whole Papacy to be purely Antichristian, could not
allow of the Ordination of their Ministers by any in communion with it; and yet
being persuaded of a necessity of continuing that Ordinance in a way of
succession, send some of the Greek and Armenian Churches, who returning with
dissatisfaction, they thereupon commit themselves and their cause to God, and
choose Elders from among themselves, and by Fasting and Prayer, solemnly set
them apart to the work of the Preaching of the Gospel. To these many more might
be added. The practice pleaded for (as is evident) is as ancient as the days
of the Apostles, and the first election of ordinary New Testament Officers,
continued in the Church till after the days of Constantine, when Pride and
Tyranny soon brought all things into horrible Confusion, upon the pretext of
Decency and Order; yet in the worst of times have the witnesses of Christ born
their testimony hereunto. What say our Reverend Fathers and Ministers of the
Church of England to these things? Have they not an equal respect to this
appointment of Christ, as to those before instanced in? Is there any thing like
it almost practiced by them, in this great concern of separating persons for
the Preaching of the Gospel of Christ? Is not the liberty of the Brethren and
Churches of Christ, as much as lies in them, wholly disanulled and broken by
them? Have they any such Call to the Ministry? Do they at all value or esteem
of it? Are they in the practice of the Primitive Church, or of the Reformed
Churches of this day in this matter? Is not the print of the feet of the old
Strumpet of Rome, the bloody persecutor of the Saints, the cunning Deviser of a
new self-invented and whorish Worship, to be solely found in the paths, they
are in this matter traversing? and can such be accounted as the subjects of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the real owners of his Authority and Power?

Answ. That Bishops or Presbyters should be chosen by the common Suffrage of
the Church of Christ in each City or Parish, or select Congregation, I find not
to be the appointment of Christ in the Scriptures alleged, or any other; the
impertinency of the Allegations to this purpose is showed before, Chap. 2.
Sect. 3. In this Chap. Sect. 6. besides what is said in answer to the Preface,
Sect. 7.22. the only text not before considered, Acts 9.26, 27. and 16.17. (if
it were alleged) were altogether impertinent; there being no election of St.
Paul but to be an Apostle; and that by Christ, not the Church, on whom Ananias
laid hands at the appointment of Christ only, That he might receive his sight,
and be filled with the Holy Ghost; and to remove the fear of him, and non
credence, of his being a Disciple, Barnabas (and no other we read of) took him,
and brought him to the Apostles declaring how Christ had converted him. Which
are altogether impertinent to prove election of Ministers by the common
Suffrage of the Church, and Ordination thereupon to be the appointment of
Christ. It is granted before in the answer to the Preface, Sect. 22. that there
are relations in antiquity of the election of Bishops by the people, which
could be no other way then in times of Persecution, when the Emperors were
Infidels; yet withal, that even then things grew into such heats, that
sometimes the Emperor was fain to interpose for quietness; and after, when
Wealth and Power by favor of Christian Emperors were added to Bishops,
sometimes bloody frayes, and other evils made that Election so turbulent, that
it was found necessary to put it into the hands of fewer, until the investiture
of Bishops being wrested from the Emperors, the Popes seized on it, leaving
the election of the inferior Clergy unto the Bishops or Patrons, that had
endowed the Ministers with Estates, except in cases reserved to his Romans.
But, where the Reformation is with the consent of Princes, much of the power
usurped by Popes is recovered by them, in other places the people either choose
or consent to the election; which being made the whole essence of the
Ministerial Call by Congregational men, and by Divine Right, their opinion is
opposed by the London Ministers in their Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici,
Printed 1654. Chap. 8, 9. Nevertheless, the Testimonies produced by this
Author, are not fully to his purpose; those out of Clements his Epistle are not
home; the former speaks of constituting and appointing Ministers after the
Apostles by other famous and discreet men (as it is in Burtons English
translation of that Epistle) with the good liking and consent of all the
Church, which is less then Election constituting their Call. The other contains
only a voluntary offer to prevent breaches, which is nothing to the asserting
of a power in them rightly seated; if it were such, it would be more then this
Author, I think, would yield, that upon the command of the multitude, a
Minister is to relinquish his place. The words of Luther, Bullinger, and
perhaps the rest of the Protestants (whose words are not set down) meant no
more than the not obtruding Ministers on the Churches of Christ, as the Monks
and Popish Bishops did, who put on the People Priests unable to Preach the
Gospel, such as fed themselves and not the flock, without choice or consent of
the people. Which, if it be any where practiced, is unjustifiable; as on the
other side, where people are corrupted with Error, or Factiousness, or Carnal
Relations, and Self aims, or are unskilful to judge of the disposition and
abilities of a Minister, it is unsafe, or rather more dangerous to entrust the
Church of Christ, though a gathered Congregation, with the election of their
Minister by Common Suffrage without intervention of some discreet and able
Ministers to ratify or disanul it. What Cyprian says, upon the occasion of
the lapse of Basilides and Martialis Bishops in Spain, of their rejection and
the election of Sabinus, and Felix, was agreeable to the Canons then in use,
and to the state of those times: what he says of Divine Authority, is not
rightly proved. The Scriptures of the New Testament and Old, prove no Divine
Institution of a certain way of electing or rejecting Ministers, so as that
there may not be variation from what he says was in his time: yet it is meet,
that according to the sayings of Cyprian, Lambard, Gualter, or others, respect
be had to people, that they be heard what they can say for, or against their
Minister; and that he, who is criminous or insufficient, be not imposed on them
to their souls hurt. What our Reverend Fathers and Ministers of the Church of
England say to these things, may be seen in Whitgift's Answer to the first
Admonition and Defense of the Answer, Tr. 3. p. 170. Bilson of the perpetual
Government of Christ's Church, Chap. 15. Andrews respons. ad Bellarm. Apolog.
Chap. 13. p. 313. after, King James his Premonition: Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5.
sect. 80. Field of the Church, l. 5. c. 54. If the Prelates do any thing
unjustly therein, they must give an account to God; the Ministers, who consent
not thereto, are not chargeable; both may be accounted as Subjects of the
Kingdom of Christ, and the real owners of his Authority and Power,
notwithstanding what is objected against them; especially if the evil be either
from the defect or iniquity of Laws, Canons, and Customs, whereby that redress
of Grievances in this kind, which even the Prelates have complained of, is
stopped. I confess, that the continuance in force of so much of the Popes Canon
Law, or our Common Law, as hinders a godly and able Ministry in every Parish,
has been deplored, and much endeavor has been to amend things: But the
experience that has been of the difficulty therein, even when Congregational
men have been most industrious to rectify things, should methinks abate the
censures of this Author, and rather cause men quietly to wait for a remedy,
using the benefit of the Ministry we have, than by separation, and popular
election in gathered Congregations make things worse than they are.

Sect. 8. Prophesying is not opposed by the Ministers.
But this Author has not yet done, but tells us, To these, many other
institutions of Christ may be added, which they subject not to. What should I
mention,

6. That Royal Command of our Sovereign King and Lawgiver (which the profound,
self-philosophically wise, but indeed foolish and unlearned Doctors of this
day, wrest, to the countenancing of the disorders and confusion of Antichrist
(darkness so gross that it may be felt) that all things be done decently and in
Order, 1 Cor. 14.40. viz. that the Saints may Prophecy one by one, and ought
to admonish, exhort, and build up one another in their most holy faith, Romans
8.26. and 12.6. 1 Cor. 4.17. and 5.4. and 11.23. Ephesians. 4.7, 11, 12. 1 Timothy
2.1. and 3.15. Jude 20. 1 Cor. 12.7, 11. Mat. 25.24. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor.
12.15. and 14.12, 24. Ephesians. 4.3, 7, 15, 16. Acts 2.42. Romans 15.14. Ephesians.
5.19. Col. 3.16. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. 2 Thessalonians. 3.15. Heb. 3.13. to which might be
added the frequent examples of the Saints in the Old and New Testament, 2 Chronicles. 17.7, 8, 9. Job 2.11. Mal. 3.16. Luke 4.16. Acts 13.15. 1 Cor. 14.24. to
34. and the practice of the Primitive Church, as witness Origin (in his Epistle
to Celsum) Terrullian ( in his Apology) Justin Martyr (in his Apology) and
many others.

Answ. The censures of the Doctors of this day, and their wresting 1 Cor.
14.40. are too general, and not to be answered, save to tell the Author, that
it is good for a man not to be wise in his own conceit, nor to be too free in
censuring others, lest he fall into Diogenes his evil, when he trampled on
Plato's pride with greater pride. But to the rest of the charge I say, That I
know none of the Ministers of England, that forbid the Saints to Prophecy one
by one: nor do I know of any at this day, that have the gift of Prophecy,
which I gather from 1 Cor. 12.28, 29. and 13.2, 8, 9, 10. and other places to
have been an extraordinary gift, by immediate revelation of the Spirit, whereby
some hidden thing is discovered. (See Lysord's Apology for the Ministry, page
27, 28.) If there were any that could Prophecy indeed, neither Prelates, nor
others, may or can hinder them. But when persons mistakingly call all speaking
to men to Edification, Exhortation and Comfort, from 1 Cor. 14.3. Prophesying
(as if these terms were reciprocal) and under pres^n^e thereof, vent many
mistakes and fancies, the restraint or regulating of such exercise^ may be no
transgression of Christ's command. And, though the performing of the duties in
the Texts alleged, ought to be cherished and furthered; and such Meetings, as
do really tend thereto, should be countenanced: since there may be abuses, which
are to be prevented by Governors, though sometimes there be injustice, and
liberty too much restrained, and complaints made to God in secret; yet should
not invectives be used to alienate the minds of people from their Teachers or
Rulers, nor any unlawful practice used tending to Sedition, or disturbance; but
by patience and quietness we should possess our souls, expecting help from God
in due time, as did the Primitive Christians with happy success. Yet once more,
says this Author:

Sect 9. Ministers service may be Divine and Spiritual, in the use of the
Liturgy.
Yea, 7. What should I mention that grand Institution of this Sovereign Lord
and Lawgiver, that nothing be offered up to the Father, but what is of his own
prescription (Divine and Spiritual, without affectation of Legal shadows (John
4.24.) of worldly pomp or carnal excellency, 2 Cor. 1.12. and 2.17. 1 Cor.
2.12. and 6.13.) 1 Cor. 12.28. Isa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12. Matthew. 15.6, 9. Heb. 8.5.
1 King. 13.33. and 12, 13. Jer. 7.31. Numb. 15.39. Deuteronomy. 12.1, 4, 31. It Is
evident, the present Ministers of England conform not to the Orders and
Ordinances, Christ as the great Prophet and Lawgiver to his people, has
appointed them to walk by; and therefore really disown the Kingly and
Prophetical Office of Christ.

Answ. It is true, no Prayers, or Praises, or other Religious exercises should
be offered to the Father; but, what is of his own prescription in respect of
the service it self, matter, or manner, which he has prescribed: But when he
has left it free to use a prescript Form of words, or to pray without such a
stinted Form, where he forbids not the use of Music in praising of God, and no
Idolatry or Superstition is used or furthered by Ordinances and Utensils for
the celebration of Gods Ordinances; notwithstanding these, the service of God
may be Divine and Spiritual without affectation of Legal shadows of worldly
pomp, or carnal excellency, contrary to the texts alleged. If any be faulty in
that way, it is to be imputed to the persons, not either to others not guilty,
nor to the Liturgy prescribed; much less such Ministers as offer up Prayers and
Praises to the Father in the name of Christ for things agreeable to the Will of
God, and use the Lords Supper without Idolatry, are to be charged to disown
really the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ.

Sect. 10. Things objected against the Ministers, are not such as justify
Separation.
This Author adds. But perhaps to these things, some may say, These are but
small matters, good men differ among themselves herein.

To which we answer,

1. That they are part of the Instituted Worship of God; the Orders he has
left his children to conform to, has already been proved: to say, That any
part of the Instituted Worship of Christ, is a small matter; is no small
derogation to the wisdom of the Lawgiver, that gave it forth.

2. What if it should appear, that as small as these things seem to be, they
are the grounds of the late Controversies of God, pleaded with fire and sword
in most of the Europaean Kingdoms? This may perhaps a little stay sober persons
from so rash a conclusion, that these are small matters: A serious review of
the late Contests of God in the Nations, with the consideration of the grounds
and rise of them; will, to persons of sobriety, sufficiently evince the truth
of the suggestion.

3. As small matters as these, have been severely punished by the Lord: He is a
jealous God, and stands upon punctilio's (if I may so call them) in his
Worship: hence is that expression, Ye cannot serve the Lord, for he is a
jealous God, Josh. 24.19. What should I mention the case of Uzziah, 2 Chronicles
26.16. of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, Numb. 16. of Uzzah, whose sin lay merely
in, whose judgment was singly upon this foot of account; his not seeking the
Lord after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. God commands that when the Ark was
removed, it should be covered by the Priests, that no hand touch it, that it be
carried on men's shoulders, Numb. 4.11, 15. which Order was violated, when they
brought it from the house of Abinadab, 'twas uncovered, and upon a Cart, after
the manner of the Egyptians, 1 Samuel 8.7. for which breach of Order Uzzah is
struck dead.

4. As small matters as these, when once commanded by the Lord, are of that
force, as not only to deface the well-being, but to overturn the true being of
the Worship of God. Take one pregnant instance herein. The Lord commanded the
Israelites by Moses, to bring their Sacrifices to the place that he should
choose, and offer them there; which in it self was but a circumstance of place;
yet all the Sacrifices offered elsewhere, were a stink in the nostrills of God,
and not accounted by him as any Worship performed unto him.

5. But the Objection is altogether impertinent: we are not debating the
greatness of the sin, but the truth of what is charged upon the present
Ministers of England: what we have mentioned, are either the appointments of
Christ, or they are not; if they are (as has been proved) the present
Ministers conform to them, or they do not; if they do not (as nothing more
sure) they conform not to the Orders and Ordinances Christ has left his people
to walk by (which is the thing in debate) and therefore really deny his Kingly
and Prophetical Office.

Answ. By whom this Objection is made I know not, I think it of use to abate
the rigor of the separation, and the sharpness of the Censure that this Author
passes on the present Ministers of England. For sure if these matters excepted
against, be small matters, and good men differ therein, they are not
fundamentals of Faith or Practice; but that notwithstanding defects, errors,
or differences about them, Churches, their Members, and Ministers, may be true
Churches, Christians, and Ministers; nor should there be separation for these
things, but mutual toleration of one another, according to the doctrine of St.
Paul, Romans 14.1, 3, 10. and 15.1, 2. Philip. 3.15, 16. nor Ministers
disclaimed, while they hold the foundation, much less so heavily judged, as
this Author does, contrary to St. Paul's Doctrine, 1 Cor. 3.15. nor should there
be such rents and breaches in the Church of God for them as there are. Though
nothing commanded by God is small, yet some are comparatively small, Mat.
23.23. that they are part of Gods Instituted Worship, appointments of Christ,
which he charge the Ministers of England to oppose, needs better proof than
is yet made; that they overturn the true worship of God, is not demonstrated;
nor that they are the grounds of the late controversies of God, or that therein
the Ministers sin, as Uzziah, Corah, Dathan, Abiram, Uzzah; and therefore the
judgments of God which fell on them, may be rashly threatened to the Ministers,
especially considering that many of them if they sin, may be charitably deemed
to sin out of ignorance, not affected, or such weakness as is incident to one
truly godly; which how far he grants, may be perceived by that which follows.

As for what is added, that good men differ among themselves in this matter,
it is of no more weight than what went before.

For, 1. It Is not at all to the business in hand.

2. It Is possible good men may for a while, do that which really enwraps in the
bowels of it a denial of the Offices of Christ. We shall not deny but some of
the Ministers of England may be so in the account of God.

3. That good men differ, is an argument of their ignorance and darkness, which
though in some cases it excuses a tanto, yet not a toto; it may alter the
degree, never the nature of the sin.

4. It Is false, that good men, pressing after reformation, and the rest^tution
of the Worship of God according to the Primitive pattern, do differ touching
the substance of the things instanced in: were but the pride and passion of
men's spirits a little more allaid, and they disentangled more from their
selfish interests, a greater harmony would appear amongst them in these
matters. But,

5. As was said, The particulars instanced in, are commanded by Christ, or they
are not; if they are (as has been proved) does it in the least discharge
persons that conform not to them, from the charge they are impleaded as guilty,
viz Nonconformity to the Laws of Christ; that good men differ in these matters
(i. e. some good men transgress the Laws of Christ, which is sure no part of
their goodness, nor any warrant to justify me in the doing of what may
strengthen their hands in such a Nonconformity.)

Answ. 1. How far this branch of the Objection is to the business in hand, is
before showed.

2. That good men may do that which may be by consequence a denial of Christ's
Office, is granted, it being no more than that they may err and sin. That he
grants some of the Ministers of England may be good men in the account of God,
should have made him afraid to censure them so deeply as he does, and to
dissuade men from hearing them, or joining with them in Gods Worship, as being
such as walk disorderly, even the best of them, as symbolizing with Antichrist,
really denying Christ's Kingly and Prophetical Office,

3. If there be darkness in others that dissent from this Author, so there may
be in this Author; and considering the many learned Non-conformists, who have
opposed the separation, such as Bradshaw, Hildersham, Ames, Paget, Ball, and
others; there is as much reason that this Author should ascribe darkness to
himself as to them.

4. If the difference among the good men pressing after Reformation, be not in
the substance of the things instanced in, but in circumstances; the more to
blame is this Author for widening the Breach, and urging separation by reason
of them. Pride, passion, self-interests we may more safely charge our selves
with, than others; especially such as it cannot be denied, but that they may be
in Gods account good men.

5. It Is true, the main matter to be discussed, is the thing it self, whether
it be sin or no: which I have therefore endeavored to examine impartially, and
do conclude, that in this Chapter it is not proved unlawful to hear the present
Ministers of England. Let us consider the rest of his Arguments.

CHAP. 5.
Sect. 1. All owning of Orders different from, or contrary to Christ's, proves
not a denial of his Offices.
THus he proceeds:

That the Ministers of England deny the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of
Christ, and therefore are not to be beard, but separated from, has been
asserted, and by one argument, proved in the foregoing Chapter: To the further
evidence whereof, a few things more are to be offered in this.

Argum 2. Those who own, submit and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances, which
not only are not of Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto, do really deny,
and oppose the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ: But the present
Ministers of England do own, submit, and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances,
that are not only not of Christ's revealing, but contrary thereunto: Therefore.
The major (or first Proposition) is beyond exception. If an owning, submitting,
and subscribing to Orders and Ordinances, that are not only, not of Christ's
revealing, but contrary thereunto, be not a denial of his Kingly and
Prophetical Office, I must profess, I know not what is. Suppose the chief
Magistrate or Magistrates of a Nation should give forth a Declaration of their
Will, touching this or that concern, were not persons Nonconformity thereunto
(supposing it to be what lies within the verge of their Authority, and power to
command, and may righteously be exacted of them, whose Conformity is thereunto
required) a silent opposition of their Authority; but should any presume to
give forth Laws of their own, without the least stamp of Authority upon them,
yea, contrary unto the Statute and Declarations of their Governors; would not
all conclude that these persons and their Abettors were guilty of Rebellion
against their Rules, and did really deny the lawfulness of their Authority?
This is the present case, if men shall be found traversing paths, in the
possession and practice of Orders and Constitutions that are foreign to the
edicts of Christ, yea, contrary thereunto; shall we not as rationally conclude
that these persons are really opposers of his sovereign Authority and
Government? doubtless so.

Answ. To the major proposition of the fourth Argument [ Those that oppugn or
deny any of the Offices of Jesus Christ, are not to be heard, but separated
from] Answer is made before. The major of this argument here needs elucidation
and limitation. Orders and Ordinances which not only are not of Christ's
revealing, but contrary thereunto, are not all of one sort. Some are in points
of Faith, some of practice, some in things not fundamental, some in
fundamental. Owning, submitting, and subscribing to them, is either out of
ignorance, inadvertency, infirmity through fear or some other motive, or
voluntary, more or less, which may be aggravated by many circumstances and
effects. Likewise the denying really, and opposing of the Offices of Christ,
may be virtual or formal, directly or by consequence, by a factious setting up
an open Antichrist, or by neglecting the proper Authority of Christ. It is
true, every sin and every error does in some sort and degree oppugn the
Offices of Jesus Christ: Every disobedience to a lawful Magistrate, every
subjection to an Usurper has in it somewhat of denying or oppugning his
Authority. Yet he that should deny, that for every such sin or error a person
can be a good Christian, or for every such disobedience or subjection a person
can be a true subject, should too Stoically make a parity in sins, and neither
hold good Divinity, nor teach good Policy. It is true, he that shall openly and
factiously set up another universal Monarch of the Church, make other
Mediators to God besides Christ, teach any other way of justification than by
faith in Christ, that shall expressly forbid the observation of what Christ has
commanded; as for instance, the Lords Supper, or any other plain Command of
Christ; such do deny really, and oppose openly the Offices of Christ. But there
may be some errors in Faith, and teaching of some use in positive Rites, as
may be a real denying or opposing interpretatively Christ's Offices, as in
teaching Circumcision as necessary at that time, Acts 15.5. in owning,
submitting, and subscribing to some use as may be not only not revealed by
Christ, but also is by nearer or remote consequence a denial of Christ's
Offices; and yet the persons observing it, as v. g. the reservation of the
Bread, in the Eucharist, sending it to the sick absent, as many did in former
times, either out of ignorance, fear, or such like motives, and yet these
neither to be reckoned for such, as either in heart, or profession, or
practice, deny the Offices of Christ, as enemies to him, nor to be shunned as
such; but may be his true subjects though weak ones. Peter's denial of Christ,
his dissimulation, Gal. 2. showed not enmity, but infirmity and instability.
And many sincere Christians may out of error or weakness teach, and practice
many things not only a while, but also all their days, and that with much
contention and zeal, which may infer a denial of Christ's Offices, or his
Nature; as for instance, Lutheran Consubstantion, and yet are not to be judged
opposers of the Kingly and Prophetical Offices of Christ, so as to be
disclaimed, separated from, and rejected as no true Christian Brethren, or
Teachers. And therefore the major proposition here, may be variously conceived;
and without some limitations and explications is not to be received. But he
tells us:

Sect. 2. Ministers submitting to Canons is unjustly censured.
It Is the minor (or second Proposition) that may be under suspicion among some,
viz. That the present Ministers of England (the very best of them) do own,
submit, and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances that are not only not of Christ's
revealing, but contrary thereunto: in which two things are incumbent on us to
prove.

1. That the present Ministers of England do own, submit, and subscribe to
Orders and Ordinances that are not of Christ's revealing.

This being a charge, as to matter of fact, the production of a few
particulars, that lie near at hand, for its confirmation, will give it a speedy
dispatch.

1. They own, submit, and subscribe to the Orders and Offices of Archbishops,
Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, with many others appertaining unto this
Hierarchy, as Orders needful and necessary in the Church of Christ, and
promise subjection and obedience unto them, Eccles. Canons, Can. 7.

2. They own, and submit ( Can. 4.) to a Liturgy or prescript Form of Worship
devised by men, and imposed solely by their authority, to which they tie
themselves, neither diminishing nor adding any thing in the matter or form
thereof.

3. They own, subscribe, and engage to conform to all the Orders, Rites* and
Ceremonies prescribed in the said Book of Common Prayer ( Can. 36.) such as
bowing at the Name of Jesus, using the Cross in Baptism, kneeling at the Lords
Supper, (which though we do not, some would say, smells very strong of the
Popish Leven, and is but one Peg beneath the adoration of their Breaden god)
wearing the Surplice, etc

4. They own, that the Office of a Deacon is the first step or degree to the
Ministry ( Can. 32, 36) to which they are t^ submit and subscribe, before they
are made Priests.

5. That no person be admitted to expound the Scriptures, though indeed worthy
of the Cure of Souls (as they speak Can. 49.) without license from the Bishop
thereunto.

6. That there be some lawful Ministers which are no Preachers ( Can. 49, 57.)

7. That these unpreaching Ministers ( Can. 57.) may lawfully administer the
Ordinances of Baptism and the Lords Supper.

8. That persons refusing to have their children baptized by such dumb
Ministers, or receive the Communion from them, worthily deserve Excommunication
if they shall persist herein, ( Can. 57.)

9. That Confirmation by Diocesan Bishops is an Ordinance of God, ( Can. 60.)

10. That it appertains to the Office of Ministers to marry, ( Can. 62.)

11. That the Bishop of the Diocese may lawfully, for a while, suspend a
Minister from his Ministry, for refusing to bury the Dead, ( Can. 68.)

12. That it is not lawful for Ministers to preach or administer the Communion
in private houses, except in times of necessity, ( Can. 71.)

13. That no Minister may lawfully appoint or keep any solemn private Fasts, or
be wittingly present at any of them; nor hold any Meetings for Sermons in
Market Towns, or other places; which if he do, and persevere therein, he may
lawfully be deposed from his Ministry, ( Can. 72.)

14. That Ministers ought to be distinguished by their Vestments and Apparel,
as Gowns, Hoods, Tippers, Square Caps; and in their journeys Cloaks with
sleeves, (called Priests Cloaks, Can 74.) with many more that might be added,
to which the Ministers of England are to subscribe and own, as agreeable to the
Word of God, before their admission into the Ministry, according to the 38.
Canon Ecclesiastical*

Are any of these Ordinances and Constitutions of the appointment of Christ?
When or where were they instituted by by him? That these are Posts set by the
Lords Posts, and Thresholds by his Thresholds (of which the Lord complains,
Ezekiel. 43.8.) who sees not? That the present Ministers of England do conform and
subscribe hereunto, cannot be denied; and thence an owning, subscribing, and
submitting to Orders and Constitutions that are not of Christ's appointment, is
evidently evinced.

Answ. Though I undertake not to justify all that is in the Ecclesiastical
Canons of the Synod at London, Anno 1603. nor need the present Ministers, nor
perhaps will they or the Bishops themselves take it upon them; yet that it may
appear how falsely and injuriously this Author has dealt with them, and how
superficially he has handled this Argument; I say,

I. That he has misrecited the Canons in all or most of the 14 particulars
alleged.

1. In the 7. Canon it is not said, That the Orders and Offices of Arch
bishops, Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, with many others appertaining unto this
Hierarchy, are Orders needful and necessary in the Church of Christ; nor is it
required therein, that the Ministers promise subjection and obedience unto
them. But it is censured as a wicked error to affirm, that the Government of
the Church of England under his Majesty by Archbishops, Bishops, Deans,
Arch^deacons, and the rest that bear Office in the same is Antichristian or
repugnant to the Word of God; and it is required of such as have thus affirmed
that before their absolution from Excommunication they repent, and publicly
revoke it.

2. In the 4. Canon, Ministers are not required to own and submit to a Liturgy,
or prescript Form of Worship devised by men, and imposed solely by their
authority, nor to tie themselves to it, neither diminishing nor adding in the
matter or Form thereof: But it is judged a wicked error to affirm, that the
Form of Gods Worship in the Church of England, established by the Law, and
contained in the Book of Common Prayer and Administration of Sacraments, is a
corrupt, superstitious or unlawful Worship of God, or contains any thing in
it that is repugnant to the Scriptures; and it is required of such as have thus
affirmed, that before their absolution from Excommunication they repent, and
publicly revoke it.

3. In the third particular are sundry things liable to Exception.

1. It is said that in the Book of Common Prayer, Bowing at the Name of Jesus
is prescribed; which I find not there, but in the 18 Canon*

2. It is not well, that when this Author does not, yet he tells us some would
say, that kneeling at the Lords Supper smells very strong of the Popish Leven,
and is but one peg beneath the adoration of their Breaden God; when he might
know, that not only the 28. Article of the Church of England, and the Homily of
the Peril of Idolatry, and the Apology of the Church of England, are fully
against it, but also the Compilers of the Common Prayer Book, suffered
Martyrdom for their refusal and abhorrency of such adoration; and in the
Rubric of the Common Prayer Book, as it is now established, after the
Communion there is a clear and sufficient Declaration against it; which should,
if this Author had dealt heartily, have been told ignorant people, who are
drawn into a separation upon this suggestion.

3. It is true, that in the 36 Canon subscription is required to this Article,
That the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordering of Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, contains in it nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may
be lawfully used, and that he himself will use the form in the said Book
prescribed in public Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and none
other; which I take not to be the same with owning, submitting, and engaging to
conform to all the Orders, Rites, and Ceremonies prescribed therein.

4. It is said Canon. 32. The Office of a Deacon, is a step or degree to the
Ministry, according to the judgment of the ancient Fathers, and the practice of
the Primitive Church, and the subscription is required in the 36. Canon to the
Book of Ordination, as I have set it down here; but they are not required by
that subscription to own this assertion, That the Office of a Deacon is the
first step or degree to the Ministry.

5. In the 49. Canon it is said, No person whatsoever, not examined and
approved by the Bishop of the Diocese, or not licensed for a sufficient or
convenient Preacher, shall take upon him to expound in his own Cure, or
elsewhere, any Scripture, or matter, or doctrine: But they do not speak [
though judged worthy of the Cure of Souls] they may have a Cure of Souls by
indirect means, or by reason of the imperfection of the Law to debarr them, or
by reason of the want of sufficient Preachers, as was in the beginning of the
Reformation, or for want of maintenance for able Preachers to undertake it, who
are not judged worthy of the Cure of Souls.

6, and 7. Neither of the Positions are Canons 49, 57. though their
Ministration of Baptism and the Lords Supper is made sufficient.

And the 8. particular is in Canon 57.

9. Can. 60. It is not said, That Confirmation by Diocesan Bishops, is an
Ordinance of God, but that it has been a solemn ancient and laudable custom in
the Church of God, continued from the Apostles times, that all Bishops should
lay their hands upon children baptized, and instructed in the Catechism of
Christian Religion, praying over them, and blessing them; which we commonly
call Confirmation; and that this holy action has been accustomed in the Church
in former ages.

10. It is not said Canon 62. that it appertains to the Office of Ministers to
marry; but they are only regulated therein.

11. The Bishop is to suspend according to Can. 68. Ministers refusing to bury;
but the lawfulness of it is not there asserted, though presupposed.

12, 13. Ministers preaching, administering the Communion in private houses,
except in times of necessity; some appointing of Fasts, holding Meetings for
Sermons, are forbidden, Can. 71, 72. but it is not there determined that they
are forbidden, because of the unlawfulness; Inexpediency, or inconvenience may
occasion a prohibition of that which is not unlawful.

14. It is not asserted Can. 74. that Ministers ought to be distinguished by
the habit there prescribed, but that ancient Churches thought it fit.

II. Were all true which this Author has alleged in these 14 particulars, yet
it is not true which he says, that either in the 36, or 38. Canon
Ecclesiastical Ministers are to subscribe to, and own all these Orders and
Ordinances, as agreeable to the Word of God.

III. To the Questions, Are any of these Ordinances and Constitutions of the
appointment of Christ? when or where were they instituted by him? I might
answer by cross Interrogations, Are the Church Covenant, gathering of Churches
in the Congregational way, by severing choice Members from the rest, requiring
an account of the manner of their Conversion, making Election by the common
Suffrage of the Members essential to a Minister, imposition of hands, tied to
the Eldership of that Church; maintenance by Collection every Lords day,
Excommunication by the major part of the Members, with many more of the Orders
of Congregational Churches, Ordinances, and Constitutions of the appointment of
Christ? when and where were they instituted by him? It is not I presume
altogether forgotten, that such questions have been propounded to them by Mr.
Ball, Apollonius, and many others, and their answers judged insufficient. And
if they cannot show Christ's appointment for their Orders, which they require,
why do they charge so deeply the Ministers of England as denying and opposing
the Prophetical and Kingly Office of Christ, for submitting to Orders, which as
well may be said to be of Christ's appointment as their own; or at least when
they themselves may by the same reason be concluded to deny or oppose the same
Offices? But for a direct answer, I grant they are not Ordinances and
Constitutions of the appointment of Christ, and yet judge they may be submitted
and conformed to, and required of Governors, while they are regulated by Laws
of Ecclesiastical Policy, and do think that Mr. Hooker in his three first Books
of Ecclesiastical Policy has evinced thus much.

IV. To what is said, that these are Posts set by the Lords Posts, and
thresholds by his thresholds (of which the Lord complains, Ezekiel. 43.8.) who
sees not? I answer, Diodate his Annot. on Ezekiel. 43.8. is this, Their threshold]
that is to say, they set their Idols, and perform their service in my Temple,
in places and Chapels near to the places which are consecrated to my service.
See 2 King. 16, 14. and 21.7. Jer. 11.15. Ezekiel. 8.3. and 23.39. and 44.7. All
the Interpreters I meet with, and the words themselves show, that the thing
complained of, was another thing than making Orders and Constitutions without
revelation and appointment of Christ for Ecclesiastical Rule (such as those
Constitutions in the Canons of the Church of England, are, which in Christian
Churches have in like sort been made in the best times; yea, and some in the
Jewish Church without reproof;) to wit, Idolatrous practices by their Kings
(such as Ahaz and Manasseh were) called Whoredoms, v. 7, 9. and abominations
which they committed and defiled Gods holy Name; and for which be consumed them
in his anger; and therefore tell this Author, that I see not those Ordinances
he mentions to be Posts set by the Lords Posts, and Thresholds by his
Thresholds, complained of Ezekiel 43.8. but rather think him in a dream or
frenzy that says he sees it. Yea further, if it were granted that the
complaint were against their Act, as adding inventions of men to Gods
Ordinances, yet this cannot be understood but of such as are made Gods Worship,
or wherein that which God has appointed is altered or corrupted. And therefore
I conclude, that it is no small abuse of this Text, which occurrs in sundry
printed Sermons and other Books to make every Order of men about Gods Worship,
or the Governing of the Church to be thus branded, and out of all infer, that
what he says he has evidently evinced, is but a vain brag of this Author.
Let Us proceed in viewing what follows.

Sect. 3. Making Canons in things undetermined, and subjection to them, agrees
with Scripture.
Object. If it be said, That though these Canons, and Constitutions owned by
the Ministers of England, be not (...) to be found in the Scripture of the
Institution of Christ in so many words, yet by consequence they may rationally
be deduced from thence: As where it is commanded, That all things be done
decently and in order, 1 Cor. 14.40. which it is the duty of the Church to make
Rules and Constitutions about, which when it has done, it is the duty of every
son thereof, to own, or subject to, without questioning its authority.

Answ. Though I assert not that the Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical of
the Church of England, may be rationally deduced from Scripture; and therefore
make not the Objection as here it is framed, yet I assert that Canons, and
Constitutions Ecclesiastical concerning Divine Worship, and Church Covernment
may be made by Governors, if they be not opposite to such Rules as are in
Scripture about Gods Worship, and the rule of his Church; and be indeed
subservient and Conducible to the well-ordering of such Worship and Rule: and
that the Members of the Churches under their Governors should submit to, and
yield obedience to them, as to other humane Laws, not conceiving the things
commanded obligatory of their Consciences, as things appointed by Divine
Authority, so as that it should be sin to disobey or omit them in any case: But
by virtue of the general Precept of Obedience, Heb. 13.17. and in Order to the
ends of their rule without any Contempt of their Authority, or refractariness
they should be either actively or passively obeyed, though the things
themselves be only indifferent, and not of themselves, or directly binding the
Conscience.

And this I conceive to be proved, 1. From Reason, because without such
regulations, Church Societies can no more be continued by reason of the
difference of minds and capacities than other Societies, which is proved true
by experience.

2. From the practice of all sorts of Churches, who have in process of time
found it necessary to have Synods to this end.

3. From the course God has taken with the Christian Churches, to whom he has
delivered the Doctrine of Faith, and necessaries of Worship in the Scriptures,
but has left many accidentals about Worship and Church Government
undetermined, and therefore left them partly to each ones own light in things
concerning himself only, partly to the Rulers Domestical, National, Civil,
Ecclesiastical in things that concern the several Communities.

4. From the Texts 1 Cor. 14.40. Heb. 13.17. and other places. For in that
after all his discourse about ordering the use of their gifts, he ends with
this general rule; he thereby shows, that more things were to be ordered by
that rule, either by each one himself, or by their Governors, as he himself
did resolve, 1 Cor. 11.34. and appointed Titus and Timothy in the Epistles to
them, and enjoined obedience, Heb. 13.17. Now let us consider what is answered
hereto. He says:

Sect. 4. It Is no derogation from Scripture, or Christ, that such Canons are
made and obeyed.
Answ. That there is any thing of moment in this Objection, though their
Achilles in this matter, and that which they are upon every turn producing, is
easily demonstrated. The whole of it being built upon as uncertain principles,
yea, upon as notoriously false suppositions, as ever objection in so weighty a
case was built upon.

1. It Is supposed that Christ has not determined in the Scripture, how the
affairs of his house should be managed with decency and order, as well as
commanded that they be so; which is:

1. No small derogation to the perfection of the Scriptures.

2. To the wisdom and faithfulness of Christ, debasing him herein below Moses;
though the Scripture in this respect prefers him before him.

3. Diametrically opposite to the Scripture instanced in, which stands as a two
edged Sword to cut the throat of their cause, in its approaches thereto for
shelter: of which take this brief account; The Apostle having in the beginning
of the Chapter pressed the Church of Corinth, to follow after spiritual gifts,
but especially that they might prophecy; the liberty of the Saints therein
being fully asserted, and several directions thereabout given, he condemns
their disorderly practice, in respect of this important duty and privilege,
ver. 26. and gives direction touching its regular performance; and this he does,

First, Generally, ver. 26. Let all things be done to edifying, which with a
little alteration he represses, ver. 40. Let all things be done decently and in
order.

Secondly, Particularly, by telling them how they ought to manage this affair
in a way of decency, order, and edification; wherein several rules are
comprised, too long to be here insisted on, as in cases of speaking in an
unknown tongue, ver. 27, 28. of prophesying by two or three, ver* 29, 30. of
the duties of women, with respect thereunto, ver. 34, 35. that from hence a
power invested in the Church for the binding of the consciences of men,
touching ceremonies in Worship, should be regularly deduced, is the first born
of improbabilities and absurdities.

1. Paul speaking by an infallible spirit of Prophecy, advises the Church of
Corinth, that all things be done decently and in order; therefore persons that
have not, pretend not to such a spirit, may of their own heads bind our
Consciences by Laws and Rules of their own in the service of God.

2. Paul does not only tell them, that all things ought to be done decently and
in order; but discovers to them, wherein that decency and order lies; therefore
the Church has power to determine in this matter, are such Non-sequiturs as
will not in haste be made good.

I reply, as the Argument is framed by me, there is moment in the objection,
which is not built upon the principle he expresses, but this; that however
Christ has not only commanded, but also determined in generals in the
Scripture, how the affairs of his House should be managed with decency and
order; yet in many particularities he has not determined how the Worship of
God and Rule of his Church should be managed with decency and order; as
whether at the Communion there should be a Table spread with a linen cloth,
the Service begin with a recital of the Institution, or Prayer; Public Prayer
begin with Confession of Sin, or Thanksgiving, or profession of our faith;
seating of persons in the meeting be with respect to their civil degrees, or
sex, or promiscuously; Sermon begin at the reading of the Text, and Prayer be
after or before; these with many more are indeterminate by Christ or his
Apostles in the Scripture, and yet are to be determined according to the Rule
of Decency and Order, either by each person himself in that which is private,
or by Rulers in that, which belongs to the Community; and Obedience is due to
the determinations of Rulers in these things. And it seems to me (to use this
Authors own phrase) the firstborn of improbabilities and absurdities, that God
should charge parents to bring up their children in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. that we should first of all make supplications, prayers,
intercessions, giving of thanks for all men, for Kings, and for all that are in
authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. that the Bishop should be one that takes care of the
Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.5. If these have no power in the Worship of God, and
rule of the Church to make Constitutions about things undetermined, or that
they may without any sin be disobeyed. For as for the exception, as if such
power reaches only to things Civil not Ecclesiastical, the contrary is proved
by Bishop Sanderson in his sixth Lecture about the obligation of Conscience.
Nor is there any derogation to the perfection of Scripture, or the faithfulness
of Christ by such a grant. For the sufficiency of the Scripture being in
affording Doctrines of Faith and Rules of Life, if as able to make a man wise
unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy
3.15. its perfection is acknowledged, there is no lessening of its use, though
it be said, that notwithstanding its sufficiency to its end; yet Laws
Domestical, Civil, National, Ecclesiastical, are necessary to be added for good
order and Government. And the faithfulness of Christ, Heb. 3.2. is not placed
in determining every particularity in Worship, (yea, he was faithful in that he
did not) for then he should have put upon us such a yoke, as Moses bid,
contrary to his Office, Joh. 1.17. but in that he discharged the work his
Father had appointed him as our High Priest, in suffering and interceding for
us; and as the Apostle of our Profession, in teachinng us the counsel of God
fully in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and that above Moses, as being not as a
servant in Gods house only as Moses, but as a Son over his own house. And it is
to be considered what Bishop Sanderson observes, that if Christ's faithfulness
must have been extended to the determination of all particularities equally to
Moses, he must have set down all particularities of Civil Government, as Moses
did in the judicial Laws of the Jews, and so those Laws must be observed (as
some have attempted) and the Common Law of England must be evacuated; and a
yoke put upon our necks, from which Christ has freed us. And therefore a good
Argument is hence deducible, that God would have the ordering of things
undetermined left to Governors, because otherwise Christ should not have been
faithful as Moses, since he has not determined them; yea should have been
unfaithful if he had, since it was the Will of God that Christians should not
have such a yoke of Rites put upon them, as Moses did put upon the Jews, Acts
15.9, 10* Gal. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. But the Text 1 Cor. 14.40. requires more
consideration, since he says it is diametrically opposite to that principle it
is alleged to establish, which is but a mere Dictate of his, for which he
brings no proof: For neither is his account of the Apostles dissertation right,
it being not true, that he asserts the liberty of the Saints in prophesying; as
if prophesying were the liberty of the Saints as such, which was the peculiar
gift of Prophets, v. 31, 32. which now the Saints have not, no^ can now claim,
as many do arrogantly, as if it were their liberty, inferring from v. 3. that
because it is said, he that prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, and
exhortation, and comfort; therefore every one that speaks unto men to
edification, and exhortation, and comfort, did prophecy* which is like as if,
because it is said, 1 Cor. 8.1. charity edifieth; therefore it should be
inferred, that whatever edifieth is charity; nor is it right, that the Apostle,
v. 40. represseth his direction, v. 26. that being another direction, and a
general one after and besides the particulars, v. 27, 28, 29, 30, 34, 35. Nor
if it were as he says, is there any thing to prove, that all the particular
ways of Decency, Order, and Edification, are there set down; or that none are
permitted to the care of After-Rulers. Nor is the Argument, as I have framed
it, evacuated; who have not endeavored to prove thence a power invested in the
Church for the binding of the Consciences of men, touching Ceremonies in
Worship, but do wave the controversies about the Ceremonies of the Cross,
Surplice and Kneeling; about which the Writings of Bishop Morton, Burges, Ames,
and others are extant; nor do I allege the words as Doctor Hammond expounds
them, rendering (...), according to appointment; in which he is opposed by Mr.
Jeans: but only thus argue, There Is a general rule after diverse particulars
instanced in, left by the Apostle in the close of his dissertation, which were
of no use, if he had set down all ways of Decency and Order, and left none to
be determined by others; therefore yet there remain particularities of Decency
and Order about Divine Worship and Church-Rule to be determined by men: which
that it belongs to Rulers, I gathered from other places. As for the Arguments
as he frames them, I know none that avows them, neither do I think any does
express himself thus, Paul speaking by an infallible spirit of Prophecy
advises the Church of Corinth; for though I doubt not but Paul spoke by an
infallible Spirit in that advise, yet that is fitter to be termed Apostolic
than of Prophecy: nor do I conceive any of them whom he opposes would
unadvisedly thus conclude, Persons that have not, pretend not to such a spirit,
may of their own heads bind our Consciences by Laws and Rules of their own in
the service of God: nor do I think any would say, Paul does not only tell them,
that all things ought to be done decently and in order; but discovers to them,
wherein that decency and order lies. For they conceive this false, except about
the point of Prophesying in that place, and that the Apostle gives only a
general rule, and leaves the particularities of Decency and Order to be
determined by others, chiefly Rulers: nor would they thence infer, therefore
the Church has power in this matter; but rather thus plead, That which
belonging to Decency and Order is commanded in general, but not in the
particularities determined, is in respect of Communities left to be determined
by their Rules: but so is the Apostles command, 1 Cor. 14.40. Therefore, etc.
The major rests on this, That what is to be determined in or for a Community,
is supposed to belong to their Rulers. This Author goes on thus:

Sect. 5 All particularities of Decency and Order in things sacred, are not
determined in Scripture.
But let this be granted, suppose that it is the privilege and duty of the
Church to make Laws and Constitutions, for the binding of the consciences of
men in matters of Decency and Orders; this Church herein is bounded by the
Scripture, or it is not: If it be (for which he cites in the Margin these words
of, Macovius in loc. com. cap. 83. p. 851. The Laws by which the Governors of
the Church are to judge, are such as are prescribed in the Word of God) bounded
by the Scripture, then when it has no prescription therein for its commands,
its not to be obeyed, and so we are where we were before, that Decency and
Order is to be determined by the Scripture: If it be not bounded thereby, then
whatever ceremonies it introduces not directly contrary thereunto, they must
be subjected to; which how fair an inlet it is to the whole farrago of Popish
inventions, who sees not?

Answ. I say not, It Is the privilege and duty of the Church to make Laws and
Constitutions for the binding of the Consciences of m^n in the matters of
Decency and Order; but that the particularities of Decency and Order not
determined in Scripture may by Canons to that end, be prescribed; the general
rules in Scripture, the Laws of Nature, Right Reason, other laudable Customs
and just Laws being duly observed; and that persons are to obey them, not as
bound in conscience directly, and by the things themselves, but indirectly and
by accident,; because appointed by Rulers, to whom God requires obedience in
those things: which being rightly understood, both horns of the dilemma are
avoided, they being bounded in the Scripture, in the general are to be obeyed
as other humane Laws; and the particularities not being there determined, the
ways of Decency and Order not determined by Scripture, are to be received: and
yet it follows not that whatever Ceremonies Rulers introduce not directly
contrary to Scripture, must be subjected to; much less a fair inlet made to the
whole farrago of Popish inventions. For if indirectly they be contrary to
Scripture, or otherwise hurtful, or not subservient to the ends of such Laws,
or become by reason of their number or imposition, such a yoke as Christ has
freed us from, there may be a relaxation from them, more than from other humane
Civil Laws; and for all, or some of these reasons, the whole farrago of Popish
inventions is to be excluded, though other Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of
England be subjected to. Wherein I meddle not with the Question about the
Ceremonies controverted, and therefore may let pass that which this Author
adds; yet were this also yielded them, they were never a jot nearer the mark
aimed at, except it can be proved, that supposing a power of introducing
Ceremonies to be invested in the Church, thence a power for the institution of
new Orders and Ordinances, the introducing of Heathenish, Jewish, and
Superstitious practices in the Worship of God, may be evinced; there being no
necessity that in answering his Argument I should avouch the imposition or use
of those Ceremonies, which the Non-conformists argue against. Nor need I reply
to what he adds: And yet should all this be yielded them, none of which will
they be able to prove to the Worlds end; how will they manifest those Lordly
Commands and Constitutions are the Constitutions of a truly constituted Church
of Christ, (a strong supposition hereof is the (...) of the present Objection:)
and yet sail they in the making good their ground herein: who sees not that
their Plea hitherto impleaded sinks of it self? Since I neither plead for the
Constitutions of the Church of England in particular; nor is it my supposition,
that only the Constitutions of a constituted Church of Christ bind in things of
Divine Worship and Church Rule, and therefore my Answer and position need not
sink for want of making good this plea. And accordingly might put him off to
others to answer his impertinent questions, What is it then they mean by the
Church, whose (...) we are without disputing to subject to? is it the National
Church of England? But where find they any National Church of the Institution
of Christ, in the Oeconomie of the Gospel? How prove they that the Church of
England is so? Nevertheless, I may say I know not any that hold concerning the
Church of England that its (...) proper opinions are to be subjected to,
without dispute; though the Romanists hold it of the Church of R^me: and for a
National Church I refer him to what is before in answer to his Preface, sect.
15. But there are more questions behind. Yet should this also be granted, where
are the Constitutions and Laws of this Church, that we may pay the homage to
them as is meet? Which Question he might answer himself, who in this Chapter
cites so many of the Canons of the Church of England.

But he yet enquires, When was it assembled (...) in the same place together,
in its several members freely to debate, (1 Cor. 11.20. and 14 23.) and in the
Margin, Maccovius in loc. com. append. de Adi. p. 861. Things indifferent, he
tells you, ought not to be introduced into the Church, but by the common
consent thereof, according to Acts 15.) determine what Laws and Constitutions
were fit to be observed by them?

To which I answer, The Church of England was assembled at London, Anno 1603.
in its several members by deputation freely to debate things, as was the usage
in the Synods of ancient and later times, and even in New England at Cambridge,
there about the Antinomian opinions in Mr. Welds History; in England in the
Assembly at Westminster, of the Congregational Churches by their Elders and
Messengers in their Meeting at the Savoy, October. 12. 1658. which kind of
Meeting must be allowed as the Meeting of the whole Church, which they
represent, there being no other way, in which orderly many particular Churches
throughout a Nation can convene and debate freely, either points of Doctrine or
Discipline, than by such Deputies; and therefore as the whole Kingdom is said
to meet in the Parliament, so the whole Church may be said to meet in their
Synod. Nor is there any thing against this, in 1 Cor. 11.20 or 1 Cor. 14.23.
unless it be supposed, that all those must meet to debate matters of Doctrine
and Discipline, who did then meet for worship, which is not to be said: For
then in such things women also must have a voice contrary to the Apostles
resolution, 1 Cor. 14.34. and the practice of all the Churches. As for Act. 15.
the Synod was about a point of Doctrine, and though it be said, ver. 22. that
it pleased the Apostles and Elders, with the whole Church, to send some to
Antioch; yet the whole Church is not likely to be meant of every particular
member, but as Acts 6.2, 5. Acts 21.20, 22. and elsewhere, by the multitude, or
whole Church, is meant a great part or indefinite number. However those from
Antioch, mentioned Acts 15.2. were not many, and therefore if that Synod be a
pattern for after times; yet it cannot be a rule in respect of the number of
persons convening, when Churches are so increased, or so far distant one from
another, as that they cannot commodiously meet in their multitudes or debate
orderly, but must of necessity act by Deputies, and their Constitutions are to
be taken as the Constitutions of the whole Church, for whom they appear. But
this Author excepts:

If it be said, that this is not requisite, it is enough that it be assembled
in its several Officers, or such as shall be chosen by their Officers, whose
laws every member is bound to be obedient to. We answer, But these Officers are
the Church, or they are not; if they are not (as there is nothing more sure) I
owe no subjection to their Laws or Constitutions, it being pleaded, that it is
the Church that has only power in this matter: if they are the Church, let
them by one Scripture prove they are so: or where the true Officers of a true
Church are so called, and as Nonius says out of N^vius to them, Dum vivebo
fidelis ero. Yet except this also be yielded them, there is nothing of moment
in the Objection produced.

Answ. The Objection, as it is by me made, is not the Plea as here is supposed.
The power in this matter, is by me ascribed to Rulers, and Texts requiring
obedience to them have been produced; and notwithstanding this Authors
exceptions, there is something of moment in the Objection; and the speech is
not made good, That the present Ministers of England, submit, own, and
subscribe to Laws and Constitutions that are not in any sense of Christ
revealing; nor if it were, does it follow, Therefore they oppose the Kingly and
Prophetical Office of Christ.

Sect. 6. It Is not proved, that the Ministers of England, own Constitutions
contrary to the revelation of Christ.
He goes on thus:

But this is not all. 2ly. The present Ministers of England do own, submit, and
subscribe to Laws, Constitutions, and Ordinances, that are contrary to the
revelation of Christ, whence an opposition to the Kingly and Prophetical Office
of Christ, may rationally be concluded. This also by the induction of a few
particular instances, will be evinced beyond exception.

Answ. Four things are here undertaken:

1. That the particular instances, stand by Laws and Constitutions.

2. That these Laws, Constitutions, and Ordinances, are contrary to the
revelation of Christ.

3. That the present Ministers of England, do own, submit and subscribe to them.

4. That from thence an opposition to the Kingly and Prophetical Office of
Christ, may rationally be concluded. In which, how he has failed, will be
apparent by the view of what he alleges.

They own, says he, and acknowledge,

1. That there may be other Archbishops, and Lord-Bishops in the Church of
Christ, besides himself: which is contrary to 1 Pet. 5.3. 1 Cor. 12.5. Ephesians.
4.5. Heb. 3.1. Luke 22.25, 26.

Answ. That there may be other Archbishops and Lord-Bishops in the Church of
Christ besides himself, is acknowledged by the present Ministers of England,
but not in the sense in which Christ is called the chief Shepherd, 1 Pet. 5.4.
or the same Lord, 1 Cor. 12.5. or one Lord, Ephesians. 4.5. or the Apostle and High
Priest of our prosession, Heb. 3.1. or Lordship is forbidden, 1 Pet. 5.3. Luke
22.25, 26. they are not acknowledged Archbishops over the whole Church, as the
Pope; but in their own Province: nor are they termed Archbishops, as if other
Bishops had their authority from them, as the Pope claims; but they only have a
Primacy or Precedence, with some other Prerogatives, by that title. Nor are
they, or other Bishops, made Lords, as Christ, over the whole Church, or have
such dominion ascribed to them over the Church they oversee, as is forbidden, 1
Pet. 5.3. Luke 22.25, 26. and is usurped by Popish Bishops; but are Lords only
by the Kings Grant, as is said before in Answer to Chap. 3. Sect. 5, 6. not in
the Church of Christ, but in the Kingdom and Parliament; and therefore this
acknowledgement is not contrary to the revelation of Christ; there being no
contrariety, or contradiction, unless there were an opposition in the same
respect, as Logicians determine Christ is said, 1 Timothy 6.15. to be (...), the
only Dynasta, or Potentate; and yet without contrariety, or contradiction the
Eunuch, Acts 8.27. is termed (...) Dynasta or Potentate, as in the reading in
the margin of our translation. But were there contrariety, yet it is not
showed, that what is acknowledged is a Law, Constitution, or Ordinance (which
do usually determine not what may be, but what shall and must be) nor that
Ministers own it by subscription.

2. That men may and ought to be made Ministers, only by these Lord-Bishops:
which is contrary to Heb. 5.4. John 10.1, 7. and 13.20. and 14.6. Act. 14.23.
with 6.3, 5.

Answ. It is true, it is acknowledged by the present Ministers of England, that
men may be made Ministers by these Lord-Bishops; but not that they may and
ought to be made Ministers only by these Lord-Bishops; since Ministers are
allowed, who are made by Suffragan Bishops, who are not Lords; and for the
Churches Reformed, of Foreigners dwelling in England Ministers made by
Presbyters only. But this is not a Law, Constitution, or Ordinance to which
Ministers subscribe; nor if they did, is there any contrariety therein to the
revelation of Christ. Heb. 5.4. it is said, And no man takes this honor, that
is, of being High Priest, unto himself, but he that is called of God as Aaron.
But this is impertinently alleged, being not spoken of the Gospel Ministry;
but of the Priesthood of the Law, and the High Priest, and of his Calling by
God immediately; and therefore, if that which the Ministers acknowledge be
proved contrary to the revelation of Christ by this text, the making of
M^nisters in Congregational Churches by their Eldership is alike contrary, since
they are not called of God as Aaron. Of the impertinency of John 10.1, 7.
enough is said before in the Answer to Chap. 2. Sect. 3. Joh. 13.20. He that
receives whomsoever I send, receives me. is no more contrary to Bishops
Ordination, than to Presbyters, John 14.6. speaks not at all of making
Ministers, but of the way whereby Christians have access to God Of Acts 14.23.
and 6.3, 5. enough has been said in Answer to Chap. 2. Sect. 3.

3. That Prelates, their Chancellors, and Officers, have power from Christ to
cast out of the Church of God, contrary to Mat. 18.16, 17. 1 Cor. 5.4.

Answ. That there is a Law, Ordinance, or Constitution of this, to which
Ministers subscribe, I find no^. Of the texts Mat. 18.16, 17. 1 Cor. 5.4.
enough has been said in Answer to the Preface, Sect. 15. to Chap. 4. Sect. 5.
whence the impertinency of the alleging these texts may appear.

4. That the Office of Suffragans, Deans, Canons, Petty-Canons, Prebendaries,
Coiristers, Organists, Archdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Parsons, Vicars,
and Curates are lawful and necessary to be had in the Church, evidently
contrary to 1 Cor. 12, 18 28. Romans 12.7. Ephesians. 4.11. The Officers instituted
by Christ are sufficient for the edification and perfecting of the Saints, till
they all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, ver. 12, 13. in what sense the forementioned, being not one
of them of the institution of Christ, may be owned as lawful or necessary,
without an high contempt of the Wisdom and Sovereignty of Christ, cannot by
such dull persons as my self he conjectured That any others see them any way
useful to the Church of Christ, may be imputed to such a sharp-sightedness as
was that of Caius Caligula, to whom, when he enquired of Vitellius, whether he
saw him not embracing the Moon? 'twas answered Solis (Domine) vobis-diis licet
se invicem videre.

Answ. Where this imagined Law, Ordinance, or Constitution is, or when and how
the present Ministers do own, acknowledge, submit, and subscribe to it (as this
Author suggests) is not here showed by him, nor do I know where to find it. O^
the Office of so many of these, as are ordained Presbyters, or Priests (as the
term is in the English Liturgy) enough has been said in answering the 3
Chapter, Sect. 3, 5. etc. that though their names are various; yet their Office
is the same with some of those who are of Christ, 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans 12.7
Ephesians. 4.11. and consequently lawful and necessary; the rest are not reckoned
among the Orders of Ministry in the Church, but counted Services, which are
acknowledged not necessary; and whether they be useful or not, it matters not
in respect of the present enquiry, if there be no Law, Constitution, or
Ordinance to make them lawful and necessary to be had in the Church, which the
Ministers subscribe to, as I think there is not.

5. That the Office ^f Deacons in the Church, is to be employed in public
praying, administration of Baptism, and preaching, if licensed by the Bishop
thereunto; contrary to Act. 6.2. Ephesians. 4.11.

Answ. That at first the institution of Deacons was to serve tables, Acts 6.2.
not to preach the word of God; yet Steven and Philip being employed in
Preaching, and Philip in Baptizing, it is not contrary to Christ's revelation in
those texts or any other, that they should be employed in those works.

6. That the Ordinance of breaking Bread, or the Sacrament of the Lords Supper
may be administered to one alone; as to a sick man ready to die: which is
diametrically opposite to the nature and institution of that Ordinance, 1 Cor.
10.16. and 11.33. Mat. 26.26. Act. 2.42. and 20.7.

Answ. The Communion is in time of infectious diseases allowed to be
administered to one only besides the Minister, which whether it be fit to be
done, is left to the Minister. That it is diametrically opposite to the nature
and institution of that Ordinance, is not easily proved. 1 Cor. 10.16. A
Communion is proved in that Sacrament, but ver. 17. and 1 Cor. 12.13. rather
proves the Communion to be therein with all believers throughout the world
though absent, than only with the present partakers; and if so, though but two
join, the Minister and the sick man, the Communion there meant is held with all
Christians, the meaning and intent of the Apostle being to show that by
partaking thereof, they show themselves of one body or community with all
Christians, and so may not partake of the table of Devils, ver. 21. Christ did
institute the Lords Supper to his Disciples; but that so many or a number above
two are necessary, so as that otherwise it should not have the nature of that
Sacrament, cannot be thence inferred. 1 Cor. 11.33. Acts 20.7. do prove it
should be administered, when all Communicants come together; but whether it want
the nature of the Sacrament, if but two be together, specially in a case
extraordinary, may be questioned. As Acts 2.42. it is said, They continued in
breaking of bread; so ver. 46. it is said, they did it from house to house;
therefore not the whole Church in Jerusalem brake Bread in one house, but by
companies in several houses, and so as they could commodiously, which is an
argument, that the smalness of the number takes not away the nature of the
Sacrament, if the thing appointed by Christ be done.

Sect. 7. A prescript Form of words in Prayer devised by man, is not contrary
to Romans 8.26. 1 Cor. 14.15.
1. That a prescript Form of words in Prayer, a ceremonius pompous Worship,
devised by man, and abused to Idolatry, is according to the will of God, and
may lawfully be used under the New Testament dispensation; contrary to Mat.
15.9. and 28.20. John 4.23. Deuteronomy. 12.32. Jer. 51.26. Romans 8.26. 1 Cor. 14.15.

Answ. That which the present Ministers own and subscribe to, as containing in
it nothing contrary to the word of God, and that it may lawfully be used, with
promise to use it, is the Book of Common Prayer. This Author impeacheth it as
contrary to the will of God, and not to be lawfully used under the
New Testament dispensation. 1. Because there is a prescript From of words in
prayer. 2. The worship is Ceremonious. 3. That it is Pompous. 4. Devised by
man. 5. Abused to Idolatry. What part of it is, or was abused to Idolatry
should have been expressed. If he mean kneeling at the Lords Supper, that is
his tenth instance to be considered again, if that which is said already in
answer to this Chapter Sect. 3. be not sufficient; if he mean the whole Book,
because out of the Popes Portuis, that is answered before, in answer to Chap.
3. Sect. 4. His allegation of Jer. 51.26. seems to be brought to prove it
unlawful to use any thing in the worship of God abused to Idolatry. But it is
so impertinent, that were any conscience made how Scripture is applied, or
shame to abuse Readers with texts impertinent, it had been omitted; it being
only a prediction of the ruin of the City of Babylon, not of the Temple of the
Idol, that it should not be built again, by reason of the Opression and
Idolatry of the Inhabitants, not a prohibition to the Jews, that they should
not use the stones of Babylon, to build a Temple to God at Jerusalem, because
abused to Idolatry. Why the worship of the Common Prayer is termed Ceremonious,
or Pompous, is left to be ghessed. If he mean it, as it is used in Cathedrals
and Collegiate Churches and Chapels, there is no constitution for it as such,
to which Ministers are required to subscribe; if because of the ceremony of the
Surplice and Cross, and the Singing of Psalms; or because it is with external
words and gestures, the first of these being an adjunct only to the Minister,
does not make the Worship it self Ceremonius or Pompous; and the second being
only a monitory sign annexed to a rite of worship is not fitly termed Worship;
the third methinks should be allowed, as commanded Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16.
external words and gestures if agreeable to the examples of holy men should not
be excepted against, nor are they contrary to John 4.23. which excludes only
the legal shawdowy worship of the Law, and that which is only external, and so
hypocritical; otherwise external Worship is required, 1 Cor. 6.20. But I
suppose the chief exception is, that the Ministers own and use a prescript Form
of words devised by man; which he conceives contrary to the other texts
alleged by him, how pertinently, is to be considered. To Mat. 15 9. and Deuteronomy.
12.32. answer is made Chap. 1. Sect. 3. Mat. 28.20. requires Teachers to teach
Disciples of Christ to observe all that he has commanded; But proves not, that
no prescript Form of Prayer devised by man, may be lawfully used. For then it
would follow, that conceived Forms of Prayer may not be used, for they are
devised by men, they are not immediately from Gods Spirit, as is apparent by
the phrases, and matter often times used; nor are they commanded by Christ, but
rather a set Form is commanded, to wit, the Lords Prayer, Luke 11.2. and
therefore the use of a prescript Form of words in Prayer devised by man, is not
contrary to Christ's revelation, Mat. 28.20. For all that Christ has commanded,
may be observed by those who use it; and it is more agreeable to Christ's
command, to use one prescript Form of words of Prayer, which he has directed
Mat. 6.7, 8, 9. Romans 8.26. is more impertinently alleged: For it is not said,
The Spirit helps our infirmities, by suggesting to us the Form of words we
shall use: but by making known what things we shall ask in his secret impulse
on our spirits, not in ordinary motions of our tongues, and by exciting in us
groans and sighs that are unutterable; and therefore this text is so far from
proving, that it is unlawful to use a prescript Form of words in Public
Prayer, because of this promise of the Spirit to suggest without meditation,
such words as shall be spoken, that it is quite another thing which is here
meant. First it is not meant of public Prayers, but of secret private Prayers:
Secondly, it is not meant of private ordinary Prayers; but as Cameron in his
Treatise of the nature and condition of the Church, observes, The Apostle
distinguishes some, and those singular Prayers of Believers from the rest* to
wit, when the mind constituted in anguish, and the same erected by trust in
God, prays, as wrapped beyond it self; such as were Moses his Prayers, who when
he is not said to have prayed in Scripture, yet God so be speaks him, as if he
had cried; to wit, the Spirit did pray in Moses, the understanding prayed not:
the Spirit, that is, the understanding conceived not distinctly the prayers.
And 1 Cor. 14.15. (which is the other place cited by this Author) I will sing
with the spirit, I will sing also with the mind. To wit, I believe none sings
with the will; for to sing is a work of the understanding; but the Apostle has
opposed the Spirit to the Understanding; because the Spirit in that place
signifies the Understanding so affected, as that it cannot distinctly explain
what it has conceived. Therefore in the same Chapter above he exhorts, that he
who speaks with tongues (that is with the Spirit) pray that he may interpret;
that is, not only speak with the Spirit but also with the Mind. Therefore it is
manifest that the prayers Rom 8.26. 1 Cor. 14.15. are meant of such as are in
extraordinary raptures and ecstacies, such as the Prophets sometimes had; and
St. Paul speaks of 2 Cor. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. and cannot be applied to the ordinary
public prayers of the whole Congregation. Thirdly, the help of the Spirit
cannot be meant of suggesting a Form of words, because it is said, the spirit
it self makes intercession for us with groans unutterable; and 1 Cor. 14.15.
is such praying in the spirit as may be without the understanding of him that
prays or others, even such as he that occupies the room of the unlearned
cannot say Amen to, seeing he understands not what the Speaker says.
Fourthly, The praying with the Spirit is such as is unfruitful of it self, v.
14. and not to be affected of it self, nor can be a matter of duty, since it is
motus liberi spiritus, as the Schoolmen speak rightly, a motion of the free
Spirit, such as lumen propheticum, prophetical illumination is, which is such a
gift as that it may be our duty to use it when we have it, not our duty to
acquire it. Upon all which reasons it is apparent, that these Texts are much
perverted against the use of a prescript Form of words in Prayer devised by
man, because of the Spirits help, Romans 8.26. praying in the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14
15. since they cannot be meant of ordinary public prayers, and of praying in
words unpremeditated, as immediately suggested by the Spirit of God.

Sect 8. The admission of vicious persons to Communion, justifies not
separation.
8. That wicked and ungodly persons, and their seed, are lawful members of the
Church, and if they consent not willingly to be so, they may be compelled
thereunto: contrary to Psalm. 110.3. Acts 2.40, 41, 47. and 19 9. 2 Cor. 6.14,
17. and 9.13.

Answ. This Author shows not where the Law is, nor when or how the Ministers
subscribes to a Constitution of this instance, not know I where to find either.
It is said, Psalm. 110.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power.
But it does not therefore follow, that men may not be compelled by pecuniary
mulcts, or other penalties, to come to Common Prayer or the Communion. For
however the question be resolved about liberty of Conscience, and toleration in
the New Testament, yet David meant not that there must none be then compelled;
if so, neither Asa nor Josiah did well in urging the people to swear to cleave
to God, and to stand to it, 2 Chronicles. 34.32. If understood of the times of the
New Testament it proves that members of the Church should be a willing people,
but not that no other may be lawful members, or admitted or caused by commands
of Rulers, or penalties to join with the Church in Gods Worship. For then it
must be the duty of them that admit members into the Church to know that they
whom they admit are a willing people, which I think none now can do. It is true
Acts 2.40. Peter exhorted the Jews to save themselves from that perverse
generation of them that opposed Christ, and v. 41. Then they that gladly
received his Word were baptized; and v. 47. The Lord added to the Church such
as should be saved; but how this proves that wicked and ungodly persons may not
be admitted as lawful members of the visible Church Christian, nor compelled
thereunto, I discern not. Sure Judas was admitted to the Apostleship, and to
the Passover, if not to the Lords Supper; Ananias and Saphira were taken as
lawful members, Simon Magus baptized, we find none blamed for admission to the
Lords Supper, of disorderly Corinthians. And for compulsion from Idolatrous
Worship, and other evils, if Parents may correct these in their children,
Princes may do it in their Subjects; and if Parents may by penalties compel
their children to conform to true Religion, so may Princes. The separation,
Acts 19 9. is nothing to countenance the separation from the Service and
assemblies of the Church of England: for that separation was not because of the
presence of professed Christians of vicious life; but because of diverse who
were hardened and believed not, but spoke evil of the way of Christ before the
multitude, and so endeavor to disturb them in the practice of Christian
Religion. The words 2 Cor. 6.14. whether we read it, be not unequally yoked, or
unevenly balanced to the other side with Infidels; and whether we expound it
of marriage, or familiar converse, or (as the words v. 16. What agreement has
the Temple of God with Idols, do plainly evince it to be meant) do not join
with the Idolaters in their Idol Temples to eat there things offered to Idols,
which he had forbidden, 1 Cor. 8.7, 10. to partake of the table of Devils, 1
Cor. 10.21. it is manifest from, v. 15. to be meant of professed Infidels
opposite to him that believes, and therefore cannot be understood of not
joining in prayer and the Lords Supper with a professed Believer, though of
vicious life. Nor can the separation from among men, v. 17. be understood of
any other than professed Infidels; nor the the touching the unclean thing be
any other then joining in service of Idols mentioned, v. 16. and therefore is
manifestly impertinent to the separation from Believers by profession in the
service of God by reason of their personal wickedness. The last Text 2 Cor.
9.13. is less to the purpose: For what show of consequence is there in this?
Christians glorify God for others professed subjection, or the subjection of
their Confession, or consent to the Gospel of Christ; therefore wicked persons,
and such as consent not willingly, are not to be taken for lawful members of
the Church, nor may be compelled thereto. It is added:

9. That women may administer the Sacrament of Baptism, contrary to 1 Cor.
14.34. 1 Timothy 2.12. Matthew. 28.18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11.

Answ. That it is true that in Q. Elizabeth's time Baptism by Women in supposed
case of necessity, was in the English Churches either tolerated or allowed; and
the like has been in the Lutheran Churches, and Mr. Hooker in his fifth Book
of Ecclesiastical Policy, sect 62. says somewhat for it; yet since the
Conference at Hampton Court in the beginning of King James his reign to the
Rubric of private Baptism in the Common Prayer Book, the words [ lawful
Minister] were added, which still continue; the Baptism of Women is not allowed
by any constitution, nor owned by the present Ministers that I know, and
therefore this instance is unjustly here recited. Yet thus much may be said,
that notwithstanding Women are excluded from any Ordinary Ministry of the Word
or Sacraments in the Church by the Texts alleged, 1 Cor. 14.34. 1 Timothy 2.12.
and from baptizing, Mat. 28.18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11. Since we find that Philip
the Evangelist had four daughters that did prophecy, Acts 29.1. mention is
made of the woman praying or prophesying, 1 Cor. 11.5. we cannot exclude them
from extraordinary Ministry, when God gives such a gift; nor, since Priscilla
instructed Apollos, Acts 18.26. can we exclude them from private teaching of
the most able, if they be fitted thereto.

Sect. 9. Receiving the Lords Supper kneeling, is not directly opposite to
Christ's practice or precept, of the abstaining from appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22.
10. That the Lords Supper is to be received kneeling, which is directly
opposite to the practice of Christ, in the first Institution thereof, Mark
14.18, 22, 23. and positive precept, as being what has an appearance of evil
in it (being a gesture used by the Papists in the adoration of their Bread^n
god) 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. as also to the practice of the Churches of Christ for
several hundred years after, to the time of the invention and the introduction
of the Popish Breaden god; not to mention its contrariety to the judgment and
practice of most of the reformed Churches (if not all) at this day.

Answ. This Constitution and the subscription to it by the present Ministers of
England, cannot be denied; nor that it has been a great stumbling block to
many persons, and as great a cause of separation from the Communion, as it is
ministered in the Church of England, as any other thing. But that it is directly
opposite to the practice of Christ in the first Institution of the Lords
Supper, is denied by them. For though it is said, Mark 14.18. (...), which we
translate [ as they sate] yet it is denied* that this gesture is mentioned as
binding Christians to the the same gesture in the use of the Lords Supper in
subsequent times.

1. Because this gesture seems not to have been of choice used by Christ, that
thence he might prescribe the same gesture he used in the Institution, making
his example in this as a constant rule: but it seems rather to have been used
occasionally, because it was instituted after the Paschal Supper, at which they
used that gesture, as they did eat, Mat. 26.26. Mark 14.22.

2. Because St. Paul* 1 Cor. 11.23. where he says, he delivered to them what
he received of the Lord, he omits the mention of Christ's gesture which he would
not have done, if he had judged it binding and necessary to Christians.

3. He mentions the night in which Christ was betrayed, v. 23. that he took the
cup after he had supped, v. 25. Luke 22.^0. and it it is not judged necessary,
that the Lords Supper should be either annually on the night in which he was
betrayed, or weekly or monthly in the night, or after supper, no not though it
be termed by the Apostle the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. therefore with (...)
reason the gesture should be urged by them as obligatory.

4. If the gesture Christ used be obligatory to Christians, then they must use
the self same gesture he used, but that was neither sitting nor standing, which
are used by the opposers of Kneeling; but lying along on beds, as the word
(...) used Mark 14.18. intimates, and is gathered from Joh. 13.23. and other
relations of the use of those times, which I think will not be denied, it being
by the learned generally acknowledged. See Ainsworth on Exodus 12.8. And so
kneeling is no more directly opposite to the practice of Christ in the first
Institution thereof than other gestures; nor however it be different from his
practice then, can it be truly said to be directly opposite to his practice,
unless he had commanded the gesture he then used to be observed, or forbidden
by his practice at that time, kneeling. The positive precept 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. is
urged very importunely, not only in this point of kn^eling at the Lords Supper,
but also very frequently on many other occasions in Sermons, Writings, and
Conferences, to deterr persons, especially of scrupulous Consciences and weak
Understandings, from any thing to which persons and practices are disaffected;
and therefore for the settling of such persons judgment, as are not averse to
the unlearning their mistakes, as I did many years since in my Book of
Scandalizing, cap. 4. sect. 23. somewhat fully open the meaning of that Text,
so I shall again with some enlargement in this place, it being no grievance to
me to write the same things again, but necessary; and so much the rather,
because Mr. Henry Jeans in his second Edition of his Tract upon this Subject,
gives me occasion to examine more exactly the meaning of this Precept. The
chief difficulty is concerning, 1. The Translation of (...). 2. Concerning the
appearance of evil which we are to abstain from, and how far we are by that
precept bound to abstain from it.

1. Concerning the Translation, it is doubted whether it should not be rather
read, abstain from every kind or sort of evil, answering to genus and species,
as Cicero renders (...), and as Porphyry in his Isagoge, Aristotle, Plato, and
other Logicians use it. That it may be so, says Mr. Jeans, Mat. Flac.
Illyricus and Beza determine; that it is so, the Syriack Interpreter, and after
him Faber, and after them our own great and learned Doctor Hammond resolve.
But I would fain know upon what ground they are thus singular against the
current both of an Ancient and Modern Expositors. Wherein he might have been
satisfied from Dr. Hammonds own words in his Annot. on the place, where having
said, the meaning will be from all sort, or the whole kind of evil, from all
that is truly so, be it never so small, according to that in Pirke avoth, be as
careful in the keeping a light, as a heavy Commandment: to this sense he cites
St. Basil on the beginning of the Proverbs* Theophylact and Leon^ius. But says
Mr. Jeans, It is used but four times in the New Testament besides this place,
and in none of them in a Logical notion. It is true, and it is true also that
in none of them it is taken in his sense for an appearance to the
understanding, but either for the shape or representation to the sight, or the
sight it self, as it is rendered, 2 Cor. ^ 7. However it is sufficient for the
justifying of the Translation, that it is used in that notion not only in other
Greek Authors, but also in Ecclesiasticus chapter 23.16 (...) two sorts of men, chapter
25.2. (...) three sorts of men, and in the LXX Version Jer. 15 3. (...) is
rendered (...) four kinds; which acception is enforced by this reason, which out
of St. Basil Dr. Hammond thus expresses the word (...), v. 21. try all things,
being taken from Merchants, that which is evil, v. 22. is opposed to that which
will upon trial bear the touch, A good Merchant will keep that which is good
unadulterate metal, but will abstain from all kind of evil, or adulterate; not
from that which appears ill, if it be not; for to what purpose then is his
skill or touchstone? but from that which is ill, what ever it appear. From all
which a reason may be gathered for Dr. Hammonds Exposition, and Tremellius his
Interpretation out of the Syriack, ab omni voluntate mala fugite fly from every
evil will; or as in his Marginal note, negotio malo, sive re mala, evil
business or evil thing; and then kneeling at the Lords Supper will not be
proved contrary to this Precept, till it be proved to be of it self an evil
thing, and not only what has an appearance of evil in it.

2. But if it be yielded that it is to be rendered show, or appearance, and not
sort or kind, yet it may be doubted whether, as the Vulgar and Tigurin, it be
not rather to be read ab omni specie mala, from every show or appearance which
is evil, rather than ab omni specie^mali, from every show, or appearance of
evil, though it be not evil. Beza in his Annotation on the place says, We may
also interpret it, ab omni specie mala, from every evil show or appearance, and
that more usual. For otherwise it seems it had been to be written, (...), the
article being adjoined; and the precept is then to abstain from that which is
an appearance it self evil, not from an appearance not evil, but indifferent,
and so not from kneeling at the Communion.

3. For the appearance of evil that we are to abstain from, it may be doubted
whether it be meant of an appearance in doctrine or in practice. Chrysostom
and the Greek Scholiast, and others apply it only to false doctrines, or lies
of false Prophets; as if the Apostle had said, though you are not to quench the
spirit, v. 19. nor to despise prophesyings, v. 20. yet you are to try all
doctrines, and to hold that which is good, v. 21. and to abstain from that
doctrine which appears evil. Against this Mr. Jeans only objects, that an
accurate and exact coherence is not necessary in those short precepts: and to
understand the words of appearance in practice also suits well with the
coherence. Which I will not gainsay: but only say if this be granted, yet if
the Interpretation of abstaining from all appearance of evil in practice, be
not necessary, but that it may be limited to doctrine, the allegation of it to
prove that kneeling at the Lords Supper is an appearance of evil, from which we
are to abstain, is not cogent, since it is not in a point of doctrine to which
this text may be limited, but in practice; of which it is uncertain whether
this Text be meant, and therefore is not directly opposite to it, as is here
asserted.

4. Were it granted that this Text is meant of the appearance of evil in
practice, to which it is not denied Interpreters of all sorts do apply it, yet
it may be doubted whether the Apostle means it of that which appears evil to
another, or to a man's self. Surely the words and series of the Text do best
suit with this Interpretation, Abstain from that which appears to your selves
to be evil. For having said, try all things, whether doctrines you hear taught,
or practices to which you are moved by your own thoughts or others examples or
persuasions, to direct them what to do; he adds, hold that which is good, that
is, what you find upon trial to be good, and abstain from all evil appearance,
or appearance of evil, which so appears to you upon your trial. Which sense, as
it has the concurrence of good Authors, so does it seem to me to be the
genuine meaning of the Text.

1. Because it best suits with the coherence and scope of the Apostle. For it
is plain that the Apostle makes these two precepts of holding that which is
good, and abstaining from every appearance of evil, the consequents of trying
all things, to which it tends: For to what end should men try all things
whether doctrines or practices, but that they may hold the one, and abstain
from the other? now as it is undoubted, that they are to hold fast that which
upon trial appears to themselves to be good, not what appears to another: for
to what purpose should they themselves try, if they must hold what others
think good, and not themselves? So for evil, they should abstain from what
appears evil to themselves who try, not what so appears to others.

2. The absurdities which follow on this* that I must abstain from all that
appears evil to another, seem great and unavoidable.

1. Because it would require an impossible task: For it is impossible for me to
know what appears to another evil, since I cannot know his thoughts, and
therefore cannot discern what appears to him good o^ evil: nor, if I could know
somewhat that appears evil to another, is it possible for me to know all that
so appears? and yet the Apostle requires me to abstain from all appearance of
evil, and that without exception of any man. Which is made impossible, if
understood of appearance to others in respect of the thing; abstaining from all
that appears evil to another being impossible, without destroying our being,
the eating of our meat, clothing of our bodies, and doing other necessaries for
our subsistence, appearing evil to some or other, either out of ignorance,
hatred, prejudice, superstition, envy, or some other malignant quality, though
the thing we do were never so right.

2. That which Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Scandal, p. 9, 10. observes, that
appearance of evil is so uncertain and unconstant a thing, that to abstain from
it universim, cannot be the matter of any possible command, and that which is
of ill report with one, or of evil appearance to one, may be of good report,
and appearance of good to a thousand others, is considerable. For then a person
must either do nothing, or act that which is appearance of evil to some, when
it appears good to others and to himself, which must of necessity create
innumerable perplexities, or rather impossibilities, if the Apostles precept be
so understood. Nor am I satisfied with what Mr. Jeans says, This fear will
quickly vanish and be discovered to be idle and vain, when anon we shall
explain that distinction of appearance of evil into real and imaginary. For
(besides that I conceive that no appearance of evil to another, can be said to
be real, per se ex natura operis, from the nature and condition of the fact it
self: when that of it self, and in its own nature, is a very probable sign of
evil, as he explains it, p. 82. but that which is from actions of themselves
sinful, and then we are not to abstain from them as appearances of evil, but as
evil: all other appearances that are from actions lawful or indifferent, are
but imaginary; that is, from others misconceits and censures thereupon, and so
his distinction as to this thing, is rather to be accounted vain and idle, than
the fear he mentions) were the distinction good, yet the fear will not quickly
vanish nor be discovered to be idle and vain, since if we must abstain from all
appearance to others of our evil, we must abstain from all appearance of evil,
whether it be real from the condition of our work of it self, or imaginary by
accident through others interpretation, which must cause perplexities
unavoidable without number.

Yea, 3. That may appear to be evil to others which is our necessary duty, as
Christ's doctrine and actions did to the Pharisees, the Apostles preaching to
the Jews; yea, to good men, as Peter's going in to Cornelius, Acts 11.1, 2. the
Magistrates punishing some vices according to his duty, may seem evil to good
Subjects, the obeying Laws of Governors, Commands of Parents and Masters do
often seem evil to some that are sincere-hearted, but weak in judgment; yea,
the necessary defense of truth may be opposed and appear as evil to godly,
learned, and otherwise judicious Divines. If we must abstain from every
appearance of evil to others we must abstain from these duties; Gods Laws will
cross one another, and we must infringe or suspend one, or otherwise be
necessitated to sin: Governors must revoke their Laws, and Subjects cease to
obey Gods Laws; and so all confusion and Anarchy must follow.

Lastly, Were the precept so meant, that we must abstain from every thing of
ours, which is an appearance of evil to another, our Christian liberty were
evacuated; there being nothing we do which will not appear evil to some or
other, and many things lawful and indifferent, will appear evil, even to the
best. Its true there are many cases in which we are to forbear our liberty; of
which, before Mr. Jeans his first Edition of his Treatise, I wrote in the
fourth Chapter of my Book of Scandalizing, but the forbearance of our liberty I
did not ascribe barely to the appearance of evil to others, but to the scandal;
that is, ruin or harm to another consequent thereon. And to prevent the
frequent abuse of the Text, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. I wrote thus, p 284. Lastly if it
were granted that the Apostle for bids us to abstain from all that which
appears to be evil to another, yet no Interpreter that I meet with, understands
it of such appearance of evil, as is conceited to be such upon some erroneous
principles in him that conceives it to be such: Or by reason of the mere
fancy, or rigid austerity, or evil will, or such like cause of him that
thinks it evil: but they usually apply it to such causes or signs of manifest
evil, as are means of drawing to some notorious sin; as going to hear a Mass,
which is a cause and sign of Idolatry; or wanton dalliance, which is a cause or
sign of whoredom. And they apply hereto that saying of Julius Caesar, that
Caesar's wife should be free not only from evil, but also from the suspicion of
it. So that even in their intent this Scripture is not appliable to this
purpose; as if the Apostle did prohibit a Christian to use any thing that
another thought evil, whether he thought so upon probable reason or no reason,
upon some ground or none. And to speak truth, the application of this Text in
that manner, as it is by some, as if the Apostle did forbid us the use of any
thing though in different in it self, when it appears as evil to another,
without any further restraint, is very absurd and so unreasonable, as that it
will bring a yoke upon men's consciences impossible to be born, since there is
scarce any thing a man can do, but some or other Infidel or Christian, weak or
strong in the faith; Orthodox or Superstitious, will think it to be evil; that
saying by experience being found true, quot homines tot sententiae, so many
men, so many minds: nor shall a man's own Conscience only make a thing evil to
him but the conscience of any other man in the World. Out of all which I
gather, that the Ministers tenent or practice in receiving the Lords Supper
kneeling, is not directly opposite to this positive precept, as being what has
an appearance of evil in it, unless it be in it self evil, or evil in their own
opinion, or else a probable sign and cause of their adoration of the Papists
Breaden god. Whereas this Author himself in this Chapter, p. 40. does not say,
though some would say, that kneeling at the Lords Supper smells very strong of
the Popish leven, and is but one peg beneath the adoration of their Breaden
god. In answering which passage, sect. 2. of this Chapter, I showed, that it
could not be taken for such by any that will heartily and charitably interpret
their actions, as for other reasons very clear and convincing, so from the
words of the Rubric at the end of the Communion, which I here subjoyn. Whereas
it is ordained in this Office for the administration of the Lords Supper, that
the Communicants should receive the same kneeling, (which Order is well meant,
for a signification of our humble and grateful acknowledgement of the benefits
of Christ therein given to all worthy r^ceivers, and for the avoiding such
profanation and disorder in the holy Communion as might otherwise ensue) yet,
lest the same kneeling should by any persons, either out of ignorance and
infirmity, or out of malice and obstinacy, be misconstrued and depraved; it is
here declared, that thereby no adoration is intended or ought to be done,
either unto the Sacramental Bread and Wine, there bodily received, or unto any
corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood. For the Sacramental Bread
and Wine remain still in their very natural substances, and therefore may not
be adored (for that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians.)
And the natural body and blood of our Savior Christ are in Heaven, and not
here; it being against the truth of Christ's natural body, to be at one time in
more places then one. Thus the Common Prayer Book. That which is said, that the
receiving of the Lords Supper kneeling, is a gesture used by the Papists in the
adoration of their Breaden god, is denied by Dr. John Burges in his Treatise of
the lawfulness of kneeling in the act of receiving the Lords Supper, cap. 21.
p. 67. and p. 479. of the Rejoinder, where he thus says: With us the Bishops
or Ministers communicate kneeling as well as the people: But with the Papists,
the Pope, when himself performs the office, receives sitting, as being a
type of Christ, the Mass Priests receive standing reverently, by the Canon of
the Mass: and for this he cites in the Margin, Ord. Romans apud B^bl. Pat. Col.
^om. 8. p. 390. Colum. 1. liter. ^. edit. Colon. 1618. The People indeed
receive it kneeling as we do, as did also the Priest, till such time as the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation b^got the Canon of his standing, for fear of
shedding ought. But I deny that kneeling in the very time of receiving, was
ever in the Church of Rome any Rite of, or for adoration of the Sacrament it
self, or any creature, and therefore not Idolatrous. I deny not the error of
their minds, concerning that they received into their mouths. But I deny, that
they ever intended adoration of the species at that moment of time when they
took it in their mouths: But then turned themselves to God rather, to give him
thanks, which was not uncomely. Of which he gives three reasons. 1. Because it
was never yet enjoined by any Pope that they should then kneel. 2. In the Mass
there is no direction for adoration of the Sacrament when it is received. 3.
For that it is an incongruous thing in their superstition, to adore a thing
which is not higher than their polls when they adore it, because they cannot be
said to humble themselves to that which is lower than they can cast themselves.
(To this last reason nothing is returned by Dr. Ames in his Triplic. chapter 4. p.
429. and Dallaeus adv. lat. cult. l. 9. c. 13. Id quod adoratur eo, a quo
adoratur celsius ac sublimius aliquid esse debere insito a natura ipsa sensu
omnes mortales confitentur, atque consentiunt.) To which is to be added, that
kneeling is used according to the Common Prayer Book with Prayer to God, and at
the receiving of the Wine as well as at the Bread, which are not so with the
Papists, and therefore kneeling is not to be taken as adoration of the Bread,
as the Papists do. And for that which is said, that the Lords Supper is to be
received kneeling, is directly opposite to the practice of the Churches of
Christ, for several hundred years after Christ, to the time of the invention
and introduction of the Popish Breaden-god; it is denied by the same Dr. Burges
in that and other following Chapters, by the Bishop of Rochester, Paybody, and
others, about which, and the judgment and practice of most of the reformed
Churches at this day, it is not necessary that I should make inquiry; since if
it were so, yet it proves nor, that the present Ministers of England, do oppose
the Kingly and Prophetical Office of Christ, by their submitting to kneeling at
the Lords Supper.

Sect. 10. Forbidding to marry or eat flesh at certain times, are not
characters of Apostates, as 1 Timothy 4.3. is meant.
It is added, What should I mention the Constitutions and Canons before pointed
to, wherein 't is forbidden to any to Preach, not licensed by the Bishops
thereunto, to marry or eat flesh at certain times, with many more of the like
nature; all directly contrary to the sovereign edicts of Christ, and some of
them evident characters of the last days Apostates, 1 Timothy 4.3. from whom
Saints are warned by the Lord to turn aside, ver. 5. These we have produced,
carry an undeniable evidence with them, that the present Ministers of England
do own, submit, and subscribe to Orders and Ordinances, that are contrary to
the revelation of Christ, and therefore deny his Prophetical and Kingly Office.

Answ. To that of forbidding to Preach, answer is made in the examining this
Chapter Sect. 2. Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from flesh at
certain times upon politic considerations, or for the better observing a
religious Fast, are not characters of the Apostates, 1 Timothy 4.3. But may be
justified by such passages of Scripture, as Jonah 3.7. Joel 2.16. 1 Cor. 7.5.
Dan. 10.3. Nor do I think the most zealous Separatists, but would restrain from
Marriage and Flesh, the members of their Churches, in the times of solemn
Fasts, or would count it evil, that the Magistrate forbids for civil ends,
abstinence from some kind of food; which being the case of the prohibitions of
the Civil Laws of England, rather than the Canons of the Church, which make it
not a sin against God to marry or eat flesh then, is unjustly made the
character of Apostates, 1 Timothy 4.3. which is more justly charged on the Monks
and Popish Votaries, who account it sinful to marry; as if it were unchastness,
and more lawful to use Concubines than Wives for Priests; as if they joined
with Pope Siricius, terming such, persons in the flesh, and such as could not
please God, and place more holiness in eating Fish than Flesh; which sort of
people are very accurately proved to be there characterized by Mr. Joseph Mede
in his Book of the Doctrine of Demons; entitled, The Apostasy of the later
times. That the present Ministers of England are such, or that precept which is
(not 1 Timothy 4.5.) 2 Timothy 3.5. From such turn aside, belongs to them, is not
proved by this Author, nor that they do own, submit, and subscribe to Orders
and Ordinances that are contrary to the revelation of Christ, or deny his
Prophetical and Kingly Office. French Protestants in the Synod of Charenton
1644. chap. 13. art. 24. The Church shall not solemnise marriage in the days
on the which the Lords Supper is administered, nor on the days of a public
Fast. See this crimination retorted on the Separatists by Paget in his Arrow,
chapter 6. sect. 3. p. 155. n. 5. Yet he has not done with this Argument.

Sect. 11. No such Headship is owned by the present Ministers, as is a denial
of Christ's Offices.
To all that hitherto has been offered in this matter, we shall yet add, as a
further demonstration of the truth we are in the disquisition of. Arg. 3. Those
that acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ, deny his
Prophetical and Kingly Office: but the present Ministers of England do own and
acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ: Therefore. If the
assertion of another King in England, that as the Head thereof has power of
making, and giving forth Laws to the freeborn Subjects therein, be a denial of
his Kingly Authority (as no doubt it is) the major (or first Proposition)
cannot be denied. If Christ be the alone King of his Church (as such) he is its
alone Head and Lawgiver. If he has not by any Statute Law established any
other Headship in, and over his Church, to act in the Holy things of God, from
and under him, besides himself; who sees not the assertion of such an Headship,
carries with it a contempt and denial of his Authority? If there be any such
Headship of the Institution of Christ, let us know when and where it was
instituted; whether such a Dominion and Sovereignty over the Subjects of his
Kingdom, with respect to Worship, be granted by them to any of the sons of men,
absolutely or conditionally: if the first, then must the Church (it seems) be
governed by persons casting off the yoke of Christ, trampling upon his royal
Commands and Edicts: for so it is possible it may fall out those that a^tain
this Headship may do; as it is evident many Popes of Rome (the great pretenders
hereunto) have done. If the second let one iota be produced from the Scripture,
of the Institution of such an Headship, with the conditions annexed thereunto,
and we shall be so far from denying of it, that we shall cheerfully pay,
whatever respect, homage, or duty, by the Laws of God or Man, may righteously
be expected from us. But this will not, we humbly conceive, in have be
performed; and that because 1. The Scripture makes mention of no other Head, in
and over the Church, but Christ, Ephesians. 1.22. and 5.23, 29 2 Cor. 11.2. 2. If
there be any other Head, he must either be within or without the Church: The
latter will not be affirmed; Christ had not sure so little respect unto his
flock, as to appoint Wolves and Lions to be their Governors and Guides in
matters Ecclesiastical, nor can the former; for all in the Church, are
Brethren, have no dominion over each others Faith or Conscience, Luke 22.25. 3.
If any other be Head of the Church but Christ, then is the Church the Body of
some others besides Christ: but this is absurd and false, not to say impious
and blasphemous. 4. There was no Head of the Church in the Apostles days, but
Christ. 5. If any be Head of the Church beside Christ, they either have their
Headship from an Original Right seated in themselves; or by donation from
Christ. To assert the first, were no less then blasphemy; if the second, let
them show when, and where, and how they came to be invested in such a right,
and this Controversy will be at an end. 6. He that is asserted in Scripture to
be the Head of the Church, is said to govern, feed, and nourish it to eternal
life, is her Spouse and Husband, 2 Cor. 11.2. In which sense, none of the Sons
of men, one or other, can be the Head thereof; and yet of any other Head, the
Scripture is wholly silent. But of this matter thus far. It cannot by any sober
person be denied, but an owning of a visible Head over the Church, having power
of making and giving forth Laws with respect to Worship (such an Headship not
being of the institution of Christ) must needs be a denial of his Sovereign
Authority and Power.

Answ. This Author in this Argument, seems to me, to hide his meaning, as they
say the Fish Saepia does, by casting out some black color, whereby the water
is infected, and she not discerned. A Headship over the Church besides
Christ's, he makes the present Ministers to acknowledge in some of the sons of
men, but who they are he means, what the Headship is, and how it is opposite to
Christ's Kingly and Prophetical Office, is not plainly expressed; nor in what
Subscription, Oath, or Conformity they own, and submit to it. Headship is a
Metaphor, and sometime notes Origination, vital influence, direction or
guidance, superiority, power, authority, or government, which may be in many
things. No Minister I think gives such a Headship to any of the sons of men, as
to Christ over his whole Body, either so as to derive their being members,
having their faith, or eternal life, or dominion over their Consciences, or
Sovereign power, authority to rule or dispose of soul or body, as Christ has:
And that which the Bishop of Rome claims over the Universal Church, is utterly
disclaimed by the present Ministers. The Headship which is made a denial of
Christ's Headship, ascribed by the present Ministers to some person on Earth, is
expressed in various phrases; A Headship in, and over his Church, to act in the
Holy things of God, a Dominion and Sovereignty over the Subjects of Christ's
Kingdom, with respect to Worship, a visible head over the Church having power
of making and giving forth Laws with respect to Worship; which it is said they
own by conformity in Worship to Laws and Edicts, made and given forth by the
sons of men, as Heads and Governors of the Church, they own an Headship; that
is, not in all things subordinate to Christ, having a a Law making and
Law-giving power touching Institutions of Worship, that never came into his
heart, Headship over the Church to make Laws, introduce Constitutions of their
own framing in matters relating to Worship. This can be conceived to be
ascribed by the present Ministers to no other than the Bishops, or Convocation,
or the King, whose Supremacy in Causes Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, seems to be
that Headship here meant by the answer to the second Objection. What Headship
is ascribed to the Bishops, or Convocation, in making Laws or Constitutions
about Worship, to wit, the accidentals thereof undetermined, in order to the
orderly decent performance of it to edification by the present Ministers, has
been examined all along in the answer to this Book, specially to the 4. and 5.
Chapters, Sect. 3. and as yet no such Headship is proved by this Author to be
ascribed by the present Ministers, as amounts to a denial of the Prophetical
and Kingly Offices of Christ: that the taking of the Oath of the Kings
Supremacy, or submission to his Edicts about matters of Worship, is not owning
such a Headship, is further to be cleared. And first I deny his major, That
those who acknowledge another Head over the Church beside Christ, by
acknowledging the King as Supreme Governor in Causes Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual (as the Oath of Supremacy is proved by me in my Book of the Serious
Consideration of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, ought to be understood)
particularly that he, or with him the Bishops or Convocation, may make Laws or
Constitutions in the accidentals of Worship undetermined in Scripture,
observing the rules of Order, Decency, Edification, deny Christ's Prophetical
and Kingly Office: and to the proofs of it, I answer: This Author does most
injuriously suppose the power and authority asserted to the King of England in
the Oath of Supremacy, to make Laws or Canons about the Worship of God with
the Counsel of a Synod, or Convocation, or Parliament, is making another King
besides Christ over his Church. For there is no such thing acknowledged
thereby, which is proper to Christ; to wit, to be the universal Monarch of the
whole Church, to prescribe what Faith or Worship shall be given to God, to be
Infallible Interpreter of Gods Will, and the Supreme Judge and Lawgiver, who is
able to save and to destroy; or which is arrogated by the Popes of Rome, and
thus acknowledged by Heart the Jesuit, in his Conference with Dr. John Rainold
in the Tower of London, chapter 1. div. 2. in these words. The power which we mean
to the Pope by this title of the Supreme Head is, that the Government of the
whole Church of Christ throughout the World does depend of him: in him does lie
the power of judging and determining all causes of Faith; of ruling Councils,
as President, and ratifying their Decrees; of Ordering and Confirming Bishops
and Pastors; of deciding Causes brought him by Appeals from all the coasts of
the Earth; of reconciling any that are excommunicate; of excommunicating,
suspending, or inflicting other censures and penalties on any that offend, yea,
on Princes and Nations; Finally of all things of the like sort for governing of
the Church, even whatsoever touches either Preaching of Doctrine, or
practicing of Discipline in the Church of Christ. Which his practice shows to
be such as to dispense with the Laws of God, as by legitimating incestuous
Marriages, releasing of lawful Oaths, granting Indulgences, releasing out of
Purgatory, Canonizing of Saints, Consecrating of things for the expulsion of
Devils, with many more; and i^ it be true which is related in a Book lately
printed, to have been asserted by the party of Jesuits in the College of
Clermont in France, that the Pope is not only infallible in matters of Faith,
but also in matters of Fact, he is elevated to that height as to accomplish the
prophecy which is, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. But the present Ministers of England do
abhor the giving such power to the King, Bishops, or Convocation; yea, it is
disclaimed by the King, Bishops, and Convocation, as blasphemous; and that
power they ascribe to the Church, is set down in the 34. Article of Religion,
Every particular or National Church has authority to Ordain, Change, and
abolish Ceremonies, or Rites of the Church, Ordained only by man's authority, so
that all things be done to edifying. And that which they acknowledge belonging
to the King as the only Supreme Governor of the Realm of England, and of all
other his Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or Causes as temporal, is thus explained: Artic. 37. We
give not to our Princes the Ministering either of Gods Word, or of the
Sacraments; the which thing the Injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth
our Queen do most plainly testify: but that only Prerogative, which we see to
have been given always to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself,
that is that they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge
by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the civil
Sword the stubborn and evil Doers. Which is so far from being no other than the
Headship pleaded for by the Church of Rome, (as this Author says, p. 47.) that
to show the calumny of it, I need use no other words than those of Dr. John
Owen in his answer to a Popish Book, entitled, Fiat Lux, chapter 13. p. 271. The
Declaration made in the days of King Henry the 8. that he was Head of the
Church of England, intended no more, but that there was no other person in the
World from whom any Jurisdiction to be exercised in this Church over his
Subjects might be derived, the Supreme Authority for all exterior Government
being vested in him alone; that this should be so, the Word of God, the Nature
of the Kingly Office, and the ancient Laws of this Realm, do require. And I
challenge our Author to produce any one testimony of Scripture, or any one word
out of any general Council, or any one Catholic Father or Writer to give the
least Countenance to his assertion of two Heads of the Church in his sense; an
Head of Influence, which is Jesus himself; and an Head of Government, which is
the Pope, in whom all the sacred Hierarchy ends: This taking of one half of
Christ's Rule and Headship out of his hand, and giving it to the Pope, will not
be salved by that expression thrust in by the way under him; For the Headship
of Influence, is distinctly ascribed unto Christ; and that of Government, to
the Pope; which evidently asserts, that he is not in the same manner Head unto
his Church in both senses, but he in the one, and the Pope in the other. I add
that Mr. Philip Nigh in his Book of the lawfulness of the Oath of Supremacy, and
power of the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical affairs and subordination of
Churches thereunto, Printed 1662. though not published, has these words, p.
46. For Persons and Causes Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, that are properly and
indeed such; as first Table-duties, which contain matters of Faith and
Holiness, and what conduces to the eternal welfare of men's souls: an interest
and duty there is in the Civil Magistrate more su^, to give Commands, and
exercise Lawful Jurisdiction about things of that nature. And for Persons,
there is no man for his graces so spiritual, or in respect of his g^fts and
Office, so eminent, but he is under the Government of the Civil Powers in the
place where he lives, as much in all respects as any other subject. Yea, in the
Apology of the Brownists, Printed 1604. these words are alleged for their
common defense out of the Letter of Henry Barrow to a Lady; 1593. p. 92. I have
every where in my writings acknowledged, all duty and obedience to her
Majesty's government, as to the sacred Ordinance of God, the Supreme Power he
has set over all causes and persons, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, within
her Dominions. Out of these things I infer, that asserting the Kings Supremacy,
or the power of making Laws owned by the Ministers of England, is not making
another King besides Christ over his Church, nor ascribing such a Headship to
the King, or Governors of the Church, as is pleaded for by the Church of Rome;
and that for the Kings Supremacy, those that dissent about Ceremonies and
Church Government do acknowledge it as it is meant in the Oath taken by the
Ministers. Concerning which Supremacy, if what I have written in the little
Treatise Printed 1660. entitled, A serious consideration of the Oath of the
Kings Supremncy, in the proof of the fourth and fifth Propositions, be not
sufficient to produce from the Scripture, the institution of such an Headship
with the conditions annexed thereunto; methinks Dr. Rainold his argument, which
convinced Heart in the conference with him, chapter 10. div. 1. and such other
writings as have been written by Bilson, Mason, Bramhall, and many more, should
have prevented this calumny of making thereby another head besides Christ
equivalent to a denial of his Kingly Office. And to his Objections, I answer,
1. to the first, That we use not the title of Head, but Supreme Governor; yet
when it was used, it meaning the same, it might be used as it was given to
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.17. though not as it it is given to Christ, Ephesians. 1.22. and
5.23, 29 2 Cor. 11.2. Nor is the title of Head so appropriate to Christ, but
that it is given to the Man over the Woman, 1 Cor. 11.3. to the Husband over
the Wife, Ephesians. 5.23. and may, in a qualified sense in respect of Government,
be given to the King over the Church in his Dominions, as to Saul, 1 Samuel
15.17. to the chief of Families, as Parents or others of greatest authority or
esteem; as the heads of houses, Exodus 6.14. in which sense Parliament men,
Judges, Ecclesiastical Governors, may be termed Heads of the Church or State
they represent, or are subject to them. To the second, though all in the Church
are Brethren, have no dominion o^ authority over each others faith or
conscience; yet neither are all equal in the Church, nor does Luke 22.25. prove
it. The Apostles sure had power over the members of the Church to command, 1
Cor. 7.10. to give orders, 1 Cor. 16.1. to judge, 1 Cor. 5.3. though no
superiority over one another. And though the King, and Bishops, or Convocation
are Brethren; yet are they Superiors, Rulers, Romans 13.1. Heb. 13.17. and
though they have no dominion or authority over each others faith or conscience,
so as that their Laws shall bind the conscience immediately, and must be obeyed
as precisely and fully, as the Laws of God and Christ; yet their Laws, Edicts,
Commands, Canons, or Rules, even in the worship of God, in things undetermined
by God, and according to such Rules, as the Scripture directs them to observe,
bind in some sort the conscience; as the commands of Parents and Masters by
virtue of the authority given them by God, Romans 13.5. 1 Peter 2.13, 14, 16, 18,
19. though not in respect of the things commanded by them. To the third, the
Church is not the body of any other than Christ as joined to any, or depending
on any, or subject to any absolutely as unto Christ; yet may particular
Churches in respect of that Ministration and Government which their Governors
afford them, be said to be the bodies of their Governors, as a wife is in some
r^spect the body of her husband, Ephesians. 5, 28. nor is there any impiety or
blasphemy in so saying: And in this sense the Apostles and Bishops or Elders,
were heads of the Church in the Apostles days, which answers the fourth. To
the fifth, their Headship is by donation from Christ in the places often
alleged; and in answer to the sixth, though not as Christ is termed the
Husband of Believers, 2 Cor. 11.2. can any be termed Husband, nor to govern,
feed and nourish to eternal life, as Christ by influence of his Spirit, or
power to give eternal life, 1 Cor. 6 17. John 17.2. nor their Father, as God is
said to be Ephesians. 4.6. 1 Cor. 8.6. Jam. 1.18. Joh. 1.13. yet the Apostles and
all others may be in a qualified sense, who are instruments to convert or build
up others by the Word or Discipline, be termed their Fathers in Christ, 1 Cor.
4 15. and to govern, feed, and nourish them to eternal life, as 1 Thessalonians. 2.7,
11. the Apostle says of himself: Whence I conclude, in answer to his major,
that notwithstanding what he has said, it may by a sober person be denied,
that an owning of a visible head, or heads over the Church, having power of
making and giving forth Laws with respect to worship, as the King, Parliament,
Bishops, or Convocation do, may be no denial of Christ's Sovereign authority and
power. Lets view that which remains.

Sect. 12. Conformity to Laws opposite to Christ's, proves not owning another
King coordinate to him.
That (says he) the present Ministers of England do own and submit to such an
Headship, is undeniable: witness their Subscription, Oath, Conformity in
Worship, to Laws and Edicts, made and given forth by the sons of men, as Heads
and Governors of the Church; which are not only foreign to, but (as has been
already demonstrated) lift up themselves in opposition against the royal
institutions of Christ. This being matter of fact, the Individuals charged
herewith, must either acquit themselves by a denial of what they are impleaded
as guilty, or prove what they do is not criminous, but lawful to be done. The
former being too notoriously known to admit of a denial, it is the latter must
be insisted on: what is therein offered, is nextly to be considered.

Answ. Though I cannot justify all that the present Ministers of England do in
their Subscriptions, and Conformity, as if it were no way criminous, but in
every thing lawful to be done; nor perhaps will all of them plead so for
themselves, as being mindful of the Psalmists words, Psalm. 19.12. Who can
understand his errors? cleanse thou me from secret faults. Yet for the Oaths
of Supremacy and Allegiance, which are the only Oaths I know they have taken,
as I have, so I do still plead, that the taking of them is not criminous, but
may be lawfully done. And I further say, that were it yielded that the Laws and
Edicts made and given forth by those sons of men, he means, as Heads and
Governors of the Church, not only foreign to but (which I utterly deny he has
demonstrated) that they lift up themselves in opposition against the royal
Institutions of Christ, yet might the Ministers be free from that which he
charge them with, as denying Christ's Kingly Office, and setting up another
King besides Christ, as his Peer; since it is clear, that such Conformity and
Subscription may be out of weakness or error, not out of Faction or Rebellion;
nor does he who conforms or subscribes to the Laws or Edicts of an Usurper own
his power, when he yields subjection to his commands. Those who obeyed the Laws
of Richard the 3. of England, did not thereby acknowledge him to be the King of
right: nor do all that submit to the decrees of the Trent Council, or the Popes
Edicts, either own the one or the other as being just, or the power as rightly
claimed: but for peace sake submit to what they cannot remedy.

Sect. 13. Headship of the Church under Christ, is not monstrous.
It is added: This is that some say, Obj. 1. That they acknowledge another Head
besides Christ, cannot indeed be denied: but the Headship owned and
acknowledged by them, is an Headship only under Christ. To which we answer:
Answ. 1. But this Headship is either of Christ's appointment, or it is not: if it
be, let it be shown where it was instituted by him, and (as we said) this
controversy is at an end: if it be not, the assertion of such an Headship,
even in subordination to Christ over his Churches as such, hinders not; but
persons owning, submitting thereunto, are guilty of denying the Kingly Office
of Christ. 2. The Headship pleaded for by the Church of Rome, is no other. 3.
It Is not so, as is pretended, they own an Headship that is not in all things
subordinate to Christ, having a Law-making, and Law-giving power touching
institutions of Worship, that never came into his heart, are flatly against his
appointments, as has been proved. 4. One Head in subordination to another,
does as really make the Body a Monster, as two Heads conjoined.

Answ. 1. The term [ Head of the Church] is not used in the Oath of Supremacy,
but Supreme Governor; and this is agreeable to Scripture, Romans 13.1. 1 Timothy
2.2. 1 Pet. 2.13. and how out of these and other Scriptures, his Government is
proved in that sense, in which it is asserted by the Ministers, is showed by me
in my Book of the serious consideration of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy in
the proof of the fourth and fifth Propositions; and if the Church as the Church
be comprised under every soul, Romans 13.1. they are Governors of the Church as
the Church; that is, as they are a Company of m^n that profess Faith in Christ.
Not as if we acknowledged that Kings had a lawful power to prescribe another
Faith or Worship besides Christ's; but as Physicians are said to be subject to
the King as Physicians, because he can prescribe rules with penalties in the
use of that Art they practice, according to Hippocrates his Aphorisms; so the
King is Governor over the Church as such, by prescribing rules about the
profession and exercise of that Faith and Worship they learn only from Christ,
in things undetermined by him, and serving for the ends which they are to aim
at. Nor do I perceive that in so doing any more i^ usurped by them, than is
ascribed by this Author unto the Church, from Mat. 18.17, 18. mistaken by him;
and therefore owning such a power under Christ, as given to the Church, is as
much a denial of Christ's Kingly Office, as when it is given to the King; yea,
it is more absurd to ascribe such a power to the Church over the Church as
such, than to ascribe it to the King; it being a confounding of Governors and
Governed, Head and Body, which were monstrous. 2. Though I deny not that the
Headship pleaded for by the Church of Rome, is pretended to be under Christ,
and the Pope terms himself Vicar of Christ; yet it is in the foregoing Section
showed, that they usurp a power not only equal, but in some respects rather
superior to Christ's, in their dispensing with the keeping of lawful Oaths, and
allowing of incestuous Marriages, none of which is claimed by those whom the
Ministers acknowledge as Heads besides Christ; and therefore it is false, that
the Headship pleaded for by the Church of Rome, is no other than what the
Ministers own. 3. His proofs have been examined before, and showed defective.
4. The terms Head and Body being used only metaphorically; there is no more
monstrosity in making a Head under a Head, than in making a Governor under a
Governor, used by St. Peter 1 Epist 2.13, 14. or making more Fathers of the
Church one under another.

Sect. 14. The Kings Supremacy is such as was allowed the Kings of Israel.
He ends this Chapter thus. If it be said, Object. 2. That the Kings of Israel
were the Heads successively, of the then Church; and therefore a visible
Headship over the Churches of Christ in the New Testament is lawful. We answer,
1. That betwixt the Economy of the Law and Gospel, there is a vast
disproportion; many things were lawful in that day, which to do, or subject to
now, were no less than a denial of Christ come in the flesh. 2. The Kings of
Israel were types of Christ. 3. That the Kings of Israel were Heads of the
Church, is false. God was its alone Head and King. Hence their Historian says,
their Government was (...), and when they would needs choose a King, God said,
they rejected him to whom even as to their political Head, a Sicle was paid
yearly as a Tribute, called, The Sicle of the Sanctuary. True indeed, as they
were a political Body, they had visible Political Governors, who when they
ceased, their Policy was at an end; but that these had any Headship over them
to make any Laws, introduce Constitutions of their own framing in matters
relating to Worship, will never be proved.

Answ. 1. That there is any such disproportion between the Economy of the Law
and Gospel, as makes the same power, which the Kings of Israel exercised
lawfully, to be now unlawful to the Kings of England, is falsely and vainly
asserted; since there is nothing therein ceremonial and temporary, peculiar to
the Jewish Economy, as appears in that all Nations have ascribed to their
chief Rulers dominion about things sacred, as is proved by me in the Assertion
of the fifth Proposition in my Book of the Serious Consideration of the Oath of
the Kings Supremacy, from that which is ascribed to Cyrus, Isa. 44.28. and
45.1. to the King of Niniveh, Jon. 3.7, 8. and others, Ezra 6.7, etc. and 7.13.
etc. Dan. 3.29. and 6.26. and that Christianity alters not civil relations or
Estates, 1 Cor, 7.24. Parents and Masters have the like power, Ephesians. 6.4, 5.
Genesis 35.2, 4. which things are more fully vindicated by Mr. Seldom in his first
Book De Syned. Hugo Grotius in his Book De Imperio summarum potestatum circa
sacra, and others. 2. It is true, that David is made a type of Christ, but that
all the Kings of Judah, much less, that all the Kings of Israel are made types
of Christ; or that Christ alone was to have that power which they used, or that
the Kingly Power used by them, ceased upon the coming of Christ in the flesh,
are all most palpably false; since the Scriptures of the New Testament do
plentifully assert the Dominion of Civil Powers, and our Lord Christ himself,
and his Apostles yielded subjection to them. 3. That the Church of Israel was
different from the Kingdom or people of Israel, is one of the Placita or proper
opinions of those who would establish from that example an Ecclesiastical
Independent Government in the Church distinct from the Civil Government of the
State. But neither the arguments of Mr. Gillespy in his Aarons Rod blossoming,
Book 1. c. 3. nor any other I have met with, convince me that it was so. Sure
both David and Solomon, and other Kings did exercise power over Ecclesiastical
persons, as in deposing Abiathar; and in Ecclesiastical things, about keeping
the Passover, 2 Chronicles. 29.30. and 30.2. and many other things, which were
approved by God, being related in the holy Story without reproof, as arguments
of their integrity. And therefore if the Kings of Israel were, as it is said of
Saul, 1 Samuel 15.17. heads of the tribes of Israel, they were also heads of the
Church of Israel, being Governors of the same persons, whether of the tribe of
Levi, or of other tribes, and about the same things, to wit, those of the
Worship of God, though they were not to meddle with the peculiar Ministry of
the Priests and Levites. It is true, that God alone was the Head and King of
the Church of Israel in some sense. He was their sole, supreme, absolute King,
that had power Legislative to assign what Faith, Worship, Judicatories, and
what other things were necessary for that Congregation, originally and of
himself de jure communi, of right common to all Nations, as their Creator; and
de jure speciali, out of right peculiar to that people, as being brought forth
out of the Land of Egypt, Lev. 25.55. and being joined in Covenant with him,
were not to set up a King over them without his appointment; and de facto, he
was actually their sole King (till the people weary of Samuels Government,
because of his sons iniquity, and out of fear of Nahash King of the Ammonites,
desired a King as other Nations) because Moses, Joshuah, and all the Judges
were immediately chosen by God, and raised up extraordinarily for a time to do
special services without ordinary succession; and accordingly acted and ruled
by extraordinary immediate motions and revelations from God; in which respects
the Government of the Israelites before Saul's reign, was not unfitly termed by
Josephus (...), Gods rule; and when they would needs choose a King, or have
Samuel to make them a King to judge them like all the Nations, 1 Samuel 8.5, 19,
20. God said they rejected him, that he should not reign over them, v. 17.
where the desire of having a King is not simply condemned as unlawful, nor
because they desired a King over the Church as such; as if they might lawfully
enough have desired a King over them as a political Head, but not as Head of
the Church as such; for neither is there any intimation of any such limitation
of their desire; but on the contrary, they desired that they might also be like
all the Nations, and that their King might judge them, and go out before them
and fight their Battles, 1 Samuel 18.20. Nor is there the least hint of any
reprehension of their desire, that they would have a King over them, as a
Church, to appoint them Religion and Worship as other people; neither was it
spoken that they rejected God, as though the Lord did not reign where there is
set up a Monarchical Government; for it is Gods Ordinance, and Kings have their
power and authority from him, according to that, Prove. 8.15, 16. By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree justice, etc. and they are his Deputies and
Lieutenants, by whom he rules. In which regard the people might have lawfully
desired a King, if they had done it with upright hearts o^ lawful grounds to
good and warrantable ends, in a right manner, and in due time For the Lord had
promised, that when they were settled in the Land of Canaan, he would (when he
thought good) set a King over them, out of whose loins the Messiah should come,
and also shows how he would have him qualified, and what he required of him,
Deuteronomy. 17.17, 18. and he had promised unto Abraham, that Kings should come out
of him, Genesis 17.6. And Jacob in his prophetical blessing says, That the
Scepter should not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh did come, i. e. the Messiah, Gen 49.10. And David speaking of
himself as a type of Christ, says Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my
holy hill of Zion. And therefore this is not simply condemned as a sin in it
self to desire a King; but because they did it with an ill mind, affecting
innovation, as being weary of Gods Government which he had established, till
himself pleased to change it; and in a pr^posterous and tumultuous manner,
before he had given any intimation of his pleasure, and to a wrong and evil
end, that they might be like to the Heathen Nations; and out of their
confidence in a King, as able to protect them; and their diffidence in God, as
insufficient to defend them in his own way, unless he would be directed in a
course of their prescribing; and finally, because they would not wait upon him
for the accomplishment of his word in his own due time, but with all
importunity press him to do at their own pleasure. Thus the Assembly
Annotations. Whence the impertinency of the allegation of this Text either
against Kingly Government, or their Headship over the Church is manifested. No^
is it more to the purpose which is added, that to God even as to their
political Head, a sicle was paid yearly as a tribute, called the sicle of the
sanctuary. For 1. If this payment be meant of that which is mentioned, Exodus
30.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. it does not appear by the Text, that it was a yearly
tribute paid to God as their political Head; but a Tax put on them when Moses
took the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then they should
give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord when he numbered them, that
there might be no Plague among them; half a shekel after the shekel of the
sanctuary, the offering of the Lord to make an atonement for the souls, which
he was to appoint for the service of the tabernacle of the Congregation, that
it might be a memorial unto the children of Israel. But if it be yielded that
it was after made a yearly tribute, as the Jewish Doctors say, and a perpetual
Ordinance according to what Mr. Ainsworth on Exodus 30 16. out of Maimony cites,
and that it continued so till the destruction of Jerusalem, as Josephus relates
in Book 7. chapter 28. of the Jewish War; yet this proves not, that it was paid to
God under that notion as to their political Head. It is true, that the tribute
or custom called Didrachma, that is, shekels mentioned Mat. 17.24, 25. is
conceived by very many learned men to be that which was paid to the Lord for
the use of the Temple as a tribute to him; which is largely argued by Cameron
in his praelections on that Text, with whom Diodate, Hugo Grotius, Dr. Hammond
concur; and before them Hilarious cited by Maldonat, who thinks it was paid to
the Romans, and cites Hierome, Bid, and of this mind are many others, as Beza,
Piscator, Pareus. But if Camerons opinion were certain, yet it may seem rather
to be paid to God as Head of the Church, then as a political Head, as this
Author speaks; since it was paid for the service of the Temple. 2. Were that
which this Author says, granted him, it should rather se^ve against him than
for him. For if it were paid to God as their Political Head, it rather proves
God to be the alone political Head, and so against that which he says, [ true
indeed, as they were a political Body, they had visible, political Governors,
who when they ceased, their policy was at an end] than that God was the
Churches alone Head and King, and that it is false that the Kings of Israel
were Heads of the Church; and therefore his sayings do interfer: That the Kings
of Israel had a Headship over them to make Laws, introduce Constitutions of
their own framing in matters relating to Worship, is conceived to be proved
from 2 Chronicles. 20.3, 21. and 29.27. and 30.1, 2, 4, 5, 23. and 31.2, 3. with
many more, which I find not yet to be enervated by the Answers I have met with.
I proceed to examine that which follows.

CHAP. 6. ARG. 5.
Sect. 1. False doctrine only makes a false Prophet not to be heard.
HE thus writes, Argument 5. Those who have the characters and properties of
false Prophets and Priests upon them, are not to be heard but separated from:
But the present Ministers of England have the characters of false Prophets and
Priests upon them: Therefore. The major (or first Proposition) stands upon too
firm a basis to be quickly removed: nor will any attempt so to do, Christ
having charged his to beware of such, Mat. 7.15. to take heed that none deceive
them, Mat. 24 4, 5, 23, 24, 25. not to believe every spirit, but to try the
spirits, because many false Prophets are gone out in the world, 1 John 4.1. not
to receive such into their houses, 2 John 10.11 to watch against them, Acts
20.29, 30, 31. with much more that might be said (if needful) for its
confirmation, is a sufficient evidence of the truth thereof. But herein the
parties litigant are at a perfect agreement.

Answ. It is true the major is yielded, if the hearing be meant of hearing them
of choice or* with reception, and separation from them in respect of that,
wherein they are false Prophets and Priests. But if it should fall out, that
one that should as Balaam at one time prophecy as he did, Numb. 23. and 24. at
another time through his counsel cause the committing of a trespass against the
Lord, as in the matter of Peor, Numb. 31.16. hold the doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balack to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat
things sacrificed unto Idols, and to commit fornication, Rev. 2.14. or as
Caiaphas being high Priest that year, at one time prophecy that Jesus should
die for that Nation, and not for that Nation only* but that also he should
gather together in one the children of God, that were scattered abroad. Joh.
11.51, 52. At another time say, that Christ had spoken blasphemy, Mat. 26 65.
Such a one may be heard and joined with in the former, though not in the
latter. Whence it follows, that it is not the Character or property of the man,
who is a false Prophet, or a false Priest, that is the reason, why he is not to
be heard, or is to be separated from; but his false doctrine, and his evil
counsel, whereby he seeks to thrust us away from the Lord our God, Deuteronomy. 13.2,
6, 10. or the damnable heresies denying the Lord that bought them, as it is 2
Pet. 2.1. turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the only
Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ, Jude 4. that do denominate them false
Prophets or false Priests, and bind us to a refusal of hearing them, or joining
with them in that Communion, in which we cannot partake without fellowship in
their error, false Worship, or other sin. And this is it, which is to be
collected from the Texts alleged; not that we are to refuse to hear persons,
or separate from them because of their personal vices, or irregular obtruding
themselves into their places; but in respect of their pernicious Doctrine, and
impious Worship, by which we are in danger to be ensnared and defiled. We are
bidden, Beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. but no where is any called a false
Prophet, but from his false Doctrine. And therefore though his counterfeit
shows of Piety be mentioned as the bait to catch men, yet the false doctrine is
the hook they are to beware of; as in like manner St. Paul warns, Romans 16.17,
18. and St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. And thus in the places cited, where Christ
bids take heed that no man deceive them; he alleges the reason: For many
shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many, Mat. 24.4,
5. and v. 23. If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there:
believe it not, for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they
shall deceive the very Elect, v. 24. the false Prophets that were gone out into
the world, 1 John 4.1. were they that confessed not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, v. 3. the person not to be received into house, 2 John 10.11. is
he that brought not the doctrine of Christ, v. 9. that confessed not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, who is the Deceiver and Antichrist, v. 7. those
that the Ephesian Elders were to watch against, Acts 20 31. were grievous
wolves that should enter in among them, not sparing the flock; and men arising
of their own selves, speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples after
them, v. 29, 30. And thus far I agree to the major; let us see how he proves
the Ministers to be such.

Sect. 2. The Ministers not false Prophets, because not sent, as Jer. 23.21.
Romans 10.15. is meant.
It Is the minor Proposition, says he, that is judged by some to come short of
a sufficient substraction, viz. That the present Ministers of England have the
properties and characters of false Prophets and Priests upon them. This we
doubt not, by a serious observation of the characters are given of such in the
Scriptures by the Holy Ghost, will to any ordinary understanding be made
exceeding perspicuous and evident, The signal characters of whom are, 1. That
they run before they are sent, Jer. 23.21. That a mission from the Lord is of
the essence of a lawful Ministry; that whoever wants such a mission is no
officer of Christ, but a false Prophet, and Minister of Antichrist, may hence
rationally, at least by way of Analogy, be deduced, is evident: which also
exactly accords with what is asserted by the Apostle, Romans 10.15. That the
present Ministers of England want such a mission, has already been
demonstrated, and we shall not actum agere. In a word, when it shall be proved
that they have received their authority from Christ, either immediately or
mediately, from any rightly constituted Church of Christ, or by succession from
the Church in the Wilderness, we shall acknowledge them to be Ministers of
Christ, and look upon our selves as obliged to pay them all honor and duty,
that as such, we are charged in Scripture to do: But if they have nothing else
to plead for themselves but what is usually instanced in by them, a succession
from the Church of Rome: That Apostate Church having lost her Churchship, and
therewith all lawful power for the sending forth Officers into the Churches of
Christ, we shall not fear to say, That they are such as are characterized here
by the Prophet, persons that run before they are sent.

Answ. A man that meant honestly, and had any spark of charity, justice, or
ingenuity, would not charge so deeply the whole order of men throughout a
Nation containing many thousands of men of years, breeding, parts, and by
reason of their Calling to be reverenced; and some of them, by his own
Confession, good men; as being false Prophets, who by the Law of Moses, Deuteronomy.
13.5. were to die, and as false Priests without some irrefragable proof, unless
he had learned that accursed art of him in Terence, Calumniare audacter,
aliquid haerebit; or having once past the bounds of modesty were resolved to be
gnaviter impudens. But I must confess, that however he thinks, that by a
serious observation of the characters, which are given in the Scriptures by the
Holy Ghost, it will be made exceeding perspicuous and evident; yet to my
understanding he has made neither of his charges perspicuous or evident in any
degree. For,

1. His charge is against all the present Ministers of England, and therefore
his proof should have been of that, which all, even the best of them are guilty
of, taken from that which they all unanimously agree in and practice; and not
from things which may perhaps be personally objected against some, but not
against the whole order.

2. The Characters which he gives should have been such as are convertible, so
as that it may be truly said, all that have these Characters are false Prophets
and false Priests, and all false Prophets and false Priests have them.

3. He should have told us, whether each of these is convertible, or all of
them, if not which they might have and not be false Prophets.

4. His proof being of matter of fact, should have better testimony then his
own assertion or interrogations, that may be denied.

5. His Characters are such as perhaps the Ministers may tell him, Physician
heal thy self, Novimus and qui te -- We can prove, if not the same, yet as bad
Characters or properties of false Prophets, or false Priests in those you allow
to be heard even in your Instituted Churches, though we rake not up out of the
ashes what was charged on the Brownists of old, or of late by Edwards, Bailey,
and others on the Independents.

6. That which is the chief Character of a false Prophet, 2 Pet* 2.1. and other
passages before recited, the bringing in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord
that bought them, is wholly omitted, without which, what else he charge them
with, will be insufficient to prove them false Prophets, or to warrant the
refusal of hearing them: But will occasion the Ministers to charge him with the
Schism of Donatists of confining the Church and Ministry to their party, and if
these things be done with a factious unquiet spirit (as they take them to be)
tending to hinder the good of souls in not embracing their Ministry, and the
peace of both Church and State: with a fury like that of the Circumcellions, or
at least an humor of reviling or uncharitable censuring. But whatever were the
Authors motives, I shall examine them as they are presented, because this
argument (if it were made good) is instar omnium, and the only genuine reason,
why the present Ministers should not be heard.

For the first, I grant that Jerem. 23 21. is a signal character of a false
Prophet, and that a mission from the Lord is of the essence of a lawful
Ministry, that whoever wants such a mission, is no Officer of Christ, but a
false Prophet and Minister of Antichrist; and that this exactly accords with
what is asserted by the Apostle, Romans 10.15. But I deny,

1. That by the sending here is meant the mediate regular outward calling.

2. That the regular outward mediate calling is only from a rightly constituted
Church of Christ in his sense; that is, after the Congregational way, or by
succession from the Church in the wilderness; that is, such as have been
separated from the Church of Rome after its Apostasy.

3. That either an immediate, or such a mediate mission, are of the essence of
a lawful Minister.

4. That any of these can any way be deduced from Jer. 23.21. or Romans 10.15.

5. I say, it is contrary to his own grant chapter 2. to make an outward mission of
the essence of a lawful Minister, since he expressly allows gifted Brethren, who
have not such mission, to Preach, and to be heard. As for inward immediate
calling, he is no judge of it; and it may be as well acknowledged in the
Ministers, as in his Gifted Brethren. As for the Texts, it is clear from the
text it self, that their running before they were sent, was in that they
Preached in Gods name, what he did not command or deliver to them; so that
their false Prophesying was not for defect of outward calling, but for their
taking upon them to deliver that message as from God, which they received not
from him: Which the words plainly show, Jer. 23.21.22. I have not sent these
Prophets, yet they ran; which is explained by the next words, I have not spoken
to them, yet they Prophesied; and in the next verse, But if they had stood in
my counsel, and had caused my people to hear my words, then they, etc. where
their not being sent of God, is expressed by Gods not speaking to them; their
not standing in his Counsel; making his people to hear words which were not
his; termed after, v. 25. Prophesying lies in his name; v. 26. Prophets of the
deceit of their own heart, ver. 30. stealing his words every one from his
neighbor, ver. 32. prophesying false dreams, ver. 36. perverting the words of
the living God. All which passages, and the whole Chapter show, that their
running when God sent them not, was not in that they had not an outward
calling, but in that they prophesied that, as from God which they had not from
him, but was of their own invention, lies, perverting Gods word: and that this
is meant by not sending, is manifest in that, ver. 32. these are put as
equipollent, I sent them not, nor commanded them, and v. 38. I have sent unto
you, saying, ye shall not say the burden of the Lord; where sending is
expressed to be saying what they should not speak. Which might be further
proved out of Jerem. 14.14. and the plain words, Jerem. 28.9. The Prophet which
prophesies of peace when the word of the Prophet shall come to pass, then
shall the Prophet be known, that the Lord has truly sent him. Whence it is
plain, that the mission of God is known by the word delivered: which if it be
according to Gods mind, a person cannot be judged a false Prophet, nor without
mission from him. Nor can the sending, Romans 10.15. be otherwise meant. For the
words imply, a person cannot preach except he be sent. But this is not true of
mediate outward calling, for those that were scattered went every where
preaching the word, Acts 8.4. and so do gifted brethren without such a calling.
But he is not sent who does preach another Gospel, and he is sent who does
preach the Gospel, as the words following intimate, How beautiful are the feet
of them that preach the Gospel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things?
Which I would not have understood, as if an outward regular calling were not
necessary for him that takes on him the public function of preaching, or that
every one were to be permitted to do so that did intrude into it: But that the
speaking of Gods word whether in private or public, is with such a mission as
acquits him that preaches it from being a false Prophet, and the hearer from
transgressing the precept, Matthew. 7.15. Beware of false Prophets. What he said
before against the Ministers mission, chap. 3. is answered before. What is
pleaded about a succession from the Church of Rome is represented by many that
understand not the occasion and plea, as odious, and a proof of the
Antichristianism of their calling. But they who peruse what Mr. Francis Mason
against Champney and others, who have answered the Papists question, Whence had
the Protestant Ministers their calling? have written, will be otherwise minded.
It follows.

Sect. 3. The Ministers not proved to commit Adultery, and walk in lies, as
Jer. 23.14. is meant.
2. That they commit Adultery, and walk in lies, Jer. 23.14. which none as I
ever yet met with; interpret literally of corporal whoredom and adultery, but
mystically of spiritual adultery, a departure from the ways and institutions
of the Lord in worship, to the devices and inventions of men: in the Margin. In
an old Translation of the New Testament, dedicated to Edward the Sixth, the
Author thereof in his Notes on Matthew. 21. says, They which in their Ministry
and preaching do otherwise then God had commanded them are no true Disciples of
Christ (a sin usually in the Scripture expressed, for the nature and greatness
of it, under that notion, Jer. 3.8. Ezekiel. 23.37. Rev. 2.22. which is also in
Scripture called a lie, Isa. 28, 15. Amos 2.4. John 8.44. the whole worship of
Antichrist being patched up with such dirty inventions, is so called, 2 Thessalonians.
2.11.) That this character also does rightly appertain unto the present
Ministers of England, the best of whom do in the sense of the spirit in the
forecited Scripture, commit adultery, and walk in lies, has already been
proved (and more hereunto shall afterward be spoken ['twere well if upon some
of them it had not a literal accomplishment] which of the Institutions of
Christ have they not mixed with their inventions? from how many have they gone
a whoring? is not a great part of their worship drops of the Whores Cup of
Fornication, and shreds of the great lie of Antichrist? who that has soberly
and unbiassedly considered of these things, but must acknowledge it?

Answ. To acquaint this Author with somewhat obvious enough, yet it seems this
Author met not with it, I will set down the Annotation of Mr. Gataker on Jer.
23.14. inferior to none of the Annotators of the Bible. They commit Adultery]
Do as Eli 's sons did, 1 Samuel 2.17, 22. whence Adultery became so rise in the
land, ver. 10. And walk in lyes] or walk up and down with lies. Hebr. with
falsehood, or a lie; as Isa. 28.15. they utter their lies not in Baals name, but
in mine, and so father their lies upon me, chap. 14.14. see ver, 26. Hebr.
committing Adultery, and walking with a lie; that is, at full, committing they
commit Adultery; and walking, they walk about with lies: they make a common
trade and practice of either: a form, though defective, yet very significant,
see on Isa. 59 11.13. See these two vile practices joined together in the false
Prophets again, chap. 29.23. For those that here restrain the term of Adultery
to Idolatry, spiritual Adultery, seem therein to wrong the Text. Now if this be
the meaning of the committing Adultery, it may be a signal character of a
wicked man, but not of a false Prophet as such. But if it be understood of
spiritual Adultery, every departure from the ways and institutions of the Lord
in worship to be devices and inventions of men, is not in this Prophet, nor in
any other, termed committing Adultery; but when that Divine Worship which is
appropriated to God is given to that which is not God, as may be showed out of
the 2. and 3. Chapters of Jeremiah, where chapter 3. 8* 9. it is said, they
committed adultery with stocks and stones, Ezekiel. 23.37. with Idols. Now if he
can prove that the present Ministers do thus commit Adultery, are Idolaters in
their Worship, I will yield, they and their Worship are to be separated from;
and if they teach it, not to be heard. What he says he has proved before, is
answered before; what he says in the next Chapter, will be then discussed. The
words in the Margin may be right, yet impertinent. As for walking in lies; I
grant it to be a signal character of a false Prophet, understanding it of lies
in doctrine opposite to the principles of Theology: and if he can prove the
present Ministers do walk in such lies, I shall yield them to be false
Prophets, and not to be heard: But yet he has not done that, nor goes about
it. That which he produces out of Isa. 28.15. Amos 2.4. John 8.44. 2 Thessalonians.
2.11. proves not every device and invention of men in worship to be meant by
lies, Jer. 23.14. Isa. 28.15. By lies some understand their Idols, some their
treachery in dissembling and compliance with the adverse party, some their
crafty shifts and wily devices. Mr Gataker conceives, most likely their
strength raised, and wealth gotten by fraudulent and deceitful courses, Amos
2.4. Diodati Annot. Their lyes] namely, their Idols, false worships and
superstitions, John 8.44. is meant of any lies, but chiefly that which is
opposed to the truth of Gods word in the Gospel, not meant as this Author
applies it. 2 Thessalonians. 2.11. is manifestly understood of a lie opposite to the
truth by which they might be saved, that is, the Gospel, v. 10.12. and so notes
anti-evangelical doctrine, though I deny not the whole worship of Antichrist
being patched up with such dirty inventions may be so called. But to his
Queries I answer. To the first, which of the Institutions of Christ have not
the present Ministers mixed with their inventions? 1. It concerns him that
accuses to show which they have so mixed. 2. That I think the Institution of
preaching the Gospel, which is that about which is the present question, they
have not so mixed. Sure, if they preach such doctrine of Faith as they
subscribe to, they do not mix their doctrine with their own inventions; yet, if
any do, while he holds the foundation, though he build some hay and stubble he
is not to be charged to walk in lies. I conceive the Preachers of the
Congregational Churches have been as guilty of Antinomian, Arminian, and other
errors as the Prelatical. To the 2. From how many have they gone a whoring? 1.
It concerns him that accuses to show. 2. They have not gone a whoring from the
Lords Supper to the Mass, by Transubstantiation, and the unbloody propitiatory
Sacrifice for Quick and Dead, and adoration of the breaden-god. To the third,
Is not a great part of their Worship drops of the Whores Cup of Fornication and
shreds of the great lie of Antichrist? The whores Cup of Fornication and great
lie of Antichrist, are according to Brightman, Mede, and others their
idolatries in Invocation of Saints, Worshipping Images, Relics, the Crucifix,
the Host, in their Herisies about Justification, Merit, the Popes Supremacy,
and other points of the Trent Council. A great part of the worship of the
Ministers of the Church of England is in their prayers to God, their praises of
God in Psalms, and Hymns, in their teaching and instructing of the people. Let
this Author show any part of this worship of the Ministers of England to be a
drop of the Whores Cup of Fornication, or a shred of that great lie of
Antichrist, even according to the exposition of the Authors named, or any other
sober Author; yea, though he be biassed toward the Congregational way, such as
Mr. Cotton, Mr. Thomas Parker, or any other of that party, or else let him be
branded lege Remnia, as an egregious Calumniator. As for that inserted passage
[ 'twere well if upon some of them it had not a litteral accomplishment] it had
been honest dealing, if he knew any, that he had either reproved them or
complained to their Superiors, but thus obliquely to insinuate it to the
Readers, too apt to entertain any suggestions against the present Ministers,
whether true or false, was neither the part of a charitable Christian, nor of a
candid Moralist.

Sect. 4. The Ministers are not proved to strengthen the hands of evil doers,
as Jer. 23.14. is meant.
3. Says he, That they strengthen the hands of evil doers, that none does
return from his wickedness, Jer. 23.13. That the present Ministers of England
really do so, is capable of an ocular demonstration: perhaps they do in their
Sermons reprove sin, thunder out the Judgments of God against the transgressors
of his Law, as much as any; but alas, what is this, to condemn them in the
state wherein they stand, without repentance to the pit of Hell, in the Pulpit;
and by and by to saint them in the Chancel, and tell them there, without
exception, that the Body of Christ was broken for them, his Blood shed for
them? O how many millions of souls are and have been thereby hardened to their
own undoing, and their hands strengthened in wickedness? What should I mention
their admission of the Children of all to Baptism, without exception, their
owning them as Church Members; yea, die they never so wickedly, as Brethren, of
whose joyful resurrection they profess they have a sure and certain hope;
thereby proclaiming their undoubted persuasion, that they are a people in
covenant with God? not to take notice of the terrible reflections, and
uncharitable censures are publicly past by them upon men truly fearing God,
because they cannot conform to them: How desparately are the hands of the
wicked hereby strengthened? so that none indeed does return from his wickedness:
How rare a thing is it to hear of one soul that is brought over to God by all
their preaching? so that visibly that judgment of God seems to be upon them,
ver. 32. therefore they shall not at all profit this people.

Answ. They confirm them in their wickedness, and so keep them from repentance,
by bearing them in hand, that they shall do well enough, whatsoever Gods
messengers tell them, that though they do continue in their sins: see Ezekiel.
13.22. is Mr. Gatakers paraphrase of this passage of the Prophet. And this
Author is not ashamed to say, that the present Ministers of England really do
so, is capable of an ocular demonstration, when his next words acquit them,
Perhaps they do in their Sermons reprove sin, thunder out Gods Judgments
against transgressors of his Law as much as any; if so, they do not strengthen
the hands of evil doers by bearing them in hand, that they shall do well
enough, though they do continue in their sins: And that, which he acknowledges
they do, is enough to acquit them from that character of the false Prophets
here charged upon them, which perhaps might more truly be imputed to those, who
have taught Arminian and Antinomian errors, which have been too rife in the
Congregational Churches. In the point of Baptism I can acquit the one no more
than the other, nor will I justify the censures of men truly fearing God; I
have some grounds to think that it is often a matter of mourning, not only to the
present Ministers, but also to some of the Bishops, and that they wish, that
there were a remedy in that, and in the admission of many ignorant and evil
doers to the Lords Supper, and they conceive by the warning before the
Communion, the enlargement of power to the Minister in the Liturgy, as now it
is, in the joint confession of Sin, and preaching before the Communion, besides
conference, and examination, which may be used to redress it, some provision is
made against it, however Laws restrain them from doing more; which being made
against Recusant Papists, are thought fit to be continued, though used
concerning others who are not such. That expression of the breaking of Christ's
Body for them, and shedding his Blood is known to be but a charitable speech,
upon the supposal of the persons repentance and faith (the truth of which is
above the Ministers cognizance) professed by them, they use; and if Judas were
at the Lords Supper, it was used by Christ; and being understood as those
speeches, 1 Cor. 8.11. Through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish, for
whom Christ died. Heb. 10.29. Has counted the Blood of the Covenant wherewith
he was sanctified an unholy thing, are not liable to exception. If any do undo
themselves by misunderstanding it, the same thing happened to Christ's hearers,
John 6.61* 66. and is to be remedied by expounding the meaning, and warning
persons, that they do not abuse it to their destruction. That the Ministers own
men as brethren, die they never so wickedly, is not true, if by legal censure
or judgment they are declared criminal; if not, the Ministers are not allowed
to exclude persons from brotherhood upon their own opinion without proof and
judicial sentence; if they do call them brethren, so all men are; and those
that profess Faith, may be charitably accounted Christian Brethren. In the
words used at Burial, the Minister does not profess, he has a sure and certain
hope of the joyful resurrection of all them that are interred; but the words
are, in sure and certain hope of the resurrection to eternal life without
application of it to the person then to be interred; and therefore these
allegations are too short of proving Ministers strengthening the hands of evil
doers as false Prophets. If their success in preaching be not as were to be
wished, it is the same that the Prophets complained of, Isa. 49.4. Isa 53.1.
and was verified of Christ, John 12.37, 38. And if it fall out, that people are
hardened notwithstanding their Ministers do preach, as here its not denied they
do, it is from themselves; and I wish their hardening and destruction be not to
be charged on this Author, and such others as are of the separation, who, by
declaiming against them as Antichristian, alienate the spirits of people from
them, so as to refuse to hear the word; which I count a most pernicious
wickedness in whomsoever, though reputed Saints. And though there is too much
cause to bewail, that there is so little effect upon the preaching of the
present Ministers, yet sure to argue thence that they are not sent of God, but
are false Prophets, is altogether inconsequent. Mr. Robinson in his
justification of separation, p. 306, 307. speaks better than so, when he says,
It is most evident, that whosoever converteth a man unto God, that person does
in truth and in deed, Minister the word of God, and the spirit by the word, and
so may be said to be sent of God. In that general and large sense, wherein Mr.
Bernard, p. 313. expounds the word, Sent or Apostle, I do acknowledge many
Ministers in England sent of God; that is, that it comes not to pass without
the special providence and ordination of God, that such and such men should
rise up, and preach such and such truths for the furtherance of the salvation
of Gods elect in the places, where they come, But this Accuser adds.

Sect. 5. The Ministers are not proved such daubers as those, Ezekiel. 22.28.
4. That they prophecy placentia, smooth things, according to the desires,
tempers, and lusts of men, to the pleasing of whom they addict themselves, Jer.
6.14. and 27.9. Ezekiel. 13.10, 11. and 22 28. What visible lineaments of such a
frame of spirit, are drawn upon the faces of that generation of men, concerning
whom we are now discoursing? Have they not been of all others (I am now
speaking of such as are looked upon by Professors, as men of the greatest parts
and holiness) the most ready to strike in with, preach up, and plead for what
was suitable unto the spirits of such upon whom they have had a dependence.
'Twere indeed well for them, could they in their present standing and practice
acquit themselves from that sore crime of seeking to please men, which if they
do, they cannot be the servants of Christ, Gal. 1.10.

Answ. They do by their glossings and flatteries, lull people asleep in
security, bearing them in hand, that there is no such dangerous matter toward
them, as Gods Prophets tell them; but that all shall be well, whatsoever they
say: see the same, chap. 8.11. see also, Lam. 2.14. Ezekiel. 13.22. is Mr.
Gatakers Paraphrase in his Annotations on Jer. 6.14. That which was prophesied,
Jer. 27.9. is expressed to be, that they should not serve the King of Babylon.
The daubing. Ezekiel. 13.10, 11. was by seeing vanity, and divining lies, ver. 9.
Ezekiel. 22.28 saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not spoken. If the
present Ministers of England do so, they are to be accounted false Prophets.
But do not this Authors own words in the next crimination before, when he
says, [ perhaps they do in their Sermons reprove sin, thunder out the
Judgments of God against transgressors of his Law as much as any] clear the
Ministers, and prove himself guilty of false accusation? what those visible
lineaments of such a frame of spirit are, should have been named, if he would
have dealt plainly. If men of greatest parts and holiness on one side, have
been the most ready to strike in with, preach up, and plead for, what was
suitable unto the spirits of such upon whom they have had dependence: may it
not be said so of men of the greatest parts and holiness of the Congregational
party, that they have been liable to the like? It were well if both parties
would search themselves, and not be so forward to accuse each other. As I
conceived long ago in my printed Treatise of glorying in men, on 1 Cor. 3.21.
so I am still by much experience confirmed, that the so termed Professors of
England out of their injudiciousness, and partial affection have done much hurt
to themselves and the Church of God, by looking upon, glorying in, adhering to
some as of greatest parts and holiness with disparagement of others; whence
evil surmizes, censurings, divisions from them that are disaffected, swallowing
down without chewing, what those utter whom they follow; which has been a
temptation to Teachers to vent such things as were not right, for the retaining
of their followers, and a trap whereby their hearers have been ensnared to
their own and others no small disquietness. And I agree with this Author, that
it were well indeed with the Ministers, and with their dissenters or opposites,
if they could all acquit themselves from this sore crime of seeking to please
men, and that we could all (...) seek and speak the truth in love, Ephesians. 4.15.
Yet further says he.

Sect. 6. Ministers changing of places, sadning some men's hearts, not
characters of a false Prophet.
5. That they are greedy Dogs, that can never have enough, and look every man
for his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. seeking and serving themselves in
their ministration, Ezekiel. 13.19, Micah 3. 5.11. in the Margin. In a translation
of the New Testament, dedicated to Edward the Sixth, the Author of the Notes on
Chap. 10. says, We must preach the truth without any respect of reward or
gains. They therefore that preach for their bellies sake, or preach after the
prescript of man -- are not the Disciples of Christ. That herein is a perfect
harmony betwixt these false Prophets and the present Ministers of England
cannot be denied; what means else their frequent calls, from places of less, to
places of greater value; their gaping and greedy desires after preferment; the
vexations they put poor men to, that cannot in conscience put into their mouths
preparing War against them.

Answ. Isa. 56.11. may be understood as well of the civil Magistrate as the
Minister; and of neither is it a Character of a Minister not to be heard, as
being a false Prophet, nor of an usurper or unlawful Magistrate, that is not to
be obeyed. Ezekiel. 13.19. notes a Character of a false Prophet, but the proper
character of him as such, is not that he prophesied for handfuls of Barley, or
pieces of Bread, but that they polluted God among his people by lying to them.
Micah 3.5. is a character of a false Prophet, in that they made Gods people to
err, their preparing war against him that put not into their mouth is a common
accident to corrupt men, not a property of a false Prophet; and in like manner
the Prophets divining for money, ver. 11. or the Priests teaching for money no
more proves a false Prophet or false Priest, then the heads judging for reward
proves them false heads: these are their personal vices, which may be in a true
Prophet, as in Judas, and in a true Priest, as Hophni, or in a true head, as in
Jehoiakim, Jer. 22.17. and so are impertinent to prove a Minister a false
Prophet. Nor is it any more to the purpose what is in the Margin, since he that
preaches truth with respect of reward or gains, may be a true Prophet, though
not a good man; and so they that preach for their bellies sake, though if they
preach not according to the word of God, but after the prescript of man, for
the matter of their doctrine they may be false Prophets: but this is not so
much as offered to be proved concerning the present Ministers of England; and
therefore it is untruly said, that it cannot be denied that there is a perfect
harmony between them, and those false Prophets. As for their removals from
places of less to places of greater value, it is a thing which may be objected
to Preachers and Pastors of the Congregational Churches, and may be upon just
cause, and therefore of it self proves not so much as a covetous mind: whether
it be out of gaping and greedy desire after preferments God may be the only
judge. If preparing War be meant of suing for their dues by Law, it may be
just; nor is a Minister bound to live upon alms, or voluntary contribution; the
Elders of the separated Churches have found by experience how great a misery it
is for a Student though godly and painful to live of the benevolence of their
Churches; nor is it any sin for a Minister more than for another man to make
use of the Magistrate and Law to gain his due, according to the Law of the
Land. And however some have instilled into peoples heads the unlawfulness of
requiring or paying Tithes, or other dues to the present Ministers, as they did
before to Non-Conformists; yet there is no colorable plea for not paying them,
it being not unlawful for me to pay what is unjustly demanded, there being
therein no doing of wrong, though there should be a suffering of wrong. And
therefore it is but vainly pretended, that they cannot in conscience put into
Ministers mouths, when there is no appearance of sin in doing it; and if their
Consciences be misled by erroneous Casuists, poor men may thank them for their
vexations, and beware of hearkening to them, and not clamor against the
Ministers as the only cause of their trouble; if out of mere obstinacy they
deny to pay, they are to blame themselves. It is added.

6. That they sadden the hearts of the righteous, Ezekiel. 13.22. what need I turn
aside to make application of this to the Prophets of this day? who that is
serious, does not experiment the truth thereof in his own soul? to see the Name
and Ordinances of God profaned, the ceremonies and inventions of man subjected
unto, by such as pretend to be Ministers of Christ, would make an heart of
stone to bleed; much more those whose hearts are made tender by the Lord. Those
of our Brethren that as yet attend upon their Ministry, will tell us, they are
troubled at their compliance and conformity -- All that look in the least after
reformation, say, they could wish it were otherwise; so that this character
also is visibly upon them.

Answer. By lies sadning the hearts of the righteous, as Ezekiel. 13.22. is
granted to be a character of a false Prophet, but this Author omits that, and
makes that a character of a false Prophet which is not, and applies that to the
Ministers which he goes not about to prove they are guilty of. Perhaps those
righteous persons he means are sadned out of mistakes, as conceiving the Name
and Ordinances of God profaned when they are not; as the Israelites were when
they mistook the Reubenites fact in building an Altar, Josh. 22.11, 12. Perhaps
it may be without their fault, perhaps the Ministers are sadned as well as
they, perhaps the sadness is from such erroneous suggestions, as are instilled
into the people by such as hold the same principles of separation with this
Author; perhaps men as righteous, as they who are sadned, do without any
sadness attend upon their Ministry; perhaps they are sadned that they stumble
at that they need not; perhaps they are more sad at such principles of division
as pervert them that are counted otherwise righteous than at any thing they
perceive practiced by the Ministers of England. If sadning the hearts of
righteous by the inventions of men be a character of false Prophets, and that
for it the Ministers of England are to be judged such, the renting of errors
and fancies which have been in the Congregational Churches, and even by their
Teachers, the many unnecessary scruples, janglings, oppositions, arrogant,
wilful carriages, deceitful and unrighteous dealings in Members, which have
sadned the hearts of many sober, and better composed spirits, and made them
weary of their societies; the heart bleedings for professors abominations are
indeed as signal characters of false Prophets in their Churches, as of the
Ministers in the Church of England being such. Though there were an utter
oblivion of what of old was done by Separatists in England, the Low Countries,
in new England; yet what has been done in England in our times, and is yet in
the memory of many yet alive, should have stopped this Authors mouth, and made
him forbear to object that against the Ministers of England, which may perhaps
more fully be retorted on those whose Ministry he would have attended on. The
Elders and Messengers of the Congregational Churches meeting at the Savoy,
October. 12. 1658. in the Preface to the decclaration of their Faith and Order do
of their own accord say, It is true, that many sad miscarriages, divisions,
breaches, fallings off from the holy Ordinances of God, have along in this time
of temptation, (especially in the beginning of it) been found in some of our
Churches. Yea, such insinuations as this Author urges against the Ministers of
England, would have proved not only the Ministers of the reformed Churches of
late, but even the Angels of the seven Churches of Asia, the teachers of the
Churches of Corinth, and other the best Churches in the Primitive times to have
been false Prophets. But I forbear.

He adds, 7. That they mix the word of God with their dreams, Jer. 23.25.29.
in the Margin. The notes on Matthew. 28. in the foresaid Translation are; Here do
all Preachers learn what they should teach; nothing else but Gods word; nothing
else but that the Lord has commanded them: not their own dreams and
inventions. So do the present Ministers of England, as has been proved.

Sect. 7. Pressing rigid Conformity no proof of the Ministers being false
Prophets.
Answ. This needs no further answer than what is before given.

8. Says he, That they come in Sheeps clothing, having the horns of a Lamb,
but are inwardly ravening Wolves, and speak like Dragons (i. e. pretend to the
Holiness and Meekness of Christ and Saints, but are inwardly full of raven and
cruelty, yea terrible in their Edicts and Laws, stirring up and making use of
the powers of the world, to persecute, kill and destroy the Saints Mat. 7.15.
Revel. 13.11. ( which second Beast is no other than the false Prophet
mentioned, Revel. 19.20. as might easily be demonstrated) As face answers face
in a glass, so do the present Ministers of England the false Prophets there
spoken of. Are not all the Persecutions, Imprisonments, Slaughters and
Butcheries of the Children of God, that the first Beast has exercised upon the
Saints for this 1260. years to be charged upon this Generation of men? yea, who
do more eagerly press a rigid Conformity (not only contrary to the Kings
Declaration from Breda) and others since published by him, but also (as is
thought) to his natural temper, and the inclination and bent of his spirit)
though to the infringing of the liberty, the banishment, the taking away the
lives of the Saints, who love Truth and Peace, and humbly beg, that they may be
suffered for the tribute they pay (as in the Dominion of the Grand Seignior
they are) in quietness to serve God according to their perswasins.

Answ. It is true, false Prophets are noted by Christ, Matthew. 7.15. to be in
outward show as sheep, meek and holy, inwardly cruel; But this is not the form,
denominating them false Prophets; nor a signal character of them, by which they
are known, but a reason of the caution, of being deceived by their fair shows.
That by which they are false Prophets, and are known to be such is their
fruits, v. 16. which though variously expounded by the Ancients, and Maldonat
understands it of their works, Grotius of the works of iniquity, yet of the
Ancients some understand it of their faith; Protestants, some by fruits
understand their false doctrine and evil life, as Beza, their doctrine, manner
of teaching, spiritual efficacy in their hearts, their life, customs and
intentions, so Diodati Annot. their doctrine, self-seeking and wickedness, so
the large Annot. Pareus, The fruit of a false Prophet is his false and damnable
doctrine. Dr. Hammond, Ye shall certainly know and discern them, if you take
notice of, and weigh the doctrines, which, when they have gotten some authority
with you, they will presently endeavor to infuse into you. Piscator in his
Scholies, From the effects of their doctrine: For as for what pertains to life,
it may be that he may teach well, who lives ill. Molin. Vates, l. 3. c. 5. The
fruits which their doctrine produces in the minds of Auditors. That the
doctrine is meant by the fruits, Matthew. 7.16. was long since in my Antidote,
Sect. 9. asserted, and in my Praecursor vindicated, Sect. 14. to which I still
adhere, and therefore count this, which is here made a signal character of a
false Prophet unfit to that end as being congruous to them who are no Prophets
in pretense, and to them who may be true Prophets or Teachers. The second
Beast, Revel. 13.11. is says Molin. Vates, l. 5. c. 17. The Roman Clergy with
the Pope himself; the Bishop of Rome with his Clergy, says Mr. Mede, Comment
on Revel. 13.11. most of the Protestant Divines make it either the Pope when he
usurped the power over the Emperor, or the Pope and his Clergy, who were
indeed terrible in their Edicts and Laws, stirring up and making use of the
powers of the world, to persecute, kill, and destroy the Saints. But this did
not show them false Prophets, but their false doctrine. But that as face
answers face in a glass, so do the present Ministers of England the false
Prophets there spoken of, is said with much heat, and without proof. That all
the Persecutions, Imprisonments, slaughters and butcheries of the Children of
God, that the first Beast, (whether he mean it of the Roman Emperors, or ten
Horns, that is, ten Kings into which it was parted, or the Bishop of Rome) has
exercised upon the Saints for this 1260. years, are to be charged upon this
generation of men, that is, the present Hierarchy and Ministry of England,
(which he means if he speak pertinently) is I confess a very dreadful and heavy
sentence, but pronounced a non judice, who I hope will be found a false
Prophet, in the event, as it shows him inwardly cruel to them, and by his own
rule is a signal character of himself being a false Prophet, I hope, by their
appeal to heaven they will get this Indictment quasht. I presume the rigid
conformity pressed has not yet tended to the banishment, the taking away of
the lives of the Saints, who love Truth and Peace; and I wish such writings and
practices, as this Author, and some others are deemed to use, do not exasperate
the King and Parliament to effect it. I assent to what he says of his Majesty,
as having by experience found it true, (which in all humble thankfulness I
acknowledge) nor do I doubt but he is, as the Poet describes a good Prince, Est
piger ad paenas Princeps ad praemia velox, Quique dolet quoties cogitur esse
ferox. Concerning the Declaration from Breda, and other Declarations since
published by his Majesty, how far the pressing of rigid Conformity opposes,
and who are the causes thereof is above our cognizance, who are at so great a
distance, That the present Ministers, who are the ordinary Teachers to be
heard, are the men that do it has no likelihood, since they are the men upon
whom the rigid conformity is pressed, and therefore this allegation is very
inaptly made a signal character of their being false Prophets.

Sect. 8 The charge Ezekiel. 22.26. reaches not the Ministers of England.
It follows 9. That they put no difference betwixt the Holy and Profane, Ezekiel.
22.26. Do not even the Ministers of England the same? Are not all their dear
Brethren and Sisters, living and dead, though Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers,
and Adulteresses? etc. Are not, as was said, the children of them all admitted
to the Font, and they themselves to the Lords Table? Is not the childrens meat
frequently given unto Dogs, and the holy Ordinances prostituted to be polluted
by the worst of men?

Answ. The charge, Ezekiel. 22.26. is against the Priests of the Law accusing them
of neglecting to discern between clean and unclean Offerings, as Piscator in
his Analysis. Grotius, They made not them to understand, to wit, the
difference, from that which was common. They are the very words from Lev.
10.10. where they are commanded to do what here they are said to have
neglected. That is holy which is dedicated unto God: Profane which is in common
use. Polluted which is forbidden to be eaten; clean which it is lawful to eat.
Aynsworth on Lev. 10.10. That ye may separate] or, to make difference; and this
is meant not only for themselves, but others, as in Ezekiel. 44.23. They shall
teach my people (the difference) between holy and profane, and cause them to
discern between unclean and clean. And for not doing this, the Priests are
blamed, Ezekiel. 22.16. see also Lev. 20.25. holy] Heb. holiness: meaning of
persons, and things. In Greek, Between the holy ones and the profane: which
Texts and others, as Levit. 22.1, 2, 3. show that this thing was an evil indeed
of a Levitical Priest, when either they admitted unclean and profane Offerings
of Beasts or Fowls, or legally unclean persons; or taught not the people to put
difference between them; yet was no Character distinguishing a false Priest
from a true, though it showed him to be negligent. But is nothing to our
Ministers who are not now to count any man or creature common or unclean, Act.
10.15.28. Whether they have power to keep any professing the Faith from the
Lords Supper, it may be doubted. Granting it that they have, yet this Author
will not allow it, I presume, to each single Minister, and if not, it is unjust
to account them false Priests for not doing it. But of this before in this
Chapter, Section. 4.

Sect. 9. The Ministers are not the false Shepherds meant, Ezekiel. 34.4.
It is added 10. That they exercise not pity to the weak broken scattered Sheep
of Christ, nor show bowels in their recovery, but with force and cruelty rule
over them, Ezekiel. 34.4 One would think, the former part of the Chapter were
rather an History of what is practiced by the false Shepherds of this day, than
otherwise: so perfect an agreement is there betwixt their practice, and this
prophecy of the Lord. They tell us it is our weakness and distemper that we
conform not to their worship; that we are persons gone astray: we profess to
them, that we would not give way to spiritual distempers, nor stray one step
from the ways of God might we but know it; we would thank any to convince us
of our mistakes, and reduce us to the true sheepfold, if we are gone astray: Do
they seek after us, in a spirit of tenderness labor to convince us, and carry
us in their bosoms, like tender Shepherds to the true fold? What less? With
force and cruelty they rule over us, threaten us with Excommunications,
Imprisonments, Banishments, dispoiling us of what God has graciously given us,
yea, condemning us to death: in all which (through the grace of God) we can
rejoice, though they thereby abundantly demonstrate, that they are the
successors of the false Shepherds here spoken of.

Answ. Though Diodati, the Annotator in the large Annotations, Junius, The
Marginal Notes of the Geneva Translation, say, he means by Shepherds, the
King, the Magistrates, Priests, and Prophets; yet after Piscator, Grotius, and
others, I think this passage is only appliable to the Kings and other Civil
Rulers of Israel, the Prophets not ruling over the people with force and
cruelty, but beguiling them with lies and deceit. Which with sundry more
passages of the Chapter upon my reading of it do convince me, that this Author
does misalleadge it, since the Ministers of England are not Successors of the
Civil Magistrates, nor are the Prince and Governors here termed false
Shepherds, but negligent, and unmerciful; which are not the signal Characters
of a false Prophet, or false Priest, and therefore this Text is impertinent to
prove the Ministers to be such. As for the practice he charge the Ministers,
with, since it is in generals, a distinct answer cannot be made to it, nor can
any but the accused well answer it. Possibly that which this Author counts
force and cruelty may be necessary, though severe discipline. I do not justify
the neglects or menaces mentioned in any; nor is it unlikely, but that there
are men of violent spirits in the Hierarchy and Ministry of England, to whom
this evil is imputed: nor do I think this Author can acquit all those that are
Elders or other members of the Congregational Churches. Iliacos intra muros
peccatur and extra. It is to be lamented that such sad things should happen as
he recites. For my part I have, even when the Congegational men had most
liberty, had conferences with persons, in which I showed my dissent from them
in respect of the Separation with my Reasons, and have often in writing
answered their Arguments for it, which I can yet produce, yet found them still
inflexible. This writing was begun by me out of compassion of those, to whom I
was once a Preacher, whom I found seduced by it, and have endeavored without
any bitterness to convince this Author of his mistakes, yet I doubt whether he
will thank me for it. I rather expect to be told for writing this Book, as I
was for writing of some other pieces, that I am an Apostate, temporizer,
flatterer, adversary to the Saints, and such like imputations. They that know
what has been done in New England, and old England even at Oxford to Quakers
for inveighing against their Teachers and Governors should be somewhat more
moderate in censures of the present Ministers and Governors; who when they read
this very Chapter will be apt to think, that the soul of the Quakers is by
transmigration gotten into this Author. My Prayer to God is, that on all sides
there may be such a calm and considerate spirit, that we may forbear one
another, and in love endeavor the rectifying of each other, not bite and
devour one another, lest we be consumed one of another, and so we be Homo
homini lupus, not Shepherds.

Sect. 10. The Ministers of England are not the second Beast foretold. Revel.
13.11.
But there is more behind. What should I mention, says he, 11. That they come
up out of the Earth, Rev. 13.11. are raised up by men of earthly spirits and
principles. 12. That they exercise the power of the first Beast, or make use of
the civil power for their supportment, ver. 13.13. That they make an Image to
the Beast, ver. 14.15. (i. e. Erect an Ecclesiastical state of Government, in a
proportio^ableness to, and resemblance of the Civil State.) 14. That they
compel all under the penalty of death, to worship or bow down to this Image of
the Beast (or Ecclesiastical Government, in its Courts, Canons, Laws, and
Ceremonies devised by it) v. 15. 15. That they compel all to receive a mark,
either in their right hands or foreheads; secretly or openly, one way or other
to acknowledge subjection unto this Beast, without which they may neither buy
nor sell, being cut off from the Church, by their Excommunications for their
stubborness, v. 16, 17. All which Characters of the second Beast (or false
Prophet) he that runs may read upon the present Hierarchy and Ministry of
England. It remains then that the present Ministers of England have the
characters of the false Prophets and Priests upon them, and therefore are not
to be heard but to be separated from.

Answ. Though the Book of the Revelation be a holy Divine writing, and has
been of great use to support the spirits of Christians under the great
Persecutions, which have befallen them, and is still of very great importance
for the animating of believers either to patience in sufferings, or
watchfulness in time of temptation; yet such abuse there has been made of it
to uphold many wild conceits, many irregular practices; notwithstanding the
confessed obscurity, and the frequent refutation of such conceits, as men have
with much confidence delivered, by the manifestation of their vanity in the
event; that sober men have wished it were either less read by some, or more,
considerately weighed, and more warily applied. The passages here alleged have
been so abused by men of opposite parties against dissenters, especially by
those of the separation against not only the Prelates and Prelatical Preachers,
but also the Presbyterian, that they have served for no other purpose but to
inflame the minds of one against the other. The first and second Beast, Rev.
19. are differently conceived. Dr. Hamond conceives the first Beast to be the
Heathen Roman Emperors upholding the Idol worship, the second Beast the Augurs,
Priests, and Magicians, such as Apollonius Tyranaeus was, and so conceives the
accomplishment already past. The Author of an Essay on that part of the
Revelation, which begins at chapter the 13. conceives it meant of one to come.
Molinaeus in his Vates, l 5. c. 17. with Mede, and others, understand it of the
Pope and Roman Clergy. There is no probability, that this second Beast should
be meant of the Hierarchy and Ministry of England, or that they should be the
false Prophet mentioned, Rev. 19.20. which is said to work miracles before the
Beast, and with the Beast was cast alive into the lake of fire burning with
brimstone: which to say of men, of whom some he acknowledges to be good men,
is so horrid an imagination, as had not this Author been transported with
extreme passion, me thinks he should have trembled to have let it enter into
his thoughts, much less to have written and printed it. Nor can the conceits be
free from these and such horrid consequences, that then the first Beast must be
Civil Powers, and they to be cast into the lake burning with fire; that the
Hierarchy and Ministry of England, cause the Earth and them which dwell therein
to worship the first Beast, whether the Roman Emperors, or Pope, or Civil
Powers, or Idols, that all that be subject to the Image of the Beast* which is
made the Ecclesiastical Government, shall drink of the wine of the wrath of
God, which is poured out without mixture into the cup of his Indignation, and
shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels,
and in the presence of the Lamb, and the smoke of their torment ascends up
for ever and ever, with more of the like; which are so monstrously uncharitable
to be conceived of such men, and so utterly destitute of all color of proof,
that I can scarce censure it so mildly as to term it dotage, but rather take it
to be the speech of a furious Bedlam. His applications also are so frivolous
and wild, as that they should be abhorred rather than answered. How does it
appear that to come out of the Earth is to be raised by men of earthly spirits
and principles? How does it appear that men raising them, whether Princes or
Patrons are men of such spirits and principles? When were they raised by such?
To exercise the power of the Beast is not to make use of the Civil Power for
its support, (which were indeed no evil, but may be good, and the wisdom of
men) but to act with the same power the first Beast used in making war with the
Saints. If the Ecclesiastical State as it resembles the Civil, be the Image of
the Beast, and to erect it, be the character of the false Prophet; and this be
so evil, then it is much more evil to erect the Civil State, which is the
Prototype, which me thinks he should fear to say. How does it appear, that the
proportionableness to and resemblance of the Ecclesiastical state of Government
to the Civil is not therefore the better and more desirable? When did the
Ministers compel all under the penalty of death, or outlawry to acknowledge
subjection to the Hierarchy? Are there not many persons and places of peculiar
and exempt Jurisdiction? many persons that either by indulgence or connivence,
though not acknowledging such subjection, live as free as those that do? Do all
great as well as small, rich and poor, free and bond receive such a mark? I am
weary with refuting such palpable gross untruths, and do wonder with what face
without the least proof, a man that would be accounted a Saint should attempt
to obtrude them upon the world, much more that he should do it to the Church of
God, and upon such absurd premises conclude thus, It remains then that the
present Ministers of England have the characters and properties of the false
Prophets and Priests upon them, and therefore are not to be heard, but
separated from.

CHAP. 7. ARG. 6.
Sect. 1. All Idolatry is, by exhibiting Divine Worship to a Creature.
THose that are guilty of Idolatry, Saints may not have communion with (much
less own them as their Teachers) but ought to separate from them: But, the
present Ministers of England are Idolaters: Therefore. The major (or first
Proposition) will not be deined, because bottomed upon express commands from
Christ, 1 Cor. 5.11. and 10.14. 2 Cor. 6.14.18. Before we descend to the
confirmation of the minor (or second Proposition) we shall crave leave to
premise; That Idolatry may be considered under a threefold notion.

1st. Most gross and absurd Idolatry, when the creature is worshipped
terminatively; this few are guilty of: the Israelites of old worshipped not the
Calf terminatively, but God in it, therefore they are said to proclaim a feast
to Jehovah, Exodus 32.5. Rab. M. Maimonides de Idolat. 8.2, 3, etc. observes,
That never any Idolater was so silly, as to think, that an Idol of wood, stone
or metal, was a God that made the Heaven and Earth, but through them all
Idolaters intend to worship God.

2ly. Somewhat more refined Idolatry, (viz. in respect of what we but now
instanced in) when we offer up any worship or homage, proper and due to God
only, before any creature, as the medium or representative of God: Such was the
Idolatry of Israel in the Golden Calf, Brazen Serpent, etc. Of this are the
Synagogue of Rome, amongst all the combinations of men in the world, most
eminently guilty. To this Head may be added,

1. The ascription of Godhead to any creature, as to Herod, Acts 12.22.

2. The ascription of the properties of the Godhead to any creature.

3. The worshipping of God in any other way than what he has prescribed: which
all that write upon the second Commandment say, is the Idolatry therein
forbidden.

4. The oblation of worship or service to God, that has been offered up to
Idols, for which there is no prescription in the Scripture.

3ly. Most refined Idolatry, when the heart goes forth in desires after any
thing beyond what is limited by the Lord, or trusts and relyes on any creature
on this side God. In the first sense, there are (as was said) few or no
Idolaters in the world: The Papists come as near thereunto as any, praying to
the Cross, the Virgin Mary, Saints, Angels, etc. expressly affirming, that the
Virgin Mary may be worshipped with that worship, which they call Cultus
Latriae, which yet they say is due only to God. In the last sense, there are
none, but at one time or other may be said to be Idolaters* the hearts of the
best men (...) too often going forth too far in desires after, and secret
dependence upon* things beneath the Lord: which yet they are watching and
warring against, waiting and longing for the day, in which they shall be
c^mpleatly swallowed up in the will of God. It Is in respect of the second
particular before instanced in, that we assert the present Ministers of England
to be Idolaters: To the proof whereof we now add^ess ourselves.

Answ. The Conclusion is not the same with that which at first Chapter 1. was
undertaken to be defended, That it is not lawful for the Saints to hear the
present Ministers of England; nor does it necessarily follow, that if we may
not have communion with persons, nor own them as our teachers, but separate
from them, That we may not hear them preach the Gospel. An excommunicate person
I am not to have communion with, nor to own the Teachers of foreign Churches
as suppose the Lutheran, as my teachers* yea I may be bound to separate from
such, as suppose a Popish Priest, as Jansenist, preaching the doctrine of
original sin, of efficacious grace* or the Gospel concerning redemption by the
blood of Christ; whom yet I may lawfully hear handling those truths according
to the received doctrine of St. Augustine.

Nor is the ma^or true, if the Idolatry be in that way which he here calls
Idolatry, the worshipping of God in any other way than what he has prescribed,
nor if the Idolatry be secret and not open, nor though it be open, if by
infirmity he fall into it and repents; or be not censured as such; or teaches
nor such Idolatry; nor requires any communion with him in his Idolatry. Nor do
the Texts prove his ma^or: 1 Cor. 5 11. forbids no other communion than eating,
and that eating which might be with Idolaters of this w^^ld, v. 10 and
therefore not eating the Lords Supper: Nor does it any mo^e forbid eating with
a B^other called an (...), than with a Brother called a fornicatour, or
covetous, (...), or an extortioner, and therefore, if this Text prove a
necessity of separation from such in holy exercises as Prayer, or the Lords
Supper, it forbids doing these things with a covetous person, or railer; and
then a Christian Brother must have cognizance of such sins, and be a Judge of
every one he communicates with, which were absurd: and therefore it can be
meant of no other than arbitrary familiar converse, as in eating, where I am at
liberty to eat, or not to eat; and of private judgment of discretion, which
each one is to exercise in the choice of his company: But nothing to the owning
of a Teacher, or shunning to hear him. For here the person is considered only
as a Brother, not a Teacher in Office. 1 Cor. 10 14. is less to the purpose,
for it requires only to flee from Idolatry, not from Teachers that are any way
Idolatrous, so as not to hear them. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17, 18. requires, not
to be yoaked with Infidels, not to have part with them, not to agree with
Idols, to come out from among Infidels, to be separate, not to touch the
unclean thing, that is the Idol; which may be done, and yet a person some way
guilty of Idolatry may be heard, yea owned as our Teacher, and we may have some
communion with him in holy things, as in Prayer, and the Lords Supper, and
praising God, which are not Idolatrous.

That which is premised by this Author before his confirmation of the minor,
requires some Animadversions upon it. The definition of Idolatry, which
hitherto has been received by all Protestants that I know of, is, Ainsworth of
the Church of Rome against Johnson, p* 145. Every abuse does not make a thing
an Idol; but, when the honor due to God alone, is given to a creature, then it
is made an Idol.
that which Dr. John Rainold has delivered in his 2 d. Book de Idololatria
Ecclesiae Romanae. c. 1. that it is the exhibiting of Divine Worship to a
Creature, and has proved it from Romans 1.25. where (...), whether it be read
instead of the Creator, as explained by the Authors of the writing of the
Constitutions of Clemens by (...), as it is cited by Grotius in his Annot. or
Praeterito Creatore, the Creator being forsaken or neglected, as Beza after
Hilarious, or besides the Creator, as (...), besides that which is laid, 1 Cor.
3 11. or as the Vulgar, Potius quam Creatori, rather than to the Creator, or
as ours, more than the Creator, shows, that there is a worship and service
proper to the Creator, and herein was the Idolatry of the Gentiles, and all
other, that they worshipped and served the creature, with that which was due
only to the Creator. And therefore I conceive it, not to be Idolatry, where
Divine Worship is not exhibited to a creature, that is, directed to some person
or thing, substance or accident, real or imagined, which is not the Creator of
all things* It is true, that Heathen-Idolaters did many of them make the
Creator of all, the utmost bound or terminus of their Image Worship, as the
Apostle says, Acts 17.23. that the Athenians did ignorantly worship the
unknown God, and yet were Idolaters, because their worship was first of the
Image as the next terminus or object to which it was exhibited. And the same is
true of the Israelites worshipping of the calf, though they worshipped God in
it, Exodus 32.5. because, though they did not worship the Calf terminatively,
that is, so as to intend to direct their worship to it as the utmost bound of
it, or last, or chief object: yet it was the molten Image which they
worshipped, Psalm. 106.19. Exodus 32.8. It is indeed most gross and absurd
Idolatry, when the creature is worshipped terminatively, and therefore the
worship of Baal is accounted worse than the worship of the golden calves at Dan
and Bethel, 1 Kings 16.31. because it was terminated lastly to the Sun, or to
the Devil, who was worshipped by Molech, to whom they sacrificed their Sons and
Daughters, Psalm. 106.37, 38. And this Idolatry was the Idolatry of the
Canaanites, and a great part of the world, and of the Jews at last, as St.
Stephen charge them with, Acts 7.41, 42, 43. Nor do I think it true, which
this Author here, and p. 63. says, that there are few or none that worship the
creature Terminative, since not only of old the host of Heaven was worshipped by
most of the Idolaters, Vide Gatak. Annot. in Antonin. l. 12. sect. 28. (...).
as may be gathered out of the Scriptures, and is largely demonstrated by M^
Seldom in his Syntagma de Diis Syris; but also at this day the Devil himself is
worshipped in the East- and West Indies, in some Northern Countries, and
Southern, if the relation of Travelers, Historians, and Chorographers be true.
It is granted, that it is somewhat more refined Idolatry, when we offer up any
worship or homage, proper and due to God only, before any creature, as the
medium or representative of God. For then the worship is directed to it, as
Gods Deputy, to receive it for him, and so the immediate or next terminus or
object is the creature, though it be intended further to or for God, as the
last or utmost term, bound or object, to which it is exhibited. But unless it
be exhibited to the creature, it is not Idolatry, though it be done before the
creature, as [ before] notes only the presence of it with the worshipper,
whether seen or unseen, minded or not minded, and not any respect to it in the
act of worshipping. Worshipping at the Temple* before the Ark or Altar, was no
Idolatry, it was a duty required, Psalm 99.5. Worship at his footstool, meaning
the Sanctuary and Ark there, says Mr. Ainsworth in his Annot. Not, as the
Vulgar reads it, and the Papists would have it, Worship his footstool; no nor
if the Lord be worshipped before a creature, as the Objectum a quo, as the
matter or thing which is the occasion, motive or reason; of worshipping the
Lord at that time, is it therefore Idolatry, though the worship be not
instituted in respect of the time. We read, 2 Chronicles. 7.3 And when all the
children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord upon
the House (the Temple,) they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground
upon the pavement, and worshipped and praised the Lord: yet was no Idolatry
therein; nor in that which Manoah and his Wife did, Judge. 12.20. or the people,
1 Kings 18.39. 2 Chronicles. 20.18. Exodus 4.31. and 12.27: Whence I infer, that,
though there be diverse sorts of Idolatry, yet in every of them there is Divine
Worship; and that, as Tertullian in his Book of Idolatry, c. 15. speaks of the
three Children refusing to worship the golden Image of Nebuchadnezzar,
Probantes Idololatriam esse quicquid ultra humani honoris modum ad instar
Divinae sublimitatis ext^llitur, then it is Idolatry, when any thing that is
not God, is extolled beyond the measure of humane honor, to the likeness of
Divine sublimity, whether it be terminatively, or as a representative.
Concerning which I acknowledge, that the Papists are deeply guilty in praying
to the Cross, the Virgin Mary* Saints, Angels, etc. in which they give them,
and their Breaden-God, Images, and Relics, that which the Scripture counts
Latriam, or the Service which is to be given to God only, as to the Image of
Christ, (Aqu. sum. part 3. qu. 25 art. 3.) ^aith, is to be adored with the
adoration of Latria: yea Bellarmine l. 2. de Imagine. Sanctorum, c. 21. holds,
that the Images of Christ, and the Saints, are to have veneration, not only by
accident or improperly, but also by themselves and properly, so as that
themselves terminate the veneration, and not only as they supply the place of
the Samplar. And this veneration is expressed in the Trent Council, Sess. 25.
to be, the kissing of them, uncovering the head, and falling down before them,
which are the same which were done to the Image of Baal, 1 Kings 19.18. and
counted Idolatrous, being given to an Image. And so are the services done to
the Virgin Mary, though I think the Papists do not affirm expressly, as this
Author says of them, That the Virgin Mary may be worshipped with that worship
which they call Cultus Latriae, which yet they say is due only to God; for they
in words deny they give her Latriam, and call her Worship Hyperduliam. Nor do I
conceive the worshipping of God in any other way than what he has prescribed,
is the Idolatry forbidden in the second Commandment; or that all who write upon
the second Commandment say so, or that the oblation of worship or service to
God, that has been offered up to Idols, for which there is no prescription in
the Scripture, is Idolatry, though perhaps it may be superstitious, and
Will Worship; Between which, if a distinction be not made, the Pharisees that
worshipped God by washing their hands after the tradition of the Elders, will
be sound Idolaters, of which Christ does not accuse them, Matthew. 15.9. And
therefore, if in respect of this, it is, that the Ministers be asserted
Idolaters, his proof will come short: but let us view it Thus he writes,

Sect. 2. All Will Worship of God is not Idolatry.
Arg. 1. Th^se that worship the true God in any other way than he has said he
will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by him, are Idolaters: But the present
Ministers of England worship the true God in another way than he has said he
will be worshipped it, and is prescribed by him: Therefore* The ma^or (or first
Proposition) is evident from this single Consideration: To wo^ship the true God
through false mediums is Idolatry; such as so wo^ship him are Idolaters; (This
must be so, or else there is little or no Idolatry in the world, nor ever was.
The Athenians (and other Gentiles) worshipped the true God, for they worsh^pped
him whom Paul declared to them, even that God, that made the world, Acts 17.23,
24. Yet none doubts but they were Idolaters, which they cannot be charged with
upon any other account, than their worshipping the true God through false
mediums:) But to worship God in any other way than what is of his own
prescription, is to worship him through a false medium: Therefore so to worship
him is Idolatry, and they that so worship him are Idolaters.

Answ. If by [ any other way] be meant of any creature, as the medium or
representative of God, as the golden calf, or brazen serpent, I yield the major
to be true, and deny the minor: But if he meant by [ any other way] any sort of
worship, such as was the worship of God by washing of hands according to the
tradition of the Elders, Mark 7.3, 4. I deny both major and minor. And to his
proof of the major I answer:

Though the worshipping of the true God through such traditions of men, which
he seems to call false mediums, be not Idolatry; there is and has been too
much Idolatry in the world, Paganish, and Jewish, and Popish, and is yet at
this day; and in the Athenian worshipping of the true God, Acts 17.23, 24.
there was Idolatry, in that they worshipped this unknown God by an Image,
worshipping the Image as the representative of God, which may be gathered from
v. 16. where the City of Athens is said to be (...), that is, wholly given to
Idolatry, as we translate it, but more rightly, full of idols; which is thus
expressed by Dr. Owen in his third Book of his Theologumena, c. 13. The streets
of the City were called Pagi, because to every of their Deities some Stone
(that is, a Pillar consecrated to this or that Idol) was erected. Thence to
signify some part of the City the use of the word was first drawn. The same
was done at Athens as was done at Jerusalem, Jerem. 2.13. For according in the
number of thy Cities, so are thy Gods O Judah, and according to the number of
the streets of Jerusalem, ye have made Altars to that shame, Altars to burn
incense to Baal. And from the expression of an Altar, v 23. which among the
Gentiles had an Image near it, and the word (...), which Dr. Hammond in his
Annot. on v. 16. says, was not their Worsh^ps, or their Altars, but their
Idols, that is, their Deities themselves, for so the word is used, Wisd. 14.20.
And, on 2 These. 2 4. alleges Theophylact as interpreting (...), Acts 17.23.
by their Idols; and from the word (...). v. 22 applied to this worship, is
collected, that the unknown God was as a Daemor, to whom they erected an Image
or Pillar, which they conceived their Deity present at, which is rendered, a
standing Image, in our translation, or an Image of stone, to which they did bow
down, forbidden Levit. 26.13. of which Ainsworth in his Annot. there, may be
seen. So that upon this account the Athenians may be charged with Idolatry, in
that they, in bowing down to, or worshipping the unknown God, did direct it to
the Idol or Pillar which did represent him, unto which also an Altar was
dedicated. But its added,

Sect. 3. This Authors Argument as well proves himself an Idolater as the
Conformist.
The minor (or second Proposition) viz. That the present Ministers of England
worship the true God in another way than he has said he will be worshipped in,
and is prescribed by him, is that which is denied by some: but the truth
thereof, we doubt not, will to the unprejudiced Reader be beyond exception
evident, from the ensuing Demonstration, viz. Those that worship God after the
way of the Common Prayer Book, worship him in another way than that he has
said he will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by him: But the present
Ministers of England worship God after the way of the Common Prayer Book:
Therefore, etc. The minor (or second Proposition) cannot be denied; their
subscription before they are admitted to the Ministry, together with their
daily and constant practice, are sufficient evidences thereof.

Answ. That unwary Readers may not be deceived by the ambiguity of the phrase
here used, it is to be considered, That the way of Worship not prescribed by
God, may be either when the worship is to another thing besides or with God,
which alone proves Idolatry, and in which sense the minor was denied, and
should have been proved: Or, by another way, is meant another Ceremony or Rite,
in which the Worship of God is placed, such as was the Pharisees washing their
hands, which may be Will Worship, if to God only, but not Idolatry; and so, if
he could prove our Ministers guilty of this, yet should they not be proved
Idolaters, any more than the Pharisees were, with which neither Christ nor his
Apostles do charge them; But this Author does no^ so much as go about to prove
the minor denied in this sense. But in a third sense, to wit, by another way of
Worship than what God has prescribed, he understands another way of expression
of worship, in which the worship is not placed, but is used only as an outward
means for convenience, yet accounted alterable. In which sense the minor is not
denied. But the major of his Argument is denied in either of these two later
senses of the phrase, and the minor in the two former: in neither of which does
he go about to prove it. I add,

1. That he does vainly suppose God has appointed or prescribed the
particularities of the modes or way of his Worship, in every of the sorts or
kinds of worship he has prescribed, as particularly in Prayer, that it must
not, in a pre-conceived and stinted form of words, imposed by Rulers, be
performed to him; but that it must by the Minister be done in a loose,
undetermined, unpremeditate or unprescribed form of words by any man; The which
supposition is before showed to be an error, in the Answer to the Preface,
sect. 20. chapter 1. sect. 3. chapter 4. sect. 9. chapter 5. sect. 3, 4, 5, 7.

2. In this sense in which he uses the phrase, his Argument may be retorted
upon himself. Those that worship the true God in any other way, that is, form
of expression, than he has said he will be worshipped in, and is prescribed by
him, are Idolaters: But they who pray in a loose, undetermined, unpremeditated
or unprescribed form of words by man; worship the true God in another way, that
is, form of expression, than he has said he will be worshipped in, and is
prescribed by him: Therefore they (among whom th^s Author is one) are
Idolaters. The major is his own; the minor by his own grants stands firm, till
he can show where God has said, He will be worshipped in, and has prescribed
such a loose form of expression in Prayer; which I yet find not. What this
Author has said before, is answered before. Till he brings better proof,
though I will not pronounce him an Idolater; yet I shall judge him to be guilty
of superstition, in counting that to be sin, which God has not made such, and
of usurpation of Gods Legislative power, in Pharisee-like requiring observance
of his own tradition as Gods command; together with evil censoriousness, rash
judging, and uncharitable separation. But let us go on.

Sect. 4. Prayer in a stinted form may be worship of God of his appointment.
As for the major Proposition; says he, That to worship God after the way of
the Common Prayer Book, is to worship him in a way that is not of his
appointment.

1. Let any show when and where such a stinted form of service was appointed by
Christ, and this part of the controversy is at an end: Sure we are, there are
not the least footsteps of such a way of worship to be found in the New
Testament, no, not in the whole Book of God (whatever is pretended by some
touching Liturgies (in the sense we are speaking) amongst the people of the
Jews;) No, nor yet was there any such a way of worship thought of, much less
imposed, in the first and purer times of the Gospel, for several centuries of
years, after the days of Christ, and his Apostles. In the Epistles of the
Church of Smyrna (about the martyrdom of Polycarpus,) and of the Churches of
Vienna and Lions (concerning their persecution,) in the Epistle of Clemens (or
the Church of Rome) to the Church of Corinth, in the writings of Ignatius,
Justin Martyr, Clemens, Tertullian, Origin, Cyprian, and their Contemporaries,
there is not only an utter silence of such a thing, but assertions wholly
(...), and opposite thereunto. Tertullian says expressly, Illuc suspicientes
Christiani, manibus expansis, quia innocuius; capite nudo, quia non
erubescimus; denique sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus. Apol. cap. 30. The
Christians in those days (he tells us) looking toward Heaven, (not on their
Common-Prayer-Books) with their hands spread abroad, etc. prayed to God without
a monitor, because from their hearts. And in several places he ^estifies, that
they praised God in a way of prayer and thanksgiving according to their
abilities. Indeed Claudius de Saints, and Pamelius ( two Popish Divines) tell
us of Liturgies comp^sed by the Apostles, James, Peter, and Mark; Of Peter 's
and Mark 's, Cardinal Bellarmine himself not only takes no particular notice,
but upon the matter condemns them, as supposititious and spurious: which that
they are, is abundantly demonstrated by learned Mo^ney, and no more need be
added thereunto. There are some also fathered upon Basil, Chrysostom, and
Ambrose: but as these l^ved about the years 372, 381, 382. in which time many
corruptions had crept into the Churches of Christ; so the spuriousness thereof,
as being falsely fathered upon the persons whose names they bear, may easily be
demonstrated: It Is already done to our hands by learned Morney, in his Book De
Missa, l. 1. chap. 6. Durantus himself (the great Liturgy-monger)
acknowledges, That neither Christ, nor his Apostles, used any prescribed
forms, but the Lords Prayer, and the Creed, (that they used these, he says,
but proves not, nor will it ever be proved to the worlds end) That about the
year 380. Theodosius (the Church being rent by Heresies) entreated Pope Damasus
(at whose election, though the contest was betwixt him and Ursinus, a Deacon of
the Church, there were not fewer than one hundred thirty seven persons slain)
that some Ecclesiastical Office might be made, which was accordingly done by
Hierome, and approved by Pope Damasus, and mad^ a Rule. The unlik^lyhood of
this later part of the story is manifest: Theodosius was too well acquainted
with the spirit of Prayer, than to go about any such thing; had he judged it
necessary, having assembled the great Council of Constantinople, wherein were
not less than an hundred and fifty persons convened; is it probable this good
man Theodosius, would in so momentous a Concern, rather consult with one single
person, than such an Assembly as were by his Authority met together? And yet,
should this be granted, it would not from hence appear, that at this time there
was any devised and imposed; all that is pretended to be done by Hierome, was
the appointiing an order for the reading of the Scriptures, which is another
thing to the imposition of Forms of Prayer in worship. There is one passage in
Socrates his Ecclesiastical History, l. 5. c. 21. who lived about the year 430.
that carrying an undeniable evidence with it, that at that time there were no
Liturgies, we cannot pass over in silence, it is this: (...), wherein he tells
us, That among all the Christians in that age, scarce two were to be found that
used the same words in Prayer. Not to tire the Reader in this disquisition;
Though one part of the Liturgy was not long after introduced by one Pope, and
another part by another; yet till Gregory's time (who, to the honor of
Liturgies be it spoken, was the very worst of all the Bishops of Rome that
preceded him) viz. about the year 600. was there any considerable use, or any
imposing of them; yea till the time of P^pe Hadrian ( which was about the year
800. was it not (as I find) by public Authority imposed: Then indeed the
Emperor Charles the Great (being moved thereunto by the foresaid Hadrian) by
his Civil Authority commands the use of a Liturgy, (viz. Gregory's Liturgy, as
it is thought) to which he compels his Ministers, by threats and punishments,
the usual attendencies and support of Liturgies ever since their production in
the world. The sum is, That in as much as first it cannot be proved (the
contrary being most manifest in the Scripture) that any Liturgy was enjoined by
Christ, or his Apostles, or in use in the first Churches planted by them;

2ly. It is evident, that for the first four hundred years and more after
Christ, there was no Liturgy framed, nor any by solemn Authority imposed, to
the year eight hundred; it follows undeniably from hence, That to worship God
in the way of a Liturgy, or stinted forms of Prayer, is to worship him in a way
that is not of his appointment.

Answ. 1. It is to be remembered, that, as I said before, were his Conclusion
granted, yet Ministers would not be proved to be Idolaters; all worshipping of
God, in a way that is not of his appointment, being not Idolatry, except
therein Divine or Religious Worship be exhibited to a Creature.

2. That his own Argument, whose way of Worship is not prescribed without a
stinted Form of Prayer, would as well prove himself an Idolater, as the
Ministers of England.

3. That he still acknowledges, that the worship according to the
Common Prayer Book, is the worship of the true God, nor does he show, that,
according to it, any other is worshipped.

4. That he does not except against the matter of the Prayers in the
Common Prayer Book, no nor the particular forms of expression, as if they were
not agreeable to the Scriptures, or indecent, or inept* But,

1. That all Liturgies, or stinted forms of Prayer (and consequently this) are
not of Gods appointment, but of humane invention.

2. That they are unduly imposed on Ministers.

3. That Ministers do sinfully, yea Idolatrously use them, because it is a way
of Worship not appointed by God.

The two former of these reach not the Ministers of England, but the Composers
and Imposers; it is the third thing which is pertinent to the present
Crimination, which may occasion to enquire,

1. Whether stinted Forms of Prayer, and service of God, which are not
otherwise faulty, than in that they are stinted, may not be lawfully used by a
Minister of the Gospel in his public ministration?

2. Whether such Prayers and service may not be a Worship of God in a way that
is of his appointment?

I affirm both, and to what is said against either, I answer,

1. That Christ did, in appointing the Lords Prayer to be used by his Apostles,
Matthew. 6 9. Luke 11.2. the Salutation to be used by the seventy Disciples, Luke
10.5. appoint such a stinted form of service.

2. That we have footsteps of such a way of Worship in the New Testament, in
his justifying and countenancing the crying of Hosanna, that is, Save us now,
taken from Psalm. 118.25, 26. (as Mr. Ainsworth in his Annotation observes) by
the multitude. And the Children, Matthew. 21.9.15. Mark 11.9 With the Disciples,
Luke 19 38, 40. John 12.13. In Christ's using the Forms which David used before
in the Psalms, Matthew. 27.46. He prays in the Form used, Psalm. 22.1. Luke
24.46. In the Form used, Psalm. 31.5. In the Apostles use of a Form of Prayer in
his Epistles, Romans 1.7. Romans 16.24. 1 Cor. 1.3. 1 Cor. 16.23. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal*
1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. Phil. 1.2. Phil. 4.23. Col. 1.2. 1 These. 1.2. 1 These. 5.28. 1
These. 1.2. 2 These. 3.16, 17, 18. 1 Timothy 1.2 2 Timothy 1.2. Tit. 1.4. Philem. 3.
Heb. 13.25. 1 Pet. 1.2. 2 Pet. 1.2. 2 John 3. Jude 2. Revel. 1.4. In the Old
Testament, Numb. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. 1 Chronicles. 16.7.35. 2 Chronicles. 20.21. 2 Chronicles.
6.41. 2 Chronicles. 5.13. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. In the Titles of Psalm. 92. and 102. Jerem.
33.11. Ezra 3.11. Zech. 3.2. Jude 9. Revel. 12.3, 4. Revel. 15. 3. Hos. 14.2,
3. Isai. 12.1. Deuteronomy. 21.8. and 26.5.10. Isai. 26.1. Mr. Ainsworth himself (than
whom none was more opposite to any set Form, as appeared by his avouching in
his writing to Mr. Paget, the Reasons in the Separatists Apology, p. 69.
against using the words of the Lords-Prayer in prayer, to which Mr. Paget has
answered, in his Arrow against the separation of the Brownists, p. 69. etc.) in
his Annot. on Exodus 12.8. reciting the Form of the later Jews at their
Passover, says, Unto these phrases the New Testament seems to have
reference, when it speaks of the cup of blessing* 1 Cor. 10.16. And of
singing an Hymn, Mark. 14 26. And after, These Observations of the Jews, while
their Commonwealth stood, and to this day, may give light to some particulars
in the Passover that Christ kept; as why they lay down, one leaning on another
bosom, John 13.23. (a sign of rest and security) and stood not, as at the
first Passover, neither sat on high, Vide Bezae Annot. in Matthew. 26.20.30.
as we use. Why Christ rose from supper, and washed, and sat down again, John
13.4, 5.12. Why he blessed, or gave thanks, for the bread apart, and for the
cup (or wine) apart, Mark 14.22, 23. And why it is said, He took the cup after
supper, Luke 22.20. Also concerning the Hymn which they sung at the end, Mat.
26.30. And why Paul calls it, the showing forth of the Lords death, 1 Cor.
11.26. As the Jews usually called their Passover, Haggadah, that is, Showing,
or Declaration. From which Observations we may gather, that our Lord Christ did
use the forms in Blessing (which is a part of Prayer) which the Jews, without
particular command of God, had taken up: And that St. Paul alludes to them,
expressing the use of Christians, by the phrases of the Jews, which shows the
Christians used their forms. Yea, that the Apostles, in many things of their
ministry, retained the customs in their Synagogues, in matters of Worship and
Ecclesiastical Government, is avouched by Mr. Stillingflete in his Irenicum,
part 2 d. ch 6. After Mr. Seldom, Dr. Lightfoot, Dr: Hammond, Mr. Thorndike,
and many others. Which things do abundantly prove, that this Author does too
too inconsiderately write, That there are not the least footsteps of a stinted
form of service, in the worship of God, to be found in the New Testament* No,
not in the whole Book of God, amongst the people of the Jews; No, nor yet was
there any such a way of worship thought of, much less imposed, in the first and
purer times of the Gospel, for several centuries of years, after the days of
Christ, and his Apostles. I do not gainsay what this Author writes about the
Liturgies fathered on some of the Apostles, and some of the Ancients: Neither
will I justify the use or imposition of them, as they have been in the later
ages; only this I say, (which is sufficient for the present purpose)

1. That neither the words of Justin Martyr in his 2 d. Apology to Ant^ninus,
That the President did send forth prayers and thanksgivings, (...), as he had
ability, the people testifying their consent, by saying, Amen. Nor the words of
Tertullian, alleged by this Author, out of his Apologetique against the
Gentiles, c. 30. That the Christians prayed for the Emperor, looking toward
Heaven, and without a monitor, because from the heart, do necessarily exclude
stinted forms of Prayer. The words of Justin Martyr may be understood of the
intention of the affections, or duration of prayers, which may be in stinted
forms; nor is it unlikely, but that thanksgivings were some of them such, as in
their Psalms which they sung, which Pliny mentions in his Epistle to Trajan in
that age; and those it is likely were stinted forms: And they might pray
without a monitor or prompter, which excludes the suggestion of others, and
from the heart, includes of their own accord, and yet pray in stinted
expressions: Yea, the things mentioned that they prayed for, seem to intimate
Set forms, agreeable to the things he mentions as prayed for.

2. However, it is apparent, if not from Tertullians Book of Prayer, yet out of
Cyprians Book concerning the Lords Prayer, that Christians did, and conceived
they ought, in public prayer, to use the prescript words of the Lords Prayer,
and that they had some other forms then, whieh are still retained, which those
words intimate, Therefore also the Priest, a Preface being premised before
Prayer, prepares the minds of the Brethren, by saying, Lift up your hearts:
that when the people answer, We lift them up to the Lord, they may be minded,
that they ought to think on nothing else but the Lord. Which, if it prove not
an entire Liturgy to have been then in use, yet a worship of God by a stinted
form of Words, was sure thought on in Cyprians time; and that this Author
writes too confidently, when he says, The least footsteps of such a way of
worship are not found, nor were thought of in those times. It follows.

Sect. 5. Common Prayer Book worship shuts not out of doors the exercise of the
gift of Prayer.
To which we add, 2. That Worship which is an obstruction of any positive duty
charged by Christ, to be performed by the Saints, is not a worship that is of
his appointment. But this is undeniably true of the Common Prayer Book worship.
Therefore, That Christ did upon his Ascension give unto his Church, Officers,
as signal characters of his love to, and care of it, will not be denied, Ephesians
4.11. is an evidence hereof beyond exception. That to th^se Officers he gave
gifts and qualifications, every way suiting the empl^yment he called them forth
unto, cannot without a most horrid advance against the wisdom, faithfulness,
love and care of Christ toward the Beloved of his Soul, be gainsaid. That he
not only expects, but solemnly charges upon these Officers, an improvement of
the gifts bestowed upon them, for the edification of his Body, is evidently
comprised, and very frequently remarked in the Scripture, 2 Timothy 1.6. 1 Cor.
12.7. Ephesians. 4.11. Prove. 17.16. Luke 19.20. To imagine after all this, that any
Worship should be of the institution of Christ, that should shut out of doors,
as unnecessary, the exercise of the gifts given by him, to be made use of in
the solemn discharge of the worship of his house, is such an imputation of
folly to him, as may not be charged upon any person of an ordinary capacity or
understanding: Yet this is righteously to be imputed to him (absit blasphemia)
if the Common Prayer Book worship be a Worship of his appointment: The exercise
of the gift of Prayer (to mention no more) being wholly excluded hereby. Nor
will it in the least take off the weight of this Argument, to say, That liberty
is granted for the exercise of this gift before and after Sermon: For,

1. The whole Worship of God, may, according to these men's principles, be
discharged without any Sermon at all; and it is manifest it is frequently so,
at one time or other, in most of the Assemblies of England.

2. Those their Prayers are also bounded and limited by the 55th. Canon of the
Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical.

3. We had always thought, that Christ having given gifts unto men, did
require the use of those gifts at all times, when ever persons were called to
the performance of that service for which they were designedly given by him, by
virtue of the forementioned precepts. When Christ has given a gift of Prayer
unto his children, and charged them to stir up the gift given them, and not to
napkin their Talent, we had verily thought, that when ever they had been called
forth to the performance of that duty, he did really intend and expect, that
they should be found in the exercise of the gift given; and see as yet no
reason to change our apprehensions in this matter.

Answ. The major Proposition is not in all cases true. The resting on the
Sabbath day was a positive duty charged by God, yet the sacrificing, which was
an obstruction of that duty, called by our Lord Christ, Profaning the Sabbath,
Matthew. 12.5. was Worship of Gods appointment. Following of Christ, and
preaching the Gospel, were Worship of Christ's appointment, and yet they were
obstructions to positive duties required to be done to Parents, Wives, and
Children Therefore it is not true, unless the thing, which is an obstruction,
be such of its own nature, of it self, and not by accident, and so necessarily
and universally such an obstruction. But not to insist on this, the minor
Proposition is many ways faulty.

1. It is supposed, that the Common Prayer Book worship is a different sort of
Worship* from such as is used by those, which exercise the gift of prayer, as
he terms it; which is absurd: For then so many several forms of words as are
used, should be so many several sorts of Worship; all expressions, that are not
immediately inspired, should be Will Worship; and so preachers several methods,
and expressions in preaching, should be several sorts of Worship. This is that
which I assert, That the same petitions, the same Confessions, and
Thanksgivings, for matter, are the same prayer, and Worship, though in various
expressions; and that the same prayers, read out of the Common Prayer Book, and
the prayers of the preachers, framed by themselves, and uttered, if they ask
the same things in other phrases, are the same prayers, and Worship: And they
that can join with the one, and say Amen to them; may as lawfully, and safely,
without sin, join with, and say Amen to the other.

2. This Authors phrase does intimate, that ability to conceive, compose, and
utter in variety of expressions, petitions to God, is the gift of prayer; and
the exercise of it, is the exercise of that gift; which is false: since the gift
of prayer is by the moving of the affections, directing the mind, exciting
faith, as the Text alleged by this Author, Romans 8.26. proves, the Spirits work
being there to acquaint us, what we are to pray for; and to (...), to
over-intercede for us, with groans unspoken; or, as it is read, which cannot be
uttered: And therefore, no^ in the inspiration of words, or method, or fitting
a person with various, or unpremeditated expressions. Yea, those who express
not, who do not compose their petitions in any order or method, as in
Ejaculatory prayers, such as Nehemiahs prayer was, Nehem. 2.4. Hannahs, 1 Samuel
1.13. Hezekiahs, Isai. 38.14 Those who premeditate before they pray, as David
did, Psalm. 19.14. have as truly, and perhaps more rightly, and do exercise the
gift of prayer, as those who in never so extemporary manner, enlarge themselves
in various expressions and petitions. It is true, the Author of the Discourse
concerning the interest of words in Prayer, chapter 2. tells us, The gift and grace
of Prayer are two things: This, he derives from the spirit of adoption; That,
he defines to be an ability of mind, to form words expressive of such desires
of our hearts, as are according to the will of God, conjoined with a faculty of
memo^y, and of expression, and elocution; which, he says, is partly natural,
partly by industry attainable. But the gift of Prayer here, by our Authors
words, page 62. is the donation of the Spirit; and usually the exercise of it
in expressions unpremeditated, or conceived in opposition to praying by a book,
or written set forms kept in the memory, is termed praying in the Spirit, and
so no natural or acquired ability; which is to be observed, that the ambiguity
of expressions may not deceive the unwary Reader. Now if this be observed they
that pray in a set form, and those that read the Common Prayer, may be truly
said to pray in the Spirit, if their heart go with their words; and to
exercise the gift of Prayer, if the gift of Prayer be as the Discourse cited
does describe it.

3. The gift of Prayer, by alleging Ephesians. 4 11* should seem, by this Author,
to be accounted a ministerial gift, proper to them; for so were the gifts
mentioned Ephesians. 4.11. which if so* then it is not common to the Saints, nor
the exercise of it a positive duty changed by Christ to be performed by the
Saints, except they be Ministers; and so it is not lawful for them, except they
be Ministers, to seek, or to use the gift of Prayer. If they have it, by this
Authors arguing, they are to exercise it, as well as Ministers; and it is as
unlawful for them to pray by a book, as for the Ministers; they so praying,
worship in a way not appointed by God, and are Idolaters, as well as the
Ministers; and separation is to be from them* as well as from Ministers.
Whereas* i^ the gift of Prayer be partly natural, partly acquired, then it is
lawful for Ministers, or other Saints, to make use of any lawful means, which
may acquire that gift, such are any that may be a Directory to know what they
a^e to pray for, that may advantage them, for remembering, composure, or
elocution, conference, imitation of others, reading, meditation,
self-examination; and if the Common Prayer Book be a help (as some conceive it
is) it may be lawfully used, or any others treatises, or forms of Prayer, for
the obtaining of it. And if so, the Common. Prayer Book worship may be, so far
from being an obstruction to the positive duty of exercising the gift of
Prayer, that it may further it, by acquainting us with many things we should
ask for: as the Homilies also may be helps for the knowledge of what Doctrine
Preachers are to teach their people. And then this Authors Argument may be thus
retorted. That Form may be lawfully used for Worship, which may be a means to
further any positive duty, charged by Christ to be performed by the Saints. But
such may be the forms of Prayers in the Liturgy of the Church of England.
Therefore. The major is grounded on the rule given by Divines about the
Decalogue: That which requires a duty, requires the means conducing thereto.
The minor is proved, in that the Common Prayer Book directs what things are to
be prayed for, by reason of the brevity of Collects; the Responds, the frequent
use, the plain expressions, help the memory and elocution, wherein the acquired
gift of Prayer consists; therefore it is not an obstruction, but a help to the
gift of Prayer. But this Author, though he may perhaps count this tolerable in
others, yet not in Ministers; let us view what he says of them. He alleges
Ephesians. 4.11. and would infer from thence, That all Ministers have the gift of
Prayer, and are to use it; that the Common Prayer Book worship shuts it out of
doors, as unnecessary, and therefore is not of Christ's appointment. But,

1. The Text expresses not the several sorts of Qualifications, but the
several sorts of Officers.

2. If it be supposed, that ministerial gifts are also employed; yet whether
extraordinary, or ordinary, may be doubted.

3. If ordinary gifts, there may be a question, Whether the gift of Prayer, as
he means it, were one: that is, Whether Christ has required* that every
Minister should be able, on all occasions, to express himself without any
stinted form, either conceived by himself, or composed by others, to make known
the requests, which it concerns his people, to whom he is Pastor, in the most
solemn and public auditory, to ask of God, in their behalf, in words and
elocution fitting the matter and auditory. I doubt not but the Minister should
be able to express the requests of the people, as he should be able to declare
the mind of God to the people; yet neither the one* nor the other, is of
necessity to be done, or the Minister tied to do it every way, but the best way
he is able, or at least, that way as is fit for the end of his expressions, to
wit, the peoples understanding, not the ostentation of his parts. The Apostles
could preach without study, but Timothy was to give attendance to reading, to
meditate, to give himself wholly to th^se things, whereby his profiting might
appear to all, and yet had a gift given by prophecy, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15.
Ministers are to preach the Word now, but they are not tied to preach without
notes, without study, without other helps which God affords: Nor are Ministers
bound to express themselves always without pre-conceived, or prescribed forms
in prayer, and yet they may faithfully discharge their work. Now God does not
give gifts, as he did in the Apostles times; and therefore the same readiness
and exuberancy of expressions, or composure of petitions, is not to be expected
of Ministers now, as was of them.

4^ I add, That though the Apostles said, Acts 6.4. We will give our selves
continually to Prayer, and to the ministry of the Word. And St* Paul, 1 Timothy
2.1. exhorts, Tha^ first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and
giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings, and all that are in authority:
Yet we read not, that this is made the Ministers work, to express the common
necessities of the Church, in a public auditory, or any rules about the form
or manner of praying. Nor do we find, that either Christ, or his Apostles, used
any forms of prayer, before or after their preaching; and therefore conceive
not this to be the proper work of a Minister, or that either way of praying is
determined* and therefore both may lawfully be used by the Minister, or other
Christians. Nor does the one way of Worship shut out of doors the other; or the
Minister, by using the Common Prayer Book, exclude conceived prayer by the
speakers. If they were tied, by the Governors, to use no other than the
Common Prayer Book expressions; yet this is not to be imputed, either to the
Common Prayer Book, or its way of worship, or to the Ministers, but unto those
who do so rigidly impose it. I add further, That were there a prohibition of
using any other than the Common Prayer, yet this were not a shutting out of
doors Christ's institution, unless it were proved Christ's institution, that at
all times in Prayer no stinted form should be used. Nor does it shut out of
doors the gift of Prayer, unless it be proved* they only have the gift of
Prayer, who use their own conceived expressions; which if so, not only those
who use the forms of Prayer, though with never so much fervency of spirit,
which they read or remember in the Common Prayer Book, or in the Practice of
Piety, or any other such Book of men's composure: but also those, who use the
words of the Psalms, or the Lords-Prayer, yea that do say Amen to the words of
any Preacher before Sermon, or any that gives thanks before meals, should shut
out of doors the gift of Prayer, or the exercise of it, since he uses not the
gift he has, to wit, the ability of mind to form words, and to utter them,
which is the definition of the gift of Prayer before given. There are many in
the Congregation perhaps yea some Women that can form and utter words as fit
for Prayer as the Minister; will not this Author have this gift of Prayer shut
out of doors, and yet not conclude that a positive duty is obstructed thereby?
Besides, there may be a restraint of a duty, as unseasonable, since affirmative
precepts bind not ad semper, to be done at all times, perhaps time will not
permit, or weather, or some accidents, or more necessary business; and yet the
gift not shut out of doors, as unnecessary, but as only inconvenient at that
time. Do not the most able Preachers sometimes omit the exercise of their
gifts, and yet count not them shut out of doors, as unnecessary? Yea, does not
the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1^. put some restraints upon Prophesying, to keep order?
Did he then shut out of doors, as unnecessary, the gift of Prophecy? I have
read, that the Separatists in the Low Countries, have spent so much time on the
Lords day in debating causes, and matters of Discipline, that they have omitted
exercise of their gifts in some other Ordinances; and yet I presume they have
not shut them out of doors, as unnecessary. If at one meeting of Christians, no
other thing had been done, but the reading of St. Paul's Epistles, as he
appointed, Col. 4.16. yet were not the exercise of A^chippus his ministry
thereby shut out of doors, as unnecessary, but only suspended for that time.
And this would be no Napkining up of his Talent, nor such exclusion of the gift
of preaching or prophesying, as, with others, this Author clamou^ously inveighs
against The 55 th. Canon directs Preachers what they should pray for, does not
limit or bound them in the words or matter: It says, They shall move the
people to join with them in prayer, in this form, or to this effect, as briefly
as conveniently they may: Not forbidding to pray for other things, or in other
words, than are there set down. And blessed be the Almighty, that yet Ministers
have liberty at all times to express themselves in prayer and preaching, as
fully as there is need; that the Kings Majesty invites to fasting and prayer;
That, notwithstanding it is to be bewailed, that the Worship of God is no
better performed than it is; and that the intemperate abuses of some, have
caused more severe restraint on others, than were to be wished: Yet there is so
much purity of Worship and Doctrine* as that Separation is unnecessary. And
this Author, as if he imitated the Gloss in the Canon Law, Non satis discretus
esset, etc. writes causelessly, if not blasphemously, that Folly may righteously
be imputed to Christ, if the Common Prayer Book worship be a Worship of his
appointment. He goes on thus.

Sect. 6. Common Prayer Book Worship is not of pure humane invention.
But 3ly. The Common Prayer Book wo^ship, is a Worship, of which we find no
footsteps in the Scripture (nor in some centuries of years after Christ) as
has already been demonstrated: Whence it follows, That it is a Worship of pure
humane invention, which is not only not of Christ's appointment, but contrary to
the very nature of instituted Wo^ship (as is proved in our first Argument) and
to very many precepts of the Lord in the Scripture, Exodus 20.4, 5 Deuteronomy. 4 2.
and 12.32. Prove. 30 16. Jer. 7 31. Matthew. 15.9, 13. Mark 7.7, 8. Rev. 22.18.
The mind of God in which Scriptures we have exemplified, Lev. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.
Josh. 22.10. etc. Judge. 8 2. 2 Kings 16 11. 1 Chronicles 15.13.

Answ This Author runs on in his gross mistakes, as if the form of words in the
Common Prayer Book were the Worship, that it were a several sort of Worship
from the prayers made by a Preacher of his own conception, and that such
prayers were worship of Christ's institution, and not the other. Which mistakes
are showed before: And what he says here, is answered, either in this chapter,
sect. 4. or chapt. 1. sect. 3. The Common Prayer Book worship is no more a pure
humane invention, than Preachers conceived-prayers: Nor is it any Idol,
forbidden Exodus 20.4, 5. Nor any Prophecy added to the Book of the Revelation,
forbidden Revel. 22.18. Nor such an Ephod as Gideon made, Judge. 8.24. Nor such
a not seeking God after the due order, as was the carrying of the Ark in a
cart, and Uzzah 's putting his hand to it, 1 Chronicles. 15.13. Nor such an
invention forbidden, as was the Altar of Damascus, imitated by Uriah, 2 Kings
16 11. And therefore it is sufficient to deny what is here said, without
forming of an Argument. As for Josh 22 10. etc. it makes for the
Common Prayer Book, not against it: since that Altar was allowed of, though it
were for religious signification, and yet not by Divine institution; and
therefore proves, that all inventions of men, whereby our Worship of God is
signified, are not unlawful, if they be not made necessary, nor the Worship of
God placed in the things so invented, or their use. It follows,

Sect. 7. Common Prayer Book worship is the same with the Worship of the
Reformed Churches.
4. That Worship which is not necessary for the edification, comfort, or
preservation of the Saints, in the Faith and Unity of the Gospel, is not of the
institution of Christ: But such is the worship of the Common Prayer Book:
Therefore. The major (or first Proposition) will not be denied. The Lord Jesus
having freeed his Disciples from all obligations to the ceremonies of the Law,
institutes nothing de novo, but what he kn^w to be necessary (at least would be
so by virtue of his institution) for the ends assigned: which was the great Aim
in all Gospel administrations, Ephesians 4.7. to 15. Col. 2.19 Acts 9.31. Romans
14.14, 15. 1 Cor. 10.23. and 14.3, 4* 5, 12, 26. 2 Cor 12 10. 1 Timothy 1.4. That
the Common Prayer Book w^^sh^p is not necessary for the edification, comfort,
or preservation of the Saints, in the Faith and Unity of the G^spel (what ever
is pretended by its admirers) might many ways be demonstrated. Take one
p^^grant instance instead of all* that will make it exceeding man^fest: The
Churches of Christ, for the first four centuries of years, and more, after his
Ascension, knew not any thing of such a Worship (as has been already
demonstrated) not to mention the reformed Churches at this day, to whom it is
as a polluted, accu^sed, abominable thing) yet, than those first and purer
Churches, for light, consolation, truth of Doctrine, and Gospel-Vnion, hitherto
there has not been any extant in the world, more famous, or excellent; no, nor
by many degrees comparable to them. But we shall not further prosecute this
Argument, enough has been said, to demonstrate, That the Common Prayer Book
worship is not of the appointment of the Lord: Therefore, such as worship him
in the way thereof, worship him in a way that is not of his prescription. If
the former, notwithstanding all that has been said, be scrupled by any, we
referr him to Tracts written by Smectymnuus, V. Powel; to a Treatise,
entitled, A Discourse concerning the Interest of Words in Prayer, by H. D. M.
A. The Common Prayer Book Unmasked; as also to a Treatise lately published by a
learned (but nameless) Author, entitled, A Discourse concerning Liturgies, and
their Imposition: In which that matter is industriously and la^gely debat^d.

A^sw This Author still continues his confounding of the Worship of the
Common Prayer Book, with the form of it, that is* the method, and phra^e, and
manner of it, which no man that speaks distinctly* calls the Common Prayer Book
Worship. The Common Prayer Book Worship is no other than the prayers, praises,
lessons, ministration of the Sacraments: And these are of Christ's institution,
and are necessary for the edification, comfort, or preservation of the Saints,
in the Faith and Unity of the Gospel; and accordingly the mi^or Proposition is
false which denies it. But since this Author, by Worship, understands the forms
and modes of it, though they be not prescribed or determined in Scripture; or
the kind of Wo^ship, in respect of those forms: meaning, that the Worship, for
example, p^ayer, prai^e, and the like, which are expressed or performed by
forms or modes not prescribed by Christ, though the kind or so^t of Worship be
of Christ's institution; yet, because it is performed in such forms or modes, as
are not necessary for the edi^ication, comfort, or p^eservation of the Saints,
in the Faith and Unity of the Gospel, it is so adulterae^d thereby, that it is
not of the institution of Christ. In which sense the maj^^ Proposition is to be
denied, and the Argument may be (...) thus: That Worship, which in respect of
the mode or form of performing, is not necessary for the edif^cation, comfort,
or p^eservation of the Saints, in the Faith and Unity of the Gospel, is not of
the institution of Christ: But such is the extemporary, conceived Prayer of
Preachers, and others, such is the praising of God in the English meter; the
reading of the Scriptures, according to ordinary division of chapters and
verses, with the contents of the chapters: Therefore. The major is his own, the
minor stands good, till it be showed, where Christ has appointed such
extemporary praying, or such praising, such reading the Scripture so divided:
To which I might add, in hearing, taking notes of Sermons, Preachers using
notes in the Pulpit, with sundry more; but I forbear.

As for the Texts alleged, Ephesians. 4.7. etc. it speaks not of Worship, and its
institution by Christ; nor what is the necessary requisite to such Worship, as
is instituted by Christ: but only of Gifts, that is, preaching Officers, and
the end and use of those gifts. Col. 2.19. speaks not of Worship, or what is
requisite, that it be of Christ's institution: but tells us, that Seducers,
which taught worshipping of Angels, held not the Head, that is, Christ: And
that from him all the Body (that is, the Church) by joints and bands, having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God.
Acts 9.31. speaks not at all of Worship, or its institution by Christ, or
Christ's aim in Gospel-administrations, or what is requisite that Worship be of
his institution: Romans 14.14, 15. much less; it speaks of the cleanness of
things of themselves, the uncleanness to him that thinks them so; and our duty
not to grieve our Brother with our meats. 1 Cor. 10.23. tells us, of the
inexpediency of some things lawful, in that they edify not; nothing of Christ's
aim in his institutions, or what is requisite to his instituted Worship. 1 Cor.
14.3, 4, 5, 12, 26. tells us, of the benefit of prophesying, the end and use of
spiritual gifts; nothing of Christ's aim in his institution of Worship, or the
requisite to such institution. 2 Cor. 12.10. does not mention any thing* but
Paul's affection and estate. 1 Timothy 1.4. nothing but the incommodity of fables
and genealogies. Which should be observed by the Reader, that he may be wary,
how he trusts to this Author's, and other Separatists multiplying Texts
impertinently, that they be not ensnared by them; and that such persons may
see, what cause they have to repent of such abusive wresting of Scripture.

As for that which he says of the Common Prayer Book worship, if he mean
thereby the prayers or praises in the forms therein, I will not say, They are
necessary for the edification, comfort, or preservation of the Saints, in the
Faith and Unity of the Gospel: I yield, that they are not necessary; those ends
may be obtained by other forms of Prayer, or rather by preaching, confessions
of Faith, and reading of the Holy Scriptures; unto which the Lessons and
portions of Scripture, confessions of Faith, in the Common Prayer Book, are as
conducible as other. Whether the Churches of Christ, in the four first
centuries, were so excellent, as he says: And whether they knew not any thing
of such a Worship as the Common Prayer Book worship, is a disputable point, Et
adhuc sub judice lis est. What is said, That to the Reformed Churches, at this
day, the Common Prayer Book worship is as a polluted, accursed, abominable
thing, I find no cause to believe, except he mean by them, the Churches of the
Separatists. I find Calvin, in his 200 th. Epistle, saying indeed, In Anglicana
Liturgia, qualem describitis, multas video fuisse tolerabiles ineptias: Yet in
his 87 th. Epistle, he says. Quod ad formulam precum and rituum
Ecclesiasticorum, valde probo, ut certa illa extet, etc. And I find Maresius of
Groaning, in his Academical Decision of some Questions, qu. 11. alleging those
words of Calvin, and disputing against Francis Johnson his Latin Answer to
Carpenter against Liturgies, and asserting Liturgical Forms to be admitted by
all the Reformed Churches: Nor do I find any thing to the contrary in Voetius
his Ecclesiastical Policy, or any other, that have lately written, who have
gainsaid these speeches; and therefore, I conceive, that this Author, in this
speech, has too great a smack of that, which is in one of Tullies Epistles,
said of such men: Qui semel vere^undiae fines transilierit, eum gnaviter
impudentem esse oportet. Neither Smectymnuus, nor the Assembly, nor Mr. Baxter
in his Disputation of a Form of Liturgy, nor any other of the Presbyterians,
that I know, have written such things of the Common Prayer Book, as this Author
vents. If they are to be read, he that would find truth, should also read the
Answers to Smectymnuus, Ball 's Trial of Separation, Paget 's Arrow against the
Separatists, with others. As for ^. Powel his Tract, I find in it such a sardle
of false Principles, misallegations of Texts, non-syllogizing, confused
Dictates, with vain Gi^des, that methinks no sober or judicious person should
be moved by it. The Common Prayer Unmasked, I have not seen: The Discourse of
the Interest of Words in Prayer, does not advantage this Author, to prove
separation from Ministers, or their Ministry, by reason of the Common Prayer.
The Discourse of Liturgies I have read, and find in it little Logic, a great
many words, which if they were reduced to syllogistical form, would appear to
be a bulk without sinews: Not to mention the many absurd Dictates; among which
I have observed this, that p. 16. The L^rds Prayer is made to belong to the
Economy of the Old Testament, and to argue thence to the New, is to deny
Christ to be ascended on high. But I must attend the Author here, who adds,

Sect. 8. No Particularity instituted is a mere Circumstance, yet
Particularities undetermined are.
Object. If to what has hitherto been proposed, it be said, That the Liturgy,
or Common Prayer Book, is no essential part of Worship, but merely
circumstantial: Praying, it is true, is part of Worship, but praying in this or
that Form is not so, but merely a circumstance thereof: And therefore, though
it be true, that the present Ministers of England worship God after the way of
the Common Prayer Book; yet it follows not, that they worship him after a way
that is not of his appointment. To this we answer,

1. That many things are strenuously supposed, as the Basis upon which the
weight of this Objection is laid, which the Framers thereof knowing to be no
easy task to demonstrate, do earnestly beg us to grant unto them: which being
matter of greater moment than many are aware of, we shall not part with, on
such easy terms. It Is supposed,

First, That there are some things in the instituted Worship of Christ, that
are merely circumstances thereof, as such.

Secondly, That it is lawful for Saints to pray in a Form.

Thirdly, That Forms of Prayer imposed, are but mere circumstances of Worship,
and no essential parts thereof.

Fourthly, That circumstances of Worship, as such, are not determined by the
Lord in the Scripture, but left to the wills of men, to determine therein as
they shall judge meet. All unproved. Of the last of we have already spoken, and
shall not here reassume the debate thereof.

Touching the First, That there are some things in the instituted Worship of
Christ, that are merely circumstances thereof, as such, we crave liberty to
deny, which, till the proof be attempted, may suffice. Circumstances in the
worship of Christ, attending religious actions, as actions, we grant;) but
circumstances of Worship, as such, will never be proved:) To infer, that
because time and place, with sundry things of the like nature, are
circumstances in Worship, therefore there are circumstances of Worship, as
such, is frivol^us: Those things being the attendments of religious actions,
common to any civil actions of the like nature, to be performed by the Sons of
men; No action to be managed by a community, can be orderly performed by them,
without such an assignment of time and place: Public Prayer being so to be
managed, as a religious action, has the circumstances before mentioned
attending it; and so it would, were it a mere civil action, to be performed by
a community, though it related not at all to the Worship of God.

Answ. It is not true, that the Objection supposes, That some things in the
instituted Worship of Christ, are but mere circumstances thereof, as such:
meaning, that any particularity of that action, which Christ has prescribed
for his Worship, being instituted by him, is a mere arbitrary circumstance, and
not a necessary part of that Worship. It is held in the Lords Supper, and all
institutions of Christ, in which particularities are expressed, there should be
strict observation of them, as part of the Worship: But in things not
determined, liberty is allowed to vary; and therefore, if Christ have not
instituted, that you shall pray without a Book, or set Form, Prayer by it may
be lawfully done. The distinction of circumstances in, and of the Worship of
Christ; of religi^us actions, as actions, or as religi^us, a^e but unnecessary
nice^ies, so long as the meaning of the Objection is manifest, That the praying
in this, or that Form, is not a part of the Worship; as if without it, the
Worship were not, or not according to Christ's institution, but an accident of
it, which may adesse vel abesse, which is in effect, if ^ understand this
Author, the same which he grants, That there are circumstances in the W^rship
of Christ, attending religi^us actions, as actions which are not in their
particula^ities expressly prescribed by Christ And if we agree in the thing, it
is but frivolous to wrangle about words.

Sect. 9. Praying in a Form, may be praying in the Spirit.
2. Says this Author, That it is lawful for Saints to pray in a Form (i. e. to
tie themselves to a written stinted form of words in Prayer) is not yet proved,
nor like to be; it is too large a field for us to enter into: nor is it needful
to do so, till it be proved, That to pray in the form of the Common Prayer
Book, or imposed devised Liturgies, is so: Yet in transitu, we crave leave
humbly to offer, That to pray in a Form, as before explained, is altogether
unlawful, being,

1. A quenching of the Spirit of Prayer.

2ly. A rendering useless the donation of the Spirit, as a Spirit of Prayer,
unto the children of God.

3ly. Directly opposite unto the many positive precepts of Christ, before
instanced in, of stirring up the Gifts given to us of God, improving the
Talents he has been graciously pleased to entrust us withal.

4ly. If it be lawful for Saints to pray in a Form, it is lawful, either because
they have not the Spirit; or that having the Spirit, he is not a sufficient
help to them in their approaches to God: If the first, they are not Saints,
Romans 8.9. To assert the second, is little less than blasphemy, besides its
direct opposition to Romans 8.26.

Answ. The position of this Author here, by his words, appears to be, That not
only it is altogether unlawful for Ministers, but also for all Saints, all that
have the Spirit of God, to pray in a Form: And though he seems to mean by his
addition, that he counts it only then unlawful, when they tie themselves, ^
whether by vow, or customary use, or once only, to a stinted form of words in
Prayer, without variation, written, not conceived by him that prays, and kept
in his memory; Yet his Arguments are against using any set Form, by any Saint,
conceived by himself, and kept in memory without writing, though but once used:
For then the Spirit of Prayer is quenched, its donation is rendered useless, its
against the positive precepts of stirring up our Gift, improving our Talent,
disabling the Spirit; which are at no time to be done: And if so, no way of
Worship of Christ's institution, and therefore Idolatrous, and, by this Authors
Doctrine, to be separated from; and therefore this Authors principles* carry
him, not only to separate from hearing the present Ministers, but also from
every Saint, that not only often, but once uses a set Form, devised by
himself, in Family exercises, as before meals, or other times: And, if he be of
Mr. Ainsworths mind, in the controversy between him and Mr. R^binson of old,
he must not only separate from the public communion of the Church of England,
but also from the private religious communion of every one that joins in common
Prayer, or in private stinted forms of Prayer, except they profess their
repentance: And if we should prove it lawful to pray in the form of the
Common Prayer Book, or imposed devised Liturgy (which seems no hard thing to
do, if we suppose the Ministers, and Common Prayer Book Worshippers, not to
have the Spirit; for then, by his Arguments, they do not quench, make useless,
neglect the gift of the Spirit; and therefore are not forbidden a stinted Form,
which would overthrow this Argument against the Ministers) yet we must do
somewhat more; we must prove it lawful for the Saints, who have the Spirit, to
use once a stinted form of words, though it be the Lords Prayer only. Which I
think will be done by this Argument: That Prayer may be lawful to Saints, in
which neither is any thing done forbidden by God, nor any thing omitted which
God requires thereto, but such may be praying in a Form: Therefore. To what
this Author humbly offers, I answer,

1. That the things he offers, proceed only upon mistakes: That the praying the
Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Jude 20. in the Holy Ghost, is meant of extemporal,
unpremeditated, unprescribed forms of words* Whereas, praying in the Spirit, is
meant of praying by the operation of the Spirit within, not of Prayer in
respect of the form of words wherein it is expressed; which may be gathered
concerning the former Text, in that the Prayers there, which are to be in the
Spirit, are all, always with all prayer and supplication, watching thereunto
with all perseverance and supplication: which cannot be well expounded of other
Prayers, than such as are solitary, of which many are only ejaculatory, without
words: And this is confirmed by the words, Ephesians 5 19. where the effect of
being filled with the Spirit, is the speaking to themselves in psalms, and
hymns, and spiritual songs, singing and making melody to the Lord in their
heart. Besides, as all the directions, Eph^s. 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. are
precepts of what each Christian should do by and for himself: so is v. 18. and
so, if not solely, yet chiefly meant of solitary Prayers, to which words are
not necessary; and therefore, praying in the Spirit, is by the operation of the
Spirit in the heart, not by the Spirits immediate forming of words in the
tongue. And the same is to be said of Jude 20. Of 1 Cor. 14.15. I have spoken
before, in answer to chapter 5. sect. 7.

2. The ability to express petitions in words extemporary, unpremeditated, is
termed, the Spirit of Prayer, as if it were in every one that has the
sanctifying Spirit of God, and they only; for so the alleging Romans 8.9.26. for
it, in the 4 th. Argument, must infer. But who knows not by experience* that
many that have not the Spirit of God, have yet this ability to admiration, as
is related by Camden, Saravia, the Author of the relation of the conspiracy
concerning Hacket, in Q Elizabeth's time, and many others: And on the other
side, many whose holiness of life showed they had the Spirit, yet not this
ability; and therefore it is ill called, the Spirit of Prayer, whereby many
unwary souls are ensnared with the opinion, as if such as can express
themselves fluently in words, largely, and with show of affection, were
immediately moved by the Spirit; and they distill thereby into many
inconsiderate persons, errors and evil principles: Whereas it is acknowledged
to be but an acquired ability, with help of natural endowments, and many times
is proved to be but a counterfeit and deceitful practice. Now then, in answer
to each of the particulars, I say,

1. That the Spirit is not quenched, as is forbidden, 1 These. 5.19. by a set
Form of Prayer, used by another, and read out of a Book, any otherwise, than by
a pronouncing without a Book, a conceived Form; the ability of another to
conceive and utter, for matter and words, is as much limited by the one, as by
the other. It is true, when prejudice is against reading, or the Forms read, or
the Reader huddles it over, or delivers it coldly, it much abates the affection
of the hearer: and so it is in saying over a conceived Prayer, if there be a
prejudice against the person, or his delivery be dull and heavy. And it is not
to be denied, that lively affectionate expressions, with readiness of speech,
and apt emphatical words, have much energy on hearers; and so sometimes it is,
when a written Sermon or Prayer is well and pathetically pronounced: So that
the Form does but lessen the affection by accident, not necessarily, and of it
self; and thus either when a stinted Form is pronounced by another, or by the
person praying, it may be very incommodious to use it, usually such Forms being
read or said without heed or feeling. Yet universally it is not so: Nor is the
quenching of the Spirit (meant 1 These. 5.19.) meant of the Spirit of Prayer,
more than any other exercise of godliness or gifts, whether ordinary or
extraordinary: Nor is the quenching the Spirit, the act of another, but of him
in whom the Spirit is quenched; who, either by his sinful life, or by cares,
and riches, and pleasures of this life, and lusts of other things, ch^kes the
word of God (which is the sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.17.) as our Savior
speaks, Luke 8 14. and they bring no fruit to perfection (unto which sense the
following Exhortations, of not despising prophecyings, and proving all things,
v. 20, 21. do incline me) and so the sense is, Quench not the operation of the
Spirit, by the preaching of the Word, whether by embracing errors, or by evil
lusts: Or if, by the Spirit, be meant, the comforts or extraordinary gifts of
it: In any of these ways, the quenching is by the persons own act, in whom the
Spirit is quenched: It is neither, by any Interpreter I meet with, or any show
of reason, applied to the extinguishing or slackning the ability of another, to
utter and conceive Prayers, by public use of a Liturgy, which does not any
otherwise quench that ability, than any other way of expression does the
ability of the hearer, which must be stinted; and so, the Spirit of Prayer, as
this Author terms it, be quenched by the speaker in all joynt-prayer, unless it
be allowed all to speak together, contrary to 1 Cor. 14.27. Whence I conclude,
that this Text is most impertinent: And though it be, that some men's reading,
and in like sort, some men's speaking without book, some using of a set Form in
public, and in private, may by accident, through the fault of the speaker,
hearer, or user, abate the fervency of spirit in solitary or joint prayers; yet
it is not so necessarily, or of it self, and therefore not unlawful, nor
quenching the Spirit of Prayer, nor a rendering useless the donation of the
Spirit, as a Spirit of Prayer, unto the children of God, as this Author speaks
in his 2 d. Offer: But in some cases a stinted Form is helpful, both to the
understanding, memory, affections, utterance in prayer, both public and
private, as many holy Saints have found by experience.

To the 3 d. I say, That the precept to Timothy, of stirring up the gift of
God, which was in him, by the putting on of Paul's hands, 2 Timothy 1.6. cannot be
understood, of the ability to express himself in extemporary prayer; but of his
ability to preach the Gospel, as 1 Timothy 4.14. is meant; which he is encouraged
to by the next words, v. 7. For, God has not given us the spirit of fear, but
of power, of love, and of a sound mind; or, as some read, of castigation, or
reducing others to s^briety. However, it is impertinent to the purpose of the
Author here, it being not meant of exciting the gift of expression in prayer
with others; and yet, if it were, he that reads a Liturgy, may stir up the
gift of expression at another time, if he cannot when he reads. As for the
impr^ving of the talents, Matthew. 25.15.27. Luke 19.13.23. it is the duty of
every Christian, and not only of Ministers; and if it be meant, of using
abilities in joynt-prayer, every Christian must, as he is able, utter himself
in prayer, contrary to 1 Cor. 14.26, 27. I conceive, by comparing Matthew. 25.29,
30. with Matthew, 13.11, 12. Mark 4.24, 25* that the talent which is given to
each, is the knowledge, or teaching of the Word of God, or the mysteries of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which each person is to improve, by bringing forth the
fruits of it, Matthew 21.43. Or if it be meant of the Ministers gift, it is to be
understood of his ability to preach the Gospel, and the improving it, by
converting others to faith and obedience; not of so mean a thing, as an ability
of conceiving and uttering Forms of prayer without book.

As for the 4 th. thing offered, The lawfulness of the Saints praying in a
Form, is neither because they have not the Spirit; nor, that having the Spirit,
he is not a sufficient help to them in their approaches to God: but because in
such praying, neither is any thing done forbidden by God, nor any thing omitted
thereby, which God requires for the performing the duty of prayer. The Spirit,
I grant, is sufficient to help in our approaches to God, and does help, Rom
8.15.26 But that it is done by enabling, by immediate inspiration, to utter
matter of prayer, for the benefit of others, is not meant in those places. And
indeed, such a mistake has filled some with high conceit of themselves, and
others with admiration of such, to their mutual perditions: Whereas this is but
a common gift, or rather an acquired ability* often used with cunning to
deceive others, of which there are many footsteps in the affected expressions,
and otherwise, which show, their p^aying is not from the Spirit of God, but
their own spirit* But of the impertinency of this Text I have spoken before, in
answer to chapter 5. sect. 7. It follows,

Sect 10. The Forms of Prayer imposed, are not made necessary essential parts
of Wo^ship.
^

Answ. The (...) P^oposition, m^ant of making it doctrinally necessa^y, by
virtue of Gods appointment, so as that the omission of it at any time, when the
worship is performed, should be sin; or using any other Form, should make it
not Gods worship, or not acceptable to him; might be granted: But being
understood, of making a thing the condition of an action, by virtue of the
authority of Governors, so, as that at some time and place, it is not to be
done without it, by persons that are their subject^, under a civil penalty, the
major is denied: In which sense, the use of the Liturgy is imposed, which does
not make it any other than a circumstance of Divine worship, not such an
adjunct as is a necessary part thereof. This Author granted before here, sect.
8. Circumstances in the worship of Christ, atttending religious actions, as
actions; without assignment of time and place, no action to be managed by a
community, can be orderly performed by them. Therefore, if the Governors
assign a time and place, undetermined by God, it is that which they may do
lawfully, and not requiring them as necessary by virtue of Gods institution;
nor of all but only of their own subjects, they are made but circumstances, not
necessary parts of Divine worship. So, if for avoiding of inconvenience,
public praying be forbidden in the night, and in some places; and it be
commanded to be done at such hours of the day, in such a place: these hours and
place are made no other than circumstances of the religious action, no Religion
is placed in them, ^hey are not made parts of worship, but adjuncts alterable
as it may stand with convenience. There is the same reason of imposing a
Liturgy for uniformity, to prevent dissonancy, or some other inconvenience,
which may be incident to some persons, as of requiring Prayers without it. If
neither be determinatively instituted by Christ, but commanded for convenience,
they both remain circumstances, ^ot necessary parts of Divine worship,
notwithstanding the imposition by Governors. Sacrificing on the Altar, at the
Tabernacle and Temple, was a part of the worship, because commanded by God; and
so would the Liturgy be, if it were commanded as that was: But that the Liturgy
is not so, it appears from the words of the Preface to it The particular forms
of Divine worship, and the rites appointed to be used therein, being things in
their own nature indifferent and alterable, and so acknowledged; it is but
r^asonable, that upon weighty and important considerations, according to the
(...) exigency of times and occasions, such changes and alterations should be
made therein, as to th^se that are in place of Authority, should from time to
time seem either necessary or expedient. Nor do I think it true, That any
considerable Minister of England, would affirm the Common Prayer Book to be an
essential part of worship, or make it such, as this Author imputes to them; nor
in use of it, is it always so observed, but that it gives place to preaching,
to reading Briefs for collections, and some other occasions; and yet, if they
did so strictly observe it, this does not prove, they esteem it a necessary
essential part of worship, by virtue of Gods command: but that they conceive
they ought to obey their Governors Laws, not judging others, who use it not.
But whatever be the judgment or practice of the present Ministers, yet the
words of the Preface (which are more to be regarded, than any particular
Ministers opinion, whereof some, its confessed, have too much magnified it) do
show, that the imposition makes it not such as this Author charge on them.
And this is enough to acquit the use of it from Idolatry, even in this Authors
own sense, since they do not place the worship of God in the Form, but in the
Kind of worship commanded by God; and so the minor of his Argument is denied.
For though the Form of the Common Prayer Book be not prescribed, yet the way of
worship therein, that is, Prayer, Praises, the Lords Supper, are worship
pre^cribed by God. If the Author mean, by way of wor-ship, the forms and modes,
the way of worship by Preachers conceived or extemporary prayers* this Authors
form of preaching, and other worship, is not prescribed by God; and the
Separatists are Idolaters, as well as the Ministers of England; and so his
Argument is retorted as before* He goes on thus,

Sect. 11. Acting in the holy things of God, by an Office-power and modes of
Idolaters, may be without Idolatry.
To which we add. Argument 2. Those who act in the holy things of God, by
virtue of an Office-power received from Idolaters; and offer up to him a
Worship merely of humane composition, once abused to Idolatry, with the modes
and rites of Idolaters, are guilty of the sin of Idolatry: But the present
Ministers of England, act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an
Office-power received from Idolaters, and offer up to him a Worship merely of
humane composition, o^c^ abus^d to Idolatry, with the modes and rites of
Idolaters. Therefore. The major (or first Proposition) carrying a brightness
along with it, sufficient to lead any one into the belief of the truth thereof,
one would think may be taken for granted. Two things are asserted therein,

1. That such as act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Office-power
received from Idolaters, are themselves such at least in respect of that their
Office-power so received by them) That Jeroboams Priests were all of them
Idolaters, we suppose will not be denied: Supposing some or more to act in the
Worship of God, by virtue of an Office-power received from them, were these to
be accounted in that respect Idolaters? It seems so: Nor can there be the
least pretense of reason to the contrary: Certainly such as act by virtue of
authority committed to them, in matters Civil, from Rebels, are equally guilty
of Rebellion, as those from whom they derive that their authority. The case is
here the same.

2. That such as offer up to God a Worship merely of humane composition, once
abused to Idolatry, with the modes and rites of Idolaters, are Idolaters: If
these be not such, I must profess, I know not who are. That there are few, or
none, that worship the Creature terminative, will not be denied, the most of
Idolaters in the world are such, upon the account of their worshipping the true
God through mediums of their own d^vising, with rites and modes that never
entered into the heart of God to prescribe. To assert, that any should symbolize
with Idolaters herein (who are solely upon this foot of account such) and not
be guilty of the sin of Idolatry, is absurd and irrational. The major
Proposition then (as was said) may be taken for granted.

Answ. Not so, without better proof, and thus understood, That they still abuse
it to Idolatry; and, That the modes and rites be of themselves Idolatrous:
without these limitations, the major is denied. Those that were ordained
Priests by Papists, and used the Common Prayer Book after, in the days of
Edward the 6 th. were not Idolaters: though this Author will not acquit
Latimer, Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, and others, from Idolatry then, yet I shall
boldly do it: And to what this Author says, I reply, That the Office-power,
no, not though it were from Idolaters, for Idolatrous purposes, does not make
persons actually Idolaters, till they do actually exhibit Divine worship to a
creature. Suppose a person be ordained a Priest, to offer Sacrifice
propitiatory for the quick and dead in the Mass; yet if he ^epent thereof, and
never do adore the Breaden-God he is not an Idolater: Yea, suppose he act in
baptizing, preaching, marrying, burying according to the rituals of the
Romanists, by virtue of his Ordination, as a Priest; or, as this Author speaks,
his Office-power, without exhibiting any Divine worship to a creature (which in
some of these may be) yet is he not thereby an Idolater. The reason whereof is
manifest, because he is not an Idolater, to whom the definition of Idolatry
ag^ees not. And this is the reason why, if Jerob^ams ^riests, though
consecrated for the worship of Idols, did not worship them, they were not to be
accounted Idolaters: Nor are those that act by virtue of authority committed to
them, in matters Civil, from Rebels, equally guilty of rebellion, as th^se from
whom they derive that their authority, unless they act rebelliously; if they
act for the restitution of their Prince, the public peace, they are accounted
good Subjects, and not Rebels, though at first they derived their authority
from Rebels. Nor does the worshipping of God by a Form merely of humane
composition, make Idolaters, though it have been abused to Idolatry, with the
rites and m^des of Idolaters, unless the^e be Idolatry in the Form, and the
rites and modes be Idolatrous in their use: because, notwithstanding this, no
Divine worship may be given to a creature. So, though the Form of Baptism in
the Roman Church* were mee^ly of humane composition, used with Crossings,
Cream, Oil, Spittle, if these rites were used, though by them abused to
Idolatry, not as they do, so as to give Divine worship to a creature, the
Users, in this manner, however guilty of Will Worship or Superstition, yet
would not be justly chargeable with Idolatry; no, not though they should in
^ome sort symbol^ze with Idolaters, that is, be assimilated to them, or in some
sort comply with them. Much less is it true, that they are Idolaters, who use
that which is of Di^ine appointment, to the right use, because Idolaters a^u^ed
it to Idolatry: He that should use the Lords Prayer, or the Psalms, to worship
God with them should not be an Idolater, because Witches have invocated the
Devil, by the Lords Prayer, or the Papists the Virgin Ma^y, by the words of the
P^alms in Bonaventures Psalter. That which he says here, That few or none
worship the creature terminative, he does revoke the next page save one,
finding Bellarmines ass^rtion, l. de Imag. c. 21. That the Images themselves
^erminate the veneration given them, as they are in themselves considered, and
not only as supplying the (...) that which they represent. But had not this
passage proved it, the Idolatry of the Papists, in worshipping the H^st,
invocating Angels, Saints, the worship of the Devil by Americans, the Sun and
Moon of old, would prove, that most of ^dolaters do worship the creature
terminative. From that which is said, I infer, That his maj^r may be denied
without (...) or irrationali^y. But I pass to his minor, of which he says thus,

Sect. 12. The English Ministers opp^s^ P^pish Idolatry, as other Protestants.
Whether this be true of the pr^s^nt Ministers of England, is next to be
considered, of which briefly.

1. That the Romish Church (so called) are Idolaters; their Wo^ship, in the
complex thereof, Id^la^ry, will not (we suppose) be denied by any that call
themselves P^otestants; the most learned of whom have asserted an^ (...): And
then allegeth th^^^ Hymns, O felix pue^pera* O crux spes unica: Bo^a^scius the
J^suite, that is, (...) lib. 3 Amphith. Honor. c. ult. ad Divam Hallensem and
(...) J^sum, hae^eo lac inter medita^s, interque cruo^em, etc. Aqu. Sum part
3. q 25. Bell. de Imag. c. 21. F^ar^ seus de mend^za in viridatio utriusque
eruditionis, lib. 2. p^o^. 2* The usual ascription in Bellarmine, Baronius,
Laus Deo Virginique matri Mariae.

Answ. In which I agree with him, That the Papists are guilty of most horrid
Idolatry: and, could he show any such things in the Common-p^aye^ Bo^k, or the
Service of the Ministers of the Church of England, I should agree to his
Separation. But when no such thing is to be found in the Liturgy or Service of
the present Ministe^s of England: And, when he knows the H^mily of the Peril ^f
Idolatry, and the writings of the lea^ned Bishops and D^v^nes of the Church of
England, are as much against ^h^ir Idolatry as other Protestants, to insinuate
into the peoples minds, as if the present Ministers of England did symbolize
with these Idolaters, of whose Idolatry they show so much detestation, is a
most viperous calumniation, and most unworthy of a Christian. But he goes on
thus:

Sect. 13. The Ministers of England act not by virtue of an Office-power from
Idolaters.
2. That the present Ministers of England act by virtue of an Office-power from
this Combination and Assembly of Idolaters, they themselves will not deny:
Succession from hence being one of the best pleas they have for the
justification of their ministry: (which when they have proved, that ever the
Lord Jesus did entrust an Assembly of the greatest Murderers, Adulterers, and
Idolaters in the world, with any power, for the sending forth Officers, to act
in the holy things of God, to, and for the Church his Spouse, will be admitted;
but that they shall never be able to do) so hugely importunate are some of them
herein, that they are not ashamed to ask us, Why Ordination may not be
received from the Church (so called) of Rome, as well as the Scripture? To
which we shall only say, That when it is proved, that we received the Scripture
from that Apostate Church, by virtue of any Authority thereof, as such,
somewhat of moment may be admitted in that enquiry, but this will never be
done. It Is true, the Bible was kept among the people, in those parts, where the
Pope prevails; yet follows it not from hence, that we received it from
their Authority, as Ordination is received: If we did, why did we not keep it,
as delivered from them to us, in the Vulgar Latin? So that of these things
there is not the same reason. It will not then be denied, but the present
Ministers of England, act in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Office
power received by succession from the Church of Rome, and so from Idolaters
(that Church being eminently so, as has been proved.)

Answ. This Objection, though it be but a slight thing, and of no real force,
to nullify or invalidate the Calling of the present Ministers; yet, because
the well-affected Protestants are zealous against Popery, as having learned the
Pope to be Antichrist, and that terrible threanings are, in the Revelation,
against any communion with any thing that is suggested to them by those, to
whom they adhere, to come from Rome, or the Pope, as being Antichristian, it is
needful, that this thing should be cleared* for rectifying the mistakes of
people, that their unadvised zeal against some things as Popish, which are not,
may not occasion unnecessary Schism, and such other evils, into which persons,
perhaps otherwise of honest hearts, cast themselves to their ruin. It is known
to those that study Controversies between Protestants and Papists, that this
has been one grand Objection of the Papists against the Reformed Churches,
that their Ministers are not rightly Ordained, and therefore they have no
succession; which by Bellarmine, in his Book de Notis Ecclesiae, c. 8. is made
a Note of the Church; and therefore they are not a true Church, but
schismatical. The Answers given to this Objection, are,

1. For the truth of the Reformed Churches, the succession in them of true
Doctrine, is sufficient to demonstrate them true Churches, as I have asserted
in my Romanism discussed, against the Manuel of H. T. Art. 2.

2. That Ministers may be sent of God, who teach the Doctrine of God, though
they have not Ordination according to Church-Canons* as was the case at the
first beginning of the Reformation; in which there was something extraordinary,
by reason of the long tyranny of Popes, and the great corruptions in the Latin
Churches.

3. That their Ministers were at first ordained by the Popish Bishops; and
though they did after renounce the offering Sacrifice for quick and dead, yet
even by the Papists own Canons, and resolutions of their Casuists, their power
to administer the Word and Sacraments, according to the Word of God, continued
still.

4. That those who had been thus ordained, had power to ordain others, for
which the French, and other Protestants of the Presbyterial Government, allege,
That Presbyters may Ordain, even by the confession of the Romanists; and that
Bishops, though they be heretics in their account, yet they lose not the power
of Ordaining, no, not when degraded; of which more may be seen in Rivet. sum.
Controv. tract. 2. q. 1. Alsted. suppl. ad Chamier. panstrat. de memb. Eccl.
milit c. 8. Ames. Bellar. Enerv. tom. 2. l. 3. de clericis, c. 2 sect. 10. and
many more, who have still pleaded, That, notwithstanding the impurity of the
Church of Rome, yet the Calling, which Luther, Zuinglius, and others had from
Popish Bishops, was sufficient, without any other Ordination, for an ordinary
calling to the Office of a Minister; and that those, who have succeeded them,
have been true Pastors in their Churches. The English Protestants, who have
had Bishops above Presbyters, have advantage above other Protestants, to plead
for the regularity of the Ordination of their Ministers, because they have been
ordained by Bishops, and those Bishops consecrated by other Bishops, according
to the ^anons of the Ancients, in a succession continued from Bishops
acknowledged by the Papists themselves. To evacuate this plea, says Dr.
Prideaux, Orat. 8. de Vocatione Ministrorum: The Papists would fain find a
defect in the succession of the English B^sh^ps from the preceding Bishops, and
in the solemnity of their consecration: And being beaten off from the denial of
Cranmers consecration* by the producing of the Popes acknowledging of him
Archbishop, and the register of his consecration, as also of other Bishops in
King Edwards days: After, Christophorus a sacr^b^sco, or Father Halywood of
Dublin in Ireland, Anthony Champney, and James Wadsworth say, That Arch bishop
Parker, Bishop Jewel, and those others, which were made Bishops in the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth, though the^e were an attempt of their consecration
at a Tavern, at the Nags-head in Cheapside, yet could not they procure an old
Catholic Bishop to join with them, and therefore their consecration was
disappointed. To show the falsehood of this fable, and to make evident the
complete solemnity of Pa^kers, and others consecration; and the truth of the
Ordination of the English Ministers, Dr. Rainold in his Letter to Mr. Barker,
testifies his sil^ncing Heart the Jesuit herewith; which is extant in Mr.
^yfords Apology, p. 11.
even by the Canons of the Papists, Bishop B^del in his Answer to Wadsworth,
chapter 11. and Mr. Francis Mason in his Vindication of the English Ministry, have
fully proved the solemnity of the consecration, out of the A^ch-bishops
Begister, to have been ^ight, and the succession to have been legitimate, even
according to the Canon Law; and the Ministers Ordination to have been good,
though not ordained sacrificing Priests for quick and dead, against the
exceptions of Bellarmine, (...), and such other of the Papists' as have denied
Protestant Ministers true Pastors, and their Churches true Churches. It is not
unlikely, that some of the Prela^ical party, have vented in writings and
conference, such expressions, as carry a show of their disclaiming the Churches
which have not Bishops, and extolling the Popish Churches Government, and
avouching their Ordination from Rome; which has caused a great ave^seness in
many zealous persons from Bishops, and the conforming Ministers; and is taken
hold of by this Author, and other promoters of Separation, as an engine suitable
to that end. But as those learned men, Bedel, Mason, Prideaux, and others, have
pleaded the succession of Bishops from the Popish Bishops, and the Ordination
of Ministers by them, there is no cause given of that outcry, that is made of
the Bishops Antichristianism, declining to Popery, or of Separation, for that
reason: the Presby^erian Churches making the like plea for themselves, That the
first Reformers had ordinary calling, even according to the Papists own Canons;
and the Episcopal Divines pleading only the same thing more fully. Yet it is
not true, which this Author says, That either the one or other make the
succession from Popish Bish^ps, one of the best pleas they have for the
just^fication of their minist^y: For, though they plead this succession against
the clamorous and violent actings of the Popish party, which Petrus Molinaeus,
in his 3 d. Epistle to Bishop Andrews, mentions to have been in France, by
Arnola the Jesuit; and the writings of Champney, Wadsworth, and others, show
to have been in England: yet they have justified their ministry without it, as
may be seen in Amos, Als^ed, B^del, and others. And for the present Ministers
of England, I conceive they will deny, that they act by virtue of an
Office-power from the Combination and Assembly of Idolaters in the Church of
Rome; their Office-power being not such as Priests are ordained to in the
Church of Rome, to offer Sacrifice propitiatory for quick and dead, but to
preach the Gospel, administer Sacraments, and Discipline, according to Christ's
institution: And in the solemnity of their Ordination, the Rom^sts rites being
relinquished by the Ordainers, who are not a Combination or Assembly of
Idolaters, but professors of the true Faith, and haters of popish Idolatry,
though some succession of their Predecessors from Idolaters be alleged to stop
the mouths of Papists, who pervert their proselytes, by impu^ation of novelty
to the reformed Churches, and their Ministers, rather than by proving their
Doctrine out of Scripture. As for that which is ob^ected, That Christ would
never entrust such, to send forth Officers, to act in the holy things of God,
for his Church, it is without reason objected, since many of them might be, and
in charity we are to conceive, were the servants of God, who abode in the
communion of the Roman Church. Dr. Ames himself, in his Animadversions on the
Remonstrants Scripta Synodalia, Artic. 5. c. 7. says, We believe there were,
and yet are many, who have not so far separated themselves from the Papists,
but that they are polluted with their manifold Idolatry, who yet have their
part in the Kingdom of God. Even in the days of King Henry the 8 th. and Q
Mary, all the Bishops were not like Gardener, Bonner, and such as were inhumane
persecutors. Why Christ should not entrust Cranmer, Tonstall, and such like, to
send forth Officers, to act in the holy things of God, as well as Judas to be
an Apostle, I find not cause. The baptism received in the Church of Rome, the
Brownists in their Apology, p. 112. acknowledge to be so far valid, as not to
need rebaptization; and why not then the Ordination by their Bishops? Bishops
and Ministers, though they be evil men, and unduly get into power; yet, as it
is with other Officers, their actings are valid: as Caiaphas, Ananias, and such
like persons, who by bribes unjustly and irregularly usurped the Highpriests
Office; yet their sentence and ministration were not therefore disannulled. He
who said, We received the Bible from the Church of Rome, it is not likely meant
it to have been received by virtue of their authority, but their ministry,
Preachers having been sent by the Pope, to instruct the Saxons in the Faith:
But whatever was meant by that speech, this we may safely say, That if the
Office-power of the present Ministers had been (as it is not) received by
succession from the Church of Rome, and so from Idolaters; yet being no other
Office-power, than what has been instituted by Christ, it no more proves the
present Ministers Idolaters, than the receiving of baptism, or the Scriptures,
by the ministry of men in that Church. It is further added,

Sect. 14. The Common Prayer Book worship was not abused to Idolatry.
3. Nor can it be denied, but they offer up to God, a Worship merely of humane
composition (as the Common Prayer Book worship has been proved to be) once
abused to Idolatry, with the m^^es and rites of Idolaters. That the
Common^Prayer Book worship, is a worship, that was once abused to Idolatry,
being the worship of that Church, whose worship (at least in the complex
thereof) is so, cannot with the least pretense of reason be denied. That the
whole of it, is derived from, and taken out of the Popes Portuis, as are the
Common Prayers out of the Breviary: The administration of the Sacraments,
Burial, Matrimony, Visitation of the Sick, out of the Ritual, or Book of Rites:
The Consecration of the Lords Supper, Collects, Epistles, Gospels, out of the
Mass Book: The Ordination of Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests, out of the
Roman Pontifical, has been a^^erted and proved by many. Which might be
evidenced (if needful) beyond exception; not only by comparing the one with the
other, but also from the offer was made by Pope Pius the 4th. and Gregory the
13th. to Q. Elizabeth, to confirm the English Liturgy, which, did it not
symbolize with the service of the Church of Rome, they would not have done.
Yea, when the said Queen was interdicted by the Popes Bull, Secretary
Walsingham procures two Intelligencers from the Pope, who seeing the service of
London and Canterbury in the pomp thereof, wonder, that their Lord, the Pope,
should be so unadvised, as to interdict a Prince, whose service and ceremonies
did so symbolize with his own: When they come to Rome, they satisfy the Pope,
That they saw no service, ceremonies, or orders in England, but might very well
serve in Rome, upon which the Bull was recalled. Not to mention what we have
already minded, viz. the testimomy of King Edward the 6th. and his Council;
witnessing the English service to be the same, and no other but the old, the
self-same words in English, that were in Latin (which was the worship of
England and Rome in Queen Mary's days) it is evident, That the present
Minsters of England, offer up a worship to God, once abused to Idolatry. That
they do this, with the rites, ceremonies, and modes of Idolaters, (viz. such as
are in use in that Idolatrous Church of Rome) needs not many words to
demonstrate: What else is the Priests change of voice, posture and place of
worship enjoined them? Not to mention their holy Vestments, Bowings, Cringings,
Candles, Altars, etc. all which, as its known, owe their original unto the
appointments thereof. In the margin, Maccovius loc. com. append. de adiaph. p.
860. says, Non licet mutuari, aut retinere res aus ritus sacros Idololatrarum
sive Ethnicorum sife Pontificiorum, etc. etsi in se res fuerint adiaphorae quia
vitandam esse omnem consormitatem cum Idololatris docemur. Lev. 19.4.27. and
21.5. Deuteronomy. 14* 1* It remains, That the present M^nisters of England, acting
in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Office-power received from
Idolaters; and offering up to him a worship merely of humane composition, once
abused to Idolatry, with the rites and modes of Idolaters, are deeply guilty of
the sin of Idolatry.

Answ. That the Common Prayer Book worship, is a worship merely of humane
composition, however the Form of words be, is denied, and not proved by this
Author, whose mistakes in confounding them are before showed. Nor is the
worship of the Common Prayer Book proved to have been abus^d to Idolatry,
because the Fo^ms of words were taken out of the Popish Service Books, any
more, than that the Scriptures or Creed, found in them, were abused to
Idolatry, because thence taken: The worship being agreeable to Gods Word,
cannot be abused to Idolatry. Nor does the Form of words used in the Mass Book
or B^eviary, which is otherwise holy and ^ight, if it had never been in those
books, cease to be holy and right, when the Idolatrous Forms are left out, any
more, than Gold found in a Dunghill, remains Dung, and cease to be Gold, when
the filth is washed away from it. To that of the Common Prayer Book being taken
out of the Popes Portuis, and King Edwards words, answer is made in the Answer
to the 3d. chapter, sect. 4. The offer of the Pope, and the report of his
Intelligencers, p^oves, that the Pope had nothing to except against the
Common Prayer Book, or the Service of the Church of England; but not, that they
are every way the same with that which is used in the Church of Rome.
Concerning its being taken out of the Popes Portuis, at least for the greatest
piece, Archbishop Whitgift, in his Answer to the first Admonition, p. 82. said
long ago, It makes no matter of whom it was invented, in what book it is
contained, so that it be good and profitable, and cons^nant to Gods Word. Well
says Ambrose, Omne verum a quocunque dicitur, a Spiritu Sancto, All truth, of
whomsoever it is spoken, is of the Holy Ghost. As for the Book of Ordination,
he an^wers, the words of the second Admonition, p. 201. thus* It is most false
and untrue, that the Book of ordering Ministers and D^acons, etc. now used, is
word for word drawn out of the Popes Pontifical, being almost in no point
correspondent to the same; as y^u might have seen, if you had compared them
t^gether: But ignorance and rashness drives you into many errors. As for the
rites, and modes, and ceremonies objected, those, which are in the Church of
Rome Idolatrous, are not observed, or used by the Ministers, who minister
according to the Common Prayer Book, to whom conformity with the Popish Priests
therein is injuriously imputed; and they are so far from being found deeply
guilty of the sin of Idolatry, that the very a^guings of this Author rather
acquit them, than convince them. As for the words of Maccov^us, they are not
right; we may retain the goods used to Idol^try and apply them to holy uses,
though they have been abused by Idolaters, yea, and abused to Idolatry, as the
Temples, Bells, Tables, which have been abused to the Idolatry of the Mass, as
is largely proved by Mr. Page^, in his Arrow against the separation of the
Brown^sts, in answer to Mr* Ainsworth, chapter 7. Nor is it proved by Maccovius*
out of the Texts alleged here, That the sacred rites of Idolaters, though they
be things in themselves indifferent, are not to be retained; but that all
conformity with Idolaters is to be avoided. For none of the Texts speak of
things in themselves indifferent; Turning unto Idols, and making to themselves
molten Gods, forbidden Levit. 19.4. being gross Idolatry: the rounding the
corners of their heads, marring the corners of their beards, v. 27. making
baldness upon their head, shaving off the corner of their beard, cutting their
flesh, Levit. 21.5. making baldness bettween their eyes for the dead, being
heathenish customs, which were Idolatrous; as Ainsworth, Annot. on Levit.
21.5. Such as those, 1 Kings 18.28. Or as Salmasius in his Book of long hair;
the rounding of the corners of their h^ads, to have been in honor of the Moon:
Or showing heathenish sorrow for the dead; all sinful in themselves, and
therefore not indifferent. But there is yet one more Charge behind.

Sect. 15. Kneeling in receiving the Sacramental elements, is not Idolatry.
Argument 3. Adoration in, by, or before a creature respecti^e, or with
relation to the creature, is Idolatry; such as so adore or w^^ship G^d, are
Idolaters: But the present Ministers of England, do adore or worship God, in,
by, or before a creature respective, or with relation to the creature:
Therefore. The major (or first Proposition) being generally owned by
Protestants, it being the very same Maxim they make use of, and stop the mouth
of the Papists with, in the point of adoring God mediately by the creature, we
shall not stand upon the proof of it: none that know what they say, will deny
it. The minor Proposition (viz. That the present Ministers of England do adore
or worship God, in, by, or before the creature respective, or with relation to
the creature) will receive a quick dispatch: Not to mention their bowing and
cringing at the Altar: That they kneel at receiving of the Sacrament, is known:
That they, with their Communicants, should do so, is enjoined by their Church:
That their so d^ing, is an adoration, or worshipping of God before the creature
respective, or with relation to the creature, is too manifest to admit of a
denial: Nothing being more certain, than that the Elements are the objectum a
quo, or the motive of their kneeling, which if they were not there, they would
not do. And in the margin. Didoclavius p. 755. says, Genus^ectere non modo
excludit ritus institutionis, sed etiam praeceptum secundum de Vitanda
Idololatria multis modis violat. Which Maccovius assents to, loc. com. p. 861.

Answ. Whether this Authors Antagonists know what they say, this Author seems
not a fit Judge, unless either he knew better what himself says, or could
better clear his meaning than he does, that his Readers might know what he
says. In this Argument, he does accuse the present Mnisters of England, and
their Communicants of Idolatry, in kneeling at the receiving of the bread and
wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and yet, chapter 5. p. 40. he had said.
Kneeling at the Lords Supper, though we do not, some would say, smells very
strong of the Popish leaven, and is but one pegg b^neath the adoration of their
breaden-God. Here he exp^esly makes that Idolatry undeniable, as being
adoration or w^^ship of God in, by, or before the creature, to wit, the
element^ respective, or with relation to the creature, as objectum
significative a quo, or the motive of their kneeling; which if it were not,
they would not do. So that one while, he will not say, it sm^lls strongly of
the Popish leaven, nor that it is but one pegg beneath the adoration of their
breaden-God; and if so (did he know what he says) he acquits it from idolatry,
which at another time he imputes to it. To which might be added. That, whereas
in the beginning of this very chapter, he ^eckons up as many sorts of Idolatry,
as either he could, or thought fit at least for his design, of making the
present Ministers of England Idolaters; and indeed, more than he should: yet
this sort of Idolatry, of worshipping and adoring God* in, by, or before a
creature respective, or wi^^ relation to the creature, as the objectum
significative a qua, or the motive of the adoration, or worship of God* is no^
mentioned there by him; nor is this Kneeling any of them. For neither is the
kneeling at the Sacrament, the worship ^f the creature terminatively: Nor
before it, as the medium or representative of God: Nor the ascription of the
Godhead, or (...) properties, to any creature: Nor the worshipping of God in
any other way, than what he has prescribed; For it is kneeling in prayer, or
thanksgiving, to God, which he has appointed: Nor is it the oblation of
worship or service to God, that has been offered up to Idols, for which there
is no prescription in the Scripture. For, if it be such, it is that which was
done to the breaden-God: But that he will not say it is; for, chapter 5. p. 40. He
would not say, it smells very strong of the Popish leaven, and is but one pegg
beneath the adoration of their breaden God; therefore he makes it more than one
pegg beneath it* and so beneath that oblation or service, that has been
offered up to Idols. Besides, as I have before said, the Papists themselves are
not enjoined to adore the bread, at the putting into their mouths, but at the
elevation of the host; i^ not consisting with their principles, to worship that
which is not above them: Nor is it the most refined Idolatry, as he speaks,
when the heart goes forth in desires after any thing, beyond what is limited by
the Lord; or trusts and relyes on any creature, besides God: For this Kneeling,
if it be Idolatry, is outward, not inward; of the members, not of the (...);
and therefore, it may be more truly charged on (...) Author, that he knew not
what he said, when he accused Ministers and people of Idolatry, for receiving
the bread and wine at the Lords Supper kneeling, though he had said enough
before to acquit them from it. And, may he not be said, not to know what he
said, who writes so ambiguously, indistinctly, and confusedly, as that his
Reader cannot well discern his meaning? For, whereas worshipping God in, by, or
before a creature respective, or with relation to the creature, may be
understood before it respective, or with relation to it, as the terminus, or
object to which i^ is directed; as worshipping before, Luke 4.7. is wo^shipping
of Satan, Matthew. 4.9. and the relation to the creature, may be, as conceiving
God included in it, as in the consecrated host; or represented by it, as by the
golden cal^, or a crucifix, or as pertaining to God, being consecrated to him,
as G^deons Ephod, or Popish relics of Saints, or hallowed grains; or the
like, without Gods institution; in these, and such like relations, the
adoration being directed to the creatures, whether as the only object to which,
or the intermediate object; whether properly, or improperly; of it self, or by
accident; if this Author had distinctly set down, that he meant his major in
one or more of these respects, his Readers would have known what he had said,
and would have granted his m^jor, and denied his minor. But he thought it best
to hide his major in ambiguous speech, and to express himself more intelligibly
in his instance in the minor, That Kneeling is adoration o^ worshipping of God
before the crea^ure respective, or with relation to the creature, as the
objectum significative a quo, or the motive of the kneeling. But in this sense
I deny his major; and that he may not think me bereft of my wits, but that I
know what I say, I give him this reason of my denial, I find the Holy Ghost
inviting the Jews to worship at Gods footstool, his holy hill, Psalm 99.5.9*
which were creatures; and there they were to bow down to God, in, by, or before
these creatures respective, or with relation to them, as the objectum
significative a quo, that is, that thing which was an object signifying Gods
presence there, and the motive of their bowing down to God; which, if they had
not been there, that is, the Ark* Temple, Altar, they would not have done; and
there was no Idolatry therein. And to stop the evasion, that it was so, when
God appointed it, though this would not avoid the instance, the bread and wine
being of Gods appointment, and the use of them in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, as well as the Altar, Ark, Temple, were, they were instituted to be
memorative signs of Christ's body and blood, communicated to the receivers by
faith; yet I find that adoration or worshipping of God before the creature
respective* or with relation to it, as the objectum significative a quo, and
the motive of the adoration, has been performed occasionally without
institution, and yet no Idolatry committed. When the Is^aelites at mount
Carmel, 1 Kings 18.38. saw the fire of the Lord fall, and consume the burnt
offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and lick up the water
that was in the trench, they fell on their faces, and they said, The Lord he is
God, the Lord he is the God. Here was adoration of God before the creature
respective, or with relation to it, as the objectum significative a quo,
signifying the Lord to be God; and as the motive of that adoration, which, if
it had not been there, they would not have done it; and yet no Idolatry
committed. Another instance is 2 Chronicles. 7.3 When all the children of Israel saw
how the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed
themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped and
praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for his mercy endures for ever. Here
was adoration and worshipping God, in, by, or before a creature, not having
special institution, abiding in their sight, as the objectum significative a
quo, or the motive of their adoration, and worship of the Lord, and yet no
Idolatry. I confess, that when the worship is before it, so as it is directed
to it, as upon the sight of the bread, or a crucifix, the host, or a crucifix
is worshipped, whether terminatively, or as the representative of another, it
is Idolatry: As If Job, when he had seen the Sun when it shined, or the Moon
walking in brightness, his heart had been secretly enticed, and his mouth had
kissed his hand, as it is Job 31.26, 27. it had been Idolatry: For then the Sun
had been not only obj^ctum a quo, the motive or occasion, but also objectum ad
quod, or the terminus ad quem, to which it had been directed. But if he had
only taken occasion, upon the sight of the Sun, to worship God, as David did,
Psalm. 8.3. magnify or worship God the Creator, it had been no Idolatry, though
the Moon or Sun were the objectum a quo significative, or the sight (...) it,
the motive to it. Till Divine worship be given to a creature, it is not
Idolatry; although in the kind or means of worship, there may be Will Worship;
and in the opinion of those, that count their act, or the object to be holy,
when it is not, there may be superstition of the mind; and in the use of such
things, or forbearing their use, superstition in the members.

That which this Author says of his major Proposition, as generally owned by
Protestants, I do not believe it to be true, understanding it as he does, of
relation only to the creature, as objectum significative a quo, or the motive
of the adoration, and not the object to which it is directed. As for this
minor, it may be denied, even in his own sense; for the adoring of God, though
it be at the receiving the elements, yet the elements are not objectum
significative a quo, or the motive of their kneeling, Ludov. Crocius
Antisocinism. contr. disp. 22. qu. 3.

Geniculando coenam sumere nos per se indifferens judicamus. q. 11. Nobis hic
ritus est indifferens, allegatq, Lutherum, M^lanchthonem, ut idem statuetes,
contra Flacium.


according to the Common Prayer Book, which says, That the order in the
Office, for the administration of the Lords Supper, that the Communicants
should receive it kneeling, is well meant, for a signification of our humble
and grateful acknowledgement of the benefits of Christ, therein given to all
worthy receivers; and for the avoiding of such profanation and disorder in the
holy Communion, as might otherwise ensue: That thereby no adoration is
intended, or ought to be done, either unto the Sacramental bread and wine,
there bodily received, or unto any corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh
and blood: Which intimate, that the elements are not the objectum significative
a quo, or the motive of their kneeling; but the benefits of Christ in the Lords
Supper, given to all worthy receivers: And that, not the sight of bread or
wine, (which is not seen till the cup be in their hand) but the remembrance of
Christ's death, and the remission of sins by his blood, by says, are the motive
to kneel to God, with prayer and thanksgiving to him, without any honor of the
bread and wine, though received, eaten and drunk, to remember Christ's death, as
the procuring cause of those benefits. As for his Reason, if the elements were
not there, they would not kneel; therefore they are the objectum significative
a quo, or the motive of their kneeling; partly the Antecedent is not true, for
they kneel before they receive the elements brought to them, and after they
have eaten and drunk, while they are in the meditation of Christ's death, and
the benefits by it, using holy ejaculation in prayer and thanksgiving to God;
partly the consequence may be denied: For, though they would not kneel, were
not the elements there, yet this is not sufficient to prove their presence the
motive of kneeling, any more, than the presence and speech of the M^nister, who
delivers them with prayer and exhortation, to whom yet this Author makes not
the kneeling to have relation. And indeed, it is not the presence of the
elements, when they are received, that is, while they are in the Ministers
hand, or their own, or in their mouths, which is the objectum significative a
quo; but the actions with the elements, at the consecration by the Minister,
which signify Christ's death: and the use by themselves in eating and drinking,
whereby are signified their nourishment by Christ unto life eternal, which are
the motive to that gratitude and trust in Christ, which in kneeling they
exercise by prayer. As for the words of Didoclavius, with Maccovius his assent,
they are the words of an Adversary to the Ministers in this cause, and
therefore not fit to be alleged as a proof in this matter: Nor, if they were
true, would they prove kneeling to be Idolatry, but to be some way against the
second Commandment for avoiding Idolatry. We might more justly, and more to
the purpose, allege the words of Dr. Ames, in his Triplication to Dr. Burges
his Rejoinder, chapter 4. sect. 4. p. 382. There is no Nonconformist, which
refuses to kneel unto Christ, in the celebration of the Lords Supper: And the
Conformists deny, they require kneeling to any other than God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ. As for their bowing and cringing at the Altar, it concerns them
to speak for themselves, who use it; neither do all the Conformists use it, no
not in Cathedrals* if my information be right; nor is there any established Law
for it; and those that use it, do avouch they do it, not to any other than God,
and therefore are not to be charged with Idolatry, whatever other fault they
are chargeable with, by reason of it. It follows

Sect. 16. The Crimination of the Ministers, as Idolaters, is not excusable.
Object. To what has been hitherto offered in this matter, if it be said, That
the charging the present Ministers of England with Idolatry, is exceeding
harsh, and that which is an argument of a very unchristian and censorious
spirit: Though this makes nothing to the enervating of what has been offered,
yet we answer,

1. That many words of Christ himself were accounted hard sayings, and not to
be born; and that by such hearers, as were once his admirers, and did with
seeming great affection attend upon his ministry. That such poor worms as we
should be recharged herewith, it is no great marvel, it is enough for the
Disciple to be as his Master.

2ly. We have in this matter said nothing, but what is in Thesi over and over
asserted by most or all Protestant Writers upon the second Commandment: who
assert fully, That the worshipping God in a way not prescribed by him, is
Idolatry, such as do so, are Idolaters: With our application hereof unto the
present Ministers of England, if they are guilty (as that they are, has been
abundantly demonstrated) why should any be offended? To speak truth, when our
silence would be prejudicial to the souls of our Brethren, methinks should not
be accounted unchristian or censorious. In the margin are these words, Calvin,
Perkins, Ames, Macc^vius, Altingius, Wendeline, Paraeus, Explicat. Cate. p. 3.
Q. 96. p. 528. says, Quid postulat secundum praeceptum? Res. Ne Deum ulla
imagine, aut figura exprimamus, neve nulla ratione eum colamus, quam qua se in
suo verbo coli praecepit, 1 Samuel 15.23. Deuteronomy. 12.30 Mat. 15 9. And afterward
he adds, Huic secundo praecepto contraria sunt ea, quae vero cultui divino
adversantur. 1. Idololatria, quae est culius numinis fictitius, aut
superstitiosus. Sunt autem Idololatriae du^ species, praecipuae: una crassior,
cum fictitium numen colitur -- haec species prohibetur in primo praecepto, and
aliqua ex part, in tertio: altera est subtilior, cum verus Deus coli fingitur,
sed erratur in genere culius, hoc est, cum vero Deo culius fingitur praestari,
aliquo opere, quod ipse non praecepit: haec species Idololatriae, hoc praecepto
proprie damnatur, and nominatur (...), sive superstitio. And page 529. Qui
peccant contra secundum praeceptum, peccant and contra primum, quia qui Deum
aliter colunt, atque vult coli, illi fingunt Deum aliter affectum, atque est,
hoc est, alium Deum: Ita non Deum, sed cerebri sui commentum, quod sic affectum
esse sibi persuadent, colunt -- Fingere alium Dei cul^um, est aliam Dei
voluntatem, proinde and alium Deum fingere, etc.

But, 3ly. What would these Objectors have said to Tertullian (that renowned
servant, and witness of the Lord Jesus in his day) who is, by far, more nice
in this print of Idolat^y, than we have declared our selves to be: He, in his
Bo^k de Idololatria, charge such as make Statues or Images, build or adorn
Temples (though it were their Trade) Astrologers, Schoolmasters, (that name the
names ^f Idols, making honorable mention of them in their orations) such as
keep holidays, d^dicated to Idolatrous service, as their Satu^nalia ( in the
stead of which, is the time with us called Christmas) etc. such as adorned
their gates, posts, houses, after the Pagan manner, at Festivals, with Laurel,
Ivy, etc. as symbolizing with Idolaters: yet sure we are, he could not justly
be charged with an unchristian or censorious spirit.

Answ. The charge is rightly laid, and your plea insufficient to take it off.
Christ's sayings were unjustly counted hard, because they were true; yours
justly, because not so: his sayings tolerable, yea precious, because they
tended to direct them in the way to life eternal; yours, judged to be from an
unchristian and censorious spirit, because uncharitable, and tending to
division. That, which by the Protestant Writers is said, is not all true: I
think all Will Worship is not ^dolatry: Our Lord, who accused the Pharisees of
Will Worship, did not accuse them of Idolatry. How far from Demonstrations
your Arguments are, may appear by this Answer. Were it fit to recriminate, I
could prove you guilty of as great Idolatry, as you impute to the Conformists.
Your zeal for truth, and love to your Brethrens souls, were good, if it were in
a good thing: if without knowledge, and it tend to error and schism, it may be
pernicious in its consequents. As for Tertullian, omitting what may be excepted
against him, and the spirit by which he was acted in the close of his life,
which showed him to be (as Dr. Casaubon observes, in his Treatise of
Enthusiasm, chapter 3.) a man, though otherwise learned, that ascribed too much to
private Revelations, out of an excess of zeal, which he showed in all his
works, (in which, I wish it were true, that this Author, who here so extolls
him, were not too like him) I conceive Tertullian might have such reasons for
his niceness in the point of Idolatry in his time, See Dr. Hammond of Scandal,
21.
when the Christians lived among Pagan Idolaters, who bore sway in the Empire
of Rome, which only maintained such Idolatry as the public received Worship,
and persecuted Christians for not conforming to their Idol-service, as this
Author has not, for his accusing Ministers of Idolatry, for using a
Service Book in the main right, in respect of the Worship; and a gesture,
avowed to be only to the true God; in a Church, holding in the main, the ^ight
Faith; under a Prince, that professes the same Faith and Worship, and to be a
Defender of it. As for such relics of Pagan customs, or Popish, as yet
remain, though it were to be wished, they were quite left, (...) since they are
not used in any honor to the Pagan Idols, but the original and reason of them
at first, being almost, if not quite forgotten by those that use them, and are
become but as civil customs, that have no state in religious worship,
experience shows, that they are more easily reformed by neglect, than by
earnest declamations against them Nor do I think, the course this Author takes,
of seeking Reformation by Invectives and Separations, likely ^o promote it; but
to exasperate Rulers, and make opposites more violent in their way. It is added,

Sect. 17. The Martyrs are unjustly made Idolaters by this Author.
Obj. 2. But what shall we judge of Latimer, Ridley, Hooper, and many other
famous witnesses and martyrs of Christ, who worshipped God after the same way
of worship that these do now? Were they also Idolaters? How could they be saved
then, when ^he Scripture says, that no Idolater shall inherit the Kingdom of
God, and we do not find that they repented hereof? To this we answer,

1. That the persons instanced in, were eminent witnesses of Jesus Christ in
their day (whose very names are in our nostrils as sweet perfume) we readily
grant, and would be loath to speak one word to abate of that just esteem is due
to their names, and testimony for Christ.

2ly. That they are now with Christ, and shall come with him, and sit upon
Thrones to judge their unjust Judges, in the day app^in^ed thereunto, we have
not the least scruple.

But, 3ly. They were but men, encompassed about with many infirmities: That
they were guilty of the sin of Idolatry, cannot (from what has been said
herein, its evident) be denied. Yet,

1. They were, in that day, but just peeping out of the gates of Babylon,
beginning to arise, and shake themselves out of the dust of the abominations of
the great Whore; and, it is no wonder, if some of the filth of her fornications
did cleave to them.

2. They worshipped God in sincerity, according to the light he was pl^^sed in
that day to communicate; and God accepted of them in Christ, granting to them a
general repentance for those iniquities they saw not to be so, or knew not
themselves to be guilty of: which is all we shall at present say hereunto. The
intelligent Reader knows, that these things are not of any moment, for the
invalidating of what has been offered upon this subject. Thus far of this
Argument, The present Ministers of England are guilty of Idolatry; therefore,
it is the duty of Saints, not to hear, but separate from them.

Answ. Though this Objection be not a direct Answer to your Argument, yet it is
a very great prejudice against it, that by striking at the present Ministers,
you wound the holy Martyrs; you make them Idolaters for that very thing for
which they dyed, that they might not be Idolaters; judging them, as committing
Idolatry, in kneeling with such respect to the bread, as they did utterly
detest, abhorred to the death, and for witnessing against it, laid down their
lives in the flames; and making all the godly at that time, who did as they
did, and held communion with them, guilty of their sin, for hearing them, and
not separating from them, and urging that against the present Ministers, which
the holy Martyrs rejoiced in, and the Ministers think themselves happy, that
they are found like them. Methinks when you wrote this chapter, you should
have thought of that which is Psalm. 73.15. If I say, I will speak thus: behold,
I should offend against the generation of thy children: And have taken heed,
how you had persuaded to separation for that, which in the Martyrs you make
their infirmity, and in charity you might so conceive of the present Ministers:
whereof many of them, even of the Bishops, and such as were in exile with the
King, and others, at home, and abroad, have showed their constant adherence to
the Doctrine of the Church of England, particularly against the ado^ation of
the consecrated host, when they were tempted to join with the Papists. I wish
you did not strengthen the hands of the Papists, by this your pleading, rather
than help to reduce them from their great abominations: and that you did not
weaken the Protestant party, by hind^ing the union that should be among men
that agree in the main, though they dissent in some things considerable, in
this time, wherein the common Cause is endangered by divisions. If the Martrys
were but peeping out of the gates of Babylon, it may seem, they were not, in
your opinion, escaped thence, if some of the filth of the great Whores
fornications did cleave to them, how is it, they are now with Christ, where no
unclean thing enters? That they should repent of that which they offered to
justify a little before they dyed, is not likely. It would be more for your
comfort, and the Churches peace, if by getting out of Babylon, you did not run
to the contrary extreme of Fana^icism: and in seeking Reformation, you did no^
unsettle all; and that you did review this Argument, in which I find strong
accusation, and weak proof.

CHAP. 8. ARG. 7 th. and 8 th.
Sect. 1. Every Offense of others, makes not sinful, that which otherwise is
lawful.
Arg. 7.
It Is not lawful for Saints to do any thing, for the doing whereof, there is no
positive p^ecept in the Scripture, that is an offense, grief, scandal, and
cause of stumbling to their Brethren: But the hearing the present Ministers of
England (as there is no positive precept in the Scripture for it, so it) is an
offense, grief, scandal, and cause of stumbling to the Brethren: Therefore. The
major (or first Proposition) is bottomed upon express precepts in the
Scripture, Romans 14.13, 15, 20. 1 Cor. 8.9, 13* and 10.24.

Answ. There are varieties of circumstances and cases incident to the point of
Scandal* which make the action from which it arises to be lawful or unlawful:
there are several effects of Scandal, and diverse degrees considerable: there
are several states of persons offending, and offended. All which, and more
besides, do require caution in denying or granting the major Proposition: Of
these I wrote many years ago, a Treatise of Scandalizing, sold by Richard
R^yston at the Sign of the Angel in Ivy-Lane, in London: from whence many
limitations may be fetched by the intelligent Reader, wherewith to limit the
major Proposition, without which it is not to be granted, nor is it to be
proved from the Texts alleged. Nevertheless, because if ^ should take them in
here, I should enlarge and encumber the present Dispute too much, I think to
let the major pass at present, and to wave also the exception which might be
taken at the form of the Argument, the conclusion either not being that which
is to be proved but by consequence, or if it be, there be four terms in the
Syllogism, and to examine what he says for his minor.

Sect. 2. Hearing the present Ministers may be the Saints duty*
The minor (or second proposition), says he, consists of two parts.

1. That for hearing the present Ministers of England, there is no positive
warrant in the Scripture; if there be, let it be produced, and this
controversy is at an end: The contrary thereunto has all along been manifest
in this present d^scourse. It cannot enter into our hearts, to imagine, that the
Lord Jesus having instituted Officers of his own, for the management of affairs
in his house, should ordain, that any of his household should attend upon the
Ministry of such as are not of his institution (as has been abundantly
demonstrated touching the present Ministers of England, that they are not) nor
is it by many pleaded as their duty so to do; but only as their liberty, which
they judge they may, or they may not do, without sin.

Answ. What warrant there is to hear the present Ministers of England has been
showed* and that which has been produced to the contrary examined especially
chapter 1. and 2. The institution of Christ concerning Ministers, and what concerns
their calling has been also discussed especially in answer to the preface, and
the 2 chapter: in which places is showed, that warrant by permission is
sufficient to justify the hearing of Ministers; that the positive precept for
hearing determins not hearing of Ministers as thus called, but as teaching the
word of God; that such election and ordination, as this Author requires, are
not necessary to make make men instituted officers of Christ, that while the
present Ministers preach the word of God the Saints may, and ought to attend on
their ministry: and that they are not bound to examine their outward calling,
but to leave that to Rulers, and themselves only to examine their doctrine; that
they may as lawfully attend on their ministry if edifying them in the faith, as
on the ministers of a gathered congregation, that they ought rather in
obedience to Rulers, and to avoid Schism* and to prevent the intangling of
themselves with private and novel opinions which are more easily vented in
private meetings then in public, and more readily entertaine^ by private
persons (few of whom are learned and judicious) than in more public and
solemn auditories: to hear ministers that preach the truth in public
congregations caeteris paribus, if their abilities, and faithfulness be alike,
than to hear ministers in gathered churches privately meeting. And with these
explications, I asse^t it not only the Saints liberty, but also their duty to
attend upon the ministry of the present Ministers of England. It follows.

Sect. 8. Sinful scandalizing is not by hearing the present Ministers.
2. That for the Saints (such as are visibly so, profess themselves to be such)
to hear the present Ministers of England, is an Offense, Grief, Scandal and
occasion of stumbling to their Brethren. This is too evident to be denied, to
how many thousands in England, for whom (those that as yet attend upon the
present Ministry thereof, dare not but think) Christ dyed, is the practice of
some herein, a Grief, Scandal and occasion of stumbling? Their Groans and
Tears alone, and together upon this foot of account, will better demonstrate
the truth thereof, than our words can. Yea, how many poor souls have been
drawn, by reason of the practice of some leading brethren in this matter,
against the checks of their own consciences to a conformity herein, to their
after grief and wounding? Upon whose doors it is to be feared (and we wish they
would in the fear of God, lay it to heart) may be written, The blood of souls.

Answ. The term of visible Saints has been too much contracted by being almost
appropriated to the members of those Churches, which are termed Congregational
in contradistinction to Presbyterial, and Prelatical: or if applied to any of
the more zealous of the Presbyterial way of discipline, yet scarce vouchsafed to
any of them, who are for Episcopal government, or conformable to the worship
and ministry of the Church of England, who are commonly termed Antichristian,
persons without, in Babylon: and for men to profess th^mselves visible Saints
is in effect all one as to say they are of a gathered Church; all others being
counted without. Which abuse of words, as it smells of arrogance, in
appropriating to themselves the title, which is common to all true believers,
and uncharitableness in conceiving of others as no visible Saints, because they
are not entered into that, which is termed Church covenant; so is it injurious
to others, though godly, from whom such are estranged as no visible Saints, but
they are censured and declined as persons without, that have nothing in them of
God, yea as adversaries to the power of Godliness, mere formalists, if they
speak for the common prayer book, or any thing favorably of any of the
Bishops; and this serves for a design of keeping them to themselves without
joining in prayer and hearing in public, which they call hearing with the
world out of the Church. This I conceive to be the reason of this Authors
expressions here of the saints visibly so scandalizing their brethren by their
hearing the Ministers that now preach publicly. By which it may be seen, that
he regards not much who do hear the present ministers of England, so that they
do not; as if it were not necessary to deter all others from hearing them, if
they be false Prophets and Idolaters, as this Author accuses them, yea and to
oppose them even unto the death, if they be such: so that this argument is
unnecessary, if the other be good, and rather supposes all that is formerly
disputed to be weak; yet this point of scandal may serve turn to affright them
from communion with the public Ministry and keep them to themselves, though
it prove never so injurious to their peace and outward estate, and sinful by
reason of the Schism that is continued by it. For this reason I shall examine
this Argument also as it is here delivered, and so much the rather because I
have found by experience, that when in this and other doubts of conscience I
have in conference with honest but scrupulous christians satisfied them
concerning the lawfulness of that which they doubted of, yet in this I could
hardly quiet their consciences, that they might do without sin what they
scrupled to do, because they should offend good people, the scandalizing of
whom our Savior and the Apostle Paul make a heinous sin, and procuring an
heavy curse. For which reason I printed the treatise of scandalizing
forementioned, more then twenty years ago; in the epistle dedicatory whereof
are these words In my small reading and experience I find few doubts of
conscience, concerning men's patent actions, in the resolving of which the
difficulty has not most of all rested on this point of Scandal. At present, I
shall not open the word scandal, nor insist on the definition of Scandal, nor
the sorts of scandalizing or causes of it, or the various cases concerning it,
leaving the Reader to that Treatise, or to what else has been since written by
D. Henry Hammond of scandal, Ma. Henry Jeanes, of abstinence from appearance of
evil, and others for a fuller understanding of this point, but assert that
notwithstanding what is here said of the offense of brethren* and the sad
consequence of blood guiltiness, which this Author would have it conceived the
hearing the present Ministers tends to: yet neither the so termed visible
Saints, nor any other by hearing the present Ministers, do sin against the
precepts of non-scandalizing, given by Christ or his Aposte St. Paul. Matthew.
18.6. Luke 17.1. 2 Romans 14.13.15.20. 1 Cor. 8.8.9.13. and 10 24. Which I prove
thus.

1. That is not scandalizing forbidden in these texts which is neither by
giving evil example in doing* that which is intrinsecally or of it self evil,
though none were offended, nor by enticing practices, or persecution impelling
to evil; nor by abuse of liberty in things lawful to the harm of another; which
are all the ways I know of scandalizing there forbidden, if there be any other
showed I think however it will not reach to the present case: that which this
Author seems to reduce it to is the last, in that he puts in a Parenthesis in
the minor these words (there is no positive precept in Scriptures for it.) But
it is not to be reduced to that sort of scandalizing, for the hearing of the
present Ministers of England cannot be accounted a matter of liberty, or
indifferency, but either duty or sin, hearing the word of God being an express
precept in the general, and so is obeying them that are Rulers: now the
ministers preaeh the word of God, and our Rulers command us to hear them, and
this they have power to do, and in this they have power over their subjects as
parents have over their children, and masters over their servants, and are to
be obeyed in that which is not evil, but good, and therefore the scandalizing
is not by abuse of liberty in things indifferent; nor is it scandalizing in
doing a thing in it self evil or impelling to it, as has been showed in the
foregoing chapters of this answer. Therefore the offending Brethren what ever
it be by hearing the present ministers is not the scandalizing forbidden.

2. That is not Scandalizing forbidden in those Texts, which does not tend to
any of those evils, for preventing of which, those precepts of not scandalizing
were given* But the hearing of the present Ministers tends not to any of those
evils, for preven^ing whereof, those precepts of not scandalizing were given.
This is proved, because it tends not to any sin, but to the performance of duty
in hearing Gods word: nor to any such sorrow or vexation, as the precepts would
have prevented; which were such, as made either persons to be discouraged in
Christianity, or to walk uncomfortably in the profession of it, as by view of
the Texts may appear. But to neither of these effects does the hearing of the
present Minister tend. This Author says, It makes visible Saints to grieve, as
their groans and tears alone and together demonstrate. But, how does the
Hearing the present Ministers tend to it? Sure, neither in the nature of the
action, no^ in the will of him that hears, if the person do hear, as persuaded
he may, and ought to do it, is any tendency to such grief: neither is there
aptitude to beget it, in what he does, which harms not the grieved: nor
intention to produce it, when he does but what he is to do* and neglects not
what belongs to him to do, to hinder it. In this case, the persons grieved, if
it be, because they are displeased with what is done, out of a contrary
judgment, they grieve themselves; if they mourn for it, as the hearers sin,
because it is a recession from their party, it is not out of zeal that they
groan, but out of frowardness, out of passion, not out of compassion, out of an
erroneous principle, to which they adhere, not out of weakness of Faith. This
Author says, Many poor souls have been drawn, by reason of the practice of
some leading Brethren in this matter, against the checks of their own
conscience, to a conformity herein, to their after grief and wounding, and so
those leaders guilty of spilling the blood of Souls. Surely this were a direful
Scandalizing, if this conformity were a Return to Babylon, as they would make
it: But being no such matter, this is but a scarbug: If there be such checks of
conscience, after grief and wounding, it is to be imputed to such as this
Author, who represents it to such a poor soul, as a horrid sin; not to him,
that by doing what he may and ought, leads others to do the like. But the truth
is, those offended Brethren, for the most part, are vexed and enraged, (as
their reviling speeches, and hard censures show) rather for the crossing them
in their way, than affected with godly sorrow for it, as a sin, counting him as
an Enemy, scarce ever admonishing as a Brother, contrary to 2 These. 3.15. Which
is so much the worse in them, in that, by representing the hearing of public
Teachers as dangerous and odious, many fall to the opinions of Quakers,
Seekers, and other erroneous opinions and practices, which by hearing the
present Ministers, might have been prevented; which whether they groan and weep
for, their own consciences can tell them: so far as I discern, the principles
of the Separatists, and their practice, have occasioned them; and for that I
think they ought to mourn.

3. That is not Scandalizing forbidden in those Texts, which does not arise
from any defect of charity, or undue behavior of the person offending; but
from the distemper of the person offended. But the offense by the hearers of
the present Ministers, does not arise from any defect of charity, or undue
behavior of the person offending; but from the distemper of the person
offended. Therefore it is not the Scandalizing forbidden in those Texts, which
do impute the offending to defect of charity, or pride, in contempt, or the
like undue behavior, toward the offended, Romans 14 10.15. 1 Cor. 8 1.11, 12.
But that it is prejudice in the offended, wherewith they are pre-possessed, and
such other malignity as comes from thence, will be made manifest in the
examination of what is said by this Author, in answer to the Objection of
Scandal taken.

4. That is not Scandalizing forbidden in those Texts, which is not offending
of persons weak in the faith, and of doubting consciences, yet peaceably
minded; but of persons conceiving themselves strong, able to argue against the
practice of hearing the present Ministers, that oppose it with violence, will
entertain no fair debate with them that dissent, but inveigh against them, with
many more evidences of wilfulness in their way. But such is the disposition and
carriage of those, that pretend to be offended with the hearing of the present
Ministers, as experience does too frequently evince. Therefore, the offense is
not such, as is forbidden in the Texts, which forbid offending the weak, Romans
14.1. and 15.1. 1 Cor. 8.7, 10.11.

5. That is not scandalizing forbidden in those texts, which is by using our
liberty where we know not any present that will be offended at the use of our
liberty, or that signifies his offense at our action, when we do it, in which
case the Apostle allows the eating of things offered to Idols 1 Cor. 10.27, 28,
29. and consequently the use of our liberty in other things lawful And if any
that are absent are likely to be offended, we have given a just reason, or are
ready to give a just reason of our doing, for this is all, that in this case
charity binds us to, to wit, to do what lies in us to rectify them. But so it
is in the offense of persons at hea^ing the present Ministers: they that are
offended are either absent, or signify not their offense, or exception, if
present; or if they do before or after show their dislike, have the reasons
given of our practice; or the offending person is ready to do it, as experience
shows: therefore the offense taken at their hearing is not scandalizing
forbidden.

6. That is not the scandalizing forbidden in those texts, in which, if the
offense be regarded, the person supposed to offend shall be deprived of his
liberty, and the benefit of the use of it, and not for one time only but
always, contrary to the Apostles resolution 1 Cor. 10.29* 30. And that not in
a thing which he man be well without, such as was flesh offered to an Idol* but
also that, which is of grea^est moment for his souls welfa^e, the hearing of
the word of God, and thereby his liberty will be lost, and a yoke of bondage
received contrary to Gal. 2.5, and 6.1. But so it is in the offense for the
hearing the present Ministers, if it were regarded, so as to abstain from
hearing to satisfy this Author, and such as are like minded, the persons
supposed to offend them must never hear them, nor any of them though preaching
never so profitably, and so must not only lose the present benefit, but also be
deprived perpetually, and judge that which is their liberty to be unlawful, and
^o entangle themselves in a yoke of bondage, which it were sinful for them to
do, and that without any real benefit to the offended, therefore they cannot be
rightly judged to scandalize, as it is forbidden in the texts mentioned who
offend others by their hearing of the present Ministers, as they are charged.

7. That is not the scandalizing forbidden in those texts, the avoiding of
which draws after it a greater scandal and of worse consequence; and that
which is not imaginary only, but real Scandal. This I conceive none should
deny: For if every Scandal should be avoided, then the chiefest, in which case
the lesser, and only imaginary, cannot be said to be forbidden. But in shunning
to hear the present Ministers, there is a real, manifold worse Scandal, than is
by hearing of them. Which I demonstrate thus,

1. The person that might hear a profitable Preacher, by shunning hearing of
him, upon the conceit of unlawfulness to hear him, does scandalize himself,
contrary to Matthew 5.29, 30. and 18.8, 9. in that he confirms himself in his
superstitious error, and hinders his spiritual good, and progress in
Christianity, and ensnares himself in an unjustifiable separation.

2. He does also truly scandalize* others by his example; confirming those that
refuse to hear, in their error and schism, whom he ought to oppose, as St.
Paul did St. Peter, Gal. 2.11. when their shunning to hold communion with some,
as unclean, tends to the establishing of an error and schism, as his did.

3. By this refusing to hear the present Ministers, through such suggestions as
this Author instills into the minds of men against them, people are driven from
the public Congregations, and thereby the sheep of Christ are scattered; some
betake themselves to the meetings of Quakers, where they are misled by the
delusions of Satan, under pretense of following the light within them, other
join with the Fifth monarchy men, who pervert them with peruicious tenants and
designs against Magistrates; and in the best of the Separatists, there is so
much bitterness and enmity, against dissenters from them, instilled into their
minds, as quite breaks the bond of charity, that should unite all Christ's
Discipl^s, which surely is real Scandal.

4. The Refuser to hear the p^esent Ministers, does really scandalize those
that a^e confo^mists in hearing, who are therefore unrighteously judged,
censured and shunned, as lapsed Brethren, or mere Formalists, and thereby are
grieved, and moved to mourn, for this evil spirit, that is between them, and
their Brethren. The present Ministers are al^o much scandalized for the same
cause, and are much hind^ed in the performance of their ministry, by reason of
the opposition of the Separatists; which experience has too much showed, in
former and later times, to have hindered the fruits of many holy Preachers, even
Non-conformists labors and to have shortened their days; so that upon the
doors of the Separatists may be written, with greater reason, than upon the
doors of the diligent conforming Preachers of the Gospel, The Blood of Souls
Therefore scandalizing by hearing the present Ministers, is not forbidden in
the Texts alleged.

8. That Scandalizing is not forbidden in those Texts, by avoiding of which,
the Magistrate is scandalized, his government disturbed, his power excited
against others, as disobedient to his Laws; and for that reason* many persons,
with their families, undone in their liberties, and outward estate. For the
offense of our Brother is not to be regarded, by observing of that which will
include in it disobedience to the command of the Magistrate, which may be
lawfully obeyed, whereby his authority is n^glected, his government disturbed,
division and ruin of families occasioned: But so it is, when the present
Ministers are not heard, as the state of things now is Therefore the
Scandalizing by hearing the present Ministers, is not forbidden in the Texts,
Romans 14. 1 Cor. 8. and 10. It follows,

Sect. 4. It is not Scandal given but when the offensive action is done
blameably.
If it be said, Object. That there is a twofold scandal, 1. Scandalum acceptum,
a scandal, or offense taken, 2. Scandatum datum, a scandal or offense given. In
respect of the former, possibly many may be offended at their practice in the
matter treated of, and so would some or other whatever is done by them: It Is
impossible but offenses should come, that there is any just offense given by
them, herein, is denied To this we answer.

Answ. 1. That as we admit of the distinction, so no doubt there is a truth in
what is suggested thereupon, that what ever I do, some one or other will be
offended at it: there are a generation of men, whom the doing of my duty will
offend, and cause to blaspheme; th^se are not to be minded, but to be pitied:
Christ himself was to some a rock of offense and stone of stumbling.

2. But it is not yet proved (nor like to be) that the Scandal treated of, is a
Scandal taken and not given, the very nature of ^candal given, as is confessed by
all, and evident beyond exception from the Apostles discourse, 1 Cor. 8.10.
lying in the doing of what is judged, by me, to be my liberty, which other
Saints are not fully persuaded of in their own minds to be so, but are ready to
conclude it to be my sin, and evil, and from thence have occasion of grief, or
stumbling, administered to them. This was the very case of the Church of Corinth
( upon the occasion whereof, Paul writes to them, 1 Cor. 8.) some of them
judged it their liberty, to sit at meat in the Idols Temple; others, not being
fully persuaded hereof, were scandalized many ways at this their practice,
which the Apostle therefore condemns as unlawful.

Answ. 1. That there is any generation of men, whose offense is not to be
minded, is not the Doctrine of the Apostle, but contrary to it, 1 Cor. 10.32,
33. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the
Church of God. Even as I please all men, in all things: not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved. Which practice of his
he had expressed, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22, 23^ For though I be free from all
men, yet have I made my self servant unto all, that I might gain the more. And
unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to them that are
under the Law, that I might gain them that are under the Law; to them that are
without Law, as without Law, (being not without Law to G^d, but under the Law
to Christ) that I might gain them that are without Law. To the weak, I became
as weak, that I might gain the weak: to all, became I all things, that I might
by all means save some. And this I do for the Gospels sake, that I may be a
joint partaker thereof. Where his avoiding of offense, and pleasing all, is not
restrained to the Saints, or the Church of God, but is extended even to
adversaries, that opposed the Gospel, to whom he would both forbear his
liberty, and do that which was otherwise not to be done; as in the case of
circumcising Timothy, Acts 16.3. and taking on him a vow, Acts 18.18. and
purifying himself with others, Acts 21.26. and 24.17. and other ways, Acts
26.25, 26, 27. while there was any likelihood, either of winning them to the
liking of the Gospel, or abating their opposition, and procuring his own peace
and safety: But when it was dis-advantage to the truth of the Gospel, he would
not have Titus to be circumcised, nor any compliance with the Jews in declining
eating with the Gentiles, Gal. 2.3, 11, 14 which yields us a rule, whose
offense we are to avoid; with whom, and when we are to comply in things lawful;
to wit, with all, either when we may win them to the embracing of the truth, or
the abating the opposition of adversaries, or procuring our own peace. Which is
a good plea for them, that, by hearing the present Ministers, do accommodate
themselves in doing that which is lawful to the command of Rulers for their own
peace, though some Brethren be thereby offended.

2. It is not confessed by all, That the very nature of Scandal given, lies in
the doing of what is judged, by me, to be my liberty which other Saints are not
fully persuaded of in their own minds to be so, but are ready to conclude it to
be my sin and evil, and from thence have occasion of grief or stumbling
administered to them. For,

1. Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Scandal, after he had accurately considered
the use of the word [ Scandal] and the sorts of Scandal,. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36,
37. he inferrs, That no man is offended or scandalized, but he that falls into
some sin: That to be angry, grieved, troubled, at any action of another, is not
[to be offended] in the Scripture sense: Nor consequently does it follow, that
I have done amiss, in doing that which another man is angry at, unless my
action be in it self evil. For if it be not, then he is angry without cause,
and that is his fault, not mine; yea, and he judges or censures his Brother,
that has done no hurt, which the weak are forbid to do, Romans 14.3. And
secondly, He is of a^l men most unlikely to do that after me, which he is angry
at me for doing; and therefore I have least reason to fear, or possibly to
foresee, that he will be scandalized in the Scripture phrase: Which fear, or
foresight, were the only just motive to me, to abstain from any justifiable
indifferent action. And as for the word (...), grieved, Romans 14.15. he gathers
it from the occasion of the grief of the grieved persons eating with a doubting
conscience, the three words by which it is explained, v 21. Stumbling, being
offended, and being weak or sick; that the meaning is [^is grieved] i e.
wounded, or falls into sin. Which he endeavors to show, to be agreeable to
Language in other words, and in that word. Whether he be in the right, or not,
this seems to me most agreeable to the Text, That (...) grief mentioned Romans
14.15. (which is the only place where I find grief in the offended, made the
effect of offense forbidden) is the grief of the offended, from his own action,
in eating with a doubting conscience: not from the action of him that used his
liberty uncharitably. For if the offended had been displeased, angry and
grieved, because he did eat, he had not followed his example, but would have
shunned his practice, as judging him licentious in so doing. And therefore, it
is not right, that this Author and others, object Scandal given by the
Conformists, because they do that, for which their Brethren do mourn, as done
by them, but do not follow them in, only are displeased, and angry with them
for so doing. Mr. Jeanes, in the 2 d. Edition of his Treatise of abstinence
from appearance of evil, p. 128. The mistake of Scandal, for the angring one,
is taken notice of by Calvin also, upon 1 Cor. 8.13. having affirmed, That some
corrupted the doctrine of Scandal with foolish glosses, and others with their
impious calumnies, he shows the original of both their mistakes, touching the
meaning of offense in the Apostle Utrique errant in verbo Offendendi: Nam
offendere accipiunt, pro Incurrere in odium vel offensionem hominum, aut, quod
idem fere est, facere quod ipsis displiceat, vel minus arrideat. Atqui
clarissime patet ex contex^u, nihil esse aliud quam malo exemplo ranquam obice
fratiem impedi^e a recto cu^su, aut illi praebere Causam Lapsus. Non ergo hic
disputat Paulus de retinenda hominum gratia* sed de sublevandis infirmis, ne
concidant; and prudenter regendis ne a recta via deflectant

2 Were Dr. Hammond, or my self mistaken, yet all that I meet with, do make it
necessary to active Scandal, That it be in all such words, or deeds, as
culpably occasion the fall of another, whether of themselves, or by accident.
And for passive Scandal, if it be culpably both given and taken, then it is
Scandalum datum: if it be culpably taken, and not culpably given, then it is
Scandalum acceptum, as M. Jeanes speaks, in his later Edition, p. 95. of his
Treatise of abstinence from appearance of evil. So that, until there appear
something culpable in hearing the present Ministers, they that hear them cannot
be justly charged with Scandal given by them to their Brethren And this will
not be proved, until it be showed, that either by the nature and condition of
their hearing, or the intention of the hearers, their Brethren are made to sin
against God. For, as it is in the Discourse concerning the Interest of Words in
Prayer, by H.D.M A. (commended before by this Author, chapter 7. p. 60.) in the
Postscript, p. 103. The true notion of a scandalous action, is, Any action done
by us, not being required by the Divine Law, by which our Brother, whether from
the nature and condition of the thing done, or the intention of him that does
it, or both, is made to sin against God And therefore, it is not confessed by
all, that the nature of Scandal given, lies in the doing of what is judged, by
me, to be my liberty, which other Saints are not fully persuaded of in their
own minds to be so, but are ready to conclude it to be my sin and evil, and
from thence have occasion of grief or stumbling administered to them; unless
that Stumbling be by falling into sin, through the culpability of my action,
either from the faulty nature of it, or my intention in the doing of it, by my
unseasonable doing it, with foresight of the effect, which I might have
avoided.

Nor is what this Author says of the nature of Scandal given, evident beyond
exception, from the Apostles discourse, 1 Cor. 8.10. For, whereas he supposes
the case of the Church of Corinth, concerning the practice of them that eat
Idolothytes, to have been, as he expresses it, on the one side, the offending
persons judging it their liberty to sit at meat in the Idols Temple: and on the
other side, others not being fully persuaded hereof, were many ways
scandalized at this their practice, which therefore the Apostle condemns as
unlawful: and conceives, the nature of Scandal given, to be in these two
things, one judging it his liberty to do it, another judging it evil, and
grieving thereat, and that such is the offense of them that hear the present
Ministers, he is many ways mistaken.

1. That the offending person, it is not likely, judged it his liberty to sit
at meat in the Idols Temple, he being described as one that had knowledge,
opposed to the weak, who with conscience of the Idol, eat it as a thing offered
to an Idol, and their conscience being weak, was defiled: Now it is not likely,
that the strong, that had knowledge by the Doctrine of Christ, that what
enters into the mouth does not defile, and therefore the eating of the
Idolothyte, though he knew it offered to an Idol, could not defile him, would
yet judge it his liberty to sit at meat in the Idols Temple, which was
manifestly evil, even partaking of the Table of Devils, 1 Cor. 10.20, 21. Or
that it was the weakness of the offended person, that he was not fully
persuaded of that liberty, it had been his weakness and sin, if he had judged
it his liberty to sit at meat in the Idols Temple. But it was the sin of him
that had knowledge, that he sat at meat in the Idols Temple, though it was his
liberty to eat it elsewhere, knowing it had been offered to Idols: and it was
the weakness of the other, that he was not so persuaded, yet was by the others
practice emboldned to it, and so was defiled both with the error and practice
of eating against his conscience, with the conscience of the Idol; that is,
though he knew it offered to the Idol, and therefore was thereby some
acknowledgement of the Idol, as something honorable, or a thing sacred.
However, if it were, that the offending person judged it his liberty to sit at
m^at in the Idols Temple, yet this is ill applied to the hearers of the present
Ministers, as if their hearing were such an action, as was his, that sat at
meat in the Idols Temple: for that was having fellowship with Devils, 1 Cor.
10.20 but this is the service of the living God, no Idolothyte, or sitting at
meat in the Idols Temple: and, as if being persuaded of the liberty to do the
one, were like the persuasion of the liberty to do the other, whereas, the
hearers judge it not only their liberty to hear the present Ministers, but also
their duty, and so not, as the case stands, a thing indifferent.

2. This Author conceives, that the Corinthians were offended in that they were
grieved at the practice of him that judged it his liberty to sit at meat in the
Idols Temple, and that giving occasion of such grief, was Scandal given:
whereas the scandal given, was not by causing grief for the offenders practice,
as evil; but in that the offended being swayed by his practice, did, against
his conscience, eat the thing offered to Idols, and perhaps in the Idols
Temple, which had been a great sin, such as would wound his conscience, make
him weak or sick, and tended to his perdition, it being a degree of back
sliding to Idolatry: And therefore, this is ill applied to the effect of the
hearing of the present Ministers, which is not in the offended any such
backsliding or sin against their conscience, tending to their perdition, or
present wounding of spirit; but mourning for their Brethrens conceited back
sliding, which they conceive tends to their salvation, not to their perdition

3. The offense of the Corinthians is set down by this Author, without any
intimation, that the Corinthians might have reason to be scandalized, because
the eating the Idolothyte was both against the precepts of the Mosaical Law,
and the Apostles decree, Acts 15.25. which was of much moment to make the
offense, Scandal given, and not only taken. For if offense be taken, where
there is no probable reason, why the scandalized should judge it evil, it is
his fault who thus judges, not his who acts, that, which he sees no reason why
any should conceive any evil in it. The Apostle therefore did not require to
forbear the eating of the Idolothyte, but when the weak Brother said This is
offered in sacrifice to Idols, 1 Cor 10 28. which showed the reason, why he
should be offended, if he did eat it; and that reason might probably induce him
to conceive it unlawful, which thing is a requisite condition to Scandal given,
since, if upon any surmise of a weak Brother, I must forbear my liberty, though
there is no show of reason, or no probability why he should conceive it evil to
use it, my liberty would be as no liberty, and a yoke more intolerable than the
Law would be on my conscience. Now, that there is no probable reason, why
persons should imagine evil in my hearing the present Ministers,
notwithstanding what this Author says, has been, and shall be further showed,
in answering that which is said by this Author.

4. This Author does not mention that, which, in the case of the Corinthians,
was requisite to Scandal given, to wit, that the Scandal should be foreseen,
as the words 1 Cor. 10.27, 28 intimate; and that not only as possible, but also
as future, with some moral certainty, by reason of the presence of persons
known to scruple the thing I do, or some one that intimates his dislike of my
action. Calvin therefore upon 1 Cor. 8 13. says, Non jubet nos Apostolus
divinare nunquid offendiculo futurum sit quod facimus, nisi cum est praesens
periculum. The Apostle does not bid us divine, whether that we do will offend,
but when there is present danger. Now this shows, that the hearing the present
Ministers is not Scandal given, where none are present that are offended, nor
any give intimation of the futurity of the offense.

5. This Author does not take notice, that Scandal given by the use of our
liberty, is not to be made perpetual, as the Apostles words in the same place
show: For if I must always abstain from that at which another is offended, it
will be made sin in it self, and so not Scandal given by the intempestive use
of our liberty in a thing indifferent: but that we must not yield to, that we
may not lose Truth for peace sake: But if men must not hear the present
Ministers, for the reasons given, they must never do it to avoid offense, which
will be perpetual, and so the scandal supposed to be given, not such as that
which was in the Corinthians liberty, in eating Idolothytes.

6. It should not have been forgotten, That the case of the offended among the
Corinthians, by eating Idolothytes, and the Brethren now in England, for
hearing the present Ministers, cannot be paralleled rightly: because the
Corinthians offense was at the time, wherein the Gospel had been but lately
preached to them, and the Doctrine of Gospel-liberty not fully cleared, which
cannot be said of Christian Professors in England, who have been fully
instructed therein; and therefore, in the use of our liberty now, cannot be the
like offense given, and not taken only, as was in those days among the
Corinthians: Yet this Author thus charge them with Scandal given.

Sect. 5. Offending some sincere Christians, by hearing the present Ministers,
is not the scandalizing threatened Matthew. 18.6.
Should it, for Arguments sake, be granted, (though in truth it be not so) That
it is the liberty of Saints, to hear the present Ministers; yet many of the
sincere Lambs of Christ, being stumbled, grieved and scandalized herea^, for
that very reason (^f no more could be said herein) it becomes our sin, (to be
guilty whereof, who can choose but be filled with trembling, that has ever with
seriousness, read that terrible Commination of Christ, Matt. 18.6. Who so shall
offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it were better for him,
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were drowned in the depths
of the Sea?) especially, when those that are thus scandalized, are able to
demonstrate, that their offense is not any peevish humor, or foolish nicety,
but what is too really administered by the actions of their Brethren: When they
shall hear Christ commanding them to separate from every thing of Antichrist,
Revel. 18.4. and therefore from his ministry; and they are in conscience
persuaded, the Ministers of England are such, which they judge, they are able
to demonstrate: When they consider, how the Laws of their dear Lord and
Lawgiver are made void, by the traditions of these ^^e^ended Ministers, whose
Kingship they see them visibly opposing: When they find upon them the
characters of false Prophets and Apostles; and are able to manifest, that they
are deeply guilty of the sin of Idolatry, (from whom they are enjoined by
Christ to turn away:) Yea, when they take a view of the frame of the Spirits of
their now Conforming-Brethren in days past, and the principles were then owned
by them: That they did then (some of them at least) separate from the
Assemblies of England, as not true Churches of Christ; and accounted the
Common Prayer Book Priests, persons not meet to preach, unworthy to be attended
upon in their so doing: and see them now saying, A confederacy with, and
attending upon the ministry of those very persons and things, from whom, not
only Christ has commanded them to separate, but these very Brethren did
formerly decry, and, at least seemingly, abominate; they judge, they have just
ground of Offense given them: Nor can it be denied, but it is indeed so.

Answ. It were indeed very grievous to a Christian, if it were their sin, and
such as brings them under the terrible Commination of Christ, Matthew. 18.6. to
do, what many of the sincere Lambs of Christ (much more those whom this Author
counts such) are stumbled, grieved and scandalized at, for that very reason, if
no more could be said therein: It were to make every honest-hearted Christian,
though simple, a Lawgiver to me, a Pope, a Lord over my conscience, an
infallible Judge, so that what he determines, I may not do or omit, because it
will grieve or offend him without any other reason, why I must not do or omit
it; This sure would take away Christ's King-ship really, and invest every
sincere Lamb of Christ with it, which this Author makes so heinous a thing in
the present Ministers, as to justify separation from them; it would be, to
ascribe dominion to them over my faith, to spoil me of my Christian liberty,
and to make me in almost every thing I do, uncertain what I may do, lest I
grieve some of them, whom I have found to be so scrupulous, and so censorious,
as that they are offended, if there be a prejudice against a person, at every
thing he does or says, if it agree not with their minds. To deliver the
consciences of people from such a slavery (worse than the bondage of the
Mosaical Law) which this principle brings to, I conceive my self bound to do my
best, and to decry it as Antichristian. I think I have read seriously Christ's
Commination, Matthew. 18.6. and I presume my Treatise of Scandalizing shows it to
be meant of other Scandalizing than such as this Author means, to wit, such as
is opposite to receiving them, v. 5. and is with despising, and persecution of
them, v. 10. causing their perdition, v. 8, 9. I dare not say, that the offense
of the sincere Lambs of Christ, is out of a peevish humor, or foolish nicety;
I hope it will not be denied, that they are weak, many of them; I am sure, none
of them are infallible, or free from undue passions and prejudice: And this is
enough to quiet my conscience, in doing what I do, notwithstanding the offense
of many honest Christians, yea and holy learned Preachers. I find cause, I
confess, to mourn on their behalf, and to pity them, whom I have heard or seen
offended at my actions, which they never examine, nor by conference, or
otherwise, enquire into the reasons or equity of them, taking reports upon
trust, and judging them evil, without any brotherly affection, or sober
consideration. I may truly say, my peace of conscience would be desperate* if I
must judge of my self, as they judge of me. I will not mention my own
experiences, lest I should be thought to particularize; but I find an Author,
one Paybody, in a Treatise about Kneeling at the Lords Supper, Printed 16.9.
part 3. chapter 5. p. 438. saying, concerning the Professors of his time, opposing
Kneeling (and I think opposers of the present Ministers now are too like them)
thus,

Let not our Brethren be offended, that I say, Many of their Professors are set
on work by humor and prejudice. For,

1. They which profess, in great resolution, without grounds or reasons, that
is, which merely profess, in imitation of certain men of note, or for company
of the best sort of Christians, (as they judge opposers to be) or out of ill
opinion conceived of conformable persons, or Church government, are led by
humor and prejudice.

2. So are they which cannot abide to be instructed or directed by them of
contrary judgment; despising the words and writings of such, before they know
them.

3. They, which upon discourse, hearing many things which they cannot satisfy
their consciences in, do yet never seek to have their doubts resolved, but rest
in one song, say what one can to the contrary.

4. They which dare avow the necessity of confessing against Kneeling* upon
pain of eternal damnation, charging other men, in the deepest obligation that
may be, to stand out; and yet, upon some other man's declaration of the lawful
liberty of Kneeling, at some time, can be content, without gainsaying, to
profess, they never studied the point.

5. They which make no conscience of slandering, backbiting, conformity to the
world in vaniti^s of apparel, pleasure, and scandalous covetousness,
unfaithfulness in their callings, unjustice in their dealings, and such like,
in opposing Kneeling, are led by humor.

6. They which have confessed themselves to be convinced of the lawfulness, and
yet will not, or would, but for their discredit in the world, specially among
the persons of that side. But there is nothing more manifest, than, that many
of your Professors are thus and thus disposed and carried, which I doubt not,
but I can particula^ly maintain, so far, as outward expressions can discover
the inward meaning or purpose. Now I know you would not have us bound to
abstain from Kneeling (may I not say, Hea^ing) for avoiding the scandal of such
persons.

But, says this Author, Their offense is too really administered by the actions
of their Brethren. But who do suggest these actions, to be a sufficient reason
of separation, but such as this Author (who is indeed, with others like minded,
the true Scandalizer, or he by whom the offense comes) or else it is the
offended persons own inference, from the real or imaginary actions of their
Brethren, of a necessity of separation, that scandalizeth him. That which this
Author brings here, is far from a Demonstration. We find, Revel. 18.4. that
St. John heard a voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her^ my people, that ye
be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. But to
^erch out of this passage, this Proposition, Christ commands them to separate
from every thing of Antichrist; and to infer this conclusion, and therefore
from his ministry, needs a Delian Diver, or cunning Alchymist, or Sophister,
that can deduce quidlibet ex quolibet. It is plain, that the Exhortation is, to
go out of Rome, called Babylon, chapter 17, 18. Nor do I gainsay, that it is meant
of it, as it is corrupted by the Papacy: Nor do I question, but the Papal
monarchy is an Antichristian state; and that, though the plain meaning is no
more, but that Gods people (whereof I doubt not, some are, and will be in Rome
when it shall be destroyed) should abandon that place before it be destroyed, to
avoid participation of its sins and plagues; yet too, it may be understood of
communion with the Papacy in their Idolatry and Heresies. But it is a wild
conceit, to make every thing done or used by Popes, to be a thing of
Antichrist; much more is it, to make the ministry of the Ministers of England,
the ministry of the Pope, when it is so directly contrary to the Pope, and
Popish Doctrine and Worship expressly abjured and abhorred by them. How
frivolous his proofs are, of the present Ministers opposing visibly Christ's
Kingsh^p, having the characters of false Prophets, of being guilty of Idolatry,
is showed already. What the frame of the spirits of the present Conformists is,
or has been, God only, who is the searcher of hearts, is fit to judge, what
their principles were formerly, and are now, is to be known, either by those
that have conversed with them, or heard them preach, or read their writings:
sure every sincere Lamb of Christ is neither fit nor able to judge or examine
the truth of any number of Conformists spirits or principles; and therefore, if
these alterations, which are here mentioned, be the ground of the offense that
is taken against them, it cannot be a just ground of their taking offense. If
it were, there were just ground of offense given to separate from the
Separatists. Not to mention what of old was charged upon the Brownists, whose
spirits and principles were such* as made many, as holy persons, as England
yielded, to dehort the godly from joining with them in their way of Separation:
Nor what either Mr. Edwards, in his Gangraena; or Mr. Baillee, in his
Disswasive; or Mr. Weld, in his Story of the Antinomians, have written, of the
state of the Congregational Churches, The Elders and Messengers of the
Congregational Churches, in the Preface to their D^claration of their Faith and
Order, in their meeting at the Savoy, October 12. 1658. say, It is true, That
many sad miscarriages, divisions, breaches, fallings off from holy Ordinances
of God, have along this time of tentation, been found in some of our Churches;
yet they do not at all stumble us, as to the truth of our way* had they been
many more: And avow this as their great Principle, That, amongst all Christian
States and Churches, there ought to be vouchsafed a forbearance, and mutual
indulgence, unto Saints of all persuasions, that keep unto, and hold fast the
necessary Foundations of Faith and Holiness, in all other matters extra
fundamental, whether of Faith or Order. Mr. Weld. in his Answer to Mr.
Rathband, heretofore denied not the Congregations Parochial in England, to be
true Churches, though impure: And Mr, Norton, in his Answer to Appollonius, chapter
16. says, We reject the Separatists, who distinguish not between the Church,
and the Impurities of the Church: Whence the great crime of Schism. Yet this
Author, not considering, that the Congregational men disclaim his rigid
separation, avows separation as commanded by Christ from the Church of England,
as no true Church; and condemns hearing the present Ministers, as the Ministers
of Antichrist, though they preach the Gospel of Christ, because of some defects
conceived in their calling, and some impurities, real or imaginary, in their
worship, as if it were saying A Confederacy, forbidden Isai. 8 12. and a just
ground of offense given to the sincere Lambs of Christ, in that they do not
separate from the Assemblies of England. But he has not yet done, but adds,

Sect. 6. The Separatists give more just cause of Offense to godly sober
Christians, than the Conformists do to them.
If it be yet further said, Object. 2. But if I do not go to hear the
Preachers of this day, many truly godly and sober Christians will be offended
at my forbearance; so that whether I hear, or whether I forbear, I shall
offend. To this I answer,

1 That, granting the case to be as is suggested, (though perhaps somewhat
else, upon a serious and strict search, may be found to lie at the bottom of
our Conformity, beyond what is here pleaded: I am very apt to believe, were but
a Toleration granted, it is not the fear of offending any, would cause our
conforming Brethren to attend upon the ministry of the present Priests of
England. Yet supposing it to be as is intimated) we ask

1. Do you look upon your going to hear, as your duty, or merely as your
liberty? If the first, let it be proved from any positive precept of Christ,
and we are satisfied: if the second, you are bound by many solemn injunctions
(which are at least reduceable to the moral Law) not to use your liberty to
scandalize your Brethren.

2. Let both parties be weighed in an upright balance, such as you judge to be
offended with you for not hearing, and such as are offended thereat: I am bold
to say, That the last mentioned, for number, holiness, spirituality, and
tenderness, do far surmount the former, who will really be scandalized at your
forbearance.

3. Let also the grounds of the offense on both sides be weighed: the one are
offended at you, That you build not up in practice, in a day of trouble; and
cause thereby the enemies of the Lord to triumph and blaspheme, what in a day
of liberty, you did, in your preaching and practice, pull down and destroy: The
other, because of your disobedience to what they are satisfied, and you your
selves once were, God is calling you to (viz. to have nothing to do with,
separate from this generation of men.) But,

4. That it is your duty (especially if in a Church-relation) to meet together,
as a people called and picked by the Lord out of the Nations of the world,
cannot be denied: The neglect of which, is charged by the Lord, as the first
step to Apostasy, Heb. 10.25. Be you in the practice of this duty, and see what
spiritual Saint will be offended at you; if any should, you might have peace
therein: you doing your duty, no just cause of Scandal is given. Yet further,

5. Consider on which side the Cross lies, which the flesh, and fleshly
interest is most opposite to, whether in going, or forbearing to go to hear
these men: Usually, that is the way of God, that has most of the Cross in it,
and the flesh is most struggling and contesting against. But thus much of the
7th. Argument.

Answ. If the case be granted as is suggested, the same Argument, which proves
it unlawful to hear the present Ministers, proves it unlawful not to hear them,
unless omission may not be said to scandalize, which is contrary to Matthew.
17.27. No serious and strict search of men, can find what lies at the bottom of
men's conformity, till God discover it. It is not fit to insinuate conceits of
others, which beget evil surmises in us of them; true charity believes all
things, 1 Cor. 13.7. It is a fruit of malignity, to say, I am very apt to
believe, what may beget evil prejudice in me, or another, toward a Brother.
But what if there were an embracing a Toleration, if granted? This would only
show, That they did not tie themselves to the present ministry; not that then,
or now, they hold it unlawful to hear them; nor that their hearing is only to
avoid offense: but for other reasons conjunct with it, which may be lawfully
aimed at in the same act. Sure it is not evil in doing that which is lawful to
arm at our own peace, and other outward advantage besides the avoiding of
offense. If a man were disposed to retaliate, it might perhaps be told this
Author, that perhaps somewhat else lay at the bottom, besides his not offending
the Lambs of Christ: that he did separate heretofore, it may be credit*
preferment, power and gain, lay that way; it may be, adherence to a party,
interest in their affections, that, I say no more, retains him still in this
way: Yet would he take this ill; and why he should do to other, what he would
not they should do to him, I see no cause: Christ taught otherwise, Matthew. 7.1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 12. But to the question, I answer, It is their duty to hear the
present Ministers, while they preach the Gospel, or Word of God: And though, by
immediate precept, a man is not bound to hear this or that particular Minister,
of this or that way of Church Government or persuasion, but is at liberty to
choose, as may be (all things considered) for his convenience; yet, if other
things concur, he ought to hear such, as the providence of God has placed
over him, or near his habitation, though he be not chosen by himself to be his
Pastor, which I think may be proved from 1 Th^s 5.12. Heb. 13.17 John 10*27
Mark 4.23. How we are to avoid Scandalizing our Brethren, is showed above: But
it favors of Schism, to appropriate the term [ Brethren] to Christians of our
persuasion, or of our society. Who exceed in number, holiness, spirituality and
tenderness, is a hard thing to determine. Vivorum difficilis est censura. Who
can tell what measure of these qualifications there is in them that are living?
Who can point out, who are such, who not? Who can tell, what men may prove, for
all their fair shows? How is it possible for this Author, or any other, to
number them, compare, weigh them in an upright balance? May not those be more
carnal, yea very hypocrites, which he counts spiritual Saints? Are not he, and
all others, specially of his way of separation, most apt to magifie those who
jump with him in his way; and to disparage dissenters? Are not the sincere
Lambs of Christ oftentimes carried away with false shows, and partial
affections, and wrong reports? What a Lesbian leaden rule does this Author then
give, whose offense is to be avoided, rather than another? Yea, the rule is
against his scope: For if those non-hearers be such holy spiritual persons, as
he makes them, there is the less danger of offending them. Yet I dare not grant
it they are: The experience the world has had of the Brethren of the
Congregational way, has yet given us no such assurance of their surpassing
holiness, but that they have been, many of them* ca^nal, and walked as men.
Have not they, even some of the prime leaders of them, showed as much passion,
pride. covetousness, self-seeking, and other sinister affections, as others of
different ways? Sure Hildersham, Ball, Bradshaw, Gataker, and many other, who
have opposed the way of Separation of old, and of late have given as much proof
of their holiness, spirituality and tenderness as Johnson, Ainsworth, Robinson,
and others, in Old or New- England, or Holland have done* Nor do I think any of
the Congregational way have exceeded, I will not say the martyred Bishops in Q.
Mary's days, but even late Bishops, Usher, Bedel, Potter, and others of the
Prelatical Ministers and Churches, in holiness, spirituality and tenderness.
Let the Reader pardon my just indignation at this rotten and stinking course of
puffing up his own party, and disparaging dissenters, which can never tend to
clear truth, and beget righteous judgments in men, but to delude men with
specious pretenses, and ^oment divisions. Non est ex personis fides aestimanda,
sed ex fide persona, said Tertullian, Truth is not to be measured by the
persons, but the persons by truth. If we must know our duty, by this Authors
rule, we must leave studying the holy Scripture, and study men. Every weak
Christian must take upon him an impossible task, to weigh two parties in an
upright balance, one offended at hearing the present Ministers, and the other
for not hearing them, and both being conceived godly and sober Christians,
judge which party is most numerous, holy, spiritual, and tender. Nor is the
next direction much better. It supposes, that they who conform, whether
Ministers or h^arers, blame the Separatists, that they do not build up in
practice in a day of trouble, what in a day of liberty they did in their
preaching and practice pull down and destroy: and thereby cause the enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme, and that this is the ground of the offense on the one
side: That they are disobedient to what they are satisfied, and the Conformists
Ministers, or hearers of them, or both, once were; that God is calling them to
have nothing to do with, to separate from this generation of men, and that this
is the ground of the offense on the other side: and that the ground of the
offense is more just on the side of these later. These words are aenigmatical,
and require an O^dipus to unriddle them. However, this I conceive is his
meaning. That the godly and sober Christians have no reason to be offended at
him, and others of his way, that, what in their preaching and practice, he and
they did pull down and destroy, conce^ning the P^elatical conforming Preachers,
their communion, and Church government, and worship by the Common Prayer Book;
they do not by conformity in hearing and communion build up; because if they
should do so, they should cause the opposite party (whom he counts the enemies
of the Lord) to triumph, that they have brought them to recantation, and
returning to what they had left; and to blaspheme, or speak evil of the holy
way of endeavoring Reformation they formerly took in the day of liberty,
because they are now fallen into a day of trouble: On the other side, That this
Author, and those of his way, being satisfied, that God is calling all godly
sober Christians to have nothing to do with, but to separate from this
generation of men, that is, Ministers that conform to the Common Prayer Book,
and Episcopal Government; and that these now hearers of them, were once
satisfied of the same; that yet they should disobey this calling of God, and
hold communion with them, have most just cause of offense for their so doing.
But I presume the godly sober Christians in the Objection, were never satisfied
with this way of separation, which this Author says, God calls them to, but
though they have been for Reformation, yet not for such violent practices and
preaching, as, it may be gathered, this Author has been for, as to pull up
root and branch of the old form of Government, to unsettle all the Ministers,
to set up itinerant Preachers* any gifted Brethren, though many of them never
studied Divinity, but had gotten some ability by hearing Preachers, and other
ways, to speak of practical points, without any ability to convince
gainsayers; and that they should take away the frame of parochial Churches, and
gather Churches out of Churches, which should, though but a few, be an entire
Church within themselves for government, without appeal or subordination to any
other Minister or Synod; that they should be tied to use no Form, no not the
Lords Prayer; in effect, that there should be, as some were wont to speak,
overturning, overturning, overturning, without settling any thing, making the
Pastors eligible by every small company, that should call themselves a Church,
who should admit and excommunicate by most voices, censure their Pastor, desert
him, allot him maintenance, and deprive him, as they saw cause Sure the godly
sober Ch^istians, who now are offended at this Authors separation, were then
offended, as many of their writings then did show, and the Apology of the
ejected Non-conformists lately has showed, p 136. of the 2 d. Edition; and
particularly at that eminent Independent, who would not have the Lords Prayer
used in the prescript form of words, p. 10. which, and the like courses, they
conceive were in the day of liberty evil, and occasions of the day of trouble,
and if persisted in, likely to bring more trouble on themselves and others, who
neither then, nor now did, o^ do approve of such rigid separation, or
deformation of all, instead of Reformation, conceiving a middle way might agree
better with truth and peace* They condemn such heavy censures of them that a^e
of the opposite party, as if they were the enemies of the Lord, a generation of
men they were called by God to have nothing to do with, but to separate from
them, since they are Christians of the same Faith, they judge, that this Author,
and such as acted, as he seems to have done, should have brought glory to God,
and peace to their own consciences, if they had un-said those things, which
abusing their liberty, they vented heretofo^e* and did endeavor to promote
union, as they have done division, and this would tend to their honor, as
Augustine's Ret^acta^ions did, and would not cause the enemies of the Lord to
triumph and blaspheme, but both them, and all sober godly Christians, to
rejoice, and bless God for their so doing, who are now justly offended at these
Separatists pertinacy, and have, by their moderate conformity in hearing
Ministers, who preach the Gospel, and joining in the public worship of
prayer, and the communion, given no just cause of offense to this Author, or
any other. Nor do they think i^ their duty to meet together as a sepa^ate
Church: Nor do they conceive, that Heb. 10.^5 requires such assembling, but
that the fo^saking the assembling there meant, was the forsaking the assembl^ng
of Christ^ans, and going back from Christianity to Judaism, as the whole series
of the Text shows; and that their joining in the public assemblies in
England* is agreeable to the precept there, and that it ^ends no^ to Ap^stacy.
But the Assemblies, according to the Separatists p^inciples, are Schismatical,
and that spiritual Saints will be offended at them, at giving just cause of
Scandal, nor can they expect peace by so doing: Nor is that which is here, made
a rule [(...) that way, that has most of the cr^ss in it;] right, suffe^ings
being not ^ight, unless the cause be for God Sometimes the ^onforming (...),
sometimes the Popish Pr^est^, have been under sufferings; yet I suppose this
Author would not have men go their way; and therefore his rule is not sale,
until the cause for which we are to suffer, be proved to be for God.

Sect. 7. Hearing the present Ministers, may be without participation with them
in sin.
Arg. 8. That which Saints cannot do, without being guilty of partaking with
others in their sin, is utterly unlawful for them to do: But the Saints cannot
attend upon the ministry of England, without being gu^lty of partaking with
them in their sin: Therefore. The major Proposition is clearly bottomed upon
Scripture, Psalm. 50.^8. Ephesians. 5.7 1* Tim. 5.22. 2 John 11. Revel. 18.4. which
might be abundantly demonstrated, were it needful: Sure that God, who commands
me to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5.22. never enjoined,
expects no^ that I should be in the practice of what, without sin, cannot be
performed by me. The (...) P^^p^sition, That the Saints cannot attend upon the
m^^^stry of England, without being partakers with them in their sin, will admit
of a speedy dispu^^h Two things are briefly to be enquired into. 1. What that,
or those sins are, we suppose the Ministers of England to be guilty of? 2. How
it will appear, That any person's amending upon their minist^y, renders him
guilty of partaking with them therein. Of the former we have already trea^^d,
and proved, (beyond what any are able to say to the contrary) That they are
guilty of the sins of worshipping God in a way that is not of his appointment;
of acting in the holy things of God, by virtue of an Antichristian power,
office, or calling; of opposing really the Prophetical and Kingly Office of
Christ; of using and conforming to modes and rites in worship, not appointed by
the Lord, that have been abused to Ido^atry, etc. Nor is it denied by our
conforming Brethren, but with some of these things, the present Ministers of
England may be justly charged: That they worship God after the way of the
Common Prayer Book, with modes and rites used in the Papacy, cannot be denied:
Nor can their undue administration of that great ordinance of our Lord Jesus,
of b^eaking bread to all, according to the form therein prescribed* That they
are Ordained, and some of them re-ordained by the Episcopacy, is also known. I
ask, are these things the sin and evil of th^se men, or are they not? If they
are not, Why did not our preaching Brethren receive the Ordination from the
Bish^ps these received? Yea, why do not our half-conforming Brethren attend
upon the reading of the Service used, join with them in the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, as administered by them? Does not their absenting themselves
herefrom, abundantly demonstrate, that they in their consciences are persuaded,
that, it is the sin and evil of the present Priests of England thus to act, and
from such a mission, in the worship of the Lord?

Answ. The major Proposition is granted: To what he says he has already
proved, answer is made before, That the present Ministers are justly charged by
him; or that they worship God with modes and rites Popish; that their b^eaking
bread to all, according to the form prescribed, is undue; or their Ordination
requires proof. The not receiving Ordination, may be from another cause, than
persuasion in conscience, that it is the sin and evil of the Ministers, that they
act by such a mission, perhaps they cannot subscribe to what is required. They
may forbear the Communion, not because Ministers sin in not keeping back some,
but because they scruple the gesture prescribed. Here then is no proof of their
sin, let us see how, if it were granted, that they did sin, participation in
their guilt is proved.

As for the Second, says he, That the hearing the present Ministers of
England, is that which renders a man guilty of being partaker with them in
their sin; the consideration of the several ways persons may be justly charged
with being guilty of partaking with others in their sin, will abundantly
demonstrate the* truth thereof. To instance in a few particulars: Then may
persons be justly changed as guilty hereof. 1. When they are found any way
consenting with them in their sin. Ps. 50.18. When thou saw a thief, then
thou consentedst with him: and have been partaker with the adulterers. It Is not
the doing of the act, that was done by these wicked persons, that is here
called, partaking with them, but a secret consenting with them therein. 2. When
they do that which has a real tendency to encourage persons in their sin. 2
John 11. Receive them not into your houses, bid them not God speed: for he that
bids them God speed, is partaker of their evil deeds. 3. When they neglect
the doing of those duties, which the Lord requires at their hands, for the
reclaiming of them from their sin; such are watching over, rebuking,
admonishing, first privately, then by two, and in case of obstinacy and
perseverance therein, telling it to the Church: which are duties eminently
c^mprised in the ensuing Scriptures, 1 These. 5 14. Heb. 3.12, 13. and 10.24,
25. Levit. 19.17. Mat. 18 15, 16, 17. 4. When they (notwithstanding all that
they have done, or can do, being under an utter incapacity of proceeding
further therein) perceive them to persevere in their sin, shall still continue
to hold communion with them, and not separate from them Rev. 18.4. Come out of
her, my people; left being partakers of her sins, ye receive of her plagues.
The abiding with obstinate persevering Offenders (as it is against positive
injunctions of the most High, Romans 16.17. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. 1 Timothy 6.5.
Ephesians. 5.8, 11. Rev. 18.4. So is it in the last place instanced in) assigned by
the Spirit to be one way of partaking with others in their sins. Not to
multiply more particulars, let us, in a few words, make application of these
remarkes to the business in hand. Is there any thing in the world, that carries
a greater brightness and evidence with it, than this, That the hearing the
present Ministers of England, is to be partakers with them in their sin? Is not
our so doing, a secret consenting with them, and encouraging of them in their
evil deeds? Is this to discharge those duties incumbent upon us (if we indeed
look upon them as Brethren) for their reclaiming? Yea, is this to come out of,
and separate from them? What less? So then, except it can be proved, that the
particulars instanced in, are not some of those ways, whereby persons do
become guilty of partaking with other men's sins: Or, that to attend upon the
present Ministers of England, is not what does symbolize with some one, more,
or all of them, (which can never be done) it evidently follows, That it is not
lawful for Saints to hear the present Ministers of England, the doing whereof,
is apparently a partaking with them in their evil deeds.

Answ. I grant, consent in sin, doing that which has a real tendency to
encourage persons in their sin, neglect of rebuking, admonishing, when they are
our duty, makes us guilty of others sins. Nor do I except against the Texts
brought to prove these, except that Mat. 18.15, 16, 17. which I have said
before, in my Answer to the Preface of this Book, sect. 15. is a rule, not of
reproving all sorts of sins, but only of particular injuries; and that telling
the Church, is not telling a particular separate Congregation in the
Independent way, but such a number of Brethren (as may be fit to compose the
difference) above two or three: and that not of necessity, so as if the
Complainant did not do, it should be his sin; but as of indulgence and
convenience, as being the way fittest to rectify the Offender. The last way of
partaking with other men's sins is not true, to wit, that if after admonition,
and obstinacy of the Offender, we join in hearing the Word of God, praying with
him, receiving the Lords Supper, we are partakers with the Minister that
preaches, prays or administers the Lords Supper, in his personal sins, such
as are acting by an unlawful mission, or other, using a sinful irregular way in
his calling: Nor do the Texts alleged prove it. The first, Romans 16.17. is an
admonition to them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine
they had learn^d, which is nothing to the avoiding of him, that teaches the
same Doctrine that the Apostles taught, because of his personal sins: It may
more fitly be applied against such as this Author, who causes divisions and
offenses by his doctrine of Separation from them that hold and teach the true
Faith, which is contrary to the Doctrine of St. Pa^l, R^m. 15.5, 6. The coming
out from among Infidels, being (...) not touching the unclean thing, that is,
the Idol, or un^ighteousness. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16, 17. is nothing to prove a
separation from hearing, or joining in prayer, or the communion, with a
Minister that preaches the truth, prays to God, in the name of Christ, for
things agreeable to Gods will administers the Lords Supper in remembrance of
Christ's death, because of his personal sins: Partaking with a Minister in these
things, in this case, is not having fellowsh^p with the unfruitful works of
darkness, or being partakers (...) who^^mongers, or unclean persons, or
covetous, Idolaters, forbidden Eph^s. 5 7.17. It is nothing for, but against
this Authors pu^pose, which the Apostle charge Timothy, 1 T^m 6.3, 4, 5. That
he should withdraw himself, that is, not (...) to himself in the work of the
ministry, such as (...) otherwise than St. Paul had instructed Timothy; that
consen^ not to wh^lesome words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ (...) the
Doctrine which is according to godliness. As for the last Text though it be
still in the mouths of the Separatists, and is ridiculously applied to every
thing, that they call Babylon, as Bishops, Common Prayer, Ministers of any
party besides their own, Tithes, at the last by the Quintomonarchians, to all
the p^esent Rulers, so it is by this Author often u^ged, still besides the
purpose of the holy Ghost, it being only a warning for the people of God to
come out of Rome, whether by local departure from the City, or by leaving the
communion of the Papacy in Doctrine and worship, which is nothing to a
separation from hearing, or joining with the Ministers in holy things, because
of their personal sins. Nevertheless, this Author cracks of abundant
demonstration; and, as if nothing in the world carried a greater brightness and
evidence with it, than this, That the hearing the present Ministers of England,
is, to be partakers with them in their sins: just as if one should say, He that
heard Judas preach the Gospel, was partaker with him in his theft, which is
more like the inference of a man crazed in his intellectuals, than a sober
minded man But because some men's confident words prevail with some persons
addi^ted to them, more than sound reason, let us consider what brightness is in
his application* Is not our so doing, says he, a secret consenting with them,
and encouraging of them in (...) evil deeds? Mavelous brightness! clear
evidence! No wonder he applauds himself like an Archimedes, and cries (...)*
(...), I have found, I have found the Demonstra^^on; and that his followers add
their plaudite thereto (...) we mo^^s do not see the brightness of this
consequence* A Christian Professor goes to hear a Minister that preaches the
Word of God truly, therefore he consents to his intrusion into his place; he
does openly hear, therefore he does secretly consent; he applies himself to
learn the word of God from him, therefore he encourages him in his evil deeds.
It is too favorable a censure, to say, his Argument is a baculo ad angulum as
if a man argued, the staff stands in the corner, therefore it will rain to
morrow; he seems to me (...) to speak contradictions. He that goes to hear him
preach Gods Word, does consent with him, that teaches, in doing well, and
encourage him to preach the truth; not, as this Author says, in evil deeds: it
may more truly be said, that this Author, and other Separatists, are guilty of
sin, in not consenting with the Preacher, but discouraging him in well doing.
Did not Ministers heretofore, and perhaps this Author, complain, that their
auditories were thin, that good people withdrew from public exercises to
p^ivate meetings, that this was a discouragement to them in their work, and is
it now to go hear them an encouragement in their evil deeds? Is not this to
blow hot and cold with the same breath? We silly Ignaro's think, we ought not
to discourage any who preach the truth of the Gospel, be they Episcopal,
Presbyterian, Independent, Antipaedobaptist, by our absence, or exceptions
against him for his personal failings, but to countenance and encourage him by
our presence and otherwise, and think we have the example of St Paul, Philip
1.18. to warrant us therein, and marvel that such should argue thus, who blame
them that silence good Preachers* for not assenting to the Liturgy, not
considering,, that they may thus argue, If we should permit the Separatists to
preach, we should consent secretly with them, and encourage them in their evil
deeds, such as they conceive their gathering a separate Congregation, and
taking their mission from it, to be. Yet we have more of this doughty
Demonstration, in a Socratical way of disputing, by questioning, Is this to
discharge those duties incumbent upon us (if we indeed look upon them as
Brethren) for their reclaiming? It seems it can hardly go down with this
Author, to call them Brethren, their conformity has unchristened them. But I
answer, If it be not the discharging their duty, for the reclaiming them (which
as it is stated, would perhaps be rather their sin, than their duty) yet it is
to discharge their duty in hearing Gods Word, which is so far from hindering
them in the discharge of any duty incumbent on them, for the reclaiming of
Ministers from any sin, they are to reprove in them, that it rather fits them
for it. For the hearing them, shows, they do not, as this Author, count them
their, or the Lords enemies, which makes a reproof to be better taken, and is
agreeable to the Apostles rule, even when we shun the company of any that is
unruly, to count him not as an enemy, but to admonish him as a brother, 2 These.
3.15. But does indeed this Author think it the duty of every hearer, to
reclaim, or else separate from every Minister, that either enters into his
ministry unduly, or does not discharge his function as he should? Suppose a
John de Cluse is unduly made an Elder, or a Johnson excommanicate his Brother
and Father rashly, an Ainsworth disagree with Johnson or Robinson, about
private communion with the members of the Church of England, a Wheel-wright
vent Antinomian errors, must every hearer reclaim them, or separate from them,
or be guilty of their sin? They that leave the Church of England, to be in
Congregations of such principles, would find it to be matter of repentance: to
avoid Episcopal government, to be under popular, would be like Tinkers work, to
stop one hole and to make two; under show of better Discipline, to introduce
Anarchy and confusion. But enough of answer to this wild Argument, in which the
Author accuses deeply, but brings no proof, only puts questions for proofs,
and would have the Defendant prove himself Not guilty, when it concerned the
Accuser to prove his Indictment. I hasten to the remainder.

CHAP. 9. ARG. 9.
Sect. 1. Separation of some, from other Christians, is no institution of
Christ.
THat the doing whereof does cast contempt upon the ways and institutions
(some or more of them) of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false way of
worship and rebellion against him, is utterly unlawful for the Saints to do:
But the hearing of the present Ministers of England is that, the doing whereof
does cast contempt upon the ways and institutions (some one or more of them)
of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a false way of worship and rebellion
against him: Therefore. The major is laid down in such full, clear and evident
expressions, bottomed upon Scripture, and right reason, as carry a brightness
with them, that none but such as are desperately and judiciously blinded, will
or can gainsay. The minor ( or second Proposition) viz That the hearing of the
present Ministers of England, is the doing of that which does cast contempt
upon the ways and institutions of our Lord Jesus, and hardens persons in a
false way of worship and rebellion against him, is by our dissenting Brethren
gainsaid.

Answ. If the major be understood of real, and not only imaginary, and in the
opinion of men; of it self per se, and not by accident, through the prejudice
or ill disposition of some persons, casting contempt and hardening; the major is
granted, and the minor denied: otherwise it is not granted. But let us attend
the proof of the minor.

Three things, says he, are therein asserted. 1. That our hearing these
persons, is that which casts contempt upon the ways and institutions of
Christ. 2ly. That it hardens persons in a false way of worship. 3ly. That it
hardens and encourages souls in their rebellion against the Lord. As for the
first, A brief observation of some of the institutions of Christ, clearly
bottomed upon the Scripture, will abundantly evince its original to be from
God. First then, That Separation from the world, and men of the world; from all
ways of false worship, and the inventions of men thereabout; until the Saints
of the most High be apparently a people dwelling alone, and not reckoned among
the Nations, (however it be decryed, and found harsh in the ears of carnal men)
is one grand institution, a man may run and read in the following Scriptures,
Numb. 23.9. Joh. 15.9. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 17, 19. Ephesians. 5.8, 11. 2 Timothy* 3.5.
Hos. 4 15. Revel. 18.4. Prove. 4.7. (Nor is it denied by some of our conforming
Brethren.)

Answ. By the world, and men of the world, in opposition to the Saints of the
most High, are understood, such professed Christians, as are not visible
Saints, able to give such an account of their conversion, and proof of their
integrity, as the Elders and members of a gathered Church, in the
Congregational way, are satisfied with, to be sufficient for their admission
into their Church: Or that enter not into Church* covenant, explicit or
implicit: And dwelling alone, is meant either of joining alone with such a
Church in hearing, praying, and Sacraments; or of dwelling alone in their
habitations. Not being reckoned among the Nations, may be understood, either of
not being members of a national or parochial Chureh, or not under a national
Government, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil; or not taking upon them an^
Offices or employments in either such Church or Commonwealth. In none of these
senses* is the Proposition proved, by any of the Texts alleged concerning the
first part of the separation from the world, or men of the world; but the
Proposition is both false and dangerous. The first Text, Numb 23 9. is only a
prophecy of Balaam, concerning the people of Israel after the flesh, that they
should dwell alone, and not be reckoned among the Nations, to infer thence,
any of his sorts of separation, to be the institutions of Christ, concerning
the Christian Churches, is without any show of reason; it might yield better
proof, for a national Church Christian, against this Author, if any institution
of Christ, concerning the Ch^istian Church visible, could be thence deduced.
John 15.19. Christ says to his Disciples, If ye were of the world, the world
would love his own: but because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you
out of the world, therefore the world hates you. And it is true, that the
Saints of the most High are not of the world, that is, that party that are
opposite to Christ, that hate him, and the profession of his name, and
accordingly hate them that are for Christ, as v. 18. shows; but that, by the
world, is meant, a national or parochial church, or national State, Common
wealth, Kingdom, City, or House, as such, because of the mixture of good and
bad, is most false. It is true, that Christ chose the Apostles, and other
Christians, out of the world, by his calling, by the Gospel, and the work of
his Spirit, that they might not be united to the world, in their enmity against
him, or his word; but be a peculiar people to himself, zealous of good works:
Not by any institution to separate themselves from other Christians by
profession, into a Congregational Church, contra-distinct from national, or
parochial, in the Episcopal, or Presbyterian way of Discipline, by an explicit
or implicit Church covenant; or into a plantation or body Politic or
Oeconomick, independent on any civil Government or Governors of the Nations. 2
Cor. 6.14, 15 17, 19. or rather 18. (for 18. is the last v. of that chapter)
has been, and so have Ephesians. 5.8, 11. Rev. 18.4. in the last Section of the
Answer to the 8th chapter, showed to be impertinently alleged, for proof of
such a Separation as is here meant. Nor is it proved, 2 Timothy 3.5. but it is a
precept for Timothy to turn away, either in respect of arbitrary society, or in
respect of associating with such, as are there described, in the work of the
ministry, or other employment, as, wherein they would be either treacherous to
him, or a hinderance, or a blot to him Hos* 4.15. is only a precept unto Judah,
of not being Idolatrous as Israel. Prove. 14.7. is a precept, advising men in
prudence, That they go from the presence of a foolish man, when they perceive
not in him the lips of knowledge. To allege Texts, so far from the proving of
what they are brought for, shows rather a mind willing to cheat honest and weak
people, than any regard to truth or honesty. And, as I said, the position is
false. For it supposes Christ to have instituted such a Separation, as he has
told us in sundry parables, shall not be till the end of the world, Matthew.
13.30, 40, 49. such as neither Christ, in the seven Epistles to the seven
churches of Asia, nor St. Paul in that to the Corinthians, or any other, ever
urged: such as never was attempted, but it was judged schismatical, and proved
unhappy in the conclusion: And it is dangerous, since it puts persons upon
withdrawing their subjection, not only from Ecclesiastical rulers, but also
from civil and household Rulers, that are counted the world, or men of the
world, that they may be a people dwelling alone, and not reckoned among the
Nations; which would overthrow also all States, bodies politic, and household
government, and is contrary to Romans 13.1. 1 Cor. 7.20, 24. It is added.

Sect. 2. Meeting of separated Christians, as a distinct body, is not Christ's
institution.
Secondly, That Saints separate from the world, should frequently meet
together, as a distinct body therefrom, for the edification and building up of
each other in the way and will of God, according to the gifts bestowed upon
them, is so evidently asserted, as the institution of our alone King and
Lawgiver in the Scripture, that it cannot be gainsaid, Mal 3.16. 1 These 5.11.
Heb. 3.12 Jude 20. Heb. 10.24, 25. 1 Cor. 12.9. Acts 12.12. and 18.23. Ephesians
5.19. James 5.16. 1 These. 5.14.

Answ. It is granted, That Saints separated from the world, that is, professed
unbelievers, should frequently meet for the ed^fication and building up of each
other in the way and will of God: But it is neither agreeable to Scripture, nor
allowable, that one party of Christians should call another part of Christians,
the world, and the men of the world, who own the true Faith of God, and worship
him, because they are not of the same way of Church Government and worship: Nor
is it either in the Scriptures alleged, or any other, that such should meet as
a distinct body from other Christians, holding the true Faith, and worshipping
the true God in Christ, as if they were a severed body from other Christians.
The Separatists, I think, do not rebaptize, but hold Baptism in the Church of
England, as being into the universal Church, right; so in the Brownists
Apology, p. 91. Robinsons Justification against Bernard, p. 349. and
elsewhere: which, if this Author hold, he must hold, that the Saints of the
gathered Churches are one body with other Christians, according to that of St.
Paul, Ephesians. 4.4, 5. There is one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called
in one hope of your calling; one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God and
Father of all, who is ab^ve all, and through all, and in you all. 1 Cor^ 12 12,
13. For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that
one body, being many, are one body: so also is Christ. For by one Spirit we are
all baptized into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond
or free. And therefore it is against the institution of Christ, that Christians
of one profession in point of Discipline and Worship, should meet as a distinct
body, separate from other Christians of different persuasions, unless there
were another Faith, Lord, Baptism, God, whom they worship. Nor do the Texts
justify such separate meetings: Not Mal. 3.16. in which is mention of speaking
one to another, but not as a distinct body from other believers. The same may
be said of 1 These. 5.11. Heb. 3.12, 13. Jude 20. The Assemblies Heb. 10.24, 25.
were not meetings of a distinct body from other believers, but from Hebrew
Infidels 1. Cor. 12.9. or rather, it speaks of gifts given to profit withal,
but not of meeting, much less as a distinct body from other believers Acts 12*
12. mentions a meeting for prayer, but not as a distinct body from other
believers. Acts 18.23. Ephesians. 5.19. James 5.16. 1 These. 5.14. mentions
employing of Gifts for our own and others good, not a Church meeting, as a
distinct body from other Christians. It follows,

Sect. 3. Separated Congregational Churches, in opposition to National, are not
of Christ's institution.
Thirdly, That particular Congregations or Assemblies of Believers, gathered
into one body, for the celebration of the worship of God, (in opposition to any
National Church or Churches whatsoever) is of the appointment of Christ, is
alike evident as the former, Act. 1.1, 3. and 12.1. and 13.14. and 15.22. and
18.22. and 20.14, 28. 1 Cor. 1.2 and 6.4. Act. 9.1. 1 Cor. 16.19. Romans 16.4. 2
Cor. 8.1. Gal. 1.2. Acts 16.4, 5. and 14.23. 1 Cor. 11.12* and 14.4, 5.12, 19 2
Cor. 1.1. Rev. 1.2, 3, 11.

Answ. In these Texts there is mention made of Churches, where the Christians
in different cities, or in a Province are mentioned; and of the Church, where
Christians of one city are mentioned; though it be made a question, whether the
Church, Acts 15.22 and 18.17. be not a Provincial Church: But that this proves
an appointment of Christ, That the Assemblies of Believers, gathered into one
body, for the celebration of the worship of God, by their voluntary agreement,
under Pastors of their own choice, in opposition to any national Church or
Churches whatsoever, should be accounted the only lawful and regular Churches
of Christ, appears not* For there is no mention, in any of the Texts, of any
institution of Christ, or his Apostles: but only thence may be gathered* that
it was then the manner of speech, to call the Christians that dwelt together in
one Town, the Church of such a place; though it is probable they were not
gathered into one body or congregation, for the celebration of the worship of
God, under select Officers: but that they were called the Church of such a
city, as that of Jerusalem, from their habitation, where they had many meetings
from house to house, for celebration of the worship of God; as from Acts 2.46,
47. and other places, was gathered by the Presbyterians, in their Answer to the
dissenting Brethren. Nor was then any such distinction of congregations of
Christians, as that in one city, as the Independents in London, and elsewhere,
did distinguish them; such a number should belong to such a Pastor, and be
termed his Church; and another number be another Church in the same city; but
the Elders of the Christians in Jerusalem, are termed, the Elders of the Church
there, Acts 15.4, 23. and 21.18. Not one an Elder of one part, and another of
another part. Sometimes there is mention made of the Church in the house of
such persons, 1 Cor. 16.19. Romans 16.5. Philem. 2. And yet this proves not, that
particular congregations or assemblies of believers, gathered into one body in
a house, for the celebration of the worship, in opposition to any city, church
or churches whatsoever, is of the appointment of Christ; and therefore no such
appointment of Christ, as here is asserted, can be gathered from the phrase of
calling the christians in one city, the church there; the christians in a
Province or Nation, the churches. A national or universal church, may be as
well collected from 1 Cor. 12.28 where it is said, God has set some in the
church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, since the
Apostles were for the universal church: But for my part, I conceive the
distinction of churches only prudential, not by any constitution of Christ, or
his Apostles. And that however Mr. Rob^r^s^n in his Catechism, Mr. Cotton in
his Way of the Churches of New England, have put it into their definitions of
the visible Church, that it consists of so many, as may meet every Lord's Day,
for all Ordinances: And Mr, Norton in his Answer to Apollonius, chapter 3. makes
such a church, the only lawful political church: And this has been continually
inculcated, that it is necessary, that every person be in such a particular
instituted church, and that is the first seat of Ecclesiastical power, alleging
Matthew. 16.18 and 18.17. to that purpose, and build thereupon their Separation.
Yet I never judged, either the allegation of those Texts, to be pertinent, to
that they produce them for; or that such conclusions as they gather from them,
about the constitution and power of a congregational church, or the necessity
of being a member in such a church, so formed, are rightly deduced. But of this
I need say no more, than what is said in Answer to the Preface of this Book,
sect. 15. and elsewhere.

Sect. 4. To attend only on the ministry of Ministers of Congregational
Churches, is not of Christ's appointment.
F^u^thly, Says this Author, That Christ has appointed Officers of his own,
to act in the holy things of God, in and over th^se Assemblies, whom he
furnishes with gifts every way suiting their employment, to whom, without
turning aside to the voice of strangers, or attending upon the ministry of such
as are not of his appointment, its the duty of Saints to hearken, is very
conspi^uous in the ensuing Scriptures, Ephesians. 4.11. Heb. 13.7, 13 Mat. 24.4,
5.23.24, 1 John 2.18. and 4.1. 2 John 10 Acts 20.29, 30, 31. Revel. 2.14, 15,
16. Which exactly agrees with what was practiced by primitive believers, who it
seems received none, without the testimony of some Brethren of known integrity
in the Churches, 1 Cor. 16.3. Acts 9.26.

Answ. It is true, That Christ has appointed officers of his own, to act in
the holy things of God, in and over the Churches, and that he furnished them
with gifts every way suiting their employment, when he ascended up on high; and
this may be proved from Ephesians. 4.11. and that such officers, as may gather and
perfect his Churches, are of his appointment, and that we are to follow and
obey them, Heb. 13.7.17. and that we are not to hear or attend upon the
Ministry of such strangers as are deceivers, false teachers, Antichrists, that
bring not the same doctrine with the Apostles, that are false prophets, speak
perverse things, Nicolaitans, that teach the doctrine of Balaam, as the Texts
alleged do import; and that S. Paul sent alms to Jerusalem by such messengers
as the Corinthians approved; that S. Paul was not at first admitted into
society with the disciples, till Barnabas brought him to the Apostles, and
informed them of his conversion. But that Christ has appointed Officers only
in and over particular Congregational Churches, or that they only, who are
chosen by such a Church, are his Officers, or that they are furnished by Christ
with gifts every way suiting their employment, as when he ascended up on high;
or that all other Ministers or Preachers are strangers, not of Christ's
appointment, or that the Saints are not to attend on their Ministry, or that
hearing them is turning aside to the voice of strangers, or that none is to be
admitted to Preach, or to Communion in a Congregational Church, or to be heard
Preach, but such as have had testimony of some brethren of known integrity in
the gathered Churches, are not in the Texts alleged, nor in any other part of
the holy Seripture: But these Tenants and Rules of the Congregational Churches,
although the things may be observed in many cases, as agreeing with the state
of Churches at some times, and in prudence may be commended; yet to make them
Institutions of Christ necessary to be observed at all times, and no other
Orders different from these lawful, but rather Antichristian, is an humane
invention, and no better then superstition, which this Author and other
Separatists do so much inveigh against. And indeed to enjoin Christians Members
of a Congregational Church, or other Christians to hear only such Officers, is
both against the doctrine and practice approved in the Scripture, against the
practice of the Congregational Churches themselves, and if it be urged rigidly
according to this principle of this Author, puts such a yoke of bondage on the
consciences of Christians, as is intolerable and pernicious. For 1. The
Ministers of the Gospel are according to Christ's design, for the benefit of all
Christians, not appropriate to this or that particular number of men, so as not
to act as Ministers of his appointment, but in particular gathered Churches. It
may be requisite perhaps for good order and government, to assign particular
places to them, and this is of Divine and Apostolical institution, that in
particular Churches there should be Pastors and Elders, and that they should be
bound to be resident with them, and to feed them: But that no other then such
should be Officers of Christ, is not proved; If there be not Apostles, Prophets
or Evangelists now, as were in the Primitive times, yet I presume none will
deny, that men may be Officers of Christ, that are assigned to no particular
Charge; as Lecturers, Catechists, Readers in the Universities, Members of
Synods, Commissioners for settling Churches in Discipline, for Approbation of
Preachers, and the like; and they, being for the benefit of the Church of God,
either in common, or more specially for some place, may be heard, or else the
end of Christ in giving them should be frustrate. This I gather partly from the
expressions 1 Cor. 12.28. That not only Apostles and Prophets, but also
Teachers are set by God in the Church indefinitely, not in this or that
definite Church, and Pastors and Teachers as well as Apostles, Prophets and
Evangelists, are given by Christ, Ephesians. 4.12. for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
without the determinate assignation of some Saints, or some part of the body,
but making them his gift to any Saints, or any part of the body which his
providence shall order; partly, and chiefly, in that S. Paul counts it sinful
glorying in men, to appropriate this or that Teacher as peculiar to some, and
that because Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, and by the same reason every
Minister was every Christians, in that every Christian was Christ's, and he Gods
1 Cor. 3.22. So that however, every of them cannot be every Christians in use,
so as that he should have jus in re, yet every Christian has a title to every
Minister, or jus ad rem, and therefore to say none are Christ's Officers, but
such as are in the Co^g^egational Churches, and over them, and to attend on the
Ministry of others, is to turn aside to the voice of strangers, is to deprive
Christians of the right God gives them to all the Ministers, and tends to that
glo^ying in men whch the Apostle condemns.

2. We find, that Apollos, said to be a Minister by whom the Corinthians
believed, whom Paul planted, and Apollos watered* 1 Cor. 3.5, 6. was a diligent
Teacher of the things of the Lord at Ephesus, and he disdained not to be
instructed in the way of the Lord more perfectly by Aquila and Priscilla, Acts
18.25, 26. who are also termed St. Paul's (...), fellow laborers in the Lord,
Romans 16.3. which proves, that Christians did and might hear others, besides
Officers of particular instituted Churches; yea that they might and did make
use of the gifts of any, though a woman, that could expound to them the way of
the Lord.

3. That this is against the practice of the Congregational Churches, who do
allow the hearing of gifted brethren that are not Officers, who send Preachers
to convert the natives, such as Mr. Eliat, Mr. Mayhew, who yet are no Officers
to them, who hear the Pastors of other Congregations, than those of which they
are members; which is not agreeable to this Authors principle* That other than
their own Officers are strangers to them; and if it be, as some have delivered,
That the Ministry is limited to that Church, to which he is Pastor, he cannot
Preach as a Minister, when they hear him, nor they hear him under that
consideration; and if a Minister be an Officer only to the people who chose
him, and they are bound to attend on his Ministry who chose him, and not
others, then a Minister cease to be a Minister when his Electors are dead, or
removed; they that choose him not, though he be elected by the major part, are
not to take him for their Minister, nor may hear him, since his voice is the
voice of a stranger.

4. To be tied to attend on such men's Ministry, and not to have liberty to
hear others, puts an yoke of bondage intolerable and pernicious on men's
consciences. 1. In that in case the Minister become empty, or erroneous, yet
being his Minister, and the major part adhere to him, he must also attend on
his Ministry, who is weary of it, and may not use the benefit of another
Ministry more sound and profitable, no, not though it be of great consequence
for the finding out the truth, in that he doubts; which is an art like to the
practice of the Papists, who will allow none of their Church to hear Protestant
Preachers, or confer with them, or read their Books, lest their errors should
be detected. Thus it might come to pass, that if Mr. Ainsworth deliver error,
his people might not go to hear Mr. Paget in the same Town, who might discover
his error; and there is the same reason concerning any in England, as in
London, a Minister to an Independent Church must be heard, though a man of mean
abilities, and perhaps an Antinomian, and none other, though a neighbor,
Godly, Learned Conformist Preach truth profitably near to him. 2. In case a
member of a separated Church, as a woman removed with her husband from London
into the Country, far from her Pastor, have a Godly learned able Teacher, who
is a Conformist near her, and no other, she must not hear him, because a
stranger, none of Christ's Officers, but must rather live without the benefit of
the public Ordinance, though it be to the great decay of that spiritual life,
heat and vigor in godliness, which she once had. These, and more evil
consequences attend the Position of this Author, That those only who are
Christ's Officers in his sense are to be heard. Yet he goes on thus:

Sect. 5. Hearing the present Ministers casts no contempt on Christ's
Institutions.
Not to mention more, let it be weighed, whether the hearing of the present
Ministers of England, does not cast contempt upon these Institutions of Christ.
What is more evidently Preached by such a practice, than 1. That separation
from the Assemblies of England ('though in their Constitution carnal and
worldly) and the worship thereof (although false, and merely of humane
invention) was, and is our sin and evil. 2dly, That it is not by virtue of any
Sovereign institution of Christ, the duty of Saints to meet together as a body
distinct (without going out to other Assemblies to worship with them) for their
mutual edification in the Lord. 3dly, That particular Assemblies are not solely
of the institution of the Lord Jesus, but that National are also to be
accounted as the true Churches of Christ (though they have no footing in the
Scripture of the New Testament, from whence the pattern of Gospel-Churches is
solely to be deduced) Yea 4thly, That the Officers of Christ's appointment are
not sufficient for the Saints; but together with them, the help of false and
Idol-shepherds is to be sought after, than which, what greater contempt can be
poured upon the forementioned Institutions of our dear Lord? Yet who sees not
all this to be the language which is heard, and goes forth into the nations,
from the practice of our brethren in the matter we are debating? If they look
upon separation in the sense before minded, to be of the institution of Christ,
can they offer a greater affront thereunto, than to run into the Assemblies of
the nation? If they judge it their duty to meet together distinct from the
world and it is worshippers, why run they thereunto? If they apprehend National
Churches to be the result of humane prudence, without bottom in the Scripture,
and the Ministers of Christ to be only (in contradistinction to the Ministers
that are not of his appointment) attended unto; why give they the right hand of
fellowship unto such Assemblies, as profess themselves to be parts of such a
National Church, and hear Ministers that have relation thereunto? who have
received (as has been proved) no mission from Christ to their Ministry. If
this be not evidently to pour contempt upon the Institutions of Christ, and
confessedly so, we shall for ever despair of success in the most facile and
righteous undertaking.

Answ. I acknowledge that he who grants your Premises, cannot deny your
Conclusion: But none, but dissemblers, will attend on the Ministry of the
present Ministers, and hold the Assemblies of England in their constitution,
carnal and worldly, and the worship thereof false, and merely of humane
invention; That the members of the Assemblies of the English Church, are the
world in contradistinction to the Saints; That they are the worshippers of the
world, not of the true Churches of Christ; That the Ministers are false and
Idol-shepherds, who have received no mission from Christ to their Ministry. By
this Answer this Author may perceive, that these charges are judged false
criminations, not at all proved by him; nor are those things granted to be
Institutions of Christ, which he makes such: And therefore if the practice of
going to the Parish-Assemblies be a casting contempt on his way, it is not on
Christ's Institutions, but his unjustifiable separation. And yet the truth is,
our hearing the present Ministers, is for the performance of our own duty; that
we may hear the word of God, and worship God truly; and our doing this we
account not any approbation of any thing evil in the Ministers, or giving the
right hand of fellowship to the Assemblies in any thing that is disorderly. Nor
do we condemn any thing but their sin, in the separated meetings, whose
separation we declare against, although we should not think it evil to hear
their Ministers Preach the word of God, or to worship God with them. We are of
opinion that it is a gross error, which is often in the mouths of Separatists,
That they may not hear with the world, nor pray with the world; whence it has
come to pass, that some have left off praying in their Families, Catechizing
their children, instructing their servants, unless members of their Churches;
which tends to bring in irreligion and profaneness, and is contrary to the
precepts of Scripture, Ephesians. 6.4. Deuteronomy. 6.7, etc. contrary to the practice of
Christ and his disciples, who heard Christ Preach with the scribes and
Pharisees, praised God with the multitude, even the children, Christ approving
it, Luke 19.37, 40. Matthew. 21.9.15, 16. And however we approve not any evil in
the Ministers, or their Ministration, nor do assent to any unfitting thing
therein, yet we rejoice that Gods word is taught, and his Name invocated in any
company by any persons, and think we have the Apostles example to warrant us,
Philip. 1.18 and do wish, that God would not lay to the Separatists charge,
besides other sins (which we think are nor a few in these withdrawings from
Communion, and invectives) their ingratitude for that benefit others have, and
they might have, from that Ministry they so much oppose. If this Author, or
those of his way suffer contempt, reproach, and hard usage, though we wish it
may not be, yet it may be told them, That not Christ's Institutions are
contemned, but their own intemperate carriage is rebuked; which is not likely
ever to succeed well, but to be a hindrance to the work of Christ, and the
peace of his Church. Yet this Author proceeds.

Sect. 6. Hearing the present Ministers, hardens none in sin.
As for the second particular, That hereby poor souls are hardened in a false
way of worship, what can be thought less? (supposing the worship in the
Parish-Assemblies of England to be so, as has been proved) when they shall see
professors, that were wont to pray and preach together, to profess and protest
against Common Prayer Book Priests, and worship, to cry up, or at least approve
of, Laws made for their Ejection, if guilty of no other crime than Conformity
to the Worship they now conform to and practice, now stock unto their
Assemblies and bear their Priests: What can they imagine less, than that these
persons, thus acting in a direct contrariety to their former judgment and
practice, do now see they were mistaken? and are beginning at least, to return
unto those paths from whence they departed, and that these ways in which they
and their forefathers have walked, are the good old way in which rest is to be
found? Woe unto the world because of offenses, woe also unto them by whom they
come.

Answ. The hearing the present Ministers to be no false way of worship, is that
which is now asserted, the contrary is not yet proved by this Author. They who
are chargeable with former miscarriages, are to answer for themselves: The
hearing the present Ministers, which is defended as lawful, is not justly
offensive, nor for it only do men fear the doom of Scandalizers. It is added.

Nor is the 3d particular, viz. That hereby poor souls are hardened in their
rebellion and blasphemy against God, the Spirit, his Tabernacle, and them that
dwell therein, to be in the least questioned: we every day hear to the breaking
of our hearts stout words spoken against the Lord, because of the practice of
some in this thing. What say the wicked of the world less, than that Religion,
which many pretend to, is but a fancy, that the professors thereof are but a
generation of hypocrites, that will turn to any thing to save themselves; that
the spirit by which they are acted, is but a spirit of Phanaticism and
delusion! Yea how do they bless themselves that they are not, nor ever were
(and resolve so much more, they will never be) of the number of such
professors! Ask them a reason of all this, and they wonder you should ask them,
and speedily reply to you, Do you not see how many of you, for fear of
persecution, have deserted your former principles, and are returned to our
Assemblies, and the Ministry thereof, and that any of you stand out ('it is from
hence evident) that it is from a spirit of pride and obstinacy, and not, as you
pretend, from divine tenderness, and the leadings of the Spirit of the Lord?
And what can we say to all these things? Must we not with grief and sorrow
confess, That there is indeed too great an occasion administered to them for
their thus speaking, though this will be no plea for them in the day of Christ.
Blessed are they that are not offended in him. It remains then, that inasmuch
as the hearing the present Ministers of England, pours out contempt upon the
ways and Institutions of Christ, hardens persons in a false w^y of worship,
rebellion and blasphemy against the Lord: it is utterly unlawful for saints to
be found in the practice thereof.

Answ. Such kind of consequences as these are incident to persons of any party,
who have been earnest for that, whch after they have relinquished: So have
Papists insulted over Protestants, upon the returning of any seeming zealous
Protestant into the Roman Church. If my memory fail me not, the Author of Fiat
Lux imputes the like things to Protestants, upon the coming over of some to
their party: Yet the Answerer, and others, know how, in that and the like cases
to reply to such, that men's instability shows their own weakness, not the thing
in which they have been zealous to have been either good or bad* that any take
advantage from their fact to harden themselves* it is by accident, not from the
nature of their action, if it were good and lawful otherwise; that in such
cases men are not to condemn or commend the thing which is done, because of the
actions of the person, but to examine things by the rule, which is the only
remedy against such events. It is true, that it is just cause of mourning and
dejection, when such things happen: But not to measure truth or falsehood by
such motives and considerations, nor conclude a thing to be evil, because of
such accidents. To which I add, That this Author does not well to call the
obloquies against his party, speaking against Religion, blaspheming God, the
Spirit, tabernacle, and them that dwell therein; whose ways may be reproached
by reason of their zeal for their way, and yet no reproach to God, his Spirit,
Religion, Tabernacle, and the indwellers. It would be more for their benefit,
if he, and others of his mind, and others who have occasioned such blasphemies
against Religion did excu^^re semetipsos search themselves, whether their own
present violence of spirit, unpeaceableness out of pretended zeal for God, or
their and others now conforming intemperate heat, have not opened the mouths of
adversaries, and if they have to be humbled for it, as David was when S^imei
cursed him, and so make advantage of an opposite persons enmity, to amend
themselves. And indeed it were very unequal that we should either be afraid to
do a thing because of clamours, or continue in that which we cannot justify,
because men's mouths will be opened against us, and perhaps hardened in their
own way. Such kind of blasphemies as they are termed, are vented against
non-Conformists, Sep^ratists, as turbulent persons, and yet this Author would
not have it thought that they by their course harden poor so^ls in rebellion
and blasphemy against God. Why then does he charge this upon the Conformists as
an argument by it self, as if it po^red contempt, and hardened others, and not
impute the same to his own way? But he tells us,

Sect. 7. Gods people are not called out of the temples in England, as places
of false worship.
To all that hitherto has been said, we shall yet briefly add Argument 10. God
calls his people out of, and strictly charge them, not to go to the places of
false worship: Therefore it is unlawful for the Saints to attend upon the
present Ministers of England. The antecedent is clearly proved, Hos. 4.15. Amos
4.4. The reason of the consequence is, because we cannot go to hear the present
Ministers of England, without we go to their places and Assemblies of false
worship (as the Common-prayer-book-worship has been proved to be.)

Answ. This argument proceeds upon the opinion of the rigid Separatists termed
Brownists, who in their Apology p. 75.76. have this as their Twelfth Position,
That all monuments of Idolatry in garments, or any other things, all Temples,
Altars, Chapels, and other places dedicated heretofore by the Heathens or
Antichristians, to their false worship, ought by lawful authority to be rased
and abolished; not suffered to remain for nourishing superstition; much less
employed to the true worship of God. Exodus 20.4, 5, 6. and 23.13. Esa. 30.22.
Genesis 35.2, 3, 4. Deuteronomy. 12.2, 3, 30, 32. and 17, 18, 19, 20. 2 Kings 10.26, 27,
28. and 18.4, and 23.12, 13, 14, 15. 2 Chronicles. 17.6. Acts 17.23 and 19.26, 27.
Jude v. 23. with Lev. 13.47, 51, 52. Rev. 17.16. and 18*11, 12, etc. which is
asserted by Mr. Ainsworth in his answer to Mr. Bernard about the Twelfth
Article, page 128. and in his Letters to Mr. John Paget, and since by Mr.
Robinson, in his Justification of the separation from the Church of England,
against Mr. Bernard, about the Twelfth and last error imputed to them, p. 354.
p. 356. where he writes thus: I see not, but as the Religion of the Papists, in
the opposition it has to Christianity, is rightly called Antichristianism, so
the Religion of the Ten Tribes, in the opposition it had to the Law given by
Moses, may fitly be called Antijudaism. And for the Baalims then and there
worshipped, they were even as the lesser Gods at this day, which are called
Patrons among the Papists. The Devil, to the end he might bring in again the
old Idolatry, craftily borrowing the names of the Apostles and Martyrs, by whom
it was in former times overthrown and driven away: and by this means it has
put on another person, that it might not be known. Whereupon it follows by
proportion, That as the temples, altars, and high places for those Baalims, and
other Idols, were by godly Kings to be raced down and taken away, and no way to
be employed to the true worship of God so are the temples (with their
appurtenances) built to the Virgin Mary, Peter, Paul, and the rest, though true
Saints, yet the Papists false Gods, and very Baalims, to be demolished and
overthrown by the same lawful authority; and in the mean while as execrable
things to be avoided by them, which have none authority to deface or demolish
them. p. 357. The moral equity of those Commandments in the old Testament,
touching the demolition and subversion of idolatrous temples, and other the
like superstitious monuments, does as well bind now as then. Which Commandments
are also in effect renewed in the new Testament, where the faithful are charged
to touch none unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17. to keep themselves from Idols, 1 John
5.21. which they cannot do, except they keep themselves from their
appertenances: to hate even the garment spotted by the flesh, Jude 23. not to
receive the least mark of the beast, Revel. 14.9. but to go out of Babylon,
Revel. 18.4. which is also called Sodom and Egypt spiritually, as for the other
sins reigning in her, so for her idolatry amongst the rest. From whence it is,
that many at this day term the Temples the high places, decline them, bury not
in Churchyards, with other actions of separation, in speech and gesture
opposite to what other Protestants conform to. And, though the chief leaders of
the Congrestational Churches not long ago did Preach and hear in the public
Temples in England, yet it seems this Author now holds it unlawful to attend
upon the present Ministers of England, not only because of their calling and
worship, but also because of the places in which it is performed; and therefore
seems to revive the controversy about the use of places once polluted by
Idolatry. Concerning which I shall not need to answer what either the Brownists
in their Apology, or Mr. Robinson has said about this point, the thing being
so fully argued, and the arguments of Mr. Ainsworth and others, answered by Mr.
John Paget in his Arrow against the separation of the Brownists, from Chap. 6.
to the end of the Book; wherein the supposed moral equity of those Judicial
Laws is showed not to be such, and that it is a great derogation from the
benefit of the Gospel purchased by Christ's death, to entangle the consciences
of Christians with such Jewish opinions, as if any creature were now polluted
by Paganish or Popish Idolatry, as that it might not now be enjoyed by
Christians, and employed for God* contrary to what the Apostle determines
concerning meat offered to an Idol, 1 Cor. 10.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 1 Timothy
4.4. nor do any of Mr. Robinsons Texts serve for the purpose he brings them: 2
Cor. 6, 17. the unclean thing not to be touched, is not the place where Idols
have been worshipped, but the Idol it self, v. 16. which, by going to places
heretofore abused to Idolatry, but now the Idol and it is worship is removed,
and the living and only true God only served, is not touched in the Apostles
sense: but then only, when the Idol is kissed, adored, or otherwise
worshipped. They who join not in any Idol-service or honor, keep themselves
from Idols, as is required, 1 John 5.21. although they go to the places
heretofore abused to Idolatry: The garments spotted by the flesh, however it
allude to legal pollution, yet it is not meant of material garments, as
belonging to an Idol; but by it is meant, any tokens or means of sinful lusts;
Revel. 14.9. and 18.4. have been often showed to be so impertinently alleged
against the actions of Protestants, which are done in opposition to Popery,
that it is a wonder, that men pretending tenderness of conscience, should be so
impudent as still to accuse Protestants as receiving the mark of the beast, and
staying in Babylon, even for that for which the holy Martyrs died in opposition
to Popery. But if it be true which Mr. Paget has in his Arrow p. 29. Mr.
Robinson was not constant to this opinion. As for what this Author says, The
Common-prayer-book-worship is proved by him to be false worship, it has been
showed not to be true in the answer to all he says here. Yet were there some
superstition in the worship prescribed in the Common Prayer Book, it is not
sufficient to make the places, in which the present Ministers and people meet,
places or assemblies of false worship, every corruption in Gods worship not
making the place or assembly to be a place or assembly of false worship, as is
manifest, both in the case of the sin of Hophni, 1 Samuel 2.17. of the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.20, 21, 22. and 14.26. Nor if the places and assemblies
were for some corruption, yet were it necessary to go out of them, except they
were idolatrous. For so were the going up to Gilgal, Bethaven, or Bethel
forbidden, Hos. 4.15. Amos 4.4. to offer sacrifice to the calves set up by
Jeroboam; which therefore prove not going to a place of false worship to be
forbidden, except it be idolatrous, and to join in that worship; and therefore
the antecedent of this Authors argument is denied, if it be meant of false
worship, that is not idolatrous. Gods people were required to go to the temple
at Jerusalem after it had been defiled with Idolatry, and the Idol removed; and
even then when corpuptions of buying and selling there, and will worship was in
sundry things continued there, yet our Lord Christ himself went up to the
Temple at Jerusalem. The consequence also is denied, it being false, that we
cannot go to hear the present Ministers of England, without we go to their
places and assemblies of false worship. To which I add, That this is contrary
to our Saviors doctrine, John 4.21, 22, 23. to tie men to worship only in the
place and assembly of the separated Churches, and contrary to S. Paul's
doctrine, 1 Timothy 2.8. to forbid any to worship God in any place; and therefore
herein this Author, and such separatists as are of his mind, are guilty of
Judaizing. But he goes on thus:

Sect. 8. There is ground to expect a blessing in hearing the present Ministers.
Argument 11. That, upon the doing whereof Saints have no promise of a
blessing, nor any ground to expect it, is not lawful for them to do. But in the
hearing of these men, the Saints have no promise of a blessing, nor ground to
expect it. Therefore, The major (or first proposition) will not be denied. As
for the minor (or second proposition) That the Saints have no promise of a
blessing from God, nor ground to expect it, in the hearing of the present
Ministers of England, may many ways be demonstrated. If there be any promise of
a blessing upon them from God, in their so doing, let it be produced, and we
shall willingly confess, there is no weight in this argument: But this we
conceive to be no easy task for any to discharge, and that for these reasons:
1. The blessing of the Lord is upon Sion, Psalm. 87.2. and 78.68. there he
dwells, Psalm. 9.11. and 74.2. Jer. 8.19. Isa. 8.18. Joel 3.17.21. The presence
of Christ is in the midst of the golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.12 13. and 2.1*
it is his garden in which he feeds and dwells, Cant. 6.2. and 8.13. and we are
not surer of any thing (nor will it be denied by our conforming brethren) (many
of them) tha^ we are of this, That the assemblies of England, in their present
constitution, are so far from being the Sion of God, his candlestick, his
garden, that they are a very wilderness, and that Babel out of which the Lord
commands his people to hasten their escape, Revel. 18.4. 2. God never promises
a blessing to a people waiting upon him in that way which is polluted, and not
of his appointment, as we have proved the worship of England to be. 3* The Lord
has expressly said concerning such as run before they are sent, That they shall
not profit the people, Jer. 23.32. 4. The Lord protests, that such as refuse
to obey his calls, to come out of Babylon, shall partake of her plagues, Revel.
18.4. 5. Where the Lord is not in respect of his special presence and grace,
there is no ground to expect any blessing; but God is not so in the midst of
the Parochial assemblies of England. Where are the souls that are converted,
comforted, strengthened, stablished, that are waiting at the^ doors of their
house? Though many will not see it, yet a^ sad spirit of withering, and visible
decaies is to be found upon many that are waiting upon the teachings of the
Ministers of this day: And we hope the Lord will in mercy, cause those that are
indeed his, to see it, that they may remember from* whence they have fallen,
repent, do their first works, and watch to strengthen the things that remain,
that are ready to die, for God has not found their works perfect before him.

Answ. Blessings are of many sorts: Any good in general, yea any immunity or
freedom from evil, is a blessing in a large sense; But in a strict sense, that
only is called a blessing, which is the conferring of some special good,
whether temporal or eternal, corporal or, spiritual. In the former sense the
major is true. It is not lawful for the Saints to do that which there is no
promise of good to them upon doing it, nor ground to expect that the person
shall not be punished for it. But if it be meant of good, as of long life to
the honoring of parents, eternal life to believing on Christ, there are many
things the Saints have no promise of special good to be conferred on them for
doing them, nor ground to expect any such blessing, but what is common to all
men, and yet the thing is lawful to be done by them, as eating and drinking for
their sustenance, buying and selling, planting, building, etc. common to other
men with them, and in this strict sense (in which this Author takes it) the
major is not true: Ezekiel Preached lawfully when he was told Israel would not
hearken, Ezekiel. 3.2, 7. and Jonah, when he thought Nineveh would not repent,
Jonah 4.2. But to wave this exception, the minor is not true: I assert the
Saints have a promise of spiritual blessing by hearing these men, while they
Preach the Gospel, as much as any Preachers in the Congregational Churches,
Isa. 55.3. Hear and your soul shall live. Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that
hear the word of God, and keep it, are promises made to them that hear the
Prelatical Preachers, as well as to those of the separated Churches, while they
Preach the same word of God: the promise being not made to the hearing of the
men because of their personal qualities, their Church-relation, or any such
consideration extrinsecal to the faithful discharge of the work of Preaching,
but to the teaching of Gods word: in hearing of which men have been blessed,
though the Teachers themselves had no blessing, the hearers have been saved,
when the Preachers themselves have been castaways, as S. Paul speaks. And if we
look to experience of former times, there is ground now to expect a blessing
from conforming Preachers, as well, or rather more, then from Preachers of the
separated Churches. Sure the conversion, consolation, strengthening,
establishing of souls in the truth, ha^h been more in England from Preachers,
who were enemies to separation, whether Non-conformists to Ceremonies, or
Conformists Presbyterial or Episcopal, even from Bishops themselves, then from
the best of the Separaratists. I think all that are acquainted with the History
of things in this last age, will acknowledge that more good has been to the
souls of men by the Preaching of Usher, Potter, Abbot, Jewel, and some other
Bishops, by Preston, Sibs, Taylour, Whately, Hildersham, Ball, Perkins, Dod,
Stock, and many thousands adversaries to the separated Churches, then ever was
done by Ainsworth, Johnson, Robinson, rigid Separatists, or Cotton, Thomas
Hooker and others (though men of precious memory) promoters of the way of the
Churches Congregational. And therefore if the Bishops, and conforming Preachers
now apply themselves (as we hope when the heat of contention is more allayed,
they will) to the profitable way of Preaching against Popery and profaneness,
exciting auditors to the life of faith in Christ, duties of holiness toward
God not only in public, but also in private Families, and righteousness,
love, peace toward men, there may be as good ground* if not better
(considering how much the spirits of Separatists are for their party, and the
speaking of the truth in love, edifying in love is necessary to the growth of
the body, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.) to expect by them a blessing in promoting the power
of godliness than from Separatists. And as for this Authors reasons to the
contrary, The first of them is from a fond application of what is said of Gods
dwelling in Sion (which is meant of the special presence there, in that his
Temple and service was upon that hill in the time of the old Testament) to the
Congregational Churches, as if Gods blessing were appropriated to them, and
excluded from the Assemblies of England, they were not the Sion of God in their
present constitution, nor Christ's Candlestick, or Garden in which he walks* but
a wilderness, that Babel, Revel. 18.4. And says, we are not surer of any thing
than we are of this; which if true, it is an article of his Creed* of which he
is as sure as that Jesus is the Christ. But he gives no proof of it* to assure
us of it, but that we may take him to be phrenetick, or to be in a dream; and,
notwithstanding his confidence, he can make no better proof of this then the
Romanists can for the new Article of their Creed, Subesse Romano Pontifici, est
de necessitate ad salutem. It is indeed said, Heb. 12.22. That the Hebrew
Christians were come to mount Sion, in opposition to mount Sinai, that is to
say (say the Annot.) to the Church under the Gospel, as Gal. 4.26. whereof
mount Sion was a Type, Psalm. 14.7. and 50.20 Esa* 2.3. and where the Gospel was
first proclaimed without that terror wherewith the Law was delivered, Esa.
2.3. But why the Assemblies of England should not be the Sion of God as well as
the separated Churches* no reason is given, but the vain conceit that of late
he and others have entertained of appropriating that title to Churches of their
way, whose maintenance of Ministers by Collection, they call the provision of
Sion, Psalm. 132.15. in opposition to maintenance by Tithes, counted Babylonish,
with such like language, whereby many well-meaning Christians of weak judgment
are misled. Sure if the Church be called mount Sion from the Preaching of the
Gospel, the Assemblies of England may be called Sion, Christ's Candlesticks and
Garden, as well as any Christians in the world: and if the Constitution of
Churches is by faith, their Constitution* is as good as the Constitution of the
separated Churches. And methinks the separated Churches, which have consisted
of persons converted and instructed, and edified in the Assemblies of the
Church of England, should have acknowledged that Gods blessing may be in them,
their own calling therein proving it, if there were any spark of ingenuity and
love of truth in them, and not, as this Author, express such malignity as to
make them a very wilderness, and that Babel out of which the Lord commands his
people to hasten their escape, Revel. 18.4. which how grossly it has been
abused by this Author, sundry times before has been showed; for which I now
only say, The Lord rebuke thee. As for the second reason, the worship of
England is no more polluted and not of his appointment, then I have showed to
have been in the Jewish, Corinthian, some of the Asian Churches, whom Christ
yet walked in the midst of, as his golden Candlesticks, and yet Gods blessing
did belong to them. And why should we not expect Gods blessing to be on the
Assemblies of England, in which the true faith is preached, and the true
worship of God is constituted, notwithstanding errors or pollutions remaining
in them? That Jer. 23.32. is wrongfully applied to the present Ministers of
England, is showed before in answer to Chapter 6. Sect. 2. And how shamefully
(mirum ni contra conscientiam) Revel. 18.4. is applied to a call of Gods people
out of the Church of England, when it is by the holy Ghost interpreted Revel.
17.18. of that great City which then reigned over the Kings of the earth, and
acknowledged by Papists, the Jesuits themselves to be Rome, has been often
showed before. In his last reason, that which he says, That God is not in
respect of his special presence and grace, in the midst of the Parochial
Assemblies of England, is a speech of a man of an uncharitable venomous spirit;
but we hope such as that which Solomon speaks of, Prove. 26.2. As the bird by
wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse causeless shall not come. And
to his question, Where are the souls that are converted, comforted,
strengthened, stablished, that are waiting at the doors of their house? I say,
that though there were none such, yet this proves not God not to be present in
them; if they complain of the little effect of their Preaching, is it any other
then we meet with elsewhere, Isa. 49.4. Isa. 53.1. John 12.38. Romans 10.16. Isa.
65.2. Romans 10.21. Micah 7.1, 2. Luke 7.31, 32, 33, 34. Matthew, 23.37? May they
not say, That these very men that upbraid them with the paucity of their
converts* are the cause thereof, by their invectives begetting enmity and
prejudice against them in the minds of men? May it not be said to themselves,
Where are the souls that are converted, comforted, strengthened, stablished by
your Ministry? Were not many, if not most in your Churches wrought upon at
first by other Preachers? And if so, may it not be said, Ye your selves are the
seal of their Ministry in the Lord? nevertheless, though God only can tell
exactly and fully, what is the fruit of any men's Ministry, yet I hope there are
that can testify their receiving good by the Ministry of some of the present
Ministers; and that, however it be, by reason of the many stumbling blocks cast
in the way, God will yet have mercy on the people of England, and give them
hearts to receive the truth Preached to them in the love of it. Sure this
Author should rather pray it may be so, and encourage the Ministers to do the
work of the Lord more faithfully, and not weaken their hands by drawing their
auditors from them. As for that which he says of the decaies of the auditors
of the Ministers, I join with him; but add withal, That, so far as mine
acquaintance, or intelligence reaches, there is too great and sensible a decay
of the spirit of love, power, and of a sound mind in the Congregational
Churches of old and new England, and that a spirit of bitterness,
consoriousness, misreporting, mistaking dissenters words and actions,
unrghteousness, unpeaceableness is too abundant in them, that I say nothing of
their proneness to embrace Antinomianism, Quakerism, and other dangerous
errors. Iliacos intra muros peccatur and extra. The Lord pardon our evils, and
heal our breaches. Yet there is one more Argument to be answered.

Sect. 9. Hearing the present Ministers, is no step to Apostasy.
Argument 12. That the doing whereof is one step to Apostasy, is not lawful to
be done. But the hearing the present Ministers of England, is one step to
Apostasy. Therefore, The major Proposition will readily be granted by all: The
beginnings of great evils are certainly to be ^esisted. Apostasy is one of the
greatest evils in the world. The minor (or second proposition) Viz. That the
hearing of the present Ministers is one step to Apostasy, is evident. 1. It
cannot be done (especially by persons of Congregational principles) without a
relinquishment of principles owned by them as received from God: That the
Church of England, as National, is a Church of the institution of Christ: That
persons not called to the office of the Ministry by the Saints, are rightful
Ministers of Christ, must be owned, and taken for granted, ere the Conscience
can acquiesce in the hearing the present Ministers (for we suppose 'twill not
be asserted by those with whom we have to do, that there can be a true
Ministry in a false Church, or that false Ministers may be heard; and yet the
present Ministers are Ministers in and of the national Church of England, and
were never solemnly deputed to that office of the suffrage of the Lords
people.) 2ly. Nor can it be done without the neglect of that duty, which with
others, is eminently of the appointment of the Lord, to secure from Apostasy,
instanced in by the Author to the Hebrews, Hebr. 10.25. Not forsaking the
assembling of your selves together as the manner of some is, but exhorting one
another, and so much the more as you see the day approaching; in which the duty
of Saints assembling themselves together, as a body distinct from the world,
and it is assemblies, ^s also their frequent, and as often as may be, exhorting
one another, as a medium to secure them (by the blessing of the Lord thereupon)
from a spirit of degeneracy and Apostasy from God, is clearly asserted: whence
it undeniably follows, that the hearing of the present Ministers of England
(being inconsistent with the constant and diligent use of the means prescribed
for the preservation of the Saints in the way of God: for whilst they are
attending upon their teachings, they cannot assemble themselves according to
the prescription of God in the forementioned Scripture) is at least one step to
the dreadful sin of Apostasy from God, and therefore it is utterly unlawful
for Saints so to do. And thus far of the Twelfth Argument for the proof of the
assertion under our maintenance, viz. That it is not lawful for Saints to hear
the present Ministers of England, to which many others might be added: but we
doubt not, to the truly tender and humble enquiring Christian, what has been
offered will be abundantly sufficient to satisfy his Conscience in the present
enquiry.

Answ. If by Apostasy be meant Apostatie from the living God and the Christian
faith the major is granted, and the minor is denied, nor is there any thing
tending to a show of proof of it produced for it, and if it should be meant of
such Apostasy the thing is so notoriously false, the hearers of such
Ministers, as ^e now Ministers in England, having been as constant in the
profession and practice of Christianity both against Popery and other
ungodliness in times of persecution by Papists and at other times, as other
Christians in other ages, that this Author would be hissed at as one extremely
impudent in asserting so palpable an untruth. But I conceive by his proof of
the minor he means by Apostasy the relinquishing of the Congregational
principles and practice. Concerning which I conceive the major may be denied,
it being not unlawful, but a necessary duty to depart from some of their
principles and practices, I mean such as are for separation in communion from
dissenting Christians. Yet I do not think but the Conscience may well acquiesce
in the hearing of the present Ministers, as teaching truth without
relinquishment of the two principles owned by them as received from God. I
think if they will weigh what is here written, they may find, if not the
congregational principles, yet separation inferred from them to be an error,
and to beget nothing but Superstition in their minds, and sinful uncharitable
division in their practice. Nor do I think it necessary that they which still
adhere to that way of Communion need neglect the duty of meeting and exhorting
one another according to Hebr. 10.25. the mistake of which is showed in the
answer to this chapter, Owen of Schisms chapter 3. Sect. 4. upon what account those
Heb. 10.25. so separated themselves is declared v. 26. thereby slipping out
their necks from the Y^ak of Christ v. 28. and drawing back to perdition v. 29.
that is, they departed off to Judaism.
Sect. 2. They that hear the present Ministers some hours, may hear other
Ministers at other hours, they that at one time hear them, may at another time
exhort one another; Heretofore persons of Congregational Principles could hear
in Parochial Assemblies Parochial Ministers; why they may not do so still I
understand not, were it not that opinions of separation animated them to
division and faction, which the Lord amend, and make them diligent to provoke
one another to love and to good works. I have now answered the Jury of Twelve
Arguments, which I have found brutum fulmen, as the shooting off Ordinances
without a bullet, nothing that might deter tender, and considerately enquiring
Christians from hearing the present Ministers. It remains, that I make good the
catasceuastick part of this dispute by confirming the Arguments brought for
hearing them, which I shall apply my self to after the answering of the
questions which here follow.

Sect. 10. A pollution in one part, makes not the whole worship polluted.
We shall, says he, only in the close offer a few Queries to be in the fear
of the holy one, considered by the intelligent Reader.

Quer. 1. Whether the Lord Jesus be not the alone Head, King, and Lawgiver to
his Church?

Answ. Yes, meaning it of the supreme, absolute, independent, Head, King,
Lawgiver to his Church as such.

2. Whether the Laws, Statutes, Orders and Ordinances of Christ be not
faithfully to be kept, though all the Princes in the world should interdict and
forbid it?

Answ. They are.

3. Whether to introduce other Laws for the government of the Church of Christ,
and the worship of his house, be not an high advance against, and intrusion
into his Kingship and Headship?

Answ. Not, if they be no other then such as are showed to be warranted in this
answer to the Preface, Sect. 8.20. to Chapter 1. Sect. 3. to Chapter 5. Sect. 11, 12,
13, 14, 3, 4, 5.

4. Whether the Lord Jesus as King and Head over his Church, has not
instituted sufficient officers and offices for the administration of holy
things in his house, to whom no more can be added without a desperate
undervaluation and contempt of his wisdom, headship and sovereignty over it?

Answ. Some servants and services may be appointed by rulers, without such an
undervaluation or contempt.

5. Whether the officers instituted by Christ, are not only Pastors, Teachers,
Deacons and helpers?

Answ. In this Catalogue I find not helpers officers instituted by Christ, by
some others not here mentioned, I find of Christ's institutions, 1 Cor. 12.28.
Ephesians. 4.11.

6. Whether the offices of Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Deacons, sub-Deans,
Prebendaries, Chancellors, Priest, Deacons (as an order of the first step to a
Priesthood) Archdeacons, Subdeacons, Commissaries, Officials, Proctors,
Registers, Apparitors, Parsons, Vicars, Curates, Canons, Petty-Canons,
Gospellers, Epistollers, Chaunters, Virgers, Organ-players, Queristers, be
officers any where instituted by the Lord Jesus in the Scripture?

Answ. Some are, some are not: See the answer to chapter 3.

7. Whether the calling and admission into these last mentioned offices, their
administration and maintenance now had and received in England, be according to
the word of God?

Answ. So much as is necessary to the resolving of this Question in order to
the present controversy, is answered before in sundry places, which the Reader
is to observe to satisfy himself.

8. Whether every true visible particular Church of Christ, be not a select
company of people, called and separated from the world, and false worship
thereof, by the spirit and word of God, and joined together in the fellowship
of the Gospel, by their own free and voluntary consent, giving up themselves to
Christ, and one another according to the will of God?

Answ. Some of these terms are so ambiguously used, as is showed before, that
in some sense it may be answered affirmatively, in some negatively.

9. Whether a company of people living in a parish (though the most of them be
visible Drunkards, Swearers, etc. or at least strangers to the work of
regeneration upon their souls) coming (by compulsion or otherwise) to the
hearing of public prayers or preaching are in the Scripture account Saints,
and a Church of Christ according to the pattern given forth for him: or rather,
be not to be esteemed daughters of the old Whore and Babel, spoken of in the
Scripture?

Answ. If their faith be right, the first part is answered affirmatively, the
last negatively.

10. Whether in such a Church there ^s, or can rationally be supposed to be, a
true Ministry of the Institution of Christ?

Answ. It may.

11. Whether the Book of Common Prayer, or stinted Liturgies, be of the
Prescription of Christ, and not of man's devising and invention?

Answ. The worship or matter (for the greatest part) of the Common Prayer Book
is of Christ, though the method and form of words be of men.

12. Whether if one part of a worship used by a people, be polluted, the whole
of their worship be not to be looked upon, in a Scripture account, as polluted
and abominable, according to 1 Kings 18.21. 2 Kings 17.33. Isa. 66.3. Hos.
4.15. Ezekiel. 43.8. Z^ph 1.5. So that, ^f their prayers be naught and polluted,
their Preaching be not so too?

Answ. No: nor is any such thing said in any of these Texts: not 1 Ki^gs 8*21.
is c^ndemned their following after Baal, and not cl^av^ng to God; no intimation
that if they cleaved to God, it would be polluted by reason of the following of
Baal; but showing they could not cleave to God, if they did follow Baal. No
pollution is ascribed to the fear of the Lord, 2 Kings 17.33. because of the
service of the gods of the nations; but the service of the gods of the nations
is counted pollution, notwithstanding such fear of God as they had. Isa. 66.3.
The killing of an ox was not a pollution, because of other pollution of
worship, but because of the evil of the person, it was polluted to him, not in
it self Hos. 4.15. Swearing the Lord lives, was evil, because they pretended
they did swear by the true God, when they swore by these calves, Amos 8.14.
Diodati Annot. in locum. Ezekiel. 43.8. notes not one part of lawful worship
polluted by another unlawful; but mentions only an Idolatrous service near to
Gods Temple, of which I have spoken before in answer to Chap. 5. Sect. 2.
Swearing by the Lord was not polluted, because they swear by Malcham; but the
hypocrisy of the persons is noted, who made show of swearing by the Lord, when
they swear also by Malcham; whereas he that serves God acceptably, must cleave
to him only as God* If, as this Authors Quaerie intimates, a Ministers
Prayers be naught and polluted, his Preaching must be so too, then all
Preaching is naught in him, that by imperfection or passion vents that in
prayer, which is not right; which I am sure has been in the Ministers of
Congregational principles; and none then should be heard Preach, whose Prayers
have any error, or imperfection in them; which is a very gross absurdity, and
such as would make all men's Preaching unlawful, and bring in the opinion of the
Seekers, who would have none accounted Ministers of God, but such as speak by
immediate inspiration.

13. Whether a Ministry set up in direct opposition unto a Ministry of Christ,
which rises upon it is fall, and falls by it is rise, can by such as so account
of it, be lawfully joined unto?

Answ. No: But they are bound to leave this account, if it be erroneous.

14. Whether such as have forsworn a Covenant-reformation according to the word
of God, and swear to a worship that is merely of humane devising, that have
nothing of the essentials of a Minister of Christ to be found upon them, may be
accounted of as his Ministers, and be adhered to?

Answer. No.

15. Whether such as shall so do, be not guilty of casting contempt upon the
institutions of Christ, and disobedience against his royal edicts, commanding
them to separate from persons of such a Complexion. To which many others of
the like nature might be added.

Answ. They would be, if they should do so wittingly and willingly. Enough of
questions are propounded already; and this is Answer to the 12. Arguments and
15. Quaeries; (...) now for the other part of the book in the last Chapter,
which begins thus.

CHAP. 10. Fifty Arguments for hearing the present Ministers.
Sect. 1. Christ's direction Matthew. 23.2, 3. warrants hearing the present
Ministers.
HAving hitherto been upon the Confirmation of the truth asserted by us, viz.
That it is not lawful for Saints to hear the present Ministers of England, we
come now to consider, what is in this matter objected by our d^ssenting
Brethren. This is that they say,

Object. 1. Christ commands (or at least permits) his Disciples to hear the
Scribes and Pharisees (who were men as corrupt in their doctrine, as vicious in
their lives, as the present Ministers of England can be supposed to be) Matthew.
23.1, 2. Therefore it is lawful to hear these.

Answ. This being the main Objection used by our dissenting Brethren in this
day (as it was by others in times past) their very Achilles in this
controversy, we shall speak the more largely to it. To which I reply, that
this is justly urged to prove it lawful to hear the present Ministers of
England preaching* the doctrine of Christ, because Christ allowed his Disciples
and the multitudes hearing the Scribes and Pharisees teaching the law of Moses,
notwithstanding they were erroneous, vicious, intruders in that business, as
much or more than are the present Ministers of England into the office, or work
of preaching the Gospel. That the force of this reason may be perceived, it is
to be noted, that it was the office of the Priest, who were to be of the Tribe
of Levi, to instruct the people in the law of Moses, as we find the Prophet
Malachi speaking, Mal. 2.7 The Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the law at his mouth, for he was the Messenger of the Lord of
Hosts, yet there they are complained of to have departed out of the way, to
have caused many to stumble at the law, to have been partial in the law, v. 18,
9. Which occasioned, especially after the return from the Captivity of Babylon,
the rising of sundry Sects among the Jews, as Sadduces, and Pharisees known by
their peculiar tenants and usages, who were not all, nor necessarily of the
Tribe of Levi, as it is certain concerning St. Paul, that he was a Pharisee,
and the son of a Pharisee Acts 23.6. yet of the Tribe of Benjamin, Philip. 3.5.
which therefore had no special function of teaching committed to them by God,
having neither extraordinary nor ordinary calling of God, but had betaken
themselves to that way, as the orders of Friars among the Papists, by their
voluntary choice, yet, as the Friars among the Papists, so the Pharisees among
the Jews bare the greatest sway with the common people, as having greatest
influence upon their Consciences in matters of Religion, and in process of time
greatest power in the government of the State* though they were not the
ordinary Magistrates. Now to these Pharisees were adjoined Scribes, who were
Writers, Teachers, Expositors, Disputers, Rabbis, Masters, Lawyers, or Doctors
of the Law, among whom our Savior is said to sit at 12 years old in the Temple
hearing them, and asking them questions, Luke 2.46. By which it is apparent,
that they which were then the Doctors of the law used to sit in the Temple to
resolve cases about the law; for which reason they were said to sit in the seat
of Moses, Matthew. 23.2. Concerning whom, though our Lord Christ had charged them
with corrupting the law by their traditions Matthew. 15.3. Mark. 7.8 and had
warned his Disciples to take heed of the leaven of their Doctrine, Matthew. 16.6
11.12. yet Matthew. 23.1, 2, 3. he spoke to the multittude, and to his Disciples,
saying, the Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses seat: All therefore whatsoever
they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for
they say and do not. Now our Lord Christ's appointing them to observe what they
bid, shows he allowed or permitted their hearing them; (for otherwise they
could not observe what they bid them) yet not absolutely, for then he should
have contradicted himself in warning them against their traditions, and the
leaven of their Doctrine, but conditionally or respectively, that is what they
bid them do according to the law of Moses, in whose seat they sat, that is
took upon them to be expounders of the law of Moses. Whence it is inferred,
that while the Ministers of England teach the doctrine of Christ, they may be
heard notwithstanding defects in their calling, and their personal evils, as
the hearing of the Scribes and Pharisees was allowed by Christ to his
Disciples. And the Argument may be formed thus. That hearing of Ministers
against which there is no more just exception than was against the hearing of
the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in the seat of Moses in Christ's time by his
Disciples, is lawful for Christian Saints now: But there is no more just
exception against hearing the present Ministers of England, than was against
hearing of the Scribes and Pharisees sitting in the seat of Moses in Christ's
time by his Disciples. Therefore the hearing the present Ministers of England
is lawful to Christian Saints now. The major proceeds on this rule, that what
in the same case our Lord Christ allowed to his Disciples then, is allowed by
him to Christian Saints now, which, if it be not granted, Christ's resolutions
then are no satisfactions or directions to our Consciences now, which were to
make those Scriptures useless, which were blasphemous. The minor is proved by
showing the exceptions against hearing the present Ministers are not greater
nor more just then against the Scribes and Pharisees, and the hearing of them,
nor the Christian Saints now any more forbidden to hear the present Ministers,
than the Disciples of Christ then to hear the Scribes and Pharisees. Again, we
may thus argue, That which warranted Christ's Disciples hearing the Scribes and
Pharisees in his time notwithstanding other defects warrants the Saints hearing
of the present Ministers of England; now notwithstanding other defects which is
grounded on such rules of Logic as these De paribus idem est judicium, Of
things alike we are to have the like judgment Idem qua idem semper facit idem,
the same consequent follows on the same reason as it is the same. But the
Scribes and Pharisees preaching or declaring the will of God warranted Christ's
Disciples hearing the Scribes and Pharisees in his time notwithstanding other
defects. Therefore the present Ministers preaching or declaring the will of God
notwithstanding other defects warrants the Saints hearing now the present
Ministers of England. The minor is grounded upon that, which is intimated to be
the reason of Christ's direction Matthew. 23.2, 3. that they sat in Moses his
chair, that is taught the observation of Gods Law, and that what they bid them
observe according to it they were to hear and do, as on the contrary they were
not, when they taught corrupt traditions of men, and other leavened Doctrine.
To these things this Author thus answers.

Sect. 2. The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses his chair as Teachers, not as
Magistrates.
Many things are supposed by the Objecters, and taken for granted (and must be
so by all that judge any weight to be in what is from this supposed command of
Christ argued (which they will never be able to prove; and yet they are the
very basis upon which the stress of the Objection lies. As 1. It Is supposed
that the Scribes and Pharisees here spoken of, were in the Ministerial seat,
Teachers and Expounders of the Law, which at first view seems to be a difficult
task for any to demonstrate, That some of the Scribes and Pharisees (which were
particular Sects among the Jews, as is known) were so, cannot be denied; that
these here mentioned by our Savior are such, is not so evident. They are
expressly said to sit in Moses seat (not Aarons) who though he were of the Tribe
of Levi, yet was not the Ministerial, but Magistratical seat committed to him.
To the posterity of Aaron did the office of Priesthood appertain (as is known
to all that have but in the least turned aside to consider of this affair) nor
is it altogether frivolous, that is by some observed, that these Scribes and
Pharisees are especially charged with the omission of judgment and mercy;
things most nearly relating unto the Office of Magistracy, to whom it does
especially appertain to look thereunto. Nor will it in the least follow, that
supposing Christ enjoined his disciples to attend upon the Scribes and
Phariseees, acting as Magistrates, and conform to what is justly and
righteously prescribed by them as such: That therefore it is lawful to attend
upon the present Ministers of England.

I reply, That it is indeed supposed, that the Scribes and Pharisees here
spoken of, were in the seat of Moses, Teachers and Expounders of the Law: But
not that they were Officers about the sacrifices and services belonging to the
worship of God at the Temple, as were the Priests and Levites; nor need we so
to suppose: It is sufficient for the Argument, That they took upon them the
expounding of the Law, and to resolve consciences, what they were to do, they
did as Casuists or Doctors of Divinity in Schools or Synagogues, or in the
Temple: Which is proved from that which is said, That they did bind heavy
burdens, and lay them on men's shoulders, v. 4. which was by their precepts,
their affecting to be called of men, Rabbi, Rabbi, Masters, Fathers, (...),
Leaders, v. 8, 9, 10. (...), Doctors, or Teachers, translated Master in Israel,
John 3. but were (...), Matthew. 23.24. blind guides, Matthew. 15.14. blind leaders
of the blind. And that they were not Priests, appeared by their paying Tithes,
Matthew. 23 23. Luke 18.12. Nor were they ordinary Magistrates, except such as
were in their Synedria; the Romans were then the ordinary Magistrates. Nor
could they be said to sit in Moses chair, either as Magistrates having the same
power he had, or as Lawgivers. For the power and office of Moses, whether as
Magistrate, Judge, or Prophet, was singular. He was a Prophet to whom there
arose none like in Israel, Deuteronomy. 34.10. and he was a Judge or Prince under God
supreme, who had jurisdiction and Empire supreme, in matters sacred and
profane, although the function of doing holy rites was committed to Aaron and
his sons, and the Levites, as is proved by Seldom, l. 2. de Syned. Ebrae. c. 2.
from Exodus 4.16. Deuteronomy. 33.5. the address to him in difficult causes his
sentences, and other things acknowledged by Writers Jewish and Christian. It is
not denied, that the Pharisees and Scribes were many of them Rulers of the
Jews, as it is said of Nicodemus, John 3.1. and of the Priests and Levites John
1.19.24. But not as Scribes or Pharisees, who were, as such, only particular
Sects among the Jews, as this Author truly acknowledges: nor as sitting in
Moses chair, which only noted their function of teaching and expounding of the
Law, being bred up at the feet of Rabbis or Doctors of the Law, as St. Paul at
the feet of Gamaliel, and after sitting in the School, or auditory of the
Temple or Synagogues, where Moses of old time had in every City them that
preached him, being read in the synagogues every sabbath day, Acts 15.21.
wherein the Scribes and Pharisees affected and obtained the chief seats, Matthew.
23 6. and had much sway with the people, though they taught not with such
authority as Christ did, Matthew. 7.26. Mark 1.22. now wherein they taught
according to Moses Law, or the truth, as about Elias coming Matthew 17.10.11.
they were to be heard in other things, as in their own traditions, and the
commandments of men their doctrine was to be rejected, Matthew. 15.9. It is
frivolous which is observed, That because judgment and mercy, the omission of
which is charged on the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew. 23.23. and those nearly
relate to the office of Magistracy, to whom it does especially appertain to
look thereunto: that therefore the Scribes and Pharisees, v. 2, 3. are
considered as Magistrates. For, as is in the Assembly Annotations on the place,
the judgment, mercy, and faith, are just dealing with all men, mercy in
relieving the poor, and faithfulness in covenants, promises and contracts,
judgment being there taken for right ordering the conversation toward God and
men, as Matthew. 12.18. which is manifest, in that it is joined with mercy and
faith, or as it is Luke 11.4. The love of God opposed to ravening, extortion,
intemperance or excess, Matthew. 23.25. rapine and wickedness Luke 11.39. such as
was when they devoured widows bouses, making long prayers for a pretense,
Matthew. 23.14. compassing sea and land to make one proselyte, and when he was
made, making him twofold more the child of hell then themselves, v. 15. No such
argument therefore is or needs be made, as this Author frames as made by his
opponent, That supposing Christ to enjoin his disciples to attend upon the
Scribes and Pharisees acting as Magistrates; therefore it is lawful to attend
upon the present Ministers of England: For neither do we say that Christ
enjoined attendance on them, nor that they acted as Magistrates; but our
supposition is, That they acted as Teachers, and his disciples were permitted
to hear them, though liable to greater and more exceptions then the present
Ministers. It is added,

Sect. 3. The Pharisees were not Church Officers of Gods appointment.
But let this be granted. Suppose 2. The Scribes and Pharisees to be the
preachers and expounders of the Law in that day, the seat mentioned to be a
Ministerial seat: Yet this will not at all help them in the matter in
controversy, except it be granted to them, that the Scribes and Pharisees were
not a lawful, but a false Ministry that had surreptitiously climbed up into
this Ministerial seat (for who sees not the invalidity and nothingness of this
argument, 'Twas lawful to hear the Scribes and Pharisees which were the lawful
Church Officers of that day, of the appointment of the Lord, acting by virtue
of an authority derived from him; therefore it is lawful to hear persons that
have not any such authority from Christ, but are mere intuders, and Ministers
of Antichrist (as the present Ministers of England have been proved to be) now
this upon that supposition, that they were Ministers, we cannot yield, to these
reasons. 1. The Pharisees are expressly said to be Priests and Levites, John
1.19. ( and this is the record of John, when the Jews sent Priests and Levites
from Jerusalem, to ask him, Who art thou? v. 24. And they that were sent were
of the Pharisees) which were the ordinary lawful Ministers of that day. 2.
These of all others were most apt to question the authority of such as taught
the people: So when John appears preaching and baptizing, and professes to
them, that he was not the Christ, nor Elias, nor Prophet (who was expected by
the people of the Jews) they immediately question his authority, John 1.25. Why
baptizest thou then? which they could not be supposed to have the face to do,
if they themselves of all others had been the greatest intruders. Nay 3. When
they question Christ himself about his authority, he asks not them from whence
they had theirs (which doubtless upon that occasion, he would have done, had
they not been lawfully seated in the seat they did possess) but from whence
John had his, who was esteemed as a prophet. 4. We have the Lord Jesus many
times crying out above all others against the Pharisees, condemning them of
pride, hypocrisy, avarice, etc. but not the least tittle of the usurpation of
Moses seat is by him charged upon them, or in the least intimated, which
doubtless would have been, had they been guilty thereof.

I reply, that this grant, that the Scribes and Pharisees were preachers and
expounders of the Law in that day, will help the objectours in the matter in
controversy, though it be not granted to them, that the Scribes and Pharisees
were not a lawful, but a false Ministry, that had surrepticiously climbed up
into this ministerial seat. For they are assured, that this Author has not
proved, nor can prove the present Ministers of England to be mere intruders and
Ministers of Antichrist, and therefore need not this supposition concerning the
Scribes and Pharisees, to prove Christ's allowing the hearing of the present
Ministers. Only this is urged, that there is as much exception and more against
the Pharisees teaching, than against the present Ministers, and yet they might
be heard, therefore with better reason may the present Ministers be heard.
Nevertheless I deny, that the Scribes and Pharisees, which they were to hear,
were the lawful Church Officers of that day, of the appointment of the Lord,
acting by virtue of an authority derived from him, it being certain that, as he
says, they were a particular Sect among the Jews, no where appointed by God to
this office of Priesthood or teaching, but taken up by men, as orders of Friars
among the Papists, though some of them were Priests, and some of them Rabbis,
or teachers of the law, and educated thereunto, as teachers of Divinity are in
the Schools among us at this day; which, if the Ministers of England had no
further ordination, being the condition of most, or very many of the present
Ministers in England might justify the hearing of them as well as the hearing
the Pharisees, who had no better calling to that function. As for the reasons
of this Author, the first is not valid. For it proves only that some of the
Priests and Levites were Pharisees, not all, St. Paul certainly was not, though
a Pharisee; nor that those that sat in Moses chair were Priests, for all were
not there being many thousands of Pharisees, who were not Rabbis. St. Paul was
a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee, when he sat at Gamaliels feet, Acts 22.3.
yet not a Doctor of the Law sitting in Moses his chair. Nor, if they were
Priests, does it prove they were the lawful Ministers of that day. For, to say
nothing of Christ's Apostles, who were at that day the lawful Ministers with
and under Christ himself, it is certain the Priests of those times got their
places, as for instance the High Priest by undue and unlawful ways, by
bribing the Roman Deputy, as Josephus reports, and therefore if it were proved,
they were Priests, yet they are not proved to be lawful Ministers. Yea that
which is said of their Ordination, and Education by the most favorable Writers
of the Jews, proves they had some kind of entrance into their profession
according to the customs of those times, which were of human invention, but
nothing of Gods institution, that they should sit in the chair of Moses. As for
the Second reason, there is no marvel they had the impudence to question John's
authority, though themselves intruders, when they were puffed up with conceits of
their authority, though they had none, when they were so proud and impudent as
to conceive themselves righteous and despise others, Luke 18.9. and to allege
it in prayer to God, though their Consciences might tell them they were
covetous and unrighteous, yea to deride Christ, when he told them they could
not serve God and Mammon, Luke 16.14. Nor is the Third reason of force, For
Christ might question their authority though he did not when they questioned
John's, and he seems after John to have done it in calling them a generation of
vipers, blind guides, with sundry other expressions disparaging of them and
their traditions; And his charging them with affectation and ambitious seeking
of the chief Seats, and to be called Rabbi, Rabbi, what is it but an evidence,
that they did unlawfully climb into Moses his seat, which they did so
ambitiously gape after? As for the not in express words charging them with
usurpation, it is no marvail it is not related, since their instigation of Herod
to take away John Baptists life related by Josephus is not related, as imputed
to them, by Christ in any of the Evangelists; Besides how irrational this
argument is, we read not, that Christ charged them with usurpation of Moses
seat, therefore he did it not, every puny in Schools knows, who has learned
that rule in Logic, argumentum non valet ab authoritate negative, an argument
from testimony negatively is not of force, especially in matters of fact, it is
not related, therefore it was not done; and most of all concerning Christ's
acts, of which it is noted, that many things are not written, John 21.25.

Sect. 4. Christ allows hearing the Pharisees while they taught the Law of
Moses.
Yet again says this Author, But let this also be granted, that we may hear
this Argument, speak its uttermost, The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses
seat; this seat is a ministerial seat, and they sit not here by virtue of any
lawful authority, but are mere intruders; what follows from hence? Why this,
if it were lawful to hear the Scribes and Pharisees, persons vicious in their
lives, corrupt in their doctrine, having no lawful call to the place they
possessed: then it undeniably follows, that its lawful to hear the present
Ministers of England, though they have no lawful authority or call to the
office they assume. It must it seems, then 3dly, be granted, that when Christ
says, what they say unto you, do, he is to be interpreted, to command, or at
least, to permit an attendance upon their Ministry. But this is that we deny,
and dare confidently aver, That it never entered into the heart of Christ to
permit, much less to command any to attend upon the Ministry of the Scribes and
Pharisees: nor is any such thing in the least intimated in the words under
consideration. For first, the words are in the original (...), etc. which may
more strictly be rendered, the Scribes and Pharisees have sat in Moses chair,
all things therefore whatsoever they have said unto you, etc. (i. e. whatever
in times past, you have heard delivered by these men, according to the mind of
God, do you not now reject because of that hypocrisy, pride, covetousness,
etc. you are made to see is predominant in them.

I reply, the Argument is framed not as here by this Author, but as I before
formed it. The command to do what they bid implies a permission to hear, else
how could they do as they bid? Though the words v. 2. may be rendered, have
sat in Moses chair, yet the words, v. 3. according to the Greek language, and,
I think, according to all interpreters must be rendered, whatsoever they shall
say unto you, it being a precept concerning their future actions, and the word
rendered [ sit] being in the first Aorist is best rendered, as noting an
indefinite time, and so is to be conceived as signifying a continued time past
and present, they have and still do sit. But were it granted, that the bidding
were meant of the time past, the argument were of force, they heard, therefore
they may hear, Christ not disapproving their former hearing, but giving a
reason, which infers a continued permission to hear them, because they sat in
Moses chair, that is, taught the law of Moses, so that he makes this the entire
reason of their observing, and consequently of hearing, in that they bid them
observe the law of Moses, which while they did, they were to hear them, and
observe them, not when they taught for doctrines the precepts of men: which is
indeed the genuine reason of his caveat there and elsewhere, especially in the
Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5. and 6. and 7. in which having said, Matthew. 5.17.
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets: I am not come to
destroy, but to fulfill, he then adds, that one Jot shall not pass from the law
till all were fulfilled, that he would not have the least Commandment broken
by practice or Doctrine, yet with monition, that their righteousness must
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, if they would enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven, and accordingly clears the law from their false glasses,
warns his Disciples of their hypocritical practices, of their corrupt doctrine
and traditions, directs persons to observe the rites of the law, while he was
on earth, and to acquit himself from being an enemy to the law a little before
his death, though he had late experience of their opposition, yet minds his
Disciples that they should not neglect their teaching out of the law, though
they were not to imitate their practice. Whence may be clearly discerned, that
Christ would have them heard teaching out of the law of God, notwithstanding
other defects or corruptions, and that the resolution of this case is a plain
rule to us, that we may lawfully hear such as teach truth, notwithstanding
other defects and corruptions in their lives and Ministry: It is added,

Sect. 5. Hearing Pharisees teaching Moses law, not attendance on their
Ministry, as Pastors is allowed by Christ.
Let the words be as they are rendered, whatever they bid you observe and do,
that observe and do. Yet 2ly, who that has but half an eye can choose but see,
that an attendance upon their Ministry is remote enough from being their
intendment? We had always thought, that they might have been sufficiently
acquainted with, and been in a capacity of hearing and knowing what had been
said by these men through their particular occasional meeting and discourse
with them, though they had never spent one hour in attending upon their
Ministry: which that our Savior did not enjoin, no nor so much as permit by
that expression, we suppose may be clearly demonstrated from the ensuing
considerations.

1. There are not a generation of men of whom the Lord Jesus does speak more
contemptuously (and charges with greater enormities) than he does of that
generation of Scribes and Pharisees. In this very Chapter he informs us of
their hypocrisy, ver. 5.23.25.27, 28, 29. and pride, ver. 6, 7. and tells us
plainly, that they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, neither entering
in themselves, nor suffering those that are entering, to go in, ver. 13. that
they make their Proselytes twofold more the Children of Hell than themselves,
ver. 15. that they are blind guides, ver. 16.19.24.26. perverters of the
Scripture, such as make void the Commandments of God by their traditions, ver.
16, 17, 18. that they are serpents, a generation of vipers, that cannot escape
the damnation of Hell, ver. 33. yea, such as shall kill, crucify, scourge,
persecute the Messengers of the Lord, ver. 34. And can it be imagined, that
Christ should have no more tenderness to poor souls, than to direct them to an
attendance upon such persons as these for teaching? -- Credat Apelles! (Apella
likely) Are these likely motives to persuade or enforce a^y thereunto? Yet this
is what he immediately subjoyned, having said, whatever they bid you observe,
that observe and do.

2. The Doctrines owned by them are known: The tessera of their sect, was,
justification by the works of the law, which is diametrically opposite to the
work Christ was then upon, and the doctrine Preached by him.

3. That they denied Christ to be the Messiah, blasphemed him in his doctrine
(as the deceiver of the people) in his life (as a winebibber and gluttonous
person) in his miracles (as one that wrought them by the Devil, who are
therefore condemned by Christ, as guilty of the very sin of blasphemy against
the holy Ghost, Matthew. 12.31.) is known, as being what is frequently remarked
in the Scripture.

4. We no where find the disciples attending upon the Ministry of the Scribes
and Pharisees, notwithstanding this supposed command or permission of Christ.

Nay, 5 We cannot but think the supposition hereof, not only inconsistent
with, and opposite to that expression concerning Christ, Mar. 6.34. And Jesus
when he saw much people, was moved with compassion toward them, because they
were as sheep not having a shepherd (what? without a shepherd, and yet the
Scribes and Pharisees, whose feeding they might lawfully attend upon; does
Christ pity them in this desperate state, and not give them one word of
direction to wait upon these profound and worthy Doctors?) but also contrary to
that solemn command given forth from the Lord, Acts 2.40. Save your selves from
this untoward generation; and the practice of the disciples, who continued in
the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer, Acts
2.42.

6. Were that the intendment of Christ, as is suggested (and the argument of
our brethren valid) a lawfulness to hear the veriest blasphemer in the world
that denies that Christ is the Messiah, affirms that he was a deluder of the
people, a gluttonous person, a winebibber, one that did miracles by Beelzebub
the prince of Devils, that persecutes even to death Christ in his people, might
by a like parity of reason be deduced. Christ commanded, or at least permitted
his disciples to hear the Pharisees who were such (as has been proved)
therefore it is lawful to hear persons with the same characters upon them. But
God forbid any such injurious dealing should be offered to Christ, or that any
who pretend to fear God (and I hope do so in reality) should stand by a cause
which has no better arguments to defend it, than what may be as righteously
every way made use of for the attending upon the Ministry of the greatest
blasphemer, or opposer of Christ in the world. Evident then it is,
notwithstanding the great flourish that many make with this Scripture, for the
abetting their attendance upon the present Ministers of England, that it
refuses to admit the least sanctuary thereunto. The Scribes and Pharisees
mentioned Matthew. 23.1, 2. may for ought we know be Magistrates, not Ministers;
if Ministers, they were, as has been proved, lawfully so: Christ says
concerning them, Whatever they bid you observe and do, that observe and do.
Therefore it is lawful to attend upon the Ministers of England, whose lawful
calling to their office cannot be proved; yea, though there is not the least
intimation of a command from Christ, or so much as a permission to his
disciples to hear the Scribes aad Pharisees, -- Nugae and tricae siculae! If
this be to dispute, a man need not fear but to be able to multiply arguments at
an easy rate, for whatever he has a mind to undertake the defense of: Yet
this is supposed by many to be of greatest moment in this controversy.

I reply, If by attendance on the Ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees be
meant a constant and ordinary hearing of them as their ordinary shepherds (as
this Authous words seem to import) doubtless neither Christ did command, nor
permit his disciples such an attendance, both for the reasons given by this
Author, and specially because he asserts himself as their only Master or
Doctor, Matthew* 23.8.10. yet the mention of their sitting in Moses his chair or
seat, notes more then their discourse upon particular occasional meeting, to
wit, their ordinary expounding the Law of Moses in their Schools, where our
Lord Christ permitted his disciples and the multitude to hear them with this
limitation and proviso, in, and as they taught the Law; which hearing he did
not forbid them, but allow them with such caveats as are there given in that
Chapter. And against such hearing, none of the reasons of this Author are of
force. Not the first: for though such personal evils were sufficient motives to
keep back people, either from following their example or private counsels, yet
not to keep them back from hearing Gods Law expounded by them The same answer
is for the second reason; The permission of Christ is not to hear the Pharisees
teach all the Doctrines of their Sect, he had before warned them of receiving
their traditions, Matthew. 15.14. the leaven of their doctrine, Matthew. 16.12. In
which no doubt they understood the doctrine about justification by the works of
the Law, to be comprehended: But the permission of hearing them is only as
they sat in Moses his seat; that is, as they taught them the duties of Moses
his Law, which he said, Matt. 5.17. He came not to destroy, but to fulfill,
which is manifest from the illative particle therefore, v. 2. because they sit
in Moses seat, and bid you observe what Moses did, you are to observe what they
bid you observe, and consequently may hear them so teaching. The third reason
has the same answer with this overplus, That to prevent any conceit of
allowing the hearing of them in their blaphemy, he avoucheth himself to be
their Master and Teacher, v. 8.10. To the fourth it is but from a testimony
negatively, and so of no force: We read not that they used the Lords Prayer,
yet none will say they did not, less that they might not; we read not of their
alms, or fasting, yet they might do both. To the fifth, it was but a limited
permission of hearing them as they taught Moses Law, not as allowing constant
attendance on them as their shepherds. Christ did conceive the people to be
without a shepherd, notwithstanding the Pharisees teaching the duties of the
Law, because though that doctrine were right, and to be observed, yet it was
not sufficient to feed them to eternal life. Acts 2.40. St. Peter did well to
exhort his auditors to save themselves from that untoward generation of
opposers of Christ, as his Master before would have him and all his disciples
do, not doing after their works, nor following their perverse doctrine, and the
Church did rightly practice, in continuing in the Apostles Doctrine and
fellowship, and breaking of bread, and prayer; yet he neither did, nor was to
dissuade them from hearing or practicing the Pharisees doctrine of the
observing the duties of Moses his Law, which they were obliged to observe. To
the sixht, I grant it lawful to hear any man teach truth, which is Gods, and
may be heard from the mouth of any man, with whom God allows us converse and
communion as they are men; though we are to hold no communion with them in
wickedness, nor willingly hear their blasphemies. That the Pharisees as such,
were not Magistrates, nor lawful Ministers, nor considered as such, is showed
before. Neither do we say that Christ permitted attendance on the Ministry of
the Scribes and Pharisees as their Pastors, nor need we. It is sufficiene for
our purpose, that Christ allowed the hearing them teaching Moses Law, and that
proves it lawful to hear the present Ministers while, and so far as they teach
truth; which hearing, not constant attending on their Ministry, was to be
proved lawful, as the question was stated by this Author, chapter 1. and all along
was his conclusion. And that he has not proved it unlawful, nor evaded the
Arguments from Mat. 23.1, 2. Notwithstanding his irrision of this dispute, I am
of the mind the solid reader will say. I think it not amiss to add here the
words of Mr. John Norton Minister of Ipswich in New England, in his answer to
Apollonius of Middleburg in Zealand, c. 16. (...), Scribarum and Pharisaeorum
in Mosis Cathedra sedentium fuit corruption al qua in publico D^i cultu absque
debita reformatione tolera^a: quia Cathedra Mosis, i e. officium docendi
public in Ecclesia legem Mosis, and libros Prophetarum, Sacerdotibus, and
Leviti^ ex instituto Dei ordinario propria erat: eos autem audire, non ab eis
separare jubet Christus, Matthew. 23.1, 2. Of the Scribes and Pharisees sitting
in Moses seat, the embassage without commission, was some corruption in the
public worship of God tolerated without due reformation: because the chair of
Moses, that is, the office of teac^ing publicly in the Churches the Law of
Moses, and books of the Prophets, was ordinarily proper to the Priests and
Levites, by the appointment of God: yet Christ commands to hear them, not to
separate from them, Matthew. 23.1, 2. It follows,

Sect. 6. Christ's and his Apostles going to the Jewish meetings, is opposite to
the Separatists opinion and practice.
Object. 2. If it be said, But we find Christ and his Apostles after him, going
frequently into the synagogues, where the Scribes and Pharisees Preached. Ans.
We answer first, That all that Christ and the Apostles did, is not lawful for
Saints to practice, will not be denied: many instances are near at hand for its
confirmation, should it so be. 2* That it is one thing to go into the
synagogues, and another thing to go thither to attend upon the Ministry of such
as taught there: This is the present case, which that Christ or the Apostles
ever did, cannot be proved. 3. They went thither to oppose them in, and confute
their innovations and traditions in the worship of God, to take an opportunity
to teach and instruct the people in his way and will: which when any have a
spirit to do, and are satisfied that they are thereunto called by the Lord, in
respect of the present Ministers and worship of England, we shall be so far
from condemning them therein, that we shall bless God for them. But this is not
to the purpose in hand: the attendance of our brethren upon the Ministers of
England, is quite another thing, that requires other arguments for its support,
than we have hitherto met with. -- Parvas habet spes Troia si tales habet.

I reply, It is clear from Luke 2.46. that our Lord went to the Temple at
Jerusalem, sat in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them
questions. Luke 4.16. That he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up,
and as his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood
up to read, that he cured persons there, Preached in the synagogues, that Peter
and John went up together into the Temple at the hour of prayer the ninth, Acts
3.1. That Paul and Barnabas went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and
sat down, and did not speak to the people till after the reading of the Law
and the Prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent unto them, Acts 13.14, 15.
That on the sabbath St. Paul went out of Philippi by a river side, where prayer
was wont to be made, and sat down; and that this was his manner, Acts 16, 13.
and 17.2. Now neither were these synagogues by any appointment of God that we
find, nor their meeting, nor their rulers, nor the order of their reading of
the Law and the Prophets, nor their Teachers, nor their worship at the Temple
without many corruptions; and yet our Lord and his Apostles were present at
them, and joined with them in hearing them read, and such other services of
Religion as were done to God. Which is a good reason, wherefore it should not
be counted necessary to separate from the present Assemblies in England, and
the public Ministers, notwithstanding such corruptions in their worship, such
defect in their calling, such pullutions in the places of meeting, as are by
this Author and other Separatists urged as a sufficient reason of their
separation. The answers hereto are insufficient. For 1. Though all that Christ
and his Apostles did either out of peculiar power or Commission, or instinct be
not lawful for us to do, as to^whip buyers and sellers out of the Temple, to
sentence persons to death as Peter did Ananias and his wife: yet what they did
as men, or part of the Jewish people in the worship and Church of the Jews, is
a warrant to us in the like case to do in the assemblies of the Christians,
there being no cogent reason, why we may not in these things do as they did,
and if these things may not be used for direction and settling our Consciences*
they are in vain written by the Spirit. 2. Though Christ and his Apostles did
not go into the Synagogues to attend on the Ministry of such as taught there,
yet they did there hear the Law and Prophets read, and joined in prayers, which
this Author will not allow his brethren to do in the Church Assemblies of
England. 3. That Christ or his Apostles went into the Synagogues to oppose them
in, and confute their innovations, and traditions in the worship of God, is
more than I remember to have read: nor do I know that any that have or shall
come into the assemblies of the Church of England to such an end, as Quakers
and other Separatists heretofore have done, can be judged to do it out of any
other spirit than a turbulent and evil spirit, without any true calling by the
Lord, which might satisfy their Consciences: And though we should bless God,
if liberty were granted more than is, and opportunities taken to teach the
people, especially where there is want thereof, in the way and will of God, yet
we should not rejoice that men's particular opinions, or such unnecessary
truths, as being unseasonably delivered, would tend to division, and not to
edification, should be vented, especially in such auditories, as are in the
common sort of those assemblies, and most of all where there are able
preachers, who constantly and rightly teach the Doctrine of the Gospel of
Christ. It is added,

Sect. 7. Paul's rejoicing at the preaching Christ, of contention, warrants
hearing the present Ministers.
Object. 3. Paul rejoices at the preaching of the Gospel, though 'twas
preached out of envy, Phil. 1.15 16. To which briefly;

1. There may be cause of rejoicing in respect of the issue and event of
things, by the wise providence of God, though the means used for their
production be evil; and not to be abetted or complied with: In what have
Christians greater cause of rejoicing than in the death of Christ? yet had it
been utterly unlawful to have joined in counsel with, or any ways abetted or
encouraged those wicked persons that Crucified and slew him. Should the Pope
send some Jesuits into any remote parts of Africa to preach the Gospel to the
poor Indians there, here were upon some accounts ground of rejoicing yet no
ground for Saints to attend upon a Jesuitical Ministry.

But, 2ly, It appears not, that these Paul speaks of, were not true Gospel
Ministers, and so it reaches not the case in hand: This being that, we have
proved the Ministers of England guilty of, viz. and acting in the holy things
of God without any commission from Christ, which when our dissenting brethren
prove they have, we shall easily acknowledge the lawfullness of attending upon
their Ministry.

3ly. It follows not in the least, that these the Apostle speaks of, were
either not real Saints, or not true Ministers of Christ, because they are said
to preach him out of envy; the object whereof was not Christ; (for had they
envyed him, they would never have preached him) but Paul, (thinking, says he,
to add afflictions to my bonds) which is consistent with grace, and a lawful
mission to the preaching of the Gospel.

Yet, 4ly, Here is not in this Scripture the least word requiring Christians to
hear them. That because Paul rejoices at their preaching, therefore it is the
duty of Saints to attend upon their Ministry, is such a non-sequitur as will
never be made good.

I reply, nor needs it, the lawfulness to hear the present Ministers of
England, not the duty of the Saints to attend upon their Ministers being the
thing in question, and therefore it is sufficient for my purpose if I prove
hence the lawfulness of hearing them, though I should not prove it the Saints
duty to attend on their Ministry. Which I conceive may be done by this
argument. They, in whose preaching of Christ we may rejoice, though they should
not preach Christ sincerely, but in pretense out of envy, not good will, out of
contention, thinking to add affliction to other Ministers bonds, may be heard
by the Saints lawfully: But the Saints may rejoice in the present Ministers of
England their preaching of Christ, though they should not preach Christ
sincerely, but in pretense, out of envy, not good will, out of contention,
thinking to add affliction to other Ministers bonds. Therefore the Saints may
hear the present Ministers of England lawfully. The major is grounded on this,
that the thing we may rejoice in is good, for which we may thank God, and
consequently hear: which is agreeable to that of the Prophets, Esai. 52.7.
Nahum. 1.15. applied by the Apostle Romans 10.15. to the preaching of the Gospel,
who, he supposes, are to be welcomed and heard. The minor is proved from the
Apostles example, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17.18. That preaching of Christ that is no
other then St. Paul rejoiced in, and professed he would rejoice in, the Saints
now may rejoice in, though it be not sincerely, but in pretense, out of envy,
not good will, out of contention, to add affliction to other Ministers bonds;
But such is the preaching Christ by the present Ministers, ergo, the Saints may
rejoice in it. The major is not to be denied, unless it be showed that the
Apostle did evil in so rejoicing. The minor is manifest, in that no other
exception is taken against their preaching, then such as with as great reason
might have nullified the joy of St. Paul in that, which moved him to rejoice.
In a word, though personal defects and miscarriages were in the preaching of
Christ, yet the thing it self being good and occasioning the magnifying of
Christ, it is, and should be, matter of joy to all that love Christ. To this
Argument I find the Author of the Pamphlet entitled prelatical preachers none
of Christ's teachers, p. 45. answering thus, that preaching of Christ is not to
be rejoiced in without limitation, because of these texts, Mark 1.24, 25. Luke
4.34, 35.41. Acts 16.18. Acts 15.1. Gal. 5.2, 4.12. Phil. 3.2, 3. Acts 20.29.
Psalm. 50.16.18. But he sets not down the limitation he would gather thence;
only it may se^m by the texts, that we are not to rejoice in the confession of
Christ or his servants by the Devils, when the necessity of circumcision and
keeping the law of Moses for justification is taught, when hypocrites take Gods
law into their mouths by professing or declaring of it, but hate to be
reformed. Which we grant, but say all these texts, and the limitation thence
deducible, are impertinent to the present argument, for as much as these do not
preach Christ. Nor, says that Author, in propriety and strictness of speech
can Christ be said to be preached by a prelatical Ministry: they justify them
that deny Christ to be the sole lawgiver of his Church, and so make him an
Idol. Which to be false is showed in the answer to the 5th. chapter of this
treatise. Yet says that Author, p. 46. In case such a Minister as this that
preaches by the Bishops license should in his Doctrine or Sermon affirm Jesus
Christ to be the sole lawgiver unto his Churches, yet in, and by his very act
of preaching he should deny it: should the Apostle rejoice in that preaching of
Christ which is a denying him? An horrible speech of monstrous absurdity and
impudent malice. I should not say so much of such preaching, though it were by
the Popes license, or the Devils instigation: For though I should not rejoice
in the motive or impulsive cause by which it is done, yet I would not so
censure the thing it self as a denying of Christ. But how the receiving of a
license from a Protestant Bishop to preach the Gospel within his Diocese, and
preaching there by virtue of it according to the order established by the law
of the land should be a denying of Christ's legislative power, is to me
incomprehensible, and to use that Authors phrasifying, the first born of
absurdities. I should rejoice, and bless God to obtain such power upon
justifiable conditions.

But to our Author; His First answer is not to the purpose; For rejoicing in
the Ministers preaching of Christ, or those that preached out of envy, is not a
rejoicing in the good event by evil means, but in a good event by good means,
the preaching Christ is a good thing, in which the Apostle, and we rejoice, and
the effect is good, although the motive and end of the preachers be evil. The
putting of Christ to death was in it self evil, and not to be rejoiced in,
though the effect of it be good, and to be rejoiced in, no way was the acting
of Pilate, or Herod, or the Jews, to be abetted, but to be abhorred, though
the Counsel of God was to be justified and extolled, as was done, Acts 4.24.
etc. Should the Pope send Jesuits to preach the Gospel, and they should
continue to preach it, and no doctrine antievangelical, I know no reason, why
the Saints might not attend on their Ministry.

To the 2 d. 3 d. and 4 th. Answers I reply, That the preaching of Christ in
opposition to Paul makes it probable, that they were not real Saints, nor true
Ministers in his sense, such motives being contrary to that brotherly love,
which is in every real Saint, 1 John 3.14. and that order of the Church by
which is a lawful mission, which me thinks he should not conceive to have been
in them that acted in a way of contention against St. Paul the Apostle of the
Gentiles. And for the Ministers of England, I like better the words of Mr. John
Robinson in his Justification of the Separation, p. 307. then these Authors
words: In the general, I confess, there is a proportion, and so in that general
and large sense, wherein Mr. Bernard page 313. expounds the word sent, or
Apostle, I do acknowledge many Ministers in England sent of God: that is, that
it comes not to pass without the special providence, and Ordination of God,
that such and such men should rise up, and preach such and such truths for the
furtherance of the Salvation of Gods elect, in the places where they come. They
which preached Christ of envy and strife to add more afflictions to the
Apostles bonds, were in this respect sent of God, and therefore it was, that
the Apostle joyed at their preaching. How much more they that preach of a
sincere mind, though through ignorance, or infirmity, both their place and
entrance into it be most unwarrantable? And sure, if they may in this sense be
said to be sent of God, it follows Saints may hear them, which was to be
proved. It is added,

Sect. 8. The truth Ministers teach, warrants the hearing of them.
Object. 4. The Ministers of England preach truth, and is it not lawful to
hear truth preached? We answer, 1. That it is lawful to hear truth preached is
readily granted; but this must be done lawfully, and in the way of Christ's
appointment. 2. All that preach truth are not to be heard, nor will our
discenting brethren say they are. For, 1. There was never yet any Heretical
preacher in the world, but he preached some truth; is it lawful to hear such?
This will not be said. 2. The Devil himself preached truth, yet Christ forbids
him, and commands that he hold his peace. 3. The Popish Priests preach truth,
yet who will say it is lawful to attend upon their Ministry? But, 3. As the
present Ministers of England preach truth, so, 1. They preach it but by halves,
and dare not for fear of the L. Bishops inhibition, preach any doctrine, though
never so clearly revealed in the Scriptures, and owned by them as the truth of
Christ, he commands them not to meddle with. 2. The main truths they preach (at
least many of them) are contradicted in their practice, They Will tell you that
the Lord Jesus is the great Prophet, and King of his Church; but how palpably
this is contradicted by them in their practice, conforming to institutions and
laws that are not of his prescription who sees not? This we have abundantly
demonstrated. 3. With the truth they preach, they mingle errors directly
contrary to the Scripture, and the revelation of his will therein. Instances of
this kind have been already exhibited, to which may be added many more: we
shall mention but a few, 1. That the Ministry, Worship, and Government, which
Christ has appointed to his Church, is not to be received or joined unto,
unless the Magistrates (where they are reputed Christian) do allow it. 2. That
the Apocryphal books which have in them errors, (2 Mac. 12.44, 45. and 14.41,
42. Eccles. 46.20. Wisd. 19.11.) untruths (2 Esd. 14.21, 22, 23. 2 Mac. 2.4.8.
Tob. 5.11, 12, 13. with 12.15. Judith. 8.33. and 10.9. with v. 12. and 11.6.12,
13, 14, 15. 1 Mac. 9.3.18. with 2 Mac. 1.13. to 17. and 9.1.5.7.9.28.29.)
blasphemy (Tobit. 12.12.15. with Romans 8.34. 1 Timothy 2.5. Rev. 8.3.4.) magic
(Tob. 6.6, 7, 8. and 9.2.3. with 3.7, 8. and 11.10, 11, 13. with 2.9, 10.) and
contradiction to the Canonical Scriptures, (Judith 9.2, 3, 4. compared with
Genesis 49.5, 6, 7. Esther in the Apocrypha chap. 12.5. and 15.9, 10. with Ester
Canonical, chap. 6.3. and 5.2. Eccles. 46.20. with Isa. 57. 2. may be used in
the public worship of God. 3. That the most wicked and their seed, may be
compelled, and received to be members of the Church. 4. That Marriage may be
forbidden at certain seasons, as in Lent, Advent, Rogation-week, etc. 5. That
Baptism is to be administered with a cross in the forehead, and that as a
symbolical sign. 6. That though the most notorious, obstinate offenders be
partakers of the Lords Supper, yet the people that join with them, are not
defiled thereby. 7. That there may be Holy days appointed to the Virgin Mary,
John Baptist, to the Apostles, all Saints and Angels; together also with Fasts
on their Eves, on Ember-days, Fridays, Saturdays ( so called heathenishly
enough) and Lent. 8. That the Cope, Surplice, Tippit, Rocket, etc. are meet and
decent ornaments for the worship of God, and Ministry of the Gospel. 6. That
the Book of Common Prayer is the true worship of God. 10. That Christ descended
into hell (as if Christ descended into the place of the damned) as the Papists
hold. 11. That Lord Bishops can give the holy Ghost, and power to forgive and
retain sins. 12. That Altars, Candles, Organs, etc. are necessary and useful in
the Church of God. 13. That all children when baptized, are regenerate, and
received by the Lord for his own children by adoption, Common Prayer Book of
public Baptism. Yea, 14. That children being baptized, have all things
necessary for their salvation, and shall undoubtedly be saved. So they profess
in the Order of Conformation in the Common Prayer Book; with much more that
might be offered in this matter.

I reply, 1. The grant, That it is lawful to hear truth preached, is
sufficient to prove it lawful to hear the present Ministers preach truth (which
he denies not they do) unless he could prove it were contrary to the way of
Christ's appointment to hear the truth from them. 2. All that preach some
truth, are not to be heard; yet all that preach the great truths of the Gospel,
notwithstanding some errors non-fundamental may be heard, especially if the
errors be seldom or never pressed on the hearers, but left to them to examine,
and to be approved or disproved. Heretical Preachers are not to be heard,
because they preach not the great truths of the Gospel but errors, which
overthrow the foundation, so do the Popish Priests; yet it were no sin to hear
either of these speak truth. The Devils we are to have no communion with, God
having put an utter enmity between the serpent and the seed of the woman. 3. If
the present Ministers of England preach truth but by halves, it is lawful to
hear them preach those halfs. The Bishops allow them to preach all truths
needful to salvation, all that is contained in the Creed, Lords Prayer, and Ten
Commandments, in the 39 Articles, the two Tomes of Homilies; nor are men
inhibited in Schools, or Convocations, or at some times in books published in
Latin, to discover any truths of God, so it be done without disturbance, or
other evil consequence. That some truths needful to be known, are not permitted
to be published to the vulgar auditories, may have the same reason as Christ
had for not acquainting his disciples with many things he had to say to them,
because they could not then bear them, John 16.12. Some things may seem very
clearly revealed in the Scriptures to some, and be owned by them, which are
pernicious, as that the Saints have all right to government, that they are to
smite the civil powers as part of the fourth Monarchy, that justified persons
are not under the command of the moral Law; some disputable, as about the
thousand years reign, That God cannot forgive sins without satisfaction to his
justice, Church-constitution, Covenant, Government, and many more, which it is
agreeable to the Apostles rule, Romans 14.1. their practice, Acts 15.28. not to
vent in all sorts of auditories; and if the Bishops do restrain Preachers,
especially those that are young, raw, injudicious, but violent, and apt to
cause division, they do, agreeably to the Apostles rule, to the example of all
Churches, where Government is not popular (which breeds confusion) yea I think
the Separatists have found by experience some restraint necessary, and that the
universal liberty of Conscience, or of prophesying, as it is termed, is
intolerable; and if Bishops, who are men, and may be more rigid then they
should, hold the reins in too hard, yet there is no reason why the people
should refuse to hear that truth which is necessary and sufficient to
salvation, because they cannot hear every truth, which perhaps out of faction,
or a childish inconstancy, or having itching ears, they desire to know.

As for what is said about the Ministers contradicting their preaching by their
practice, it is answered before in the Answer to the 5 th Chapter. And yet were
it granted, their personal evils are not sufficient to make the hearing of the
truth unlawful to the hearers. As for the errors they are said to mingle with
the truths they teach, they are not such as overthrow the foundation, if they
were errors, and taught by them; and therefore this is no sufficient reason
why they may not be heard preaching necessary truths. Yet to show the futility
of this allegation, I shall consider each of the supposed errors. The first I
doubt not they will deny, and require this Author to prove it. For the second,
it is not, for ought I know, preached by any of the Ministers, That the
Apocryphal books which have in them errors, may be used in the public worship
of God, nor do I think if they should so do, could it well consist with their
subscription to the sixth Article of the Confession of the Church of England,
which excludes them out of the Canon of holy Scriptures, which contain all
things necessary to salvation, and says, The Church (as Hierome says) does
read them for example of life, and instructions of manners: but yet does it not
apply them to stablish any doctrine. And what Dr. Rainold, the Bishop of Durham
that now is, with many of the English Protestant, and conforming Divines have
written about the Apocryphal Books, is sufficient to clear the present
Ministers from suspicion of complying with the Papists, who according to the
Decree of the Trent Council ses. quarta, put most of them (though they leave
out some of them) into the Catalogue of sacred Books, containing that truth and
discipline of the Gospel which is saving, and to be preached to every creature,
and receive and venerate them with equal affection of piety and reverence, as
other books of holy scripture. And although the passages alleged by this
Author are liable to exception, nor do I think it fit for me to justify or
excuse them; yet this I say, to show there is not a sufficient reason to
withdraw from hearing the present Ministers preaching or praying. 1. Some of
the books are not appointed to be read at all. 2. Some of those that are
appointed to be read, are capable of an easier censure, and better
construction, then is put upon them by this Author. 3. That those which are
not so capable of excuse, yet are appointed to be read on such days, and in
such places, as those that allege this for a reason of not hearing the
present Ministers, need not be present. 4. That it was once resolved as lawful
by Dr. George Abbot, after Archbishop of Canterbury, in his answer to Dr. Hill
the Papist, p. 317. from the Preface to the second Tome of the Homilies, for
the Minister, instead of the Apocryphal books, to read some other part of the
Canonical Scripture of the old Testament. Which things being considered, there
seems not for this to be a sufficient reason of not hearing the present
Ministers, or charging them, Dr. Sparks in his book of Uniformity allowed, and
printed by command, 1607. c. 1. In the conference at Hampton Court, His
Majesty's Order was, That none of the Apocryphal books that had any error,
should be read, etc.
as this Author does. The third error I conceive they will deny to be their
tenent. But concerning this, and the 4th. 5th. 6^^* 8th. 9th. 11th. errors, so
much has been said before chiefly in the answer to the 5 th. 6 th. 7 th.
chapters of this book, that I need not here make a particular answer concerning
each of these severally; yet I say, Dr. Barlow by the preface to the second
tome of Homilies, declared it might be lawful by our Church, to read other
chapters, and alleges Archbishop Abbot c. 10.
the things are not matters of the Ministers Doctrine, however they be of their
practice, and therefore cannot be a reason of not hearing their Sermons. And
they who make this a sufficient reason not to hear, or to pray, or receive the
Lords Supper with a person by reason of some error he holds or teaches, or
some undue practice on Gods worship, or conversation with other men, go against
all rules and examples in holy Scripture, and approved Christians; and such a
one must suppose Preachers infallible, every Communicant unblameable, or each
Christian to have power to excommunicate, if the person faulty be not amended
upon his reproof, that he must know what Tenants his Teacher holds, and what is
the conversation of each Communicant, ere he can warrantably hear the one, or
communicate with the other. Which with sundry other superstitious conceits, or
unnecessary scruples, put an intolerable burden upon men's consciences, and will
as well prove withdrawing from the Ministers and Churches Congregational
necessary, as from the Conformists. As for the 7th. error, it will be denied
by them to be their Tenent, that there may be Holy days appointed to the Virgin
Mary, John Baptist, etc. For though they be termed for distinction sake, St.
Peter's day, etc. yet says Archbishop Whitgift in his answer to the second
Admonition, the 3 d. reason, The Papists Saints days were appointed for the
honoring and worshipping of the Saints by whose names they were called: ours
be ordained for the honoring of God, for public prayer, and edifying the
people by reading the Scriptures and Preaching: neither are they called by the
name of any Saint in any other respect, than that the Scriptures which that day
are read in the Church, be concerning that Saint, and contain either his
calling, preaching, persecution, martyrdom, or such like. The like is alleged
by Rainold, conference with Heart, chapter 8. divis. 2. Hooker Eccles. Policy, l. 5.
Sect. 71. yea T. C. the defender of the Admonition confesses that the Church
of England means not that in these holy days the Saints should be honored,
and Rivet on Exodus 20. praecept. quartum, acquits the Church of England from
Idolatry, by reason of our form of service, and our doctrine of worshipping God
only. Of which more also may be seen in Zanchius, tom. 4. in praece. quartum
loc. 1. q. 2. etc. As for the 10th. error, That Christ descended into hell, is
in the Creed called the Apostles, and is the 3d. Article of the Confession of
the Church of England, and is deduced by Augustine, Epist. ad Evodium 99. from
Acts 2.26, 27. and how to understand it of other descent then the place of the
damned, Quis ergo nisi infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos Christum?
or Limbus Patram, which is the Papists tenent, may be seen in Archhishop
Vshers answer to the Jesuits challenge, chapter 5. Dr. Pearson his Exposition of
the Creed on that Article, and others. The 12th. I think neither the present
Ministers, nor any of the Bishops will assert. The two last let them that hold
them answer for themselves; I say only that they are such as hearers are not
necessitated to assent to, nor such as can justify separation. But it follows,

Sect. 9. Evil persons may be heard as true Ministers.
Object. 5. Judas preached, though a wicked man; and no doubt 'twas lawful, yea
the duty of Saints to hear him. To this we say, no doubt it was so. But 1.
Judas was not a visible wicked man at the time of his preaching, but so close
an hypocrite, that he was not known to be so, no not to the disciples: but some
of the present Ministers of England are visibly wicked and profane. 2. Judas
was chosen, and called by Christ to be an Apostle, commissioned by him to
preach: but the present Ministers of England are not so, as has been proved.
So that this is not at all to the business in hand.

I reply, It is confessed that the present Ministers are not chosen and called
by Christ to Preach as Judas was; and it may be also proved concerning the
Ministers of the Congregational Churches, whose calling may be questionable as
well as theirs, being often by a small company of ignorant persons, many of
them women, who challenge power of election without Ordination, or other help,
or giving the right hand of fellowship by Elders of other Churches, nor are
they all free from visible wickedness and profaneness. And this may be somewhat
to the business, by allaying the vehemence of this Authors spirit against
others. But the chief use of this objection is to answer one exception of this
Author, chapter 2. That the present Ministers are not to be heard as gifted
brethren, because they walk disorderly: For Judas did walk disorderly, and yet
might be heard. It Is true, Judas was not so apparently a thief as others that
are openly vicious; yet Christ knew him to be a thief and a traitor, when he
appointed him to preach, and forbade none to hear him preach the Gospel, and
therefore allowed hearing of evil men preach truth, which is denied by the
Author of Prelatical preachers none of Christ's teachers, p. 43, 44. and is
frequently the reason of many peoples not hearing them that preach truth. It is
to be added that Christ had given some intimation of Judas his wickedness, John
6.70, 71. He goes on,

Sect. 10. It is a sin not to encourage good men in their Ministry.
Object. 6. But there are some good men amongst them, and such as belong to
God, may we not hear good men? To which briefly. Answ. 1. That there are some
among the present preachers of this day, that are good men, we shall not stand
to deny. Yet, 2. We crave leave to say, That they are all of them such as are
sadly polluted and defiled by their compliance, in respect of their standing in
the Ministry Antichristian, whose teachings Saints have no warrant to attend
upon. 3. The greater hopes we have of their goodness, the more cautelous should
we be of encouraging them in a false way; that they by our relinquishment of
them, and separating from them (after we have discharged all other duties we
are satisfied are incumbent upon us to perform toward them) may come to see
their sin, repent, and do their first works, that God and we may again receive
them. 4. Yet the goodness of any, as to the main, is no warrant for any to hold
communion with them, or attend upon their teach^ngs: There are brethren that
walk disorderly, whom it is the duty of Saints to separate from: that the very
best of the Ministers of England do so, will not be denied. The incestuous
person, 1 Cor. 5. was, as to the main, for ought I know, a good man: yet were
not the Saints at Corinth to hold communion with him, till upon his repentance
he was again received 2 Cor. 2* 6. 5. It Is utterly unlawful to communicate
with a devised Ministry upon what pretext soever. 6. So is it for any to
partake in other men's sins (as has been proved:) but every usurped Ministry is
the sin of him (though never so holy a person) that exercises it.

I reply, this objection being an argument ad hominem against this Author, who
has represented all the present Ministers as walking disorderly, deniers of
Christ's offices, Antichristian, Idolaters, Scandalous, even the best of them:
which what face he can say of them, and yet acknowledge them good men is not
easily conceivable, they seem to me inconsistent speeches. That their Ministry
is Antichristian, when they minister the word of God is also in my
understanding oppositum in apposito a contradiction; That they stand in that
Ministry, which they had by Episcopal ordination, is so far from being their
defilement, that it seems to me their virtue and wisdom, it being always
judged by me a great sin to renounce that ministry, since it is no other then of
the Doctrine and Sacraments, and the Discipline of Christ as the Lord has
commanded, So are the words in the book of Ordination.
and as this Church and Realm has received the same, according to the
Commandments of God; which, for any to disclaim, is to go back from the
service of Christ, and if the present Ministers do stand in this Ministry, the
Saints are warranted, and engaged to attend upon it. The greater hopes we have
of their goodness, the more are all, that love the Lord Jesus, bound to
encourage them in this way, as being the the true way of Christ, and to
relinquish them, and separate from them, for this cause is very sinful, since
it is to separate from them for doing their duty: To hold them as
excommunicate, to reprove, to urge them to repentance, not to receive them, to
conceive of them as brethren walking disorderly, is uncharitableness, and
injustice. That the incestuous person was a good man before he repented cannot
be well conceived, since he committed such a sin as was not named among the
Gentiles: it was the sin of the Corinthians that they were puffed up and had
not rather mourned, that he that had done that deed might be taken away from
among them, it is no sin, that the Saints do not mourn, that the present
Ministers, who are confessedly good men, may be taken away from among them, it
is their great sin, if they do not bless God for them, and pray for their
establishment and good success in their Ministry. That the Ministry is devised
by any other than God is not showed: they that talk and write ignorantly, not
ever reading the book of Ordination, which shows what their Ministry is, make
invectives against them, and wildly wander from them upon false suggestions
often to their perdition. That to hear them is not to partake with them in sin,
is showed in answer to this Authors 8 th. argument, chap. 8 th. That their
Ministry is usurped, is not proved; if it were, it might be a true Ministry,
which if it be, though it were usurped, it is not the sin, but may be the duty
of him that exercises it. It follows,

Sect. 11. The example of the learned godly Nonconformists is some inducement
to hear the present Ministers.
Object. 7. But many learned and good men (and such as in Conscience could not
conform to the Ceremonies of the Church of England) have in days past (and do
now) hear the present Ministers thereof. To which we answer, 1. That the
greatest Scholars, and most accomplished for humane wisdom, parts, yea visible
holiness, have not been always on the Lords side, following him in paths of
his own appointment; but many times have been found the greatest persecutors
and opposers of Christ; the most stupendiously ignorant of the will of God, in
respect of the truth, and work of their generation, of any persons in the
world: witness the Scribes and Pharisees, the learned Rabbis, and profound
Doctors of that day, with what virulency did they oppose Christ and the
doctrine of the Gospel preached by him? 2. That persons of as great holiness,
and renown for learning, and all manner of accomplishments, as learned
Ainsworth, Cotton, etc. have been and are of the same apprehension with us in
this matter: not to mention the reformed Churches, who generally renounce the
Ministry of the Church of England, not admitting any by virtue of it to the
charge of Souls (as they speak.) But 3. To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa.
8.20. if they speak not according to this rule, though Angels for knowledge and
holiness, they are not to be received or heeded: one word from the Lord is of
more weight to hearts made truly tender, than the example of an hundred
professors can be: it is possible these may err, be yea and nay; but so cannot
the truth of God, which is always the same, and will abide so for ever. 4. The
Apostle has long since determined this case, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of
me, as I am of Christ: so far as Saints follow Christ, I may and ought to
follow them, but no further: so that the learning parts or holiness of any that
attend upon the present Ministers of England, is no warrant for me so to do;
nor will ever be a satisfactory answer to that enquiry, who has required these
things at your hands?

I reply, It is not denied, that the most learned and zealous of the law, such
as St. Paul among the Jews, the most excellent Moralists among the Gentiles,
have been great enemies to the Gospel before their calling to the faith of
Christ, but the objection is of learned and good men among Christians, who are
never found the greatest persecutors and opposers of Christ. Possibly it may
fall out, yea and it has fallen out, that among Christians the greatest
Scholars, and most ac^omp^^shed for humane parts, wisdoms, yea for visible
holiness, have not been always on the Lords side, following him in paths of
his own appointment, but have been stupendiously ignorant of the will of God in
respect of the truth and work of their generation; I think ^ardinal Caietan was
one of the greatest Scholars of his time, yet saw not what Luther saw, about
justification by faith, and Luther, though he did much in that point, yet saw
not so much as Calvin in the point of the re^l presence in the Eucharist; and
therefore (like well the 3 d. and 4 ^h. answer here, that we should adhere only
to the Law and to the Testimony and be followers of the learned as they are of
Christ. Yet I conceive, that it is a wicked course, which is taken by some, so
to disparage learning, as if it were of no necessity, Universities, as of no
use, but rather Seminaries of ungodliness, to say that men that have humane
learning are the unlearned and unstable, which do wrest the Scriptures, 2 Pet.
3.16. as How the Cobbler a much followed Preacher a great while ago in London
vented in print, that learned Scholars do make the Scriptures as a nose of wax,
are but Juglers, and deceivers, which are too too often insinuated into the
minds of well meaning, but weak minds, whereby they are more addicted to such
as How, Tillinghast, and other popular Orators, and their injudicious
discourses, if stuffed with fained words and earnest affections, then to the
most solid proofs of the most learned, whose interpretations of Scripture, and
handling of Controversies, have cleared the truth, and restored purity of
Doctrine to the great benefit of the Church of God, which these people
understand not. But it happens according to the saying, Scientia n^minem hab^^
inimicum nisi ignorantem. And sure though I would have no Christian enslave his
judgment to any man, it were that Anthropolatria or sin of glorying in men
forbidden, 1 Cor. 3.21. against which I printed a little treatise in the the
year 1645* foreseeing it would be the means of dividing Christians into
parties; nor would I have that which is propounded by men of none or lesser
learning rejected, because it is from them, one Paph^utius may see that truth,
which a whole Council, though such as the first N^cene, without him did not
discern, it was an evil spirit in Matthaeus Langius, that made him disdain to
be taught by Luther, as is related in the History of the Council of ^rent, God
does out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings perfect praise, as our Savior
Matthew. 21.16. allegeth Psalm. 8.2. against the Priests and Scribes indignation
at the Childrens saying Hosanna: yet I would have such things examined by the
learned, and godly, especially either their own Pastors, or such as are found
or reputed learned and judicious, and that as well what may be said against, as
what is said for the thing vented be weighed, lest persons deceive themselves,
as too often they do, by their propensity to take all for Oracles, which is
said by such as they do affect or magnify. And surely in doubtful cases, and
in points which are above the Sphere of common capacities to determine, I mean
such as require more insight in Languages, History, Arts, and other reading,
than they can reach to by reason of defect in their natural abilities,
educations, time to study, means of attaining the use of books, health or
strength, it is a safe way to rest on the received practice and determination
of their learned Guides, whom they have reason to judge faithful and able, and
to be satisfied with their resolutions and reasons after a serious and modest
arguing of the thing, though every scruple be not removed. As for that which is
here said of Ainsworth, Cotton, etc. I think they that knew, and read what
Vssher, Ball, Gataker, and such like men were, will not believe it. Mr.
Ainsworths differences between him and Johnson, Robinson* and Paget, and their
writings, especially of this last, show him to have been much short of what
this Author conceived of him. What Mr. Cotton was I do not rely upon Mr.
Baylies Dissuasive, but I think Dr. Twisse his answer to him about reprobation,
Mr. Cawdrey about the keys, that I mention no other, showed him not such, as
whose judgment might be safely rested in. And I scarce think either by the
reading of his way of the Churches in new England, or his commendation of Mr.
Nortons answer to Apollonius he could be of the same apprehension with this
Author in this matter. That the Reformed Churches generally renounce the
Ministry of the Church of England, I think is a manifest untruth. The passages
at the Synod of Dort, Peter Moulin his Letter to Bishop Andrews, with many more
of the like evidences of former and later times assure me this Author is
deceived. He adds.

Sect. 12. The Magistrates command to hear, the present Mininisters is to be
obeyed.
Object. 8. But the Magistrate commands us, and ought we not to obey
Magistrates.

Answ. 1. That Magistrates have no power to command in matters of instituted
worship, where Christ is silent, or to govern in his Church is affirmed by many.

2. The commands of Magistrates, when contrary to the will and way of Christ,
are not to be subjected to. This case is long since stated and resolved by the
Apostle (Acts 4.19, 20. and 5.29) and Spirit of the Lord, breathing long before
in his renouned witnesses, Dan. 3.16, 17. and 6.10. nor is it denied by any
that are sober, and judicious. Whether the hearing of the present Ministers of
England be contrary to the word of God, the will and way of Christ, we leave
from what has been offered, to the considerate reader to judge; And shall only
add what was long since asserted by Augustine de verb Domini Sermon. 6. in this
matter, who was herein fully of the same mind with us; Sed timeo inquies ne
offendas majorem, time prorsus ne offendas majorem, and non offendes Deum. Quid
enim times ne offendas majorem? Vide ne forsan major sit isto qu^m times
offendere. Majorem certe noli offendere -- quis est inquies major eo qui me
genuit? an ille qui teipsum creavit? -- qui enim resistit potestati, Dei
ordinationi resistit: sed quid si illud jubeat quod non debes facere? --
timendo potestatem ipsos humanarum rerum gradus advertite: si aliquid jusserit
Curator, nonne faciendum est? Tametsi contra Proconsul jubeat, at non utique
contemnis potestatem, sed eligis majori servire, nec hinc debet minor irasci,
si major praelata est. Rursum si aliquid ipse Proconsul jubeat, and aliud
jubeat Imperator, numquid dubitatur in illo contemptu illi esse serviendum?
Ergo si aliud Imperator and aliud Deus quid judicatis? Solve tributum, est mihi
in obsequio recte* Sed non in Idolio, in Idolio prohibet, quis prohibet? major
potestas. Da veniam! tu carcerem, ille gehennam minatur. He tells us plainly
that such as fear to offend their Superiors, should much more fear to offend
God, who is greater than all. The Emperors and Monarchs of the world, threaten
us with a Prison if we disobey them; the Lord threatens us with Hell upon our
disobedience of him.

I reply, The Brownists in their Confession of faith, art. 39. say, Princes and
Magistrates by the Ordinance of God are Supreme Governors under him over all
persons, and in all causes within their Realms and Dominions, and that it is
their duty to enforce all their Subjects whether Ecclesiastical or Civil to do
their duties to God and men, protecting and maintaining the good, punishing and
restraining the evil, according as God has commanded, whose Lieutenants they
are here on earth; and to prove this many Texts are cited by them, of which
confession Mr. Ainsworth said to be of the fame apprehension with this Author
in this matter, was a principal composer. In the Apology of the Non-conformists
by Irenaeus E^eutherius in the admonition to the Reader, the Kings Supremacy is
acknowledged. Which has been more largely proved before in this Answer to the
5th. Chapter of this book, Sect. 11, 12, 13, 14. And though it be not yielded,
that Princes should exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, or determine
Doctrines of faith, or impose what worship they will on the Subjects, yet it is
allowed by all I know except Papists, that when the Magistrate commands men to
be present at the true worship of God, and to hear them that preach truth, he
does what he ought, and is to be obeyed therein. This Author where in this
Chapter, p. 86. he supposes Christ enjoining his Disciples to attend upon the
Scribes and Pharisees acting as Magistrates, and conform to what is justly and
righteously prescribed them as such, must yield this, that the Saints are to
obey the Magistrate in this, unless he can show, that it is an unlawful thing
to hear the present Ministers, which he pretends he has done, but how vainly
is showed by this Answer, and so his Answer here to this Objection to be
insufficient. And indeed it tends to the gratifying of Popish Recusants* who
allege, for their not hearing, the non-conjunction with the Pope and Church of
Rome, as this Author, does the non-election and non-membership of the present
Ministers in a Congregational Church, to be in which as the only Instituted
Church of Christ, is made necessary, as Papists do to be in Communion with the
Church of Rome: And therefore if it be unlawful to hear the present Ministers,
the Papists have a just plea for their not coming to Church; which evacuates
all the Laws and Government requiring it. It is added,

Sect. 13. Conformists Ministry has been instrumental to Convert Souls.
Object. 9. But the Ministers of England are true Gospel Ministers, for they
convert Souls; which the Apostle makes the Seal of his Ministry or Apostleship:
therefore it is lawful to hear them.

To this we say, 1. That the Ministers of England are true Gospel Ministers, is
absolutely denied by us; what is offered in this Objection proves nothing.

1. Paul makes not the Conversion of the Church of Corinth, singly, a
sufficient demonstration, or convincing argument of his Apostleship; he only
uses it, as what was most likely to win, and work upon their affections, who
upon other accounts could not but know that he was an Apostle of the Lord Jesus.

2. Conversion of Souls is no argument, either of a lawful call to an
Apostleship, or Ministry of Christ.

For, 1. Many have converted Souls, that were not Apostles, as ordinary
Ministers.

2. The Lord has used private brethren, women, yea, some remarkable
providence, as instruments in his hand for the conversion of many Souls; yet
who will say that private brethren, women, or Divine Providence, are Apostles
or Ministers of the Lord Jesus.

But 3. Should it be granted, that conversion of Souls is an argument of a
lawful Ministry, where are the Churches, nay where are the particular persons
converted by them? We have not heard of any, nor will it be an easy task for
the Objectors to produce instances in this matter.

I reply, That the Ministers of England, who preach the Gospel truly, are true
Gospel Ministers, may be denied absolutely, but not justly, their preaching the
Gospel truly being it, which alone is the form denominating a Minister a true
Gospel Minister; though more be required to his regularity. Election by a
Congregational Church, Ordination by an Eldership, or Bishop, do not make a
true Gospel Minister without it, and it does it notwithstanding some other
defects. But conversion of Souls is no certain sign of a true Gospel Minister,
or the defect of it an argument against it: nor do I allege 1 Cor. 9.1, 2. to
prove either. Yet when the Gospel of Christ is truly preached, and so blessed
an effect follows on their labors, who do so, it is a good motive to the
converted to hear them who have been instruments of their conversion, and is an
engagement to them to follow their doctrine and conversation, 1 Cor. 4.15, 16.
Heb. 13.7.17. 1 These. 5.12, 13. And if this Author, or any other do separate
from them, who have been instruments of their conversion, and continue still to
preach the Gospel truly, because they abide in their station without renouncing
Episcopal Ordination, or accepting of an election by a congregational Church,
they do it unwarrantably and injuriously. As for the words of the Apostle 1
Cor. 9.1, 2. the Apostles aim is to show he was as free, and might use his
liberty as much as any other Apostle, being as truly an Apostle as any other,
which might, besides other evidences, from the effect of his Apostleship on
them appear to them; so that it is an argument of his Apostleship, though not
singly, not, as this Author conceives, a motive to win upon their affections;
yet I think it an argument from and of some thing proper to the Apostle, and
the Corinthians, and therefore would not merely from conversion of Souls,
conclude a true Gospel Ministry in all that have been instruments therein. As
for the demand, where are the Churches, where are the particular persons
converted by them? It may perhaps be as justly demanded of this Author, where
are the Churches or particular persons converted by the Ministers of the
congregational Churches in old or new England, or Holland? Mr. Robert Baylie of
Scotland in his Dissuasive from the Errors of the time, Mr. Thomas Edwards in
his Gangraena tell stories of the fruit of separation, which I will not avow as
true: yet so much of truth may be picked out of them, as may stop the mouths of
them, that extol those Ministers, and decry the best of the Conformists; who
yet have been, if not of late, yet heretofore Fathers in Christ to the Members
of the Congregational Churches, and to the most eminent in the Churches of old
or new England. But this disparagement of some, and extolling of others, is an
odious course tending to nothing but promoting of faction, and weakening the
hands of them that do the work of Christ, and therefore do pray that this
spirit of pride and bitterness may be extinguished, than in love we may serve
one another, and that nothing be done out of strife and vainglory, but that in
lowliness of mind each may esteem others better than our selves. And I wish
none had vented or read such criminations as those in the book entitled
Prelatical preachers none of Christ's teachers, in which he breaks out thus, p
61. They that were ^oundly right down without any abatement or need of
explication, Ministers of a Prelatical Ordination, have amongst them in matters
of true Religion, sound knowledge and piety toward God reduced the generality
of the Nation to a morsel of bread. All those Idolatrous and Superstitious
conceits and practices, all the bloody ignorance and prophaeess, all that
customary boldness in sinning, that hatred of goodness and good men, which are
the nakedness and shame of the land, and render it obnoxious to Divine
displeasure, may justly call this generation of men either fathers, or foster
fathers, or both, p. 75. he terms their Ministry a Ministry which is no where
approved or sanctified by Christ in his word, but obtruded upon Christians with
an high hand by those who are confederate both in spirit and in practice with
the scarlet colored beast, and drunken with the blood of the Saints (a
description which belyeth not the Prelatical Priesthood and Ministry,) and then
applies the description Revel. 13.11. to them, and the warning Revel. 14 9. to
those who join to them, p 76, 77. he makes the Bishops to comply with
Antichrist in claiming and exercising a power of imposing on men what they
please in matters of Religion, or faith, and worship, under what penalties they
please also, makes those ordained and Ministers under them and by them to
receive the mark of the beast, p. 52. though God did before the discovery of
the evil of Prelacy benefit Souls by them, yet not after. But enough of this;
there remains yet that which follows,

Sect. 14. To the observation of the Lords day, hearing the present Ministers
as the case now is, may be requisite.
Object. 10. But our Ministers are removed, and we know not where to go to
hear; would you have us sit at home idle? We cannot so spend the Lords day.

Answ. To which we would humbly offer a few things.

1. That though we are not against any Ordinance of Jesus Christ, yet we are
afraid that those poor Souls, that know not how to spend the Lords day without
hearing, do too much Idolize that Ordinance of God, and never knew what it was
to spend that day with him.

2. You need not sit at home; if you are enquiring after God, and communion
with his people, you may soon hear of some one or other of the Assemblies of
the Saints, whither you may repair to wait upon the Lord with them.

3. But thirdly, were it, or should it be otherwise; yet better be idle, than
do worse; better do nothing, than sin against God, encourage others in their
evil deeds, pollute and wound thy own Soul, grieve the Saints, stumble and
harden the wicked, and cause them to blaspheme his Name, Sanctuary, and such as
dwell therein.

But, 4. There is no necessity of being idle, if thou know not where to hear
on that day, have thou no work to do save that?

1. Art sure that God, and Christ, and Eternal Glory, are thy portion and
inheritance? Thou walk in the light of assurance, or thou do not? If thou
do, is one day in seven too much to spend in the solemn admiration of grace,
that ever so vile a creature as thou, should be accounted worthy of such
unexpressible kindness and glory? What, O what will Eternity be then? If thou
do not, are not these worthy of thy utmost diligence to get assurance of?
What, stand idle, and an interest in God, Christ, and Eternal Glory to make
sure of!

2. Art thou sufficiently acquainted with thine own heart? Do know so much of
thy self as thou need to know? Or judge thou this to be a work that
requires not thy utmost diligence and attendance?

3. Have thou no sin to be mortified, no want to be supplied, no grace to be
quickened and strengthened in thee?

4, Have thou as much communion with God as thou desire? Have heard as often
from him by the tea^hings of the Spirit (the incomparably and infinitely best
teacher) as thou do wish? Or do think that God will not manifest himself
to, and teach in a corner, a poor Soul that is there waiting for him alone,
because there be no Assemblies of Saints he knows of, to whom he might join
himself, and he dares not have Communion with Adulterers? If thou have not
fellowship with God thou desire, and teachings from him (as who has) stir up
thy self to lay hold on God, groan and cry after him, till he has brought thee
into his chambers, and afforded thee richer displayes of his glory.

5. Art thou altogether ready trimmed (without more ado) for the coming and
Kingdom of Christ Jesus? what should I mention those important duties of
reading the Scriptures, meditation on them, etc. have thou all this to do, and
much more that might be added, and yet nothing to do on the Lords day? set
about these things in good earnest, and when thou live in the light of
assurance, without the least doubt or clouding, when thou art sufficiently
acquainted with thine own heart, the will and Scriptures of the Lord; when thou
have as much communion with God in retirement, as thou desire, and teachings
from his Spirit; when thou have no sin to be mortified, nor grace to be
quickened and strengthened; when thou art quite ready for the day of Christ,
and need no further fittings, we shall consider what may be further said to
this Objection; but till then, it cannot be pleaded, when souls have all this
work to do, that they must sit at home idle, if they go not to hear the
Preachers of this day. But thus far of the Objections that are by some made
against the assertion of the unlawfulness of attending upon the present
Ministers of England; which are all of any moment we have yet met with: what of
weight is in them, must be left to the judgment of the Christian Reader to
determine. We shall add no more but this, that we have spoken our judgment and
conscience herein, as in sincerity, in the sight of God: with what meekness,
Christian tenderness, and fear of giving any just offense to the truly
conscientious, he knows. The sole of our aim in the whole is, That Christ may
be glorified in the recovery of any poor lamb, that is turned aside to the
flocks of the companions in this cloudy and dark day; that others that have
hitherto kept themselves from Idols, might be further established in the will
of God, and strengthened to follow Christ in his temptations, that they may
inherit that kingdom and glory, prepared for them before the foundation of the
world: May we but in the least contribute, by Divine blessing, hereunto
whatever becomes of these papers, or however they be by others accounted of, we
have our end, and shall rest satisfied.

I reply, this objection I find made not only by some of the common sort of
professors, but also particulaly by Mr. Crofton, and made by him as an
argument, wherefore he did, and ought to join in hearing and praying in public
on the Lords day, notwithstanding the defects in the ministerial mode and
method of the public Ministers, the worship of God substantially existing in
matter and essential form in their Ministration, and the Lords day being to be
observed in public as well as private, where, and when the Ordinances cannot
be enjoyed in a purer manner. His second in the book entitled, Jerubbaal
justified, does reduce his plea to this Syllogism. Communion with the Church
visible in Gods solemn public worship, is an essential part of the
sanctification of the Sabbath, and indispensable duty. But communion with the
English Church, in the worship by her celebrated, is communion with the Church
visible in Gods solemn worship. Ergo, Communion with the English Church (having
no opportunity with any other) in the worship of her celebrated, is to me an
essential part of the sanctification of the Sabbath, and indispensable duty.
This Syllogism is defended in that Book, to which I refer the Reader, and
consider the objection as here it is urged and answered. The objection proceeds
upon suppositions of the Separatists, or Independents, in the number of whom he
is to be accounted, as appears by his words in this Chapter, in answer to the
7th. objection, where he says, Learned Ainsworth, Cotton, etc. have been and
are of the same apprehension with us in this matter. Now in Mr. Cottons way of
the Churches of Christ in New England, it is put into the definition of a
visible Church, that they are a number that may meet every Lords day for all
Ordinances, and in the Declaration of the Elders and Messengers of the
Congregational Churches at the Savoy, Oct. 12. 1658. chapter 22. art. 8. The
Sabbath is then kept holy to the Lord, when men are taken up the whole time in
the public and private exercises of his worship, and in the duties of
necessity and mercy. Among these art. 5. The reading of the Scriptures,
preaching and hearing of the word of God are reckoned, and art. 6. God is to be
worshipped as in private families daily, and in secret each one by himself, so
more solemnly in the public assemblies, which are not carelessly nor wilfully
to be neglected or forsaken, when God by his word or providence calls
thereunto. Upon which, and other suppositions, it concerns every tender
conscience, which receives these principles, to consider how they can acquit
themselves from not observing the Lords day in public assemblies, where God is
invocated in the name of Christ, and the word of God truly taught, especially
in such places where they may enjoy these performed by the present Ministers,
and are deprived of their former Ministers and communion, and cannot of
themselves discharge these duties.

That which this Author answers, does not solve the doubt: That such persons
conceive they cannot spend the Lords day without hearing, is not out of any
Idolizing the Ordinances of God; but from those grounds which are by the
declaration before named, and the generality of zealous Preacher, pressed upon
Christians, That it is one duty of sanctifying the Lords day, not only to
abstain from labor, which makes only Sabbatum asinorum, a Sabbath that beasts
have as well as men; nor only to exercise themselves in reading and prayer at
home, for that is every days duty; but also to frequent the public assemblies
where God is worshipped, which this Author conceives enjoined, Heb. 10.25. and
is gathered from Exodus 20.8. Acts 20.7. Revel. 1.10. 1 Cor. 16.1.2. John
20.19.26. That many persons cannot in many places find such assemblies of the
Saints, as this Author means, is a thing out of doubt with me. Were public
hearing a sin, I confess it were better to do nothing than do that: But that is
not yet proved, and I think it fit to acquaint the Reader, That Mr. Norton of
New England, in that Answer to Apollonius his questions, which is commended by
Mr. Cotton, Dr. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Philip Nigh, and Mr. Sidrach Simpson, chapter
13. does thus determine, Such things being observed as are to be observed, it
may be lawful to use forms of prayers, administrations of Sacraments, etc.
prescribed in the Church, neither are the Churches which use them guilty of
superstition, will worship, and violating the second Commandment; yea, it is
lawful to embrace communion with them, where such forms in the public worship
are in use: neither does it lie as a duty on a believer, that he separate and
disjoyn himself from such a Church, unless he would partake in the
superstitious worship of Images. Communion with a Church, qua utitur, as it
uses worship of it self unlawful, is unlawful; communion with a Church quae
utitur, which uses it, to wit, in other lawful worship, is lawful; and
separation from it, is unlawful.

And to show how evil the counsel of this Author is to men to spend the Lord's
day in a corner idle at home, rather then go to hear in public. I think good
to subjoyn some words of Mr John Paget in his Preface to the Christian Reader,
before his Book, Entitled, An Arrow against the separation of the Brownists.
Of the Brownists there are sundry sorts: some separate from the Church of
England for corruptions; and yet confess both it and Rome and it also to be a
true Church, as the followers of Mr. Johnson, Christian Plea, p. 216, 217. Some
renounce the Church of England as a false Church, and yet allow private
communion with the godly therein, as Mr. Robinson Justify. p. 339, 340, 247.
and his followers Relig. Com. p. 1. etc. Some renounce all religious communion
both public and private with any Member of that Church whosoever, as Mr.
Ainsworth Counterpoy. page 197. and such as hearken unto him, being deepest and
stiffest in their Schism. The evil of this separation is great.

First, The minds of many are troubled and distracted hereby; even of such as
do not separate, but have some liking thereof; especially if it be true which
Mr. Robinson writes of them, Relig. comm. preface; to wit, That they seeing it
not to be for their purposes that the world should so esteem of them* do
undoubtedly strain and wring the neck of their consciences and courses, to look
the contrary way* etc. What can be more miserable then to have the necks of
consciences thus broken by the doctrine of separation?

Secondly, for those that separate, but do not yet join unto them, or being
joined* do withhold from actual communion, living alone, and hearing the word
of God in no Church, as some do; How great is their misery also; Mr. Robinson
himself, ibid. p. 36.39. shows it at large, no^ing them to be Idol-members,
such as break the commandment of Christ, loose the fruit of his ascension, and
fail their own edification and salvation many ways, etc.

Thirdly* for those that being enjoined to them, do also live with them, seeing
they have in effect excommunicate themselves from all other Churches of Christ*
and consequently from the fellowship of Christ Jesus himself, and from the
participation of his grace and glory, so far as he reveals the same by dwelling
in those Churches: It is therefore no wonder to hear Mr. Johnson treat on Matt.
18. Preface A. 2. complaining of the evils among them, as emulation, debate,
and other sins which daily arise and spread themselves to the great dishonor
of God, etc.

As for the directions given by this Author, how to spend at home the Lords
day, some of them are such as weak persons; women and novices cannot make use
of it, yea, they would be dangerous to them, occasioning them to fall into
errors, Enthusiastic conceits, some of them Antinomians count unnecessary,
and those that are good; yet by the deprivation of society, and public
teaching, and heavily performed; and they that take such courses, do either
very frequently decay in the exercise of godliness, grow barren and liveless in
prayer and holy conferences, or turn Seekers, Quakers, Ranters, Censurers,
Scoffers, Libertines: However, were they all used, yet they solve not the doubt
arising from those principles, which require public hearing for hallowing the
Lords day; which is to be observed not only for the benefit of our own
edification, but also for the glory of God, and testification of our
profession; which is not done by private exercise of Religion. And although
some persons may more benefit themselves in knowledge by reading at home, yet
the example hinders others from the use of the public Ordinances, whereto we
should by our practice encourage them. For these, and other reasons often urged
by those, who have been for separation, it is not to be expected that such
private exercises should be blessed or accepted of God, when the public are to
be performed. Both certainly should be done in their seasons, not one exclude
the other.

I have thus answered all I find in this Author, and do join with him in
referring the thing to the Reader, who, if he will not cheat his own soul, must
judge impartially, and without prejudice, weighing what is said on both sides.
As for my aims and spirit in writing this thing, having found so little equity
in men's censures of me about former writings, I can the less trust to any sort
of men's good or bad of one or other opinion or judgment of me: My care I hope
shall be, to approve my self to God, and to solicit him by prayers for his
blessing upon my labors in this thing: To which I shall add as over-measure,
these ensuing Arguments for hearing the present Ministers as now the case is.

Sect. 15. An Appendix, containing forty additional Reasons against denying
the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers.
First I argue for the lawfulness of hearing them Preach the Doctrine of the
Gospel, as it is professed in the Church of England, from the definition of
sin, which is a transgression of the Law, 1 John 3.4. whence the Apostle, Romans
4.13. Where no law is, that is, no law prohibiting that which is done, there is
no transgression. Whence I argue, That is lawful in which is no sin, in the
hearing of the present Ministers Preach the doctrine of the Gospel, as it is
professed in the Church of England, is no sin, therefore it is lawful. The
major is undoubted, that being unlawful only in which is sin according to the
notion of the terms: The minor is proved; because it is no breach of the Law,
there being neither any law of nature, nor any written law of the Old or New
Testament, moral or positive, in express terms, or by good consequence against
it. Which is sufficiently proved by the answer to such Arguments as are here
brought to prove a prohibition of such hearing, and by requiring those that
condemn it as unlawful, to produce the law which forbids it; which yet is not
done that we know. If it be said (as it is by many of the people who scruple
the doing of many things used in the public worship as now it is) that in Gods
worship it is not enough, that there is no law against what we do, but there
must be also a command to do it, else it is will worship. Besides what I have
answered in the examination of the first Chapter of this Treatise I add 1. That
the alleging of a command is not necessary to prove a thing lawful, but to
prove it a necessary duty, it is sufficient to prove my present conclusion,
That no Law forbidding the hearing the present Ministers can be produced. 2.
That as express command may be showed for hearing the present Ministers, as for
hearing the congregational Ministers, at least those of them that are
Separatist, against whom there are more just exceptions then against the
present Conforming Ministers of England, why they should not be heard: Which
leads me to a second Argument for the lawfulness of hearing them; which I thus
form.

2. Those Ministers may lawfully be heard, against the hearing of whom by no
exceptions, but such as are extrinsecal to the duty of hearing, as it is a part
of Gods worship. But so it is concerning the hearing of the present Ministers:
Therefore they may be heard. The duty of hearing, as it is a part of Gods
worship, consists in this, That we apply our selves to learn the mind of God,
by which we come to know and obey him: It is extrinsecal to this, that it be
delivered to us by a good or a bad man; a man in Church Covenant or not, our
proper Pastor chosen by our selves, or imposed upon us; and therefore such
personal exceptions against the deliverer, are extrinsecal to the duty of
hearing or non^hearing, if he declare Gods mind to us, we may worship God in
hearing, though the Preacher sin in his conversation, or entrance on his
Ministry, or be otherwise faulty, if he be faithful in delivering the truth of
God to us: though other things make one man's teaching more desirable, or more
delightful, or useful to us, yet the defect of them makes not our hearing his
teaching unlawful, who teaches the word of God truly, because we may thereby
learn Gods mind, in applying our selves whereto is his worship by hearing.

3. This is further proved in that where there are any prohibitions which
restrain us from hearing any Teachers, it is because of their Doctrine: Which
is an argument, That in hearing others that teach true Doctrine, or the truth
of Gods word, we are at liberty to hear them, and consequently the present
Ministers supposed to do so. The antecedent is verified by inspection of these,
Deuteronomy. 13.3. Matt. 7.15. Mark 4.24. and such other Texts as cautionate men from
hearing Teachers. Whence may be inferred: That Is not unlawful for us, from
which Gods cautions restrain us not; But from hearing the present Ministers
supposed to teach the truth of Gods word, Gods cautions restrain us not:
therefore it is not unlawful to hear them.

4. It is the character or property of one that is of God, or is a sheep of
Christ, to hear Gods word, or Christ's voice without limiting it to some
persons, John 8.47. He that is of God, hears Gods word, John 10.27. My sheep
hear my voice. Whence I argue, That is not unlawful which may be a duty, and a
characteristical property of one that is of God or Christ's sheep. But to hear
the present Ministers, being supposed to teach the word of God, and the voice
of Christ, may be a duty, and a characteristical property of one that is of
God, or Christ's sheep. Therefore it is not unlawful to hear them, being
supposed to teach the word of God, and the voice of Christ.

5. From the same Scriptures it may be argued thus, That may be unlawful which
may be a sign of one that is not of God, nor of Christ's sheep; but not to hear
the present Ministers, when they teach the word of God, and the voice of Christ
may be a sign of one that is not of God: for Christ says, John 8.47. Ye
therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God, nor a sheep of Christ, who
says, John 10.26. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, as I
said unto you. Therefore it may be unlawful not to hear the present Ministers,
and consequently lawful to hear them.

6. To refuse to hear the word of God, though delivered by the present
Ministers, is profaneness, such as is condemned in Esau. Heb. 12.16. For it is
the rejecting, or neglecting of a holy thing, as it is termed by our Lord
Christ, Matthew. 7.6. therefore it may be unlawful to shun hearing them, and
consequently lawful to hear them.

7. The word of God is a pearl of great price, Matt. 7.6. such as a merchant
man should sell all he has to buy, Matthew. 13.46. a great treasure, v. 44.
therefore to be heard and received by whomsoever held forth, and consequently
it is folly and sin to shun hearing it, because of personal exceptions against
the bringer, as it would be folly to refuse a treasure found in a dunghill, or
a pearl brought by an unworthy person.

8. If the word of God preached by the present Ministers, may be effectual for
that good, which is the end wherefore it is preached, then it may be lawfully
heard from them, or rather ought to be heard according to that precept, James
1.21. Receive with meekness the ingraffed word, which is able to save your
souls, 1 Pet. 2.1, 2. Desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow
thereby. But the word of God preached by the present Ministers, may be thus
effectual: For the efficacy of it comes not from the personal qualifications of
the Preacher, but from the verity of it, it is derivation from God, his promise
and blessing; and however Sepatists have declaimed against such Ministers, and
suggested to their Partisans, as if no good could be gotten by hearing them;
yet experience has proved the contrary: and therefore they are to be heard.
Finis dat mediis ordinem mensuram and amabilitatem. The hearing of them is an
ordinary means of hearers edification in the faith and obedience of Christ, and
therefore is not unlawful, but to be made use of.

9. That is not unlawful, the neglect of which may be the occasion and reason
of a man's condemnation, it is the condemnation of a person, John 3.20. that he
comes not to the light. But the present Ministers holding forth the light, men's
not hearing them, is not coming to the light, and so much the more dangerous,
if by not hearing them, they are deprived of any other to bring the light to
them, as it may, and perhaps does fall out at some times; and in some places:
Therefore the neglect of hearing them may be the occasion and reason of a
persons condemnation, and so a damnable sin in them that refuse to hear them,
and in those that deter others from hearing them.

10. The words of Peter, John, 6.68. Lord to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life, include in them this proposition, We may go to them, as
to Teachers of us, who have the words of eternal life* But the present
Ministers who teach the Gospel of Christ, have the words of eternal life: for
it contains his words, and is the power of God to salvation, from the matter of
it. Romans 1.16, 17. Mighty through God to bring into captivity every thought to
the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Therefore we may go to the present
Ministers, who teach the Gospel of Christ, and hear them as our Teachers.

11. The Apostle Paul, 1 Th^s: 2.13. writes thus: For this cause also thank we
God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God which ye heard of
us, ye received (...) not as the words of men, but (as it is in t^^th) the wo^d
of God, which effectually works also in you that believe. Whence I thus
argue, If the word of God be to be heard as his word, and not as the word of
men, then it is sufficient for right hearing, that we attend to the preaching
of it, without consideration of the personal qualifications of the men that
deliver it* and consequently we need not decline hearing of Preachers that
deliver it, though otherwise liable to exceptions; yea, it is our duty to hear
any men preach it without questioning any thing, but whether it be the word of
God, and it is evil to refuse to hear it, because of our disaffection and
prejudice against the Preachers; and accordingly it is enough to justify the
hearing of the present Ministers, that they preach the word of God, and that we
hear them as teaching it. For quatenus ipsum inc^udes de omni, if we may, yea
ought to hear the word of God, as Gods word, we may and ought to hear it at any
time, from any person; and if we do not hear it under this consideration, we
hear amiss, and worship not God in hearing. But the word of God is to be heard
as Gods word, as is evident from St. Paul's thanksgiving that the Thessalonians
so heard it, and not as the word of men, though Preached by himself, who
ascribes the efficacy of it to this consideration in their hearing. Therefore
it is sufficient for right hearing* that we attend to the Preaching of Gods
word, without consideration of the personal qualifications of them that deliver
it; and consequently we may rightly hear the present Ministers Preaching Gods
word, though without such personal qualifications as are required of them.

12. The same is further proved by the holy Ghosts approbation of the practice
of the Beraeans, neighbors to the Thessalonians, Acts 17.11, 12. These were
more noble then those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily, whether these things were
so; therefore many of them believed. Whence I argue, They may be right hearers
of the present Ministers, who may hear them as the Beraeans did; which
proposition is confirmed, in that the holy Ghost gives them the commendation of
right hearers, in that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, whether the things taught by St. Paul were
agreeable thereto, without examining his commission to Preach, or other
qualifications of his person; yea, and this is made the reason of their
believing: and therefore the word of God is sufficient to beget faith, because
of it is agreeableness to the Scripture, and has most success when hearers hear
it with respect to it is congruity to the holy Scripture, and not because
delivered by such men as they approve of. But thus may Christians hear the
present Ministers of England, and therefore may be right hearers of the present
Ministers; and consequently they that do so, do lawfully hear them; and they
that hear their Ministers out of other particular respects, and not in this
manner, hear not rightly, nor does their hearing edify them in the faith of
Christ, but tends to inordinate glorying in men, and to division consequent
thereon.

13. From our Lord Christ's word: Luke 9.49* 50. And John answered and said,
Master, we saw one ca^ting out devils in thy name, and we forbade him, beca^se
he followe^h not with us. And Jesus said into him, Forbid him not; for he that
is not against us, is for us. I gather, That Christ would not have him
forbidden to Preach, who Preached in his name, though he were not joined to
Christ's disciples. For though the acting in Christ's name expressed, (...) only
using his name to expel devils, yet by using his name there was some Preaching
of Christ, and the words Mark 9.39. For there is no man which shall do a
miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me, and the occasion both
Mark 9.37. and Luke 9.48* immediately foregoing, Whosoever shall receive one of
such children in my name, receives me: and whosoever shall receive me,
receives not me, but him that sent me; and Christ's reason, Forbid him not: for
he that is not against us, is for us, show that Christ's words are at well meant
of preaching in his name, as of casting out devils, at least the reason of them
is of like force for the not prohibiting of men to Preach in his name, as to
cast out devils: Whence I argue, They may be heard Preach in Christ's name, who
are not to be forbidden to Preach in Christ's name* But the present Ministers of
England are not to be forbidden to Preach in Christ's name; therefore they may
be heard Preach in Christ's name. The major is of it self evident, there being
no reason to be given why they that are allowed to Preach in Christ's name,
should not be heard by the same allowance, allowance to Preach being vain and
frivolous, without allowance for others to hear. The minor is also proved by
parity of reason, for allowing them to preach as well as those who cast out
Devils in Christ's name, yet joined not with the Disciples, since so doing they
did not speak evil of Christ, nor were against him, but for him, nor is there
so much reason of prohibiting the Ministers to preach in Christ's name, because
they are not in a separated Church, nor elected by the Members thereof, as
there was of prohibiting them that followed not with the Apostles to cast out
Devils in Christ's name. If Christ would not have these forbidden to do a
miracle in his name, neither would he have the other forbidden to preach in his
name, which they do in effect, who make it unlawful to hear them.

14. I shall adjoyn to this, that our Savior, Matthew. 7.22, 23. where he
alleges the plea and expectation of formal hypocrites, he does not reject
them for prophesying in his name, but for their working iniquity, thereby
showing, that he allowed their prophesying in his name as good, though not
sufficient without obedience. Whence I argue, if their prophesying in Christ's
name who were workers of iniquity, then much more their teaching in Christ's
name, who are only supposed to be defective in outward calling, or faulty in
some actions consistent with Christianity, is to be allowed, and if their
teaching be allowed, then the hearing of them is by consequence allowed: for
these are conjugates.

15. Our Lord Christ says Luke 10.16. concerning the seventy Disciples, he
that hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me, and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me. The reason hereof is, because
they preached the same Doctrine: if if there be an outward mission, and the
same Doctrine which Christ taught is not preached, Christ is not heard, but
when the same Doctrine is heard which Christ taught, he is heard, and if it be
rejected, he is despised. Whence I argue, They may be lawfully heard, by
hearing of whom we may hear Christ. But by hearing of the present Ministers who
preach the Doctrine of Christ, we hear Christ, therefore we may hear the
present Ministers who preach the D^^trine of Christ. The reason of the minor is
from that speech (...) Christ, John. 7.16. my Doctrine is not mine, but his
that sent (...), in the preachers Doctrine which he preaches after Christ, is
not his own, but Christ's who sent him, as an Ambassadors message is his Kings,
not his own, and by hearing him deliver it according to his Commission, his
Master is heard.

16. This is further confirmed from Romans 10.15. And how shall they preach
except they be sent? As it is written, How beautiful are the feet of them that
preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things. The citation
of these words to prove, that they cannot preach who are not sent, does
presuppose, 1. That they who preach the Gospel of Peace, that bring the glad
tidings of good things, are sent to preach, and that by hearing of it comes
faith, and that the word of God is heard, else were the citation impertinent,
and the inference v. 17. inconsequent. 2. That their feet are beautiful, and
that they are to be heard in this respect. But I subsume the present Ministers,
who preach the Doctrine they undertake to teach, preach the Gospel of Peace,
and bring the glad tidings of good things, therefore are they sent, their feet
are beautiful, and are to be heard.

17. In the parable of the talents, Matthew. 25.15. or pounds, Luke 19.13. our
Savior says the Kingdom of Heaven is as when a noble man goes into a far
Country, gives his Servants his money to trade with, and they are to gain more
thereby, 1 Cor. 12.7.8. the gifts of the spirit are given to profit withal, in
which are reckoned the word of wisdom, of knowledge, teachers v. 28, 29.
Ephesians. 4.11. for the ed^fying of the body of Christ in the unity of the faith,
and of the knowledge of the son of God. Whence it is apparent, 1. That ability
to teach the things of Christ, to edify the body of Christ is a gift of
Christ, 2. That they who do use this ability do it unto Christ's advantage
according to his design. 3. That not to improve this gift is to disappoint
Christ of his end in giving it, 4. For any to hinder this improvement is
sinful. Whence I argue: They that have ability to preach the Gospel have
received a Talent from Christ to improve it, their improving is by preaching,
this cannot be done unless they be heard, therefore the not hearing them makes
void the use of that gift. The present Ministers who preach the Gospel have
received this gift, and by preaching do use i^, therefore they are to be heard,
and the not hearing them is to d^sable them from improving it, and consequently
is a sin against Christ's design.

18 As from the end of Christ's gifts, so from the duty of them that have
received them we may prove, that the present Ministers are to be heard, 1 Pet.
4 10.11. As every man has received the gift, even so Minister the same one to
another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let
him speak as the Oracles of God. Whence I argue; If the present M^nisters have
received a gift to speak the Oracles of God, then are they to Minister the
same, and consequently to be heard. This is acknowledged by this Author chapter 2.
in these words; That Christ has appointed some, as Ministers, by virtue of an
office power, to dispense the Ordinances of the Gospel, until his Second
Coming, is granted by all, that it is permitted to others, as their liberty;
enjoined them, as their duty (having received gifts and enablements from the
Lord thereunto) to improve those gifts in preaching, praying, etc. for the
edification of the body of Christ (though not solemnly invested into office) is
assented unto, at least by some of those with whom we have to do; whence a
lawfulness to hear them as Ministers* or as gifted brethren does necessarily
arise. But the present Ministers have received a gift to speak the Oracles of
God, as experience shows, and that equally, if not beyond the teachers of the
congregational Churches, and they are to Minister the same, which cannot be
done unless they be heard, and therefore are to be heard. When is opposed
against this is answered in the examination of the Second Chapter of this book.

19. That the present Ministers may be heard preach the Gospel, is further
proved from 1 Cor. 3.22. where it is said to the Corinthians against their
addicting themselves to some teachers rather than others, whether Paul or
Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come; all are yours. They are said to be theirs, because they had
interest in the use of of them, and the use of the teachers was their hearing
them, any of them, though not their particular Pastor, and one of them, to wit
Apollos his setting a part to that function is not recorded, and however he did
teach, and was to be heard Acts 18.24, 25, 26. before he was ordained to be a
preacher, or fully knew the way of God. Whence I infer, that every Christian
has an interest in every preacher of the Gospel, that no Minister is to be
accounted (...) peculiar to any party of Christians so as to be impropriated by
them, that the ability of every one may be used by any though not their proper
Minister, nor perhaps regularly ordained, and therefore the present Ministers
of England may be heard by any Saints, while they teach the Gospel, though such
irregularities, as are objected against them, were granted to be in them or
their Ministry.

20. From the same Scripture I collect, that the practice of this Author in
disclaiming the Ministry of those, who are not either Officers in a gathered
Church in the congregational way, or gifted brethren Members in such a Church,
though otherwise good men, and able diligent preachers, and adhering only to
those of their own Society, is glorying in men forbidden by the Apostle, 1 Cor.
3.21. and contrary to what he says, 1 Cor. 4.6. And these things brethren, I
have in a figure transferred to my self and to Apollos for your sakes, that ye
might learn in us not to think of men above that which is written, that no one
of you be puffed up for one against another. Wherein the Apostle dissuades from
such esteem of some Ministers above others, as to overprize some, elevating
some, and disparaging others, following some, and flighting others, though
teachers of truth. Which sin I deprehended long ago to be in this land, chiefly
in the Capital City thereof, and therefore discovered it in a Sermon in one of
the most eminent Auditories thereof many years before; and printed it in the
year 1645. with this Title, Anthopolatria, or the sin of glorying in men,
especially in eminent Ministers of the Gospel, and I wish I had not been too
prophetical therein. I do now wish that this Author, and such others as
magnify their own teachers, or tie men to them, and draw them off from hearing
other Ministers, because Conformists, though teachers of the Gospel, did by
scanning these texts see their error and evil. It is true Chrysostom and
Hierom on 1 Cor. 1.12. and many other interpreters conceive a fiction, as if
the Apostle Paul had transferred that to the persons of the Apostles, which did
agree to the false Apostles, being moved by the words, 1 Cor. 4.6. which it is
likely our translators conceived by their reading, I have in a figure
transferred these things to my self. At which Pareus marvai^^ in his
Commentary on 1 Cor. 1.12. And I give reasons against it in my Sermon
forenamed Sect. 5. conceiving the word (...) not to note a Rhetorical figure of
speech, but application as the outward habit is to the body, and the things
applied are either, as Pareus, what he had said, 1 Cor. 3.7. That he which
planteth is nothing, and he which waters is nothing, or, as I rather
conceived then, what is said 1 Cor. 4.1. That they were Ministe^s of Christ and
Stewards of the mysteries of God, Christian Berman exerci^. Theolog. 12.
Intelligit metaphoram ministri, Oeconomi, Villici, and Hortu^an, he m^ans the
metaphor of a Minister, Steward, Husbandman, Gardener: which confirms my
argument against the separating principle of those that forbid the hearing of
the present Ministers, though Stewards of the mysteries of God, Planters,
Waterers, Builders, and tie men to hear those only who are their elected
Ministers or gifted brethren, which is glorying in men, and tends to puff up
for one against another.

21. The Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.1. says, Let a man so account of us as of the
Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the mysteries of God. 1 Thessalonians* 5.12, ^3.
And we beseech you, brethren, to know them which labor among you, and are over
you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them very highly in Love for
their works sake, and be at peace among your selves. 1 Timothy 5.13. Let the
Elde^s that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they who
labor in the Word and Doctrine. Heb. 13.7. Remember your Rulers or Guides who
have spoken to you the Word of God. Which texts do show who are to be accounted
true Ministers, to wit, such as are Stewards of the mysteries of God, who
labor in the Word and Doctrine, who spoke unto us the Word of God, what
account should be made of them, they are to be esteemed highly, honored*
remembered, and for what reason, for their work sake, not for particular
respects only, as our election of them, our opinion of their parts, our
affection to them as of our party. Now I suppose the present Ministers of
England are Stewards of the mysteries of God in dispensing the Gospel truly,
that they speak the Word of God to the people, that they labor in the Word and
Doctrine, and therefore are to be accounted Ministers* and to be esteemed,
honored, remembered for their work sake: and therefore much more are to be
heard who are such, for this reason however otherwise defective. The main of
this, that they speak the word of God is so manifest that it is not denied,
what is gainsaid is answered before: and therefore: judge the denying the
Saints liberty of giving them audience, and most of all the (...) against them
are great sins against these Precepts, the 5th. Commandment and other
Precepts, as Acts 23.5. St. Paul conceived.

22. The Precept, 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. and be at peace among your selves, a^ded to
that of esteeming them in love who admonish them for their wo^k sak^, gives me
occasion to annex this further reason, why the present Ministers should be
heard: because it tends to peace among Christians, and the not hearing them;
especially upon the principles of separation is from disunion, is Schism, or
tends to it contrary to that peace, unity, and love which should be among
Christians, who have the same God, Lord, Spirit, Faith, Hope, and are, or
should be joined in one body with all Christians, from whom there should be no
Schism, 1 Cor. 12 25, 26, 27. The Schism in the Church of Corinth did arise
from the affecting of, and addicting themselves to some teachers with
relinquishment, if not disclaiming of others, as appears by that which is said
1 Cor. 1.12. Every one of you says I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of
Cephas, and I of Christ: whereupon there were among them envying and strife,
and division, 1 Cor. 3.3. and they sorted themselves into companies severed
from others, as may be gathered from 1 Cor. 11.17, 18. and that about the Lords
Supper, v. 21.33. Now the not hearing of the present Ministers and the
separation from the Churches that hear them, and adhering only to their own
teachers and Churches according to the principles of the Separatists is either
the same, or very like the Schism, or division among the Corinthians, or tends
to it, and has begotten, and is like to beget the same, if not worse, effects
among the Christians in England, as were in the Church of Corinth, and
therefore it is to be censured to be alike evil, as the Schism among the
Corinthians, and is reckoned Gal. 5.20, 21. among the works of the flesh
excluding out of the Kingdom of God. What is alleged by this Author to
justify such separation is answered before. That which Dr. John Owen has in
his book of Schism, tending to acquit such separation from the crime of Schism,
or to difference it from that which was the evil among the Corinthians, has
been examined by Mr. Daniel Cawdrey. That notion which is appropriated to the
Corinthian Schism, as if it were only division in the same particular Church,
and not separation from others not joined in the same particular Congregation,
or such congregational Church, is not agreeable with what the Apostle delivers,
1 Cor. 10.17. and 12.12, 13. Romans 12.4, 5. Ephesians. 4.4. Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32.
Ephesians. 1.23. Col. 3.11.15. whereby every Christian believer wherever is
counted of the same body, to which they should be joined in love, peace, mutual
affection, and correspondent endeavors for their good, and if the Apostle 1
Cor. 12.25. expressly count it a Schism in the body when any Christian does
neglect another, and not take care of another, much more is it Schism, when
Christians separate without necessary cause from communion with others, and
more specially, when they disclaim them that are teachers of the Word of God,
as if Christ were divided, as St. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 1.13.23. St. James in his
Epistle chapter 2.1. writes thus, My brethren, have not the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ the Lord of glory with respect of persons, and he expresses himself by
instance, that they preferred the rich before the poor, in placing them in
their Assemblies, and taxes them therefore as partial in themselves, and
judges of evil thoughts. Now to hear one that preaches the faith of Christ
because he is of our particular Society, or by reason of particular interest,
or agreement in opinion, or any other then the unity of faith in the Lord
Jesus, and to disclaim hearing another, that has the same faith, preaches it,
and holds communion with them that embrace it, and to separate from such, to
despise or oppose such, is to have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with
respect of persons for other reasons then their faith, and therefore is
condemned by St. James as evil.

24. St. Paul Romans 16, 17. writes thus, Now I beseech you brethren, ma^k them
which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine which ye have
learned, and avoid them. But those who teach men not to hear their Ministers,
which preach to them the truth of Gods Word, because they are not in a
congregational Church, or not elected or ordained according to the rules of
such Churches, or because they conform to some things conceived unwarrantable
(which are made the reasons of unlawfulness to hear the present Ministers who
preach the Gospel) do cause offenses and divisions contrary to the Doctrine,
Romans 12.4.5. Romans 14.1. etc. Romans 15.1. etc. therefore their Doctrine is to be
avoided.

25. The Apostle 1 Cor. 14.36. speaks thus, What? came the Word of God out from
you? or came it unto you only? Which seems to reprehend the conceits whether
schismatical or arrogant, as if the Word of God were from them as the only
right teachers, or confined to them as the only persons, to whom it was
communicated, and from whom it might be received, and so condemns such supposed
enclosures by any Church or company of teachers. But such conceits and
enclosures they have and make* who deny the present Ministers are to be heard,
conceiving the separated Churches, and Ministers, the only right Churches and
Ministers to be heard.

26. The Apostle Philip. 3 15, 16. writes thus, Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall
reveal even this unto you, tha^ is, as many of you as are well instructed in
the Christian Doctrine (for so the word is used 1 Cor. 2.6. 1 Co^. 14.20. H^b.
5 14. being opposed to Children and Babes that is w^ak in the faith, Romans
14.1.) Let them be minded as I am, which he had expressed before in the chapter
from v. 4. to v. 15. and if any through weakness ^n faith be otherwise minded,
as those Romans 14 2.5. that thought Mosaical Laws were yet obligatory, God would
in time reveal this to be their liberty, which I now judge to be mine*
Nevertheless, says he, whereto ye have already attained, let us walk by the
same rule, let us mind the same things. Which requires Christian communion
without separation notwithst^nding such difference, and consequently condemns
separation from Minister^ or Christians by reason of diversity of judgment
about Church Government and Liturgy, and different practice about Conformity or
Nonconformity to them, which are of less moment than those differences about
meats and days, and therefore notwithstanding them, there should be walking
together in preaching, hearing, praying, and other duties of Christian
communion.

27. The Holy Ghost has recorded the Prophecy of ^alaam, Numb. 24.3, 4. etc.
of Caiaphas John 1^.51, 52. yea the sayings of Greek Infidel Idolatrous Poets
cited by St. Paul, as the words of Aratus Acts 17.28* of Menander 1 Cor. 15.33
of Epim^nides, Titus 1.12. which shows the lawfulness of reading, hearing, and
making use of true sayings of any though neither true Ministers of Christ, nor
believers, but Idolaters and wicked enemies to the faith much more may the
books be read, and the Sermons heard of such learned men, or preachers, as
clear and deliver the word of God notwithstanding dissent, or disconformity to
others about Liturgy and Church Discipline.

28. The Apostle 1 Thessalonians. 5.20, 21. requires Christians not to despise
prophesyings, but to prove all things: to hold fast that which is good. St.
John 1 Epist. chap. 4. Beloved believe not every Spirit, but try the Spirits
whether they are of God; they make it not sin merely to hear them that are
erroneous if they try them, they may hear pretenders prophesying if they prove
it, much more those Ministers who preach the truth; it is each Christians duty
to try their doctrine, nor their sin to hear their Sermons.

29. This Author himself, chapter 2. in the words before cited, allowed the hearing
of gifted brethren, though not solemnly invested into office; nor do I think he
would think it unlawful to hear Parents or Masters Catechize, or Readers in the
University, when they read Divinity Lectures, or dispu^e in Divinity Schools;
and therefore by a like reason must allow the hearing of such Ministers, who
Preach the Gospel, and are found in the faith, and are regularly ordained
according to the discipline of that Church in which they live, and are taken
for true Ministers, by the godly and learned at home, and the most able and
pious Pastors and brethren of the Reformed Churches abroad.

30. The reasons of this Author, and other Separatists, against hearing the
present Ministers, may be retorted against themselves. Mr. William Bradshaw
having answered Mr. Francis Johnsons Arguments to prove this conclusion [ It is
not lawful to hear or have any spiritual communion with the present Ministry of
the Church Assemblies of England] added Reasons or Arguments tending to prove,
That it is a sin to separate from the public Ministry of the Church Assemblies
of England: directly contrary to Mr. Johnsons own Reasons, and usually in that
regard, made in the same mood and figure, which are to be seen in the
unreasonableness of the separation, p. 126. etc. Printed 1640. in Mr. Gatakers
Rejoinder against the Reply of Mr. John Can. And as for this Authors 12.
Arguments, it were no hard matter to prove [That the Ministers of the separated
Churches are not to be heard] by some, if not by all the middle terms he has
used to prove [ That the present Ministers of the Church of England are not to
be heard.] As for instance, That they come not in by the door, but climb
another way, by usurping Ministry without any regular Ordination by other
Ministers, That they walk disorderly in separating themselves from true
Churches, they have Antichristian names or titles, in being called Masters,
That they deny Christ's Offices in submitting to, and imposing Orders or
Ordinances about worship, not appointed by Christ, as Church Covenant,
Paedobaptism, etc. That they are false prophets, that deny them to be true
Churches of Christ, who hold the faith of Christ, That some commands of the
Ceremonial Law of Moses, are Rules to us Christians, That they are Babylon, and
Antichristian in their constitution, and their practice in dividing from other
Churches, not submitting to their Teachers, those who have begotten them
through the Gospel, without any well settled order among themselves, that they
therefore long agree not, but crumble into many small companies, and sometimes
take them to be members of their Churches who dwell in remote places; so that
their gathered Churches extend as far some times as a Bishops Diocese, that
they ascribe the power of the keys to the whole Church, confound Governors and
Governed, allow men not set apart to that function, to teach publicly, and
that frequently, if not constantly, those to take upon them to prophecy, who
are no Prophets, That they scandalize their brethren, their Governors by their
invectives, That they partake of the sins of others, in allowing them to usurp
that power which Christ has not committed to them, That they cast contempt
upon the ways of Christ, to wit, the Prayers and Preaching of the Ministers of
the Church of England; That they go to the places of false worship, as Mr. John
Paget in his Arrow against the Separatists proves against Ainsworth, that they
cannot expect a blessing from God upon their separation, it having no promise
of God, but is against the union that should be among Christians; That it is a
step to Apostasy, is a forsaking of the assembly of the Saints; to refuse to
hear the present Ministers, and to join in Prayers with them, and too much
experience has proved what backsliding, if not to Popery, yet to other errors
of Antinomians, Familists, Quakers, Seekers, Ranters, has been the fruit of
Separation. But I forbear recrimination, and touching the sore, which I rather
desire may be healed, and that our breaches may be made up, and not widened, to
which this Authors reasonings tend.

31. The grounds upon which this Author and other Separatists deny the
lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, are either false or doubtful; as,
That nothing is to be done in the worship of God, and Church Discipline,
without a particular institution; That only a Congregational Church is of
Christ's institution; That a true Ministry cannot be in a false Church; That a
prescibed form of prayer by men, is unlawful; That we may not use any thing in
Gods worship, which has been composed by Popes, or used in the Church of Rome,
with many more; whereof many are showed in this answer to be false, or
uncertain, and insufficient for this Authors separation, and the fallacy of
them manifested in so* many other Treatises of Conformists and non-conformists
extant in Print, that I need not add any more in this place.

32. On the other side the Ministers of the Church of England, have so
sufficiently proved the truth of their Ministry against Papists and
Separatists, and so firmly by wrirting and otherwise, opposed Popery, even the
Prelates, whom the Separatists do so much cry down as Antichristian, Popish,
etc. that were not men resolved never to lay down a calumny they have once
taken up, they would lay this down, and forbear pressing separation upon such
exceptions, and imputations as this Author has gathered together in this his
dung-cart, to furnish the inconsiderate, though perhaps otherwise well-minded
in matters of Religion, to cast into their faces.

33* If it be not lawful to hear the present Ministers, because they are not
rightly Elected, Ordained, in and by a Congregational Church, according to
Christ's institution (as this Author conceives) or because they use the
Common Prayer Book, are faulty in their lives, or some evil consequences, as
offense of some Saints, contempts of some ways of God, by accident ensue
thereupon, then it will follow that every hearer, before he hears a Minister;
must 1. be able to judge of the validity of these Reasons, whether they can
warrant his not hearing. 2. He must be able to judge every Minister or Preacher
he hears, whether he be rightly thus Elected, Ordained, or qualified. 3. He
must actually examine him before he hears him. 4. He must have power either to
silence or withdraw from him, if he be not so qualified, and must use that
power. But 1. Such ability is not in every hearer, nor indeed is it as the
estate of things in this life is, ordinarily possible it should be. 2. Then
Ministers Preaching and Ministry should be at the will of their Auditors. For,
if one may forbear hearing, all may upon the same reason, and so the Minister
be silenced or deprived for want of hearers. 3. This would put power in hearers
over their Ministers, and overthrow all Church Government. 4. It would
introduce greater oppression of Ministers, then either Prelates or their Canons
bring upon them. 5. Even the Ministers of Congregational Churches would be in
danger of being deserted by their members, their maintenance withdrawn, they
exposed to penury and other grievances, as well as Conforning Ministers. Nor do
I think, but that many even of them have found the bitter fruits of such
popular licentiousness out of such principles of separation, as well as others.
6. Nor can there be any settled order of government in Church or civil State, if
the stated Ministers or Magistrates according to the present Laws, though
perhaps in some things unjust, yet in the main upholding truth of faith and
worship, and the public good, should be deserted or disobeyed* because every
hearers or subjects conscience or mind is not satisfied.

34 Such a plea as is made by these men, is made by Papists for their
Recusancy, that the Ministers of the Church of England are not rightly called,
that they are in a Schism, with other the like objections; and then if the Plea
of the Separatists be allowed, they have this advantage, That they should not
be urged to hear the Ministers, nor have the penalties of Recusancy imposed on
them. I say not that this reason would reach to the toleration of their Priests
and Mass, but only if such a Plea should be allowed, why the present Ministers
should not be heard, the same, or the like justifies the Papists for not
hearing them, and condemns the inflicting penalties for Recusancy, because, if
this Author say true, it is unlawful to hear the present Ministers. The same
may be said in behalf of Quakers, Seekers, profane persons, ignorant people,
they are not to be required to hear the Ministers, if it be unlawful; and so
the Magistrate should sin if he command them to hear, though Mr. Robinson
himself in his Justification of Separation, page 242. as Printed in the year
1639. writes thus. That godly Magistrates are by compulsion to repress public
and notable Idolatry, as also to provide that the truth of God in his
Ordinance, be taught, and published in their Dominions, I make no doubt: It may
be also it is not unlawful for them by some penalty or other, to provoke their
subjects universally unto hearing, for their instruction, and conversion; yea
to grant they may inflict the same upon them, if after due teaching they offer
not themselves unto the Church.

35. That position which takes away a considerable and important part of
Christians liberty, and puts a yoke on their ne^ks grievous to be born, is not
to be received, it being contrary to that which the Apostle charge on
Christians, that they should stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has
made us free, and not be again entangled with the yoke of bondage. Gal. 5.1. Ye
are bought with a price, become ye not the servants of men, 1 Cor. ^.23. But,
if we hold it unlawful to hear the truth of Gods word taught by the present
Ministers, we let go our liberty of hearing, which Christ has not debarred us
of, and make our selves servants to some whom alone we might hear, to the
insharing of us if they err, so as that we may not hear them who may free us:
which is no small bondage to a Christian, and tends to the calling Rabbines or
Masters, forbidden Matt. 23.8, 10 and is an artifice by which Papists and
others have still held people from discerning their errors, and kept them in
dependence on them, and adherence to their party: Therefore it should not be
received by us.

36. There is a negative superstition, when men abstain from some things, under
a notion of Religion, or worship of God, which are not forbidden by God, but
left free and indifferent: either not forbidden, or, if once they were, now
antiquated or outdated: And of this so^^ was that Col 2.21. Touch not, taste
not, handle not; which was superstitious negative will worship, as Mr. Cawdrey
in his Treatise of Superstition, Sect 5. writes. This the Apostle v. 20. blames
as being dogmatized, or yielding to men's ordinances, as living in the world,
not dead with Christ from the elements of the world, though it have a show of
wisdom in will worship, such was that of the Pharisees in not eating till they
had washed their hands, observing the tradition of the elders condemned by
Christ, Mark 7.7. as teaching doctrines the commandments of men; which he
counts worshipping God in vain, and it has these evil effects, 1. That it
occasions the neglect of Gods commands. 2. It bege^s unnecessary perplexities
in men's spirits. 3. It puffs men up with conceit of more holiness then others.
4. Makes them censorious of those that are not as scrupulous as themselves, as
if they were loose and profane. That such is the opinion of the unlawfulness of
hearing the present Ministers, as it is maintained by this Author, I suppose
is manifested by the answer and reasons foregoing; and that it has the evil
effects here named, is too evident, by experience, in the neglect of the
public communion in worship, and other duties of love to them with whom
communion in public worship is not held, in the doubts and opinions of not
observing the present Ministers with any respect, nor paying them dues imposed
by Law, in conceiving themselves the Saints, others Antichristian, with many
bitter taunts, scoffs, reproaches, revilings, tales of and against them,
contrary to the fruits of the spirit of God mentioned, Gal. 5.22. Therefore it
is not be to received.

37. Hereto is to be added, That upon the same suppositions the opinion of
denying the lawfulness of hearing the present Ministers, as it is asserted by
this Author, is an usurpation of Christ's regal office, in putting a law on the
consciences of men, arrogating that power which is proper to that one Lawgiver
who is able to save and destroy, James 4.12. binding heavy burdens and
grievous to be born, and laying them on men's shoulders, Matt. 23.4 imitating
therein Pharisaical pride, and Papal dominion, and such other practices as they
condemn in others. They that condemn those that permit not them to Preach, who
will not use Ceremonies, are guilty of the like Imposition, who permit not
Christians to hear Preachers of the Gospel, unless they be in a Congregational
Church, and be called by them; and while they charge others with adding to the
word the inventions of men, are themselves guilty thereof.

38. Nor is it a light matter, but to be well pondered, That by this means the
knowledge of the word of God is much hindered, and thereby the furthering of the
kingdom of God, the coming of which we are to pray for, is neglected, such as
hold the opinion of not hearing the Ministers in public, thinking it enough if
they can teach those of their society; if by conference they instill any truths
into others, it is seldom without somewhat that alienates them from others, and
engages them to their own society, with diminution of love to others, if not
worse dispositions and practices. Whence many remain in ignorance, profaneness,
and errors, being hardened in opposition to the present Ministers; whom I deny
not, may give too much occasion by their loose walking, and negligent
Preaching, in which they are not to be excused; yet is not the opinion of not
hearing them while they Preach the Gospel thereby justified, but both to be
blamed as guilty of hindering the good of men's souls, and Christ's kingdom, and
so in some sort Antichristian.

39. Nor are the effects of this opinion only pernicious to them who are
without; but evil also to them within, whether Ministers or people. To
Ministers, in that by the neglect of hearing them, and such esteem as is due to
them for their work sake they are disheartened, and by this wrangling,
opposition, disquietness they meet with, disabled in a great measure from doing
that good which otherwise might be done. Yea, by this opinion, their Ministry,
though they Preach the Gospel, is disanulled, and accounted as accursed. So the
people, in that they are divided, become unpeaceable, some for not hearing,
being unnecessarily cast on the danger of the Laws, deprived of Estates and
Liberty, in many places growing empty of fruitful knowledge, exposed to the
attempts of Seducers, who lie in wait to deceive, filled with bitterness of
spirit toward others, though profuse toward those that agree with them; and
in a word, there is a sad breach between Christians of the same profession of
faith, which is most contrary to the union which they should have in Christ by
the same spirit; and I wish it were not true that it is fulfilled now, which
was foretold 2 Timothy 4.3, 4. That men heap to themselves Teachers after their
own lusts.

40. The many absurdities which are consequent on the opinion, should dissuade
us from entertaining it. For if it be true, That it is unlawful to hear the
present Ministers, then it is not lawful for us to invite them to Preach, or
to exhort them to it, or to rejoice in it, or to pray to God that they may, or
to praise God for their Preaching: Then it is better that Quakerism, Ranting,
Barbarism, Rudeness should be spread among the people, then they be urged to
hear the public Preachers; That Magistrates do ill to command people to go to
hear them; That they countenance or maintain them, then it is good at Sermon
time to stay at home idle, or to lie in an Alehouse, rather then to go to hear
them; the non-preaching Readers are as tolerable as Preaching Ministers; their
forbearing to Preach, is avoiding of sin; the less they Preach, and the less
they are heard Preach, there is the less sin, their silencing is no evil, not
they to be blamed for not Preaching; for it can be no evil for them to forbear
Preaching, if it be a sin for others to hear them, they ought rather to forbear
Preaching, then to draw others to sin. And yet, so wild is this opinion, that
many of them that refuse to hear and condemn as this Author does, the hearing
of them, do yet except against non-preaching Ministers, blame the Ministers for
not Preaching more frequently, and those that hinder their Preaching: Whereas,
if the hearing them were unlawful, it were good counsel to persuade men not to
hear their Sermons, nor to Preach them; which would introduce Irreligion, or
some pernicious Error, as the state of things now stands in this Nation.

Sect. 16. Some passages in the writings of Mr. John Goodwin opposite to the
Book Entitled, Prelatical Preachers none of Christ's Teachers.
For a conclusion, whereas the Book mentioned in my Epistle to the Reader
Entitled [P^elatical Preachers none of Christ's Teacher] showed to me as that,
which did make men Separatists, and the book was written not in a Logic form,
and therefore not answered by me, yet the Author being supposed the same with
him who Printed in the year 1653. two books against some that about baptism
left his Communion, I have here added some passages with animadversions, which
show how his separation in this latter book crosses his sayings in the former.

In his 40. Quaeries, Qu. 10. I read thus, When men may separate that which is
precious from that which is vile, and enjoy it thus separated and apart without
suffering any inconvenience by that which is vile, is it a point of wisdom in
them to deprive themselves of the enjoyment of what is precious, because there
is somewhat, which they suppose to be vile near to it? Why then does lie
dissuade from hearing the present Ministers; who preach precious Doctrine,
because of some things conceived vile in them, yet may be separated from that
which is precious?

Qu. 14. The experience of many years in the reformed Churches abroad, and of
some years amongst our selves at home, has abundantly taught and informed us,
that the said question has yielded little other fruit unto those that have set
their hearts to it, yea and to others also, but Contention, Strife, Emulations,
evil Surmizings, Distractions, Confusions, Alienations of mind, and Affections,
amongst Christian Brethren, evil Speakings, Vilifyings, Revilings, needless
and wastfull Expense of time, loss of many precious opportunities for matters
of greatest consequence, unprofitable disturbings and turmoylings of weak
Consciences, shatterings, scatterings, rendings, and tearings such of Churches
and Christian Societies, who, till this root of bitterness sprang up amongst
them, walked in love, and with the light of Gods countenance shining on them,
holding the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace, edifying one another in
their most holy faith, etc. These things were not the fruit of that question,
but of that separation, which was made by occasion of it, and are as true of
the separation this Author maintained in his later book.

Qu. 23. Whether ought not the law of edification [1 Cor. 14.26.] to overruled
all Laws and Precept concerning Spiritual and Church Administrations, as the
law of Salus populi ought to umpire and overruled all politic laws and
constitutions, in their respective executions? If so, the supposed laws of
outward calling of Ministers should not be urged, so as to hinder people from
hearing Ministers, because of some defect supposed therein, when they may be
heard to edification of the hearers.

In his Water-dipping, Consideration 17. Is it not then presumption in the
highest, and an assuming of an Antichristian power, to impose Laws upon
Christian societies, which the Lord Christ never imposed; yea, and to cesure
and scandalize them with the odious and reproachful terms of Antichristian, and
unclean, only for the transgression of their own Laws? What does he less, who
forbids to hear in his latter Book the present Ministers.

Consideration 22. Whereas Antichrist himself is not more Antichristian, then
in claiming and exercising such a dominion over the faiths of his Proselytes
and Disciples; by virtue whereof he commands them to depend only upon
Ministes and Teachers of his own faith and wicked persuasion in matters of
Religion, severely prohibiting unto them the hearing of Protestant Preachers;
we understand that the same high imposing spirit domineers more generally in
the Churches and Congregations, which solemnly conjure all their Proselytes and
Converts not to hear Jesus Christ himself speaking by any other mouth then
theirs; thus bearing them in hand, as if a voice from heaven, like unto that
which was heard by the people at Christ's Baptism, concerning him, had come to
them also in reference to themselves and their Teachers, in this or the like
tenor of words, We are the only true Churches and Ministers of Christ: Hear
us. Yea, there was of late a very great Schism made in one of these Churches,
and the greater part aposynagog^ized by the lesser, because of the high
misdemeanour of some of the Members, in hearing the words of eternal life from
the mouths of such Ministers, who follow not them in their way. Such principles
and practices as these, we judge to be most notoriously and emphatically
Antichristian, and such wherein (as was said in a like case) the very horns and
hoofs of the beast may be discerned. Yea, we cannot but judge them to be of
most pernicious consequence to the precious souls of men, as depriving them of
the best means and opportunities which God most graciously affordeth^ unto them
for their recovery out of all such snares, wherein at any time their foot may
be taken, Ex ore tuo. -- From these words might the Author of that Book
[Prelatical Preachers none of Christ's Teachers] have learned not to condemn the
hearing of the present Ministers, as if none were to be heard but of his own
way.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 5. read one. p. 5. l. 39. r. by him to them. p. 9. l. 4. r. case.
p. 11. l. 26. r. utensils. p. 12. l. 5. r. wills. p. 13. l. 19. add after 25.
and 18.15. l. 20. r. 13.10. l. 21. r. 29.25. p. 14. l. 14. r. Separatists. p.
16. l. 28. r. persevering. l. 33. r. 9.16. p. 21. l. 26. r. times. p. 30. l.
34. r. breadth. p. 31. l. 37. r. has. p. 48. running title, r. makes not. p.
49. l. 20. r. stupendous. p. 50. l. 8. r. he. p. 66. l. 29. r. distra. p. 69.
l. 14. r. applies. p. 89. l. 41. r. bounded. p. 92. l. 17. r. parallel. l. 33.
r. Sanctius. p. 93. l. ult. r. Ishi. p. 101. l. 9. r. super. p. 106. l. 36. r.
solum. p. 108. l. 26. r. preside. p. 118. l. 28. r. acknow. p. 136. l. 39. r.
pretense. p. 153. l. 22. r. did. p. 161. l. 10. r. Queristers. p. 197. l. 6. r.
the. p. 205. l. 6. r. venting. p. (206.) l. 32. r. Tyanaeus. p. (208.) running
title, r. ill applied. p. 223. l. 3. r. intension. p. 370. l. 22. r. ly. p.
318. running title, r. Preacher.

Books Printed for Henry Eversden, and are to be sold at his shop under the
Crown-Tavern in West-Smithfield.
1. THe Sphere of Gentry, deduced from the Principles of Nature, an Historical
and Genealogical work of Arms and Blazon: by Sylvanus Morgan.

2. The History of the late Civil Wars of England.

3. Riverius his Universal Body of Physic in five Books, etc.

4. The Language of Arms by the Colors and Metals, in quarto, by Silvanus
Morgan.

5. Scepsis Scientifica, or Confessed Ignorance the way to Science, by Joseph
Glanvil, Fellow of the Royal Society.

6. The Gospel Physician in quarto.

7. The Mystery of Rhetoric unveiled, Eminently delightful, and profitable for
young Scholars, and others of all sorts, enabling them to discern and imita^e
the Elegancy in any other Author they read, etc. by John Smith Gent.

8. A Crew of kind London Gossips, all met to be merry: to which is added
ingenious Poems, or Wit and Drollery, in octavo, at 1 s. bound.

9. The natural Rarities of England, Scotland, and Wales, according as they are
to be found in every Shire, very useful for all ingenius men of what profession
or quality soever, by J. Childrey, in octavo.

10. Pearls of Eloquence, or the School of Complements, very useful for all
young Ladies, Gentlewomen, and Scholars, who are desirous to adorn their
speech with gentile ceremonies, complemental, amo^ous, and high expressions, of
speaking or writing, at 1 s. bound.

11. Hodges directions for true writing, in octavo.

12. Gods Alsufficiency, by Mr. Jeremy, in 120*


