Mr. Tongues Vindication, In Answer to the Malicious and Lying Aspersions thrown
upon him by Thomson and the Observator:
Veritas non quaerit Angulos.
THe Press was never fuller of Seditious Pamphlets then at this time, wherein
Men make it their chief business and Study to create Feuds and Animosities
amongst his Majesty's good Subjects, by creating false Reports; for this Reason
I thought I was bound in Conscience to vindicate my self from that scandalous
and lying Aspersion that Thomson has thrown upon me in his Domestic
Intelligence of the third instant, wherein he falsely intimates, as if I had
formerly sworn, that Ezerel Tongue was the chief contriver of the Popish-Plot,
discovered by a Man, etc. Therefore being deeply sensible of what evil
consequence this notorious Lie may be, do solemnly declare, that what was
printed by the said Thomson, was done without my knowledge or consent, having
some time since, given a true and full Account of those persons (that would
have trapan'd and endeavored to make me swear, that my Father and Doctor Oats
were the contrivers of the Popish-Plot) in my case which was printed by Mr. C
-- in the New Exchange in the Strand; but by some indirect means or other, was
stifled, and never suffered to come abroad; in which Narrative, I have
discovered nothing but the naked Truth, with the several Arguments and
inducements they made use of, to make me accuse my deceased Parent, and yet
notwithstanding all this, Thomson and the Observator have the impudence to
affirm the contrary; we live in a very profligate Age, wherein some persons
assume an unheard of impudence, who never value any man's Reputation, provided
they may be gainers by what they print; I confess, and ingenuously acknowledge
to the world, that indigency (through the instigation of men of ill principles)
had imbarkt me on a very unnatural attempt, no less than the accusing of my own
innocent Parent, whilst he was living* I was very sensible how close my
undutifulness stuck to him; and therefore by all imaginable Demonstrations I
endeavored to make my sorrow known for so great a fault. Great sinners we read
of in Scripture that have upon their unfeigned Repentance been received unto
Mercy: it has often been my serious and hearty Prayer to God through the merits
of the blessed Jesus, that he would vouchsafe to pardon me; and I hope my
Prayers have been accepted at the Throne of Grace and truly during my
confinement, now upwards of a twelvemonth, in great want and distress, this
was the greatest content and satisfaction that buoyed up my sinking spirits,
that I had discharged a good Conscience, little expecting that any whifling
Intelligencer, or Crackfarting Observator, would have been so impudent to have
endeavored to impose such scandalous and lying Rumors upon the Nation in
reference to my concern; I have more than once by writing satisfied Doctor Oats
(since I printed my Case) that I was extremely troubled that I should be so
very imprudent to be persuaded to go about to stifle his Evidence, and since my
first commitment from the Council, it was my desire to discover those persons
that were my chief Abettors, which I have heartily laid down in my Narrative,
and being nothing but the Truth, will vindicate it self without any Apology,
and however I may be censured by some, I bless God for it, I have not so feared
a Conscience as to justify so false and Villainous a thing which is cast upon
me, in so weighty a concern as the Popish-Plot, which has had so many evident
and remarkable proofs to confirm the verity of it, and maugre the malice of all
opposers, remains invincible and triumphant, when the rest of their shams
dwindle and expire into nothing. The Observator who often turns the most
serious expressions into ridicule, mentions how I was first trapan'd to suggest
that story against my Father, etc. then he goes on with this impudent stuff, by
way of distinction, all this may very well be Whig, but whether he meant the
Father of his Country, or his Father by Generation is the question, etc. To
this I answer, that for my Vindication I do refer my self to my Case and that
it was not my own voluntary Act, will sufficiently appear to those that have
ever perused it; neither did I verisy or assert any thing by dreadful
imprecations: for the first ground for that lying Rumor was, that Ely having
heard that my Uncle, Captain Tongue, was with me, and that I had made a true
Confession to him concerning what had past betwixt us, fearing least it might
prejudice him; when he was at Windsor drew up a Paper, wherein he would have
had me declared with many solemn imprecations, as in the presence of God
Almighty, that I had declared nothing but the Truth concerning my Father; this
Paper he would have forced me to Sign, but I perceiving the Villainous Design of
it, refused it, it being no other than Ely's Roguery to save his own Bacon; but
his Impudence, as it is superlative, cannot rest here; for thus he goes on, I
do really believe he told the King little more, then he had said many, and many
a time to other people long before he had made any application to his Majesty;

To this I answer that Ely was the person who ^ad me to the King who told me at
the Garter Tavern in Windsor, that I must recollect my self, and say something
which might give his Majesty some satisfaction: when I came before the King I
gave his Majesty a short account, as I had heard it from my fathers own mouth,
that Doctor Oats after he came from St Omers first imparted the Plot to him,
and afterward gave him his assistance to bring his papers into the Concell;
then I declared that I was wholly ignorant as to any Transactions relating to
the Plot, by reason I was newly come from the University, and then kept a
school. at a place called Lu^on in Bedfordshire, when the first discourse of
the Popish plot, was noised about the Country whereunto his Majesty was
pleased to reply, that he had been misinformed concerning me, but should be
very glad to be informed of the Truth, and would be glad to speak, with my
father, would be resolve him but some few Questions he would propound to him.

This was all the Discourse I had with the King, which I the rather mention
now, because I gave but a very short hint of it in my Narrative; but the
Observator abhors plain dealing, and to hear the Truth, and therefore strives
to palliat it by cunning subterfuges and Evasions, the better to curry favor
with his Party: Whilst Truth is as bold as a Lion and abhorring such indirect
means, soon unmasks this counterfeit Proteus, notwithstanding all the subtle
windings he makes to no other purpose, then as preparatives and incentives to
Faction and Rebellion: creating fears and jealousies in the hearts of the
people, excellently well read in Pluto's politiks, whose faithful Drudge he is
notwithstanding those specious Pretenses he would impose on the over credulous,
that what hedoes is only out of a cordate zeal for the service of his King
and Country.

And now having sufficiently vindicated my self, from the malicious and lying
aspersions put upon me by Thomson, and the Observator I return to the
Pa^quetier, who amongst them all is the only person that has done me that
Justice, heartily to represent my condition to the world, performing the part
of an honest man, in declaring the great sorrow wherewith my spirits have been
oppressed for the unnatural villainy I was persuaded to perpetrate against my
deceased Parent, and truly my Grief is so great for it; that many times I have
had a serious resolution in my self, (if it should ple^se God I ever got my
Enlargement) to transport my self to some remote Region, the horror of the fact
having made so deep an impression on my sentiments, that I fancied I should
never be able to walk the streets in quiet; but then again upon second thoughts
I have checked my self, and something alleviated my sorrows with that expression
of holy Job, to him that is aflicted Pity should be shown him by his friend,
considering with my sell that we are or at least should be all Brethren and
Friends of the same profession of Christianity, and therefore should even with
tears pity the the miseries, and pass by the failings one of another flebile
being as proper to man as visibile; I did not then all together despair; that
considering my juvenile years, should I ever get a broad, some would
commiserate me, becoming truly penitent for my unnatural act, whilst my Tears
being instead of a Jordan, a pool of Siloam, to cure the sores, and cleanse the
Leprosy of my sins

Since my long restraint, means has not been wanting by some to make me recant
my case using those plausible Arguments to induce me to it, which they are
never without, to wit, Money, Clothes, Linne, and what else of convenience, I
could propose to my self, being now in a very indigent condition on the common
side of the Kings Bench; but honesty as it is the best Policy, so a good
conscience is that which will bring a man peace at the last; and therefore
contemning such offers, I will rather rest my self contented with my mean
condition, feasting on the divine Providence, (extolling his unspeakable
goodness and mercy toward me, who by afflicting has snatched me as a firebrand
out of the fire) who knows what is best for me, then by unjust means gain the
riches of Cresus, and with it the hatred of the Divinity, and the the contempt
and sc^rn of all good men; most persons adore the rising Sun, and when a man is
once under a cloud, every one is too apt to trample upon, and expose him to the
obloquy of a censorious World; therefore it behooves me to stand upon my Guard,
and by the force of Truth repel those vicious calumnies, which are cast upon
me; which I hope is here performed to the content and satisfaction of all true
unblast protestants; and now having fully discharged a good conscience the main
end of this vindication; least therefore I should be thought too prolix, I will
conclude all with this hearty prayer: God Allmighty vouchsafe to be propitious
and mercy-full to us, unite all our differences and distractions, and regulate
out disorders, compose our Breaches, and heal our Land, bless and guide our
gracious Sovereign and his whole Council, that we may lead a peacable life in
all godliness and honesty.

I do farther declare that from the bottom of of my heart, I abhor all
Popish principles and practizes, and am a zealous admirer and professor of the
Reformed Protestant Religion, as it is now established in the Church of England;
and what I have said here was upon mature deliberation, and I do solemnly
protest in the presence of the great Jehovah, it is nothing but the Truth,
witness my hand,

SIMSON TONGUE.

LONDON Printed for the Author. 1682.


