Historical COLLECTIONS, Out of several Grave Protestant Historians, Concerning
the CHANGES OF RELIGION, AND The strange Confusions following: In the Reigns of
KING HENRY the Eighth. EDWARD the Sixth. QUEEN MARY and ELIZABETH With an
Addition of several Remarkable Passages taken out of Sir Will. Dugdale's
Antiquities of Warwickshire, relating to the Abbeys and their Institution.

Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty
for His Household and Chapel. And for him and Mat^ Tur^er at the Lamb, in High
holbourn. 1686.

THE PREFACE.
HAving perused several of our Histories of England; and standing amazed to
find in them, That the Alteration of Religion here has been totally carried on
by worldly Interest, I thought it would not be ungrateful to the Reader, to
have those various Passages, concerning the Changes of Religion, collected
together out of those Histories; for the informing him exactly, how those
Changes have been made: And withal of the Beginning, and Progress of Presbytery
in this Nation; and the Ground of Multiplying other Sects, which has been the
cause of all our late Confusions.

I have labored to connect these Passages together, in as good an order, as I
think, could be expected in matters, ^ulled out of such large volumns.

Much more might have been Collected, concerning these matters, out of diverse
other Histories: But I think, the chief matters are here sufficiently handled;
which may satisfy the curiosity of any indifferent Reader.

To add more Authority to what shall be here taken out of Dr. Heylyns History
of Reformation, (from whence the chiefest matters of these Collections are
gathered) I will here Insert a Passage out of the Preface of it; by which it
will appear, what diligence he has used in composing this History. The words
of the Preface are these.

IN this following History you will find more to satisfy your curiosity, and
inform your judgment, then can be possibly drawn up in this general view. As
for my performance in this work, In the first place I am to tell you, that
toward the raising of this Fabric I have not borrowed my materials, only out
of vulgar Authors but searched into the Records of the Convocation; consulted
all such Acts of Parliament, as concerned my purpose; advised with many Foreign
Writers, of great name and credit, exemplified some Records, and Charters of no
common quality (many rare pieces in the Cottonian Library) and not a few
Debates and Orders of the Council Table: which I have laid together in as good
a form, and beautified it, with a trimming as agreeable, as my hands could give
it.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. A Preamble to the following Collections, concerning the great
Kindness, and good Correspondence between King Henry the Eighth, and some Popes.
FIrst King Henry the Eighth, for writing a Book against Luther, received a
Bull from the Pope, whereby he had the Title given him to be Defender of the
Faith for him and his Successors for ever.

The Relation concerning which Book and the Reception of it by the Pope, is
thus set down in the History of the Lord Herbert of Cherbury, page 104.

OUr King (being at leisure now from Wars, and delighting much in learning)
thought he could not give better proof, either of his Zeal or Education, then
to write against Luther. To this also he was exasperated, That Luther had
oftentimes spoken contemptuously of the learned Thomas of A^uin, who yet was in
so much requst with the King, that he was therefore called Thomistious.

Hereupon the King compiles a Book; wherein he strenuously opposed Luther, in
the point of Indulgences, Number of Sacraments, the Papal Authority, and other
particulars, to be seen in that his work, Entitled (de Septem Sacramentis,
etc.) a principal Copy whereof, richly bound, being sent to Leo, I remember my
self to have seen in the Vatican Library. The manner of the delivery whereof
(as I find it in our Records) was thus.

Doctor John Clark, Dean of Windsor our Kings Ambassador, appearing in full
Consistory; the Pope (knowing the glorious Present he brought) first gave him
his cheek to kiss, and then, (receiving the Book) promised to do so much, for
the Approbation thereof, as ever was done for St. Augustine, or St. Hierome's
Works: Assuring him withal, that the next Consistory, he would bestow a public
Title on our King: which having been heretofore privately debated among the
Cardinals; those of Protector, Defensor Romanae Ecclesiae, or Sedis
Apostolicae, or Rex Apostolicus, or Orthodoxus produced, they at last agreed
on, Defensor Fidei: a Transcript of which Bull (out of an Original, sub plumbo,
in our Records) I have here inserted.

Leo, Bishop, Servant of the Servants of God, to his most dear Son, Henry King
of England, Defender of the Faith, All health and happiness. God having called
Us (although infinitely unworthy of it) to the Government of the whole Church,
We bend all Our thoughts, to promote the Catholic Faith; (without which none
can be saved) and labor by all means, (as belongs to Our duty) to make use of,
and promote all such helps, as have been wisely ordained, for the preserving;
the integrity of Christian Faith, amongst all; but most especially amongst
Princes, and to suppress the endeavors of those who labor to corrupt it by
lies, and false Doctrines. And, as other Bishops of Rome, our Predecessors,
have been accustomed to confer special favors upon Catholic Princes,
according to the exigency of Times, and Affairs: Especially, upon such, as have
not only remained unmovable in their Obedience to the Holy Roman Catholic
Church; with an entire Faith, and servent Devotion, in the tempestuous times
and raging perfidious fury of Schismatics, and Heretics; But likewise, as
legitimate Children, and stout Champions of the same Church, have opposed
themselves, both temporally and spiritually, against the mad fury of such
Schismatics and Heretics, as have opposed it: So we also desire to extol your
Majesty with condign, and immortal Praises, for your excellent, and immortal
works and actions, in favor of Us, and this Holy See; (where, by Gods
permission, we are established) and to grant you those things which may enable,
and engage you to have a care, to preserve our Lords Flock, from Wolves, and to
cut off, with the material Sword, rotten members that seek to infect the
mystical Body of Christ; confirming in the solidity of Faith, the Hearts of
such as waver, or are in danger of falling,

When, our beloved Son, John Clark, (your Majesty's Orator, or Ambassador)
delivered unto Us, in Our Consistory, before Our Venerable Brethren, Cardinals
of the Holy Roman Church, and many other Prelates of the Roman Court, a Book
which your Majesty has composed, (out of your great Charity and Zeal of
Catholic Faith, enflamed with a fervor of Devotion toward Us, and this Holy
See) as a Noble and proper Antidote, against the errors of diverse Heretics,
(often condemned by this Holy See, and lately raised up again by Martin Luther)
he then, likewise further declared unto Us, your Majesty's desire, that this
Book might be approved by Our Authority, and withal, in a copious Oration,
manifested unto Us, that as your Majesty has confuted the notorious Errors of
the same Martin Luther, from true, and convincing Reasons, and unanswerable
Authorities of the holy Scriptures, and Fathers, so that you will be ready
(with all the Forces and Arms of your Kingdom) to punish and prosecute all
such, as shall presume to follow, or defend any of the said Opinions.

Whereupon we have with all care and diligence perused the same Book; and
finding it to contain admirable Doctrine, and full of the Spirit of God, do
give God infinite thanks (from whom proceeds every good and perfect Gift) for
having thus inspired your mind, and enabled you by his Grace, to compose this
Work for the defense of his holy Faith against this raiser up of old condemned
Errors, and to the inviting of other Kings and Christian Princes, to follow
your example in protecting Orthodox Faith, and Evangelical Truth, now exposed
to great danger, and many oppositions.

We, upon this, likewise judging it just and reasonable to confer all Honor
and Praises upon such as have employed their pious Labors, in the defense of
the said Christian Faith; do not only extol and magnify, approve and confirm
by Our Authority, what your Majesty has (with so much solid Learning and
Eloquence) written against the same Martin Luther; but do likewise confer upon
your Majesty, such a Title of Honor, that by it, all the Faithful may
understand, both now, and for all future times, how grateful and acceptable,
this your Majesty's Gift has been unto Us; especially offered at this time.
We, (who are the true Successor of St Peter, whom Christ, ascending up to
Heaven lest as his Vicar upon Earth, committing to him the care of his Flock:)
We, (I say) sitting in this holy See, having with mature Deliberation,
considered of this business with Our Brethren, do with their unanimous Counsel,
and consent, grant unto your Majesty the Title of Defender of the Faith; which
We do, by these presents, confirm unto you; commanding all the Faithful to give
your Majesty this Title; and when they write unto you, after the word King to
annex this other, of Defender of the Faith.

And assuredly, if the excellency and dignity of this Title, and your singular
merits, be well weighed and considered, We could not have thought of any name
more Noble nor better agreeable to your Majesty then this: which as often as
you hear and read, you will have occasion to reflect upon your own Virtue and
Merit, not becoming more proud thereby, but (according to your wonted Prudence)
rather more humble, and more established in the Faith of Christ, and respect
toward this holy See, rejoicing in our Lord, the Giver of all Good things, and
leaving unto your Posterity this perpetual, and immortal monument of your
Glory; showing them the way, that if they desire to possess this Title, they
labor to do works of this kind, and to imitate your Majesty's example: who
having deserved so much from Us, and this See, We give you Our Benediction, and
also to your Wife and Children, and all that shall be born of them: In the name
of him, from whom We have received this Power: Beseeching the Almighty (who
said, By me Kings reign, and Princes command, and in whose Hands the Hearts of
all Kings are) that he will confirm you in this holy Resolutiand increase your
Devotion, and make your Actions (for the preservation of Faith) so illustrious
throughout the whole World: That no Man may have occasion to judge, that this
Title is conferred upon you in vain. And lastly, Our Prayer is, That your
Majesty having happily passed the course of this present life, may be made
partaker of Eternal Glory.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, etc.

Thus far my Lord Herberts History. I will now relate some other favors showed
to him by Popes.

HE received from Pope Clement, a Rose of Gold for a Present. The reception of
it is thus related by Sir Rich. Baker, page 391.

Doctor Thomas Hannibal, Master of the Rolls, was received into London by
Earls, Bishops, and diverse Lords, and Gentlemen, as Ambassador from Pope
Clement: who brought with him a Rose of Gold, for a Present to the King: and on
the day of the Nativity of our Lady, after a Solemn Mass, sung by the Cardinal
of York, the said Present was delivered to the King: which was a Tree, forged
of fine Gold, with Branches, Leaves, and Flowers, resembling Roses.

Thus far Sir Rich. Baker. ANother Present was sent him by Pope Julius: whereof
there is this Relation in the same History, page 376.

Pope Julius the second, sent to King Henry a Cap of Maintenance, and a Sword;
and being angry with the King of France, tranferred, by Authority of the
Lateran Council, the Title of Christianissimo from him upon King Henry: which
with great solemnity was published the Sunday following, at the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul.

Thus far Sir Rich. Baker. CHAP. I.
The First Ground of the change of Religion in England was the business of the
Kings Divorce from Queen Catherine; which when it came to be publicly
examined, the Queen made this following Speech.

THe Queen (according to the Form) being called upon, to come into the Court,
made no Answer, but rose out of her Chair, and came to the King, kneeling down
at his Feet: to whom she said, Thus related by Howes upon Stow, page 543.


The Queens Speech.
SIR, IN what have I offended you? or what occasion of displeasure have I given
you, intending thus to put me from you? I take God to be my Judge, I have been
to you a true and humble Wife, ever conformable to your Will, and Pleasure;
never contradicting, or gainsaying you in any thing: being always contented
with all things, wherein you had any delight, or took any pleasure, without
grudge, or countenance of discontent, or displeasure. I loved for your sake,
all them whom you loved, whether I had cause, or no, whether they were my
Friends or my Enemies. I have been your Wife these twenty years or more, and
you had by me diverse Children; and when you had me at first, I take God to be
my Judge, that I was a Maid: and whether it be true, or no, I put it to your own
Conscience. If there be any just cause that you can allege against me, either
of dishonesty, or matter lawful to put me from you, I am content to depart, to
my shame and confusion: and if there be none, then I pray you to let me have
Justice at your Hands. The King, your Father, was, in his time, of such an
excellent Wit, that he was accounted amongst all men, for Wisdom, to be a
second Solomon: and the King of Spain my Father Ferdinand, was accounted one of
the wisest Princes, that had reigned in Spain, for many years. It is not,
therefore, to be doubted, but that they had gathered as wise Counselors unto
them, of every Realm, as to their Wisdoms they thought meet: and I conceive,
that there were in those days, as wise and well-learned men, in both the
Realms, as be now at this day: who thought the Marriage between you, and me,
good and lawful. Therefore it is a wonder to me, what new inventions are now
invented against me. And now to put me to stand to the Order, and Judgment of
this Court, seems very unreasonable. For you may condemn me for want of being
able to answer for my self; as having no Counse, but such as you assigned me;
who cannot be indifferent on my part, since they are your own Subjects, and
such as you have taken, and chosen out of your own Council; whereunto they are
privy, and dare not disclose your Will, and Intent. Therefore I humbly pray
you, to spare me, until I may know, what Counsel, my Friends in Spain will
advise me to take: And if you will not, then your Pleasure be fulfilled.

And, with that, she rose up, and departed, never more appearing in any Court.

The King, perceiving that she was [Stow, p. 543.]
gone, said;

I Will now in her Absence declare this unto you all, That She has been unto me
as True and Obedient a Wife, as I would wish, or desire. She has all the
virtuous qualities, that ought to be in a Woman of her Dignity, or in any other
of Mean Condition. She is also, surely, a Noble Woman born: Her Condition will
well declare it. After this, the King sent the Two [Stow, p. 543.]
Cardinals, Campeius, and Wolsey, to speak with her.

WHen the Queen was told, that the Cardinals were come to speak with Her, She
rose up, and, with a Skein of white Thread about her neck, came into her Chamber
of Presence. The Cardinals said, they were sent by the King to understand her
mind, concerning the business between Him and Her. My Lords, (says the Queen)
I cannot answer you so suddenly; for I was set, among my Maids, at work, little
thinking of any such matter; wherein there needs a longer deliberation, and a
better head, then mine, to make Answer. For I have need of Counsel in this
case, which concerns me so near: and for any Counsel, or Friends, that I can
find in England, they are not for my Profit. For it is not likely, that any
English man will Counsel me, or be a Friend to me against the King's Pleasure,
since they are his Subjects: And for my Counsel, in which I may trust, they are
in Spain.

The Cardinals returning to the King, gave him an account of what She said.
Thus the case went forward, from Court to Court, till it came to Judgment.

The King's Counsel at the Bar called for Judgment: unto whom Cardinal Campeius
said thus. I will not give Judgment, till I have made relation to the Pope of
all our proceedings; whose Counsel, and Command, I will observe. The matter is
too high for us, to give an hasty Judgment, considering the Highness of the
Persons, and doubtfulness of the Case; and also whose Commissioners we be;
under whose Authority we sit. It were therefore reason, that we should make our
Chief Head a Counsel in the same, before we proceed to a definitive sentence. I
come not to please, for Favor, Need, or Dread, of any Person alive, be he
King, or otherwise. I have no such respect to the Person, that I will offend my
Conscience. I will not for the Favor, or Disfavour, of any High Estate, do
that thing, which shall be against the Will of God. I am an old man, (both weak
and sickly) that look daily for death. I will not wade any further in this
matter, until I have the Opinion, and Assent of the Pope. Wherefore I will
adjourn the Court for this time, according to the Order of the Court of Rome:
from whence such Jurisdiction is derived. Upon this the Court was dissolved,
and no more done.

Then stepped forth the Duke of Suffolk from the King, and uttered with an
haughty Countenance, these words, [Stow, p. 544.]


It was never merry in ENGLAND, since we had any Cardinals amongst us. Thus far
Stow. Upon this there was a Debate held in Council, Whether it were convenient
for the King to Assume to himself the Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs? In
opposition to which there was this Speech made; related in my Lord Herbert' s
History, page 362.

SIR,
YOur Highness is come to a point, which needs a strong, and firm Resolution;
it being, not only the most important in its self, that can be presented; but
likewise of that consequence, that it will comprehend your Kingdom, and
Posterity. It is, whether in this business of your Divorce, and Second
Marriage, as well as in all other Ecclesiastical Affairs, in your Dominions,
you would make use of your own, or the Popes Authority. For my own part, as an
Englishman, and your Highnes's Subject, I must wish all Power in your Highness.
But when I consider the Ancient practice of this Kingdom, I cannot but think
any Innovation dangerous. For, if in every Temporal Estate, it be necessary to
come to some Supreme Authority, whence all inferior Magistracy should be
derived; it seems much more necessary in Religion; both, as the Body thereof
seems more susceptible of a Head, than any else; and, as that Head again, must
direct so many others; We should therefore, above all things, labor to keep an
unity in the parts thereof; as being the Sacred bond, which knits and holds
together, not its own alone, but all other Government. But how much, Sir,
should we recede from the Dignity thereof, if we (at once) retrenched this its
chief and most eminent part? And, who ever liked that Body long, whose Head was
taken away? Certainly, Sir, an Authority received for many Ages, ought not
rashly to be rejected. For, is not the Pope, Communis Pater, in the Christian
World, and Arbiter of their Differences? Does not he Support the Majesty of
Religion, and vindicate it from neglect? Does not the holding his Authority
from God, keep Men in awe, not of Temporal alone, but Eternal punishments; and
therein extend his Power beyond death it self? And will it be secure, to lay
aside those potent means of reducing People to their Duty, and trust only to
the Sword of Justice, and Secular Arms? Besides, who shall mitigate the rigor
of Laws in those Cases, which may admit exception, if the Pope be taken away?
Who shall presume to give Orders, or Administer the Sacraments of the Church?
Who shall be Depository of the Oaths and Leagues of Princes? Or, Fulminate
against the perjured Infractors of them? For my part (as Affairs now stand) I
find not, how, either a general Peace amongst Princes, or any equal moderation
in Humane Affairs, can be well conserved without him. For, as his Court is a
kind of Chancery, to all other Courts of Justice in the Christian World; so if
you take it away, you subvert that Equity, and Conscience, which should be the
Rule, and Interpreter of all Laws and Constitutions whatsoever. I will
conclude, that, I wish your Highness (as my King and Sovereign), all true
Greatness and Happiness; but think it not fit (in this Case) that your Subjects
should either examine by what right Ecclesiastical Government is Innovated; or
enquire how far they are bound thereby; since, beside that it might cause
Division, and hazard the Overthrow, both of the one and the other Authority;
it would give that Offense and Scandal abroad, that Foreign Princes would both
reprove and disallow all our Proceedings in this kind, and upon occasion, be
disposed easily to join against us.

Thus my Lord Herbert relates this excellent Speech. But notwithstanding this
Speech, or whatsoever could be said against it, the Popes Supremacy was
excluded, and the King Married Anne Boleign: which is thus set down by Stow,
continued by Hows, Page 554.

KIng Henry upon occasion of these delays made by the Pope, in his Controversy
of Divorce, and through Displeasure of such Reports as he heard had been made
of him to the Court of Rome; and Thirdly, moved by some Counselors to follow
the example of the Germans, caused a Proclamation to be made in the Two and
twentieth year of his Reign, forbidding all his Subjects to purchase any manner
of thing from the Court of Rome: And obtaining a Divorce from Queen Catherine,
his Wife, by an Act of Parliament, he privately Married Anne Boleign: And upon
that, by another Act of Parliament, the Pope with all his Authority, was clean
banished his Realm, and Order taken that he should no more be called Pope, but
Bishop of Rome; and the King to be taken and reputed as Supreme Head of the
Church of England, having full Authority to Reform all Errors, Heresies, and
Abuses in the same. It was further Enacted by another Act of Parliament, That
no Person should Appeal for any Cause out of this Realm to the Court of Rome;
but from the Commissary, to the Bishop; from the Bishop, to the Archbishop;
from the Archbishop to the King; and all Causes of the King to be tried in the
Upper-House of Parliament. Moreover, the First Fruits and Tenths of all
Ecclesiastical Dignities and Promotions were granted to the King.

Thus far Stow. This Deserting of the Pope is thus related by Dr. Heylyn, in
the Preface of his History of Reformation.

KIng Henry the Eighth being Nothing but Passion and Interest carried on this
business.
violently hurried with the Transport of some private Affections; And finding,
that the Pope appeared the greatest Obstacle to his desires, he extinguished
his Authority in the Realm of England.

This opened the first way to the Reformation; and gave encouragement to those
who inclined unto it: To which the King afforded no small countenance out of
Politic Ends. But for his own part, he adhered to his Old Religion; severely
Persecuting those that Dissented from it. And died (though Excommunicated) in
that Faith and Doctrine which he had sucked in (as it were) with his Mothers
milk: And of which he showed himself so stout a Champion against Luther.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning the beginning of this prodigious Change of
Religion. The first Opposition against this sudden Change, was a Sermon of one
Friar Peto, in opposition to the King's second Marriage.

Thus related by Howes upon Stow, Page 562.

THe First, that openly resisted, or reprehended the King, touching his
Marriage with Anne Boleign, was one Friar Peto, a simple Man, yet very Devout,
of the Ord^ of the Observants. This Man, Preaching at Greenwich, upon the Two
and twentieth Chapter of the third Book of the Kings, to wit, the last part of
the story of Achab, saying, Even where the Dogs licked the Blood of Nabaoth,
even there shall Dogs lick thy Blood also, O King. And therewithal spoke of the
Lying Prophets, which abused the King etc. I am (says he) that Micheas whom
you will hate, because I must tell you truly that this Marriage is unlawful:
And I know that I shall eat the Bread of Affliction, and drink the Water of
Sorrow; yet because our Lord has put it into my mouth, I must speak it.

And when he had strongly enveighed against the King's second Marriage, to
diswade him from it: he also said, There are many other Preachers, yea too
many, which Preach, and Persuade you otherwise; feeding your folly and frail
Affections, upon hope of their own worldly Promotion; and by that means betray
your Soul, your Honor, and Posterity, to obtain Fat Benefices, to become Rich
Abbots, and get Episcopal Jurisdiction, and other Ecclesiastical Dignities.
These (I say) are the Four hundred Prophets, who, in the spirit of Lying, seek
to deceive you. But take good heed lest you being seduced, find Achab' s
punishment; which was to have his Blood licked up by Dogs; saying, that it was
one of the greatest miseries in Princes, to be daily abused by Flatterers.

The King, being thus reproved, endured it patiently, and did no violence to
Peto. But the next Sunday [Stow. p. 562.]
Dr. Curwin Preached in the same place, who most sharply reprehended Peto, and
his Preaching, calling him Dog, Slanderer, base beggarly Friar, Rebel, Traitor,
saying, that no Subject should speak so audaciously to Princes: And having
spoken much to that effect, and in Commendation of the King's Marriage, thereby
to Establish his Seed in his Seat for ever, etc. He then supposing that he had
utterly suppressed Peto, and his partakers, lifted up his voice, and said, I
speak to thee, Peto, which make thy self Micheas, that thou may speak evil
of Kings: But now thou art not to be found, being fled for fear and shame, as
being unable to answer my Arguments. And whilst he thus spoke, there was one
Elstow, a fellow Friar to Peto, standing in the Rood-loft, who said to Dr.
Curwin;

Good Sir, you know, that Father Peto, as he was Commanded, is now gone to a
Provincial Council, held at Canterbury; and not fled for fear of you; for to
morrow he will return again. In the mean time I am here, as another Micheas,
and will lay down my Life, to prove all those things true which he has taught
out of the holy Scripture, and to this Combat (...) challenge thee, before
God, and all equal Judges; even unto thee, Curwin, I say, which art one of the
Four hundred false Prophets, into whom the spirit of Lying is entered, and
seek, by Adultery, to establish a Succession; betraying the King unto
endless Perdition, more for thine own vain Glory, and hope of Promotion, than
for discharge of thy clogged Conscience, and the King's Salvation.

This Elstow waxed hot, and spoke very earnestly, so as they could not make him
cease his Speech, until the King himself bad him hold his peace: And gave
Order, that He, and Peto should be Convented before the Council; which was done
the next day. And when the Lords had rebuked them, then the Earl of Essex told
them, that they had deserved to be put into a Sack, and cast into the Thames:
Whereunto Elstow, smiling, said, Threaten these things to Rich, and Dainty
Persons, who are clothed in Purple, fare Deliciously, and have their chiefest
hope in this World. For we esteem them not, but are joyful, that for the
discharge of our Duty, we are driven hence: And with thanks to God, we know the
way to Heaven to be as ready by Water, as by Land; and therefore we care not,
which way we go.

These Friars, and all the rest of their Order, were banished shortly after:
And after that, none durst openly oppose themselves against the Kings
affections.

Thus far Stow. Now more perfectly to Establish this Change, It was Ordered,
That there should be Sermons Preached at Paul's-Cross, against the Popes
Supremacy. Thus related by Howes upon Stow, Page 571.

Every Sunday, at Paul's-Cross, Preached a Bishop, declaring the Pope, not to
be Supreme Head of the Church. Also, in other Places of this Realm, great
Troubles were raised about Preaching; namely at Bristow, where Mr. Latimer
preached; and there preached against him, one Mr. Hobberton, and Dr. Powel: So
that there was great partakings on both sides; insomuch that diverse Priests,
and others, set up Bills against the Mayor, and against Mr. Latimer. But the
Mayor permitting Laymen to Preach, caused diverse Priests to be apprehended, and
put in Newgate, with Bolts upon them: and diverse others ran away, and lost
their Livings, rather than come into the Mayor's handling.

Thus Howes. The King, being thus Established Head of the Church of England,
makes one Thomas Cromwell his Vicar General; which is thus set down by Sir Rich.
Baker, Page 408.

Thomas Cromwell, Son to a Black smith in Putney, being raised to High
Dignities, was lastly made Vicar General, under the King in all Ecclefiastical
Affairs: who sat diverse times in the Convocation-House, amongst the Bishops,
as Head over them.

Thus Sir Richard Baker. And, thus far, of the first beginning of this
prodigious Change of Religion.

CHAP. II.
Of the Dissolution of Abbeys, being the first Effect of this Change of
Religion.

Stow, Page 572. THE King sent the said Cromwell, and others, to visit the
Abbeys and Nunneries in England; (the said Cromwell being ordained Principal
Visitor), He put forth all Religious Persons, that would go, and all under the
Age of Four and Twenty: And after closed up the residue, that would remain; so
that they should not come out of their places.

All Religious Men, that departed the Abbot, or Prior, gave them for their
Habit a Priests Gown, and Forty Shillings in Money.

The Nuns had such Apparel given them, as Secular Women wear, and had liberty
to go whither they would.

They took out of the Monasteries, and Abbeys, their Relics, and chiefest
Jewels, (to the Kings use they said).

Thus Stow. Here follows a more particular Account of the Dissolution of these
Abbeys.

The first Religious House, that the King took into his hands, was the Hospital
of St. James, near Charing Cross, with all the Means to the same belonging;
compounding with the Sisters of the House, who were to have Pensions, during
their lives: And built in place of the said Hospital, a Goodly Mansion,
retaining still the Name of St. James.

Stow, p. 560. In a Parliament were granted to the King, and his Heirs, All
Religious Houses, in the Realm of England, of the value of Two hundred pounds,
and under, with all Lands, and Goods, to them belonging.

The Number of these Houses, then suppressed, were about Three Hundred Seventy
Six; and the value of their Lands then, Thirty two thousand pounds, and more by
the Year. The Moveable Goods, (as they were then sold at Robin-Hood's
peny-worths) amounted to more than Ten thousand pounds.

The Religious Persons, that were in the said Houses, were clearly put out;
whereof some went to other Greater Houses; and some went abroad to the World.
It was (says my Author) a pitiful thing, to hear the lamentation, that People
in the Country made for them; for there was great Hospitality kept amongst
them; and (as it was thought) more than Ten thousand Persons (Masters and
Servants) lost their Living, by the putting down of these Houses. Thus Sto^v.

Not long after, by the means of the said Cromwell, All the Orders of Friars and
Nunns, with their Cloisters, and Houses, were suppressed, and put down. First,
the Black-Friars in London; the next day the White-Friars, the Grey-Friars, and
the Monks of Charter House; and so all the others.

Thus Baker, page 415. Here follows a particular Relation concerning the Shrine
at Canterbury. Thus delivered by Sir Rich, Baker, page 411.

SAint Augustines Abbey at Canterbury was suppressed, and the Shrine, and
Goods, taken to the Kings Treasury; as also the Shrine of Thomas Becket, in the
Priory of Christs-Church, was likewise taken to the Kings use.

This Shrine was built about a man's height, all of Stone; and then upwards, of
Timber plain, within the which was a Chest of Iron, containing the Bones of
Thomas Becket, Scull and all, with the wound on his Head, and the piece cut out
of his Scull in the same wound.

These Bones, by the Command of the Lord Cromwell, were burnt. The Timber-work
of This Shrine, on the outside, was covered with Plates of Gold, Damasked with
Gold-wyre: which Ground of Gold was again covered with Jewels of Gold, as Ten
or Twelve Rings, ^ramped with Gold-wyre, into the said Ground of Gold: many of
these Rings having Stones in them.

There were likewise Images of Angels, Precious Stones, and Great Pearls,

The Spoil of which Shrine, in Gold and Precious Stones, filled two great
Chests; such as six, or seven strong men could do no more, than remove one of
them at once, out of the Church.

The Monks of that Church were commanded, to change their Habits into the
Apparel of Secular Priests.

Thus Baker. The Knights of the Rhodes, and Knights of St. John of Jerusalem,
in England and Ireland, were utterly Dissolved, and made void: The King, his
Heirs and Successors, to have, and enjoy, all the Mansion House, Church, and
all other Buildings, and Gardens, to the same belonging, near to the City of
London, called the House of St. John of Jerusalem, in England; and also the
Hospital-Church, an House of Kilwarin in Ireland, with all Castles, Honors,
Manors, Measees, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Revenues, Services, Woods, Downs,
Pastures, Parks, Warrens, etc. in England and Ireland, with all the Goods,
Cattels, etc.

Thus Stow, page 579. Besides these Religious Houses, there were likewise by
Act of Parliament, given the King, All Colleges, Chanteries, Hospitals, Free
Chapels, Fraternities, Brother-hoods, and Gilds.

The Number of Monasteries suppressed, were 645: besides 90 Colleges, 110
Hospitals; and of Chanteries, and Free Chapels, 2374.

Thus Baker in the former page. Now to give a more exact Account of the
Grounds, and Progress of the Dissolution of these Monasteries; We will here
insert a Discourse, taken out of Mr. Dugdales Antiquities of Warwickshire,
Page 801. where he treats of the Dissolution of a particular Monastery of
Nuns, called Poles-worth; and upon that occasion of the Dissolution of all
other Monasteries in the Kingdom. The Discourse is thus delivered.

I Find it left Recorded, by the Commissioners, that were employed to take
Surrender of the Monasteries in this Shire, Anno 29. Hen. 8. viz. That after
strict scrutiny, not only by the fame of the Country, but by Examination of
several Persons, they found these Nuns, Virtuous, and Religious Women, and of
good Conversation: And that in the Town, where the Monastery was, there were
Forty Four Tenements, and but one Plough: the residue of the Inhabitants,
being Artificers, who had their livelihood by the Monastery. These implored
the Mediation of Thomas Cromwell, that it might not be suppressed. Nevertheless,
it was not the strict, and regular Lives of these Devout Ladies, nor any thing
that might be said in the behalf of the Monasteries, that could prevent their
ruin, then approaching: So great an aim had the King, to make himself thereby
glorious; and many others, no less hopes, to be enriched, in a considerable
manner.

But, to the end, that such a change should not overwhelm those that might be
Active therein; in regard the People, every where, had no small esteem of these
Houses, for their Devout and Daily Exercises of Prayer, Alms-deeds,
Hospitality, and the like; whereby, not only the Souls of their Deceased
Ancestors had much benefit, (as then was taught), but Themselves, the Poor, as
also Strangers, and Pilgrims constant advantage; there wanted not the most
subtle Contrivances, to effect this stupendous Work, that, I think, any Age
has beheld.

In order therefore to it, that, which Cardinal Wolsey had done, for the
Founding his Colleges, in Oxford and Ipswich, dissolving about Thirty Religious
Houses, was made a President. Now that this business might be the better
carried on, Mr. Thomas Cromwell, who had been an old Servant to the Cardinal,
and not a little active in that, was the chief Person pitched upon to assist
therein.

For, I look upon this business, as not originally designed by the King, but by
some Principal Ambitious Men of that Age; who projected to themselves all
worldly Advantages imaginable, through that deluge of Wealth, which was like to
flow amongst them, by this hideous storm.

First therefore, having insinuated to the King matter of Profit, and Honor:
(Profit, by so vast an Enlargement of his Revenue; And Honor, in being able to
maintain mighty Armies, to recover his Right in France; as also to strengthen
Himself against the Pope, whose Supremacy he had abolished; and withal to make
a firmer Alliance with such Princes, as had done the like). Further, to promote
this Design, they procured Cranmers Advancement to the Sea of Canterbury, and
more of the Protestant Clergy, (as my Author terms them) to other Bishoprics,
and high Places; to the end, that the rest should not be able, in a full
Council, to carry any thing against their design; sending out Preachers, to
persuade the People, to stand fast to the King, without fear of the Pope's
Curse.

Next, that it might be the more plausibly carried on, care was taken so to
represent the Lives of the Monks, Nunns, Canons, etc. to the World, as that the
less regret might be made at their ruin.

To which purpose, Thomas Cromwell, being Constituted General Visitor, employed
sundry Persons, who acted their parts therein accordingly.

He likewise sent others, to whom he gave Instructions in Eighty Six Articles;
by which they were to enquire into the Government, and Behavior of the
Religious, of both Sexes: Which Commissioners, the better to manage the design,
gave encouragement to the Monks, not only to Accuse their Governors, but to
Inform against each other; compelling them also to produce their Charters, and
Evidences, of their Lands; as also their Plate and Money; and to give an
Inventory thereof.

And hereunto they added certain Injunctions, from the King, containing most
severe and strict Rules; by means whereof, many being found obnoxious to their
Censure, were expelled; and others, discerning themselves not able to live free
from Exception, or Advantage that might be taken against them, desired to leave
their Habitations.

And having, by these Visitors, thus searched into their Lives, (which by a
Black-book, containing a world of Enormities, were represented, in no small
measure scandalous) to the end, that the People might be the better satisfied
with their proceedings; it was thought convenient to suggest, that the
Lesser-Houses, for want of Good Government, were chiefly guilty of these
Crimes; and so they did; as appears by the Preamble of the Act for their
Dissolution, made in the 27* Hen. 8. which Parliament, consisting, for the most
part, of such Members, as were packed for the purpose through private Interest,
(as is evident by diverse original Letters of that time) many of the Nobility,
for the like respects also favoring the design, Assented to the suppression of
All such Houses, as had been Certified of less value than Two hundred pounds by
the year; giving them, with their Lands, and Revenues to the King; yet with
this addition, That the Possessions belonging to such Houses, should be
converted to better uses: But how well this was observed, we shall soon see:
These specious pretenses being made use of for no other purpose, than by
opening this gap, to make way for the total Ruin of the Greater Houses;
wherein notwithstanding, it is by the said Act acknoweldged, that Religion was
well observed.

For, no sooner were the Monks turned out, and the Houses demolished, (that
being first thought requisite, least some accidental Change might conduce to
their restitution) but care was taken, to prefer such Persons to the
Superiority in Government, upon any vacancy of these Great Houses, as might be
Instrumental to their Surrender, by persuading with the Convent to that purpose.

The truth is, that there was no omission of any endeavor, that can well be
imagined, to accomplish these Surrenders. For so subtlely did the Commissioners
act their parts, that after earnest solicitation with all the Abbots, when they
found them backwards, they tempted them with the promise of Good Pensions,
during life.

Neither were the Courtiers unactive, in driving on this Work: as may appear by
my Lord Chancellor Audley's employing a special Agent, to treat with the Abbot
of Athelney, offering him a Hundred Marks a year, in case he would Surrender;
and the personal endeavor that he used with the Abbot of Osiths in Essex, as
by his Letter to the said Visitor, is evident: wherein is signified, that he
had, with great solicitation, prevailed with the said Abbot: But withal,
insinuated his desire, that his place of Lord Chancellor being very chargeable,
the King might be moved for an Addition of some more profitable Offices to him.
Nay, I find, that this Great Man, hunting eagerly after the Abbey of Waldon in
Essex (out of the Ruins whereof, afterward, that Magnificent Fabric called
by the Name of Audley Inn, was built) as an argument, the sooner to obtain it,
did, besides the extenuation of its worth, allege, that he had in this World,
sustained great Damages and Infamy, in his serving the King; which the Grant of
this should recompense.

Some Arguments were used by the Abbots to hinder these Suppressions; but
nothing would avail. For resolved they were, to effect what they had begun, by
one means or other: insomuch, as they procured the Bishop of London, to come to
the Nunns of Syon, with their Confessor, to solicit them thereto: who, after
many persuasions, took it upon their Consciences, that they ought to submit to
the King's pleasure therein, by God's Law. But what could not be effected by
such Arguments, and fair Promises, was by terror and straight dealing, brought
to pass. For under pretense of suffering Delapidations in the Buildings, or
negligent administration of their Offices; as also for breaking the Kings
Injunctions, they deprived some Abbots, and then put others, that were more
plyant in their rooms.

From others they took their Convent-Seals; to the end they might not, by
making Leases, or Sale of their Jewels, raise Money, either for supply of their
present Wants; or payment of their Debts; and so be necessitated to Surrender.

Nay, to some, as in particular to the Canons of Leicester, the Commissioners
threatened, That they would charge them with Adultery and Buggery, unless they
would submit: And Dr. London told the Nunns of Godstow, That because he found
them obstinate, he would dissolve the House by virtue of the King's Commission,
in spite of their Teeth. And yet all was so managed, that the King was
solicited to accept of them, not being willing to have it thought, that they
were by Terror moved thereto; and special notice was taken of those, who did
give out, that their Surrenders were by Compulsion.

Which courses (after so many, through underhand corruption, had led the way)
brought on others apace, as appears by their Dates, which I have observed from
the very Instruments themselves; insomuch as the rest stood amazed, not knowing
which way to turn them.

Some therefore thought fit to try, whether Money might save their Houses from
this dismal fate, so near at hand. Others with great constancy refused to be
thus accessory, in violating the Donations of their Pious Founders: But these
tasted of no little severity. For, touching the Abbot of Fountains, in
Yorkshire, I find, that being charged by the Commissioners for taking into his
hands some Jewels belonging to the Monastery, (which they called Theft and
Sacrilege), they pronounced him Perjured; and so deposing him, extorted a
private Resignation.

And it appears, that the Monks of Charter House, in the Suburbs of London,
were committed to Newgate; where, with hard and barbarous usage, Five of them
died, and Five more lay at the point of death; as the Commissioners signified:
But withal alleged, That the Suppression of that House, being of so strict a
Rule, would occasion great Scandal to their doings; for as much as it stood in
the face of the World, infinite concourse, from all parts, coming to that
Populous City; and therefore desired that it might be altered to some other use.

And lastly, that under the like pretense of robbing the Church, (wherewith the
before specified Abbot of Fountains was charged) the Abbot of Glastenbury, with
Two of his Monks, being condemned to death, was drawn from Wells upon a Hurdle,
and then hanged upon the Hill called the Tore, near Glastenbury; his Head set
upon the Abbey-gate, and his Quarters disposed of to Wells, Bath, Ilchester,
and Bridgewater.

Nor did the Abbots of Colchester, and Reading, speed much better; as they that
shall consult our story of that time, may see. And for further terror to the
rest, some Priors, and other Ecclesiastical Persons, who had spoken against the
Kings Supremacy, (a thing then somewhat uncouth, being so newly set up) were
condemned as Traitors, and Executed.

And now, that all this was effected, to the end it might not be thought, that
these things were done by a high Hand, a Parliament was called (^0 Hen. 8.) to
confirm these Surrenders. Now there wanted not plausible insinuations to Both
Houses, for drawing on their Consent with all smoothness thereto: The Nobility
being promised large shares in the spoils, either by Free-gift from the King,
easie-Purchases, or most advantageous Exchanges; and many of the Active Gentry,
advancements to Honor, with increase of their Estates: All which, we see,
happened to them accordingly.

And the better to satisfy the vulgar, it was represented to them, that by
this Deluge of Wealth, the Kingdom should be strengthened with an Army of Forty
Thousand men^ and that, for the future, they should never be charged with
Subsidies, Fifteens, Loans, or Common Aides. By which means the Parliament
Ratifying these Surrenders, the Work became completed.

For the more firm Settling whereof, a sudden course was taken, to pull down,
and destroy the Buildings, as had been done before, upon the Dissolution of the
smaller Houses: Next, to disperse a great portion of the Lands, amongst the
Nobility, and Gentry, which was accordingly done. The Visitor General having
told the King, That the more had interest in them, the more they would be
irrevocable.

And lest any Domestic stir should arise, by reason of this great, and strange
Alteration, rumors were spread of great dangers from Foreign Invasions; against
which great Preparations were made every where; which seemed so to excuse this
Suppression of the Abbyes, as that the People (willing to spare their own
Purses) began to suffer it easily.

But, let us look upon the Success. Wherein I find, that the said Visitor
General (the grand Actor of this Tragical business) having contracted upon
himself an Odium from the Nobility, by reason of his low Birth, and being
raised to so high Dignities, (as likewise from the Catholics, for having thus
Acted in the Dissolution of the Abbeys) was, (before the End of the said
Parliament, wherein that was ratified, which he had, with so much Industry,
brought to pass) deserted by the King; who, (not having any more use of him)
gave way to his Enemies Accusations. Whereupon, being Arrested by the Duke of
Norfolk, at the Council Table, when he least dreamed of it, he was Committed to
the Tower, and Condemned by the same Parliament, for Heresy, and Treason,
unheard, and little pitied, and had his Head cut off on Tower Hill. Nor did
many of the Reformers speed much better: For Fire and Faggot, happened to be
their Portion.

And as for the fruit, the People reaped, from all their hopes, built upon
these specious Pretenses, it was very little: For Subsidies from the Clergy,
and Fifteens of all Laymens Goods, were soon after exacted. And in Edward the
Sixth's time, the Commons were constrained to Supply the King's wants by a new
Invention; to wit, Sheep, Clothes, Goods, Debts, etc. for Three years: which
Tax grew so heavy, that the year following they prayed the King for mitigation
of it.

Nor is it a little observable, that whilst the Monasteries stood, there was no
Act for Relief of the Poor: so amply did those Houses give succor to them.
Whereas in the next Age, to wit, the 39 of Elizabeth, no less then Eleven Bills
were brought into the House of Commons for that purpose.

Thus far out of Mr. Dugdale concerning this Prodigious, and Diabolical Action.
A word out of the same History (Page 109, and 119.) concerning Chantryes,
Gilds, or Fraternities. I shall only mention one of each of them, to make it
known what they were.

Prestons Chantery.
THis was Founded by John Preston, for two Priests to Sing Mass daily, for the
good Estate of Him, the said John, during this mortal Life, and afterward, for
the health of his Soul; as also, for the Souls of his Parents, and Benefactors,
and all the Faithful Deceased.

Thus Mr. Dugdale. Of Gilds, or Fraternities.
The word Gild, Proceeds from the Saxon word Gelo, or Gilo, which signifies
Money: because that such, as were, either for Charity, Religion, or Merchandise
sake, associated, did cast their Money, Goods, yea, and sometimes Lands,
together, for the public support of their own common charge.

These had their Annual Feasts, and Neighbourly Meetings.

The First, and most Ancient of these Gilds, here in Coventry, was Founded in
the Fourteenth year of Edward the Third. At which time the King granted License
to the Coventry men, That they should have a Merchants Gild, and a Fraternity,
of Brethren, and Sisters, of the same, in this Town, with a Master, or Warden,
thereof, to be chosen out of the same Fraternity: And that they might make
Chantries, bestow Alms, do other works of Piety, and Constituted Ordinances
touching the same, with all Appurtenances thereto.

And in the Seventeenth year, Edward the Third gave leave to several, to enter
into a Fraternity, and make a Gild, consisting of themselves, and such others
as would join with them, to the Honor of St. John Baptist. As also to purchase
certain Lands, Tenements, and Rents, for the Founding of a Chantry, of Six
Priests, to Sing Mass every day, in the Church of the Holy Trinity, and St.
Michael, in Coventry, for the Souls of the King's Progenitors; and for the good
Estate of the King, Queen Isabel, his Mother, Queen Philippa his Wife, and
their Children: As also of Walter Chesthunt, and William De-Belgrave, during
their lives here on Earth, and for their Souls, after their departure hence;
and for the good Estate of the said John, John, Tho. Rich. Pet. and William,
and the rest of the said Gild, with their Benefactors: and likewise for the
Soul of John Eltham, late Earl of Cornwall, and all of the Faithful Deceased.

Which Gild, being so Founded, within Two years after, the same King Edward
gave License to Queen Isabel his Mother, to Give, and Assign thereunto a parcel
of Land, to build thereupon a Chapel, to the Honor of our B^essed Savior, and
St. John Baptist, for Two Priests to Sing Mass daily, for the good Estate of
the said King Edward, Queen Isabel his Mother, Queen Philippa his Wife, Edward
Prince of Wales, and of the Brethren, and Benefactors, of the same Gild, whilst
they lived in this World, and for their Souls after their Departure hence. As
also for the Soul of John of Eltham, Earl of Cornwall, and the Souls of the said
Brethren and Benefactors, with all the Faithful Deceased.

Thus Mr. Dugdale, p. 119. There were great store of these, and such like Pious
Foundations, throughout all England, as appears by the same History: All
destroyed by King Henry the Eighth, and his Son.

This Change being made, something must necessarily be established, in order to
Religion.

CHAP. III.
A Book of Religion Published.

THE Clergy held a Convocation, in St. Paul's Church; where, after much
disputing and debating of matters, they Published a Book of Religion,
Entitled, Articles Devised by the King's Highness, etc.

In which Book is mentioned but Three Sacraments, Baptism, Eucharist, and
Penance.

The Articles, contained in this Book, were Six: And by an Act of Parliament
all were condemned for Heretics, and to be Burnt, that should hold the
contrary to them; Asserting,

1. That the Body of Christ was not really present in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, after Consecration.

2. That Priests entered into Holy Orders, might Marry.

3. That the Sacrament might not truly be Administered in one kind.

4. That Vows of Chastity, made upon mature deliberation, were not to be kept.

That Private Masses were not to be used.

That Auricular Confession was not necessary in the Church.

Thus Sir Rich. Baker. page 408. Here follows the Act it self, out of the
Statute Book.

An Act of Parliament made in King Henry the Eighth's time, for abolishing
diversity of Opinions in certain Articles concerning Religion.
THe King's Most Royal Majesty, most prudently considering, that by occasion of
various Opinions, and Judgments, concerning some Articles in Religion, great
discord, and variance has arisen; as well, amongst the Clergy of this Realm,
as amongst a great number of the vulgar People: And being in a full hope, and
trust, that a full and perfect Resolution of the said Articles would make a
perfect Concord, and Unity, generally amongst all His Loving, and Obedient
Subjects, of His most Excellent Goodness, not only Commanded that the said
Articles should Deliberately, and Advisedly, by His Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Learned Men of His Clergy, be Debated, Argued, and Reasoned, and their
Opinions therein to be Understood, Declared and Known: But also most Graciously
vouchsafed, in his own Princely Person, to come unto his High Court of
Parliament, and Council, and there, like a wise Prince of most high Prudence,
and no less Learning, opened, and declared many Things of most high Learning,
and great Knowledge, touching the said Articles, Matters, and Questions, for an
Unity to be had in the same.

Whereupon, after a great, and long, deliberate and advised Disputation, and
Consultation, had, and made concerning the said Articles, as well by the
consent of the King's Highness, as by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and other Leaned Men of His Clergy, in their Convocations, and by the
Consent of the Commons in Parliament Assembled, it was, and is, finally
resolved, accorded, and Agreed, in manner, and form following; that is to say,

1. First, That in the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, by the strength and
efficacy of Christ's mighty Word, (it being spoken by the Priest) is present
really, under the Forms of Bread and Wine, the natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Jesus Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary, and that after the
Consecration, there remains no substance of the Bread, or Wine, nor any other
Substance, but the Substance of Christ, God and Man.

2. That the Communion in both kinds, is not necessary (to Salvation), by the
Law of God, to all Persons: and that it is to be Believed, and not Doubted, but
that in the Flesh, under the Form of Bread, is the very Blood; and with Blood,
under the Form of Wine, is the very Flesh, as well apart, as if they were both
together.

3. That Priests, after the Order of Priesthood received, may not Marry, by the
Law of God.

4. That Vows of Chastity, Widowhood, etc. are to be kept.

5. That it is meet, and necessary, that Private Masses be continued, and
admitted, in the King's English Church, and Congregation; as whereby good
Christian People, orcering themselves accordingly, do receive both Godly, and
Goodly Consolations, and Benefits* and it is agreeable also to God's Law.

6. That Auricular Confession is expedient, and necessary to be retained, and
continued, used and frequented, in the Church of God.

For the which most Godly study, pain, and travel of His Majesty, and
determination and resolution of the Premises, His humble and obedient Subjects,
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
Assembled, not only render, and give unto His Highness, their most high, and
hearty Thanks, and think themselves most bound to Pray for the long continuance
of his Graces most Royal Estate and Dignity: And being also desirous, that his
most Godly enterprise may be well accomplished, and brought to a full end, and
perfection; and so Established, that the same might be to the Honor of God, and
after to the common Quiet, Unity, and Concord, to be had, in the whole Body of
this Realm for ever, Do most humbly beseech His Royal Majesty; that the
Resolution and Determination above written, of the said Articles, may be
established, and perpetually perfected, by the Authority of this present
Parliament.

It is therefore Ordained, and Enacted by the King, our Sovereign Lord; and by
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal; and by the Commons, in this present
Parliament Assembled; and by the Authority of the same; That if any Person or
Persons, within this Realm of England, or in any other of the Kings Dominions,
do by Word, Writing, Printing, Ciphering, or any otherwise, Publish, Preach,
Teach, Say, Affirm, Declare, Dispute, Argue, or Hold, any Opinion.

1. That in the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, under the Form of Bread and
Wine, after the Consecration thereof, there is not present really, the natural
Body and Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary: or
that, after the said Consecration, there remains any Substance of Bread, or
Wine; or any other Substance, but the Substance of Christ, God and Man; or
likewise to Publish, Preach, Teach, Say, Affirm, Declare, Dispute, Argue, or
Hold Opinion, that in the Flesh, under the Form of Bread, there is not the very
Blood of Christ; or that with the Blood, under the Form of Wine, there is not
the very Flesh of Christ, as well apart, as though they were both together; or
by any the means abovesaid, or otherwise, do Preach, Teach, Declare or Affirm,
the said Sacrament to be of other Substance, than is abovesaid; or do by any
means Contemn, Deprave, or Despise the said Blessed Sacrament; that then such
Person or Persons, so offending, shall be deemed, and adjudged Heretics; and
that every such offense shall be judged manifest Heresy; and that every such
Offender, and Offenders, shall therefore have, and suffer, Judgment, Execution,
Pain, and Pains of Death, by way of Burning without any Abjuration, Clergy, or
Sanctuary; and their Estates to be Confiscated to the King, as in Cases of High
Treason.

2. And moreover, if any do obstinately Affirm, Uphold, Maintain, or Defend,
that the Communion of the Blessed Sacrament, in both kinds, that is to say, in
Form of Bread, and also of Wine, is necessary for the health of Man's Soul; or
that it ought, or should, be Given, and Administered to any Persons, in both
kinds; or that it is necessary so to be taken, or received, by any Person,
other than Priests being at Mass, and Consecrating the same.

3. Or that any Man, after having received the Order of Priesthood, may marry.

4. Or, that any Man, or Woman, who has advisedly vowed, or professed
Chastity, or Widowhood, may marry.

5. Or that Private Masses be not lawful, or not laudable, or should not be
celebrated, had, nor used in the Realm; nor be not agreeable to the Laws of God.

6. Or that Auricular Confession is not expedient, and necessary to be
retained, and continued, used, and frequented in the Church of God. Such
Persons are to suffer pains of death, as in cases of Felony, without any
benefit of Clergy, or Privilege of Church, or Sanctuary; and shall forfeit
all their Lands and Goods, as in cases of Felony.

Thus far out of the same Book. CHAP. IV.
Of another Effect of this Change, which was a horrid Effusion of Blood.

QUeen Anne Boleign, who had been the first occasion of this Change of
Religion, was beheaded. Whereof there is this Relation. Baker, page 407.

It was now the Twenty eighth year of King Henry's Reign: When there were
solemn Justs at Greenwich; from whence the King suddenly departed, and came to
Westminster: Whose sudden departure struck amazement into many; but to the
Queen especially: And not without cause. For the next day the Lord Rochford,
her Brother, and Henry Norris, were brought to the Tower, Prisoners: Whither
also the same day, was brought Queen Anne, her self: Who at the Tower-gate fell
on her knees, beseeching God to help her, as she was innocent of that, whereof
she was accused.

Soon after this, she was arraigned in the Tower, and found guilty, and had
Judgment pronounced. Immediately the Lord Rochford, her Brother, was likewise
Arraigned: Who, together with Henry Norris, Mark Smeton, William Brierton, and
Francis Weston, all of the King's Privy-Chamber, about matters touching the
Queen, were beheaded on Tower Hill.

Within Two days, Queen Anne, her self, on a Scaffold, upon the Green within
the Tower, was also beheaded.

At her death she spoke these words: God save my Master, and Sovereign, the
King; the most Goodliest, Noblest, and Gentlest Prince, that is; and grant him,
that he may long Reign over you: (which words she spoke with a smiling
countenance:) which done, she kneeled down, and the Hangman of Calais smote off
her head at one stroke.

For her Religion, she was an earnest Professor, and one of the first
Counternancers of the Gospel. The Crimes, for which she died, were Adultery,
and Incest. She had many Enemies, as being a Protestant; and perhaps, in that
respect, the King himself not greatly her Friend. For, though he had excluded
the Pope, yet he continued a Papist still.

Her Death cast upon King Henry a dishonorable Imputation: Insomuch, that
whereas the Protestant Princes of Germany, had resolved to choose him for Head
of their League; after they heard of this Queens Death, they utterly refused
him.

Thus far Sir Rich. Baker. The next day after her Death, the King Married the
Lady Jane Seymour.

Stow, Page 573. In the next place, Thomas Cromwell, who had been the grand
Promoter of this business, was likewise beheaded. Whereof thus writes Howes
upon Stow, page 508.

THomas Cromwell, Earl of Essex, being in the Council Chamger, was suddenly
apprehended, and committed to the Tower of London; and soon after attainted of
Heresy and High Treason.

When he was brought to the Scaffold on Tower Hill, to be executed, he spoke
these words,

I pray you that be here, to bear me witness that I die in the Catholic Faith,
not doubting in any Article of my Faith, or in any Sacrament of the Church.
Many have slandered me, and reported, that I have been an A better of such, as
have maintained evil Opinions; which is untrue. But I confess, that like as
God, by his holy Spirit, does instruct us in the Truth; so the Devil is ready
to seduce us: And I have been seduced. But bear me witness, That I die in the
Catholic Faith of the holy Church: And I desire you to pray for me, that so
long as life remains in this Flesh, I waver nothing in my Faith. Having said
this, he was presently beheaded. Thus Howes. This following Relation, (although
it concerns not the shedding of Blood) yet is very remarkable, as manifesting,
how the King's Marriage with the Lady Anne of Cleve, was in Parliament declared
not lawful: Which is thus related by Howes, upon Stow, Page 578.

AFter the Death of the Lady Jane Seymour, the King's Third Wife; He Married
the Lady Anne of Cleve, in the Two and thirtieth year of his Reign: From which
time the King, not only continued his first Misliking of her; but his hatred
increased more and more against her; not only for want of beauty, (whereof at
first he took exceptions) but also for sundry other qualities, whereof he
secretly accused her: As also he said, that her body was unpleasant, making
great doubt, that she was no Virgin, when she came into England; with diverse
other defects, which he said, he knew, by her outward appearance, to be in her.
And being thus so sore perplexed, and desperate of redress, he grew wondrous
apt, and willing to call in question any thing, that might tend to the
dissolving of this Marriage.

Within Eight days the King told his Physicians, his further cause of grief,
That she was loathsome to him in Bed, and that her Body was foul, and out of
order.

The King being thus tormented in Body, and Mind, knew not how to ease himself,
until he had procured a speedy Divorce: Which was thus effected.

Certain Lords came down into the Lower House of Parliament, expressly declaring
the causes, why this Marriage was not Lawful: And, in conclusion, the matter
was by the Convocation clearly determined, that the King might lawfully marry,
where he would; and so might she.

It appears clearly in the Record, what moved the King to this Marriage. For
these are his words:

I declare, that when the first Communication was had with me, about this
Marriage, I was glad to hearken to it; trusting to have some assured Friend by
it: I much doubting, at that time, both the Emperor, France, and the Bishop of
Rome. Thus Stow. The King's Fifth Wife, Catherine Howard, put to death for
Adultery: As appears by this Relation: Baker, page 514.

THe King was informed of the Queens dissolute life; first, before her
Marriage, with one Francis Dereham; and since her Marriage, with one Thomas
Culpepper, of the King's Bedchamber. Whereupon Sir Tho. Wrioths^ey was sent to
the Queen, at Hampton Court, to charge her with these Crimes, and discharging
her Household, to cause her to be conveyed to Syon.

The Delinquents being examined, Dereham confessed, that before the King's
Marriage with the Lady Catherine, there had been a pre-contract between him and
her. But when once he understood of the King's good liking to her, he then
waved it, and concealed it, for her preferment.

These Gentlemen were arraigned, and had Judgment to die, as in cases of
Treason.

They were drawn from the Tower to Tyburn; Where Culpepper was beheaded, and
Dereham hanged, and dismembered.

The Lord William Howard, and the Lady Margaret his Wife, Catherine Tilney, and
Alice Bestwold, Gentlewomen, Joan Bulmer, Anne Howard, Wife to Henry Noward,
the Queens Brother, with diverse others, were all condemned for Misprision of
Treason, in concealing the Queens misdemeanour, and adjudged to forfeit all
their Lands, and Goods, during life, and to remain in perpetual Prison.

The Lords and Commons in Parliament Petitioned the King, That he would not vex
himself with the Queens Offenses; and that both she, and the Lady Rochford,
might be Attainted by Parliament: And that to avoid protracting of time, he
would give his Royal Assent to it, under the Great Seal, without staying for
the end of the Parliament. Also, that Dereham and Culpepper, having been
Attainted before by the Common Law, might be Attainted likewise by Parliament:
All which was Assented unto by the King.

After this, the Queen, and the Lady Rochford, were beheaded, on the Green
within the Tower. It is certainly said, that after her Condemnation, She
protested to Dr. White, Bishop of Winchester, her last Confessor, That as for
the Act, for which She was condemned, She took God, and his holy Angels to
witness, upon her Souls Salvation, that She died guiltless.

Thus of the putting to death of his Wives.

Here follows an unheard of Cruelty, of Bloodshed for Religion, in these times
of Confusion and Change of Religion.

ONe Lambert was accused for denying the real presence in the Sacrament; who
Appealed to the King; and the King was content to hear him. Whereupon a Throne
was set up in the Hall of the King's Palace at Westminster, for the King to
sit. And when the Bishops had urged their Arguments, and could not prevail;
then the King took him in hand, hoping, perhaps, to have the Honor of
converting an Heretic, when the Bishops could not do it; and withal promised
him pardon, if he would recant. But all would not do; for he remained
obstinate, the King missed his Honor, and the Delinquent his Pardon: Being
shortly after drawn to Smithfield, and burnt.

Baker, page 412. Two more were for the same cause burnt.

Baker, in the same page. Dr. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, and Sir, Thomas
Moor, expressly denied, at Lambeth, before the Archbishop of Canterbury, to take
the Oath of Supremacy: and thereupon were both beheaded.

Bishop Fisher was much lamented, as being reputed a man both learned, and
wise, and of good life.

Sir Thomas Moor was both learned, and very wise. His Devotion was such, that
he used to wear a Shirt of Hair-cloth next his skin, for a perpetual Penance:
And oftentimes in the Church he would put on a Surplice, and help the Priest at
Mass: Which he did not forbear to do, when he was Lord Chancellor of England;
as one time the Duke of Norfolk, coming to the Church, found him doing it.

Baker, page 406. Sir William Peterson, Priest, late Commissary of Calais, and
Sir William Richardson, Priest of St. Mary's in Calais, were both there drawn,
hanged, and quartered, in the Marketplace, for the Supremacy. Stow, page 579.
Dr. Wilson, and Dr. Samson Bishop of Chichester, were sent to the Tower, for
relieving certain Prisoners, who had denied to Subscribe to the King's
Supremacy: And for the same offense Richard Farmer, Grocer of London, a rich
and wealthy Citizen, was committed to the Marshalsea, and after arraigned, and
attainted in a Praemunire, and lost all his Goods; his Wife and Children thrust
out of doors.

Stow, page 580. Robert Barns, Dr. of Divinity, Thomas Gerrard, Parson of
Honey-lane, and William Jerome, Vicar of Stepney-Heath, Bachelors in Divinity:
Also Edward Powel, Thomas Able, and Richard Fetherston, all Three Doctors, were
drawn from the Tower of London, to West- Smithfield.

The Three First, were drawn to a Stake, and there burnt: The other three were
drawn to a Gallows, and there hanged, headed, and quartered.

The Three First, as appears in their Attainders, were executed for diverse
Heresies: The last Three for Treason; to wit, for denying the King's Supremacy,
and affirming, his Marriage with Queen Catherine, to be good.

Stow, page 581. Thomas Empson, sometimes a Monk of Westminster, who had been
Prisoner in Newgate, more than Three years, was brought before the Justices in
Newgate; and for that he would not ask the King Pardon, for denying his
Supremacy, nor be Sworn thereto, his Monks-Cowl was plucked off his back; and
his Body reprieved, till the King was informed of his Obstinacy.

Stow, page 591. Three Men, and one Woman, were burned in Smithfield, for the
Sacrament. Dr. Shaxton, sometimes Bishop of Salisbury, Preaching at the same
fire, and there recanting, persuaded them to do the like: But they would not.

Stow, page 592. Some Anabaptists, Three Men, and one Woman, all Dutch, bore
Faggots to Paul's Cross: and a Man and a Woman, Dutch Anabaptists, were burnt in
Smithfield,

Stow, page 576. Dr. Forest, a Friar Observant, was apprehended; for that in
Secret he had declared to many, that the King was not Supreme Head of the
Church. Whereupon he was condemned; and afterward, upon a pair of new Gallows,
set up for that purpose in Smithfield, he was hanged by the Middle, and
Armpits, quick; and under the Gallows was made a Fire, wherewith he was burnt
and consumed.

Stow, page 577. Hugh Faringdon, Abbot of Reading, and Two Priests, named Rugg
and Owen, were hanged, and quartered at Reading.

The same day was Richard Whiting, Abbot of Glastenbury, hanged, and quartered
on Tore-Hill, adjoining to his Monastery.

John Thorn, and Roger James, Monks, the one Treasurer, the other
under-Treasurer of Glastenbury-Church, were, at the same time, executed.

Also, shortly after, John Beck, Abbot of Colchester, was executed at
Colchester: All, for denying the King's Supremacy.

Stow, page 577. Six Persons, and one led between Two, were drawn to Tyburn; to
wit, Laurence Cook, Prior of Doncaster, William Horn, a Lay-Brother of the
Charter House at London, Giles Horn Gentleman, Clement Philipp, Gentleman of
Calais, Edmond Bolhelm Priest, Darcy Jennings, Robert Bird: And all there
hanged and quartered, as having been Attainted by Parliament, for denying of
the King's Supremacy.

Stow, page 581. Sir David Jenison, Knight of Rhodes, was drawn through
Southwark, to St. Thomas of Watterings, and there executed for the Supremacy.

Stow, page 581. German Gardener, and Lark, Parson of Chelsey, were executed at
Tyburn, for denying the King's Supremacy: As likewise, one Ashby.

Stow, page 585. Three Anabaptists were burnt in the Highway, beyond Southwark,
toward Newington.

Stow, page 579. Thus far of these Cruelties.

CHAP. V.
Of a Third Effect of this Change, to wit, a General Confusion in Religion.

THese horred Cruelties made the state of Religion in England in a strange
Confusion; as appears by this Relation of Sir Rich. Baker, page 408.

And now was the state of Religion in England come to a strange pass, because
always in Passing, and had no Consistence. For at first, the Authority of the
Pope was excluded in some cases only; a while after in all: But yet his
Doctrine was wholly received. Afterward his Doctrine came to be impugn'd; but
yet in some few points only; a while after, in many: That the Fable of Proteus
might be no longer a Fable; when the Religion of England might be its true
Moral.

The Confusion was so great in these times, that in Parliament one called the
other Heretic, and Anabaptist; and he again called him Papist, and Hypocrite.

And this not only amongst the Temporality, but even the Clergymen themselves
preached, and enveigh'd, one against another. So that the Frame of Religion was
extremely disjoynted: the Clergy that should set it in Frame, being out of
frame themselves.

The Minds of the People extremely distracted; and the Nobility, that should
cement them together, scarce holding themselves together.

Thus Baker. The Truth of this Relation appears more fully confirmed from this
Speech of King Henry, made in Parliament. Thus related by Hows upon Stow, page
590.

A part of King Henry the Eighth's Speech, made in Parliament, in the Thirty
seventh Year of his Reign.
WHat Love or Charity, is there amongst you, when one calls another Heretic
and Anabaptist, and he calls him again Papist, Hypocrite, and Pharisee! I must
needs judge the fault, and occasion of this Discord, to be partly by negligence
of you, the Fathers and Preachers of the Spirituality. For I hear daily, that
you of the Clergy Preach one against another, Teach one contrary to another,
railing one against another.

Some are so stiff in their old Mumpsimus; others are so busy and furious in
their new Sumpsimus, that all men almost be in Variety, and Discord; and few,
or none, preach truly and sincerely the Word of God. Now, how can poor Souls
live in concord, when you Preachers, sow amongst them in your Sermons, Debate
and Discord? Of you they look for light, and you lead them into darkness.

Now, although I say, that Spiritual-men be in some fault, that Charity is not
kept amongst you; yet you of the Temporality, be not clear and unspotted, from
malice and envy. For you rail at Bishops, speak slanderously of Priests, and
rebuke and taunt Preachers.

You must understand, that although you be permitted to read Holy Scriptures,
and to have the Word of God in your Mother Tongue; yet this License is given
you only to inform your Conscience, and to instruct your Children, and not to
dispute, and make Scripture a railing and a taunting-stock against Priests and
Preachers, as many light persons do. I am very sorry to hear how irreverently
that most precious Jewel (the Word of God) is Disputed, Rimed, Sung, and
Jangled in every Alehouse and Tavern; contrary to the true meaning and
Doctrine of the same. And I am as much sorry, that the Readers of it, follow it
(in doing) so faintly, and coldly. For of this I am sure, that Charity, and
Virtue, was never less exercised; nor God, amongst Christians, was never less
reverenced, honored, or served* Thus Stow.

These Confusions, and others, are thus related by Dr. Heylyn, in his History
of Reformation. Page 17.

THE People were generally divided into Factions and Schisms; The Treasures of
the Crown were exhausted by prodigal Gifts, and the Money of the Realm so
mixed, that it could not pass for current amongst Foreign Nations, to the great
dishonor of the Kingdom, and loss of the Merchant. For although an infinite
Mass of Jewels, Treasure of Plate, and ready Money, and an incredible
improvement of Revenue, had accrued to him; by such an universal Spoil and
Dissolution of Religious Houses, yet was he little or nothing the richer for
it: insomuch, that in the year 1543. (being within less than Seven years after
the general Suppression of Religious Houses) he was forced to have recourse for
Moneys to his Houses of Parliament: by which he was supplied after an
extraordinary manner; the Clergy, at the same time, giving him a Subsidy of six
shillings in the Pound, to be paid out of their Spiritual Promotions; poor
Stipendiary Priests, paying each of them six shillings, eight pence, to
increase the Sum: which also was so soon consumed, that the next year he
pressed his Subjects to a Benevolence; and in the following year, he obtained
the Grant of all Chantries, Hospitals, Colleges, and Free-Chappels, within the
Realm; though he lived not to enjoy the benefit of it.

Most true it is, that it was somewhat of the latest, before he cast his Eye on
the Lands of Bishoprics: though there were some, that thought the time long,
till they fell upon them. Concerning which there goes a story, That after the
Court-Harpies had devoured the greatest part of the Spoil, which came by the
Suppression of Abbeys, they began to seek some other way, to satiate that
greedy Appetite, which the division of the former Booty had left unsatisfied.
And for the satisfying whereof, they found not any thing so necessary, as the
Bishops Lands.

This to Effect, Sir Thomas Seymour is employed as the fittest man, being in
Favor with the King, and Brother to Queen Jane, his most beloved and best Wife;
and having opportunity of access unto him, as being one of his Privy Chamber.
And he not having any good affection to Archbishop Cranmer, desired, that the
experiment should be tried on him.

And therefore took his time to inform the King, that my Lord of Canterbury did
nothing but fell his Woods, letting long Leases for great Fines, and making
havoc of the Royalties of his Arch Bishopric, to raise thereby a Fortune to
his Wife, and Children. Withal, he acquainted the King, That the Archbishop
kept no Hospitality, in respect of such a large Revenue; and that in the
Opinion of many wise men, it was more convenient for the Bishops to have a
sufficient yearly stipend out of the Exchequer, than to be so encumbred with
Temporal Royalties; being so great a hinderance to their Studies, and Pastoral
Charge; and that the Lands, and Royalties, being taken to his Majesty's use,
would afford him (besides the said Annual Stipends) a great yearly Revenue.

The King, considering of it, could not think fit, that such a plausible
Proposition, as taking to himself the Lands of Bishops, should be made in vain:
only he was resolved to prey further off, and not to fall upon the spoil too
near the Court, for fear of having more partakers in the Booty, than might
stand with his profit.

And to this end he deals with Holgate preferred not long before, from Landaff,
to the Sea of York: from whom he takes, at one time, no fewer than Seventy
Manors, and Townships, of good old Rents; giving him, in exchange, to the like
yearly value, certain Impropriations, Pensions, Tithes, and Portions of Tithes,
(but all of an extended Rent) which had accrued to the Crown by the Fall of
Abbeys: Which Lands, he laid, by Act of Parliament, to the Duchy of Lancaster.
For which see 37 Hen. 8. Chap. 16.

He dismembered also, by these Acts, certain Manors from the Sea of London; and
others, in like manner from the Sea of Canterbury; but not without some
reasonable Compensation for them.

And although, by reason of his death, which followed within a short time
after, there was no further Alienation made, in his time, of the Churches
Patrimony; yet having opened such a gap, and discovered this Secret, that the
Sacred Patrimony might be Alienated with so little trouble, the Courtiers of
King Edward's time, would not be kept from breaking violently into it, and
making up their own Fortune, in the spoil of Bishoprics. So impossible a thing
it is, for the ill Examples of Great Princes, not to find followers in all
Ages; especially, where Profit or Preferment, may be furthered by it.

Thus Heylyn. CHAP. VI.
Of some other Passages concerning this King, and likewise of his death.

HAving now prosecuted this Relation thus far, and drawing to an end of it, we
will here insert a Passage out of Dr. Heylyn's History of Reformation (Page 6.)
concerning King Henry the Eighth's. Absolute Power of disposing of the Crown.
The words are these.

Anno Regni 28.
In the Act of Succession, which past in the Parliament of this year, there is
this Clause, to wit, That for lack of Lawful Heirs of the Kings Body, it should
and might be lawful for Him, to confer the Crown, on any such Person, or
Persons, as should please his Highness, and according to such Estate, and after
such Manner, Form, Fashion, Order, and Condition, as should be Expressed,
Named, Declared, and Limited, in his Letters Patents, or by his Last Will: The
Crown to be enjoyed by such Person, or Persons, so to be nominated and
appointed, in as large and ample manner, as if such Person, or Persons, had
been his Highness's Lawful Heirs to the Imperial Crown of this Realm.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. By this, and what has been said in these Collections, it
evidently appears, that all Inheritances, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical; as
likewise the Lives of all men, in the Reign of this King, depended upon the
Arbitrary Government of those times.

Now we must end this story, concerning matters of Religion in this Kings
Reign, with a brief Relation of his Death, with a Summary Account of his Wives,
and the years of his Reign.

The Relation of his Death is thus delivered by Dr. Heylyn, in his History of
Reformation. Page 14.

THe King, having lived a voluptuous Life, and too much indulged to his Palate,
was grown so corpulent, or rather so overgrown with an unweildy burden of
Flesh, that he was not able to go up Stairs, from one Room to another; but as
he was hoised up by an Engine: which filling his Body with foul and foggy
Humors, did both wast his Spirits, and increase his Passions. In the midst of
which Distempers, it was not his least care to provide for the Succession of
the Crown to his own Posterity. At such time as he married Anne Bulleign, He
procured his Daughter Mary to be declared Illegitimate, by Act of Parliament:
The like he also did by his Daughter Elizabeth, when he had married Jane
Seymour; settling the Crown upon his Issue by the said Queen Jane.

But having no other Issue by her, but Prince Edward; and none at all by his
following Wives, he thought it a point of prudence to establish the Succession
by more Stays than one. For which cause he procured an Act of Parliament in
the 35 year of his Reign, in which it is declared, That in default of Issue of
the said Prince Edward, the Crown should be entailed to the Kings Daughter, the
Lady Mary, and the Heirs of her Body: And so likewise to the Lady Elizabeth,
and the Heirs of her Body: And for lack of such Issue, to such, as the King by
his Letters Patents, or his last Will in Writing, should limit.

Of which Act of Parliament, he, being now sick, and fearing his approaching
end, made such use, in laying down the state of the Succession to the Crown, in
this Last Will, that (contrary to all Justice) he totally Excluded the whole
Scottish-Line (Descended from the Lady Margaret, his eldest Sister) from all
hopes of having their turns in it.

His Infirmity, and the weakness it brought upon him, confining him to his Bed,
he had a great desire to receive the Sacrament: and being persuaded to receive
it in the easiest posture (sitting, or raised up in his Bed) he would by no
means yield unto it; but caused himself to be taken up, and placed in his
Chair; in which he heard the greatest part of the Mass, till the Consecration;
and then received the Blessed Sacrament on his Knees, as at other times; saying
withal, (as Saunders relates the Story) That if he did not only cast himself
upon the Ground, but even under it also, he could not give unto the Sacrament,
the Honor that was due unto it.

The instant of his Death approaching, none of his Servants (though thereunto
desired by his Physicians) durst acquaint him with it: till at last Sir Anthony
Denny undertook that ungrateful Office: which the King entertaining with less
impatience than was looked for from him, gave order, that Archbishop Cranmer
should be presently sent for. But he being then at Croyden, it was so long
before he came, that he found him speechless. However, applying himself to the
Kings present condition, and discoursing to Him on this Point, That Salvation
was to be obtained only by Faith in Christ: He desired the King, (if he
understood the effect of his words, and believed the same) that he would
signify so much by some Sign or other: which the King did, by wringing him
gently by the Hand; and shortly after died.

There is a sharp, but shrewd Character of this King; to wit, That he never
sparea Woman in his Lust, nor Man in his Anger. Sir Walter Rawleigh says of
him, That if all the Patterns of a Merciless Prince had been lost in the World,
they might have been found in this King.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. I will here set down some Passages out of his last Will,
related by Dr. Heylyn, page 23. By which it will appear, how constant he was
till his death, in professing and maintaining these following Points of
Catholic Doctrine; to wit, The Real Presence in the Sacrament: Invocation of
Saints: and Prayer for the Dead. The words of the Will are these;

WE most humbly, and heartily recommend our Soul to God: who, in the Person of
his Son redeemed us with his most precious Body and Blood. And for our better
remembrance thereof, has left here with us, in his Church Militant, the
Consecration, and Administration of his most precious Body and Blood.

We also instantly desire, that the Blessed Virgin Mary, with all the Holy
Company of Heaven, may continually pray for us, whilst we live in this World;
and at our passing out of it; that we may the sooner attain everlasting life.

We likewise further Ordain, That there be a convenient Altar at Windsor,
honorably prepared, with all things requisite, and necessary, for a daily Mass,
there to be said perpetually, while the World should endure.

Moreover, He gave Order, That all Divine Offices accustomed for the Dead,
should be daily Celebrated for him.

And, that at the removal of his Body to Windsor, a Thousand Marks should be
distributed amongst the Poor, to pray for the Remission of his Sins, and the
good of his Soul.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. An Account of his Wives.
Of Six Wives this King had, Anne Boleign, his Second Wife, was beheaded for
Incest with her own Brother.

The Third, Jane Seymour, being in Childbirth, and in danger of death, had her
Belly ripp'd up to preserve the Child.

The Fourth, Anne of Cleve, was cast off within two or three Months.

The Fifth, Catherine Howard, was beheaded for Adultery.

Concerning his Sixth Wife, thus writes Sir Rich. Baker, Page 418.

The Sixth, Catherine Parre, being an earnest Protestant, was accused to the
King, to have Heretical Books in her Closet: and this was so aggravated against
her, that they prevailed with the King to Sign a Warrant to Commit her to the
Tower, with a purpose to have burnt her for Heresy. This Warrant was committed
to Wriothsley, Lord Chancellor; and he, by chance letting it fall from him, it
was taken up, and carried to the Queen; who having read it, went soon after to
visit the King. Being come to the King, he presently fell into Talk with her,
about some Points of Religion, demanding her Resolution therein.

But she knowing, that his nature was not to be crossed, specially considering
the case she was in, made him answer, That She was a Woman, accompanied with
many Imperfections; but his Majesty was Wise, and Judicious, of whom she must
learn, as of her Lord, and Head.

Not so, by St. Mary (said the King) for you are a Doctor, Kate, to instruct
us, and not to be instructed by us, as often we have seen heretofore.

Indeed, Sir, (said She) if your Majesty have so conceived, I have been
mistaken. For if heretofore I have held talk with your Majesty, it has been to
learn some Point of your Majesty, whereof I stood in doubt: and sometimes, that
with my Talk I might make you forget your present infirmity. And is it so,
(says King) Then we are Friends.

But nevertheless, soon after, upon a day, appointed by the Kings Warrant for
apprehending her, the King being disposed to walk into the Garden, took the
Queen with him: when all on the sudden the Lord Chancellor, with Forty of the
Guard, came into the Garden, with a purpose to apprehend her: whom, as soon as
the King saw, he stepped to the Chancellor, and calling him Knave and Fool, bid
him get him out of his Presence.

The Queen, seeing the King so angry with him, began to entreat him; to whom
the King said, You little know, what it is he came about. Of my Word,
Sweetheart, he has been a very Knave to Thee.

Thus the Queen was preserved; who else had tasted of as bitter a cup, as any
of his former Wives had done.

Thus Sir Rich. Baker. Now we will give an Account of the Years, when these
changes were made. Sir Rich. Baker, Page 425.

IN the Eighth year of this King's Reign, Luther began to Preach against the
Authority of the Pope, and to bring in a Reformation of Religion: for
repressing of whom the Council of Trent was called by Pope Paul the Third.

At the same time, with Luther, there arose also, in the same Country, other
Reformers of Religion, as Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Melancthon, etc. wh^
differing from Luther in some Points, made the difference, which is, at this
day, of Lutherans and Protestants; so called at first at Ausburgh, for making a
Protestation, in defense of their Doctrine.

In his Two and twentieth year, a Proclamation was set forth, That no Person
should purchase any thing from the Court of Rome: and this was the first
beginning of his Deserting the Church of Rome.

In his Three and twentieth year, the Clergy submitting themselves to the King,
for being found guilty of a Praemunire, were the first that called him Supreme
Head of the Church; yet with this restriction, So far as it was according unto
Gods Word; and not otherwise.

In his Four and twentieth year, an Act of Parliament was made, That no Person
should Appeal, for any Cause, out of this Realm, to the Court of Rome.

In his Twenty sixth year, an Act was made, which Authorized the King to be
Supreme Head of the Church of England, and the Authority of the Pope to be
abolished; and then also was given to the King the First Fruits, and Tenths, of
all Spiritual Livings: and this Year were many put to death: Papists for
denying the Kings Supremacy: Protestants, for denying the Real Presence in the
Sacrament: nor is it credible, what numbers suffered death, for these two
Causes, in the last Ten Years of the Kings Reign: of whom, if we should make
particular mention, it would reach a great way in the Book of Martyrs.

In his Eight and twentieth Year, the Lord Cromwell was made Vicar General,
under the King, over the Spirituality: and at least Four Hundred Monasteries
were suppressed, and all their Lands and Goods, conferred upon the King, by an
Act of Parliament.

In his One and thirtieth Year, was set forth by the Bishops, the Book of the
Six Articles; and all the rest of the Monasteries were conferred upon him.

Lastly, In his Thirty fifth Year, all Colleges, Chantries, and Hospitals, were
given to him.

Thus Sir Rich. Baker. Here you have had a short view of the Beginning, and sad
Effects, of this Prodigious Change of Religion, begun by King Henry the Eighth.

A Further PROSECUTION Of these HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS Concerning a Second
Change of Religion, Made for POLITIC ENDS, And of the Occurrences concerning
it; In the Reign of King EDWARD the Sixth.
A Preamble.
THIS is a Summary Account of this King's Reign, (as to these matters of
Religion) taken out of the Preface of Dr. Heylyn's History of Reformation.

Where, after a brief Narration of King Henry the Eighth's Deserting the Pope,
he gives this following Account of his Son King Edward the Sixth: The Relation
whereof begins thus.

Next comes his Son Edward the Sixth upon the Stage, whose Name was made use of
to serve Turns withal, and his Authority abused to his own undoing.

In his First year, the Reformation was resolved on, but on different ends;
endeavored by some Bishops, and others of the Lower Clergy; and promoted with
the like Zeal and Industry, but not with like Integrity, by some great Men
about the ^rt: Who, under Color of removing corruptions out of the Church, had
cast their eyes upon the Spoil of Shrines and Images, (though still preserved
in the greatest part of the Lutheran Churches) and the improving their own
Fortunes by the Chantry Lands: All which they most Sacrilegiously divided
amongst themselves, without admitting the poor King to share with them; though
nothing but the filling his Coffers, by the Spoil of the one, and the Increase
of his Revenue by the fall of the other, was openly pretended in the Conduct of
it.

But to speak no more of this, the work chiefly intended, was vigorously
carried on by the King and his Counselors, as appears by the Doctrinals in the
Book of Homilies, and by the Practical part of Christian Piety.

And here the business might have rested, if Calvin's Pragmatical Spirit had
not interposed. He first began to quarrel at some passages in the Liturgy; and
afterward never left Soliciting the Lord Protector, and practicing, by his
Agents, on the Court, the Country, and the Universities, till he had laid the
first Foundation of the Zuinglian Faction; who labored nothing more than
Innovation, both in Doctrine and Discipline: to which they were encouraged by
nothing more, than some improvident Indulgence, granted unto John Alasco; who
bringing with him a mixed multitude of Poles and Germans, obtained the
Privilege of a Church for himself, and his, distinct in Government, and Form
of Worship, from the Church of England.

This much animated the Zuinglian Gospellers to practice, first upon the
Church; who being Countenanced, if not Headed by the Earl of Warwick, (who then
began to undermine the Lord Protector) first quarrelled the Episcopal Habit;
and afterward enveighed against Caps, and Surplices; against Gowns and
Tippets: But fell at last upon the Altars, which were left standing by the
Rules of the Liturgy.

The touching upon this string made excellent Music, to most of the Grandees
of the Court; who had, before, cast many an envious eye, on those costly
Hangings, that massy Plate, and other Rich and Precious things, which adorned
those Altars.

And what need all this wast, said Judas, when one poor Chalice only, and
perhaps not that, might have served the turn. Beside, there was no small spoil
to be made of Copes; in which the Priest Officiated at the Holy Sacrament: Some
of them being made of Cloth of Tissue, Cloth of Gold and Silver, or Embroydred
Velvet; the meanest being made of Silk, or Satin, with some decent Trimming.

And might not these be handsomely converted unto private uses, to serve as
Carpets to their Tables, Coverlets to their Beds, or Cushions for their Chairs,
and Windows. Hereupon some rude People are encouraged, underhand, to beat down
some Altars; which makes way for an Order of the Council Table, to take down
the rest, and set up Tables in their places; followed by a Commission, to be
executed in all parts of the Kingdom, for seizing on the Premises for the
King's use.

But as the Grandees of the Court intended to defraud the King of so great a
booty; and the Commissioners to put a cheat upon the Court-Lords, who employed
them in it: So they were both prevented, in some places, by the Lords and
Gentry of the Country; who thought the Altar-cloths, together with the Copes,
and Plate of their several Churches, to be as necessary for themselves, as for
any others.

This Change drew on the Alteration of the former Liturgy, but almost as
unpleasing to the Zuinglian Faction, as the former was. In which conjuncture of
Affairs, King Edward the Sixth, died.

From the beginning of whose Reign, the Reformation began: All that was done, in
order to it, under King Henry the Eighth, seemed but accidental only, and by
the by, rather designed on Private Ends, than out of any settled purpose of a
Reformation; and therefore intermitted, and resumed again, as those Ends had
variance. But now the great Work was carried on with a constant hand; the
Clergy cooperating with the King, and the Council, for the effecting of it.

But scarce had they brought it to this pass, when King Edward died; whose
Death I cannot reckon for an infelicity to the Church of England. For, being
ill principled in himsels, and easily inclined to embrace such Counsels, as
were offered to him, it is not to be thought, but that the rest of the
Bishoprics (before sufficiently impoverished) must have followed Durham, and
the poor Church be left as destitute of Lands, and Ornaments, as when she came
into the World, in her Natural Nakedness.

Nor was it like to happen otherwise, in the following Reign of Queen Jane, if
it had lasted longer than a Nine-days wonder.

For Dudley, of Northumberland, who then ruled the roast, and had, before,
dissolved, and in hope devoured, the wealthy Bishopric of Durham, might easily
have possessed himself of the greatest part of the Revenues of York, and
Carlisle. By means whereof he would have made himself more absolute on the
North-side of Trent, than the poor Titular Queen had been on the South Side of
it: To carry on whose Interest, and maintain her Title, the poor remainder of
the Churches Patrimony was, in all probability, to have been shared amongst
those of the Party, to make them sure unto that side.

Thus far out of Dr. Heylyn' s Preface, Summarily, concerning this Rapine and
Sacriliege, which followed this Second Change of Religion. Now in the History
it self, (Page 33.) Dr. Heylyn begins orderly to treat of the Reign of this
King, as to matters of Religion, as will appear by what shall be here said.

CHAP. I.
Of the many Policies used in the Introducing this Second Change of Religion.

Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti. 1.
THE Solemnities of the Coronation being passed, the Grandees of the Court
began to entertain some thoughts of a Reformation. In which they found
Archbishop Cranmer, and some other Bishops, to be as forward as themselves; but
on different ends; endeavored by the Bishops out of Zeal, but by the
Courtiers, upon a hope of enriching themselves by the spoil of Bishoprics. To
the Advancement of which Work, the Conjuncture seemed to be as proper, as they
could desire. Fot first, the King being of such tender Age, and wholly governed
by the W^ll of the Lord Protector, who had declared himself a Friend to the
Lutheran party, in the time of King Henry, was easy to be molded into any
form: And as the Champions of the Papacy were removed out of all Office, so it
was thought expedient, for the better carrying on of the Design, not only to
release all such, as had been committed unto Prison, but also to recall all
such, as had been forced to abandon the Kingdom, for not submitting to King
Henry's Six Articles. But the business was of greater moment, than to expect
the coming back of these Men. Wherefore neither to lose time, nor to press too
much at once upon the People, it was thought fit, to smooth the way to the
intended Reformation, by setting out some Preparatory Injunctions: and this to
be done by sending out Commissioners, into all parts of the Kingdom, armed with
Instructions, to enquire into all Ecclesiastical Concernments: Which
Commissioners were accompanied with Preachers, appointed to instruct the People.

And, that they might not cool, or fall off again from what they had been
taught, they were to leave some Homilies with the Parish Priest; (which the
Archbishop had composed.)

Now, besides the Points, contained in the said Injunctions, the Preachers were
to persuade them from Invocation of Saints, Praying for the Dead, Images, Use
of Beads, Ashes, Processions, Mass, Dirges, etc. All which was done to this
intent, That the People, being prepared by little and little, might with more
ease, and less opposition, admit the total Alteration in the face of the
Church, which was intended, in due time, to be introduced.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning this Policy. Another Policy.
But there was something more than the Authority of a Minor King, which drew on
such a general Conformity to these Injunctions; and thereby smoothed the way to
those Alterations, both in Doctrine, and Worship; which the Grandees of the
Court, and Church, had began to fashion. The Lord Protector, and his Party,
were more experienced in Affairs of State, than to be told, That all great
Counsels, tending to Innovation in the Public Government, (especially where
Religion is concerned) are, either to be backed by Arms, or otherwise prove
destructive to the undertakers. For this cause, he resolves to put himself at
the Head of an Army; as well for the security of his Person, and the
preservation of his Party, as for the carrying on of the Design against all
Opponents. And for the raising of an Army, there could not be found a fairer
color, nor a more popular pretense, than a Wat with Scotland; not to be made
on any new Emergent Quarrel, (which might be apt to bread suspicion in the
heads of the People), but in pursuit of the great Project of the King Deceased,
for uniting that Realm, by a Marriage, to the Crown of England. On this
Pretense, Levies are made in all parts of the Kingdom. He entertained also
certain Regiments of Walloons, and Germans; because they were conceived more
likely to enforce Obedience, (if his Design should meet with any opposition)
than the natural English.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning this War with Scotland. A Third Policy.
But, in the first place care was taken, that none of the Neighboring Princes
should either hinder his Proceedings, or assist the Enemy. That which seemed to
give most satisfaction to the Court of France, was the performance of a Solemn
Obsequy, for King Francis the First: Whose Funerals were no sooner Solemnized
in France, but Order was given for a Dirge to be sung in all the Churches of
London, as also in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul: in the Quire whereof,
(hung with Black) a sumptuous Hearse was set up, for the present Ceremony. And
the next day Archbishop Cranmer, assisted with Eight other of the Bishops, all
in their rich Miters, and other their Pontificals, did sing a Mass of Requiem;
the Funeral Sermon being Preached by Dr. Ridley. This great Solemnity being
thus honorably performed, the Commissioners for the Visitation were dispatched
to their several Circuits, and the Army drawn to their Rendezvous.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning what was done before the calling of a Parliament.
CHAP. II.
Of what was done in Parliament in order to the Establishing this Change of
Religion.

Dr. Heylyn, Page, 47. A Parliament began, upon the Fourth of November, in
which the Cards were so well packed by Sir Ralph Sadler, that there was no need
of any further Shuffling, till the end of the Game: This very Parliament,
without any sensible Alteration of the Members of it, being continued until the
Death of the King. And though this Parliament consisted of such Members, as
disagreed amongst themselves in respect of Religion; yet they agreed well
enough together, in one common Principle; which was, to serve the present time,
and preserve themselves: which appears plainly, by the strange mixture of the
Acts, and Results thereof; some tending to the present Benefit, and Enriching
of particular Persons: And some again, being devised on purpose, to prepare a
way for exposing the Revenues of the Church, unto spoil, and rapine.

There was an Act made in King Henry the Eighths time: Inhibiting the reading
of the Old and New Testament, in the English Tongue. But this was here
abrogated, together with all, and every Act, or Acts of Parliament, concerning
Doctrine, and matters of Religion, and all and every Article, Branch, Sentence,
and Matter, Pains, and Forfeitures, in the same contained. By which repeal, all
Men seem to have been put into a liberty of reading Scripture, and being in a
manner, their own Expositors; and of entertaining what Opinions in Religion
best pleased their fancies; and promulgating such Opinions, as they
entertained: So that the English enjoyed that liberty, which the Romans are
affirmed, by Tacitus to have enjoyed, without control, in the times of Nerva;
that is to say, A liberty of being of what Opinion they pleased, and of
speaking freely their Opinions, wheresoever they listed.

There was also an Act passed, Entitled, An Act against such, as speak against
the Sacrament of the Altar. And to say truth, it was but time, that some
provision should be made, to suppress that Irreverence and Profaneness, with
which the Blessed Sacrament, was, at that time, handled, by too many of those,
who seemed most ignorantly Zealous of Reformation. For, they reproached it with
such names, and so unbecoming the mouths of Christians, that they were never
taken up by the Turks, and Infidels.

There was another Act passed, for the Receiving the Communion in both kinds;
yet with these Provisoes notwithstanding, If necessity did not otherwise
require; as in the Case of sudden Sickness, and other such like Extremities; in
which it was not possible, that Wine could be provided for the use of that
Sacrament; nor the sick Man depart in peace without it. And Secondly, That the
permitting this Liberty to the People of England, should not be looked upon, as
a condemning of any other Church or Churches, or their Practices, in which the
contrary is observed.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these acts of Parliament. Another Act of Parliament.
The next great Business was the Retrieving of a Statute made in the Twenty
seventh year of King Henry the Eighth: By which all Chantries, Colleges,
Free-Chappels, and Hospitals were given to the King. But he died before he had
taken many of them into his Possession. And the Grandees of the Court not being
willing to lose so Rich a Booty, it was set on foot again, and carried in this
present Parliament. In which were Granted to the King, all Chantries, Colleges,
Free-Chappels, Hospitals, Fraternities, Brotherhoods and Gilds (not already
seized on by his Father) with all their Lands, and Goods: which being sold at a
low rate, enriched many and ennobled some: And therefore made them firm in
maintaining the change.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning the ground of maintaining this Change of Religion.
Of Chantries.
Now as concerning the Nature of these Chantries here given to the King,
something has been said, out of Mr. Dugdale, in the Reign of Henry the Eighth.
But it will not be amiss, in this place, to set down what Dr. Heylyn says
concerning them. page 51. His words are these.

THese Chantries consisted of Salaries, to one, or more Priests, to say Mass
daily, for the Souls of their deceased Founders, and their Friends: Which not
subsisting of themselves, were generally Incorporated, and united to some
Parochial, Collegiate, or Cathedral Church: no fewer, than Forty seven, being
Founded in St. Paul's Free Chapels; which, though ordained for the same intent
with others, yet were independent, of stronger Constitution, and richer
Endowment: though therein they fell short of the Colleges; which exceed them,
both in the beauty of their Buildings, the number of their Priests maintained
by them, and the proportion of Revenue allotted to them.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these Foundations made for Praying for the Dead. A
Sermon Preached.
Now concerning the Suppressing of these Chantries, it was Preached at
Mercers-Chappel in London, by one Dr. Cromer (a Man, that wished well to the
Reformation) That if Trentals, and Chantry-Masses could avail the Souls in
Purgatory, then the Parliament did not well, in giving away Colleges,
Chantries, etc. which served principally for that purpose. But if the
Parliament did well, in dissolving, and bestowing them on the King (which he
thought that no Man could deny) then was it a plane case, that such Chantries,
and private Masses, did confer no Relief on the Souls in Purgatory. Which
Dilemma, (though it were unanswerable) yet was the matter so handled by the
Bishops, (seeing how much the Doctrine of the Church was concerned therein)
that they brought him to a Recantation at St. Paul's-Cross, in the June next
following; (this Sermon being Preached in Lent): where he confessed himself to
have been seduced by naughty Books, contrary to the Doctrine then received in
the Church. But the current of these times have run another way; and Cromer
might now have Preached that safely, for which, before, he had been brought
into so much trouble.

Thus far Dr. Heylyn as to these Chantries. An Act of Parliament, for the
Election of Bishops.
BUt that which made the greatest Alteration, and threatened most danger to the
State Ecclesiastical, was, The Act, Entitled, An Act for the Election of
Bishops, and what Seals and Styles shall be used by Spiritual Persons, etc. In
which it is Ordained, That Bishops should be made by the Kings Letters Patents,
and not by the Election of the Dean and Chapters: and that all their Processes,
and Writings should be made in the King's Name, only with the Bishops Test
added to, and Sealed with no other Seal, but the Kings, or such as should be
Authorized, and appointed by him. In the composing of which Act there was more
danger couched, than at first appeared. By the last branch thereof, it was
plain, and evident, That the intent of the Contrivers, was by degrees to weaken
the Authority of the Episcopal Order, by forcing them from their strong hold of
Divine Institution, and making them no other, than the King's Ministers only;
his Ecclesiastical Sheriffs, as a Man might say, to execute his Will, and
disperse his Mandates. And of this Act such use was made, That the Bishops of
those times were not in a capacity of Conferring Orders, but as they were
thereunto empowered by special License. The tenor whereof (if Saunders be to be
believed) was in these words: to wit,

The King, to such a Bishop, Greeting. Whereas All, and All manner of
Jurisdiction, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, flows from the King, as from
the Supreme of all the Body* etc. We therefore Give, and Grant to you Full
Power and License, (to continue during our good Pleasure) of conferring Orders
within your Diocese, and promoting fit Persons, unto Holy Orders, even to that
of Priesthood.

Which being looked upon by Queen Mary, not only as a dangerous Diminution of
the Episcopal Power, but as likewise an odious Innovation in the Church, She
caused this Act to be Repealed in the First year of her Reign.

There was also, in the first branch, more contained, than did appear. For,
though it seemed to aim at nothing, but that the Bishops should depend wholly
upon the King for their Preferment; yet the true drift of that Design was, to
make Deans and Chapters useless, and thereby to prepare them for a Dissolution.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this Act of Parliament. I will take leave here,
(although it be not its proper place) to insert an Act of Parliament of the
third year of this King's Reign, concerning the Form to be used in making of
Bishops. The words of the Act are these: to wit,

THat such form and Manner of Making, and Consecrating of Archbishops, Bishops,
Priests, and Deacons, as by Six Prelates, and Six other Learned Men, or by the
most number of them (they being appointed, and assigned by the King) shall be
devised for that purpose, and set forth under the Great Seal, shall be
accounted, as lawfully exercised, and Used, and no other.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, page 82. concerning the Election of Bishops. From this
Alteration, which was made in Parliament, in reference to the making of
Bishops, and the way of Exercising their Authority, we shall find, in the
Progress of this story, That there was great Havoc and Spoil made of the
Bishoprics themselves. Two Examples, and Testimonies whereof here immediately
follow. Related thus by Dr. Heylyn, page 129.

The Sea of Lincoln, being vacant, it was kept void from August till the next
June: During which interval, the Patrimony of that great and wealthy Bishopric
(one of the richest in the Kingdom) was so dismembered in it self, so parcelled
out for a prey to others, That when the new Bishop was to be restored to his
Temporals, there was none of all his Manors reserved for him, but his Manor
of Bugden, together with some Farms and Impropriations: The rest was to be
raised out of the Profits of his Jurisdiction: Yet so, that nothing was to be
abated in his Tenths and First Fruits; which were kept up according to their
former value.

The second Example is this:

Doctor Barlow being made Bishop of Bath and Wells, gratified the Lord
Protector with a Present of Eighteen or Nineteen Manors, which anciently
belonged unto it. And lying all, or most part of them, in the County of
Sommerset, seemed very conveniently disposed of, for the better maintenance of
the Title of Duke of Sommerset, which the Protector had taken to himself. Many
such strange Donations we shall find in others: The more to be excused, because
there was no other Means (as the times then were) to preserve the whole, but by
advancing some part thereof, to preserve the rest.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, page 130. concerning these Bishoprics; And thus far
concerning the proceedings of this Parliament. CHAP. III.
Of several other Alterations in Religion made in the beginning of this Year:
Of which Dr. Heylyn gives this Account Page 54.

Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti. 2.
NO sooner was this year begun, but it was Ordered by the King, and his Privy
Council, that no Candles should be born upon Candlemas-day, nor Ashes, or
Palms, used any longer.

The Lords drove this business on so fast, That before this Order could be
published in the remote parts of the Kingdom, they followed it with another,
(as little pleasing to the main Body of the People) concerning the taking down
of all Images; which in some places of the Realm, were either not taken down at
all (as was required the year before, by the King's Injunctions), or had been
Re-edified again, as soon, as the first heats of the Visitation had began to
cool.

Bishop Gardener, in a Letter of his, signified his great dislike of some
proceedings had at Portsmouth, in taking down the Images of Christ, and his
Saints: certifying withal, That he had not only seen these Images, standing in
all the Churches of the Lutherans; but that Luther himself had purposly written
a Book against some men, that had defaced them. And therefore it may be well
thought, that Covetousness spurred on this business, more than Zeal: There
being none of these Images so poor, and mean, the spoil whereof would not
afford some Gold, and Silver, (if not Jewels also) besides Censers,
Candlesticks, and many other rich Utensils, appertaining to them. In which
respect, the Commissioners hereto Authorized were entertained, in many places,
with scorn, and railing; and the further they went from London, the worse they
were handled: Insomuch, as that one of them, as he was pulling down an Image in
Cornwall, was stabbed. And though the Principal Offender was hanged, (which
quieted all matters for a time) yet the next year the storm broke out more
violently than before; not only to the endangering of the peace of those
Western Counties but in a manner of all the Kingdom.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning the Zeal of the People, about the taking down of
Images. Which great Commotions the Council could not but foresee, as the most
probable Consequents of such Alterations: Especially, when they are sudden, and
pressed too fast. There being nothing, of which People commonly are so tender,
as they are of Religion; on which their happiness depends, not only for this
world, but the world to come.

And therefore it concerned them, in point of Prudence, to let the People see,
that there was no intention to abolish all their ancient Ceremonies. And in
particular, it was held expedient, to give the generality of the Subjects some
contentment, in a Proclamation for the strict keeping of Lent; and the Example
of the Court in Pursuance of it.

For Dr. Glasier, Preaching at Paul's Cross, affirmed, That Lent was not
Ordained of God to be Fasted; neither the eating of Flesh to be forborne: But,
that the same was a Politic Ordinance of men, and therefore might be broken by
men at their pleasures. Upon this, there was no scarcity of those, that cried
down all the Observations of Days and Times; even to the Libelling against that
ancient and Religious Fast, in most scandalous Rhymes: Complaint whereof being
made by Bishop Gardener, to the Lord Protector, a Proclamation was set out; by
which all People were commanded to abstain from Flesh in the time of Lent; and
the King's Lenten-dyet was set out, and served, as in former times.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this Policy. To Establish this more firmly, there
was this following Act of Parliament made concerning it. Thus set down in the
Statute Book.

FOrasmuch as diverse of the King's Subjects, have of late, more than in times
past, broken and contemned such Abstinencies, as have been used in this Realm,
upon Fridays and Saturdays, Ember-days, Vigils, Lent, and other accustomed
times, this Parliament, considering, that due and godly Abstinence is a means
to Virtue, and to subdue men's Bodies to their Soul, and Spirit: And considering
withal, that Fishers may thereby be more set a work; and that by eating of
Fish, much Flesh shall be saved, and increased; and also for diverse other
Considerations, and Commodities of the Realm, does Enact and Ordain, That all
manner of Statutes, Laws, Constitutions, and Usages, concerning any manner of
Fasting, and Abstinence from any kind of meats, heretofore in this Realm made
or used, shall lose their force and strength, and be void, and of no effect.
And also, that no Person, or Persons, of what Estate, Degree, or Condition
soever he, or they be, shall at any time, after the First day of May,
willingly, and wittingly, eat any manner of Flesh, after what manner, or kind,
or sort, it shall be ordered, dressed, or used, upon any Friday, or Saturday,
or upon any of the Ember-days, or upon any day, in the time commonly called
Lent; nor upon any such other day, as is, or shall be at any other time
hereafter commonly excepted, and reputed as a Fish-day within this Realm of
England; wherein it has been commonly used to eat Fish, and not Flesh: Upon
pain, that every Person, eating any manner of Flesh, upon any of the said Days
or Times prohibited by this Act, shall forfeit, for the said first offense Ten
shillings; and also suffer Imprisonment for the space of Ten days. And during
the time of his, or her said Imprisonment, shall abstain from eating of any
manner of Flesh.

Thus far the Act. Little, or Nothing, has been hitherto done in this King's
Reign (as to Religion) but pulling down, and destroying. Wherefore it is now
time to Establish something: Which is here done by that which immediately
follows.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Administering the Communion, and of the Composing a Book of
Common Prayer. Of which thus writes Dr. Heylyn. page 57.

SOme Bishops, and others, were Appointed by the King's Command, to Consult
together about one Uniform Order of Administering the Holy Communion in the
English Tongue: Who so ordered it, That the whole Mass should proceed (as
formerly) in the Latin Tongue; even to the very end of the Canon, and the
receiving of the Sacrament by the Priest himself: Which being ended, they were
to begin with an Exhortation, in the English Tongue, directed to all those,
that did intend to receive the Communion: Which Exhortation began with these
words, Dearly Beloved in the Lord, ye coming to this Holy Communion, etc.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this strange medly in the Divine Service. But
notwithstanding the setting forth of this Uniform Order of Administering the
Holy Communion, yer there did arise a mavelous Schism, and variety of
Factions, in Celebrating the Communion Service, and Administering of the
Sacrament, and other Rites, and Ceremonies of the Church. For some allowed of
the King's proceedings; others, dissemblingly, and patchingly, used some part
of them; Many contemned them all. Moreover, it is observed in the Register-Book
of the Parish of Petworth, that many, at this time, affirmed, that the most
Blessed Sacrament of the Altar was of little worth: So that in many places, it
was irreverently used, and cast out of the Church; and many other great
Enormities committed: Which they seconded by oppugning the Established
Ceremonies; as Holy Water, Holy-Bread, and diverse other Rites of the Seven
Sacraments. And yet these were not all the mischiefs, which the time produced.
For, in pursuance of this Schism, many of those, that had been licensed to
Preach, appeared as active in Preaching against the King's proceedings, as many
of the unlicensed Preachers had been found to be.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these Confusions. Upon this it was advised, that a
Public Liturgy should be drawn, and confirmed by Parliament; which was
accordingly done. Now, here it is to be observed, that those who had the
directing of this Business, were before hand resolved, that none but English
Heads and Hands should be used therein; lest otherwise it might be thought, and
perhaps objected, That they rather followed the Example of some other Churches,
or were swayed by the Authority of those Foreign Assistants, than by the Word of
God. Certain it is, that upon the very first reports of a Reformation here
intended Calvin had offered his Assistance to Archbishop Cranmer, as himself
confessed. But the Archbishop knew the man, and refused the offer. And it
appears in one of Bishop Latimer's Sermons, that there was a report, about this
time, of Melancthon's coming: But it proved only a report. And though it was
thought necessary, for the better seasoning of the Universities, in the
Protestant Reformed Religion, that Bucer, and Peter Martyr should be invited to
come over; yet the Archbishop's Letter of Invitation, sent to Bucer, was not
written till the 12th of October; at which time, the Liturgy, then in hand
(being the chief Key of the Work of Reformation) was in a very good
forwardness; and must be completely finished, before he could so settle, and
dispose his affairs in Germany, as to come for England. And though Peter
Martyr, being either more at leisure, or more willing to accept of the
Invitation, came many months before the other, yet neither do we find him here,
till the end of November; when the Liturgy had been approved of. Nor was it
likely, that they would make use of such a man, in Composing a Liturgy, wherein
they were resolved to retain a great part of the ancient Ceremonies; who being
made Canon of Christ's Church in Oxford, and frequently present at Divine
Service in that Church, could never be prevailed with, to put on the Surplice.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning the ground of setting out a Book of Common Prayer.
CHAP. V.
Of the Suppression of Chantries, and other Foundations.

Whereof Dr. Heylyn gives this following Account, page 60.

WE must now attend the King's Commissioners, dispatched into every Shire, to
take a Survey of all Colleges, Free Chapels, Chantries, and Brotherhoods;
according to the return of Commissions, it would be no difficult matter, to put
a just Estimate and Value on so great a Gift: Or to know, how to parcel out,
proportion, and divide the Spoil, betwixt all such, as had before, in hope,
devoured it.

In the first place, (as lying nearest) came in the Free Chapel of St.
Stephen, originally Founded in the Palace at Westminster, reckoned for the
Chappel-Royal of the Court of England. The whole Foundation consisted of no
fewer, than Thirty eight Persons; to wit, One Dean, Twelve Canons, Thirteen
Vicars, Four Clerks, Six Choristers; besides a Verger, and one that had charge
of the Chapel.

There was likewise a certain number appointed for the officiating of the daily
Service: (Gentlemen of the Chapel they were commonly called.) As for the
Chapel it self, together with a Cloister of curious Workmanship, built by John
Chambers, one of the Kings Physicians, and the last Master of the same, they
are still standing as they were; the Chapel having been since fitted, and
employed for a House of Commons, in all times of Parliament.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this Chapel. At the same time also fell the
College of St. Martins, situated in the City of London, not far from
Aldersgate; first founded for a Dean, and Secular Canons, in the time of the
Conqueror.

This College was surrendered into the Hands of King Edward the Sixth; who
after, gave the same to the Church of Westminster; and they, to make the best
of the Kings Donation, ordered, That the Body of the Church, with the Quire,
and Isles, should be Leased out for Fifty years, excepting out of the said
Grant, the Bells, Lead, Stone, Timber, Glass, and Iron, to be sold, and
disposed of, for the sole use, and benefit, of the said Dean and Chapter.

Which foul Transaction being made, the Church was totally pulled down, a
Tavern built on the East-part of it; the rest of the Situation of the said
Church, and College, together with the whole Precinct thereof, being built upon
with several Tenements. But for this Sacriliege, the Church of Westminster was
called immediately to a sober reckoning. For the Lord Protector, thinking it
altogether unnecessary, that two Cathedrals should be Founded so near together;
and conceiving, that the Church of Westminster, (as being of a late Foundation)
might best be spared, had cast a longing Eye upon the goodly Patrimony, which
remained unto it. And being then unfurnished of a House, or Palace,
proportionable to his Greatness, he doubted not to find room enough, upon the
Dissolution and Destruction of so large a Fabric, to raise a Palace, equal to
his vast Designs. Which coming to the Ears of Benson, the last Abbot, and first
Dean of that Church, he could bethink himself of no other means to preserve the
whole, than by parting, for the present, with more than half the Estate, which
belonged unto it.

And thereupon a Lease is made of Seventy Manors and good Farms, lying almost
together, in the County of Gloucester, for the term of Ninety nine Years; which
they presented to the Lord Thomas Seymour, to serve as an Addition to his
Manor of Sudeley; humbly beseeching him to stand their good Lord and Patron,
and to preserve them in a fair esteem with the Lord Protector.

Another Present of almost as many Manors, and Farms, lying in the Counties of
Gloucester, Worcester, and Hereford, was made, for the like term, to Sir John
Mason, a special Confident of the Dukes; not for his own, but for the use of
his Great Master: which, after the Duke, all came to Sir John Bourn, Principal
Secretary of State, in the time of Queen Mary.

And yet this would not serve the turn, till they had put into the Scale their
Manor of Islip, conferred upon the Church by King Edward the Confessor; to
which no fewer, than Two hundred customary Tenants owed their Soil and Service:
and being one of the best Woody things in these parts of the Realm, was to be
granted also, without impeachment of Wast; as it was accordingly.

By means whereof the Deanery was preserved for the latter times. How it
succeeded with the Bishopric, we shall see afterward.

Thus Benson saved the Deanery; but he lost himself. For, calling to
remembrance, that formerly he had been a means to Surrender the Abbey, and was
now forced on the necessity of Dilapidating the Estate of the Deanery, he fell
into a great disquiet of Mind, which brought him to his Death, within some
Months after.

The reason of selecting these two Free-Chappels out of all the rest, was
because there was more depending on the story of them, than of any others.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning the College of St. Martins. Bad Examples, seldom
end, where they first begin. For the Nobility, and inferior Gentry, possessed
of Patronages, considering how much the Lords, and Great Men of the Court, had
improved their Fortunes, by the Suppression of Chantries, and other
Foundations, which had been granted to the King, conceiving themselves in a
capacity, to do the like, by taking into their Hands the yearly profits of such
Benefices, of which, by Law, they only were entrusted with the Presentations.

Of which Abuse complaint is made by Bishop Latimer; who says, That the Gentry
of that time invaded the Profits of the Church, leaving the Title only to the
Incumbent; and that Chantry-Priests were put, by them, into several Cures, to
save their Pensions. That many Benefices were let out in Fee-Farm, or given
unto Servants, for keeping of Hounds, Hawks, and Horses, and for making of
Gardens. And finally, That the poor Clergy, being kept to some sorry Pittance,
were forced to put themselves into Gentlemen's Houses, and there to serve, as
Clerks of the Kitchen, Surveyors, Receivers, etc. Bishop Latimer, in his
Printed Sermons, Page 38. 71. 91. 114.

All which Enormities, (though tending so apparently to the Dishonor of God,
and Disgrace of Religion) were generally connived at by the Lords, and others,
because they could not question those, who had so miserably invaded the
Churches Patrimony, without condemning of themselves.

Thus Dr. Heylyn relates these Prodigious Sacrilieges. CHAP. VI.
Of the Sacrileges committed in the Building of Sommerset-House, and of the
starting up of New Sects, and other Occurrences of this Year.

Dr. Heylyn, Page 72. Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti. 3.
THE Protector, intending to Erect a Magnificent Palace, was bought out of his
Design of building it on the Deanery and Close of Westminster, and therefore
cast his Eye upon a piece of Ground in the Strand, on which stood Three
Episcopal Houses, and one Parish Church: The Parish Church Dedicated to the
Virgin Mary; the Houses belonging to the Bishops of Worcester, Lichfield, and
Landaff: All these he takes into his hands; the Owners not daring to oppose,
and therefore willingly consenting to it. Having cleared the place, and
finding, that more materials would be wanting, than the demolished Churches,
and Houses could afford, he resolved to take down the Parish Church of St.
Margarets in Westminster, and to turn the Parishioners, for Celebrating all
Divine Offices, into some part of the Nave, or main Body of the Abbey Church.
But the Workmen had no sooner advanced their Scaffolds, when the Parishioners
gathered together in great multitudes, with Bows and Arrows, Staves and Clubs,
and other such Weapons; which so terrified the Workmen, that they ran away in
great amazement, and never could be brought again upon that Employment.

Upon this he conceived it would be a safer undertaking to fall upon St.
Paul's, the Bishop then standing on his good behavior; and the Dean and Chapter
of that Church (as of all the rest) being no better, in a manner, (by reason of
the last Act of Parliament) than Tenants at Will of their great Landlords. And
upon this, he employs Workmen, to take down the Cloister of Paul's, on the
North-side of the Church, and a piece of curious Work round about the Cloister,
with a Chapel, that stood in the midst of the Churchyard: also the
Charnel-House, that stood upon the South Side of it (now a Carpenters-yard)
with the Chapel, Timber, and Monuments therein; which were all beaten down,
the Bones of the Dead carried into Finsburyfields, and the Stones converted to
this Building, and the vacant places filled up afterward with Dwelling-Houses.
Moreover, the Church of St. John of Jerusalem, near Smith-field, was
undermined, and blown up with Gunpowder, and the Stones applied to this
Spacious Building.

Likewise Barking Chapel, near the Tower of London, and the College-Church of
St. Martins le Grand, nigh the Shambles, and St. Ewens within Newgate; also the
Parish Church of St. Nicholas in the Shambles, were pulled quite down. Such was
the Ground, and such the Materials of the Dukes new Palace, called
Sommerset-House. Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this Example given of pulling down
of Churches.

According to this beginning all the year proceeds; in which there was nothing
to be found, but Troubles, Commotions, and Disquiets, both in Church and State.
For about this time, there started up a Sect of Men, that were named
Gospellers; who asserted the Blasphemous Doctrine of Calvin, of Gods being the
Author of Sin. And, at the same time, the Anabaptists, who had kept themselves
unto themselves, in the late King's time, began to look abroad, and disperse
their Dotages.

For the prevention of which mischief, before it grew to a Head, some of the
chief of them were Convented in the Church of St. Paul, before Archbishop
Cranmer; who in Examining them, took up his Seat upon an Altar of our Lady.

These Men, being convicted of their Errors, some of them were dismissed only
with an Admonition; others condemned to bear their Faggots at St. Pauls-Cross.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these Sects. Now the time draws on for the putting
forth the new Liturgy; which differed little in the main (no not so much as in
the Canon of the Mass) from the Latin Service. But notwithstanding the
Publishing, and Commanding the use of this Book, yet many did Celebrate their
Private Masses, in such secret places, that it was not easy to discover them.
More confidently carried in the Church of St. Paul; in many Chapels whereof,
by the Bishops Sufferance, the former Masses were kept up; that is to say, Our
Ladies Mass, the Apostles Mass, etc. performed in Latin, but disguised with
English names, of the Apostles Communion, and our Ladies Communion. But these
were afterward suppressed.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning the new Liturgy. An Opposition against the new Form
of Religion. Page 75.

UPon the Imposition of this Book, and a new Form of Religion obtruded, many
Counties took up Arms to oppose it. But yet so, that they were presently ready
to lay down, if the King would grant them some few Demands; whereof one was
this, to wit,

That for as much as we constantly believe, that after the Priest has spoken
the words of Consecration, being at Mass, there is very really the Body and
Blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, God and Man; And that no Substance of Bread
and Wine remains after, but the very self same Body, that was born of the
Virgin Mary, and was given, upon the Cross, for our Redemption; therefore we
desire to have Mass celebrated as it was in times past: Because we find, that
many presume unworthily to receive the same; putting no difference between our
Lords Body, and other kind of Meat: Some saying, That it is Bread, both before
and after Consecration: And some again say, that it is profitable to no man,
unless he receives it; with many other abused terms.

Secondly, we desire, that Curates may Administer Baptism at all times of
necessity, as well upon Weekdays, as Holy Days.

Thirdly, That Children may be Confirmed by the Bishop.

Fourthly, That there may be Holy-Bread, and Holy Water, in remembrance of
Christ's precious Body and Blood.

Fifthly, That our Lord's Body be reserved in Churches.

Sixthly, That Priests may live unmarried.

Seventhly, That the Six Articles, set forth by King Henry the Eighth may be
continued; at least till the King comes to full Age.

They further made this Remonstrance, viz. That the Freeborn Commonalty was
oppressed by a small number of Gentry, who glutted themselves with Pleasures,
whilst poor Commons, wasted with daily Labor, did, (like Pack-horses) live in
extreme slavery. Secondly, That Holy Rites, established by Antiquity, were
abolished, and new ones Authorized, with a new Form of Religion obtruded, to
the subjecting of their Souls to those horrid pains, which no death could
terminate. And therefore, Thirdly, they declared, That they thought it
necessary, and convenient, to have new Counselors placed about the King,
during his Minority; with the removing of those, who Ruling as they list,
confounded things Sacred and Profane, regarding nothing, but the enriching
themselves with the Public Treasure, that they might riot it amongst those
Public Calamities.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this Commotion. But these Men were soon suppressed,
and the Changes went on. As appears by this following Relation of Dr Heylyn,
page 79.

But then there started up another Faction, as dangerous to the Church, as
opposite to the Public Liturgy, and as destructive of the Rules of
Reformation, then by Law established as were those of Rome. The Archbishop, and
the rest of the Prelates, having so far proceeded in abolishing the Religion,
and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, resolved, in the next place, to go
forwards, with a further Reformation, in a particular point of Doctrine,
concerning the Sacrament. In order whereunto Melancthon's coming was expected
in the year before.

But he came not then; and therefore Letters were directed by the Archbishop to
Martin Bucer, and The bringing in of Presbytery into this Nation.
Peter Martyr, who were more addicted to the Zuinglian, than the Lutheran
Doctrines, in the Point of the Sacrament.

Martyr, coming over, was made the King's Professor of Divinity at Oxford: and
about two years after, made Canon of Christ's-Church. In his first Lectures, he
is said, by Saunders, (if he may be credited) to have declared himself so much
a Zuinglian in the Point, as to give great offense to Cranmer, and the rest of
the Bishops: But afterward, upon notice of it, to have been more moderate, and
to conform his judgment to the sense of the Prelates.

But however it were, it is certain, that his Readings were so much disliked by
some of the University, that a public Disputation was shortly had, betwixt
him, and some of those, who disliked his doings: in which he publicly
maintained these Two Propositions:

1. That the Substance of the Bread and Wine was not changed.

2. That the Body, and Blood of Christ, was not carnally, and bodily, in the
Bread, and Wine; but united unto them Sacramentally.

When the Disputation was ended, it was declared in the open Schools, That
Martyr had the upper hand, and had sufficiently answered all Arguments. But
Chadsey, the chief of the Opponents, and the rest of those, that Disputed with
him, acknowledged no such Satisfaction to be given unto them; their Party
noising it abroad, that they had the Victory.

But Bucer not coming over at the same time was earnestly invited by the
Archbishop's Secretary; upon which he came, and presently writ to Peter Martyr.
Being now settled here, he receives Letters from Calvin; by which he was
advised to take heed of his old fault, and to run a moderate course in his
Reformations.

The first thing, that he did at his coming hither, was to make himself
acquainted with the English Liturgy. Of this he gives account to Calvin, and
desires some Letters from him to the Lord Protector, (with whom Calvin had
already began to tamper) that he migh: find the greater Favor from him.

He was sent to take a Chair at Cambridge, where his first Readings gave no
such distaste, as to put him to the necessity of Challenging the Dissenters to a
Disputation; though in the ordinary Form a Disputation was there held, at his
first coming thither, concerning the Sufficiency of Holy Scripture, the
Fallibility of the Church, and the true nature of Justification. But long he
had not held the place, when he left this life.

Yet so it was, that the Account which he had given to Calvin of the English
Liturgy, and his desiring of a Letter from him to the Lord Protector, proved
the occasion of much trouble to the Church, and the Orders of it. For Calvin,
not forgetting the repulse he found at the hands of Cranmer, when he first
offered his assistance, had skrewed himself into the Favor of the Lord
Protector. And thinking nothing to be well done, which either was not done by
him, or by his direction, (as appears by his Letters to all Princes, that did
but cast an eye, toward a Reformation) must needs be meddling in such matters,
as belonged not to him.

He therefore writes a very long Letter to the Lord Protector; in which,
approving well enough of Set Forms of Prayer, he descends more particularly to
the English Liturgy; in canvasing whereof, he there excepted against
Commemoration of the Dead, (which he acknowledges however to be very ancient)
as also against Chrism, and Extreme Unction: the last whereof being rather
allowed of, than required by the Rules of the Book.

Which said, he makes it his advice, That all these Ceremonies should be
abrogated; and that withal he should go forward, to Reform the Church without
Fear, or Wit; and that without regard to Peace at home, or Correspondency
abroad; such considerations being only to be had in Civil Matters, but not in
Matters of the Church; wherein nothing is to be exacted which is not warranted
by the Word, and in the managing whereof, there is not any thing more
distastful in the eyes of God, than worldly wisdom, either in moderating,
cutting off, or going backwards, but merely as we are directed by his Revealed
Will.

In the next place he gives a touch upon the Book of Homilies. These, very
faintly, he permits for some time only; but by no means allowed of them for any
long continuance, or to be looked on as a Rule of the Church, or constantly to
serve for the Instruction of the People; and thereby gave a hint to the
Zuinglian Gospellers, who ever since almost have dec aimed against them.

And whereas some Disputes had grown (by his setting on, or the pragmatical
Humor of some Agents, which he had amongst us), about the Ceremonies of the
Church then by Law Established; he must needs trouble the Protector in that
business also: to whom he writes to this effect. That the Papists would grow
insolenter every day, unless the Differences were composed about the
Ceremonies. But how? Not by reducing the Opponents to Conformity, but by
encouraging them rather in their opposition: Which cannot but appear most
plainly to be all he aimed at, by soliciting the Duke of Sommerset in behalf of
Hooper, who was then fallen into some trouble upon that account.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, who gives this following account of Hooper. This Hooper,
being designed Bishop of Gloucester, the Archbishop would not Consecrate him,
but in such Habit, as Bishops are required to wear by the Rules of the Church;
but he refused to take it upon such conditions. And repairing to his Patron,
the Earl of Warwick, he obtains a Letter to the Archbishop, desiring a
forbearance of those things; implying also, that it was the King's desire, as
well as his, that such forbearance should be used. It was desired also, that he
would not charge him with any Oath, which seemed to be burdensome to his
Conscience. For the Elect Bishop as it seems, had boggled also at the Oath of
paying Canonical Obedience to his Metropolitan. The King likewise writ to the
Archbishop to the same effect. At last the business was thus composed; to wit,
That Hooper should receive his Consecration; attired in his Episcopal Robes:
but that he should be dispensed withal from wearing it, at ordinary times, as
his daily Habit, but that he should be bound to use it, whenever he Preached
before the King. Fox reproacheshim for giving any way to wear this Popish
Attire; and makes it to be a great cause of shame, and contumely to him. And
possibly it might be thought so at that time, by Hooper himself, who ever after
hated Bishop Ridley, the principal Man, that held him up so closely to such
hard conditions.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. VII.
A further Continuation of the Confusions, and Disorders, used by the
Presbyterians, and other Sects. Dr. Heylyn, page 69.

Anno Regni Edwardi Sixti. 4.
THe Free admitting of John a Lasco, a Polonian born, with his Congregation of
Germans, and other Strangers, who took Sanctuary this year in England, hoping,
that they might here enjoy that Liberty of Conscience, which their own Country
denied them, proved no small Disturbance to the proceedings of the Church, and
the quiet ordering of the State. For by suffering these Men to live under
another kind of Government, and to Worship God after other Forms, than those
allowed of by the Law, proved in effect, the setting up of one Altar against
another, in the midst of the Church; and the Erecting of a Commonwealth in the
midst of a Kingdom: So much the more unfortunately permitted in this present
Conjuncture, when such a Rupture began to appear amongst our selves: which was
made wider by the coming in of these Dutch Reformers, and the Indulgence
granted to them.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning John a Lasco. Thus we have the first beginning of
that Opposition, which has continued ever since, against the Liturgy it self,
the Cap, and Surplice, and other Rites, and Usages of the English Church. And
these were the Effects of Calvin's interposing in behalf of Hooper. For what did
follow thereupon, but a continual multiplying of Disorders in all parts of this
Church? The sitting at the Sacrament used, and maintained by John a Lasco,
first caused Irreverence in the Receiving, and afterward a Contempt, and
Depraving of it. The crying down of the Sacred Vestments, and the Grave Habit
of the Clergy, first occasioned a dis-esteem of the Men themselves, and by
degrees a vilifying, and contempt of their Calling. Nay such a peccancy of
Humor began then manifestly to break out, that it was Preached at Paul's Cross,
by a Curate of St. Catherines Christ-Church, That it was fit, the Names of
Churches should be altered, and the Names of the Days in the Week changed. That
Fish-days should be kept on any other days, than Fridays and Saturdays, and the
Lent at any other time, except only between Shrove-tide and Easter. We are told
also by John Stow, that he had seen this Curate of Christ-Church to leave the
Pulpit, and Preach to the People out of an High Elm, which stood in the midst
of the Churchyard; and that being done, to return into the Church again, and
leaving the High Altar, to sing the Communion-Service upon a Tomb of the Dead,
with his face toward the North. Which is to be observed the rather, because
this Curate has found so many followers in these latter times.

For, as some of the Preciser sort have of late left the Church, to Preach in
Woods, and Barns, etc. and in stead of the old Days, and Months, can find no
other Title for them, than the First, Second, or Third Month of the Year; and
so of the Days of the Week, etc. So was it propounded, not long since, by some
State Reformers, That the Fast of Lent should be kept no longer between
Shrove-tide and Easter, but rather (by some Act, or Ordinance, made for that
purpose) betwixt Easter, and Whitsontide. To such wild Fancies do Men grow,
when once they break those Bounds, and neglect those Rules, which wise
Antiquity ordained, for the Preservation of Peace, and Order.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning these Confusions. If it be asked, What in the mean
time was become of Bishops, and why no care was taken for the Purging those
peccant Humors? It may be answered, That the Wings of their Authority had been
so clipped, that it was scarce able to fly abroad: The Sentence of
Excommunication not having been in use, since the first of this King. Whether
it were, that Command was laid upon the Bishops, by which they were restrained
from the Exercise of it; or that some other course was in agitation, for
drawing the Cognizance of all Ecclesiastical causes to the Court of
Westminster; or, that it was thought inconsistent with that dreadful Sentence,
to be issued in the King's Name, (as it had been lately appointed by Act of
Parliament) it is not casie to determine. But certain it is, that at this time
it was either abolished for the present, or of no effect; not only to the
cherishing of these Disorders amongst the Ministers of the Church, but to the
great increase of viciousness in all sorts of men. Lechery (says Bishop
Latimer) is used in England, and such Lechery, as is used in no other part of
the World. And it is made a matter of sport, a matter of nothing, a laughing
matter, a Trifle not to be regarded, not to be reformed. Peter Martyr much
bemoans the miserable condition of the Church, for want of Preachers.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning these Disorders. Altars taken down.
But the great business this year, was the taking down of Altars. The Principal
Motive whereunto was the Opinion of some dislikes which had been taken by
Calvin against the Liturgy; and the desire of those of the Zuinglian Faction to
reduce this Church unto the Nakedness, and Simplicity of those Transmarine
Churches, which followed the Helvetian, or Calvinian Forms; and withal to
abolish the thought of a Sacrifice.

But that the consideration of Profit did advance this work, as much as any
other, (if perchance not more) may be collected from an Enquiry made about Two
years after. In which it was to be Interrogated, What Jewels of Gold, and
Silver, or Silver-Crosses, Candlesticks, Censers, Chalices, Copes, and other
Vestments, were then remaining in any of the Cathedral, or Parochial Churches,
or otherwise had been Embezzeled, or taken away. The leaving of one Chalice to
every Church, with a Cloth, or Covering for the Communion Table, being thought
sufficient.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this strange way of Reforming, or rather Deforming
all things. Reasons given for the taking down of Altars.
The Reasons, that were given for the doing of this, were these: First, To
withdraw the People from the Opinion of the Mass, to the right use of the
Lord's Supper: The use of an Altar being to Sacrifice upon, and the use of a
Table to eat upon: And therefore a Table to be far more fit for our feeding on
him; who was once only crucified, and offered for us. Secondly, That in the
Book of Common Prayer, the name of Altar, and Lord's Board, and Table, are used
indifferently, without Prescribing any thing in the form thereof. For as it is
called a Table, and the Lord's Board, in reference to the Lord's Supper; so it
is called an Altar also, in reference to the Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving: And so, that the changing of Altars into Tables, was no way
repugnant to the Rules of the Liturgy. Thirdly, That Altars were erected for
the Sacrifices of the Law; which being now ceased, the Form of the Altar was to
cease together with them. Fourthly, That as Christ did Institute the Sacrament
of his Body and Blood at a Table, and not at an Altar; so it is not to be
found, that any of the Apostles did ever use an Altar in the Ministration. And
finally, That it is declared in the Preface to the Book of Common Prayer, That
if any Doubt arise in the use and practicing of the said Book, that then, to
appease all such diversity, the matter shall be referred unto the Bishop of the
Diocese; who, by his discretion shall take order for the quieting of it.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these Reasons. Page 96. But the taking down of
Altars being Decreed, and Commanded, a question afterward did arise, about the
Form of the Lord's Board, some using it in the form of a Table, and some in the
form of an Altar. Ridley, Bishop of London, determined it for the form of a
Table, to abolish all memory of the Mass: And upon this, caused the Wall
standing on the backside of the Altar in the Church of St. Paul's, to be
broken down, for an example to the rest. But yet there followed no universal
change of Altars into Tables, in all parts of the Realm, till the repealing of
the first Liturgy; in which the Priest is appointed to stand before the midst
of the Altar, in the Celebration, and the establishing of the Second; in which
it is required, That the Priest shall stand on the North-side of the Table;
which put an end to the Dispute.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning Altars. CHAP. VIII.
Of the strange Confusion in all matters of Religion, which this new Change of
Religion caused, no man yet knowing positively, and dogmatically, what he was
to believe. Dr. Heylyn, Page 106.

Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti. 5.
NOthing as yet had been concluded positively, and dogmatically, in Points, of
Doctrine, but as they were to be collected from the Homilies, and the Public
Liturgy; and those but few, in reference to the many Controversies which were
to be maintained against the Sectaries of that Age: Many Disorders having grown
up in this little time, in officiating the Liturgy, the Vestures of the Church,
and the Habit of Churchmen, begun by Calvin, prosecuted by Hooper, and
countenanced by the large Immunities granted to John a Lasco, and his Church of
Strangers. And unto these, the change of Altars into Tables, gave no small
increase; as well by reason of some differences, which grew amongst the
Ministers themselves upon that occasion; as in regard of the irreverence which
it bred in the People; to whom it made the Sacrament to appear less venerable,
than before it did.

The People had been so long accustomed to receive the Sacrament upon their
knees, that no Rule, nor Canon, was thought necessary to keep them to it. But
the change of Altars into Tables, the practice of the Church of Strangers, and
John a Lasco's Book, in maintenance of Sitting at the Holy Table, made many
think that posture best, which was so much countenanced. And what was like to
follow upon such a Liberty, (the proneness of those times to Heterodoxies, and
Profaneness considered) gave just cause to fear.

Something therefore were to be done to prevent that mischief; and nothing
could prevent it better, than to reduce the People to their ancient Custom, by
some Rule, or Rubric, by which they should be bound to receive it kneeling. So
for the Ministers themselves, they seemed to be as much at a loss in their
Officiating at the Table, as the People were in their irreverences to the
Blessed Sacrament: Which cannot be better expressed, than in the words of some
Romish Prelates, who objected it unto some of our chief Reformers. Thus White
of Lincoln charges it upon bishop Ridley, saying, That when their Table was
constituted, they could never be content in placing of it, now East, now North,
now one way, now another, until it pleased God, of his Goodness, to place it
quite out of the Church. The like was Weston (the Prolocutor of the
Convocation, in the First of Queen Mary) in a Disputation held with Latimer;
telling him, with reproach and contempt, That the Protestants having turned
their Table, were like a company of Apes, that knew not which way to turn their
Tayls; looking one day East, and another West one this way, and another that
way, as their fancies lead them. Thus finally, one Miles Hubbard, in a Book
called, The Display of Protestants, reports the business. How long (says he)
were they learning to set their Tables, to minister the Communion upon? First,
they placed it aloft, where the High Altar stood: Then must it be removed from
the Wall, that one might go between; the Ministers being in contention, on
whether part to turn their faces, either toward the West, the North, or South.
Some would stand Westward, some Northward, some Southward. To take away these
Disorders, which gave great Scandal to many moderate, and well meaning Men, a
Rubric was resolved on; by which the Minister that Officiated, should be
pointed to a certain place; and by the Rubric then devised, the North-side was
thought fitter, than any other.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning this Rubric, and these Confusions. CHAP. IX.
Of Calvin' s Opposition against the former Book of Common Prayer, and of a New
one set forth to satisfy him; and of the Composing a Book of Articles.

D. Heylyn, page 107. BUt the main matters, which were now brought into
Consideration, were the Reviewing of the Liturgy, and the Composing of a Book
of Articles. This last, for the avoiding diversities of Opinions, and for the
establishing of Consent, touching True Religion: The other, for removing of
such Offenses, as had been taken by Calvin, and his followers, at some parts
thereof. For Calvin, having broken the Ice, resolved to make his way through
it, to the mark he aimed at; which was to have this Church depend upon his
direction, and not to be less esteemed here, than in other places.

To which end, as he had formerly applied himself to the Protector, so now he
sets upon the King, the Council, and the Archbishop of Canterbury, in hope to
bring them to his bent. In his Letters to the King and Council (as himself
signified to Bullinger, on the 29th of August) he excites them to proceed to a
Reformation; that is to say, to such a Reformation as he had projected, and
without which his Followers would not be contented.

In his Letters to the King alone, he lets him know, that many things were
still amiss in the State of the Kingdom, which stood in need of Reformation.
And finally, in those to Cranmer, he certifies him, that in the Service of this
Church, as then it stood, there remained a whole mass of Popery; which did not
only darken, but destroy Gods Holy Worship. Moreover, he had his Agents in the
Court, the Country, and the Universities, by whom he drives on his Design, on
all parts at once. And so far he prevailed in the first Two years, that in the
Convocation, which began in the former year, the first Debate amongst the
Prelates was of such Doubts, as had arisen, about some things contained, in the
Common Prayer Book, and more particularly touching such Feasts, as were
retained, and such as had been abrogated by the Rules thereof; the form of
words used at the giving of the Bread, and the different manner of Administering
the Holy Sacrament: which being signified to the Prolocutor, and the rest of
the Clergy, (who had received somewhat in charge about it the day before,)
Answer was made, that they had not yet sufficiently considered of the Points
proposed; but that they would give their Lordships some account thereof in
their following Session. But what account was given, does not appear: only this
is certain, that upon this Debate, there was a New Book of Common Prayer set
forth.

Now, for the avoiding of diversities of Opinions, and establishing consent
touching true Religion, it was thought necessary, to Compose a Book of
Articles, in which should be contained the Common Principles of the Christian
Faith, in which all Parties did agree, together with the most Points, in which
they differed. For the better performing of which Work, Melancthon's Company,
and Assistance had been long desired.

That he held Correspondence with the King, and Archbishop Cranmer, appears by
his Epistles of the year, 1549, 1550, 1551. But, that he came not over, as was
expected, must be imputed, either to our Homebred troubles, or the great
Sickness of this year, or the Death of the Duke of Sommerset, upon whom he did
most rely. But though Erasmus was dead, and Melancthon absent, yet were they to
be found, both alive, and present in their Writings. By which, together with
the Augustan Confession, the Composers of those Articles were much directed.

That Cranmer had a great hand in composing of them, is not to be doubted; who
therefore takes upon himself, as the Author of them, and is to be looked upon,
as the principal Architect; who contrived the Building, and gave, the inferior
Workmen, their several Parts, and Offices, in that employment.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. X.
Of some particular Passages and Occurrences of this year, and most
particularly of the Changes that were made by the setting out of the new
Common Prayer Book.

Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti. 6.
Dr. Heylyn, page 121. THis year, the Bishopric of Westminster was dissolved
by the Kings Letters Patents; by which the County of Middlesex, which had
before been laid unto it, was restored unto the Sea of London; made greater,
than in former times, by the addition of the Archdeaconry of St. Albans; which
at the Dissolution of the Monastery had been laid to Lincoln; the Lands of
Westminster having been so dilapidated by Bishop Thirlby, that there was almost
nothing left to support the Dignity; most of the Lands were invaded by the
Great Men of the Court; the rest, laid out, for the Reparation of the Church of
St. Paul's, pared almost to the very quick, in those days of Rapine. From hence
came that significant Byword, of Robbing Peter, to pay Paul.

There was Summoned also this year, a Convocation of the Bishops; in which was
Settled, and Confirmed, the Book of Articles, prepared by Archbishop Cranmer,
and his Assistants.

There was likewise set out, a new Book of Common Prayer; upon the setting out
this Book, there appeared no small Alterations, in the outward Solemnities of
Divine Service; to which the People had been formerly so long accustomed. For
by the Rubric of the Book, no Copes, or other Vestments, were required, but
the Surplice only: whereby the Bishops were necessitated to forbear their
Crosses, and the Prebends of St. Paul's, and other Churches, occasioned to
leave off their Hoods.

To give a beginning hereto, Ridley Bishop of London, officiated the Divine
Service in his Rochet only, without Cope, or Vestment. And not long after, the
upper Quire in St. Paul's Church, where the High Altar stood, was broken down,
and all the Quire there about; and the Communion Table was placed in the lower
part of the Quire, where the Priest sang the Daily Service. What hereupon
ensued of the rich Ornaments, and Plate, wherewith every Church was furnished,
after its proportion, we shall see shortly, when the Kings Commissioners shall
be sent abroad to seize upon them, in his Name, for their own Commodity.

At this time, the Psalms of David were composed in English Meeter, by John
Hopkins, following the Example of Beza, who translated them, to be fitted unto
several Tunes; which hereupon began to be sung in private Houses, and by
degrees, to be taken up in all Churches of the French, and other Nations, which
followed the Genevian Platform. Hopkins's Composition likewise, (although it
was full of Barbarity, and Botching), yet notwithstanding was first allowed for
private Devotion, and by little and little brought into the use of the Church,
allowed to be sung before, and after Morning and Evening-Prayer, and also
before, and after Sermons: afterward Printed, and bound up with the
Common Prayer Book, and at last added at the end of the Bible. But in some
tract of time, as the Puritan Faction grew in strength and confidence, it
prevailed so far in most places, as to thrust the Te Deum, the Benedictus, the
Magnificat, and the Nunc Dimittis, quite out of the Church.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning these strange Changes. CHAP. XI.
Of the Kings being engaged in Debt notwithstanding the vast Treasures he had
gotten by his former Sacrileges, and of one of his last Sacrileges in Pillaging
of Churches.

Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti. 7.
Dr. Heylyn, page 131. Such was the Rapacity of the Times, and the
unfortunateness of the Kings condition, that his Minority was abused to many
Acts of Spoil and Rapine, (even to the high degree of Sacrilege) to the raising
of some, and enriching of others, without any manner of improvement to his own
Estate. For, notwithstanding the great, and almost inestimable Treasures; which
must needs come in, by the spoil of so many Shrines, and Images, the Sale of
the Lands, belonging to Chantries, Colleges, Free-Chappels, etc. and the
Dilapidating of the Patrimony of so many Bishoprics, and Cathedral Churches;
he was nevertheless, not only plunged in Debr, but the Crown Lands are much
diminished, and empair'd, since his coming to it. Besides which spoils, there
were many other helps, and some great ones too, of keeping him beforehand, and
full of Money, had they been used to his Advantage.

The Lands of diverse of the Halls, and Companies of London, were charged with
Annual Pensions, for the finding of such Lights, Obits, and Chantry-Priests, as
were Founded by the Donors of them. For the redeeming whereof, they were
constrained to pay the Sum of Twenty thousand Pounds, to the use of the King.
Other vast Sums likewise came to him upon several accounts; yet notwithstanding
all this, he is now found to be much overwhelmed with Debt. It must now be his
care, and the endeavors of those, who plunged him into it, to find the
speediest way for his getting out. In order to which, the main Engine, at this
time, for the advancing Money, was the Speeding of a Commission, into all parts
of the Realm, under pretense of selling such of the Lands, and Goods, of
Chantries, etc. that remained unfold; but, in plain truth, it was, to seize
upon all Hangings, Altar-Cloths, Fronts, Parafronts, Copes of all sorts, with
all manner of Plate, Jewels, Bells, and Ornaments, which were to be found in
any Cathedral, or Parochial Church: to which rapacity, the demolishing of the
former Altars, and placing the Communion. Table in the middle of the Quires, or
Chancels, of every Church, (as was then most used), gave a very great hint, by
rendering all such Furniture, rich Plate, and other costly Utensils, in a manner
useless. And that the business might be carried on with as much advantage to
the King, as might be, he gave out certain Instructions under his hand, by
which the Commissioners were to regulate themselves in their proceedings, to
the advancement of the Service.

Now we cannot doubt, but they were punctual, and exact, in the execution:
which cannot be better discerned than by that, which is reported of their
doings in all parts of the Realm; and more particularly in the Church of St.
Peter in Westminster, more richly furnished by reason of the Pomps of
Coronations, Funerals, and such like Solemnities, than any other in the
Kingdom. Unto this Church they left no more then two Cups, with covers, all
gilt; one white Silver Pot, three Hearse-Cloths, twelve Cushions, one Carpet
for the Table, eight Stall-Cloths for the Quire, three Pulpit-Cloths, nine
little Carpets for the Dean's Stall, two Table-Cloths. The rest of all the rich
Furniture, Massy Plate, and whatsoever else was of any value (which
questionless must amount to a very great Sum) was seized on by the said
Commissioners. The like was done generally in all other parts of the Realm.

But notwithstanding this great care of the King on the one side, and the
double diligence of his Commissioners on the other, the Booty did not prove so
great as was expected. In all great Fairs and Markets there are some
fore-stallers, who get the best penny-worths to themselves, and suffer not the
richest, and most gainful Commodities to be openly sold. And so it was here:
For there were some, who were as much beforehand with the Commissioners, in
Embezzelling the said Plate, Jewels, and other Furniture, as the Commissioners
did intend to be with the King, in keeping always most part of it unto
themselves. For when the Commissioners came to execute their Powers in their
several Circuits, they neither could discover All, or recover much of that,
which had been made away: Some things being utterly embezzelled by Persons not
responsible: in which case the King, as well as the Commissioners, was to lose
his Right. But more was concealed by Persons not to be discovered; who had so
cunningly carried on the stealth, that there was no tracing of their
Footsteps. And some there were, who being known to have such Goods in their
Possession, conceived themselves to be too great to be called in question, and
were connived at willingly by those, that were but their equals, and either
were, or meant to be Offenders in the same kind. So that although some profit
was hereby raised to the King's Exchequer, yet the far greatest part of the
Prey came to other hands. Insomuch, that many private Men's Parlors were hung
with Altar-cloths, their Tables and Beds covered with Copes, instead of
Carpets, and Coverlets; and many made Carowsing Cups of the Sacred Chalice, as
once Belshazzar Celebrated his drunken Feasts in the Sanctified Vessels of the
Temple.

It was a sorry House, not worth the naming, which had not something of this
Furniture in it, though it were only a fair large Cushion, made of a Cope, or
Altar-cloth, to adorn their Windows, or to make their Chairs appear to have
somewhat in them of a Chair of State.

Yet how contemptible were these Trappings, in comparrison of those vast Sums
of Money, which were made of Jewels, Plate, and Cloth of Tissue; either
conveyed beyond the Seas, or sold at home, and good Lands purchased with the
Money; nothing the more blessed to the Posterity of them that bought them, for
being purchased with the Consecrated Treasures of so many Churches.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. XII.
Of his last designed Sacriliege, to wit The Suppression of Bishoprics, and
Collegiate Churches, and particularly of his Suppressing the Bishopric of
Durham.

Dr. Heylyn, page 132. BUt as the King was plunged in Debt, without being put
to any extraordinary Charges; so was he decayed in his Revenue, without selling
any part of his Crown Lands, toward the payment of it. By the Suppressing of
some, and the Surrendering of other Religious Houses, the Royal Intrado was so
much increased in the late King's time, that for the better managing of it, the
King Erected, first the Court of Augmentation. and afterward, the Court of
Surveyors. But in short time, by his own profuseness, and the avariciousness of
this King's Ministers, it was so retrenched, that it was scarce able to find
work enough for the Court of Exchequer. Whereupon followed the Dissolving of
the said Two Courts in the last Parliament of this King: Which as it made a
loud noise in the ears of the People, so did it put this jealousy into their
minds, That if the King's Lands should be thus daily wasted without any
recruit, he must at last prove burdensome to the common Subject. Some course
is therefore to be thought on, which might pretend to an increase of the King's
Revenue: And none more easy to be compassed, than to begin with the
Suppression of such Bishoprics, and Collegiate Churches, as either lay
farthest off, or might be best spared.

In reference whereunto, it was concluded, in a Chapter held at Westminster, by
the Knights of the Garter, That from thenceforth the said most Noble Order of
the Garter, should be no longer entitled by the Name of St. George, but that
it should be called, The Order of the Garter only; and the Feast of the said
Order should be Celebrated upon Whitsun-Eve, Whitsun-Day, and Whitsun-Munday,
and not on St. George's-day, as before it was. And to what end was this
concluded, and what else was to follow upon this Conclusion, but the Dissolving
of the Free-Chappel of St. George in the Castle of Windsor; and the
transferring of the Order, to the Chapel of King Henry the Seventh, in the
Abbey of Westminster: Which had undoubtedly been done, and all the Lands
thereof converted to some powerful Courtiers, (under pretense of laying them to
the Crown) if the King's death, (which happened within Four months after) had
not prevented the design, and thereby respited that ruin, which was then
intended.

The like preservation happened, at the same time, to the Church of Durham, as
liberally endowed as the most, and more amply privil^eged, than the best in the
King's Dominions: The Bishops thereof by Charter, and long Prescription,
enjoying and exercising, all the Rights of a County Palatine, in that large
Tract of Ground, which lies between the Tees and the Tyne; the Diocese also
containing all Northumberland; of which the Bishops, and the Priests, had the
greatest shares. No sooner was Bishop Tonstal committed to the Tower, but
presently an eye was cast upon his Possessions: Which questionless had followed
the same fortune with the rest of the Bishoprics, if one, more powerful than
the rest, had not preserved it from being parcelled out, as the others were, on
a strong confidence of getting it all unto himself.

After this, the Earl of Northumberland, to preserve himself, gave unto the
King, the greatest part of his Inheritance; and dying without Children, not
long after, left his Titles also to the King's disposing. The Lands, and
Titles, being thus fallen unto the Crown, continued undisposed of till the Fall
of the Duke of Sommerset; when Dudley, Earl of Warwick, being created Duke of
Northumberland, doubted not but he should be able to possess himself, in short
time also, of all the Lands of that Family. To which Estate the Bishopric of
Durham, and all the Lands belonging to it, would make a fair Addition: upon
which grounds the Bishopric of Durham, being Dissolved by Act of Parliament,
under pretense of patching up the King's Revenue, the greatest part of the
Lands thereof were kept together, that they might serve for a Revenue to the
future Palatine.

But all these Projects failed in the Death of the King, and the subsequent
Death of this great Duke, in the following Reign of Queen Mary.

Thus far out of Dr. Heylyn' s History of Reformation, concerning the strange
Proceedings in this Change of Religion, and the sad Effects of it. An Appendix.
I will here end this King's Reign, with a short Relation of this great Dukes
Ambition, and the King's Death.

Sir Rich. Baker, page 445. THe Duke of Northumberland, having procured the
cutting off the Proctor's Head, and being placed next the King, had now gone a
great way in his Design: It only remaining to persuade King Edward to exclude
his two Sisters from Succession in the Crown. For, that done, his
Daughter-in-law, the Lady Jane, would come to have Right: for, as to Pretenders
out of Scotland, or any other, he made no great matter.

And now to work the King to this persuasion, being in a languishing Condition,
not far from Death) he inculcates to him, how much it concerned him, to have a
care of Religion, that it might be preserved in Purity, not only in his own
Life, but also after his Death: which would not be, if his Sister, the Lady
Mary, should Succeed; and She could not be put by, unless the other Sister, the
Lady Elizabeth, were put by also; seeing their Rights depended one upon
another. But if he pleased to Appoint the Lady Jane, the Duke of Suffolk's
eldest Daughter, and his own next Kinswoman to his Sisters, to be his
Successor, he might then be sure, that the True Religion should be maintained,
to God's great Glory; and be a worthy Act of his Religious Prudence.

This was to strike upon the right string of the young King's Affections; with
whom nothing was so dear, as Preservation of Religion: And thereupon his Last
Will was appointed to be drawn, (contrived chiefly by the Lord Chief Justice
Mountague, and Secretary Cecil): By which Will, as far as in him lay, he
excluded his Two Sisters from the Succession, and all others, but the Duke of
Suffolk's Daughters: And then causing it to be read before his Council, he
required them all to Assent unto it, and to Subscribe their Hands: which they
All, both Nobility, Bishops, and Judges did; only the Archbishop, Cranmer,
refused at first; Sir James Hales, a Judge of the Common Pleas, to the last;
and with them also Sir John Baker, Chancellor of the Exchequer.

His Will being thus made, he shortly after dies; conceived to have been
Poisoned. It is noted by some (says Sir Richard Baker) That he died the same
Month, and the day of the Month, that his Father King Henry the Eighth, had put
Sir Thomas Moor to death. Thus of this Duke, and the Kings Death.

We will now give an Account of the Years when these changes were made.

IN the First year, a Reformation was resolved on: and to prepare the way for
it, Injunctions were set out, and Commissioners sent into all parts of the
Kingdom, to enquire into all Ecclesiastical Concernments. With them also were
sent Preachers; to dissuade the People from their former practices in Religion.
And this to prepare the way, for the total Alteration in Religion, which was
intended. There was likewise a Parliament called, to promote, and confirm the
same Designs.

In the Second year, Images were taken down, and many Ancient Customs
abolished; and a Book of Common Prayer composed. All Colleges, Hospitals, etc.
were given to the King.

In the Third year, a part of Paul's, and many Churches, were pulled down, to
build Sommerset House in the Strand. There were great Troubles and Commotions,
both in Church, and State. The Book of Common Prayer, composed in the former
year, was now set out. Peter Martyr, and Bucer, came over.

In the Fourth year, one John a Lasco, a Polonian, with his Sectaries, settled
themselves here.

The great business of this year, was the taking down of Altars.

Until this following Fifth year, nothing had been Positively, and Dogmatically
concluded in Points of Doctrine. Wherefore to set a stop to the great
Confusions, that were at this time, there was a Book of Articles composed. And
to satisfy the Calvinists, there was a New Book of Common Prayer set forth.

In the Sixth year, Hopkins Psalms began to be sung in Churches: And the use of
the New Common Prayer Book made strange Alterations; but all in order to
Calvin's designs: who had a chief hand in composing it.

In the Seventh year, the King is found to be extremely engaged in Debt: and
under Color of satisfying such Debts, great spoil is made of the Treasures of
the Church.

Thus you have had a short Relation of the strange Confusions, and Alterations
of Religion, which happened in the few years Reign of this King.

A CONTINUATION Of these HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS Concerning the Restoration of
Catholic Religion; And the Occurrences concerning it, In the Reign of Queen
MARY.
A Preamble.
WE shall here follow Dr. Heylyns order, in relating, First, some Passages
concerning her, before She came to the Crown: With a brief Narration of her
Mother's Death; whereof Dr. Heylyn gives this following account in his History
of Reformation, page 9.

The Execution of Bishop Fisher, and Sir Thomas Moor, with many others, who
wished well unto her, added so much affliction to the desolate Queen, that not
being able longer to bear the burden of so many miseries, she fell into a
languishing Sickness; which more and more increasing on Her: And finding the
near approach of Death (the only Remedy now left for all Her miseries) She
dictated this ensuing Letter; which She caused to be delivered to the King, by
one of Her Women: Wherein She laid before him these Her Last Requests. Viz. My
most Dear Lord, King, and Husband, (for so She called Him).
THe Hour of my Death now approaching, I cannot choose (out of the Love I bear
you) but advise you of your Soul's health, which you ought to prefer before all
Considerations of the World, or Flesh, whatsoever: For which yet, you have cast
me into many Calamities, and your Self into many Troubles. But I forgive you
all; and pray God to do so likewise. For the rest, I commend unto you, Mary,
our Daughter, beseeching you, to be a good Father unto her; as I have
heretofore desired. I must entreat you also to consider my Maids, and give them
in Marriage; which is not much, they being but Three: And to grant unto all my
other Servants, a years pay, besides their due; lest otherwise they should be
unprovided for. Lastly, I make this Vow, That my Eyes have desired you above
All Things.

Farewell.



Within few days after the writing of which Letter, She yielded her pious Soul
unto God, at the Kings Manner-House of Kimbolton, and was Solemnly buried in
the Abbey of Peterborough. The rending of her Letter, drew some tears from the
King; which could not, but be much increased by the news of her Death: Moved,
by them both, to such a measure of Commiseration of Her sad condition, That he
caused the greatest part of Her Goods, (amounting to Five Thousand Marks) to be
expended or her Funeral, and in the recompensing of such of Her Servants, as
had best deserved it. Never so kind to Her in the time of her Life, as when he
had rendered Her incapable of receiving any kindness.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning her Mothers death. Now concerning her Self, he
writes thus. Page 11.

THe Princess Mary is now left wholly to her Self, declared Illegitimate by her
Father, deprived of the comfort of her Mother, and in a Manner forsaken by all
her Friends; whom the severe proceedings against Moor and Fisher, had so
deterred, that few durst pay her any offices of Love, or Duty. In which
condition the poor Princes had no greater comfort, than what She could gather
from Her Books: In which She had been carefully instructed by Dr. John Harman,
appointed her Tutor by the King; and for his good Performance in that place of
Trust, advanced by him to the Sea of Exon; and afterward, made Lord President
of Wales.

By satisfying the King, her Father, in a Message sent unto her, She gained so
far upon him, that from that time forwards, he held her in the same rank, with
the rest of his Children, gave Her, her Turn in the Succession of the Kingdom,
assigned Her a Portion of Ten thousand pounds, to be paid at her Marriage; and
in the interim, Three Thousand pound per annum, for Her personal maintenance.

Little, or nothing, more occurs of Her in the time of King Henry; because
there was little Alteration made in the face of Religion, which might give Her
any cause of Public, or personal dislike.

But when the great Alterations happened in the time of King Edward, She then
declared her Self more openly, (as She might more safely) in opposition to the
same. Concerning which, She thus declared Her self, in a Letter to the Lord
Protector, and the rest of the Council; Dated at Kenninghall, June 22. Anno
1549. My Lord,
I Perceive by the Letters, which I lately received from you, and others of the
Council, That you be all sorry to find so little Conformity in me, touching the
observation of his Majesty's Laws; who am well assured, that I have offended no
Law, unless it be a late Law, of your own making, which in my Conscience is not
worthy the name of a Law, both for the King's Honors sake, and the wealth of
the Realm, and giving the occasion of an evil bruit throughout all Christendom;
besides the partiallity used in the same, and (as my Conscience is very well
persuaded) the offending God; which passes all the rest. But I am very well
assured, That the King his Father's Laws were allowed, and consented to,
without Compulsion, by the whole Realm, both Spiritual and Temporal; and all
the Executors Sworn upon a Book, to fulfill the same; so that it was an
Authorized Law. And that I have obeyed, and will do, with the Grace of God;
till the King's Majesty, my Brother, shall have sufficient years, to judge in
this matter himself.

In this, my Lord, I was plain with you, at my last being in the Court;
declaring to you, at that time, whereunto I would stand: And now do assure you
all, the only occasion of my stay from altering my Opinion, is for Two causes:
One, principally, for my Conscience: The Other, that the King, my Brother,
shall not hereafter charge me, to be one of those, that were agreeable to such
Alterations, in his tender years. And what fruits daily grow by such Changes,
since the death of the King, my Father, it well appears to every indifferent
Person; both to the Displeasure of God, and Unquietness of the Realm.

Notwithstanding, I assure you all, I would be as loath to see his Highness take
hurt, or that any evil should come to this his Realm, as the best of you all:
And none of you have the like cause, considering, how I am compelled by nature,
(being his Majesty's poor, and humble Sister) most tenderly to Love, and pray
for Him; and to wish unto this Realm (being born within the same) all wealth,
and prosperity, to God's Honor. And if any judge of me the contrary, for my
Opinions sake, (as I trust none does) I doubt not in the end, with God's help,
to prove my self as True a Natural and Humble Sister, as they of the contrary
Opinion, with all their devices and altering the Laws, shall prove themselves
good Subjects.

I pray you, my Lords, and the rest of the Council, no more to disquiet and
trouble me with matters touching my Conscience; wherein I am at a full point,
with God's help, whatsoever shall happen to me; intending, with his Grace, to
trouble you little, with any worldly suits: But to bestow that short time I
think to live, in quietness; praying for the King's Majesty, and all you:
Heartily wishing, that your Proceedings may be to God's Honor, the Safeguard of
the King's Person, and quietness of the Realm. And thus my Lords, I wish unto
you, and all the rest, as well to do as my self.




But notwithstanding this Letter, no favor was to be hoped for from these
Lords: They signifying unto her, how sensible they were of those
Inconveniences, which the Example of her Inconformity to the Laws Established,
was likely to produce, amongst the rest of the Subjects. And hereupon the Lord
Chancellor, and Secretary Peter's, were sent to her; who, after some
Conferences, brought her to the King at Westminster.

Here the Council declared unto her, how long the King had permitted her the
use of Mass; and considering her Obstinacy, was resolved now no longer to
permit it, unless She would put Him in hope of some Conformity in time. To
which She answered, That her Soul was God's; and touching her Faith, as she
could not change, so she would not dissemble it.

Reply was made, That the King intended not to constrain her Faith, but to
restrain the outward profession of it, in regard of the danger the Example
might draw.

After some like enterchanges of speeches, the Lady was appointed to remain
with the King: When there arrived an Ambassador from the Emperor, with a
threatening Message of War, in case his Cousin, the Lady Mary, should be denied
the Free Exercise of Mass.

Hereupon, the King presently advised with the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
with the Bishops of London and Rochester: Who gave their Opinion, that to give
license to sin, was sin: But to connive at sin might be allowed, so it were not
too long, nor without hope of Reformation.

Then Answer was given to the Ambassador, That the King would send to the
Emperor within a Month or Two, and give him such Satisfaction, as should be fit.

Upon this Earnest Soliciation of the Emperor, it was declared unto her by the
King, with the consent of his Council, That for his sake, and her own also, it
should be suffered, and winked at if she had the private Mass used, in her own
Closet, for a season, until she might be better informed: But so, that none,
but some few of her own Chamber, should be present with her: And that to all
the rest of her Household, the Service of the Church should be only used.

Whereupon Mallet, and Barkeley, Two of her Chaplains, saying Mass
promiscuously, in her absence, to her houshold-Servants, were seized on, and
committed Prisoners: Which first occasioned an exchange of Letters betwixt her
and the King; and afterward more frequently between her, and the Council.

One of which Letters to the Council, touching this matter, I will here insert;
taken out of Fox's Acts and Monuments, Page 704.

The Lady Mary, to the Lords of the Council.
My Lords,
WHereas you writ, that two of my Chaplains, Dr. Mallet, and Barkeley, are
Indicted for certain things committed by them, contrary to the King's Majesty's
Laws; and that a Process for them is also awarded, or given forth, and
delivered to the Sheriff of Essex: I cannot but marvel they should be so used,
considering it is done (as I understand) for s^ying Mass within my House; and
although I have been of my self, minded always, and yet am, to have Mass
within my House; yet I have been advertised, that the Emperor's Majesty also
has been promised, that I should never be unquieted, nor troubled, for my so
doing (as some of you, my Lords, can witness.) Moreover, the declaration of the
said Promise, was made to me by the Emperor's Ambassador that dead is (by his
Majesty's order) to put my Chaplains more out of fear. When I was the last year
with the King's Majesty, my Brother, that question was then moved, and could
not be denied, but was affirmed by some of you, before his Majesty, to be true,
now I am not so much unquieted for the trouble of my said Chaplains, as, I am,
to think how this matter may be taken, the Promise to such a Person being no
better regarded: and, for mine own part, I thought full little to have received
such unkindness at your hands, having always (God is my Judge) wished, unto the
whole number of you, as to myself, and have refused to trouble you, or to crave
any thing at your bands, but your good will, and friendship, which very
slenderly appears in this matter. Notwithstanding, (to be plain with you)
howsoever ye shall use me, or mine, (with God's help) I will never vary from
mine Opinion touching my Faith, and if ye, or any of you, bear me the less good
will for that matter, or lessen your friendship toward me, only for that
cause, I must, and will, be contented, trusting that God will in the end show
his Mercy to me; assuring you, I would rather refuse the friendship of all the
World, than for sake any Point of my Faith. I am not without some hope, that ye
will stay this matter; not enforcing the rigor of the Law against my Chaplains.
The one of them was not in my House these Four Months; and Dr. Mallet, having
my License, is either at Windsor, or at his Benefice, who, (as I have heard)
was Indicted for saying of Mass out of my House, which was not true; but
indeed, the Day before my removing from Woodham-water, (my whole Household in
effect being gone to Newhall) he said Mass there by mine Appointment. I see,
and hear, of diverse, that do not obey your Statutes and Proclamations, and
nevertheless escape without punishment; be ye Judges, if I be well used, to
have mine punished by rigor of a Law, not to take notice of all the false
reports that ye have suffered to be spoken of me. Moreover, my Chaplain, Dr.
Mallet, besides mine own Command, was not ignorant of the Promise made to the
Emperor, which did put him out of fear. I doubt not therefore but ye will
consider it, and likewise in such a manner, as by the occasion ^o part of our
friendship be taken away, nor I have any cause, not to bear you my good will,
as I have done heretofore. Thus with my hearty Commendations to ye all, I pray
Almighty God to send you as much of his Grace, as I would wish to mine own Soul.


The Copy of the Lady Mary's Letter to the King's Majesty. Fox's Acts, p. 709.
MY Duty most ^umbly remembered to your Majesty; it may please the same to be
Advertised, That I have received, by my Servants, Your most Honorable Letters,
the Contents whereof do not a little trouble me, and so much the more for that
any of my said Servants should move or attempt me in matters touching my Soul,
which I think the meanest Subject within your Highness Realm, could evilly bear
at their Servants hands; having, for my part, utterly refused heretofore to
talk with them, in such matters; and of all other Persons least regarded them
therein, to whom I have declared what I think: as she, which trusted, that your
Majesty would have suffered me, your poor Sister, and Beads-woman, to have used
the accustomed Mass, which the King your Father, and mine, with all his
Predecessors, did evermore use: wherein also I have been brought up from my
youth, and thereunto my Conscience does not only bind me, which by no means
will suffer me to think one thing, and do another; but also the Promise made to
the Emperor by your Majesty's Council, was an Assurance to me, that, in so
doing, I should not offend the Laws; although they seem now to qualify, and
deny the thing. And at my last waiting upon your Majesty, I was so bold to
declare my Mind and Conscience to the same; and desired your Highness, rather
than you should constrain me to leave Mass, to take away my life: Whereunto
your Majesty made me a very gentle Answer: And now I most humbly beseech your
Highness, to give me leave to Write what I think touching your Majesty's
Letters; indeed they be signed with your own Hand, and nevertheless (in mine
opinion) not your Majesty's in effect; because it is w^ll known (as heretofore
I have declared in the Presence of your Highness) that although (our Lord be
praised) your Majesty has far more Knowledge, and greater Gifts, than others
(...) your years; yet it is not possible that your H^ghness can, at these
years, be a Judge in matters of Religion: and therefore I take it, that the
matter in your Letter, proceeds from such as do wish those things to take
place, which be most agr^eable to themselves; by whose doings, your Majesty not
offended, I intend not to rule my Conscience: and thus without molesting your
Highnes^ (...) farther, I humbly beseech you, even for God's ^ake, to bear with
me, as you have done, and not to think that by my Doings, or Example, any
inconvenience might grow to your Majesty, or your Realm, for I use it not after
such sort; putting no doubt, but in time to come, whether I Live or Die, your
Majesty shall perceive that my intent is grounded upon a true Love toward you,
whose Royal Estate I beseech Almighty God long to continue, which is, and shall
be, my daily prayers, according to my duty: And if, neither at my humble suit,
nor for the regard of the Promise made to the Emperor, your Highness will
suffer, and bear with me, as you have done, till your Majesty may be a Judge
herein your self, and rightly understand these Proceedings, (of which your
Goodness yet I despair not) otherwise, rather then to offend God, and my
Conscience, I offer my Body, at your Will, and Death shall be more welcome to
me than Life, with a troubled Conscience. And thus I pray Almighty God to keep
your Majesty in all Virtue, and Honor, with good Health, and long Life, to his
Pleasure.


Thus of these Letters.

Dr. Heylyn, page 15. Much care was taken, and many endeavors used, by the King
and Council, to bring her to a good conceit of the Reformation. But nothing in
this could be effected. As much unprofitable pains was taken by the Emperor's
Agent, in laboring to procure for her the free Exercise of her own Religion.
Whereupon, She being weary of the Court, retired to Hunsdon, in the County of
Hereford: where Ridley, Bishop of London, had recourse unto her, and at first
was kindly entertained. But having staid Dinner, at her request, he made an
offer of his Service to preach before her, on the Sunday following: To which
she answered, That the Doors of the Parish Church adjoining, should be open for
him, that he might Preach there, if he pleased; but that neither She, nor any
of her Servants, would be there to hear him. Madam, (said he) I hope you will
not refuse to hear God's Word: To which she answered, That she could no^ tell
what they called God's Word; it not having been accounted such in the days of
her Father. After which, falling into many different expressions, against the
Religion then Established; She dismissed him thus: My Lord (said she) For your
Kindness to visit me, I thank you: But for your offer to Preach before me, I
thank you not. Which said, he was conducted by Sir Thomas Wharton, to the place
where they dined; by whom he was presented with a Cup of Wine: which having
drank, and looking very sadly on it; Surely, (said he) I have done amiss, in
drinking in that place, where God's Word offered, was refused. Whereas, if I
had done my duty, I ought to have departed immediately, and to have shaken the
dust from off my feet, in testimony against this House, in which the Word of
God could not find admittance. Which words he spoke with such a vehemence of
Spirit, as made the hair of some of those who were present, to stand an end, as
themselves afterward confessed.

Of this behavior of the Princess, the Bishop much complained, in a Sermon
preached at Paul's Cross, July 16. Anno 1553. in which he was appointed by the
Lords of the Council, to set forth the Title of Queen Jane: to whom the
Succession of the Crown had been transferred by King Edward.

Of whose Death the Princess being secretly advertised, dispatched Letters to
the Lords of the Council, requiring them, not only to acknowledge Her Just
Title to the Crown, but likewise to cause Proclamation to be made in the usual
Form: which was accordingly done.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. And thus far concerning Her, before She came to the Crown: we
will now proceed to make a brief Relation of Her Reign, as to matters of
Religion.

CHAP. I.
Of the putting to Death of the Duke of Northumberland, and some others, who
had been chief Actors against Her.

Anno Reg. Mar. 1.
THE Lady Mary being Proclaimed Queen, gave on the same day, Eightpence, to
every poor Householder in London.

Thus Howes upon Stow, page 613. Dr. Heylyn, page 18. The Duke of
Northumberland (the chief Actor against Her) was, soon after this, condemned to
die. In that short Interval, which past between the Sentence and the Execution,
he was frequently visited by Dr. Heath, Bishop of Worcester: He having made it
his Request to the Lords, That some Godly, and Learned man, might be licensed
by the Queen, to repair to him, for the quiet, and satisfaction of his
Conscience.

When he was on the Scaffold, turning himself to the People, he made a long
Oration to them, touching the quality of his offense, and his fore-passed life:
and then admonished the Spectators, To stand to the Religion of their
Ancestors, rejecting that of later date; which had occasioned all the Misery of
the foregoing Thirty years: and that for the prevention of the future, if they
desired to present their Souls unspotted in the sight of God, and were truly
affected to their Country, they should expel those Trumpets of Sedition, the
Preachers of the Reformed Doctrine. That for himself (whatever had been
otherwise pretended) he professed no other Religion than that of his Fathers:
for testimony whereof he appealed to his good Friend, and Ghostly Father, the
Lord Bishop of Worcester: and finally, that being blinded with Ambition, he had
been contented to make rack of his Conscience, by temporizing: For which he
professed himself sincerely repentant; and so acknowledged the justice of his
Death.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning the Death of this Duke. Here follows another
Relation of this Duke's Death. By Howes upon Stow, page 614.

WHen he came upon the Scaffold, he said to the People, Though my death be
terrible to Nature, yet, I pray you judge the best in God's works; for he does
all for the best. And, as for me, I am a wretched sinner, and have deserved to
die. I forgive all Men, and I pray God to forgive them. And if I have offended
any of you here, I pray you, and the World, to forgive me. And most chiefly, I
desire Forgiveness of the Queens Highness, whom I have most heinously Offended.
And I pray you all to bear me witness, that I depart in perfect Love, and
Charity, with all the World; and I beg, that you will assist me with your
Prayers, at the hour of my Death.

And when he had made a Confession of his Belief, he added these words:

And here I do protest to you, unfeignedly, even from the bottom of my Heart,
that this, which I have spoken, is of my self, and not moved thereto by any
Man; nor for any flattery, or hope of Life: And of this I take to witness my
Lord of Worcester, my old Friend, and Ghostly Father, that he found me in this
mind, and opinion, when he came to me. Wherefore be assured, that I have
declared this, only upon my own mind, and affection, and for the Zeal and Love
that I bear to my Natural Country. I could rehearse much more, even by
experience, that I have of this Evil, that has happened to this Nation by
these occasions. But you know, I have another thing to do, whereunto I must
prepare me, for that time draws near. After he had thus spoken, he kneeled
down, saying to them that were about him, I beseech you all, to bear me
witness, that I die in the true Catholic Faith. And then said the Psalms of
Miserere, and De Profundis, his Pater Noster, and six of the first Verses of
the Psalm In Te, Domine, Speravi, ending with this Verse, Into thy hands, O
Lord, I commend my Spirit: and when he had thus ended his Prayers, the
Executioner asked him forgiveness; to whom he said, I forgive thee with all my
Heart; and do thy part without fear. And bowing toward the Block, he said, I
have deserved a thousand Deaths: and then laid his Head upon the Block; and so
was Beheaded: whose Body, with the Head, was buried in the Tower, by the Body
of Edward, late Duke of Sommerset. So that there lies before the High Altar in
St. Peter's Church, Two Dukes between Two Queens: to wit, the Duke of
Sommerset, and the Duke of Northumberland; between Queen Anne, and Queen
Catherine: All Four beheaded.

At the same time, and place also, were likewise beheaded, Sir John Gates, and
Sir Thomas Palmer.

Sir John Gates being upon the Scaffold, spoke these, or the like Words: My
coming hither this day is to die; whereof I assure you all, I am well worthy,
for I have lived as viciously, and wickedly, as any Man has done in the World.
I was the greatest reader of Scripture that might be of a Man of my degree, and
a worse follower thereof there was not living: For I did not read to be edified
thereby, nor to seek the Glory of God; but contrariwise, arrogantly to be
Seditious, and dispute thereof, and privately to interpret it after mine own
brain and affection: Wherefore I exhort you all, to beware, how, and after what
sort you come to read God's Holy Word. For it it is not a trifle, or
playing-game, to deal with God's Holy Mysteries. Stand not too much in your own
conceits. For, like as the Be, of one Flower gathers Honey; and the Spider
Poison of the same; Even so you, unless you humbly submit your selves to God,
and Charitably read the same, to the intent to be edified thereby, it is to you
as Poison, and worse; and it were better to let it alone.

And then, after he had asked the Queens Highness forgiveness, and all the
World, he desired the People, of their Charity, to Pray unto God with him, for
remission of his sins; and then refusing the Kerchief, laid down his Head,
which was stricken off at Three blows.

Sir Thomas Palmer, as soon as he came to the Scaffold, took every Man by the
Hand, and desired them to Pray for him; and then said these Words:

It is not unknown to you, wherefore I come hither: which I have worthily well
deserved at God's Hands. For I know it to be his Divine Ordinance, by this
means to call me to his mercy, and to teach me to know my self, what I am, and
whereunto we are all Subject. I thank his merciful Goodness: For he has caused
me to learn more, in one little dark corner in yonder Tower, than ever I
learned by any Travel, in so many places as I have been. For there I have seen
what God is, and how inscrutable his wondrous Works, and how infinite his
Mercies be. I have there seen my self thoroughly, and what I am: Nothing but a
lump of sin, earth, dust, and of all vileness the most vile. I have there seen
and known what the World is, how vain, deceitful, transitory, and short; how
wicked and loathsome the works thereof are in the sight of God's Majesty; how
he neither regards the menac^s of the proud and mighty, nor dispises the
humbleness of the poor and lowly. Finally, I have there seen what Death is, how
near hanging over every Man's head, and yet how uncertain the time is, and how
little it is to be feared. And should I fear Death? or be sad therefore? Have I
not seen two die before mine Eyes? yea, and within the hearing of my Ears? No;
neither the sprinkling of the Blood, nor the shedding thereof, nor the Blood it
self, shall make me afraid. And now taking my leave to the same, I pray you all
to Pray for me. Come on, Good Fellow; Are you he that must do the deed? I
forgive you with all my Heart.

And then kneeling down, and laying his Head upon the Block, he said, I will
see how fit the Block is for my Neck. I pray strike not yet: for I have a few
Prayers to say; and that done, strike on God's Name.

His Prayer ended; and again desiring all to Pray for him, he laid down his
Head; which the Executioner took off at one stroke.

Thus Howes concerning the Death of these two Persons. CHAP. II.
Of Her Coronation; and of a Tumult raised, and of Her moderate proceeding upon
it.

Dr. Heylyn, page 20. SHe came with great Magnificence to the Abby-Church;
where She was met with Three Silver Crosses, and Fourscore Singing-men, all in
rich and noble Copes: (so sudden a recruit was made of those Sacred Vestments.)
Amongst whom went the New Dean of Westminster, and diverse Chaplains of Her own;
each of them bearing in their hands some Ensign or other. After them marched
Ten Bishops (which were as many as remained of her Persuasion) with their
Miters, rich Copes, and Crosier-Staves, etc.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning Her Coronation. Upon Her being Proclaimed Queen,
She Declared, That She would persecute none for Religion, nor force their
Consciences. But this could not hinder Factious Spirits from raising Tumults:
whereof this was one.

Howes upon Stow, page 613. Mr. Bourn, a Canon of Paul's-Cross, not only Prayed
for the Dead, but also declared, that Dr. Bonner, Bishop of London, (lately
restored, and there present) for a Sermon by him Preached in the same place,
upon the same Gospel, was about Four years since, unjustly cast into the vile
Prison of the Marshalsea, and there kept curing the Reign of King Edward the
Sixth: which saying so offended some of the Audience, that they breaking
silence said, The Bishop had Preached Abomination. Other some cried, Pull him
out, pull him out: And some, being nearer the Pulpit, began to climb, wherewith
the Preacher stepped back, and one Mr. Bradford, a Preacher of King Edwards time,
stepped into his place, and persuaded the Audience to Quietness and Obedience.

Nevertheless Mr. Bourn standing by Mr. Bradford, one threw a Dagger at him.

Whereupon Mr. Bradford broke off his Speech; and forced himself, with the help
of John Rogers, another Preacher, to conveigh Mr. Bourn out of the Audience:
whom, with great labor, they brought into Pauls-School.

Thus Howes. Dr. Heylyn, page 21. Upon occasion of this Tumult, the Lords of
the Council ordered the Mayor and Aldermen of London, to call the next day a
Common Council of the City, and that they should charge every Householder to
cause their Children and Apprentices to keep to their own Parish Churches, upon
Holy days, and not suffer them to attempt any thing to the violating of the
Common Peace: Willing them all to signify to the said Assembly, the Queens
Determination, uttered to them by Her Highness in the Tower: which was, That
albeit Her Graces Conscience was settled in matters of Religion, yet She
Graciously meant, not to compel or constrain other Men's, otherwise than God
should (as She trusted) put into their Hearts a persuasion of the Truth, which
she was in, through the opening of his Word unto them by Godly, Virtuous, and
Learned Preachers.

She further set out this following Proclamation.

THe Queens Highness well remembering what great Inconveniences and Dangers have
grown to this Realm, in times past, through the diversities of Opinions in
Questions of Religion: And hearing also that now of late the same Contentions
be again revived, through Writings, false Reports and Rumors spread abroad by
some evil-disposed Persons: Informs all Her Subjects, That she cannot now hide
that Religion, which God and the World knows she has ever Professed from her
Infancy hitherto: which, as her Majesty is minded to observe and maintain for
her self, by God's Grace, during her time; so does her Highness much desire,
and would be glad the same were of all Her Subjects quietly and charitably
entertained. And yer She does signified unto all Her Majesty's loving Subjects,
That Her Highness minds not to compel any of Her said loving Subjects
thereunto: forbidding nevertheless, the moving of any Seditions, by the
interpreting the Laws after their brains and fancies; applying their whole
care, study and travel, to live in the Grace of God, exercising their
Conversations in such Charitable and Godly doings, as their lives may indeed
express the great hunger and thirst they have of God's Glory; which, by rash
talk and words, many have pretended. And in so doing they should best please
God, and live without danger of the Laws, and maintain the tranquillity of the
Realm.

And furthermore, for as much as it is well known, That Sedition, and false
Rumors have been nourished and maintained in this Realm, by the subtilty and
malice of some evil-disposed Persons, who take upon them, without sufficient
Authority, to Preach and Interpret the Word of God after their own brains, in
Churches and other places, both Public and Private; and also by playing
Enterludes, and Printing of false fond Books, Ballads, Rhymes, and other lewd
Treatises, concerning Doctrine in matters now in Question. Her Highness
therefore strictly Charges, and Commands, That nothing in this kind be evermore
Acted.

Thus Dr. Heylyn Relates Her moderate Proceedings, as to Religion. CHAP. III.
A full Relation of the Reconciling this Nation to its former Obedience, and
Subjection, to the Church of Rome.

Anno Reg. Mar. 2.
Dr. Heylyn, page 41. THe next work was, the Reconciling this Nation to its
former Obedience, and Subjection, to the Church of Rome. But before the
attempting this, it was thought fit, to remove one Difficulty; which was most
likely to hinder the progress of this Design.

The Difficulty was this.

There was a general fear, That if the Popes were restored to their former
Power, the Church might challenge Restitution of her former Possessions. Now to
secure them against this Fear, they had not only the Promise of the King and
Queen, but some Assurance underhand from the Cardinal Legate; who knew right
well, that the Church Lands had been so chopped and changed by the Two last
Kings, as not to be restored without the manifest ruin of many of the
Nobility, and most of the Gentry; who were invested in the same.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning this Obstacle. Which being removed, the work goes
on: The Relation whereof is thus delivered by Sir Rich. Baker, Page 461.

Cardinal Pool, being sent for by the King and Queen, came over into England
from Rome, as Legate a Latere. Whereupon a Parliament being called, and the King
and Queen sitting there under a Cloth of State, with the Cardinal on their
right hand; All the Lords, Knights, and Burgesses being present, the Bishop of
Winchester, Lord Chancellor, made a short Speech, signifying the Presence of
the Lord Cardinal, and that he was sent from the Pope, as his Legate a Latere,
to do a work, tending to the Glory of God, and the Benefit of them all: which
(says he) you may better hear from his own Mouth,

Thus Sir Rich. Baker. Dr. Heylyn, page 41. Then the Cardinal rose up, and made
a very grave and eloquent Speech; First giving them Thanks, for being restored
unto his Country: In recompense whereof he told them, That he was come to
restore them to the Country, and Court of Heaven; from which, by their
departure from the Church, they had been estranged. He therefore earnestly
exhorts them, to acknowledge their Errors, and cheerfully to receive the
benefit, which Christ was ready, by his Vicar, to extend unto them.

His Speech was said to have been long, and Artificial; but it concluded to
this purpose, That he had the Keys, to open them away into the Church; which
they had shut against themselves, by making so many Laws, to the dishonor and
reproach of the Sea Apostolic: On the revoking of which Laws, they should find
him ready to make use of the Keys, in opening of the door of the Church unto
them. It was concluded hereupon by both Houses of Parliament, That a Petition
should be made, in the Name of the Kingdom; wherein should be declared, how
sorry they were, That they had withdrawn their Obedience from the Apostolic
See, and consented to the Statutes made against it: promising to do their best
endeavor hereafter, That the said Laws and Statutes should be Repealed;
beseeching the King and Queen to intercede for them with his Holiness, that
they might be Absolved from their Crimes and Censures which they had incurred
and be received as Penitent Children into the bosom of the Church.

These things being thus resolved upon, both Houses are called again to the
Court, on Sr. Andrews- day: Where being Assembled in the Presence of the King
and Queen, they were asked by the Lord Chancellor Gardener, Whether they were
pleased, that Pardon should be demanded of the Legate; and whether they would
return to the Unity, of the Church, and Obedience of the Pope, Supreme Head
thereof? To which they assenting, the Petition was presented to their Majesty's
in the Name of the Parliament: Which being publicly read, they arose with a
purpose to have moved the Cardinal in it: who meeting their desires, declared
his readiness in giving them that Satisfaction, which they would have craved.

And having caused the Authority given him by the Pope, to be publicly read;
he showed, how acceptable the repentance of a Sinner was in the sight of God;
and that the very Angels in Heaven rejoiced at the Conversion of this Kingdom.
Which said, they all kneeled upon their Knees, and imploring the Mercy of God,
received Absolution for themselves, and the rest of the Kingdom: Which
Absolution was pronounced in these following words, viz.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, who with his most precious Blood, has redeemed and
washed us from all our sins and iniquities, that he might purchase to himself a
glorious Spouse, without spot or wrinkle, and whom the Father has appointed
Head over all his Church, He by his Mercy Absolve you: And we by Apostolical
Authority given unto us, by his Holiness Pope Julius the 3d. his Vicegerent
here on Earth, do Absolve and Free you, and every one of you, with the whole
Realm, and the Dominions thereof, from all Heresy and Schism, and from all and
every Judgment, Censures, and Pains for that cause incurred: and also we do
restore you again to the Unity of our Mother the Holy Church, as in our Letters
more plainly it shall appear: In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost.

Which words of his being seconded by a loud Amen by such as were present, he
concluded that days work with a solemn Procession to the Chapel, for rendering
Prayers and Thanks to Almighty God.

And because this great work was wrought on St. Andrews- day, the Cardinal
procured a Decree, or Canon, to be made in the Convocation of the Bishops and
Clergy, That from thenceforth the Feast of St. Andrews-day should be kept in
the Church of England for a Majus Duplex (as the Rituals call it) and
Celebrated with as much Solemnity as any other in the year.

It was thought fit also, That the Actions of that Day should be communicated,
on the Sunday following, at St. Paul's Cross, in the hearing of the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and the rest of the City: According to which appointment, the
Cardinal went from Lambeth by Water, and landing at St. Paul's-wharf, from
thence proceeded to the Church, with a Cross, two Pillars, and two Pole-axes of
Silver, born before him: Received by the Lord Chancellor with a Solemn
Procession. They tarried till the King came from Westminster. Immediately upon
whose coming, the Lord Chancellor went into the Pulpit, and Preached upon those
words of St. Paul, Romans 13. Brethren, ye are to know, That it is now time to
rise from sleep, etc. In which Sermon he declared, what had been done on the
Friday before, in the Submission which was made to the Pope, by the Lords and
Commons, in the Name of themselves, and the whole Kingdom; and the Absolution
granted to them by the Cardinal in the Name of the Pope. Which done, and
Prayers being made for the whole Estate of the Catholic Church; the Company
was for that time dismissed. And on the Thursday after, the Bishops and Clergy
then Assembled in their Convocation, presented themselves before the Cardinal
at Lambeth, and kneeling reverently on their Knees, they obtained Pardon for
all their Perjuries, Schisms and Heresies. Upon which a formal Absolution was
pronounced, That so all sorts of People might partake of the Popes Benediction,
and thereby testify their Obedience, and Submission to him.

The news whereof coming to the Pope, he caused not only many Solemn
Processions to be made in Rome, and most part of Italy; but proclaimed a
Jubilee to be held on the 24 th. of December then next coming. For the
Anticipating of which Solemnity he alleged this reason, That it became him to
imitate the Father of the Prodigal Child; and having received his lost Son, not
only to express a Domestical Joy, but likewise to invite all others to partake
thereof.

During this Parliament was held a Convocation also (as before was intimated;)
By whom a Petition was prepared, to be presented in the Name of the
Convocation, to both their Majesty's, humbly beseeching them, That they would
be pleased to interceed with the Cardinal, not to insist on the restoring of
Church Lands.

Which Petition, being not easy to be met withal, and never Printed before, is
here subjoyned, according to the Tenor and Effect thereof in the Latin Tongue.

WE, the Bishops, and Clergy, of the Province of Canterbury, assembled in
Convocation, during the sitting of this Parliament according to the ancient
Custom, with all due reverence and humility do make known to your Majesty's,
That though we are appointed to take upon us the Care and Charge of all those
Churches, in which we are placed, as Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Priests, or
Vicars; as also of the Souls therein committed to us, together with all Goods,
Rights, and Privileges thereunto belonging, according to the true intent and
meaning of the Canons made in that behalf: And that in this respect we are
bound to use all lawful means for the recovery of those Goods, Rights,
Privileges, and Jurisdictions, which have been lost in the late desperate and
pernicious Schism, and to regain the same unto the Church, as in her f^rst and
right estate: Yet notwithstanding, having took mature deliberation of the whole
matter amongst our selves, we cannot but (...) confess, That we know well, how
^ifficult a thing (if not impossible) it is, to recove^ the said Goods unto
their Churches, in regard of the manifold unavoidable Contracts, Sales, and
Alienations which have been made about the same: And that if any such thing
should be attempted, it would not only redound to the disturbance of the
Public Peace; but be a means, that the Unity in the Catholic Church, which by
the Goodness of your Majesty's has been so happily begun, could not obtain its
desired effect, without very great difficulty: Wheresore, preferring the
Public Good and Quiet of the Kingdom, before our own private Interest; and the
Salvation of so many Souls, redeemed with the precious Blood of Christ, before
any earthly things whatsoever, and not seeking our own, but the things of Jesus
Christ, We do most earnestly, and most humbly beseech your Majesty's, that you
would graciously Vouchsafe to interceed in our behalf, with the most Reverend
Father in God, the Lord Cardinal Pool, Legate a Latere from his Holiness, That
he would please to settle and confirm the said Goods of the Church, either in
whole or in part (as he thinks most fit) on the present Occupants thereof,
according to the Power and Faculties committed to him. Thereby preferring the
public Good before the Private; the Peace and Tranquillity of the Realm,
before Suits and Troubles; and the Salvation of Souls before earthly Treasure.
And for our parts, we do both now, and for all times coming, consent to all,
and every thing, which by the said Lord Legate shall, in this case, be finally
ordained, and concluded on: humbly, beseeching your Majesty's to persuade the
Lord Cardinal, not to be too strict, and difficult in the business.

And we do further beseech your Majesty's, to take such course, that our
Ecclesiastical Rights, Liberties, and Jurisdictions which have been taken from
us, by the iniquity of the former times, and without which we are not able to
discharge our common Duties, either in the exercise of the Pastoral Office, or
the Cure of Souls, committed to our ^rust and care, may be again restored unto
us, and be perpetually preserved inviolably, both to us, and our Churches: And
that all Laws which have been made to the prejudice of this our Jurisdiction,
and other Ecclesiastical Liberties, or otherwise have proved a hindrance to it,
may be repealed, to the Honor of God, and the Temporal and Spiritual Profit,
both of your Majesty's, and this Realm: Giving our selves assured hope, that
your most Excellent Majesty's, according to your singular Piety to Almighty
God, for so many, and so great benefits received from him, Will not be wanting
to the necessities of the Kingdom, and the occasions of the Churches, having
Cure of Souls: But, that you will consider, and provide, as need shall be, for
the Peace thereof.

Which Petition being thus drawn up, was humbly offered to the Legate; and being
assented unto, there was a General and Solemn Procession throughout London, to
give Thanks for their Conversion to the Catholic Church.

In this Procession, there were Ninety Crosses, an Hundred and Six Priests in
Copes, Eight Bishops in Pontificalibus, followed by Bonner, Bishop of London,
carrying the Blessed Sacrament under a Canopy, attended by the Lord Mayor, and
Companies, in their several Liveries: Which Solemn Procession being ended, they
all returned into the Church of St. Paul, where the King and Cardinal, together
with all the rest, heard Mass: And the next day the Parliament, and
Convocation, were Dissolved.

Thus largely Dr. Heylyn, concerning this great Solemnity. For a more full
Satisfaction in this Relation, I will here insert some Acts made in this
Parliament, in order to this business. To be found in the Statute Book.

An Act for Repealing of all Statutes, Articles and Provisions made against the Sea Apostolic, since the Twentieth year of Henry the Eighth.
WHereas, since the Twentieth year of King Henry the Eighth, much False and
Erroneous Doctrine has been Taught, Preached, and Written, partly by diverse,
the natural born Subjects of this Realm; and partly being brought in hither
from sundry other Foreign Countries, has been sown and spread abroad within
the same: By reason whereof as well the Spirituality as the Temporality of this
Kingdom, have swerved from the Obedience of the Sea Apostolic, and declined
from the Unity of Christ's Church, and have so continued, until such time, as
your Majesty, being settled in the Royal Throne, the Pope's Holiness and the Sea Apostolic, sent hither unto your Majesty, as a Person undefiled, and by
God's Goodness preserved from the common infection aforesaid, and to the whole
Realm, the most Reverend Father in God, the Lord Cardinal Pool, to call us home
again into the right way, from whence we have all this long while wandered and
straye^ abroad: And we, after sundry long and grievous Plagues and Calamities,
seeing by the Goodness of God our own Errors, have acknowledged the same unto
the same most Reverend Father in God, and by him been, and are received and
embraced into the Unity, and bosom of Christ's Church, upon our humble
submission, and promise made (for a Declaration of our Repentance) to Repeal
and Abrogate such Acts and Statutes as had been made in Parliament since the
said Twentieth year of the said King, against the Supremacy of the Sea
Apostolic, as in our Submission exhibited appears: The tenor whereof here
ensues:

We, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons Assembled in this
present Parliament, in the Name of our selves, and the whole Kingdom, do
declare our selves very sorry, and repentant of the Schism and Disobedience,
committed in this Realm, and the Dominions thereof, against the Sea Apostolic,
either by making, agreeing, or executing any Laws, Ordinances, or Commands
against the Supremacy of the said See; or otherwise, by doing or speaking any
thing that might impugn the same: Offering our selves, and promising, by this
our Supplication, that for a token and acknowledgment of our said repentance,
we be, and shall be always ready, to the utmost of our Power, to do what lies
in us, for the abrogating, and the repealing of the said Acts and Ordinances in
this present Parliament, etc.

Whereupon we most humbly desire your Majesty to set forth this our most humble
Suit, That we may obtain from the Sea Apostolic, release, and discharge from
all danger of such Censures and Sentences, as by the Laws of the Church we are
fallen into; and that we may, as Children repentant, be received into the bosom
and unity of Christ's Church; so as this Noble Realm, withal the members
thereof, may, in this unity, and perfect obedience to the Sea Apostolic, serve
God and your Majesty, to the furtherance and advancement of his Honor and
Glory, etc.

This Petition being granted, They further add:

We being now, at the Intercession of your Majesty, assoiled, discharged, and
delivered from Excommunication, Interdiction, and other Censures
Ecclesiastical, which have hanged over our heads, for our said faults, since
the time of the said Schism, mentioned in our Supplication.

May it therefore now please your Majesty, That for the better accomplishment
of our promise, made in the said Supplication, we may Repeal All Laws and
Statutes made contrary to the said Supremacy and See Apostolic during the said
Schism.

Thus, as to the Repealing of all such Laws made in the Reign of King Henry the
8th.

Another Act for the Repealing of certain Statutes made in the time of King
Edward the Sixth.
FOrasmuch, as by diverse and several Acts of Parliament, made in the time of
King Edward the Sixth, as well the Divine Service, and good Administration of
the Sacraments, as diverse other matters of Religion, (which we, and our
Forefathers found in this Church of England, to us left by the Authority of
the Catholic Church) be partly altered, and in some part taken from us; and in
place thereof New Things imagined, and set forth by the said Acts; such as a
few, of singularity, have of themselves devised: Whereof has ensued amongst
us, in a very short time, numbers of diverse and strange Opinions, and
diversity of Sects; and thereby grown great unquietness, and much discord, to
the great disturbance of the Kingdom: And in a very short time like to grow to
extreme peril, and utter confusion of the same, unless some remedy be in that
behalf provided: Which Thing all True, Loving, and Obedient Subjects ought to
foresee, and to provide against, to the utmost of their power, etc.

Be it therefore Enacted, etc.

A third Act for the Repeal of Two several Acts, made in the time of King
Edward the Sixth; touching the Dissolution of the Bishopric of Durham.
WHereas, there has been, time out of mind of any man to the contrary, a See
of a Bishop of Durham, commonly called, The Bishopric of Durham; which has
been one of the most Ancient, and worthiest Bishoprics, in Dignity, and
Spiritual Promotion, within the Realm of England; and the same place always
supplied, and furnished with a man of great Learning, and Virtue; which was
both to the Honor of God, and the increase of his True Religion; and a great
Surety to that part of the Realm: Nevertheless the said Bishopric was, without
any just cause, or consideration, by Authority of Parliament, Dissolved,
Extinguished, and Exterminated: And further, by the Authority of the said
Parliament, it was Ordained, and Enacted, That the said Bishopric, together
with all the ordinary Jurisdiction thereunto appertaining, should be adjudged
clearly dissolved and extinguished: and that King Edward the Sixth should from
thence-forth have, possess, and enjoy, to him, his heirs, and successors, for
ever, whatsoever did appertain or belong to the said Bishopric, in as large
and ample manner and form, as any Bishop thereof had, held, or possessed; or,
of right, ought to have had, held, or possessed, etc.

Be it therefore Enacted, etc.

Thus far, as to these Acts of Parliament.

CHAP. IV.
A Relation of some English Protestants that forsook the Kingdom, and of the
Factions, and Schisms, that were amongst them, being in other Countries.

Anno Reg. Mar. 3.
Dr. Heylyn, page 59. MAny English Protestants forsook the Kingdom, to the
number of Eight Hundred: who having put themselves into several Cities, partly
in Germany, and partly amongst the Switzers, and their Confederates, kept up
the Face and Form of an English Church, in each of their several Congregations.
Their principal retiring places amongst the last were Arow, Zurick, and Geneva:
And in the first, the Cities of Emden, Strasburgh, and Frankfort.

In Frankfort they enjoyed the greatest privileges, and therefore resorted
thither in greatest numbers: which made them the more apt unto Schisms and
Factions. At their first coming to the place, they were permitted to have the
use of one of their Churches; which had before been granted to such French
exiles as had repaired thither on the like occasion: yet so, that the French
were still to hold their Right; the English to have the use of it one day, and
the French another; and on the Lord's Day, so to divide the hours between them,
that the one might be no hindrance unto the other.

It has been also said, That there was another condition imposed upon them, of
being conform to the French in Doctrine and Ceremonies: Which condition, if it
were imposed, and not sought by themselves, must needs be very agreeable to the
temper and complexion of their principal Leaders; who being, for the most part,
of the Zuinglian Gospellers, at their going hence, became the great promoters
of the Puritan Faction at their coming home. The Names of Whittingham,
Williams, Goodman, Wood, and Sutton, who appeared in the head of this
Congregation, declare sufficiently of what Principles they were, and how
willing they would be to lay aside the face of an English Church, and frame
themselves to any Liturgy but their own.

The noise of this new Church at Frankfort, occasioned Knox (who after proved
the great Incendiary of the Realm and Church of Scotland) to leave his
Sanctuary in Geneva, in hope to make a better market for himself in that
Congregation.

These Frankfort-Schismaticks desire, That all Divine Offices might be executed
according to the Order of the Church of Geneva; which Knox would by no means
yield to, thinking himself as able to make a Rule for his own Congregation, as
any Calvin of them all.

Infinite were the Confusions which they had amongst themselves, and from hence
was the beginning of the Puritan Faction, against the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church; that of the Presbyterians against the Bishops, or Episcopal
Government; and finally, that also of the Independents against the
Super-intendency of Pastors and Elders.

But Sorrow seldom goes alone; for their Differing from the Government, Form,
and Worship, Established in the Church of England, drew on an Alteration also
in point of Doctrine. Such of the English as had retired to Geneva, employed
themselves in setting out a New Translation of the Bible in the English-Tongue;
which afterward they published with certain Marginal Notes upon it, very
Heterodox in point of Doctrine; some dangerous and seditious, in reference to
the Civil Magistrate; and some as scandalous, in respect of Episcopal
Government.

From this time the Calvinian Doctrine of Predestination began to be dispersed
in English Pamphlets, as the only necessary, Orthodox, and saving Truth.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning these Protestants. But now leaving these
Confusions, the Effect of Schism; we will here Relate a Princely Work of Piety,
done by the Queen.

CHAP. V.
Of the Queens Resolution of Restoring Church Lands, and of what She did
Actually Restore before Her Death.

Anno Reg. Mar. 4.
Dr. Heylyn, page 56. BEfore She undertook this Work, She thought it necessary
to Communicate her purpose unto some of the Council: and therefore calling them
to Her, She is said to have spoken to them in these following words;

We have willed you to be called to Us, to the intent you might hear of Me, my
Conscience, and the Resolution of my Mind, concerning the Lands and
Possessions, as well of Monasteries, as of other Churches whatsoever, being now
in my Possession.

First, I do consider, that the said Lands were taken away from the Churches
aforesaid in time of Schism; and that by unlawful means, such as are contrary
both to the Law of God, and of the Church: For which cause my Conscience does
not suffer me to detain them. And therefore I here expressly refuse, either to
claim, or retain those Lands for Mine: But with all my heart, freely and
willingly, without all Paction, or Condition, here and before God, I do
Surrender and Relinquish the said Lands and Possessions, or Inheritances
whatsoever; and renounce the same with this mind and purpose, that order and
disposition thereof may be taken, as shall seem best liking to the Pope, or his
Legate, to the Honor of God, and Wealth of this our Realm. And albeit you may
object to Me again, That the State of my Kingdom, the Dignity thereof, and my
Crown Imperial, cannot be Honorably Maintained and Furnished without the
Possessions aforesaid: Yet notwithstanding (and so She had affirmed before,
when She was bent upon the Restitution of the Tenths and First Fruits) I set
more by the Salvation of my Soul, than by Ten such Kingdoms: And therefore the
said Possessions I utterly refuse here to hold, after that sort and Title: And
give most hearty Thanks to God, who has given me a Husband of the same mind;
who has no less good Affection in this behalf, than I my self. Wherefore I
Charge and Command, That my Chancellor (with whom I have conferred my Mind in
this matter) and you Four, do ^esort to morrow together, to the Legate,
signifying to him the Premises in my Name. And give your Attendance upon me,
for the more full declaration of the State of my Kingdom, and of the aforesaid
Possessions* according as you your selves do understand the matter, and can
inform him in the same.

Upon this opening of Her Mind, the Lords thought it req^isite to direct some
course, wherein She might satisfy Her desires, to Her own great Honor, and yet
not Alienate too much at once of the public Patrimony.

The Abbey of Westminster had been Founded for a Convent of Benedictin Monks by
King Edward the Confessor, valued at the Suppression by King Henry the Eighth,
at the yearly Sum of Three thousand, Nine hundred, Seventy seven pounds in good
old Rents, Anno 1539. At which time, having taken to himself the best and
greatest part of the Lands thereof; he Founded with the rest a Collegiate
Church, consisting of a Dean, and Secular Canons. But now the Queen put into it
a Convent of Benedictins, consisting of an Abbot, and Fourteen Monks: which
with their Officers, were as many as the Lands then left upon it, would well
maintain.

A Convent of Observants (being a reformed Order of Franciscan Friars) had been
Founded by King Henry the Seventh near the Manor of Greenwich; and was the
first which felt the fury of King Henry the Eighth, by reason of some open
opposition made, by some of the Friars, in favor of Queen Catherine, the
Mother of the Queen now Reigning: Which moved Her, in a pious gratitude, to
re-edifie that ruined House, and to restore as many as could be found of that
Order, to their old Habitations; making up their Corporation with some new
Observants to a competent number.

She gathered together also a New Convent of Dominican, or Black-Friars; for
whom She provided a House in Smithfield, in the City of London; fitting the
same with all conveniences, both for the Divine Office, as likewise for other
necessary Uses.

At Syon, near Brentford, there had been anciently a House of Religious Women,
Nunns of the Order of St. Bridget, dissolved, as were all the rest, by King
Henry the Eighth. Such of these as remained alive, with the addition of some
others, who were willing to embrace that course of Life, made up a competent
number for a New Plantation: These She restored likewise to their old
Habitation, repairing their House, and laying to it a sufficient Estate in
Lands, for their future maintenance.

At Sheen, on the other-side of the Water, there had been Anciently another
Religious House not far from a Mansion of the Kings; to which they much
resorted, till the building of Richmond. This House She stocked with a New
Convent of Charthusians, and endowed it with a Revenue great enough to maintain
that Order.

And the next year, having Closed up the West End of the Quire, or Chancel, of
the Church of St. John's near Smithfield, (which was all the Protector
Sommerset had left standing of it) She restored the same to the Hospitality of
the Knights of St. John, to whom it formerly belonged, assigning a liberal
Endowment to it for their more honorable Subsistence.

An Hospital had been formerly Founded in the Savoy, by her Grandfather King
Henry the Seventh, for the relief of such Pilgrims, as either went on their
Devotions to the Shrine of St. Thomas Becket of Canterbury, or any other
eminent Shrine, or Saint, in these parts of the Kingdom. Now this Hospital
being destroyed by Edward the Sixth, and the Means disposed of, it could no: be
restored to its first condition, but by a new endowment from such other Lands
belonging to Religious Houses, which were remaining in the Crown.

But the Queen was so resolved upon it, and withal so desirous to add some
Works of Charity unto those of Piety; or else in Honor of Her Grandfather,
(whose Foundation She restored at Greenwich also) the Hospital was again
Re-founded, and a convenient yearly Rent allotted to the Master, and Brethren,
for the Entertainment of the poor, according to the tenor and effect of the
first Institution. Which Prince-like Act, so wrought upon the Maids of Honor,
and other Ladies of the Court, that for the better attaining of the Queens good
Grace, they furnished the same at their own costs, with new Beds, Bedding, and
other necessary Furniture, in a very ample manner. In which condition it
continues to this very day; the Mastership of the Hospital being looked on as a
good preferment for any well deserving Man about the Court.

How far the Queens Example, Seconded by the Ladies about the Court,
countenanced by the King, and earnestly insisted on by the Pope, might have
prevailed on the Nobility and Gentry, for doing the like, either in restoring
their Church Lands, or assigning some part of them to the like Foundations, it
is hard to say: most probable it is, that if the Queen had lived some few years
longer, either for Love to Her, or for fear of gaining the King's Displeasure,
or otherwise out of an unwillingness to incur the Popes Curse, and the Churches
Censures, there might have been very much done that way, though not all at once.

That which might have much furthered this business, was the Greatness to which
Philip had attained at this present time, when the Queen was most intent on
these new Foundations. For having passed over to Calais in the Month of
September, Anno 1555. And the next day going to the Emperor's Court, which was
then at Brussels, he found his Father in a Resolution of Resigning to him all
his Dominions and Estates, except the Empire (or the bare Title rather of it)
which was to be Surrendered to his Brother Ferdinand: not that he had not a
Design to settle the Imperial Dignity on his Successor in the Realm of Spain,
for the better attaining of the Universal Monarchy, which he was said to have
aspired to, over all the West: But that he had been crossed in it by
Maximilian, the Eldest Son of his Brother Ferdinand, who Succeeded to his
Father in it, and left the same Hereditary, in a manner, to the Princes of the
House of Austria, of the German race.

For Charles, grown weary of the World, broken with Wars, and desirous to apply
himself to Divine Meditation, resolved to discharge himself of all Civil
Employments, and spend the remainder of his life in the Monastery of St.
Justus, situated amongst the Mountains of Estremadura, a Province in the Realm
of Castile.

In pursuance whereof; having called before him the Principal of the Nobility,
and Great Men of His several Kingdoms and Estates, He made a Resignation of All
his Hereditary Dominions to King Philip, his Son; having then scarce attained
to the Fifty fifth year of his Li^e, to the great Admiration of all the World.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning this Noble Action of the Queen. CHAP. VI.
A Proclamation against the setting out of Seditious Books, and of the
Conventicles, and Seditious Meetings of Sectaries; and a Word concerning the
Lutherans.

Anno Reg. Mar 5. The Proclamation.
Dr. Heylyn, page 70. WHereas diverse Books, filled with Heresy, Sedition, and
Treason, have of late been Daily brought into this Realm, out of Foreign
Countries; and also some covertly Printed within this Realm, and cast a broad
in sundry parts thereof; whereby not only God is dishonored, but likewise
encouragement given to disobey Lawful Princes, and Governors. Therefore, for
redress hereof, We Command the Suppressing of all such Books.

Thus Dr. Heylyn relates this Proclamation. Seditious Meetings.

Dr. Heylyn. page 73. Now besides these Seditious Books, they had likewise
their Conventicles, or Seditious Meetings, even in London it self: In one of
which Congregations, that namely, whereof Bentham was at that time Minister;
there Assembled seldom under Forty, many times an Hundred, and sometimes Two
Hundred: but more or less, as it stood most with their convenience and safety.
They had not all the convenience of such Meetings; but they Met frequently
enough in smaller Companies.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these Meetings. A Remark concerning Sectaries.

There is one thing very remarkable in these Sectaries; which is, That although
they al^ agree in a general malice against Catholic Religion; yet they
strangely disagree amongst themselves, by furious Animosities, and hatred one
against another. One Example whereof is here related by Dr. Heylyn, page 80. in
this following short Note concerning the Lutherans.

The Lutherans abominated nothing more than an English Protestant, because they
concurred not with them in their Doctrine of Consubstantiation. Insomuch that
Peter Martyr tells us of a Friend of his in the Dukedom of Saxony, that was
generally hated by the rest of his Countrymen, for being hospitable to some
few of the English Nation. And it is further signified by Philip Melancthon, in
an Epistle of this year, That the Lutherans could find no other Names (but the
Devils-Martyrs) for such as suffered Death in England, in defense of Religion

Now one ground of this their hatred was, That John a Lasco, and his Company,
had been lately there, where thy spoke so reproachfully of Luther, the Augustan
Confession, and the Rites and Ceremonies of their Churches, as rendered them
incapable of any better entertainment than they found amongst them. And by the
behavior of these men, coming then from England, the Lutherans past their
judgment on the Church it self; and consequently on all those who suffered in
defense thereof. Some of the Lutherans had given out, on the former ground,
That the English had deservedly suffered the greatest Hardships, both at home,
and abroad, because they Writ, and Spoke, so irreverently of the Blessed
Sacrament.

Thus Dr. Heylyn,, concerning the Lutherans detesting an English Protestant.
Nothing occurring more in this Queens Reign, (as to these matters of Religion)
we will now give an Account of the years when these Changes were made; with an
Addition of some works of Piety, done by Her, and in Her time.

IN the First year of this Queens Reign, All Bishops, that had been deprived in
the time of King Edward the Sixth, were restored to their Bishoprics, and the
new removed.

Also this year, on the Twenty seventh of August, the Service was sung in Latin
in St. Paul's Church. The Pope's Authority being likewise, by Act of
Parliament, restored in England, and the M^ss Commanded in all Churches to be
used.

In her Second year, the Realm is Absolved, and Reconciled to the Church of
Rome; and First Fruits, and Tenths, restored to the Clergy.

In her Third year, Eight hundred English Protestants sorsook the Kingdom; who
fell into great Confusions amongst themselves, being in other Countries.

In her Fourth year, Monasteries were be gun to be re-edified.

In her Fifth year, great endeavors were used by Sectaries, to raise Sedition,
by Seditious Books, and unlawful Meetings, or Conventicles.

In her Sixth year, She built Public Schools in the University of Oxford:
Which being decayed in tract of time, and of no beautiful Structure, when they
were at the best, were taken down: In place whereof (but upon a larger extent
of Ground) was raised that Goodly and Magnificent Fabric, which we now behold.

Works of Piety.
The Queen restored a great part of the Abbey-Lands that were in her Possession.

In her First year, Sir Thomas white, then Mayor, Erected a College in Oxford,
called S. John's College. He also Erected Schools at Bristow and Reading, and
gave Two thousand pounds to the City of Bristow to purchase Lands; the profits
whereof to be employed for the benefit of young Clothiers.

In her Third year, died Sir John Gresham, late Mayor of London; who Founded a
Free School at Holt, in Norfolk; and gave to every Ward in London Ten pounds,
to be distributed to the Poor. Also to Maids-Marriages, Two hundred pounds.

Cuthbert Tunstal, Bishop of Durham Erected a goodly Library in Cambridge,
storing it with many Excellent, both Printed and Written Books. He also
bestowed much upon Building, at Durham, at Alnewick, and at Tunbridge.

Thus Sir Richard Baker. Here you have had a short View of the great Zeal and
Piety, that was in this Nation, during the Reign of this Queen. And this
delivered from the mouths of her Enemies, the most zealous Protestants.

This Account being here ended, we will now proceed to relate, what Changes
were made (as to Religion) in Queen Elizabeth's time: Wherein the Scene was
totally Altered; She following the Example of her Father, and Brother, in going
on with the Destructions, and Confusions, begun by them.

The Last Part Of these HISTORICAL COLLECTIONS Concerning A Fourth Change of
Religion Made for POLITIC ENDS, And of the Occurrences concerning it; In the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth.
A Preamble.
BEfore we begin this Queens Reign, we will (following Dr. Heylyn's order)
first make a Relation out of him of the various Fortunes of her Mother, Anne
Boleign; of whom thus he writes in his History of Reformation, page 86.

Anne Boleign, from her tender years, was brought up in the Court of France:
Who returning into England, was preferred to be Maid of Honor to Queen
Catherine: In whose Service the King falls in Love with her. But so long
concealed his Affections, that there was a great League contracted betwixt her,
and the young Lord Peircy, Son to the Earl of Northumberland. But that being
broken off, by the endeavors of Cardinal Wolsey; and the King laboring for a
Divorce, from Queen Catherine, that he might Marry her; that also was sought to
be obstructed by the Cardinal: Which being understood by Mrs. Anne Boleign she
seeks all ways for his destruction; and prevailed so far with the King, that he
was presently Indicted, and Attainted of a Praemunire; and not long after, by
the Counsel of Thomas Cromwell, (who had sormerly been the Cardinals Solicitor
in his Legatine Court) envolves the whole Clergy in the same Crime with him.
And by persuasion of this man, he requires of the said Clergy, to acknowledge
him for Supreme Head, on Earth, of the Church of England; and to make no new
Canons, and Constitutions, not to Execute any such, when made, by his consent.
And having thus brought his own Clergy under his Command, he was the less
solicitous how his matters went in the Court of Rome, concerning his Divorce.
Whereupon he privately Marries Mistress Anne Boleign: And a long time after, to
wit, Three or Four Months after the Birth of the Princess Elizabeth) began a
Parliament; in which the Kings first Marriage was declared Unlawful; and the
Succession of the Crown settled upon His Issue by this Second Marriage: An Oath
being devised in maintenance of the said Succession; and not long after, Moor
and Fisher were Executed for refusing to take that Oath.

The New Queen being thus settled; and considering, that the Pope and She had
such different Interests, that they could not subsist together, She resolved to
suppress his Power what she could. But finding, that the Pope was too well
entrenched, to be dislodged upon a sudden, it was advised by Cromwell, to begin
with taking in the Outworks first; which being gained, it would be no hard
matter to beat him out of his Trenches.

In order whereunto a Visitation is begun, in which a diligent Enquiry was to
be made into all Abbey's, Priories, and Nunneries within the Kingdom: (an
Account of which Visitation, and the D^ssolution of Abbeys, has been formerly
given in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.)

But the New Queen (for whose sake Cromwell had contrived that Plot) did not
live to see this Dissolution.

For such is the uncertainty of Humane Affairs, that when she thought her Self
most Secure, and free from Danger, She became most obnoxious to the ruin
prepared for Her. It had pleased God, upon the Eighth of January, to put an end
unto the Calamities of the Virtuous, but unfortunate Queen, unto whose Bed she
had succeeded: The News whereof she entertained with such contentment, that she
caused her self to be apparelled in lighter Colors, than was agreeable to the
season, or the sad occasion. Whereas, if she had rightly understood her own
Condition, She could not but have known, that the long Life of Queen Catherine,
was to be her best preservation, against all changes, which the King's loose
Affections, or any other Alteration in the Affairs of State, were otherwise
like to draw upon her.

But this Contentment held not long. For within Three Weeks after, She fell in
Travail; in which she miscarried of a Son, to the extreme discontent of the
Father: Who looked upon it, as an Argument of God's displeasure, as being much
offended at this Second Marriage. He then began to think of His ill Fortune,
with both His Wives; both Marriages subject to cispute, and the Legitimation of
both His Daughters, likely to be called in question, in the time succeeding. He
must therefore cast about for another Wife; of whose Marriage, and his Issue by
Her, there could rise no controversy. His eye had carried him to a Gentlewoman
in the Queens Attendance; on the enjoying of whom he so fixed his Thoughts,
that he had quite obliterated all remembrance of his former Loves.

Whereupon He began to be as weary of Queen Annes Gayeties, and Secular humor,
as formerly, of the Gravity, and Reservedness of Queen Katharine. And causing
many eyes to observe her Actions, they brought him a Return of some
particulars; which he conceived, might give him a sufficient ground to proceed
upon.

The Lord Rochfort (her own Brother) having some Suit to obtain (by her means)
of the King, was found whispering to her on her Bed, when she was in it; which
was interpreted for an act of some dishonor done, or intended to be done to the
King: in the aggravating whereof, with all odious circumstances, none was more
forward, than the Lady Rochfort her self.

It was observed also, That Sir Henry Norris, Groom of the Stool to the King,
had entertained a very dear affection for her; not without giving himself hopes
of succeeding in the King's Bed, if she chanced to survive Him: And it
appeared, that she had given him opportunity, to make his Affection known, and
to acquaint her with his hopes; which she expressed, by twitting him, in a
frolic humor, with looking after dead men's shoes.

Weston and Breerton, both Gentlemen of the Privy Chamber, were observed also
to be very diligent in their Services and Addresses to her; which were
construed more to proceed from Love, than Duty.

Out of all these Premises, the King resolved to come to a conclusion of His
aims and wishes.

A Solemn Tilting was maintained at Greenwich; at which both the King and Queen
were present; the Lord Rochfort, and Sir Henry Norris being principal
Challengers.

Here the Queen (by chance) let fall her Handkerchief; which was taken up by
one of her supposed Favorites, who stood under the Window; whom the King
perceived to wipe his face with it. This taken by the King to have been done of
purpose, he thereupon leaves the Queen, and all the rest, and goes immediately
to Westminster: Rochfort and Norris, are the next day committed to the Tower;
and the Queen likewise. After which Breerton and Weston, with Mark Smeton, one
of the King's Musicians, were committed on the same occasion. These persons
being thus committed, and the cause made known, the next care was to find
sufficient evidence for their condemnation. It was objected, That the Queen,
growing out of hope of having any issue Male by the King, had used the company
of the Lord Rochfort, Norris, Breerton, Weston, and Smeton; involving her at
once in no smaller crimes, than Adultery and Incest.

It appears by a Letter of Sir William Kingston Lieutenant of the Tower, that
he had much communication with her, when she was his Prisoner; in which her
language seemed to be broken, and distressed, betwixt tears and laughter. She
exclaimed against Norris, as if he had accused her. It was further signified in
that Letter, that she named some others, who had obsequiously applied
themselves to her Love and Service, acknowledging such passages, as showed, she
had made use of very great liberties. The conclusion of this Business was, That
both the Queen, and the rest of the Prisoners were all put to death.

So died this great Lady; one of the most remarkable Mockeries and Disports of
Fortune, which these last ages have produced; raised from the quality of a
private Lady, to the Bed of a King; Crowned on the Throne, and Executed on the
Scaffold; the Fabric of her Power and Glory being Six years in Building; but
cast down in an instant: The splendour and magnificence of her Coronation,
seeming to have no other end, but to make her the more glorious Sacrifice, at
the next Alteration.

But her death was not the chief mark the King aimed at. If she had only lost
her Head, though with the loss of her Honor, it would have been no Bar to her
Daughter Elizabeth, from Succeeding her Father in the Throne. Now he must have
his Bed free from all such pretensions, the better to draw on the following
Marriage.

It was therefore thought necessary, that she should be separated from his Bed,
by some other means than the Ax or Sword; and that He should be legally
separated from her in a Court of Judicature; when the Sentence of Death had
deprived Her of all means, as well as of all manner of desire to dispute the
point.

It does not appear in Record, upon what ground this Marriage was dissolved.
All which occurs, in reference to it, is a Solemn Instrument, under the Seal of
the Archbishop Cranmer; by which that Marriage is declared (on good and valid
Reasons) to be null, and void.

Which Sentence was pronounced at Lambeth, in the Presence of most of the great
Men of that time, and approved by the Prelates and Clergy assembled in their
Convocation; and lastly, confirmed by Act of Parliament.

In which Act, there also passed a Clause, which declared the Lady Elizabeth to
be Illegitimate.

Thus far Dr. Heylyn, concerning her Mother. Now because the Relation here made
concerning this Queen, belongs to the Reign of King Henry the Eighth; I think
it will not be altogether improper to insert a Speech made in that Kings Reign,
which did not come to my hands time enough to be put into its proper place.

A Speech made in the Upper House of Parliment, by Dr. John Fisher Bishop of
Rochester, in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, in opposition to the
Suppressing of the lesser Monasteries.
My Honored Lords,
THis is the place where your glorious and noble Progenitors have paternized
the Kingdom from oppression. Here is the Sanctuary where, in all Ages but this
of ours, our Mother Church found still a sound Protection. I should be
infinitely sorrowful, that from you, that are so lovely Branches of antiquity,
and Catholic Honor, the Catholic Faith should be so deeply wounded. For
God's, and your own Goodness sake, leave not to Posterity, so great a blemish,
that you were the First, and only those, that give it up to ruin. Where there
is Cause you nobly punish, and with Justice; but beware of infringing so long
continued Privileges, or denying the Members of the Church, the parts of their
Advantage that is enjoyed by every private Subject. The Commons shoot their
Arrows at our Livings, which are the Motives that conceit us, (or make us to be
conceived) guilty. Is all the Kingdom innocent, and we only faulty, that there
is no room left for other Considerations far more weighty? The Diligence,
Devotion, and Liberality of your Great Forefathers endowed their Mother Church
with fair and large Revenues, making it still their greatest care to keep her
upright, able, still in freedom: And will you give consent, that like a servile
Bondmaid, she now sinks lower to a naked thraldom, and, by degrees, be forced
from her Mansion? If not, to what end serves the flux of these Petitions, that
taint your Ears with Language far unfit the Ears of Christian Princes. These
strike not at the withered Branches, but, at the Tree, on which Religion
grows. Certainly, All are not guilty. Admit that some, as they enforce (or
urge) be vicious, must it conclude, there is none good amongst us, or able to
reform their proper vices? Will you assume a Power, till now unheard of, to
give away their Rites, by new made Statutes? If you will seek and sist our
Constitutions, you shall there find as strict Injunctions, as you can make, for
Reformation. But, I suppose, it is not that is aimed at; pretense of
Restoration, (or Reformation) tends to ruin, else such beginnings could not
find such Favor. My Lords, consider well your actions; be advised. This Cause
seems only Ours, it will be Yours, if that the Mother Church do feel Injustice
Your turns are next to feel the like Oppression. When Faith* begins to fail,
then all must perish. Heretic, (or Heretical) Fancies taint the common People,
whom Novelties betray, even to Perdition. Let Neighbor Nations tell you your
own story. Husse, Luther, and such frantic Teachers, cry out against the
Church in all their Sermons, they do pretend nothing else but Reformation, when
they themselves are deepest dyed in mischief. What follows them, (to wit,
Perdition) we may expect in Justice. The Churches Wealth, occasioned this first
moving. If that were poor, our Vices would be Virtues, and none would be so
forward to Accuse us. What can we look for then but Desolation, where private
ends are made a public grievance? Our Lesser Houses are desired from us; not
that their value does deserve the Motion; but, that the Greater may succeed
their fortune; which soon will follow, if the gap be opened. The King himself,
I hope, is too too gracious, to set abroach an Action so disordered: Nor, can I
think, the Lower House of Commons will be so blind, to Second this loose
Motion. Some giddy-brain, whose fading Fortunes lead him to hope to raise
himself out of our Ruins, betrays their Judgments with a show of Justice; which
seeks in truth but merely Innovation, which must succeed, unless you do oppose
it. Wherefore, My Lords, call back that Ancient Virtue, that so long time has
sat in these your places. Now is the time to show your worth; the Church
Implores it, the Church which you acknowledge for your Mother. If Liberty take
place of Faith, farewell Religion. The Turk may then direct us how to guide in
Rapine, Blood, and Murder. Foul Dissension proceeds from want of good Devotion.
The lack of Faith, begets these strange Conceptions, which time will make stark
dead, if we continue.

Thus of this Speech.

Now we will proceed to relate what occurs in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, as
touching matters of Religion.

CHAP. I.
Of Her Praying for the Dead, and being Crowned by a Catholic Bishop.

Anno Reg. Eliz. I.
Howes upon Stow, page 635. THe Princess Elizabeth, being Proclaimed Queen,
caused these Solemn Rites to be performed for Her Sister, and Charles the
Emperor.

In the Abbey-Church of Westminster, the Corpse of Queen Mary was very royally
Enterred, with all Solemn Funeral Rites, and a Mass of Requiem.

In the same place, and in like Princely manner, were performed Solemn
Obsequies for the late famous Emperor, Charles the Fifth.

Thus Howes. Her Coronation.
She was Crowned according to the Order of the Roman Pontifical, by Dr. Owen
Oglethorpe, Bishop of Carlisle; the only Man, amongst all the Bishops, who
could be wrought on by her, to perform that Office: Whether it were that they
saw some Alteration coming, to which they were resolved not to yield
conformity, or for some other reasons, is not certainly known.

The Bishop of Ely had a particular reason for his refusing this; because he
had been one of those, that were sent to Rome, to render the Submission of the
Kingdom, to the Pope still Living; and therefore could not now appear with
Honor, in any such Action, as seemed to carry with it a Repugnancy, (if not a
manifest Inconsistency) with the same Engagement. It cannot be denied but that
there were Three Bishops yet alive of King Edward's making, all of them
Zealously affected to the Reformation. And possibly it may seem stange, that
the Queen received not the Crown rather from one of their hands, than to put
her self to the hazard of so many denials, as had been given Her by the others.

But unto this it may be Answered, That the said Bishops, at that time were
deprived of their Sees, and therefore not in a capacity to perform that
service. Besides, there being at that time, no other Form estalished for a
Coronation, than that which had much in it of the Ceremonies of the Church of
Rome, she was not sure, that any of the said Three Bishops would have acted in
it, without such Alterations, and Omissions, in the whole course of the Order,
as might have rendered the action questionable amongst captious Men.

And therefore finally she thought it more conducible to her Reputation amongst
Foreign Princes, to be Crowned by the hands of a Catholic Bishop, (or one, at
least, that was accounted such) than if it had been done by any of the other
Religion.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. But notwithstanding these Solemnities, and the profession of
the Catholic Religion in all things, not only by Permission, but also by
Command, (which sufficiently manifest, that there was nothing, but Humane
Policy in the conduct of this Affair): yet a change of Religion was designed,
as will appear by what shall be here said.

CHAP. II.
Of the Policy used, and strange manner of introducing this following Change of
Religion, and of the Consequence of it, (to wit, a general Confusion in all
matters of Religion.)

Dr. Heylyn, page 103. QUEEN Elizabeth knew full well, that Her Legitimation,
and the Pope's Supremacy, could not stand together, and that She could not
possibly maintain the one, without a discarding of the other. But in this case
it concerned her to walk very warily, and not to unmask her self too much at
once, before she had put her self into a posture of Ability to make good her
Actions. Notwithstanding upon a serious debate of all particulars, she was
resolved to proceed to a Reformation, as the time should serve.

In order whereunto, She Constitutes her Privy Council; which she compounds of
such Ingredients, as might neither give encouragement to any of those, who
wished well to the Church of Rome, or alienate their Affections from Her, whose
Hearts were more inclined to the Reformation. Now, as the Papists, in the first
beginning of the Reign of Queen Mary, hoping thereby to obtain her Favor, began
to build new Altars, and set up the Mass; So fared it now with the Zealots
among the Protestants; who measuring the Queens Affections by their own, or
else presuming, that their Errors would be taken for an honest Zeal, employed
themselves as busily in the demolishing of Altars, and defacing of Images, as
if they had been Licensed, and commanded to it by some Legal Warrant.

It happened also, that some of the Ministers, who remained at home; and
others, which returned, in great numbers, from beyond the Seas, had put
themselves into the Pulpits, and bitterly enveighed against the Superstitions,
and corruptions of the Church of Rome. The Papists accused the others of
Heresies, Schisms, Innovation in the Worship of God. For the Suppressing of
which Disorders, the Queen Commanded, there should be no Disputes concerning
Religion; and that no Man, of what Persuasion soever he was, should be suffered
to Preach in public, but only such as should be Licensed. Which Command and
Proclamation, was so strictly observed, that no Sermon was Preached at St.
Paul's Cross, or any Public place in London, till the Easter following.

At which time, when the Preacher was to go into the Pulpit, the Door was
locked, and the Key thereof not to be found: So that a Smith was sent for to
break open the Door; and that being done, the like necessity was found, of
cleansing, and making sweet the place; which by a long disuse had contracted so
much filth and nastiness, as rendered it unfit for a present Sermon.

By another Proclamation it was enjoined, That no Man, of what quality or
degree soever, should presume to alter any thing in the State of Religion, or
innovate, in any of the Rites and Ceremonies thereunto belonging: But that all
such Rites and Ceremonies, should be observed in all Parish Churches of the
Kingdom, as were then used, and retained in her Majesty's Chapel, until some
further order should be taken in it. Only it was permitted, That the Litany
should be said in the English Tongue; as likewise the Epistle, and Gospel, at
the time of High Mass; which was accordingly done in all the Churches of London
on the next Sunday after; and by degrees, in all the other Churches of the
Kingdom.

Further than this, She thought it not convenient to proceed at the present:
Only She Commanded the Priest, or Bishop, (for some say it was the one, and
some the other) who Officiated at the Altar in the Chapel Royal, not to make
any Elevation of the Sacrament, the better to prevent the Adoration, which was
given to it; which she could not suffer to be done in her sight, without a most
apparent wrong to her Judgment, and Conscience: Which being made known in other
places, and all other Churches being commanded to conform themselves to the
Example of her Chapel, the Elevation was forborne also in most other places.

And though there were no further progress made, toward a Reformation, by any
public Act, or Edict; yet secretly a Reformation in the Form of Worship, and
consequently in point of Doctrine, was both intended, and projected.

Thus far Dr. Heylyn, 'Concerning 'the Policy used in making this Change. This
Relation is thus otherwise delivered by Sir Rich. Baker, page 474.

QUeen Elizabeth, intending an Alteration of Religion, would not do it all at
once, and upon the sudden, but by little and little. As at first she permitted
only the Epistles and Gospels of the Day to be read at Mass in English. But in
all other matters they were to follow the Roman Rite and Custom, until order
could be taken for Establishing Religion by Authority of Parliament. And a
severe Proclamation was set out, prohibiting all Disputations of Religion. By
which means She both put the Protestants in hope, and put not Papists out of
hope. Yet privately, She committed the Correcting of the Book of Common Prayer,
(set forth in the English Tongue, under King Edward the Sixth) to the care and
diligence of Dr. Parker, and others.

But the matter was carried on so closely, that it was not communicated to any,
but the Marquess of Northampton, the Earl of Bedford, and Sir William Cecil.
Soon after this, the use of the Lord's Supper in both kinds was by Parliament
allowed: And (within Two or Three Months) the Sacrifice of the Mass was
abolished, and the Liturgy in the English Tongue Established; though (as some
say) but with the difference of Six Voices in the House of Commons.

The next Month the Oath of Supremacy was offered to the Catholic Bishops, and
others; and the Month following, Images were removed out of the Churches,
broken, and burnt. By these degrees Religion in England was changed; The
Supremacy confirmed to the Queen; As many of the Bishops, as refused to take
the Oath, were presently deprived of their Bishoprics, and Protestant Bishops
put in the possession of them.

Thus Sir Rich. Baker relates this strange manner of changing Religion, by
degrees. A necessary consequence of these Proceedings was a general Confusion
in matters of Religion: Which is thus set down by Howes upon Stow, page 635.

At this time the English Nation was wonderfully divided in Opinions, as well
in matters of Ecclesiastical Government, as in diverse Points of Religion, by
reason of Three Changes within the compass of Twelve years: Every one of these
varying from that which was Authorized by Henry the Eighth.

For King Henry assuming the Ecclesiastical Supremacy, with the First Fruits,
and Tenths, maintained Seven Sacraments, with Obits, and Mass for the Quick and
Dead.

King Edward abolished the Mass, Authorized a Book of Common Prayer in English,
with Hallowing the Bread and Wine, etc. and Established only Two Sacraments.

Queen Mary restored all Things according to the Church of Rome; reduced all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Papal Obedience, with restitution of First
Fruits and Tenths; permitting nothing within her Realm, and Dominions,
repugnant to the Roman Catholic Church.

Queen Elizabeth, in Her First Parliament, expelled the Papal Supremacy,
resumed the First Fruits, and Tenths; Suppressed the Mass; and for the general
Uniformity of her Dominions, Established the Book of Common Prayer in the
English Tongue; forbidding all others.

Thus Stow, 'concerning these Prodigious Changes in Religion, made by Public
Authority. CHAP. III.
Of the order of the Establishment of this last Change of Religion by
Parliament; And of a Speech made in Parliament, in Opposition to the Queens
Supremacy.

Dr. Heylyn, page 107. NOw a Parliament draws on, Summoned chiefly in reference
to the Reformation, which was therein to be established. The Queens design, in
order to it could not be so closely carried, but that such Lords and Gentlemen,
as had the managing of Elections in their several Counties, retained such Men
for Members of the House of Commons, as they conceived most likely to comply
with their intentions for a Reformation: Amongst whom, none appeared more
active than the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Arundel, and Sir William Cecil.

In this Parliament there passed an Act, for Restoring to the Crown the Tenths,
and First Fruits. For the better drawing on of which Concession, it was
pretended, that the Patrimony of the Crown had been much dilapidated, and that
it could not be Supported with such Honor as it ought to be, if Restitution
were not made of such Rents, as were of late dismembered from it. Upon which
ground they also passed an Act for the Dissolution of all such Monasteries,
Convents, and Religious Orders, as had been Founded, and Established by the
Queen deceased.

When the Act of Parliament concerning the Supremacy came to be Debated, it
seemed to be a thing abhorrent, even in Nature and Policy, that a Woman should
be declared Supreme Head on Earth of the Church of England. But those of the
Reformed Party meant nothing else, than to contend about words, so they might
gain the Point they aimed at: Which was the stripping of the Pope of all
Authority within these Dominions; and fixing the Supreme Ecclesiastical Power
in the Crown Imperial: And this they did, not by the Name of Supreme Head
(which they perceived might be liable to some just Exceptions) but (which comes
all to one) of Supreme Governess.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. I will here insert a Speech made in this Parliament, against
this Supreme Ecclesiastical, or Spiritual Authority, granted to the Queen. The
Person that spoke it, was Nicholas Heath; who was First Bishop of Worcester,
and Lord President of Wales: Afterward Archbishop of York, and Ambassador into
Germany: And made Lord Chancellor of England, by Queen Mary, in the year of our
Lord 1555; and continued, until he did surrender it up, in Queen Elizabeth's
time, to Sir Nicholas Bacon.

The Person, from whom I had this Speech, is yet living; who told me, That he
found it in Manuscript, amongst Papers and Notes of his great Grandfather,
George Parry, who had been High Sheriff of Hereford-shire, in the Second year
of the said Queen.

A Speech Made in the Upper House of Parliament, against the Supremacy to be in
her Majesty; by Nicholas Heath, Lord Chancellor of England, in the first year
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, above 100 years since.
In the Original Copy it is styled, A Tale told in Parliament. For Oaths the
Land shall be clothed in Mourning.

My Lords,
WIth all humble Submission of my whole Discourse to your Wisdoms, I purpose to
speak to the Body of this Act, touching the Supremacy; that so, what this
Honorable Assembly is now a doing, concerning the passing of this Act, may
thereby be better weighed, and considered by your Wisdoms.

First, When by the Virtue of this Act of the Supremacy, we must forsake and
fly from the Sea of Rome, it would be considered, what matter lies therein;
and what matter of danger, or inconvenience; or else, whether there be none at
all.

Secondly, If the intent of this Act be to grant, or settle upon the Queens
Majesty a Supremacy; it would be considered of your Wisdoms, what this
Supremacy is, and whether it does consist in Spiritual Government, or Temporal?

If in Temporal; what further Authority can this House give Her, more than what
She already has by right of Inheritance? And not by our Gift, but by the
Appointment of God: Being our Sovereign Lord and Lady; our King, and Queen; our
Empress and Emperor: And if, further than this, we acknowledge Her to be Head
of the Church of England, we ough: also to grant, that the Emperor, or any
other Prince, being Catholic, and their Subjects Protestants, are to be Heads
of their Church. Whereby we shall do an Act, as disagreeable to Protestants, as
this seems to Catholics.

If you say, The Supremacy consists in Spiritual concernments.

Then, it would be considered, what the Spiritual Government is; and in what
points it does chiefly consist: Which being first agreed upon, it would be
further considered of your Wisdoms, whether this House may grant it to her
Highness or not? And whether her Highness be an apt Person to receive the same?

So by through Examination of these parts, your Honors shall proceed in this
matter groundedly, upon such sure knowledge, as not to be deceived by ignorance.

Now to the First Point, wherein I promised to examine, what matter of weight,
danger, or inconvenience might be incurred, by this our forsaking, and flying
from the Church of Rome, if there were no further matter therein, than the
withdrawing our Obedience from the Popes Person, (supposing, that he had
declared himself to be a very Austere and Severe Father to us) then the
business were not of so great importance; as indeed it is, as will immediately
here appear.

For, by relinquishing and forsaking the Church, or See of Rome, we must
forsake and fly from all General Councils.

Secondly, From all Canonical and Ecclesiastical Laws of the Church of Christ.

Thirdly, From the Judgment of all other Christian Princes.

Fourthly, and Lastly, We must forsake and fly from the Holy Unity of Christ's
Church; and so by leaping out of Peter's Ship, we hazard our selves to be
overwhelmed in the waves of Schism, of Sects, and Divisions.

First, Touching the General Councils, I shall name unto you these Four: The
Nicene Council, the Constantinopolitan Council, the Ephesine, and the
Chalcedon: All which are approved by all Men.

Of these same Councils, Saint Gregory writes in this wise; Sicut enim Sancti
Evangelii quatuor Libros, sic haec quatuor Concilia, Nicenum,
Constantinopolitanum, Ephesinum, and Chalcedonense, suscipere, ac venerari me
fareor: That is to say in English, I confess, I do receive, and reverence those
Four General Councils, of Nice, Constantinople, etc. even as I do the Four Holy
Evangelists.

At the Nicene Council, the first of the Four, the Bishops which were there
Assembled, did write there Epistles to Sylvester, then Bishop of Rome, That
their decrees then made, might be confirmed by his Authority.

At the Council kept at Constantinople, all the Bishops there, were obedient to
Damasus, then Bishop of Rome: He, as chief in the Council, gave Sentence
against the Heretics, Macedonius, Sabellius, and Eunomius: Which Eunomius was
both an Arrian, and the first Author of that Heresy, That only Faith does
justify. And here (by the way) it is much to be lamented, that we, the
Inhabitants of this Realm are much more inclined to raise up the Errors and
Sects of Ancient condemned Heretics, than to follow the True, Approved
Doctrine of the most Catholic and Learned Fathers of Christ his Church.

At the Ephesine Council Nestorius the Heretic was condemned by Celestine the
Bishop of Rome, he being chief Judge there.

At the Chalcedon Council, all the Bishops there Assembled, did write their
humble Submission unto Leo, then Bishop of Rome; wherein they did acknowledge
him there to be their Chief Head: Six Hundred and Thirty Bishops of them.

Therefore to deny the Sea Apostolic, and its Authority, were to contemn and
set at naught the Authority and Decrees of those noble Councils.

Secondly, We must forsake and fly from all Canonical and Ecclesiastical Laws
of Christ his Church; whereunto we have already professed our Obedience at the
Font, saying, Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Catholicam; that is, I believe the Holy
Catholic Church: Which Article contains, That we must receive the Doctrine,
and Sacraments of the same Church, obey her Laws, and live according to the
same: Which Laws do depend wholly upon the Authority of the Sea Apostolic. And
like as it is here openly professed by the Judges of the Realm, that the Laws
agreed upon in the Higher and Lower Houses of this Honorable Parliament, be of
small, or none effect, before the Royal Assent of the King, or Prince be given
thereunto: Even so Ecclesiastical Laws made cannot bind the Universal Church of
Christ, without the Royal Assent, and Confirmation of the Sea Apostolic.

Thirdly, We must forsake and fly from the Judgment of all other Christian
Princes, whether they be Protestant or Catholic Christians, when none of them
do agree with these our doings: King Henry the Eighth being the first that ever
took upon him the Title of Supremacy.

And whereas it was of late, here in this House, said, by a Nobleman, That the
Title of Supremacy is of right due to a King, for that he is a King; then it
would follow, That Herod being a King, should be Supreme Head of the Church at
Jerusalem: And Nero the Emperor, Supreme Head of the Church of Christ at Rome;
they being both Infidels, and therefore no members of Christ his Church.

And if our Savior Christ, at his departure from this World, should have left
the Spiritual Government of his Church in the hands of Emperors, and Kings, and
not to have committed the same to his Apostles, how negligently then should he
have left his Church!

It shall appear right well, by calling to mind, That the Emperor Constantinus
Magnus was the First Christian Emperor, and was Baptized by Sylvester, Bishop
of Rome, about Three hundred years after the Ascension of Christ Jesus.

If by your Proposition, Constantine, the first Christian Emperor was the First
Head, and Spiritual Governor of Christ his Church, throughout his Empire; then
it follows, That our Savior Christ, for the space of Three Hundred years,
unto the coming of this Constantine, left his Church (which he had so dearly
bought by effusion of his most precious Blood) without any Head at all.

But how untrue the saying of this Nobleman was, it shall further appear by
Example of Ozia, and also of King David. For King Ozia did take the Censor to
do Incense to the Altar of God. The Priest Azarias did resist him, and expelled
him out of the Temple, and said unto him. Non est Officii tui, Ozia, ut adoleas
Incensum Domino; sed est Sacerdotum, and Filiorum Aaron: Ad hujusmodi enim
Officium consecrati. That is to say, It is not thy Office, Ozia, to offer
Incense to the Altar of God. But it is the Priests Office, and the Sons of
Aaron; for they are Consecrated, and Anointed to that Office.

Now I shall most humbly demand this question; When the Priest Azarias said to
the King, Non est Officii tui; whether he said Truth, or not? If you answer,
that he spoke the Truth, then the King was not Supreme Head of the Church of
the Jews. If you shall say, No: Why did God plague the King with Leprosy and
not the Priest?

The Priest, Azarias, in resisting the King, and thrusting him out of the
Temple; in so doing, did the Priest play the faithful part of a Subject, or no?
If you answer No; why then did God spare the Priest, and not spare the King? If
you answer, Yea; then it is most manifest, Ozia, in that he was a King, could
not be Supreme Head of the Church.

And as touching the Example of King David, in bringing home the Ark of God
from the Country of the Philistians to the City of David, what Supremacy, or
Government of God's Ark, did King David there take upon him? Did he place
himself amongst the Priests? Or take upon him any Spiritual Function unto them
appertaining? Did he approach near unto the Ark? Or yet presume to touch the
same? No doubtless. For he had seen before, Ozia stricken to death by the hand
of God, for the like arrogance and presumption.

And therefore King David did go before the Ark of God with his Harp, making
Melody; and placed himself amongst the Minstrels, and humbly did abase himself,
(being a King) as to dance and leap before the Ark of God; like as his other
Subjects did: Insomuch, as his Queen Michol, King Readiness Daughter, beholding
and seeing this great Humility of King David, did disdain thereat. Whereunto
King David, making answer, said, Ludam, and vilior fiam plus quam factus sum,
etc. That is, I will dance, and abase my self, more than yet I have done; and
abjecting my self in mine own eyes, I shall appear more glorious with those
Handmaids, that you talk of. I will play here before my Lord; which has chosen
me, rather than thy Father's House. And whereas Queen Michol was therefore
plagued at God's hand, with perpetual Sterility and Barrenness, King David
received great praise for his Humility.

Now may it please your Honors, to consider which of both these Kings
Examples, shall be most convenient for your Wisdoms, to make the Queens Majesty
to follow; whether the Example of Proud Ozia; moving Her, by your persuasions
and Councils, to take upon her Spiritual Government; and thereby exposing her
Soul to be plagued at the hand of God, as King Ozia was: or else to follow the
Example of the good King David, which, in refusal of all Spiritual Government
about the Ark of God, did humble himself, as I have declared unto you.

Whereunto our Sovereign Lady, the Queens Highness, of Her own nature being
well inclined; we may assure our selves, to have of Her as Humble, as Virtuous,
and as Godly a Mistress to Reign over us, as ever had English People here in
this Realm; if that her Highness be not by your Flattery, and Dissimulation,
seduced and beguiled.

Fourthly, and Lastly, We must forsake, and fly from the Holy Unity of
Christ's-Church: Seeing that St. Cyprian, that Holy Martyr, and great Clerk,
does say, that the Unity of the Church of Christ does depend upon Peter's
Authority, and his Successors. Therefore by leaping out of Peter's Ship, we
must be overwhelmed with the Waves of Schisms, of Sects and Divisions: Because
the same Holy Martyr in his Third Epistle to Cornelius testifies, That all
Heresies, Sects, and Schisms, do spring only from hence, that Men will not be
obedient to the Head-Bishop of God.

And how true this saying of St. Cyprian is, we may see it most apparent to all
Men that list to see, both by the Example of the Germans, and by us, the
Inhabitants of this Realm of England.

And by this our forsaking, and flying from the Unity of the Church of Rome,
this inconveniency amongst many, must consequently follow: That either we must
grant the Church of Rome to be the True Church of God, or else a malignant
Church. If you Answer, that it is a True Church of God, where Jesus Christ is
truly taught, and his Sacraments rightly Administered; how can we disburthen our
selves of our forsaking, and flying from that Church, which we do confess, and
acknowledge to be of God? When with that Church, which is of God, we ought to
be One, and not to admit of any Separation.

If you Answer, the Church of Rome is not of God, but a Malignant Church; then
it will follow, that we the Inhabitants of this Realm have not as yet received
any Benefit of Christ; seeing we have received no Gospel, or other Doctrine,
nor no other Sacraments, but what was sent unto us from the Church of Rome.

First, in King Lucius his days, at whose humble Epistle the Holy Martyr
Elutherius, then Bishop of Rome, did send into this Realm two Holy Monks,
Fugatius, and Damianus; by whose Doctrine and Preaching, we were first brought
to the knowledge of the Faith of Jesus Chrrst of his Holy Gospel, and his most
Holy Sacraments.

Then Secu^y (...) St. Gregory, being Bishop of Rome, did sen^ (...) (...)
Realm two other Holy Monks, St. Austin, (...) the Apostle of England, and
Milletus, to receive the very self same Faith, that had been before planted
here in this Realm, in the days of King Lucius.

Thirdly, and Last of all, Paulus Tertius being Bishop of Rome, did send hither
the Lord Cardinal Pool his Grace, (by Birth a Nobleman of this Land) his
Legate, to restore us unto the same Faith which the Martyr, St. Eleutherius and
St. Gregory had Planted here many years before.

If therefore the Church of Rome be not of God, but a false and Malignant
Church, then have we been deceived all this while; seeing the Gospel, the
Doctrine, Faith, and Sacraments must be of the same nature, as that Church is,
from whence it, and they came; and therefore in relinquishing, and forsaking
that Church, the Inhabitants of this Realm shall be forced to seek further for
another Gospel of Christ, other Doctrine, other Faith and Sacraments than we
have hitherto received: Which will breed such a Schism, and Error in Faith, as
was never in any Christian Realm. And therefore of your Wisdoms worthy of
Consideration, and maturely to be pondered, and be provided for, before you
pass this Act of Supremacy. Thus much touching the First chief Point.

Now to the Second Deliberation, wherein I promised to move your Honors, to
consider, What this Supremacy is, which we go about, by virtue of this Act, to
give unto the Queen, and wherein it does consist; whether in Spiritual
Government, or Temporal. But if Spiritual, (as these words in the Act do
import, Supreme Head of the Church of England, immediately and next unto God;)
Then it would be considered, in what Points this Spiritual Government does
consist? and the Points being well known, it would be considered, Whether this
House has Authority to grant them, and her Highness Ability to receive them.

And as concerning the Points, wherein Spiritual Government does consist, I
have, in reading the Gospel, and the whole course of Divinity thereupon (as to
my Vocation belongs) observed these Four, as chief among many others: whereof
the first is, The Power to loose and bind Sins. When our Savior, in ordaining
Peter to be Chief, and Head-Governor of his Church, said unto him, Tibi dabo
Claves Regni Coelorum, etc. That is, To thee will I give the the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven, etc. Now it would be considered by your Wisdoms, whewhether
you have sufficient Authority to grant unto her Majesty this first Point of
Spiritual Government; and to say unto Her, Tibi dabimus, etc. To Thee will we
give the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. If you say Yea; then do we require the
sight of Warrant and Commission, by the Virtue of God's Word. And if you say
No: then you may be well assured, and persuade your selves, that you have not
sufficient Authority to make her Highness Supreme Head of the Church of Christ
here in this Realm.

The Second Point of Spiritual Government is gathered out of these words of our
Savior Christ, spoken to St. Peter in the 20th. Chapter of St. John's Gospel,
Pasce, -- and Pasce -- and Pasce, That is, Feed my Lambs, Feed my Lambs, Feed
my Sheep: Now, whether your Honors have Authority by this Court of Parliament,
to say unto our Sovereign Lady, Pasce, and Pasce, and Pasce, etc. That is to
say, Feed you the Flock of Christ, you must show your Warrant and Commission
for it. And further it is evident, that Her Majesty, being a Woman by Birth and
Nature, is not qualified by God's word, to feed the Flock of Christ, appears
most plainly by St. Paul, in this wise, Taceant Mulieres in Ecclesiis, sicut
and lex dicit. Ler Women be silent in the Church: for it is not Lawful for them
to speak, but to be in subjection, as the Law says. And it follows in the
same place. Turpe est enim, Mulieres loqui in Ecclesia, that is, for that it is
not seemly for a Woman to speak in the Church. And in his second Epistle to
Timothy, Dominari in virum, sed esse silentes; that is to say, I allow not that
a Woman be a Teacher, or to be above her Husband, but to keep her self in
silence. Therefore it appears likewise, as your Honors have not Authority to
give her Highness this second Point of Spiritual Government, to Feed the Flock
of Christ: So by St. Paul's Doctrine, her Highness may not intermeddle her self
with the same. And therefore She cannot be Supreme Head of the Church, here in
England.

The Third chief Point of Spiritual Government is gathered out of those words
of our Savior Christ, spoken to St. Peter in the 22th. Chapter of St. Lukes
Gospel, Ego rogavi pro Te, ut non deficiat fides Tua; and Tu aliquando
conversus, confirma fratres Tuos. That is, I Prayed for Thee, that thy Faith
shall not fail; and thou being converted, Confirm thy Brethren, and ratify
them in wholesome Doctrine, and Administration of the Sacraments; which are the
Holy Instruments of God, so Instituted and Ordained for our Sanctification;
that without them his Grace is not to be received. But to Preach, or to
administer the Sacraments, a Woman may not be admitted to do; neither may she
be Supreme of Christ's Church.

The Fourth and Last chief point of Spiritual Government, which I promised to
Note unto you, does consist in the Excommunication, and Spiritual Punishment of
all such, as shall approve themselves, not to be the Obedient Children of
Christ's Church.

Of which Authority our Savior Christ speaks in St. Matthew's Gospel, in the
18th. Chapter, saying, If your Brother offending will not hear your charitable
admonition, whether secretly at first, or yet before one, or two Witnesses,
then we must complain of him to the Church, and If he will not hear the Church,
let him be taken as an Heathen or Publican.

So the Apostle did Excommunicate the notorious Fornicator, that was among the
Corinthians; and by the Authority of his Apostleship: unto which Apostles,
Christ ascending into Heaven, did leave the whole Spiritual Government of his
Church, as it appears by those plain words of St. Paul, in his Epistle to the
Ephesians, Chap. 4th. saying, Ipse dedit Ecclesiae suae, etc. He has given to
his Church, some to be Apostles, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors,
for consummation of the Saints, to the work of the Ministry, for edifying of
the Body of Christ. But a Woman in the degrees of the Church, is not called to
be an Apostle, nor Evangelist; nor to be a Pastor (as much as to say, a
Shepherd) nor a Doctor, or a Preacher. Therefore she cannot be Supreme Head of
Christ's Militant Church; nor yet of any part thereof. For this High Government
God has appointed only to the Bishops, and Pastors of his People; as St. Paul
plainly witnesses in these words, in the 20th. Chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, saying, Attendite vobis, and universo gregi, etc. And thus much I
have here said, right Honorable, and my very good Lords, against this Act of
Supremacy, for the discharge of my poor Conscience, and for the Love, and Fear,
and Dread, that I chiefly owe unto God, to my Sovereign Lord and Lady the
Queens Majesty's Highness, and to your Honors All. Where otherwise, without
mature consideration of all these Premises, your Honors shall never be able to
show your faces before your enemies, in this matter; being so strange a
spectacle and example in Christ's Church, as in this Realm is only to be found,
and in no other Christian Realm.

Thus humbly beseeching your Honors, to take in good part, this my rude and
plain Speech, which here I have used, of much Zeal and fervent good will: And
now I shall not trouble your Honors any longer.

Thus as to this Speech.

But notwithstanding this Speech, or whatsoever else could be said against it,
the Act passed, and this Supremacy was granted to the Queen.

CHAP. IV.
A further Prosecution of the Settlement of this Change of Religion Established
by Parliament, and of the Opposition of the Catholic Clergy against this
strange Innovation.

Dr. Heylyn, page 108. NOw for the better exercising, and enjoying the
Jurisdiction thus acknowledged in the Crown, there was this Clause put into the
Act, That it should be Lawful for the Queen to give Power, to such as she
thought fit, to exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, and to
visit, reform, redress, order, correct and amend all kind of Errors, Heresies,
Schisms, etc. With this Proviso notwithstanding, that nothing should from
thenceforth be accounted Heresy but what was so adjudged in the Holy
Scripture, or in one of the four first General Councils, or in any other
National, or Provincial Council, determining according to the word of God; or
finally which should be so adjudged in the time to come, by the Court of
Parliament.

This was the first Foundation of the High Commission Court: And from hence
issued that Commission, by which the Queens ministers proceeded in that
visitation, in the first year of her Reign, for rectifying all such things as
they found amiss.

There also passed another Act, for recommending and imposing the Book of
Common Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, according to such Alterations,
and Corrections, as were made therein, by those that were appointed to review
it. In performance of which service, there was great care taken to expunge out
all such passages in it, as might give any Scandal or Offense to the Papists;
or be urged by them, in excuse for their not coming to Church.

In the Litany first made and published by King Henry the Eighth, and
afterward continued in the two Liturgies of King Edward the Sixth there was a
Prayer to be delivered from the Tyranny, and all the detestable enormities of
the Bishop of Rome: Which was thought fit to be left out, as giving matter of
Scandal and dissatisfaction to all that Party.

In the first Liturgy of King Edward the Sacrament of our Lord's Body was
delivered with this Benediction, that is to say, The Body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which was given for the Preservation of thy Body and Soul to Life
Everlasting. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Which being thought by
Calvin, and his Disciples, to give some countenance to the Carnal presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, (which passed by the name of Transubstantiation in the
Schools of Rome) was altered in this Form into the second Liturgy; that is to
say, Take and Eat this in remembrance that Christ died for thee, and feed on
him in thy Heart by Faith, with Thanksgiving. Take and drink this, etc.

But the Revisors of the Book, joined both Forms together, lest under color of
rejecting a carnal, they might be thought also to ceny a real presence, as was
de^ended in the Writings of the Ancient Fathers. Upon which ground they
expunged also a whole Rubric at the end of the Communion Service: by which it
was declared, That kneeling at the Communion was required for no other reason,
than for a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledg^ent of the
Benefits of Christ, given therein unto the worthy R^ceiver, and to avoid that
Profanation, and Disorder, which otherwise might have ensued: And not for
giving any Adoration to the Sacramental Bread and Wine, there bodily received;
or in regard of any Real or Essential Presence of Christ's Body and Blood.
(This Rubric is again lately inserted.)

And to come up closer to those of the Church of Rome, it was ordered by the
Queens Injunctions, That the Sacramental Bread (which the Book required only to
be made of the finest Flower) should be made round, in the fashion of the
Wafers, used in the time of Queen Mary.

She also Ordered, that the Lord's Table should be placed where the Altar
stood; and that the accustomed Reverence should be made at the Name of Jesus:
Music retained in the Church, and all the other Festivals observed, with their
several Eves.

By which compliances, and the expunging of the passages before mentioned, the
Book was made more plausible: And that it might pass the better in both Houses,
when it came to the Vote, it was thought requisite, That a Disputation should
be held about some Points, which were most likely to be keked at.

Two Speeches were made against this Book in the House of Peers, by Scot and
Feckenham; and one against the Queens Supremacy, by the Archbishop of This
Speech you have formerly had at large.
York: But they prevailed little in both Points by the Power of their Eloquence.

In the Convocation, which accompanied this present Parliament, there was
little done; because they despared of doing any good to Themselves or their
Cause.

The chief thing they did, was a Declaration of their Judgments in some certain
Points: which at that time were conceived fit to be commended to the sight of
the Parliament; that is to say,

First, That in the Sacrament of the Altar, by virtue of Christ's Assistance,
after the words of Consecration are duly pronounced by the Priest, the Natural
Body of Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary, is really present under the
species of Bread and Wine. As also his Natural Blood.

Secondly, That after the Consecration, there remains not the Substance of
Bread and Wine; nor any Substance, but the Substance of God and Man.

Thirdly that the true Body of Christ, and his Blood, is offered for a
Propitiatory Sacrifice for the Quick, and Dead.

Fourthly, That the Supreme Power of Feeding, and Governing the Militant Church
of Christ, and of Confirming their Brethren, is given to Peter the Apostle, and
to his lawful Successors in the Sea Apostolic, as unto the Vicars of Christ.

Fifthly, That the Authority to handle and define such things, as belong to
Faith, the Sacraments, and Ecclesiastical Discipline, has hitherto ever
belonged, and only ought to belong unto the Pastors of the Church, whom the
Holy Spirit has placed in the Church; and not unto Laymen.

These Articles they caused to be Engr^ssed; and so commended them to the Care
and Consideration of the Higher House; presented by Boner, to the hands o^ the
Lord Keeper Bacon: by whom they were candi^ly received.

But, they prevailed no further with the Queen, or House of Peers, when
imparted to them, than that (possibly) they might help forwards the
aforementioned Disputation.

It was on the Four and twentieth of June, that that the (...) Liturgy was to
be officiated in all the Churches of the Kingdom. In the performance o^ which
service, the Bishops giving no encouragement, and many of the Clergy being
backw^d in it, it was thought fit to put them to a Final T^st; and either to
bring them to Conformity, or to bestow their ^laces and (...), on m^re ^actable
P^sons.

The Bishops at that time, were reduced into a narrow^ (...), than at any other
time bef^, ^ere being no more than Fifteen of that (...) Order (...) alive.

These, being ^alled by certain of the Lords of the (...), were required to
take the Oath of (...). (...), of Landaff, only takes it: who having ^merly
submitted to every Change, resolved to show himself no Chang^ing, in not
conforming to the pleasures of the Higher Powers.

By all the rest it was refused.

Whereupon they were deprived of their Bishoprics. The Bishops being thus put
out, the Oath is tendered next to the Deans, and Chapters; and lastly, to the
rural Clergy. Thus ^r. Heylyn.

It is here to be noted, That during the forementioned Convocation, there came
from both the Universities, a Writing signed by a public Notary; by which they
both signified their concurrence to the aforesaid Articles, only with a little
alteration of the last.

But these Declarations, and Protestations of the whole Representative Clergy,
and Universities, were not like to signify much; since a Change of Religion
was absolutely resolved on.

CHAP. V.
Of an Ignorant and Illiterate Clergy, and a medley of Calvinists, introduced
to Govern this New Church; and of some other particulars, concerning the
Settlement of it.

Dr. Heylyn, page 115. BY the Deprivations of these Persons, and the death of
so many in the last years sickness, there was not to be found a sufficient
number of Learned men to supply the Cures: Which filled the Church with an
Ignorant, and Illiterate Clergy: Whose Learning went no further than the
Liturgy, or the Book of Homilies; but otherwise conformable (which was no small
felicity) to the rules of the Church. And on the otherside, many were raised to
great preferments, who having spent their time of (...) in such Foreign
Churches, as followed the Platform of Geneva, returned so disaffected to
Episcopal Government, and unto the Rites and Ceremonies, here by Law
established, as not long after filled the Church with most sad disorders; not
only to the breaking of the Bond of Peace, but likewise to the extinguishing
the Spirit of Unity. And not to speak of private Opinions, nothing was more
considered in them, than their zeal against Popery.

On which account, we find the Queens Professor at Oxford, to pass amongst the
Non-Conformists, though somewhat more moderate than the rest: And Cartwright
at Cambridge, to prove an unextinguished Firebrand to the Church of England:
Wittington, the chef Ringleader of the Frankfort-Schismaticks, preferred unto
the Deanery of Durham: From thence encouraging Knox and Goodman, in setting up
Presbytery, and Sedition in the Kirk of Scotland. Sampson advanced to the
Deanery of Christ's-Church; and within a few years after, turned out again for
an incorrigible Nonconformist. Hardiman, one of the first Twelve Prebends of
the Church of Westminster, deprived soon after for throwing down the Altar, and
defacing the Vestments of the Church.

The Pope, being informed of these proceedings, labors to Persuade the Queen
from going on with these Alterations in Religion. But that not succeeding, She
sent out, by the Advice of her Council, a certain Body of Injunctions; the same
in effect with those, which had been published in the First of King Edward; but
more accommodated to the temper of the present time.

Nothing more singular in them, than the severe course taken about Ministers
Marriages. But this was long since worn out of use, and not much observed when
it first came out: As if it had been published, only in way of Caution, to make
the Clergymen more wary in the choice of their Wives, rather than with any
purpose of pursuing it to an Execution.

Concerning the Position of the Holy Table, it was ordered thus by these
Injunctions, viz. That no Altar should be taken down but by oversight of the
Curate of the Church, or the Churchwardens, or one (...) (...) at least;
wherein no riotous or disordered manners were to be used. And that the Holy
Table, in every Church should be decently made, and set in the place where the
Altar stood, and there commonly covered, as thereto belonged, and as should be
appointed by the Visitors: And so to stand, saving when the Communion of the
Sacrament was to be Administered: At which time the same should be placed within
the Quire, or Chancel, as whereby the Minister might be more conveniently heard
of the Communicants, in his Prayer and Administration; and the Communicants
also more conveniently, and in more number, Communicate with the said Minister.
And after the Communion done, from time to time, the said Table to be placed
where it stood before.

By these Injunctions she made way for her visitation, regulated by the Book of
Articles. By which Articles, all Images were removed out of the Church, and all
the Roods, and other Images, which had been taken out of the Churches, were
burnt in St Paul's Churchyard, Cheapside, and other places of the City. And in
some places, the Copes, Vestments, Altarcloths, Books, Sepulchers and
Rood-lofts were burnt altogether.

Thus far Dr. Heylyn, concerning the first progress of this Change of Religion
established by Parliament. A short Note concl^g the Occurrences of this year.
I Will end the Occurrences of this year, with the Relation of a new and
strange Obsequy, performed for Henry the 2d. King of France.

Howes upon Stow, page 639. A solemn Obsequy was kept in Paul's Church at
London, for Henry the Second, King of France.

This Obsequy was kept very solemnly, with a rich Hearse; but without any
Lights: The Bishops of Canterbury, Chester, and Hereford, executing the Dirge
of the Even song in English; they siting in the Bishop of London's Seat, in the
upper Quire, in Surplices, with Doctors Hoods about their shoulders.

The next day, after the Sermon, Six of the Lords, Mourners, received the
Communion with the Bishops: Who were in Copes upon their Surplices, only at the
ministration of the Communion.

Howes in the same Page.

The Second of October, in the Afternoon, and the next day in the Forenoon, a
solemn Obsequy was held in St. Paul's Church in London, for Ferdinand the late
Emperor departed.

Thus Howes. CHAP. VI.
Of the great Havoc this Queen made of Bishoprics, although She retained
Episcopal Government.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 2.
Dr. Heylyn, page 120. IN the Second year of Her Reign, some days after the
Deprivation of the former Bishops, She Elected other Bishops, to satisfy the
world that She intended to preserve Episcopal Government.

But why this was deferred so long, may be a question. Some think it was, That
She might satisfy her self, by putting the Church into a posture by her
Visitation, before she passed it over to the care of the Bishops. Others
conceive, That she was so enamoured with the Power and Title of Supreme
Governess, that she could not deny Her self the contentment in the exercise of
it, which the present Interval afforded. And it is possible enough, that both
or either of these Considerations might have some influence upon Her. But the
main cause for keeping the Episcopal Sees in so long a vacancy, must be found
elsewhere.

An Act had passed in the late Parliament (Anno Reg. Eliz. 1.) which never had
the confidence to appear in Print: In the Preamble whereof it was declared,
That by the Dissolution of Religious Houses, many Impropriations, Tithes, and
portions of Tithes, had been invested in the Crown, which the Queen could not
well dismember from it, in regard of the present low condition, in which she
found the Crown at her coming to it: And thereupon it was Enacted, that in the
vacancy of any Archbishopric, or Bishopric, it should be lawful for the Queen
to issue out a Commission under the great Seal, for taking a Survey of all
Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, and all other Hereditaments, to the (...)
Episcopal Sees belonging; and upon the return of such Survey, to take into Her
hands any of the said Castles, Manors, Lands, Tenements, etc. as to Her seemed
good, giving to the said Archbishops, and Bishops, as much Annual Rents, to be
raised upon Impropriations, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, as the said
Castles, Manors, Lands, etc. did amount unto: The Church Lands certified
according to the ancient Rents, without consideration of the Casualties, or
other Perquisites of the Court, which belonged to them: The retribution made in
Pensions, Tithes, and portions of Tithes, extended to the utmost value, from
which no other profit was to be expected, than the Rent it self: Which Act
being not to take effect till the end of the Parliament, the Interval (between
the end of that Parliament, the deprivation of the old Bishops, and the
Consecration of the new) was to be taken up in the execution of such Surveys,
and making such Advantages of them, as most redounded to the profit of the
Queen, and her Courtiers. Upon which ground, as all the Bishops Sees were so
long kept vacant, before any one of them was filled; so in the following times,
they were kept void, one after another, as occasion served, till the best
Flowers in the Garden of the Church, had been culled out of it.

There was another Clause in the said Statutes, by which the Patrimony of the
Church was as much Dilapidated, even after the restoring of the Bishops, as it
was in the times of vacancy. For by that Clause, all Bishops were restrained
from making any Grants of their Farms and Manors for more than One and Twenty
years, or Three Lives at the most, except it were to the Queen, her Heirs, and
Successors: And under that pretense, they might be granted to any of Her hungry
Courtiers in Fee-farm, or for a Lease of Fourscore and Nineteen years, as it
pleased the parties. By which means Crediton was dismembered from the Sea of
Excester; and the goodly Manor of Sherbourn from that of Salisbury. Many fair
Manors were likewise Alienated for ever, from the rich Sees of Winchester,
Ely, and indeed what not? Moreover, when the rest of the Episcopal Sees were
supplied with new Bishops; yet York and Winchester were not so soon provided,
That they might afford on Michaelmas-Rent more to the Queens Exchequer, before
the Lord Tresurer could give way to a new Incumbent.

But notwithstanding this great Havoc that was made of the Bishoprics, yet
Episcopacy was now settled, with the retaining of many Rites and Ceremonies
belonging to Catholic Religion: Whereof one was, that she had caused a Massy
Crucifix of Silver to be placed upon the midst of the Altar, in her Chapel.
But this so displeased Sir Francis Knolls, the Queens near Kinsman, by the
Caries, (a great Zelot for the Reformation) that he caused it to be broken in
pieces.

There was at this time a Sermon preached in defense of the Real presence: For
which the Queen openly gave the Preacher Thanks for his Pains and Piety.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. But it is here to be noted, T^t in the beginning of Her
Reign, out of scruple of Conscience, she did forbid the Elevation of the
Sacrament: So that although Christ were acknowledged to be really present, yet
he was not to be Adored. I could not omit to take notice of this contradiction.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Disturbance the Presbyterians gave to the Settling of this New Church;
and of a Rebellion in Scotland, and the Death of the Queen of Scots.

Dr. Heylyn, page 124. THe Queen having thus regulated, and settled
Ecclesiastical Affairs; the same settlement might have longer continued, had
not Her Order been confounded, and her Peace disturbed by some factious
Spirits; who having had their wills at Frankfort, or otherwise Ruling the
Presbytery, when they were at Geneva, thought to have carried all before them,
with the like facility, when they were in England.

But leaving them, and their designs, to some other time, we must next look
upon the Aid, which the Queen sent to those of the Reformed Religion in
Scotland, (but carried under the pretense of dislodging such French Forces as
were Garrisoned there.) Such of the Scots as desired a Reformation of Religion,
taking advantage by the Queens absence, the easiness of the Earl of Arran, and
want of Power in the Queen Regent to suppress their practices, had put
themselves into a Body; headed by some of the Nobility, they take unto
themselves the Name of the Congregation, managing their own Affairs apart from
the rest of the Kingdom. The principal Leaders of the Party, well followed by
the Common People, put themselves into Perth, and there begin to stand upon
higher terms than before they did. The news whereof occasioneth Knox to leave
his Sanctuary in Geneva, and join himself unto the Lords of the Congregation.

At Perth he goes into the Pulpit, and falls so bitterly on Images, that the
People (in a popular fury) deface all the Images in that Church, and presently
demolish all the Religious Houses within that City. Those of Couper (hearing of
it) forthwith destroy all the Images, and pull down the Altars in that Church
also. Preaching at Craile, he enveighed sharply against the Queen-Regent, and
vehemently stirred up the people to join together for the expulsion of the
French: Which drew after it the like destruction of all Altars, and Images, as
was made before at Perth, and Couper.

The like followed on his Preaching at St. Andrews also; the Religious Houses
being pulled down, as well as the Images, and laid so flat, that there was
nothing left in the form of a building. Inflamed by the same Firebrand, they
burned down the Rich Monastery of Schone, and ruined that of Cambus-braneth,
demolished all the Altars, Images, and Convents of Religious persons in
Sterling, Lithgow, Glascough, Edinburgh, making themselves masters of the last,
and putting up their own Preachers into all the Pulpits of the City, not
suffering the Queen Regent to have the use of One Church only for her Devotions.

Nor staid they here, but being carried on by the same ill Spirit, they pass an
Act amongst themselves, for Depriving the Queen-Regent of all place and Power
in the Public Government: Concerning which the Oracle being first consulted,
returned this answer, sufficiently ambiguous, as all Oracles are, that is to
say, That the iniquity of the Queen Regent ought not to with draw their hearts
from the Obedience due to their Sovereigns: Nor did he wish any such sentence
to be pronounced against her; but when she should change her course, and submit
her self to good counsel, there should place be left unto her, of regress to
the same Honors, from which, for good causes, she ought to be deprived.

This Act is intimated to the Queen-Regent; who ordered her business so well,
that they were quickly brought to great extremity; and had been soon
suppressed, but for the Succors they received from England.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. This Rebellion is thus delivered by Sir Rich. Baker. Page 475.

IT happened, that there was a Reformation begun in Scotland: But was indeed an
Encroachment upon the Princes Authority. For at the Preaching of Knox, and
other headstrong Ministers, not only great Outrages were committed in
Churches, but it was likewise put into the heads of the Nobility, That it
pertained to them, of their own Authority, to take away Idolatry; and by force
to reduce the Prince to to the prescript of the Laws.

Whereupon there was presently a banding of the Lords of Scotland, against the
Queen-Dowager, Regent of the Country; and England fomenting, and supporting the
Rebellion, the Queen was at last worsted, and forced to fly into England:
Where, contrary to promise of being friendly received by Queen Elizabeth, she
was kept Eighteen years in prison, and afterward beheaded.

The Order of whose Death, and Execution, was as follows.

The sentence of Condemnation being pronounced against her, some Earls were
sent to Fotheringham, where She was kept prisoner. These, together with Sir
Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury, with whom she was then in custody, go to the
Queen, and reading their Commission, signify the cause of their coming, and in
a few words admonish her to prepare her self for death: For that she must die
the next day: whereunto, without any change of her countenance, or passion of
mind, she made answer, I had not thought that my Sister the Queen, would have
consented to my death; who am not subject to your Laws. But since it is her
pleasure, death shall be to me most welcome.

Then she requests, that she might confer with her Confessor, and Melvyn her
Steward: But the first would not be granted her. The Bishop, or Dean of
Peterborough they offered her; but them she refused.

The Earls being departed from her, she gave order that Supper should be
hastened; where she eat, (as she used to do), soberly and sparingly: And
perceiving her men and women-Servants, to lament and weep, she comforted them,
and bid them rejoice rather, that she was now to depart out of a world of
misery.

After Supper, she looks over her Will, reads the Inventory of her Goods, and
Jewels; and writ their Names severally, to whom she gave any of them.

At her wonted hour she went to bed; and after a few hours sleep, awaking,
spent the rest of the night in her devotion. And now the Fatal day being come,
she gets up, and makes her ready in her best Apparel; and then betook her self
to her closet, to Almighty God, imploring his assistance with deep sighs, and
groans: Until Thomas Andrews, Sheriff of the County, gave notice, (...) it
(...) (...) to come forth. And then with a (...) Majesty, and cheerful
countenance, (...) came out, her head covered with a (...) (...), and carrying
an Ivory-Crucifix in (...) hand.

In the Gallery the Earls met her, and the other Gentlemen: Where Melvyn, her
Servant upon his knees, deplored his own Fortune, that he should be the
Messenger to carry this sad news into Scotland: Whom she comforted, saying, Do
not lament, Melvyn, you shall, by and by, see Mary Stuart, freed from all her
cares.

Then turning her self to the Earls, she requested, that her Servants might
stand by at her death: Which the Earl of Kent was very loath to grant, for fear
of Superstition: To whom she said, Fear nothing: These desire only to give me
my last farewell: And I know, the Queen, my Sister, would not refuse me so small
a request.

After this, the two Earls leading the way, with the Sheriff of the County, she
came to the Scaffold; which was set up at the upper end of the Hall, where was
a Chair, a Cushion, and a Block, all covered with Mourning.

Then she, falling upon her knees, and holding up the Crucisix in both her
hands, prayed with her Servants out of the Office of our Lady.

Prayers being ended, she kissed the Crucisix: and signing her self with the
sign of the Cross, she said, As thy Arms, O Christ, were stretched forth upon
the Cross; so embrace me with the open Arms of thy Mercy. And then the
Executioner asking her pardon, she forgave him. And now, her Women helping off
her outward Garments, and breaking forth into shreeks, and cries, she kissed
them, signed them with the Cross, and willed them to leave lamenting; for now
an end of her Sorrows was at hand. And then shadowing her face with a linen
cloth, and lying down on the Block, she repeated the Psalm, In Te, Domine,
Speravi: non confundar in aeternum. At which words, she stretching forth her
body, her head, a^ two blows, was taken off.

This end had Mary, Queen of Scots, in the Forty Sixth year of her Age; and of
her Imprisonment, in England, the Eighteenth. A Lady so complete in all
excellent parts of Body and mind, that it must needs have made her a happy
Woman, if she had not been a Queen; and (perhaps) a happy Queen too, if she had
not been Heir to the Crown of England.

Thus Baker. I will insert here one Passage more concerning this Queen; which
has been omited in order of this story.

Dr. Heylyn, page 160. Certain of the Queens Servants, being assembled for
their Devotions, in the Chapel Royal of the Palace of Holy-rood House, in
Edinburgh, the doors were broken open, some of the company haled to the next
Prison, and the rest dispersed: The Priest escaping with much difficulty by a
private passage.

The Queen was then absent in the North; but questioned Knox at her return, as
the cause of the uproar. By which Expostulation she got nothing from that fiery
Spirit, but neglect, and scorn.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, 'concerning this 'barbarous action. CHAP. VIII.
A short Relation concerning the Affairs of Ireland, as to Religion; And how
the Hugonots in France betrayed the English,

Dr. Heylyn, page 128. WE shall find the Queen there as active in advancing the
Reformation, as she had been in either of the other Kingdoms. King Henry had
first broke the Ice, by taking to himself the Title of Supreme Head on Earth,
of the Church of Ireland; exterminating the Popes Authority, and suppressing
all the Monasteries, and Religious Houses.

In matters of Doctrine, and Forms of Worship, as there was nothing done by
him, so neither much endeavored in the time of King Edward the Sixth: It being
thought (perhaps) unsafe, to provoke that people, in the King's Minority,
considering with how many troubles he was else here exercised. If any thing
were done there^n, it was rather done by toleration, than command. But Queen
Elizabeth, having settled her Affairs in England, and undertaken the protection
of the Scots, conceived her self obliged in point of Piety to promote the
Reformation in that Kingdom likewise. A Parliament is therefore held; where
passed an Act, restoring to the Crown the Jurisdiction over all Ecclesiastical
persons. By which Statute were established both the Oath of Supremacy and the
High Commission, as before in England.

There also passed an Act for the Unifor^ity of Common Prayer, with permission
of saying the same in Latin, where the Minister had not the knowledge of the
English Tongue. But for translating it into Irish, (as it was afterward done
into Welsh) there was no care taken. The people are required by that Statute,
under several penalties, to frequent their Churches, and to be frequent at the
reading of the English Liturgy, which they understand no more, than they do the
Mass. By which means the Irish were not only kept in continual ignorance, as to
the Doctrines and Devotions of the Church of England; but we have likewise
furnished the Papist with an excellent Argument against our selves, for having
the Divine Service celebrated in such a language as the people do not
understand.

There also passed another Statute for restoring to the Crown the first Fruits,
and Twenty parts of all Ecclesiastical promotions; as also of all Impropriated
Parsonages; of which there are more in number, than those Rectories, which have
Cure of Souls. The like Act passed for the Restitution of all Lands belonging
to the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, with the Annulling of all Leases, and
other Grants, made by the late Lord Prior of the same.

The Bishops of Ireland, finding how things went in England, and knowing, that
the like Alteration would ensue amongst themselves, resolved to make such use
of the present times, as to enrich their Friends and Kindred, by the the spoil
of their Churches. To which end they so dissipated the Revenues of their
several Bishoprics, by long Leases, Fee-farms, and plain Alienations, that to
some of their Sees, they left no more than a Rent of Five Marks Per Annum: To
others, a bare yearly Rent of Forty shillings, to the high displeasure of God,
the reproach of Religion, and the perpetual ignominy of themselves, for that
horrible Sacrilege.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning Ireland. How the English were betrayed by the
Hugonots.
Dr. Heylyn, page 161. A Peace being concluded betwixt the King and the
Hugonots, they betrayed the English, whom they had brought into the Country;
and joined their Forces with the rest, to drive them out of Newhaven, a Town
besieged; where the Pestilence had gotten amongst them, and raged so terribly,
that the Living were scarce able to bury the Dead. And to complete the misery
of the Besieged, the Prince of Conde, and Duke of Monpensier, (who had been the
Heads of the Hugonot party) showed themselves openly amongst the rest, in the
Camp of the Enemies; whereupon they were necessitated to yield.

This might be looked upon, as an Argument of God's displeasure on this Nation,
for giving Aid unto the Rebels of a Christian Prince, masked with the vizard of
Religion. And for a further punishment of this Action, the Plague, brought out
of France by the Garrison Soldiers of Newhaven, had so dispersed it ^elf, and
made such a desolation, in many parts of the Realm, that it swept away above
Twenty Thousand in the City of London.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. And thus far, as to these particul Relations of other
Countries.

We will now prosecute our story of England.

CHAP. IX.
A Word concerning the then Pope's Letter to the Queen; with a long Relation
concerning the Presbyterians.

Dr. Heylyn, page 131. WE find the new Bishops in England very high, and
resolute, in opposing the Church of Rome. Whereof the then Pope, being
informed, directs unto the Queen an affectionate Letter, calling Her his
Dearest Daughter; and declaring unto Her, how sollicitous he was for her
Salvation, and the prosperity of her People; which he told Her, was not to be
found by wandering out of the Communion of the Catholic Church: Unto which he
again invites Her, with much Christian meekness. But the Queen had set up her
Resolution, to go forward with the Change. Wherefore all was lost labor.

But all this while, there was no care taken to suppress the practices of the
Calvinists, who secretly endeavored to subvert the English Liturgy. For whilst
the Prelates of the Church of England bent all their forces toward the
confuting of the Papists, another Enemy appeared; which seemed not openly to
aim at the Churches Doctrine, but quarrelled rather at some Rites, and
Extrinsecals of it. Their purpose was to take in the Outworks of Religion
first, before they levelled their Artillery at the Fort it self.

The Schismatics of Frankfort had no sooner heard of Queen Mary's Death, but
they make what have they could for England, in hope of fishing better for
themselves, in a troubled water, than a quiet: Followed not long after by the
Brethren of the Separation; which retired from thence to Geneva; who, having
left some few behind, to complete their Notes upon the Bible, and to make up so
many of the Psalms in English Meeter, as had been left unfinished by Hopkins,
hastened as fast homewards as the others. But notwithstanding all their have,
they came not time enough to effect their purposes, either in reference to the
Liturgy, or Episcopal Government; in which the Queen was so resolved, that they
were not able to prevail in either project.

It grieved them at the Heart, that their own Prayers might not be made the
rule of Worship in their Congregations, and that they might not Lord it here in
their several Parishes, as Calvin did at Geneva,

Some friends they had about the Queen, and Calvin was resolved to make use of
all his power, and credit, both with Her and Cecil, (as appears by his Letters
unto both) to advance their ends: and he was seconded therein by Peter Martyr;
who thought his Interest in England to be greater then Calvin's; though his
name was not so eminent in other places. But the Quen had fixed her self, on
her resolution, of keeping up some outward Splendour of a Church. When therefore
they saw the Liturgy imposed by Act of Parliament, and Episcopal Sees supplied
with Bishops, nothing seemed more convenient to them, than to revive the
quarrels raised in King Edward's time, against Caps and Surplices, and such
particulars, as had been then questioned in the public Liturgy.

And herein they were seconded (as before in King Edward's time) by the same
Peter Martyr, as appears by his Letters to a Nameless friend. To which he added
(in another of his Letters to the same friend also) his dislike of the same,
and other Points proposed unto him: as touching the Cap, the Episcopal Habit,
the Patrimony of the Church, the manner of proceeding to be held against
Papists, the Perambulation used in Rogation-week; with many other such Points,
in which his judgment was desired.

But these Helps being too far off, and not to be consulted upon all occasions,
without a greater loss of time, than would consist with the impatience of their
desires, they fell upon another project, more to their purpose, than the
decrying of the Liturgy, or the quarrels about the Cap, and Vestments.

Grindal, the new Bishop of London, was known to have a great respect for
Calvin: The business therefore was so ordered, that by Calvin's Letters to
Grindal, and the friends they had about the Queen, way was given to such of the
French Nation, as had repaired hither, to enjoy the Freedom of their own
Religion, and to have a Church unto themselves. They could not but remember
those many advantages, which John a Lasco, and his Church of Strangers,
afforded to the Zuinglian Gospellers, in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth:
and they despaired not of the like, or greater, if a French Church were settled
upon Calvin's Principles, in some part of London. Now a Church being granted
them, we must not wonder, if we find dangerous consequences to ensue upon it.
For what else is the setting up of a Presbytery, in a Church Founded and
Established by the Rules of Episcopacy, than the Erecting of a Commonwealth in
the midst of a Monarchy? Which Calvin well knew, and thereupon gave Grindal
thanks for his favor in it: Of whom they afterward served themselves upon all
occasions. Upon the news of which success, diverse, both French and Dutch,
repaired into England, planting themselves in the Sea-towns, and openly
professing the Reformed Religion; under which covert they disguised their
several Heterodoxies, and Blasphemous Dotages; some of them proving to be
Anabaptists; others infected with unsound Opinions, of as ill a nature; but all
endeavoring to disperse their Heretical Doctrines, and to empoyson the People,
amongst whom they lived, to increase their Sects.

And although a Proclamation was set out for their Banishment, yet many of them
lurked in England, without fear of discovery; especially after the Erecting of
so many French and Dutch Churches, in the Maritime parts; which they infected
with some of their phrenzies, as at this time they had London; and occasioned
such Disputes amongst them upon that account, that Peter Martyr was
necessitated to enterpose himself, for the composing those Heats and
Differences, which had grown amongst them.

There was likewise, at the same time, another Proclamation published, to
hinder and stop a certain Abuse, which was this, The Queen, having given
Command, by her Injunctions, in the year foregoing, for destroying, and taking
away all Shrines, and Coverings of Shrines, all Tables, Candlesticks, Trindals,
and Rolls of Wax; together, with all Pictures, Paintings, etc. so that there
was to remain no memory of the same, either in the Walls, Glasswindows, or
elsewhere, whether it were in Churches, or private Houses; it is said, that
they proceeded, in the Execution of this, even to the breaking down all Coats
of Arms, to the tearing off of all the Brass of the Tombs and Monuments of the
Dead. And being given to understand, that Bells were blessed in time of Popery,
and that even the Churches themselves had been abused to Superstition and
Idolatry, their Zeal transported them to sell the Bells, to turn the Steeples
into Dove-coats, and to rob the Churches of those sheets of Lead, with which
they were covered.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning these confusions. There remains nothing more of
this year, but this short Note, concerning Westminster.

Dr. Heylyn, page 136. In the space of Twenty years, it had been changed from
an Abbey, to a Deanery; from a Deanery, to a See Episcopal; and from that,
reduced again to a Deanery; and likewise once more to the state of an Abbey; and
lastly, by Queen Elizabeth, (having first pleased her self in the choice of
some of the best Lands belonging to it, and confirmed the rest upon the Church)
it was to be called, The Collegiate Church of St. Peter's in Westminster.

Thus Heylyn. I will add here one short Note more (although it belongs not to
this year) concerning the Bishopric of Oxford.

Dr. Heylyn, page 156. This Bishopric was only supplied with a Bishop for
Three years, in the space of Forty six years: The Jurisdiction of it was
managed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Revenues of it remained in the
hands of the Earl of Leicester; and after his decease, of the Earl of Essex; by
whom the Lands thereof were so spoiled, and wasted, that they left nothing to
the last Bishops, but Impropriations. By means of which havoc and destruction,
all the Five Bishoprics Erected by King Henry the Eighth, were so
impoverished, and destroyed, that the new Bishops were constrained to require a
Benevolence of the Clergy, at their first coming to them.

Thus Dr. Heylyn concerning this Bishopric, and the other Four founded out of
Abbey-Lands. CHAP. X.
Some particular Passages concerning Bishoprics; with other short Passages
concerning other things.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 3.
Dr. Heylyn, page 140. IN the beginning of this year were filled up all such
Episcopal Sees, as were vacant. There was one Scambler, made Bishop of
Peterborough. But during the vacancy thereof, Sir William Cecill possessed
himself of the Manors in Soak, which belonged unto it.

And for Scambler's readiness to confirm the same Manors to him, he preferred
him to the Sea of Norwich.

Dr Thomas Young, Bishop of St. David's, was translated to the Sea of York;
which was done in an unlucky hour to that City. For scarce was he settled in
that See, when he pulled down the Goodly Hall, and the greatest part of the
Episcopal Palace in the City of York; which had been built with so much care
and cost by one of his Predecessors, in the year 1090: Whether it were for
Covetousness to make Money of the Materials of it, or out of sordidness, to
avoid the charge of Hospitality, let them guess that will.

But neither the filling up of those vacant Sees, nor the Queens Proclamation
for the Banishing of Sectaries, could free the Land from those dangerous
Inmates, or preserve the Church from the Contagion of their poisonous Doctrines.

A short Note concerning St. Paul's Church
Dr. Heylyn, in the same page. The Zuinglian Gospellers, or those of the
Genevian party, rejoiced much at a most lamentable accident, which happened to
the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, on the Fourth of June, on which day a fearful
Fire first showed it self, near the top of the Steeple, and from thence burnt
down the Spire to the Stone-work, and Bells; and raged so terribly, that within
the space of Four hours, the Timber and Lead of the whole Church, and
whatsoever else was combustible in it, were burnt and consumed. Now when Men
began to cast about, to find out, what might be the occasion of this
misfortune, The generality of the Zuinglian, or Genevian party, affirmed it to
be a just Judgment of God upon an old Idolatrous Fabric, not thoroughly
Reformed, and purged from its Superstitions; and would have been content, that
all other Cathedrals in the Kingdom had been so destroyed.

The Emperors Zeal.
Dr. Heylyn, page 142. The Emperor Ferdinand, being informed of these
Confusions of Religion in England, persuaded the Queen, by his Letters, to
return to the old Religion, and not relinquish the Communion of so many
Catholic Kings, and Princes, and Her own Ancestors also, nor to prefer Her
singular judgment, and the judgment of a few private Persons, and those not of
the most Learned neither, before the Judgment and Determination of the Church
of Christ. And that, if She were resolved to persist in her own Opinion, at
least, that She would deal favorably with so many Reverend and Religious
Prelates, as She kept in Prison, and that merely for adhering unto that
Religion which himself professed. And finally, he entreas her most earnestly,
That she would set apart some Churches to the use of the Catholics, where they
might freely exercise their Religion.

A Nuncio sent to the Queen.
Dr. Heylyn, in the same page. Pope Pius, also sent his Nuncio to the Queen,
with whom he conceived himself to stand upon terms of Amity. It had been much
labored by the Guises, and Spanish-faction, to divert him from it, by telling
him, That it would be an undervaluing of his Power, and Person, to send a
Nuncio into England, or to any other Princes of the same Persuasions, who
openly professed a Separation from the Church of Rome. To which he made this
prudent and pious answer, That he would humble himself, even to Heresy it
self: in regard whatsoever was done to gain Souls to Christ, did beseem that
See.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. XI.
Of the Contest between the Church of England, and the Presbyterians; and how
they sought to undermine the said Church.

Dr. Heylyn, page 144. THe Genevians slept not all this while, but were busily
employed in practicing against the Church of England: nothing being able to
satisfy them, but the nakedness and simplicity of the Zuinglian Churches, the
new fashions taken up at Frankfort, and the Presbyteries of Geneva.

And they drove on so fast upon it, that in some places they had taken down the
steps where the Altar stood, and brought the Table into the midst of the
Church. In others, they laid aside the Ancient use of Godfathers and
Godmothers, in the Administration of Baptism, and left the answering for the
Child to the charge of the Father: the Weekly Fasts, the time of Lent, and all
other Days of Abstinence, were looked upon as Superstitious observations.

No Fast by them allowed of, but occasionally only; and them too of their own
appointing. And the like course they took also with Festival Days; neglecting
those which had been instituted, as Human Inventions, not fit to be retained in
a Reformed Church.

And finally, that they might bring in their Outlandish Doctrines, with such
Foreign usages, they had procured some of the inferior Ordinaries, to impose
upon their several Parishes certain new Books of Sermons, and Expositions of
the Holy Scripture.

To stop these proceedings, the Archbishop with Advice of some of the Bishops,
set forth a Book of Orders. But notwithstanding these Orders, the Calvinists
drive on their designs; as appears by this following Relation of Dr. Heylyn,
page 154.

The Genevians had already begun to blow the Coals, and brought Fuel to them:
But it was only for the Burning of Caps and Rochets. The Common Prayer Book was
so fortified by Act of Parliament, that there was no assaulting of it. And as
to Episcopal Government, it was so interwoven, and incorporated with the Laws
of the Land, so twisted in with the Prerogative of the Crown, and the Royal
Interest, that they must first be in a capacity of trampling on the Laws, and
the Crown together, before they could attempt the destruction of it. But Caps
and Tippets, Rochets and Lawnsleeves, and Canonical Coats, seemed to be built
upon no better Foundation, than Superstitious custom, some old Popish Canon,
or, at the best, some Temporary Injunction of the Queens devising, which could
not have the Power, and effect of Law. This Game they had in chase, in King
Edwards time; which now they are resolved to follow to the very last.

The obstinacy of these Men, in matter of Ceremony, prompted the Bishops to
make trial of their Orthodoxy in Points of Doctrine. Whereupon the Articles of
Religion lately agreed upon, were required to be subscribed to in all places,
with threatening no less than Deprivation to such as wilfully refused. Many
there were, that boggled at it, (as they all did); but yet not so perversely,
nor in such great numbers, as when their faction was grown strong, and improved
to multitudes.

Some stumbled at it, in regard of the first clause, added to the Twentieth
Article, about the Authority of the Church. Others in reference to the Thirty
Sixth, touching the Consecration of Archbishops and Bishops. Some thought they
Attributed more Authority to the Supreme Magistrate, over all Persons and
Causes, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, than could consist with that
Independency which Calvin arrogated unto his Presbyters, and other Churches of
the Platform. And others looked upon the Homilies, as beggarly Rudiments,
scarce Milk for Babes: But by no means to be looked upon as Meat for a stronger
stomach. In general, thought by the Genevians and Zuinglian Gospellers, to have
too much in them of the Pope, or too little of Calvin; and therefore no way to
be subscribed unto.

Of which number, none so much remarkable, as Father John Fox, the
Martyrologist, who had before appeared in the Schism at Frankfort, and left
that Church, when Cox had got the better in it, to retire to Geneva: Who being
now called upon to subscribe, (that the opinion, which was had of his parts,
and Piety, might advance the work,) he is said to have appeared before the
Bishop, carrying the New Testament in Greek with him; before whom he spoke
these words. To this Book I will subscribe; and if this will not serve, take my
Prebend'ry at Salisbury, the only Preferment which I hold in the Church of
England; and much good may it do you.

But notwithstanding this refractory Answer, so much kindness was showed to
him, that he both kept his resolution, and place together.

The Genevians, for the greater countenanceing of their inconformity, had
stirred up the most eminent Divines of the French and Zuinglian, or Helvetian
Churches, to declare in favor of their doings. And it appears also by
remembrances in some Authors, that Calvin, apprehending some neglect from Mr.
Secretary Cecill, in making either no return, or a return, which signified
nothing, to his first Addresses, had laid aside his care of the Church of
England. But Peter Martyr, whilst he lived, conceived himself to have some
Interest in this Church, in which he had enjoyed such a good preferment; but
more in some particular Persons and Members of it, who seemed to depend upon
his judgment, and to ask counsel of him, as their surest Oracle, in which, how
much he countenanced the Faction in King Edward's time, both by his Practice
and Pen, and what encouragement he gave them in this present Reign, has been
shown before. But how much he was out-gone by Beza (who next usurped a
Super-intendency over all the Churches of this Island) may be seen hereafter.

All that shall now be said of either of them, or of altogether, shall be
briefly this, That this poor Church might better have wanted their best helps
in Points of Doctrine, than have been troubled with their intermedlings in
matter of Discipline.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning the Calvinists. Dr Heylyn having little or nothing
in the Fourth and Fifth year of this Queens Reign, that belongs to the matter
of these Notes, we will pass to the 6th year.

CHAP. XII.
Of one Cartwright, a great Promoter of Presbytery; and of the Earl of
Leicester, and the death of Calvin.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 6.
Dr. Heylyn, page 164. THis Summer, in a Progress, the Queen came to Cambridge;
where were sown the seeds of those Divisions, and Combustions, with which the
Church of England has been continually distracted to this very day. For so it
happened, that one Preston and Cartwright were appointed to hold a Disputation:
In which the First was both liked, and rewarded by Her; the Other receiving
neither reward nor commendation: Which so incensed the proud man, that he
retired to Geneva: Where having thoroughly informed himself in all particulars,
both of Doctrine and Discipline, wherein the Churches of that Platform differed
from the Church of England, he returned home, with an intent to repair his
credit, or rather to get himself a name, by raising such a fire, and such
combustions in the Church of England, as never were to be extinguished, but by
the immediate hand of Heaven.

The next considerable Action, which followed on the Queens Reception at
Cambridge, was the preferring of Sir Robert Dudley, the Second Son, then
living, of the Duke of Northumberland, to the Titles of Lord Denbigh, and Earl
of Leicester. She had before Elected him into the Order of the Garter, made him
Master of her Horse, and Chancellor of the University of Oxon; suffered him to
carry a great sway in all Affairs, both of Court and Council; and given unto
him the fair Manor of Denbigh, being conceived to be one of the goodliest
Territories in England. And now She adds unto these Honors, the goodly Castle
and Manor of Kenelworth, part of the parrimony of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Advanced unto which height, he engrossed unto himself the disposing of all
Offices in the Court and State, and of all Preferments in the Church; proving,
in fine, so unappeasable in his Malice, and unsatiable in his Lusts; so
Sacrilegious in his Rapines, so false in Promises, and treacherous in point of
Trust; And finally, so destructive of the Rights, and Proprieties of particular
Persons, that his Little Finger lay heavier on the English Subjects, than the
Loins of all the Favorites of the Two last Kings. And that his Monstrous Vices
(most insupportable in any other but himself) might either be connived at, or
not complained of, he cloaks them with a seeming zeal to the true Religion, and
made himself Head of the Puritan Faction: Who spared no pains in seting forth
his praises upon all occasions: Nor was he wanting to caress them, after such a
manner, as he found most agreeable to those Holy Hypocrites; using no other
language in his Speech, and Letters, than pure Scripture Phrase; in which he
was become so dextrous, as if he had received the same Inspirations with the
Sacred Penmen.

But notwithstanding the viciousness of this man, yet the Queen labored
further to advance him, even to a Marriage with the Queen of Scots: As appears
by this Relation of Dr. Heylyn, page 169.

Queen Elizabeth kept a Stock still going in Scotland; the returns whereof
redounded more to her own security, than to the profit and advantage of the
Church of England. The Queen of Scots being now a Widow, possessed of that
Kingdom, and next Heir to this, Queen Elizabeth proposes to her a Marriage with
the Earl of Leicester; whom she pretended to have raised to those Eminent
Honors, to make him, in some sort, capable of a Queens Affections. Which
Proposition proved agreeable to neither party; the Queen of Scots disdaining
the unequal offer; and Leicester dealing underhand with Randolph, the English
Resident, to keep her still in that aversness; having given himself a hope of
Marrying Queen Elizabeth, interpreting all her Favors to proceed in order to
it. I had not spoken so much of this Earl of Leicester, but that he seemed to
have been born for the destruction of the Church of England, as will appear by
what shall be here said concerning the Presbyterians in this Queens Reign.

But leaving this Court-Meteor to be gazed on by unknowing men, we will now
conclude this Sixth year, with that which was very advantageous to the Church
of England; to wit, the Death of Calvin: By whose Authority (if he had lived
longer) much more Disorders and Confusions must have necessarily succeeded. For
his Name was much Reverenced, not only by those of his own party; but by many
others, grave, and moderate men, who did not look at first, into the dangers,
which ensued upon it. His Platform at Geneva was made the only Pattern, by
which all Reformed Churches were to frame their Government. His Writings were
made the only Rule, by which all Students in Divinity were to square their
judgments.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning Cartwright, Leicester, and Calvin. CHAP. XIII.
The first Origin of the name Puritan, and of the Protestation devised to
hinder the Disorders caused by this Sect.

Anno Reg. Eliz. 7.
Dr. Heylyn, page 172. THis year the Zuinglian, or Calvinian Faction began to
be first known by the name of Puritans: Which name has ever since been
appropriated to them, because of their pretending to a greater Purity in the
Service of God, than was held forth unto them (as they gave it out) in the
Common Prayer Book; and to a greater opposition to the Rites and Usages of the
Church of Rome, than was agreeable to the Constitution of the Church of
England. But this Purity was accompanied with such Irreverence; this opposion
drew along with it so much licentiousness, as gave great scandal and offense to
all men: So that it was high time to give a check to those Disorders and
Confusions, which by their practices, and their Preachings, they had produced;
and thereby laid the ground of that woeful Schism, which soon after followed.

For the preventing these Disorders for the future, a Protestation was devised
to be taken by all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates; by which they were required to
declare and promise,

1. That they would not preach, nor publicly interpret, but only read that
which was appointed by public Authority.

2. That they would use sobriety in Apparel, and especially in the Church at
Common Prayers, according to Order appointed.

3. That they would not openly meddle with any Artificers Occupation, as
covetously to seek a Gain thereby; having in Ecclesiastical Livings, Twenty
Nobles, or above, by the year: Which Protestation, if it either had been
generally pressed upon all the Clergy, (as perhaps it was not) or been better
kept by them that took it, the Church might, questionless, have been saved from
those Distractions, which by the Puritan-Innovators were occasioned in it.

Thus far Dr. Heylyn, concerning this strange Reformation of the Church of
England. Doctor Heylyn having Prosecuted his History of the Reformation of the
Church of England, until the Eighth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, was not
willing to wade any further into the Confusions of those times; and therefore
makes this following Conclusion of it.

CHAP. XIV.
The Order of the Establishment of this New Church, and of the strange Disorder
it was at this time brought unto by the Puritan Faction.

Dr. Heylyn's Conclusion of his History.
THus we have seen the public Liturgy confirmed in Parliament; with diverse
Penalties on all those, who either did reproach it, or neglect to use it, or
wilfully withdraw their attendance from it: The Doctrine of the Church
declared in the Book of Articles; External matters in Officiating God's Public
Service, and the Apparel of the Clergy, regulated by the Book of Orders, and
Advertisements; the Episcopal Government settled. The Church of England is
therefore now fixed on her Natural Pillars of Doctrine, Government, and
Worship; not otherwise to have been shaken, than by the blind zeal of such
furious Sampsons, as were resolved, to pull it on their own heads, rather than
to suffer it to stand.

And here it will be time to conclude this History; having taken a brief view
of the State of this Church, with all the Aberration from its first
Constitution, as it stood at this time, when the Puritan Faction had begun to
disturb its Order. And that this may be manifested with a greater certainty, I
will speak it in the words of one who lived, and writ his knowledge of it, at
this time. I mean John Rastel, in his Answer to the Bishops Challenge: Who,
though he were a Papist, and a Priest, yet, I conceive, he has faithfully
delivered too many sad Truths in these particulars.

Three Books he writ within the compass of Three years, against Bishop Jewel:
In one of which he makes this Address unto him.

And though you, Mr. Jewel, (as I have heard say) do take the Bread into your
hands, when you celebrate solemnly, yet thousands there are of your inferior
Ministers, who esteem it as death, to be bound to any such External Fashion.
And your order of Celebrating the Communion, is so unadvisedly conceived, that
every man is left unto his private Rule or Canon, whether he will take the
Bread into his hands, or let it stand at the end of the Table, where it pleases
the Sexton, or Parish-Clerk to set them, page 28.

Thus, as to the Communion; now, as to Altars, he has these words:

In the Primitive Church, Altars were used amongst Christians; upon which they
offered the unbloody Sacrifice of Christ's Body; yet your Company, (to declare
what Followers they are of Antiquity) do account i:, even among one of the
kinds of Idolatry, if an Altar be kept standing. And indeed you follow a
certain Antiquity, not of Catholics, but of desperate Heretics. Optatus,
writing of the Donatists, says, That they did break, raze, and remove the
Altars of God. page 34. and 165.

Now as to the Objection of Praying in an unknown Tongue, he writes thus:

Where Singing is used, what shall we say to the case of the People, that kneel
in the Body of the Church? Yea, let them hearken at the Chancel-door it self,
they shall not be much wiser. Besides, how will you provide for great Parishes,
where there are a Thousand People?

An Objection of the Presbyterians.
Then, to come to the Apostles: Where do you read, that in External Behavior
they did wear Frocks, or Gowns, or Four cornered Caps? Or, That at their
Prayers, they sat in sides, fell prostrate, or sung Te D^um, or looked toward
the South? Or wore Copes of T^ssue or Velvet; with a thousand more such
questions. page 446.

The next question he asks him, is,

Where the Church of God, so well ordered, with excellent men of Learning, and
Piety, was ever constrained to suffer Cobblers, Weavers, Tinkers, Tanners,
Card-makers, Tapsters, Fiddlers, Goalers, and others of like Profession, not
only to enter into Disputation with her; but also to climb up into Pulpits, and
to keep the place of Priests? etc. page 2.

Or, That any Bag-pipers, Horse-coursers, or Jaylors, were admitted then into
the Clergy? page 162 Or, that any Bishop then did Swear by his Honor, when in
his Visitation, he would warrant his Promise to some poor Prisoner-Priest under
him; or not satisfied with his imprisoning, did cry out and call upon the
Prince, (not disposed that way) to put them to most cruel deaths? Or, That
refused to wear a white Rocket? Or, To be distinguished from the Laity by some
decent Priests Apparel? page 162. Or, Gathered a Benevolence of his Clergy, to
set him up in his Household? page 163. Or, that the Communion Table (if any then
were) was removable up and down, hither and thither, and brought, at any time,
to the lower part of the Church, there to Celebrate the Lord's Supper? Or, That
any Communion was kept upon Good Friday? Or, That the Sacrament was administered
then, sometimes in Loaf-Bread, sometimes in Wafers? And that without the Name
of Jesus, or the sign of the Cross? Or, That at the Communion-time the Minister
should wear a Coap; and at all other Service, a Surplice only? Or (as it is
used in some places) nothing at all beside his Common Apparel? Or, That they
used a Common, and Profane Cup, at the Communion? page 162 Or, That a solemn
Curse should be used on Ashwednesday? Or, That a Procession about the Fields
was used in Rogation week, rather thereby to know the Bounds, and Borders of
every Parish, than to move God to Mercy, and men's hearts to Devotion? Or, That
the Man should put the Wedding-Ring upon the Fourth Finger of the left hand of
the Woman, and not on the right; as has been many Hundred years practiced?
page 163 Or, That the residue of the Sacrament, unreceived, was taken of the
Priest, or of the Parish Clerk, to spread their young Childrens Butter with, or
to serve their own Tooth with it, at their homely Table? Or, That it was lawful
then, to have but one Communion, in one Church in one day? page 164 Or, That
the Lent, or Friday was to be Fasted for Civil Policy, not for any Devotion?
page 165. Or, That the Lay People Communicating, did take the Cup at one
another hands, and not at the Priests? page 166. Or, That any Bishop, then
threw down the Images of Christ, and his Saints; and set up their own, their
Wives, and their Childrens Pictures in their Chambers, and Parlours? page 164.
Or, That being a Virgin at the taking of the Holy Order of Priesthood, did
afterward lawfully Marry? page 165. Or, That was Married on Ashwednesday? Or,
That preached it to be all one, to Pray on a Dunghill, and in a Church? Or, That
any Friar of 60 years, obtaining afterward the Dignity of a Bishop, Married a
young Woman of Nineteen years? etc. page 166.

Here ends Dr. Heylyn's History of Reformation.

Now to complete the story of the Presbyterians, I will here add what is
related by Dr. Heylyn concerning their actings in this Queens Reign, in his
History of Presbytery.

AN ADDITION Of some other Historical Collections Taken out of Dr. Heylyn's
History of Presbytery.
CHAP. XV.
A Discovery of the Insolent, and Rebellious Spirit of the Presbyterians; and
particularly of Knox.

Dr. Heylyn, page 244. AT Queen Elizabeth's first coming to the Crown, such
English as had lived in exile amongst the Zwitzers, or at Geneva, became
exceedingly enamored with Calvin's Platform; by which they found so much
Authority ascribed unto Ministers in their several Churches, as might make them
absolute, and independent, without being called to an account by King, or
Bishop. This Discipline they purposed to promote at their coming home. But the
Queen had heard so much, from others, of their carriage at Frankfort, and their
untractableness, in point of Decency, and comely Order, in the Reign of her
Brother, as might sufficiently forewarn her. Besides, She was not to be told,
with what reproaches Calvin had reviled her Sister; nor how she had been
persecuted by his followers in the time of her Reign: Some of them railing at
her Person, in their scandalous Pamphlets; Some practicing by false and
dangerous Allusions, to subvert her Government; and others openly praying to
God, That he would either turn Her heart, or put an end to her days.

And of these Men she was to give her self no hope, but they would proceed with
her, in the self same manner, whenever any thing should be done, (how
necessary, and just soever) which might cross their humors. The Consideration
whereof was of such prevalency with those of her Council, (who were then
deliberating about the altering of Religion) that they were resolved to have an
eye upon those Men: Who were so hot in the persuit of their flattering hopes,
that (out of a desire of Innovation, as my Author tells me) they were busied,
at that very time, in setting up a new form of Ecclestastical Policy; and
therefore were to be suppressed with all care and diligence, before they grew to
a head.

But, notwithstanding this discovery of their Rebellious practices; yet they
had so many Friends in England, that they might easily have obtained Favor, in
order to the Promoting their designs, had not Knox's furious Spirit moved him
to write these following malicious Letters. In one of which, to Sir William
Cecill, he first upbraids him with consenting to the suppressing of Christ's
true Evangile, to the erecting of Idolatry, and the Shedding the Blood of God's
most dear Children, during the Reign of mischievous Mary, the professed enemy
of God, as he plainly calls her. Then he proceeds to justify his Treasonable
and Seditious Book, against the Regiment of Women: of the truth whereof, he
positively affirms, That he no more doubted than of the truth of that Voice of
God, pronounced against that Sex; to wit, That in dolor they should bear their
Children.

Next he declared (in reference to the person of Queen Elizabeth) That he would
willingly acknowledge her to be raised by God, for the manifestation of his
Glory, although not nature only, but Gods own Ordinance, did oppugn such
Regiments. And thereupon did infer, That if Queen Elizabeth would confess,
that the Extraordinary Dispensations of God, did make that Lawful in her, which
both Nature, and Gods Laws, did deny in all Women beside, none in England
should bemore ready to maintain her Lawful Authority, than himself. But on the
other side he pronounces this Sentence on her, That if she built her Title upon
Custom, Laws, and Ordinances of Men, such foolish Presumption would grievously
offend God, and that her ingratitude in that kind should not long lack
punishment.

To the same purpose he writes also to the Queen her self, reproaching her
withal, That for fear of her life she had declined from God, Bowed to Idolatry,
and gone to Mass, during the persecution of Gods Saints, in the time of her
Sister.

In both his Letters he complains of his being denied the liberty of Preaching
in England, and endeavors to excuse his Flock, of late assembled in the most
Godly Reformed Church and City of Geneva.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. XVI.
A further Discovery of their Practices in order to the Promoting of their
Discipline, which was much Advanced by their being admitted into the Public
Ministry.

Dr. Heylyn, page 246. SUch was the necessity, which the Church of England was
under, that it was hardly possible to supply all the vacant places in it, but
by admitting some of the Genevian Zealots to the Public Ministry: the Realm
had been extremely visited in the foregoing year, with a dangerous and
contagious Sickness, which took away almost half of the Bishops; and occasioned
such a Mortality amongst the rest of the Clergy, that a great part of the
Parochial Churches were without Incumbents. The rest of the Bishops, Twelve
Deans, and as many Archdeacons, Fifteen Masters of Colleges, and Halls, Fifty
Prebendaries of Cathedral Churches, and about Fourscore Beneficed Men, were
deprived at once, for refusing to submit to the Queens Supremacy. For the
filling of which vacant places, it cannot be imagined, but many past amongst
the rest, who either had not hitherto discovered their dissatisfaction, or were
connived at in regard of their Parts and Learning.

Wherefore, there is no question to be made, but that some numbers of them were
admitted unto Country-Cures, by means whereof they had as great an opportunity,
as they could wish or desire, not only to Dispute their Genevian Doctrines, but
likewise to prepare the People committed to them, for receiving such
Innovations, both in Worship and Government, as were resolved, in time
convenient, to be put upon them.

For a Preparative whereunto, they brought along with them the Genevian Bible,
with their Notes upon it, together with David's Psalms in English Meeter; that
by the one they might effect an Innovation in points of Doctrine; and by the
other, bring this Church more near to the Rules of Geneva, in some chief Acts
of Public Worship.

The Notes upon the same Bible, in many places, savor of Sedition; and in
some, of Faction, destructive of the Persons and Power of Kings, and of all
Civil Intercourse, and Human Society.

There is a Note on 2 Chronicles. 8. 15, 16. where Asa is taxed by them, for not
putting his Mother to death, but deposing her only from the Regency, which
before She executed. Of which Note, the Scottish Presbyterians made especial
use; not only in deposing Mary, their lawful Queen; but prosecuting her openly,
and underhand, till they had taken away her life.

Now with this Bible, and these Notes, which proved so advantageous to them in
their main projectments, they also brought in David's Psalms in English Meeter;
of which they served themselves to some Tune, in the time succeeding. For they
came to be esteemed the most Divine part of God's Public Worship; the Reading
Psalms, together with the First and Second Lessons, being heard in many places
with a covered head; but all Men sitting Bareheaded, when the Psalm is Sung.
And, to that end the Parish-clark must be taught to call upon the people to
Sing it, To the Praise and Glory of God; no such preparatory Exhortation being
used at the naming of the Chapter, or the Daily Psalms. By these Preparatives
they hoped in time, to bring in the whole Body of Calvinism, as well in
reference to Government, and Forms of Worship, as in Points of Doctrine.

In all this time, they could obtain no Countenance from this State; though it
was once endeavored for them, by the Earl of Leicester, whom they had gained
to their Party; But it was only to make use of them for Politic Ends. Finding
this opposition, they not only repined, and grudged at the Reformation, which
was made in this Church, because not fitted to their Fancies, and to Calvin's
Platform; but have labored to sow those Seeds of Heterodoxy, and Disobedience,
which afterward brought forth those Troubles, and Disorders, which ensued upon
it.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. These Islands (the only remainder of the Crown of England in
the Dukedom of Normandy) had admitted the Reformation in the Reign of King
Edward; by whose command the Public Liturgy had been turned into French. But
the Reformed Religion being suppressed in the time of Queen Mary, was revived
again, immediately after her decease, by such French Ministers, as had resorted
thither for Protection, in the days of their troubles. These French Ministers,
desiring to have all things Modelled by the Rules of Calvin, endeavored by all
the friends they could make, to advance his Discipline: to which they were
encouraged by their Brethren here, and the Governors there. The Governors in
each Island advanced the Plot, out of a covetous intent, to enrich themselves
with the spoils of the Deaneries; the Brethren here, having by this means a
hope to gain ground, by little and little, for the Erecting of the same in most
parts of England. And in pursuance of this project, both Islands join in a
Confederacy to Petition the Queen for an Allowance of this Discipline, Anno
1563. In the year next following, some French were delegated to the Court, to
solicit it; where they received a Gracious Answer, and returned full of hopes.

In the mean time, the Queen, being strongly persuaded, that this design would
much advance the Reformation in those Islands, was contented to give way unto
it, in the Towns of St. Peter's- Port, and St. Hilaries only in Jersey; and in
the Port of St. Peter's in Gernsey, but no further: Other parts of the Islands
being to be Conform to the Church of England. Now, although there be no express
mention, in their Grant, of Allowing their Discipline, but only of their Form
of Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments; yet they presumed so far on the
general words, as to put it presently in practice; intending to advance it by
degrees in all the rest of the Parishes, as opportunity should serve, and the
condition of Affairs permit.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning these Islands. CHAP. XVII.
A further Account of their laboring to Undermine the Church of England.

Dr. Heylyn, page 252. IN England they found not such success, as they did
abroad; not a few of them being deprived of their Benefices, and other
preferments in the Church, for their Inconformity. The news of which severity
flies to France and Scotland; occasioning Beza in the one, and Knox, and his
Comrades, in the other, to interpose themselves in behalf of their Brethren.
With what Authority Beza acted in it, we shall see anon. In Knox his Letter,
sent from the General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, the Church-Vestments
are called Trifles and Rags of Rome.

With more Authority writes Beza, as the greater Patriarch; and he writes too
concerning things of greater consequence than Caps and Surplices. For in a
Letter of his to Grindal, he makes a sad complaint of suspending these Men,
from the Ministry, for not subscribing to some new Rites, and Ceremonies,
imposed upon them. But he seems more offended, That Women were suffered to
Baptize in extreme necessity. That Power was granted to the Queen, for
Ordaining such other Rites, and Ceremonies, as should seem convenient; and that
the Bishops had so much Authority. He excepts likewise against many other such
things. The Copies of these Letters were presently dispersed, if not also
Printed. Some of the Brethren, in their Zeal to the name of Calvin, preferred
him once before St. Paul; and Beza, without doubt, would have taken it ill, if
he had been esteemed of less Authority, than any of the Successors of St. Peter.

So good a Foundation being laid, the Building could not choose but go on apace.
But first they must prepare the Matter, and remove all doubts, which otherwise
might interrupt them in the course of their Building. And herein Beza is
consulted, as the Master-workman. To him they send their several Scruples; and
he returns such Answer to them, as did not only confirm them in their present
obstinacy, but fitted, and prepared them for the following Schism.

To those mentioned before, they add the calling of Ministers, and their
Ordaining by the Bishops, the Presbytery being not consulted: Which he
condemns, as contrary to the Word of God; but so, that he conceives it better
to have such a Ministry, than none at all: praying withal, that God would give
this Church a more lawful Ministry.

In some Churches, and particularly in Westminster Abbey, they still retained
the use of Wafers, made of Bread unleavened: This he acknowledges for a thing
indifferent. Unto several other Questions, he gives Answer in this Letter;
which is Superscribed, To certain of the Brethren of the Churches of England,
touching some Points of Ecclesiastical Order, and Government.

Upon the receiving this Letter, they fall into an open Schism, in the year
next following. At which time, some (taking upon them to be of a more ardent
Zeal, than others, in professing the true Reformed Religion) resolved to allow
of nothing in God's Public Service, but what was found expressly in the Holy
Scriptures. Their Number much increased, on a double account. First by the
negligence of some, and the connivance of other Bishops; and partly, by the
secret favor of some Great Men in the Court, who greedily gaped after the
remainder of the Churches patrimony.

It cannot be denied, but this Faction received much encouragement, underhand,
from some Great Persons near the Queen: from no Man more, than from the Earl of
Leicester, the Lord North, Knolls, and Walsingham; who knew, how mightily some
Numbers of the Scots, both Lords and Gentlemen, had, in short time, improved
their Fortune; by humouring the Knoxian Brethren in their Reformation: and
could not but expect ^he like in their own particulars, by a compliance with
these Men, who aimed apparently at the ruin of Bishops, and Cathedral Churches.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning the further advancement of Presbytery. CHAP. XVIII.
Of their Meetings, and the Powerful Friends they had at Court; with a short
Relation concerning Cartwright.

Dr. Heylyn, page 259. THe Genevian Brethren, rather chose to Meet in Barns and
Woods, yea, and in Common Fields, than to associate with their Brethren. For,
that they did so, is affirmed by very good Authors; who much bemoaned the sad
condition of the Church of England, in having her bowels torn in pieces, by
those very Children, which she had cherished in her bosom. By one of which we
are first told, what great Contentions had been raised in the first Ten years
of Her Majesty's Reign, through the peevish frowardness, and the outcries of
such, as came from Geneva, against the Vestments of the Church, and suchlike
matters: And then he adds, That being crossed in their desires touching these
particulars, they separated from the rest of their Congregations, and Meeting
together in Houses, Woods, and Common Fields, kept there their most unlawful
and disorderly Conventicles.

Thus of their Meetings.

Their Friends at Court.
Dr. Heylyn, page 262. The Presbyterians had many powerful Friends at Court; in
which the Papists had scarce any, but mortal Enemies. Spies, and Intelligencers
were employed to attend the Papists, and observe all their words, and actions;
so that they could not stir without a discovery. But all Men's eyes were shut
up, as to the other party; so that they might do what they listed, without
observation; of which one reason may be given; to wit, That the Queen suffered
that Faction to grow up to confront the other.

A Word concerning Cartwright.
Dr. Heylyn, page 263. Now comes Cartwright on the Stage; on which he Acted
more than any of the Puritan Faction. He, coming from Geneva, became more
practical, or pragmatical rather, condemning the vocation of Archbishops, and
Bishops, Archdeacons, and other Ecclesiastical Officers, the Administration of
the Sacraments, and observation of our Rites, and Ceremonies. And buzzing these
conceits into the heads of many young Preachers, and Scholars of the
University, he drew after him a great number of Disciples, and Followers.
Amongst whom he prevailed so far, by his secret practices, but much more by a
Sermon, which he Preached on a Sunday Morning, in the College-Chappel, that in
the Afternoon, all the Fellows, and Scholars, threw aside their Surplices,
(which by the Statute of the House they were bound to wear) and went to the
Divine Service only in their Gowns and Caps. But he, not content with that
which he had done in the College, puts up his Disciples into all the Pulpits in
the University; where he, and they, enveigh most bitterly against the
Government of the Church, and the Governors of it, the Ordination of Priests
and Deacons, the Liturgy, and the Rites thereof.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. XIX.
Of their laboring to destroy Episcopal Government, and of their Erecting a
Presbytery.

Dr. Heylyn, page 271. THE English Puritans had hitherto, maintained their
Quarrel by the Authority of Calvin, the Sawciness of Knox, the Bold Activities
of Beza, and the Interposing of some Foreign Divines, whose Names were great
in all the Churches of the Reformation. But now they are resolved to try it out
by their proper valor; and to make no other use of them, than as Auxiliaries,
and Reserves.

Hitherto they had appeared only against Caps, and Surplices, and suchlike
things; But now they are resolved to venture on the Episcopal Government, and
to endeavor the Erecting of the Presbyterian, as time, and opportunity should
make way unto it. Amongst which Undertakers, none more eminent, because none
more violent than Cartwright. He, and his Accomplices, frequently handled such
Points as concerned the Discipline; many Motions being made, and some
Conclusions settled in pursuance of it. But more particularly it was resolved
upon the question, That for as much as diverse Books had been written, and
sundry Peti^ions exhibited to her Majesty, the Parliament, and their Lordships,
to little purpose; every man should therefore labor, by all means possible, ^o
bring the Reformation into the Church.

It was also then, and there resolved, That for the better bringing on of the
said Holy Discipline, they should not only, as well Publicly as privately
teach it, but by little and little, as well as possibly they might, draw the
same into practice. According to which resolution a Presbytery was Erected, on
the Twentieth of November, in the year 1572. at a small village in Surrey,
called Wandsworth; a place conveniently situated for the London Brethren, as
standing near the Bank of the Thames, but Four miles from the City, and more
retired and out of sight, than any of their own Churches about the Town.

The first Establishment they endorsed by the name of The Orders of Wandsworth:
In which the Elders names are agreed on, the manner of Election declared, the
Approvers of them mentioned, their Offices agreed on also, and described. Sir
Christopher Hatton was at that time, in special favor, o^ known aversness to
the Earl of Leicester, and consequently no friend to the Puritan Faction. This
obstactle must be removed, one way or other. This Office Burchet undertakes;
and does it upon this opinion, That it was Lawful to assassinate any man, who
opposed the Gospel. But he mistakes the man; and stabs one Hawkins desperately,
with a Poniard, conceiving him to be Hatton. But by the terror of a
Proclamation, and the Execution of this Burchet, they were restrained from
practicing any further at the present.

But what they durst not do directly, and in open sight, they found a way to
act Obliquely, and under disguise of setting up another Church of Strangers in
the midst of London. Many of the Low Country men had fled their Country, and
settled their Dwellings in the Ports and Sea Towns of England; and good numbers
of them, at London. For these there must be a Church in London. And for this
purpose, a Suit is made by their Friends in Court, for the obtaining of it. And
that they might proceed in setting up their Presbytery, and New Forms of
Worship, they obtain, not only a connivence, or Toleration* but a plain
Approbation of their Acting in it. This likewise gave the First Beginning to
the now Dutch Churches in Canterbury, Sandwich, Yarmouth, Norwich, and some
other places in the North; to the great animation of the Presbyters, and to the
discomfort of all such, who were of Judgment to foresee the sad consequents of
it.

With like felicity, they drove on their designs in Jersey, and Gernsey,
introducing their Discipline, by degrees, into all the Villages: Furthered
therein by the Sacrilegious avarice of their several Governors, out of a hope
to have the spoil of the Deaneries, to engross all the Tithes to themselves,
and then put off the Ministers with some sorry Stipends; as, in fine, they did.

It was also thought fit, That Snape, and Cartwright, (the great Supporters of
the Cause in England) should be sent unto them, to put their Churches in a
posture and settle the Discipline amongst them in such Manner, and Form, as it
was practiced at Geneva.

Grindall's being Translated from the Sea of York, unto that of Canterbury,
gave great h^pes to the Presbyterians; who soon found how plyant he was like to
prove to their expectation: Which happened accordingly; he seeking in all
things to promote their designs, and making great Alterations in the Church of
England.

A Breach happened betwixt him and Leicester, that mighty Patron, and Protector
of the Puritan Faction, occasioned by his denying, at the Earl's request, to
Alienate his House and Manor of Lambeth, that it might serve for a
Retiring-place to that mighty Favorite. And hereunto he did contribute
further, by refusing to grant a Dispensation, to Marry One, that was near of
Kindred to him. This Leicester, thought he might command, and was exceedingly
vexed, not to find obedience in one, who had been raised by him, and depended
on him.

Upon which ground, all passages, which before where shut against his enemies,
were now left free and open for them. Whereupon they acquainted the Queen, what
a neglect there was of the Public Liturgy, in most parts of the Kingdom, what
ruin, and decay of Churches, what Innovations made already, and what more
projected; by which She would be eased, in time, of all Cares of Government,
and find the same to be transferred to the Puritan Consistories.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning the sad state of the Church of England. CHAP. XX.
A further Relation concerning Cartwright, and other Presbyterian Ministers;
and how they labored to set up Presbytery in this Nation.

Dr. Heylyn, page 290. CArtwright, having settled the Presbytery in Jersey, and
Gernsey; first, sends back Snape, to his old Lecture, at Northampton, there to
pursue such Orders, and Directions, as they had agreed on: And afterward put
himself into the Factory at Antwerp, and was soon chosen for their Preacher.
The news whereof, brings Travers to him; who receives Ordination (if I may so
call it) by the Presbytery of that City, and thereupon is made his Partner in
that Charge. They easily persuaded the Merchants to admit the Discipline: And
they endeavored it the rather, that by their help they might effect the like
in the City of London, whenever they should find the times to be ready for
them.

The like they did also in the English Church at Middleborough, the chief Town
in Zealand; in which many English Merchants had their constant Residence. To
which Two places they drew over many of the English Nation, to receive
admission into the Ministry, in a different Form, from that which is allowed in
the Church of England. Some of them, (following the Example of Cartwright
himself) renounced the Orders, which they had from the hands of Bishops, and
took a new Vocation from those Presbyters, and others there admitted to the
rank of Ministers, who never were ordained in England.

Not to say any thing of such, as were Elected to be Elders, or Deacons, in
those Foreign Consistories; that they might serve the Churches, in the same
capacity, at their coming home.

And now at last they are for England; where Travers put himself into the
Service of the Lord Treasurer Burleigh; by whose recommendation, he is chosen
Lecturer of the Temple-Church; which gave him opportunity for managing all
affairs, that concerned the Discipline, with the London-Ministers.

Cartwright applies himself to the Earl of Leicester; by whom he is sent down
to Warwick, and afterward made Master of an Hospital of his Foundation: In the
chief Church of which Town he preached, when he pleased; making it his business
to promote the Discipline, and to undermine the Church of England. But this was
not done all at once, or in the first year only after his Return; but by
degrees, as opportunity was offered to them. Yet so far he prevailed in the
first year only, that a Meeting of Sixty Ministers, out of the Counties of
Essex, Cambridge, and Norfolk, was held at a Village called Corkhill, where
Knewstubs (who was one of the Number) had the Cure of Souls: Which Meeting was
held May the 8th; Anno 1582, there to Confer about some passages in the
Common Prayer Book, as what might be tolerated in it, and what refused.

The like Meeting was held, at the Commencement in Cambridge then next ensuing.

Thus Dr. Heylyn, concerning these proceedings of the Calvinists. (It would be
too tedious to relate all the particulars, in the carrying on this business:
And therefore for this, I remit the Reader to the History it self.)

CHAP. XXI.
The Queens Resolution of maintaining Episcopal Government, and the great
Opposition that was made against it.

Dr. Heylyn, page 302. THe Queen was resolved to hold Her Prerogative Royal at
the very height; and therefore would not hearken to such Propositions, as had
been made in favor of the Puritan-faction, by their great Agents in the Court,
though She had been many times solicited in it.

She acquaints Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury, that She determined to
discharge her Self from the Trouble of all Church-Concernments, and leave them
wholly to his care. That She was sensible enough, into what Disorder, and
Confusion, the Affairs of the Church were brought, by the connivance of some
Bishops, the obstinacy of some Ministers, and the Power of some great Lords,
both in Court, and Country: But that notwithstanding, he must resolve, not only
to assert the Episcopal Power, but also to restore the Uniformity in God's
Public Worship, which by the weakness of his Predecessor, was so much
endangered.

It is not easy to imagine what clamors were raised amongst the Brethren, upon
this occasion; how they moved Heaven and Earth, the Court and Country, and all
the Friends they had of the Clergy, or Laity, to come to their assistance, in
this time of their trial. By means whereof, they raised so strong an opposition
against his proceedings, that it put him to great difficulties. Some great Men
about the Court, who had engaged themselves in the Puritan Quarrels, thought
best to stand a while behind the Curtain, and set Beal upon him, of whose
impetuosity, and edge against him, they were well assured. This Beal was in
himself a most eager Puritan, trained up by Walsingham, to draw dry-foot after
Priests and Jesuits; his extreme hatred to those men being looked on, as the
only good quality, which he could pretend to. But being over-blinded with zeal,
he conceived, that whatsoever was not Puritan, must needs be Popish: And that
the Bishops were to be esteemed no otherwise, than the Sons of Antichrist,
because they were not looked upon as Fathers, by the Brotherhood. And so far
was he hurried on by these disaffections, that though he were raised to be one
of the Clerks of the Council, yet he preferred the Interest of that Faction,
before that of the Queens. Insomuch, that he was noted to Jeer, and Gibe, at
all such Sermons, as did most commend her Majesty's Government, and move the
Auditory to Obedience; not sparing to accuse the Preachers, to have broached
false Doctrine. From this man the Archbishop received great affronts.

The Lord Burleigh, upon some complaint made against the Liturgy, by some of
the Brethren, required them to compose another, such as they thought might
generally be accepted by them. The first Classis thereupon devised a new one,
agreeable in most things, to the Form of Geneva.

But this draught being offered to the Consideration of the second Classis,
(for so the wise Statesmen had of purpose contrived the plot) there were no
fewer than Six-hundred Exceptions made against it; and consequently, so many
Alterations to be made therein, before it was to be admitted. The Third Classis
quarrelled at those Alterations; and resolved therefore on a new Model, which
should have nothing of the other: And against this, the Fourth Classis was able
to pretend as many Objections, as had been made against the first. So that no
likelihood appearing of any other Form of Worship, either better or worse, to
be agreed upon between them, he dismissed their Agents for the present; with
this assurance, that whenever they could agree upon any Liturgy, which might
be universally received amongst them, they should find him very ready to serve
them, in the settling of it.

Walsingham tries his Fortune next, in hope to bring them to allow of the
English Liturgy, on the removal of such things, as seemed most offensive: And
thereupon he offered, in the Queens Name, that the Three Ceremonies, at which
they seemed most to boggle; that is to say, Kneeling at the Communion, the
Surplice, and the Cross in Baptism, should be expunged out of the Book of
Common Prayer, if that would content them. But thereunto it was replied, That
they would have a total Abolition of the Book, without retaining any part, or
office in it, in their next New-nothing: Which peremptory Answer, did much
alienate his Affections from them; as afterward he affirmed to some, from
whose Pen I have it.

The Brethren, on the other-side, finding how little they had gotten by their
Application to the Lords of the Council, began to steer another course, by
practicing upon the temper of the following Parliaments; into which they had
procured many of their chief Friends to be received for Knights, or Burgesses,
as they could prevail. By whose means, (notwithstanding that the Queen had
commanded them, not to deal in any thing, which was of concernment to the
Church) they procured a Bill to pass in the House of Commons, 1585, for making
trial of the Sufficiency of such, as were to be ordained or admitted Ministers,
by Twelve Laymen; whose Approbation, and Allowance, they were first to pass,
before they were to receive Institution into any Benefice.

Another Bill was also passed, for making Marriage lawful at all times of the
year, (which had been formerly attempted by the Convocation.) They were in hand
also with a Third, concerning Ecclesiastical Courts, and the Episcopal
Visitations; pretending only a redress of some Exorbitancies, in excessive
Fees; but aiming plainly at the overthrow of the Jurisdiction.

The like attempts were made in some following Sessions; in which some Members
showed themselves troublesome to sober men, alienated from the present
Government, and disrespective toward the Queen.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. CHAP. XXII.
Their Design is promoted from Scotland, and from many Great Men about the
Court.

Dr. Heylyn, page 261. THe chief Zealots of the Faction of Scotland, (finding,
that they could not have their Wills on the young King James, [whose Mother was
Prisoner in England] and his Council) came into England; where they were much
countenanced by Mr. Secretary Walsingham, who had set them at work, and
therefore was obliged to gratify them.

The Lords, and great Men of that Nation, were ordered to retire to Norwich,
and many of the Ministers permitted to prepare for London, Oxford, Cambridge,
and some other places. At London they are suffered, by some Zealous Brethren,
to possess the Pulpits; in which they rail without control, against their
King, the Council, and their Natural Queen; laboring withal to beget, amongst
the People, an ill opinion against the present Government, and to engage them
for advancing that of the Presbytery. It would be too tedious to relate all
that they acted in this kind.

The Lords of this Faction obtained such Assistance from Queen Elizabeth, that
they got the King into their hands, put a new Guard upon him, and conducted him
whither they pleased. Upon this the English Puritans showed themselves to have
more of the Scot in them, than in former times. For presently, upon the News of
the good Success, which their Scottish Brethren had, a scandalous Libel, in the
nature of a Dialogue, is published and dispersed in most parts of England; in
which the state of this Church is pretended to be laid open. They likewise had
prepared their way to the Parliament then sitting, Anno 1586, by telling them,
That if the Reformation they desired, were not granted, they should betray God,
his Truth, and the whole Kingdom: That they should declare themselves to be an
Assembly, wherein the Lord's cause could not be heard, wherein the infelicity
of the miserable could not be respected, wherein Truth, Religion, and Piety,
could bear no sway; an Assembly, that willingly called for the Judgment of God
upon the whole Realm: And finally, That not a Man of their Seed should prosper,
be a Parliament Man, or bear rule in England any more.

This necessary preparation being thus premised, they tender to the Parliament,
a Book of the Form of Common Prayer, by them desired; containing also, in
effect, the whole pretended Discipline, so revised by Travers. And their
Petition, in behalf of it, was in these words following; to wit, May it
therefore please your Majesty, That the Book hereunto annexed, and every thing
therein contained, may be from henceforth used through all your Majesty's
Dominions. But in this they were able to effect nothing.

It may seem strange, that Queen Elizabeth should be so severe to her English
Puritans, and yet protect and countenance the Presbyterians in all other
places. But that great Monster in Nature (called Reason of State) is brought to
plead in her defense.

Leicester, Walsingham, and others, gave such encouragment, underhand, to the
Presbyterians, that they resolved to proceed toward the putting of their
Discipline in execution. These great Persons did likewise entertain their
Clamours, and promote their Petitions at the Council Table, crossing and
thwarting the Archbishop, whenever any cause, which concerned the Brethren,
was brought before them.

It may be gathered from hence, what a hard game this Prelate had to play, when
such great Masters in the Art, held the Cards against him. For, at that time,
the Earls of Huntingdon and Leicester, Walsingham, and Knolls, Comptroller, of
the Household (a professed Genevian) were his open Adversaries. Burleigh, a
Neutral at the best.

Thus Dr. Heylyn. The Order of their Government, both at London, and in the
Country.
Dr. Heylyn, page 213. THe Book of Discipline being published, was no where
better welcome than in London; the Wealth and Pride of which City was never
wanting, to cherish and support such as most apparently opposed themselves to
the present Authority, or practiced the introducing of Innovations both in
Church and State.

The several Churches, or Conventicles rather, which they had in the City, they
reduced into one great, and general Classis, of which Cartwright, Egerton, or
Travers, were for the most part Moderators; and whatsoever was there ordered,
was esteemed for current: from thence the Brethren of other places did fetch
their light, and as doubts did arise, thither they were sent to be resolved;
the Classical, and Synodical decrees of other places, not being Authentical,
till they were ratified in this; which they held the Supreme Consistory, and
chief Tribunal of the Nation.

But in the Country none appeared more forward, than those of Northampton,
Daventry, and Nottingham, and the device is taken up in most parts of England,
but especially in Warwickshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, etc. In these Classes
they determined Points of Doctrine, Interpreted hard places of Scripture,
delivered their resolution, in such cases of Conscience, as were brought before
them, decided doubts and difficulties, touching Contracts of Marriage, etc. and
whatsoever was concluded by such as were present (yet still with reference to
the better judgment of the London Brethren) became forthwith binding to the
rest: none being admitted into any of the aforesaid Classes, before he had
promised under his hand, that he would submit himself, and be obedient unto all
such Orders, and Decrees, as were set down by the Classis to be observed.

At these Classes they enquired into the Life, and Doctrine of all, that had
subscribed unto them, censuring some, and deposing others, as they saw occasion.

Unto every Classis there belonged a Register; who took the Heads of all that
passed, and saw them carefully entered into a Book for that purpose: that they
might remain upon Record.

Thus Dr. Heylyn gives a full Relation of the Progress of Presbytery in this
Nation. Now I will make a short Relation of the Queens Proceedings against
Catholics.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the great endeavors used totally to extirpate Catholic Religion, by Penal
Laws, and a horrid Effusion of Blood.

Stow, page 678. THere was an Act of Parliament passed, 5 Eliz* In the Body
whereof it was provided, That no Man, living, or residing in the Queens
Dominions, should, from thenceforth, maintain the Power and Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome. And for the better discovery of all such persons as might be
Popishly affected; it was Enacted, that none should be admitted to receive
Orders in the Church, or to take any Degree in either of the Universities, or
to be Barrester, or Bencher in any of the Inns of Court, etc. Or to practice as
an Attorney, or otherwise to bear any Office in any of the Courts at
Westminster Hall, or any other Court whatsoever, till they had taken the Oath
of Surpemacy.

It was likewise made Treason for any one to be reconciled to the Church of
Rome, or to be made Priest beyond the Seas: upon which Two accounts very many
were afterward Executed.

A Proclamation also was set forth, That whosoever had any Children beyond the
Sea, should, by a certain day, call them home.

Commissioners were sent into all Parts and Divisions of the Realm, to enquire
out Priests, and such as were reconciled by them; further charging all manner
of Persons, to retain none in their Houses, without due examination of their
conditions, manner of life, and conformity in Religion; and to keep thereof a
Register, to be showed to the said Commissioners, if they should demand it.

In pursuance of which Commission, a Priest was taken saying Mass in the Lord
Morley's House; and the Lady Morley with her Children, and diverse others were
also taken, hearing the same Mass.

There was also taken at the same time another Priest, at the Lady Gilfords in
Trinity-lane, for saying Mass: and for hearing the said Mass, the Lady Gilford,
with diverse other Gentlewomen were taken.

And likewise at the same instant, were taken Two Priests, in the Lady Browns
House in Cowlane, for saying Mass; with the Lady her self, and diverse others,
for hearing it: All which persons were Endicted, Convicted, and had the Law
Executed, according to the Statute.

There was found in their several Chapels, Beads, Images, Palms, Chalices,
Crosses, Vestments, Pixes, Paxes, and suchlike.

Thus Stow. He that desires to be fully satisfied concerning all the severe
Laws made against Catholics in this Queens Reign, may have recourse to the
Penal Statutes.

Now we will proceed to a further Execution of these Laws, by a horrid effusion
of Blood.

TWo Laymen, and one Priest, where hanged, bowelled, and quartered, for denying
the Queens Supremacy. Stow, page 684, and 685.

Six Priests were drawn from the Tower to Tyburn, and there hanged, bowelled,
and quartered. Stow, page 695.

Four Priests more were found guilty of High Treason, in being made Priests
beyond Seas, and by the Pope's Authority; and had Judgment to be hanged,
bowelled, and quartered: who were all Executed at Tyburn. Stow page 698.

Two other Priests were condemned for Treason, for being made Priests at Rhemes
in France; were drawn to Tyburn, and there hanged, boweled, and quartered,
Stow, page 719.

As likewise Two other Priests were Condemned, and Executed, for the same
cause. Stow, page 720.

Six Priests more were Executed, for being made Priests beyond Seas; and Four
Secular Men, for being reconciled to the Roman Church; and Four others for
relieving, and encouraging the others.

Moreover, Thirteen Secular Men were upon the same account hanged in several
places: and a Gentlewoman, for conveighing a Cord to a Priest in Bride-well;
whereby he let himself down, and escaped. Stow, page 750.

Another Priest was hanged, headed, and quartered, at Kingston: and after this,
Two more for being made Priests at Paris: and a Secular Man, for being
reconciled to the Church of Rome. Stow, in the same page.

There was also another Priest hanged, for being made Priest beyond the Sea:
and Two Secular Men, for relieving him.

The Priest was hanged, bowelled, and quartered in Fleet Street, at Fetter-lane
end: and the other Two, one in Smithfield, and the other at Graies-Inn-lane
end. Stow, page 761.

Three Priests more, with Four others for relieving them, were Executed: one of
which was Swithun Wells, Gentleman. Stow, page 764.

Another Priest was Covicted for being a Priest, and reconciling a Haberdasher;
who was likewise Convicted of High Treason, for being so reconciled; and of
Felony, for relieving the said Priest.

The Priest was Executed in St. Paul's Churchyard. Stow, in the same page.

Likewise another Secular Priest, and a Jesuit, hanged, cut down alive, and
then bowelled, and quartered. Stow, page 766, 769.

One Priest more, hanged, bowelled, and quartered, for being made Priest beyond
the Seas: his Head was set upon the Pillory in Southwark; and his Quarters in
the Highway, toward Newington, and Lambeth. Stow, page 788.

A Layman was hanged, bowelled, and quartered, for being reconciled to the
Church of Rome; and Five Priests more were hanged, and quartered, for coming
into this Realm; and with one of them a Gentleman was likewise Executed, for
relieving, and lodging them in his House. Stow, page 790.

Another Priest, after Seven years imprisonment, was hanged, bowelled, and
quartered, for coming into England. Stow, page 793.

Two Priests more, hanged, and quartered, for the same cause. Also the same
day, and in the same place, was hanged a Gentlewoman, a Widow, for relieving a
Priest. Stow, page 795.

Four Priests more hanged, bowelled, and quartered, upon the same account.
Stow, page 804.

The Earl of Arundel seeing this great Severity used against Catholics,
resolves to quit the Kingdom. But before he began his Journey, he left behind
him this following Letter, to be delivered to the Queen after his departure:
Thus related by Howes upon Stow, page 703.

The Letter.
Madam,
I Perceived in my late Troubles, how narrowly my Life was sought, and that my
Innocence was not sufficient warrant to protect me. I knew my self, (and
besides was charged by your Council) to be of that Religion, which they
accounted odious, and dangerous to your Estate. Lastly, (but principally) I
weighed, in what a miserable, and doubtful case, my Soul had been, if my Life
had been taken away (as it was not not unlikely) by former troubles.

For I protest, the greatest burden, that rested in my Conscience, was,
because I had not lived according to the prescript rule of that, which I
undoubtedly believe, and assuredly presume to be the Truth.

Wherefore, bing induced by all these reasons, but chiefly moved by this last
Argument, I thought, that the not performing my Duty to God, in such sort, as I
knew would please him best, might be a principal occasion of my late
punishment: and therefore resolved, whilst I had opportunity, to take that
course, which might be sure to save my Soul from the danger of Shipwreck,
although my Body were subject to peril of misfortune.

And ever since that time, I followed and pursued this good intent of mine,
though I perceived somewhat more danger to my Estate, yet I humbly thank God, I
have found a great deal more quiet of mind: and in this respect I have just
occasion to esteem my passed Troubles, as my greatest felicity. For both of
them were (though indirectly) the means to lead me into that course, which ever
brings perfect quietness, and only procures Eternal happiness.

And being resolved, rather to endure my punishment, than willingly to decline
from what I had begun, I bent my self wholly, as near as I could, to continue
in the same, without doing any act, that was repugnant to my Faith and
Profession; and by means hereof was compelled to do many things, which might
procure peril to my self, and be an occasion of mislike to your Majesty.

For, the First day of Parliament, when your Majesty, with all your Nobility,
was hearing of a Sermon, in the Cathedral Church of Westminster, above in the
Chancel, I was driven to walk by my self below, in one of the Isles: and so
upon several other occasions.

These things, with many others, I could by no means escape, but only by an
open and plain discovery of my self, as the true cause of my refuse. Wherefore,
since I saw, that of necessity it must shortly be discovered; and withal
remembering, what a Watchful, and Jealous Eye, was carrid over all those, that
were known to be Recusants; and withal, reflecting how all their Lodgings were
continually searched, and to how great danger they were subject, if a Jesuit,
or Priest, were found in their Houses, that either I could not serve God in
such sort, as I had professed, or else I must incur the hazard of greater
punishment.

I stood resolute, and unremovable to continue in the first, though it were
with danger of my Life: and therefore did apply my Mind to devise, what means I
could find out, for avoiding the Last.

Long I was debating with my self, what course to take. But when I considered
in what continual danger I did remain here in England, both by the heretofore
Established, and by a New Act lately made, I thought it the safest way, to
depart out of the Kingdom, and remain in some other place; where I might live
without danger of my Conscience, without offense to your Majesty, without this
servile subjection to my Enemies, and without this daily peril of my Life.

And yet I was drawn by such forcible persuasions to be of another opinion,
that I could not easily resolve what to do.

For, on the one side, my Native Country, my Friends, my Wife, and Kindred, did
invite me to stay: on the other side, the power of mine Enemies, the
remembrance of my former Troubles, and the knowledge of my present Danger, did
hasten me to go. And in the end, I found no middle course; but either I must
venture to live in extreme Poverty abroad, or to be sure to remain in continual
Danger at home.

I regarded more the hazard of my Life, (wherein stood the peril of my Estate)
and rather sought the preservation of my Life, than the profit of my Living.

Wherefore, after I had weighed as many dangers, as I could remember, and was
persuaded, that to depart the Realm was the safest way I could take, I resolved
to take the benefit of a happy Wind, to avoid the violence of a bitter Storm.
And knowing, that the Actions of Those, who go beyond Seas, though their intent
be never so good, and dutiful, were yet evil thought of: I presume to write
this Letter to your Majesty, and in it to declare the true causes and reasons
of this my departure.

I here take God, and his Holy Angels, to witness, that I would not have taken
this course, if I might have stayed still in England, without danger of my
Soul, and peril of my Life. And though the loss of Temporal Commodities be so
grievous to Flesh and Blood, that I could not desire to live, if I were not
comforted with the remembrance of his Mercy, for whom I endure all this (who
endured ten thousand times more for me) yet I assure your Majesty, that your
Displeasure would be more unpleasant to me, than the bitterness of all my
Losses, and greater grief, than the greatest of my Misfortunes.


The Earl having written the foregoing Letter, and leaving it behind him, to be
delivered to the Queen after his departure, attempted to have passed the Seas
without License: for the which he was committed to the Tower, and condemned to
pay Ten thousand Pound Fine for his contempt, and to remain Prisoner, at the
Queens pleasure.

Thus Stow. This short Relation of these Severities, may make it easily
conceived, what endeavors there were then used, totally to extirpate Catholic
Religion in England.

Thus you have had a short view of the state of Religion in this Queens Reign.

An Account of the Years, in which these Changes in Religion were made.
IN her First year, she being resolved upon an Alteration of Religion (as
knowing well, that her Legitimation, and the Pope's Supremacy, could not stard
together) called a Parliament, which totally complied with her Designs, in
order to such a Change. But the Convocation of the Clergy, which accompanied
this Parliament, totally opposed it: and thereupon were deprived of their
Ecclesiastical Benefices; a company of Ignorant and Illiterate Men, being
Substituted in their places: which gave occasion to the Calvinists, or
Presbyterians, to obtain great Ecclesiastical Preserments here: By which they
have continually labored to supplant and undermine the Church of England.

It was the Second year of her Reign, before any Protestant Bishops were
elected. The main cause, for keeping the Episcopal Sees so long vacant, was,
that in the mean time, the best Flowers might be culled out of them. Aid this
year was sent to assist the Rebels in Scotland against their Lawful Queen. The
Presbyterians, seeing Episcopal Government settled, begin to play their Game.

The Bishops, being thus settled, begin the next year, to make Laws, and to
compose Articles of Religion, and to exact a Conformity to them: upon which
they find great oppositions from the Presbyterians.

In her Fourth year, she was solicited by Pope Pius, to send her Orators, to
the Council of Trent; which she refused to do. The Emperor also writ to her to
desist from these Alterations of Religion, and to return to the Ancient
Catholic Faith of her Predecessors.

In her Fifth year, the Articles of Religion were agreed on in the Convocation.

In her Sixth year, she would have Married the Earl of Leicester to the Queen
of Scots. Calvin dies this year, and Cartwright, the great promoter of
Presbytery, retires out of England, upon a discontent, to Geneva.

In her Seventh year, the Calvinists began first to be called Puritans.

Dr. Heylyn. In her Eighth year, the Government of the Church, by Archbishops,
and Bishops, was Confirmed. And for this we are beholding to Boner, the late
Bishop of London: who being called up to take the Oath of Supremacy, by Horn of
Winton, refused to take the Oath, upon this account, because Horn's
Consecration was not good and valid by the Laws of the Land.

Which he insisted upon, because the Ordinal, Established in the Reign of King
Edward the Sixth, (by which both Horn, and all the rest of Queen Elizabeth's
Bishops, received Consecration) had been Repealed by Queen Mary, and not
restored by any Act of Parliament, in the present Reign: (which being first
declared, by Parliament in the Eighth of this Queen, to be Casus Omissus; or
rather, that the Ordinal was looked upon as a part of the Liturgy, confirmed in
the First year of this Queen:) They next Enacted, and Ordained, That all such
Bishops, as were consecrated by it, in time to come, should be reputed to be
lawfully Consecrated.

Baker. In her Eleventh year, there arose a Sect, openly condemning the
received Discipline of the Church of England, together with the Church-Liturgy;
and the very Calling of Bishops.

This Sect so mightily increased; that in the Sixteenth year of her Reign, the
Queen, and Kingdom, was extremely troubled with them.

In the same Sixteenth year, were taken at Mass, in their several Houses, the
Lord Morley's Lady, and her Children; the Lady Gilford, and the Lady Brown: who
being thereof Endicted, and Convicted, suffered the penalties of the Laws.

In her Twentieth year, the severe Laws, against Roman Catholics, were Enacted.

In her Twenty third year, a Proclamation was set forth, That whosoever had any
Children beyond Sea, should by a certain day, call them home; and that no
Person should harbor any Seminary Priest, or Jesuit. At this time also there
arose up in Holland a certain Sect, naming themselves, The Family of Love.

In a Parliament held the 26th. year of her Reign, the Puritan party labored
to have Laws made, in order to the destroying of the Church of England, and the
setting up of their own Sect.

In her Twenty eighth year, the Queen gave a special Charge to Whitgift,
Archbishop of Canterbury, to settle an Uniformity in the Ecclesiastical
Discipline, which lay now almost a gasping. And at this time, the Sect of
Brownists (derived from one Robert Brown) did much oppose the Church of England.

In her One and Thirtieth year, the Puritan-Flames broke forth again.

In her Thirty sixth year, the Severity of the Laws were Executed upon Henry
Barrow, and his Sectaries, for condemning the Church of England, as no
Christian Church.

Thus Sir Rich. Baker. Here is an End of this Work. Wherein, I hope, there is
full Satisfaction given, concerning the Alterations of Religion, which have
been made by Public Authority, in the Reigns of these Kings and Queens: with a
sufficient discovery of the Actings of the Presbyterians in this Nation, and
the ground of multiplying other Sects.
Here ends the Historical Collections.
AN APPENDIX.
CHAP. I.
A Word concerning the Doctrins, and Practices, deserted by this Nation, in
these Changes of Religion.

NOw, for a close to this Work; I will add here in the first place, one thing,
which I conceive deserves well to be taken notice of, which is this; to wit,
That all the Doctrins, and Practices, which this Nation has deserted in these
Changes of Religion, were delivered to us, by those Apostolical Men, that
converted the Saxons, our Predecessors, to the Christian Faith; and this by the
Confession of many Learned Protestants themselves: Which being so, it must
necessarily be granted, that we have as much certainty of the Truth of those
Doctrins, and Practices, as we have of any other Doctrins, or Practices, in
Christianity: Since they were all confirmed to us by the same Miracles, that
first made us Christians. So that, if they be now found to be false, and
erroneous, all the other Doctrins and Practices of Christianity must be so
likewise; since the truth of them all depends upon the same Testimony: To wit,
the Miracles that were then wrought, and the Authority of those Apostolical
men, that delivered them to us.

Now, for warrant of what I have here said concerning this, besides the
Testimony of St. Gregory's Writings, Liturgy, Ritual, Missal, etc. and besides
the ancient Ecclesiastical History, (especially of England, and the Synods
anciently Assembled in this Nation,) I appeal to the Confession of the most
Learned Protestants, as Humfr^y, Fulk, the Centuriators of Magdeburg, etc.
Whose words, describing the Religion brought into England by St. Gregory, and
St. Augustine the Benedictin Monk, are these; They brought in (say they) Altars,
Holy Vestments, Images, Chalices, Candlesticks, Censors, Sacred Vessels,
Holy Water, and Sprinkling with it, Relics and the Translation of them,
Humph. Jesuitism. rat. 5. p. 5. Car. Chron. l. 4. p. 567. Bal. in Act. Romans
Pont p 44. Osiand Cent. 6. p. 288. Magdeb. Cent. 6. p. 748 and 369. Fulk.
Confut Purg. page 333.
Dedication of Churches, with the Bones and Ashes of Dead men, Consecrations of
Altars, of Chalices, of Corporeals, of Baptismal Fonts, of Chrysme, of Oil, of
Churches by using sprinkling of Holy Water, Celebration of the Mass, use of the
Archiepiscopal Pall in the Solemnizing of the Mass, Books of Roman Rituals, and
a Burden of Ceremonies, Free Will, Merit, and Justification by Works, Penance,
Satisfaction. Purgatory, Single-life of Priests, Public Invocation of Saints,
and Worship of them, Veneration of Images, Exorcisms, Indulgences, Vows,
Monachism, Transubstantiation, Prayer for the Dead, Exercise of the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop, and his Primacy over all Churches: In a word,
the remaining Chaos (as these zealous Reformers are pleased to call them) of
Popish Superstition.

Here you have had it clearly confessed by these Protestants, that these
Doctrins and Practices, were delivered unto us by those, that first Converted
our Predecessors, the Saxons, to the Christian Faith: And therefore be your
self a Judge, whether these men do with Justice, and Reason, call the said
Doctrins, and Practices, Superstitions: And withal, by this you may further
perceive, how unjust all the Choppings and Changes in Religion have been, which
have been related to you in this Book. And moreover, it will appear, That by
these proceedings we have renounced our Right, and made our selves incapable of
defending the Truth of our Christianity: Since if those, who first brought us
the News of it, and Converted us to it, brought such a Mass of Superstitions
with it, (as Protestants are pleased to call them) then it is evident, we
cannot be certain of the Truth of any Thing they taught us

Thus we may see, how unjust we have been to our selves, in pretending these
Reformations of Religion.

Now, yet further to manifest the sad condition of this Nation, in having thus
deserted its Mother Church, I will here annex some other Additional Chapters,
to make this appear.

CHAP. II.
Testimonies of Scripture, evidently convincing, That there can be no hope of
Salvation for such as are separated from the Church by Heresy, or Schism.

SAint Paul says, Romans 16. 17. I beseech you, Brethren, observe those, who make
Schisms and Scandals, contrary to the Doctrine, which you have been taught, and
avoid them. For such men serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly,
and by kind Speeches, and Benedictions seduce the hearts of the simple.

Annotations.
St. Paul here carefully warns them to take heed of Seditious sowers of Sects
and dissension in Religion, and this ever to be the mark to know them by; to
wit, If they teach, or move them to any thing, which was not agreeable to that,
which they had learned at their Conversion: Not bidding them to examine the
case by the Scriptures, but by their First Form of Faith, and Religion,
delivered to them before they had, or did read any Book of the new Testament.

Now his saying, That such Seducers serve their own belly, does evidently
manifest, that howsoever Heretics pretend in words, and external show of their
Sheeps-coat, to preach the Truth; yet indeed they seek but after their own
profit, and pleasure: And by the Apostle's own Testimony here we are warranted
so to judge of them, as of men, that indeed have no Religion, nor Conscience.

Now to manifest how much such Heretics, are to be detested, he writes thus to
Titus, [Tit. 3. 10. 11.] A man that is an Heretic, after the first, and second
admonition, avoid: Knowing, that he that is such an one, is subverted, and
sins, being condemned by his own judgment.

Annotations.
It is here to be noted, that not every one, who errs in Religion, is an
Heretic; but he only, that after the Churches determination, wilfully, and
stubbornly, stands in his false Opinion, not yielding to the Decrees of
Councils, or to the chief Pastors of the Church therein. T^y (says St.
Augustine, Epist. 162.) that defend their Opinions (although they be false, and
erroneous) with no stubborness, nor obstinacy, especially if they be such, as
themselves, did not broach by bold presumption, but received them of their
deceived Parents, and do seek the Truth warily, and carefully, being ready to
be reformed, if they find it, such are not to be reputed Heretics. And again,
[Lib. 18. De Civitat. Dei. Cap. 11.] They, that in the Church of Christ hold
any unsound, or erroneous Opinion, if being admonished to be of a right, and
sound Opinion, they resist obstinately, and will not amend their pestiferous
opinions, but persist in defense of them, are thereby become Heretics; and
going forth out of the Church, are to be accounted for Enemies that Exercise
us; to wit, by Disputing against them. Again, [Lib. 4. De Baptism. cont.
Donatist. cap. 16.] He is an Heretic, that when the Doctrine of Catholic Faith
is made plain and manifest to him, had rather resist it, and choose that which
himself held. And in diverse places he declares, that St. Cyprian, though he
held an Error, yet was no Heretic, because he would not defend it, after a
General Council had declared it to be Erroneous. [Lib. 2. De Bapt. Cap. 4.] So
Possidonius, in the Life of St. Augustine [Vit. August. cap. 18.] reports, how
after the Determination of the Sea Apostolic, to wit, that Pelagius his
Opinion was Heretical, all men esteemed Pelagius an Heretic; and the Emperor
made Laws against him, as against an Heretic. Again St. Augustine says, [Lib.
De Utilit. Credendi. cap. 1.] He is an Heretic in my opinion, that for some
Temporal Commodity, and specially for his Glory, and Principality, coins, or
else follows new Opinions. St. Augustine likewise, notes in the latter end of
his Book, De Haeresibus, That the People need not to be curious, to know what
Opinions Heretics hold; much less to labor to confute them: It being enough
for them to know, that they are condemned. And St. Cyprian [Epist. 52. Number. 7.]
says notably to Antonianus, demanding curiously, what Heresies Novatian
taught? No matter (says he) what Heresies he holds, or preaches, when he
teaches without: (That is to say, out of the Church.) Now, although Heretics
be often incorrigible, yet the Church of God ceases not by all means possible
to revoke them. Therefore St. Augustine, says, [Epist. 162.] The Heretic
himself, though swelling with odious and detestable pride, and mad with the
frowardness of wicked Contention, as we admonish that he be avoided, lest he
deceive such as are weak, and little ones, so we refuse not, by all means
possible, to seek his amendment, and reformation.

Now to understand the Reason, why the Apostle here says, That an Heretic is
condemned by his own judgment; we are to know, That some other grievous
offenders are separated by Excommunication from the Communion of Saints, and
the Fellowship of God's Church, by the Sentence of their Superiors in the same
Church: But Heretics, more miserable and unfortunate than they, run out of the
Church of their own accord; and so give Sentence against their own Souls to
damnation.

Now further to show the Reason, why Heresy (which seeks to divide, and tear
in pieces the body of the Church) is so horrid a crime, St. Paul here describes
its Unity, saying, [1 Cor. 12. 12.] For as the Body is one, and has many
Members; and all the Members of the Body, whereas they be many, yet are One
Body; So also Christ. For in one Spirit, we were all baptized into one Body.
And verse. 23. God has tempered the Body, giving to it that wanted, the more
abundant honor, that there might be no Schism in the Body; but the Members
together might be careful one for another. And a little after, You are the Body
of Christ, and Members of Member.

Now to prevent the making a Schism in this Body, he says, [1 Cor. 1 10.] I
beseech you, Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you All say
one Thing, and that there be no Schisms among you; but that you be perfect in
one Sense, and in one Knowledge. Again, [Eph. 4. 1.] I beseech you, that you
walk worthy of the Vocation, in which you are called. And a little after,
Careful to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. One Body, and One
Spirit; as you are called in one Hope of your Vocation. One Lord, One Faith,
One Baptism. One God and Father of All.

And now to manifest, what care our Savior had taken to preserve this Unity of
the Church; he further adds, verse. 11. And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and other some Evangelists, and other-some Pastors, and Doctors, to
the Consummation of the Saints, unto the Work of Ministry, unto the Edifying
(or building up) of the Body of Christ, (to wit, his Church;) until we meet all
into the Unity of Faith, and Knowledge of the Son of God, into a perfect Man,
into the measure of the Age of the Fullness of Christ: That now we be not
Children, wavering and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, in the
wickedness of Men, in craftiness, to the circumvention of Error. But doing the
truth in charity, let us in all things grow in him, who is the Head, Christ: Of
whom the whole Body (to wit, the Church) being compact, and knit together by
all juncture of Subministration, according to the Operation in the measure of
every Member, makes the increase of the Body unto the edifying of it self in
charity. Thus the Apostle fully delivers the admirable Structure of the Church.

Annotations.
Now as Rebellion is the bane of Civil Commonwealths and Kingdoms, and Peace
and Concord the preservation of the same; so is Schism, Division, and diversity
of Faith, the Calamity of the Church; and Peace, Unity, and Uniformity the
special Blessing of God therein: And in the Church, above all Commonwealths,
Because it is in all points a Monarchy, tending every way to Unity: There being
but One God, One Christ, One Church, One Hope, One Faith, One Baptism, One
Head, One Body, as the Apostle here assures us.

Thus the Apostle, of the United Body of the Church.

Now to manifest the great Dignity of the Church, and how much she is beloved
by our Savior; St. Paul, [Ephes. 5 22.] says, The Man is the Head of the
Woman, as Christ is the Head of the Church. Himself, the Savior of his Body,
(to wit, the same Church, and of no other.) And a little after, verse. 25.
Husbands (says he) love your Wives, as Christ also loved the Church, and
delivered himself for it, that he might Sanctify it, cleansing it by the laver
of Water in the Word; that he might present it to himself a glorious Church,
not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it may be holy, and
unspotted. And again a little after, verse. 29. No man ever hated his own flesh,
but he nourishes and cherishes it; as also Christ the Church: Because we be
the Members of his Body, of his Flesh and of his Bones.

Annotations.
The Apostle here saying, that Christ is the Savior of his Body, (to wit, his
Church) does evidently declare, That none can be saved, or have any benefit by
Christ, that is not of his Body, the Church: And what Church that is, St.
Augustine expresses in these words; The Catholic Church only is the Body of
Christ, whereof he is the Head. Out of this Body, of the Church, the Holy Ghost
quickens no man. And a little after, He that will have the Spirit, let him
beware he remain not out of the Church; Let him beware, he enter not into it
feignedly. August. Epist. 50. ad Bonifacium Comitem, in fine.

It is an unspeakable Dignity of the Church; which the Apostle expresses often
elsewhere, but more especially in this whole passage, to be that Creature for
which Christ effectually Suffered, to be washed and embrued with Water and
Blood issuing out of his holy side, to be nourished with his own Body, to be
his Members, to be so joined unto him, as the Body and Members of the same
Flesh, Bone and Substance to the Head, to be loved and cherished of him, as a
Wife of a Husband; yea, to be his Wife and most dear Spouse, taken, and formed
(as St. Augustine often says) out of his own Side upon the Cross, as Eve, our
First-Father Adam's Spouse, was made of his Rib. August. in Psalm. 126, and 127.

In respect of which great Dignity, and Excellency, the same holy Father
affirms the Church to be the principal Creature of God; and therefore named in
the Creed next after the Holy Ghost. And he proves, against the Macedonians,
the Holy Ghost to be God; because he is named before the Church in the
Confession of our Faith. Of which incomparable Excellency of the Church, so
beloved of Christ, and so inseparably joined in Marriage with him, if the
Heretics of our time, had any sense or consideration, they would neither think
their contemptible Company, or Congregation, to be the glorious Spouse of our
Lord; nor teach, that the Church may Err; that is to say, may be divorced from
her Spouse for Idolatry, Superstition, Heresy, or other Abominations. For this
is as much as to say, That this his Wife, so dear, and so praised here, is in
truth become a very Whore. By this it evidently appears, how just it is, that
all Heretics should be Excluded from all hope of Salvation; they being so
injurious to Christ, in thus reviling the Church his Spouse, and accusing her
of such horrid crimes.

It would require a large Volume to treat of all the passages of Scripture,
which speak of this Sacred Authority of our Mother, the Church, and the certain
Damnation incurred by all such as refuse to hear and obey her: to manifest
which, I conceive, what has been here already said may suffice; as also to
confute that horrid false Opinion generally held in this Nation, to the
Destruction of many Souls; to wit, That all the multiplicity of Sects in this
Nation, may yet be capable of Salvation, if they lead a Moral good Life: which
how untrue it is, these following Testimonies of the Fathers, conformable to
the Testimonies of the Holy Scriptures, will make it evidently appear.

CHAP. III.
Testimonies of the Fathers, showing their Affection, and Zeal to Catholic
Unity; and their detestation of Schisms, and Divisions.

SAint Augustine says of the Donatists, [Epist. 48] That they conceived it a
thing indifferent unto what Party they joined themselves, supposing, that they
were Christians: and therefore, they remained fixed to that Party, in which
they were born.

Now unto these St. Augustine, and the rest of the Provincial Council at Cirta
in Nu^idia, sent this following Declaration. Aug. Epist. 152.

Whosoever is separated from this Catholic Church, (amongst whom they reckoned
the Sect of the Donatists) how laudably soever he may think himself to live,
shall be excluded from Eternal Life, and remain obnoxious to God's heavy Wrath,
as being guilty of the heinous crime of being divided from the Unity of Christ,

And as for the Sacraments, received by them in that Separation, the
Declaration goes on thus.

You being fixed in the Sacrilege of Schism, partake of the Sacraments of
Christ to your own judgment, (or condemation:) Which Sacraments were
profitable, and very advantageous to you, when in Catholic peace you had
Christ for your Head, where Charity covered a multitude of sins.

Again St. Augustine says of them, [De Bapt. lib. 1. chap. 8.] Those whom the
Donatists heal of the Wound of Idolatry, and Infidelity, they themselves wound
more dangerously with the wound of Schism.

And again, [Super Gest. Emerit.] Out of the Catholic Church an Heretic may
have all things, but Salvation. He may have the Sacraments, He may sing
Hallelujah, He may answer Amen, He may keep the Gospel, He may have the Faith,
and Preach it: only Salvation he cannot have.

Likewise in his Book against Petilian [lib. 3. cap. 5.] he says, No Man
preaching the Name of Christ, and carrying, or ministering the Sacraments of
Christ, is to be followed against the Unity of Christ.

And again, writing against the Adversary of the Law and the Prophets, [lib. 1.
cap. 17.] he has these words, If he hear not the Church, let him be to thee as
an Heathen, or Publican; which is more grievous than if he was stricken through
with a Sword, consumed by Flames, exposed to wild Beasts, etc.

And again, [August. de Symb. ad Catech. lib. 4. cap. 10.] For this cause (says
St. Austin) our Christian Creed concludes with the Articles touching the
Church; because if any one be found separated from her, he shall be excluded
out of the number of God's Children, neither shall he have God for his Father,
who will not have his Church for his Mother. It will nothing profit such an
one, that he has been Orthodox, (or sound) in his Belief, done so many Good
Woorks, etc.

Lastly, In another place [Lib. de Past. cap. 12.] he says, The Devil says
not, Let them be Donatists, and not Arians; for whether they be here, or there,
they belong to him, that grathers without making a difference. Let him adore
Idols, says the Devil, he is mine: Let him remain in the Superstition of the
Jews, he is mine: Let him quit Unity, and pass over to this, or that, or any
Heresy, he is mine.

So likewise the Ancient Father, St. Irenaeus, [lib. 4. cap. 62.] God (says
he) will judge those which make Schisms in the Church. Ambitious men, who have
not the honor of God before their eyes; but rather embracing their own
interest, than the Unity of the Church, for small and light causes, divide the
great, and glorious Body of Christ.

In like manner, St. Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, [Hist. lib. 6. cap. 45.]
(as Eusebius witnesses) writing to Novatian, says, A Man ought rather to
endure All Things, than to consent to the Division of the Church of God; since
Martyrdom, to which Men expose themselves, to hinder the dismembring of the
Church, is no less glorious, than what a Man suffers for refusing to sacrifice
to Idols.

Also St. Cyprian [Lib. de Unitat. Ecles.] in his Book of the Unity of the
Church: Do they think (says he) that Christ is amongst them when they are
Assembled? I speak of those which make Assemblies out of the Church of Christ.
No; although they were drawn to Torments, and Execution, for the Confession of
the Name of Christ; yet this pollution is not washed away: No, not with their
Blood. This inexplicable, and inexcusable crime of Schism is not purged away,
even by death it self. That Man cannot be a Martyr, that is not in the Church.

And again, (he says) He shall not have God for his Father, that would not
have the Church for his Mother.

So likewise St. Pacianus, in one of his Epistles, [Epist. 2. ad Sempr.]
Although that Novatian (says he) has been put to death (for Christ) yet he
has not received a Crown. And why? Because he was separated from the peace of
the Church, from concord, from that Mother, of whom whosever will be a Martyr,
must be a portion.

St. Chrysostom, in one of his Homilies [Hom. 11. in Ephesians.] tells us, There is
nothing does so sharply provoke the wrath of God, as the Division of the
Church: insomuch, as though we should have performed all other sorts of Good
Things, yet we shall incur a punishment no less cruel, by dividing the Unity
and Fullness of the Church, than those have done who pierced and divided
Christ's own Body.

And therefore the Fourth Council of Carthage declares, [Can. 1.] That out of
the Catholic Church there is no Salvation.

St. Fulgentius likewise says, [De Remiss. Peccat. cap. 22.] Out of this
Church, neither the Title of Christian secures any one; neither does Baptism
confer Salvation; neither does any man offer a Sacrifice agreeable to God;
neither does any man attain to Eternal Life. For there is one only Church, one
only Dove, one only Well-Beloved, one only Spouse.

And again, (in his Book De Fide ad Petrum, cap. 39.) Hold this (says he) most
firmly, and doubt not of it in any wise, That every Heretic and Schismatic
whatsoever, Baptized in the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, if
before the end of his Life he be not Reunited to the Catholic Church, let him
bestow never so many Alms, yea, though he should shed his Blood for the Name of
Christ, he cannot obtain Salvation.

Likewise St. Prosper says, [Lib. de Prom. and Praedestinat. Dei p. 4. cap. 5.]
He who does not Communicate with the Universal Church, is an Heretic and
Antichrist.

See Athanasius in the beginning of his Creed.

Whosoever expects to be saved, must necessarily (before all things) Assent to,
and retain the Catholic Faith: which unless he preserves entire, and
inviolate, (that is, entirely submits to it) without all question, he will
perish everlastingly.

And again, at the end thereof, thus.

This is the Catholic Faith: which except a Man believe Faithfully, he cannot
be saved.

See St. Augustine, writing upon this Beatitude. Blessed are those that suffer
Persecution for Justice.

(Lib. 1. de Sermon Domini in Monte.) It is not the suffering these Things
(says he) that makes men Blessed, but the undergoing them (for the Name of
Christ) not only with an equal mind, but likewise with joy and much
satisfaction. For many Heretics, deceiving Souls under the name of Christians,
have suffered many of these things: But they are therefore excluded from this
reward of being Blessed, because it is not here only said, Blessed are those
which suffer Persecution; but it i^ further added, for Justice. Now, where
Faith is not sound and entire, there can be no perfect Justice; since the Just
man lives by Faith. Neither can Schismatics promise to themselves any thing of
this reward; because likewise where there is no Charity, there can be no
Justice. For the love of our Neighbor cannot design any thing that is evil, or
unjust, against him. Hence it is manifest, that if they had such Charity, they
would not seek to rent and tear in pieces the Body of Christ, which is his
Church.

Likewise the same Father, in his Fourteenth Sermon, De verbis Domini, proves
in general against all Heretics, and Schismatics, That whatsoever in
particular their opinions are, yet since they profess otherwise than the Church
does, and requires of them to do, they are in a damnable Estate; because
thereby they virtually renounce one Fundamental Article of Faith: viz. of the
Authority and Unity of the Catholic Church: And therefore if they break
Communion, though but for one Doctrine, and that of it self of no great
importance, their Orthodoxness in all other Points will not avail them, wanting
Truth; and especially renouncing Charity and Obedience to the Universal Church.
Hereupon the same Father [in Psalm. 54.] says of the Donatists, We have each of
us one Baptism; in This they were with me. We celebrated the Feasts of the
Martyrs; in This they were with me. We frequented the Solemnity of Easter; in
This they were with me. But they were not in All Things with me. In Schism they
were not with me. In Heresy they were not with me. In many Things they were
with me; and in some few Things they were not with me. But in those few Things
in which they were not with me, those many Things do not profit them in which
they were with me.

So again the same Father, speaking to the same Donatists [Epist. 48.] says,
You are with us in Baptism, in the Creed, and in other Sacraments of the Lord:
But in the spirit of Unity, in the bond of Peace, and finally in the Catholic
Church you are not with us.

To the same purpose writes St. Cyprian, in his Book [De Unitate Ecclesiae]
One Church (says he) the Holy Ghost, in the Person of our Lord; designeth, and
says, One is my Dove. This Unity of the Church he that holds not, does he
think that he holds the Faith? He that withstandeth and resists the Church;
He that forsakes Peter's Chair, upon which the Church was built, does he trust
that he is in the Church? When the Blessed Apostle St. Paul also shows this
Sacrament of Unity, saying, One Body, and one Spirit, [Ephes. 4. 4.] Which
Unity, we Bishops especially, that Rule in the Church, ought to hold fast and
maintain; that we may prove the Bishoply Function also it self to be one, and
undivided.

And again, in one of his Epistles, [Epist. 40.] There is one God, and one
Christ, and one Church, and one Chair, by our Lord's Voice founded upon Peter.
Another Altar to be set up, or a new Priesthood to be made, besides one Altar
and one Priesthood, is impossible. Whosoever gathers elsewhere, scatters.
It is adulterous, it is impious, it is sacrilegious, whatsoever is instituted
by man's Fury, to the breach of God's Divine Disposition. Get ye far from the
contagion of such men, and fly from their speeches as from a canker, and
pestilence; Our Lord having premonished, and warned us beforehand, saying, they
are Blind leaders of the Blind. Matt. 15. 14.

St. Hilary likewise [Libro ad Constant. August.] thus applies this same place
of the Apostle [Ephes. 4. 4, 5.] against the Arians, as we may do against the
Calvinists.

Perilous, and miserable it is (says he) that there are now so many Faiths as
Wills, and so many Doctrins as manners; whiles either Faiths are so written as
we will, or as we will, so are understood. And whereas according to one God,
and one Lord, and one Baptism, there is also one Faith, we fall away from that
which is the only Faith; and whiles more Faiths be made, they begin to come to
that, that there is none at all.

Noah's Ark is an acknowledged Type of the Church, as it appears by St. Peter,
[1 Pet. 3. 20, 21.] Wherefore, as All perished Temporally by the Deluge, that
were not in the Ark; so all perished Eternally, who are out of the Church:
Witness St. Cyprian, whose words are these [Cyprian. lib de Unitat. Ecclesiae.]

Whosoever separates himself from the Church, is separated from the Promises of
Christ.

Whosoever forsakes the Church is an Alien, an Enemy, a profane Person. He
cannot have God for his Father, who will not have the Church for his Mother.
Could any escape drowning, being out of the Ark? So neither shall any one
escape Damnation out of the Church.

They cannot abide with God, who refuse to continue with one accord in his
Church. Though they be cast into the Fire and burnt; though they be devoured by
wild Beasts, etc. yet shall not that be any Crown of their Faith, but a
punishment of their perfidiousness. Such an one may be killed; he shall never
be crowned.

Thus St. Cyprian. Now concerning the Supereminent Power of Bishops in the
Church, as to the Excommunication of Heretics, and of the effect thereof, St.
Jerome, [Epist. ad Heliodorum. cap. 7.] has these remarkable words: God forbid
(says he) I should speak sinistrously of them, who succeeding the Apostles in
degree, make Christ's Body with their holy mouths, by whom we are made
Christians; who having the Keys of Heaven, do after a sort, judge before the
day of Judgment: who in sobriety and chastity, have the keeping of the Spouse
of Christ, (to wit, his Church.) And a little after, They may deliver me up to
Satan, to the destruction of my Flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in the day
of our Lord Jesus. And, in the old Law whosoever was disobedient to the
Priests, was either cast out of the Camp, and so stoned of the People; or
laying down his neck to the Sword, expiated his offense by his Blood: But now
the Disobedient is cut off with the spiritual Sword; or being cast out of the
Church, is torn by the furious mouth of Devils. Thus St. Jerome.

The Church's Practice in this, is taken from the Example of St. Paul, [1 Timothy
1. 19.] where, having exhorted Timothy to preserve his Faith, and a good
Conscience, he presently adds, Which certain repelling, have made shipwreck
about the Faith (that is, of their Faith;) of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander;
whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

Now to prevent our being Seduced by Heretics, St. Paul says, 2 Timothy 3. 1. And
this know you, that in the last days shall approach perilous times: and Men
shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, haughty, proud, blasphemous, not
obedient to their Parents, unkind, wicked, without affection, without peace,
accusers, incontinent, unmerciful, without benignity, traitors, stubborn,
puffed up, and lovers of voluptuousness, more than of God; having an appearance
indeed of Piety, but denying the virtue thereof: and these avoid. For these be
they, that craftily enter into houses, and lead captive silly Women, laden with
sins, which are led with diverse desires; always learning, and never attaining
to the knowledge of the truth. But as Jannus and Jambres resisted Moses, so
these also resist the Truth; men corrupted in mind, reprobate concerning the
Faith. But they shall prosper no further. For their folly shall be manifest to
all, as theirs also was. All these words St. Cyprian [Epist. 55. Number. 3.]
Expounds of such as by pride and disobedience resist God's Priests. Let no
faithful man (says he) that keeps in mind our Lords and the Apostles
Admonition, marvel if he see, in the latter times, some proud and stubborn
fellows, and the Enemies of God's Priests go out of the Church, or impugn the
same: when both our Lord and the Apostle foretold us, that such should be.

Now one Reason, why the going out of the Church by Heresy is so great a
crime, is, because the Church is always preserved from Error, by the privilege
of Christ's Presence, of the Holy Ghosts Assistance, of our Lords Promise, and
Prayer: of which see St. Augustine upon those words of the 118 Psalm. Conc. 13.
Ne auferas de ore meo verbum veritatis usque quaque. Where he writes admirably
of this matter.

To the same purpose also these words of Lactantius are very remarkable. It is
the Catholic Church only that keeps the true Worship of God. This is the
Fountain of Truth, This is the House of Faith, This is the Temple of God; into
which if a Man enter not, or from which if any Man goes out, he is an Alien,
and Stranger from the hope of everlasting life and salvation. No Man must by
obstinate contention flatter himself: for it stands upon Life, and Salvation.
St. Cyprian [Epist. 55. ad Cornel. Number. 3.] says, The Church never departs from
that which she once has known; And St. Irenaeus [lib. 1. cap. 3.] That the
Apostles have laid up in the Church, as in a rich Treasury, all Truth. It were
an infinite labor to recite all that the Fathers say of this matter; All
counting it a most pernicious absurdity to affirm, That the Church of Christ
may err in Doctrins of Faith.

St. John the Apostle, 1 John 2. 18. says, Little Children, it is the last
hour, and as ye have heard that Antichrist comes, now there are become many
Antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last hour. They went out from us;
but they were not of us. St. Cyprian upon this place writes thus; [Epist. 76.
Number. 1. ad Magnum.] The holy Apostle St. John did not put a difference betwixt
one Heresy or Schism and another; nor meant any sort, that especially
separated themselves, but generally called All, without exception, Antichrists,
that were adversaries to the Church, or were gone out from the same. And a
little after, It is evident, that All be here called Antichrists, that have
severed themselves from the Charity and Unity of the Catholic Church.

Concerning St. Peter's Supremacy, or Charge of the whole Church, from which
Heretics separate themselves; St. Cyprian writes thus [Lib. de Unitat.
Ecclesiae.] To Peter (says he) our Lord after his Resurrection, said, Feed my
Sheep; and built his Church upon him alone, and to him he gives the charge of
Feeding his Sheep. For although, after his Resurrection, he gave his Power
alike to all, saying, As my Father sent me, so I send you. Receive the Holy
Ghost. If you remit to any their sins, they shall be remitted, etc. Yet to
manifest Unity, he constituted one Chair, and so disposed by his Authority,
that Unity should have origin of one. The rest of the Apostles were that, which
Peter was, in equal Fellowship of Honor, and Power; but the beginning comes of
Unity; the Primacy is given to Peter, that the Church of Christ may be showed
to be one, and one Chair.

St. Chrysostom also says thus, [Lib. 2. de Sacerdot.] Why did our Lord shed
his Blood? Truly, to redeem those Sheep, the Cure of which he committed both to
Peter, and also to his Successors. And a little after, Christ would have Peter
endowed with such Authority, and to be far above all his other Apostles. For he
says, Peter, Do thou love me, more than all These do? Whereupon our Master
might have inferred, If you love me, Peter, use much Fasting, Sleep on the hard
Floor, Watch much, be a Patron to the Oppressed, a Father to Orphans, and
Husband to Widows. But omitting all These things, he says, Feed my Sheep. For,
all the other Virtues, certainly, may be done easily by many Subjects, not only
Men, but also Women: but when it comes to the Government of the Church, and
committing the charge of many Souls, all Women-kind must needs give place to
the burden and greatness thereof, and a great number of Men also.

St. Gregory likewise [Lib. 4. Epist. 76] writes thus; It is plain to all men,
(says he) that ever read the Gospel, that by our Lord's mouth, the charge of
the whole Church was committed to St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles. For, unto
him it was said, Feed my Sheep. For him was the Prayer made, that his Faith
should not fail. To him were the Keys of Heaven given; and Authority to bind
and loose. To him the Cure of the Church, and Principality was delivered: And
yet he was not called the Universal Apostle. This Title indeed was offered, for
the honor of St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles, to the Pope of Rome, by the
holy Council of Chalcedon; but none of that See did ever use it, or consent to
take it. Thus St. Gregory.

St. Paul [ad Corinth. 1. 2. 15.] says, The Spiritual man judges all things.

Annotations.
St. Irenaeus [lib. 4. cap. 6.] excellently declaring, That the Church, and
every Spiritual Child thereof, judges and condemns all false Prophets, and
Heretics, of what sort soever: At length concludes with these remarkable
words; The Spiritual man shall judge also all that make Schisms, who are cruel,
not having the love of God, and, who respecting more their own private, (to
wit, Interest) than the Unity of the Church, mangle, divide, and (as much as in
them lies) kill, for small causes, the great and glorious Body of Christ, (to
wit, his Church): Speaking Peace, and seeking Battle. He, (to wit, the
Spiritual man) shall judge likewise such as be out of the Truth, that is to
say, out of the Church: Which Church shall be under no man's judgment, for to
the Church are all things known, in which is perfect Faith of the Father, and
of all the Dispensation of Christ, and firm knowledge of the Holy Ghost, that
teaches all Truth.

It is said, Acts 11. 26. That the Disciples were at Antioch first named
Christians.

Annotations.
This name Christian ought to be common to all the Faithful; and other new
Names of Schismatics and Sectaries, must be abhorred. If you hear (Says St.
Hierom, contr. Lucif. cap. 7. in fine) any where such as be said to be of
Christ, not to have their Names of our Lord Jesus Christ, but to be called
after some other certain Name, as Marcionites, Valentinians, (as now also the
Lutherans, Calvinists, Protestants, etc.) know you, that they belong not to the
Church of Christ, but to the Synagogue of Antichrist.

Lanctantius also [lib. 7. Divinarum Institution. cap. 30.] says thus; When
Phrygians, or Novatians, or Valentinians, or Marcionites, or Anthropomorphites,
or Arians, or any other (to wit, such Sects) be named, they cease to be
Christians; Who having left the Name of Christ, have assumed the Names of Men.

Neither can our now Sectaries help, or excuse themselves, by objecting, That
we are called Papists: For, besides that it is by them scornfully invented (as
the name Homousians was by the Arians) This Name is not of any one Man, Bishop
of Rome, or elsewhere, known to be the Author of any Schism, or Sect (as their
callings be) but it is of a whole State, and order of Governors, and that of
the chief Governors; to whom we are bound to cleave in Religion, and to obey in
all things concerning it. So that to be a Papist is to be a Christian, a Child
of the Church, and a Subject of Christ's Vicar. And therefore against such
impudent Sectaries as compare the Faithful, for following the Pope, to the
diversity of Heretics, bearing the names of new Masters, let us ever have in
readiness this saying of St. Hierom, writing to Pope Damasus [Hierom. Epist. ad
Damasum] Vitalis I know not, Miletius I refuse, I know not Paulinus. Whosoever
gathers not with you, scatters. That is to say, Whosoever is not Christ's,
is Antichrists. And again, If any man joins with Peter's Chair, he is mine;
that is, he is of one Faith with me.

It is here further to be observed, That this name Christian (given to all
Believers, and the whole Church) was especially taken, to distinguish them from
Jews and Heathens, which believed not at all in Christ: And the same now
likewise severeth, and makes Christians known from Turks, and others, who
believe nothing of the Divinity of Christ.

But when Heretics began to rise up among Christians, (which Heretics
professed Christ's Name, and sundry Articles of Faith, as true Believers do)
then the name of Christian was too common to distinguish such Heretics, and
make them known from true Believers, who were entirely sound in their Faith.
And therefore to distinguish these, from such true and faithful Believers of
All Doctrines of Christian Faith, the Apostles (inspired by the Holy Ghost) put
into the Creed the name Catholic; which is as much as to say, A true and
faithful Believer of all Christian Doctrine.

And by this it appears evidently, That no Heretic is a Catholic, although
they falsely pretend to it, when they are pr^ssed with this Article of the
Creed.

To confirm what has been here said, St. Pacianus [Epist. ad Sympherianum.]
writes thus: When Heresies were risen, and endeavored by diverse Names to tear
the Dove of God, and Queen (to wit, the Church) and to rent her in pieces; the
Apostolical People reqired their Surname, whereby the incorrupt People might
be distinguished, etc. and so those that before were called Christians, are now
Surnamed Catholics. Christian is my Name (says he) Catholic my Surname. And
thus the word Catholic is a proper note, by which the Apostles, in their
Creed, taught us to discern the true Church from the false Heretical
Congregations of all sorts of Heretics.

And not only the meaning of the word, which signifies Universality of Times,
Places, and Persons, but likewise the very name, and word it self, by God's
Providence, has been always, and only, appropriated to True Believers: And
though sometimes, at the beginning, or first rising up of Sects, challenged by
them, yet never obtained by Heretics, as their constant Name.

Wherefore St. Augustine says, In the lap of the Church, the very name of
Catholic keeps me, [Aug. contr. Epist. Fundament. cap. 4.] And again, [Tract.
32. in Joan.] We receive the Holy Ghost, if we love the Church, if we be joined
together by Charity, if we rejoice in the Catholic Name and Faith.

And again, [Tom. 1. libr. de vera Religione, cap. 7.] We must hold the
Communion of the Church, which is named Catholic; not only of her own, but
also of all her Enemies. For will they, nill they, the Heretics also, and
Schismatics themselves, when they speak not with their own Fellows, but with
Strangers, call the Catholic Church, nothing else, but the Catholic Church.
For they would not be understood, unless they discerned it, that is, expressed
it, by this Name, by which she is called of all the World.

Thus far of the Testimonies of the Fathers concerning Schisms.

CHAP. IV.
The Reason of this great Severity of both Scriptures, and Fathers, against
Heresy, and Schism.

NOw the reason of this great Severity of the Fathers, excluding all from any
hope of Salvation, that are divided from the Unity of the Church by Schism, or
Heresy, is manifested by St. Augustine, in a Discourse of his upon those words
of our Savior, John 6. 55. My Flesh is meat indeed, and my Blood is drink
indeed. Where he writes thus:

The following words are these, as my Living Father sent me, and I live by the
Father; so he, that eats (or feeds upon) me, shall live by me. Our Savior has
taught us by these Misterious Words, That we are to be as Members in his Body,
the Church under him, or connected to him, as our Head, feeding upon his Flesh,
and not deserting his Unity.

Now that, which makes us his Members, is this Unity: Which Unity is caused by
charity, diffused into our hearts by the Holy Ghost, who is given to us. It is
therefore the Spirit (to wit, of Charity) that gives life, making us living
Members. Nor does this Spirit make any living Members, but such as are in the
Body of the Church; which receives life from the same Spirit. For the Spirit,
or Soul which is in man, does not give life to a member separated from the
Body; because it is not joined by Union to the same Body.

The design of this Discourse, is to move us to love Unity, and fear a
separation from the Church. For a Christian ought to fear nothing more, than to
be separated from the Body of Christ, to wit, his Church: Since such as are
separated from this his Mystical Body, are not his Members; and not being his
Members, they cannot receive life from his Spirit.

Now the Apostle assures us, That such as have not the Spirit of Christ, belong
not to him.

And a little after, in the same Homily, he goes on thus:

The Faithful know Christ's Body, if they neglect not to be his Body. They must
be his Body, if they will live of the Spirit of Christ. For none live of the
Spirit of Christ, but his Body, the Church. Consider well, what I have said.

You, being a Man, are composed of a body and a spirit; which is otherwise
termed a Soul. The Spirit, or Soul, is invisible, the Body, visible. Now as
your Body lives by your Spirit; so if you will live by the Spirit of Christ,
you must be in the Body of Christ. For as my Body lives by my Spirit, and your
Body, by yours; so the Body of Christ cannot live, but by the Spirit of Christ.

He that desires to live, may understand here where he is to live, and from
whence he is to receive his life. He must approach, believe, and be
incorporated, if he pretends to live. He must not voluntarily separate himself
from being connected with the Members of this Body of the Church; nor be a
corrupted Member, so as to deserve to be cut off: Nor yet so deformed, or out
of order, that the rest of the Members of the Body may be ashamed of him. He is
therefore to be fair, and neat, aptly proportioned to the rest, and in perfect
health.

Moreover he must be careful to adhere closely to the Body of the Church,
taking his life from God, and referring it to him, laboring here in this life,
that he may afterward reign in Heaven.

Thus St. Augustine convinces evidently, That no Schismatic, or Heretic, can
be saved.

CHAP. V.
A further manifestation of the Horridness of the Sin of Schism; and in what
Case Ignorance may Excuse from the Guilt of it.

NOw yet, to penetrate more fully into the true Grounds, why, above almost all
other Sins a Christian is capable of committing Schism, that is, the setting up
of an Altar against an Altar; or the relinquishing the External Communion of
the Church, the making Collects or Assemblies without, yea against the consent
of the true Bishops, or Church Governors, etc. should be a sin so unpardonable,
we are to consider, that the true reason of this may be deduced from the
Example of all other Governments whatsoever.

For, the greatest offense a Subject can commit against Monarchy, is an actual
attempt, or rather the attempt executed, by which Monarchy is dissolved.
Inwardly to condemn the Laws of such a Government; or to entertain Principles,
which if put in practice, would withdraw Subjects from their due Obedience, is
an offense of an high nature; but the actual Cantonizing of a Kingdom, and the
raising in it Courts and Judicatories, independent on, and opposite to the
Common Tribunal of the Country, is the utmost of all crimes: both the Seducers
and the Seduced, are not only deprived of the Privileges belonging to good
Subjects, but pursued by Arms, as the worst of All Enemies.

It is so in God's Church. The main Thing our Creed teaches us to believe of
it, is its Unity, without which it is not a Church. Now if Unity, then Order,
then Subordination of Governments, etc. What therefore is the great Sin against
this Fundamental Constitution of the Church, but Schism? A dissolving the
Communion, and connection, that the Members of this great Body have amongst
themselves, and with relation to the whole?

We all willingly acknowledge, that the great sin of the Synagogue, the sin
that filled up the measure of the crimes of the Jews, was their Murdering of
our Lord. Now, says St. Chris^stom [Homil. 11. ad Ephesians.] We shall not merit,
or incur, a less cruel Punishment, if we divide the Unity and Plenitude of the
Church, (the Mystical Body of our Lord) then Those have done, who pierced,
mangled, and tore his own Body.

But may not Ignorance excuse the Guilt of Schism? No: On the contrary, in some
regard, it aggravates it.

For, though Pride, and Malice, be far greater in the leading Schismatics,
Persons of Wit and Learning; yet ignorant Souls, and Idiots, seem more to
contradict Human reason; because the more ignorant they are, and being no
Pastors, the more they ought to submit their judgments to Authority; and
consequently the preferring their own conduct, or the conduct and direction of
particular men, or Churches, before the universal Authority of the Church, the
Excommunicating, as it were, the whole Church of God, the esteeming all
Christians, both Pastors and Flocks, as Heathens and Publicans, is a
presumption so contrary to human nature and reason, that their want of Learning
is that which will most of all condemn them.

I speak not now of Persons absolutely Idiots, who scarce know there are any
other Pastors, or any other Church than their own; who pretend not at all to
pass their judgments on other Religions; but know only what their Pastors teach
them; having not ability, by reason of their condition, to examine Scriptures,
and Churches.

For such, no doubt, may, by their simplicity, and absolute invincible
ignorance, escape the malignity of Schism.

But I speak of Inferior Tradsmen, of Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, who have a
capacity of being rightly instructed, and better informed, of the Spiritual
Authority, to which they owe their Subjection; and yet who, by their own
perverseness, become troublers of the Church; and who, because they can read the
Scriptures, take upon them to judge of the Sense of them, both for themselves,
and their Pastors.

Such as these, no doubt, have drunk in the very Gall of Schism, by usurping an
Authority, which express Scripture says, belongs only to Pastors.

I fear, much fewer than is ordinarily imagined of those, who have any liberal
Education, will be excused from this sin, by any Ignorance, Surreptition,
Provocation, etc. by reason of that great evidence and light, which they have
of the continued Succession, Unity of Doctrine, perfect Obedience to their
spiritual Superiors, Pennances, and Retirements from the World; and several
other signal marks of the One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostclick Church.

Some may be more deeply guilty, and obnoxious to a heavier damnation, than
others; as Ringleaders, more than their Followers: But Damnation is by the
Fathers generally denounced, as the portion of them all. Thus of the sin of
Schism.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Schism of the Church of England.

NOw, whereas some Protestants seek to vindicate the Church of England from
Schism, by likening it to the Church of St. Cyprian, of whom it is said, That
it condemned no man, nor separated none from its Communion; yet you are to
know, that this Plea helps them not at all.

For, although this Moderation did exempt St. Cyprian from Schism, because (as
St. Augustine says) The Church had not then decided the dispute; to whose
decision St. Cyprian would certainly have submitted: Yet this Moderation does
not at all exempt the Church of England from Schism; because her separation
from her Mother Church is for very many Doctrins of Faith, defined, and
determined by the same Church.

This following Example, will make the Case of the Church of England evidently
appear.

For if (for Example) a Province in England had withdrawn it self from the
Public Civil Authority, this Excuse would not exempt them from being Rebels,
to say, We do not intend to quarrel with Those that continue in Obedience to
the King; we mean neither him, nor them, any harm, They shall be welcome to
come among us; if they will, we will be good friends; we will not meddle with
their doings, but we will be governed only by our own Laws, and Magistrates,
etc. I believe, (I say) This would not take from them the Guilt of Rebellion.
Their Civility, in such their Rebellion, would not change the Title of their
crime, nor free them from the punishment due unto it. It may perhaps, qualify
the Prince's resentment; but the civilest Treason is Treason.

In this Point of Schism, to the end that Doctor Pierce, in his Court-Sermon,
may clear Protestants, and lay the weight of so great a crime, on the Catholic
Church; he argues thus: Since besides the corruptions in Practice, (which yet
alone cannot justify separation) there were in the Roman Church so many
corruptions in Doctrine likewise, entrenching on Fundamentals, the Schism could
not be on the Church of England's side; which was obliged to separate, so just
cause being given; but on theirs, who gave the cause of the separation.

This Plea of the Doctors, if it be admitted, totally destroys all Governments,
and lays all the Guilt of Schisms, and Rebellions in Church and State, upon
Civil and Ecclesiastical Governors.

For, if Subjects may accuse their Governors, and be themselves Judges of the
Justice of such their Accusations, the Governors are always sure to be
condemned and pronounced guilty, and the Subject justified.

Now, to admit this Liberty of the Subject in Church Government, above all
others is the most unjust Thing imaginable; because that Government is
protected from all error in Doctrins of Faith, by the assistance of the Holy
Ghost; who was sent by our Savior to teach it all Truth.

Wherefore, to tax that Government with Errors in Faith, is, either to tax the
Holy Ghost with them, or to blaspheme against our Savior, by saying he has not
kept his word, in sending the Holy Ghost to teach the Church All truth.

Besides, There is this other consideration, which does further manifest the
weakness of this the Doctor's Plea.

For, if the Church of Rome be our Mother Church, (as King James acknowledged
her to be, in a public Speech made to his Parliament, wherein he says, I
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be our Mother Church: [See Stow, page 840.)
then it will follow, (as it was urged in Parliament by Doctor Heath, Archbishop
of York, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth), That if now, after so many Ages,
this Church of Rome be found an Erroneous Church, then we have hitherto
received no benefit by our Christianity; but rather have been all along
deceived: Since if this Mother Church be false, the Doctrine which she taught
us, must necessarily be false: A Church being said to be false, because she
teaches false Doctrine.

Thus the Doctor may see, what he has gotten by his Reformation.

There is one thing yet, that deserves well to be taken notice of, in this
change of Religion here in England.

For, if all the Clergy, and the Universities, had generally assented to this
Change, it might have seemed a lesser crime. But to have this done, (as de
facto it was done in Queen Elizabeth's Reign) by Laymen only, and this only with
the Difference of Six Voices in Parliament (although that Parliament was packed
for this purpose) and in opposition to the contrary Protestations, and
Declarations of all the Clergy, and Universities, This does heighten this crime
to the utmost of all Impiety.

I will yet for a close, add one thing more: which does not a little manifest
this Impiety.

For although Reformation of Religion was here pretended; yet it evidently
appears by our English History, that nothing but worldly and carnal Interests
carried on this business. For was not the Liberty, obtained by King Henry the
Eighth, to bring into his Bed a new handsome Wife, instead of his former
virtuous Queen, a very carnal Interest?

Was not his invading all the Possessions, and Treasure of Monasteries, a great
Secular Interest?

Was not the dividing the said Lands amongst the Nobility, and Gentry, at very
easy rates, a very great Interest?

In King Edward's days, was not the Protector's seizing on the remainder of
Churchspoyls, a great Interest?

Was not the freeing of Clergymen from a necessity of saying, daily, and
almost hourly, long Ecclesiastical Offices, from lying alone without
Bedfellows, etc. matters of great, both carnal and secular Interest?

Was not the exempting of All, both Layity and Ecclesiastics, from the Duty of
confessing their Sins, and submitting themselves to Penitential Satisfactions,
from rigorous Fasts out of Conscience and Religion, and other Austerities, a
matter of considerable Interest to Flesh, and corrupt Nature?

By what has been hitherto said, appears but even too clearly, how that the
Fundamental Rule of all Government and Subordination, was utterly neglected in
England, at the time that the pretended Reformation was contrived, and executed.

Here is a new, and thorough moulding of a Church, both in Doctrins, and
Discipline, called a Reformation: Wherein all the Synodical Acts of this
Church, since Christianity entered among us, are, as to any obliging Power, by
their Authority reversed; wherein all the Decisions of Patriarchal Councils,
yea, of Ecumenical Synods, are called into Examination: All their Laws, (so
far as to them seemed meet) reformed; the whole regard, that England had to all
other Catholic Churches, as a Member of the whole, is utterly broken by one
National Church.

Nay, not so much: By one Luxurious King; By one Child, and by one Woman: Even
when the whole Body of the Clergy protested against it. Let the world now be
judge, Whether this Action can be justified.

Thus of the Schism of the Church of England.

CHAP. VII.
The Assertions of some Protestants concerning Church Authority: And of some of
them concerning the Dignity, and Authority of the Church of Rome.

SChism, and Heresy being here so evidently demonstrated, to consist in
denying Obedience to Church Authority, it may seem strange to find any
Protestants (so much to their own condemnation) to write any thing in defense
of such Church Authority, and particularly of the Authority of the Church of
Rome, from which they have separated, totally casting off all obedience to it.
But yet this they have done; as will appear by these following Testimonies of
some very Eminent amongst them.

See Sir Edwyn Sands in his Europae Speculum, Numb. 12. where he has this
following Discourse of the Security in submitting to the Authority of the
Church of Rome: Which although he delivers in the Person of a Catholic. yet it
is without Reply, or seeking to deny the Truth of any thing here said. The
Discourse then is this.

SInce Christianity is a Doctrine of Faith, a Doctrine whereof all Men are
capable, as being in gross, and in general to be believed by all; and since the
high Virtue of Faith is in the Humility of the Understanding; and the Merit
thereof in the readiness of Obedience to Embrace it: and withal, since of
outward proofs of our Faith (where the true sense of Scripture is disputed) the
Churches Testimony, whether for declaring to us the sense of Scripture, or the
judgments of the Ancients, is a proof of most weight: What madness were it for
any man, to tire out his Soul, and to wast away his Spirits, in tracing out all
the thorny paths of the Controversies of these days! wherein to err is no less
easy, than dangerous, what through forgery of Authors abusing him; what
through sophistry beguiling him; what through passion and prejudice
transporting him: and not rather betake himself to the right path of Truth;
whereunto God, Nature, Reason, and Experience do all give witness: And that is,
to associate himself to the Church, whereunto the custody of this Heavenly and
supernatural Truth has been, from Heaven it self, committed. To weigh
discreetly which is the true Church; and that being once found, to receive
faithfully, and obediently, without doubt, or discussion, whatsoever it
delivers.

Now to discover this, let him reflect, that, besides the Roman Church, and
such others, as are United with it, he finds all other Churches to have had
their end, or decay, long since; or their beginning but of late. This Church
was founded by the Prince of the Apostles, with a promise to him from Christ,
That Hell Gates should never prevail against it, Matt. 16. 18. And that himself
would be assistant to it, to the Consummation of the World. It has now
continued Sixteen hundred years, with an Honorable and certain Line of near Two
hundred and forty Popes, Successors of St. Peter; both Tyrants, Traitors,
Pagans, and Heretics in vain wresting, raging, and undermining it.

All the Lawful general Councils, that ever were in the World, have, from time
to time, approved and honored it: God has so miraculously blessed it from
above, that many Learned and wise Doctors have enriched it with their Writings,
Armies of Saints with their Holiness and Virtues; Armies of Martyrs with their
Blood; and of Virgins with their Purity* have sanctified and embellished it.
And even at this day, in such difficulties of unjust Rebellions, and unnatural
Revolts of her nearest Children; yet she stretches out her arms to the utmost
corners of the World, newly embracing whole Nations into her bosom.

Lastly, in all other opposite Churches there are found inward dissensions, and
contrarieties, change of opinions, uncertainty of resolutions, with robbing of
Churches, rebelling against Governors, confusion of Order: Whereas,
contrariwise in this Church, there is the Unity undivided, the resolutions
unaltered, the most heavenly Order, reaching from the hight of all Power, to
the lowest of all Subjection; all with admirable Harmony, and undefective
correspondence bending the same way, to the effecting of the same work: all
which do promise no other, than a continual increase and victory.

Wherefore, let no Man doubt to submit himself to this glorious Spouse of
Christ.

This then being accorded to be the true Church of God, it follows, that she be
reverently obeyed in all things, without further inquisition; she having the
warrant, that he that hears her, hears Christ; and whosoever hears her not,
has no better place with God, than a Publican or Pagan. And what folly were
it, to receive Scriptures upon the credit of her Authority, and not to receive
the interpretation of them, upon her Authority also, and credit?

And if God should not always protect his Church from Error, and yet
peremptorily command Men always to obey her, then had he made very slender
provision for the Salvation of Mankind: which conceit concerning God (whose
care of us, even in all things touching this transitory Life, is so plain and
evident) would render us very ungratefully impious.

And hard were the case, and mean had his regard been, of the vulgar People;
(whose wants, and difficulties in this life, and whose capacities will not
suffice to sound the deep and hidden Mysteries of Divinity, and to search the
truth of intricate Controversies); if there were not others, whose Authority
they might safely follow and rely upon, Blessed are they who believe, and have
not seen, Joh. 20. 29. The merit of whose Religious Humility and Obedience
exceeds (perhaps) in honor and acceptance before God, the subtle and profound
knowledge of many others.

Thus Sir Edwyn Sands. To the same purpose Dr. Jeremy Tailor, in his Treatise
of the Liberty of Prophesying.

These following Considerations (says he) may very easily persuade persons of
much reason, and more Piety, to maintain that, which they know to have been the
Religion of their Forefathers; which had actual possession and seizure of Men's
minds, and understandings, before the opposite Professions had a name. As
first, its Doctrine having had a long continuance, and possession of the Church:
Which therefore cannot easily be supposed, in the present professors, to be a
design; since they have received it from so many Ages. And it is not likely,
that all Ages should have the same purposes; or that the same Doctrine should
serve the several ends of diverse Ages.

Secondly, its long prescription; which is such an advantage, that it cannot,
with many Arguments be retrenched; as relying upon these grounds: to wit, that
Truth is more Ancient than Falsehood; and that God would not, for so many Ages,
forsake his Church, and leave her in an Error.

Again, the beauty and splendour of that Church, their Solemn Service, the
stateliness and magnificence of their Hierarchy, their name of Catholic, which
they claim as their own due, and to concern no other Sect of Christianity. The
Antiquity of their Doctrine; the continual Succession of their Bishops, their
immediate derivation from the Apostles.

Their Title to Succed St. Peter; whose Personal Prerogatives were so great.
The Honorable Expressions concerning this Church, from many eminent Bishops of
other inferior Sees: which being old Records, have obtained a credibility.

The multitude, and variety of People, which are of their Persuasion: Apparent
consent with elder Ages, in matters Doctrinal: The Advantage, which is derived
to them by retaining the Doctrine of the Church of Ancient times: The great
consent one part with another, in that which they affirm to be de Fide: The
great differences which are commenced amongst their Adversaries, abusing the
liberty of Prophesying unto a very great Licentiousness.

Their happiness in being instrumental in converting diverse Nations. The
advantage of Monarchical Government; and the benefit which they daily enjoy by
it. The Piety, and the Austerity of their Religious Orders of Men and Women.
The single life of their Priests and Bishops. The riches of their Church; The
severity of their Fasts; and other their Exterior Observances.

The great Reputation of their Bishops, for Faith and Sanctity. The known
Holiness of some of those Persons, whose Institutes the Religious Persons do
now imitate, and follow.

Their Miracles. The Casualties, and Accidents, that have happened to many of
their Adversaries. The oblique Acts, and indirect Proceedings of some of those,
who have departed from them.

And among many other Things, the names of Heretic, and Schismatic, which
they fasten upon all, that disagree from them, etc.

Thus Dr. Tailor. See the Learned Grotius, declaring the impossibility of
Uniting Christians into one Body, but by their adhering to the Roman See.

What is the reason (says Grotius, in his First Reply to Rivet. ad Artic. 7.)
That such as differ in Opinion amongst Catholics, remain in the same Body, not
breaking Communion: But on the contrary, when dissensions happen amongst
Protestants, they cannot thus compose Disputes, and oppositions, although they
speak much of Fraternal Love? Now he, that shall examine this well, will find
how much force and power there is in the Primacy. Thus he.

This brings to mind that saying of St. Jerome, concerning St. Peter's Primacy.
Wherefore, amongst the Twelve One was chosen, that a Head being constituted,
and appointed, all occasion of Schism might be taken away. Hieronym. lib. 1.
cap. 14. advers. Jovinian.

Now again, the same Grotius, in the close of his last Reply to Rivet, written
not long before his death; writes thus:

It is well known, that Grotius has always wished for a Restitution, and
Reuniting of Christians into one and the same Body. He was sometime of Opinion,
that this might have been begun by a Conjunction, or Union of Protestants
amongst themselves. But he afterward discerned, that this was impossible to be
effected; because, besides that, most of all the Calvinists are totally averse
from any such Peace, or Union; Protestants are not associated, or united, under
any Common Ecclesiastical Government; which is the cause, why the diverse parts
of them cannot be collected into one Body. And withal, this is the Reason, that
they must necessarily still divide into more new Sects, or Parts.

Wherefore Grotius now plainly sees, and judges, as likewise many others with
him, that Protestants can never be united amongst themselves, unless they be
joined with those, that adhere to the Roman See; whithout which no common
Government can be expected in the Church.

And therefore he wishes, that the Division and Separation which has been made,
and likewise the causes of it, may be taken away. Now amongst these the Primacy
of the Bishop of Rome according to the Canons, cannot be looked upon as one
cause, even by the Confession of Melancthon himself; who thinks that Premacy to
be necessary for the retaining, and preserving of Unity.

Thus Grotius, concering the Uniting all Christans by their adhering to the
Roman See.

See Doctor Field, in the Preface to his Book of the Church; recommending the
ending all Disputes in Religion, by a lawful Church Authority.

Seeing (says he) the Controversies in Religion, in our times, are grown in
number so many, and in matters so intricate, that few have time and leisure,
fewer strength of understanding, to examine them: what remains for men
desirous of satisfaction in Things of such consequence, but diligently to
search out, which, amongst all the Societies of the World, is that Blessed
company of Holy Ones, that Household of Faith, that Spouse of Christ, and Church
of the Living God, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth, that so he may
embrace her Communion, follow her Directions, and rest in her Judgment.

Thus Dr. Field.

In like manner, Dr. Hammond in his Treatise of Heresy, [Sect. 13. Number. 2, 3.]
speaks thus of the Christians Security (from the Divine Providence) in his
adherance in matters of Faith to Church Authority.

If we consider (says he) God's great, wise, and constant Providence, and care
over his Church, his desire that All Men should be saved; and in order to that,
come to the knowledge of all necessary Truth; his Promise, That he will not
suffer his Faithful Servants to be tempted above what they are able; nor permit
scandals, and false Teachers to prevail to the seducing of the very Elect, his
most Pious, Godly Servants: If (I say) we consider These, and some other
suchlike general Promises of Scripture, wherein this question [about the
Errability of Councils] seems to be concerned, we shall have reason to believe,
that God will never suffer All Christians to fall into such a Temptation, as it
must be, in case the whole Representative of the Church should err in matters
of Faith; and therein find approbation, and reception amongst all Those
Bishops, and Doctors of the Church diffused, which were out of the Council.
Thus he,

See also his Commentary on 1 Timothy 3. 15. The Church, the Pillar, and Ground of
Truth.

According to this it is, (says he) that Christ is said, Ephesians. 4. 12. to have
given not only Apostles, etc. but also Pastors, and Teachers; that is, Bishops
in the Church, for the compacting the Saints into a Church, for the building up
of the Body of Christ, confirming, and continuing them in all Truth; that we
should be no more like Children, carried about with every wind of Dectrin.

And so again, when Heresies came into the Church, in the first Ages, it is
every where apparent by Ignatius his Epistles, that the only way of avoiding
Error, and Danger, was to adhere to the Bishop in Communion and Doctrine: And
whosoever departed from him, and from that Form of wholesome words kept by him,
was supposed to be corrupted.

Thus far Dr. Hammond. See Doctor Jackson on the Creed, lib. 2. cap. 4. page
165.

Sundry (says he) in profession Protestants, in eagerness of opposition to the
Papists, affirm, That the Church, or Spiritual Pastors, must then only be
believed, then only obeyed, when they give Sentence according to the evident
and express Law of God, made evident to the Heart and Consciences of such as
must believe and obey them. And this, in one word, is to take away all
Authority of Spiritual Pastors, and to deprive them of all Obedience: Unto
whom, doubtless, God, by his Word, has given some special Authority, and
Right, to exact some peculiar obedience of their Flock.

Now if the Pastor be then only to be obeyed, when he brings evident commission
out of Scripture for those particulars, unto which he demands Belief, or
Obedience; what obedience do men perform to him, more than to any other man
whatsoever? For, whosoever he be, that can show us the express, undoubted
Command of God, it must be obeyed of all. But whilst it is thus obeyed, it
only, not he that shows it unto us, is obeyed.

And if this were all the Obedience, that I owe unto others, I were no more
bound to believe, or obey, any other man, than he is bound to obey, or believe
me: The Flock no more bound to obey the Pastors, than the Pastors the Flock.
Yet certainly God, who has set Kingdoms in Order, is not the Author of such
confusion in the Spiritual Regiment of his Church. Thus Doctor Jackson; tying
All to Obedience, or Submission, to the judgment of their Spiritual Superiors.

See lastly Doctor Fern. page 48.

The Church of Christ (says he) is a Society, or Company, under a Regiment,
Discipline, and Government; and the Members constituting that Society, are
either Persons Taught, Guided, and Governed; or Persons Teaching, Guiding,
Governing: And this in order to preserve all in Unity, and to advance every
Member of this visible Society to an effectual, and real participation of
Grace, and Union with Christ, the Head. And therefore upon no less account is
Obedience due unto them. Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13, 16. and Heb. 13. 17. And he that
will not hear the Church, is to be as an Heathen, and Publican. Matthew. 18. 17.
Thus Doctor Fern. Now in Confirmation of what has been here said by these
Protestants, concerning Obedience to Church Authority, See St. Augustine in his
Book De utilitate credendi, (of the benefit of believing the Church) written to
his Friend Honoratus, (led away by many extravagant Manichaean Dotages)
advising him Submission of judgment to Church Authority.

There is nothing (says he) more easy, than, not only to say, but also to
think, or conceive, that we have found out the Truth; but in reality it is very
difficult. Aug. de utilitat. credendi. Cap. 10. And Chap. 12. who is there, but
even of a mean capacity, that does not plainly see it to be more secure for all
such, as are not profoundly knowing in Divine matters, to obey the Precepts of
the wise, than to rely upon their own judgments? -- For, if this be convenient
to be observed in lesser matters, as in Merchandising, Tilling of Ground, etc.
certainly much more in concerns of Religion. For human Affairs are far more
easily understood, than the Divine Things of Faith: Which being more sacred and
sublime, as they ought to be more reverenced and esteemed by us, so the danger
and offense is greater, if we fail in the true notion of them.

And Chap. 17. he argues thus: If every Discipline, although never so mean, and
easy to be understood, requires a Master, or Teacher, what can be a more
temerarious Pride, than not to learn the Books of the Divine Sacraments, or
Mysteries, from the Interpreters of them?

And Chap. 7. No man, that is not a Poet, presumes to read Terence without a
Master: And will you venture upon the reading of those Books, which by the
Confession of almost all mankind, are accounted Holy, and full of Divine
Mysteries; and presume to give a judgment of the sense of them, without a
Master?

And Chap. 16. he thus goes on: Since it is so difficult a thing, to come to
the knowledge of God by Reason, Do you think, that all men are capable of
comprehending the reasons, which are produced to guide men's minds to this
Divine Knowledge?

Thus he; to induce his Friend Honoratus, in such Divine matters, to yield the
guidance of himself, to Church Authority: And then the Church Authority he
would have him Submit to, he describes thus, Chap. 17.

Which Church (says he) has obtained Supreme Authority from the Apostolic
See, by a Succession of Bishops, Heretics in vain barking against it: Who were
lastly condemned, partly by the judgment of the People, partly by the Gravity
or Authority of Councils, and partly also by the Majesty, or Greatness of
Miracles.

Now, not to submit to this Authority, were the height of Impiety, or a
precipitant arrogance. For, if there be no other way of obtaining Wisdom, and
Salvation, but by Faith, preparing, and disposing Reason; what could more
manifest our Ingratitude unto God, for his Divine aid and assistance, than to
make it our endeavors, to resist the forementioned Authority?

Lastly, he concludes with him thus: Chap. II. If now you have been
sufficiently tossed, and wearied out with variety of Disputes, and desire to
put an end to them, follow the Direction of the Catholic Church, (or the way
of Catholic Discipline) which his derived from Christ himself to us by his
Apostles, and is to continue, in the same Channel of Succession, unto the End
of the World. Thus St. Augustine, concerning the Security of adhering to
Church Authority.

Now because, in the precedent Historical Collections, there is so often
mention made of the great contests, that happened concerning the Sacrament of our
Lord's Supper, I will endeavor to give some satisfaction, and to settle men's
minds in the true notion of this Doctrine of Faith.

CHAP. VIII.
What Ways the Church has made use of, to settle men's minds in the Doctrine of
the Sacrament of the Eucharist; or our Lord's Last Supper.

TO make this appear more fully, I will give you a brief Relation of the past
proceedings of the Church, in the Decision of the Disputes concerning the Real
Presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and the Substantial Conversion of the
Elements of Bread and Wine into the Body and Blood of Christ.

This Real presence, and Substantial Conversion, Berengarius, and some
Followers of his long ago denied: Who being complained of, Two Councils were
called one after another, at Rome and Verseilis, Anno Domini 1050. Berengarius
Summoned, and he not appearing, his Heterodox Opinions were condemned. He
(according to the now Protestant Grounds) thinking his a Doctrine of great
consequence, and the Decrees of the Two Councils, a manifest Error; and that
himself had manifest Scripture, and Demonstration against it, judged himself
freed from the obedience of silence, or noncontradiction, of these Councils.
And so he, and his Followers publicly justified his Tenent, desiring a
reversing, by some new Council, of the former sentence against it.

Upon this revived Disturbance of the Church, another Council, Five years
after, is Assembled at Tours, Anno 1055. not far distant from Angiers, where he
was Archdeacon. Here himself, with others of his Party, where present, his
Cause pleaded, his Demonstrations considered; and after all, his Opinion again
condemned; himself also Recanting it.

The Council dismissed, he finds yet other new Reasons, and a greater strength
in his former; and falls again to the abetting, maintaining, and spreading
abroad his old Doctrine. A Fourth Council upon these new Troubles of the Church,
Anno 1059. Four years after the last, was called at Rome; where himself also
was present. Some say, long Disputation there had, his new Plea for it was
found too light, and rejected: And his Opinion, opposing Substantial
Conversion, again condemned, both by himself and Council, consisting of an
Hundred and Three Bishops.

The Third time this man revolts, and publishes a Writing, (answered by
Lanfranck, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury) wherein he complains, That some
particular Enemies of his swayed the former Council, and had made him to Swear
Contradictions.

These new Imputations occasioned a Fifth Council to be called at Rome, Anno
Domini 1078. in which were new Disputings, his last Cavils censured, and the
Article of a Substantial Conversion further vindicated; and his Error of the
Substance of Bread remaining, again condemned by this Council: And lastly
condemned by himself.

Such was the Sentence of Five General Councils of the West; and the same
Arguments then refuted, yet are still urged; as will appear by the Writers of
those times, (Lanfranck, Guitmundus, Algerus,) to any one that pleases to
peruse them: The same Authorities out of the Fathers then pressed, as are still
produced a new by the Reformed, and with the same Answers repelled. All these
Councils (if some of them in the Members thereof, less numerous, yet)
universally accepted by all the Western Churches; where this Controversy was
only agitated: Not one single Bishop thereof (that is known) dissenting, or
siding with the Berengarians. Look we for more satisfaction yet?

When the Fervor of parties, in this matter, was much allaied, and the Church
had had sufficient leisure to consider, and digest the former Conciliary
Decrees, above an Hundred years after the last of the Councils forementioned,
the great Lateran Council was assembled, under Innocent the Third; in which
were present the Patriarch of Constantinople and Jerusalem in person, and the
Substitutes of the Patriarch of Antioch; and of the Alexandrian Patriarch
(lying under the Saracen yoke) Germanus, his Deacon.

['Tis true indeed, that some of These Patriarchs were then Latins or belonging
to the Latin, or Western Church; because both Constantinople, and Jerusalem,
being held in Possession (the one for near 60, the other for near 100 years) by
the Latins; Latin Patriarchs were then Elected: As sometimes Greeks also, by
the Power of the Emperors, have been Bishops of Rome. But yet they were the
Lawful, and the only Patriarchs of those Sees, at that time.]

And present there were besides These, a considerable number of other Eastern
Bishops; the whole Council consisting of four hundred and twelve Bishops, and
seventy Archbishops. Now this Council again, instead of reversing, declared for
a Substantial Conversion: Where also first (that is, in a Council) was used the
Name of Transubstantiation.

Two Hundred years after this, again, the Council at Florence declared likewise
for the same, in the Articles of Instruction for the Jacobins, and Armenians,
in these words: By force of the Words of Christ, the Substance of Bread is
converted (or changed) into the Body of Christ; and the Substance of Wine into
his Blood.

Now if the Decrees of so many Councils, so often weighing the Adversaries
Reasons, and Evidences, was not sufficient for settling such a Point, what can
hereafter be sufficient! Or how can we ever hope, that any Controversy shall
be finally determined, or ended, by any future Council! Can there be any ground
here, to question the integrity, or lawful proceedings of so many Councils, at
such a distance from one another? All concuring in the same judgment, for a
Real Presence, and a Substantial Conversion. Or can there be any New Light in
this Point, (since there are no New Revelations) attainable in these present
times, which those were never capable of? Or, if there could, is not much the
major part of the present Clergy, and Ecclesiastical Governors of Christianity,
still swayed on the same side, against any present Evidence pretended? How then
can the Reformed, reviving the former Arguments of Bertram, Scotus, Erigena,
Berengarius, etc. still trouble the Church again, with urging the same
Arguments, after the judgment of so many Councils already passed upon them?

Can any desire a fairer Judicature by Councils, in any matter, than there has
been already in this? And is there any reason, that Protestants should refer
themselves in this Point (as they do) to the judgment of a new Council? If all
the Councils Successively erred in this Point, so manifestly, as that they
could not lawfully oblige their Subjects to obedience, the next, and the next
to that, of such Councils as ever we can hope for, may err so too, and the same
Obedience be denied to them; whilst one pretended Evidence, or Demonstration,
quelled, another new one starts up, and demands satisfaction.

But if these Councils be invalid, or not sufficient for the establishing the
belief of a Substantial Conversion, let us see the Proceedings of the
Reformation here, to repeal their Acts, and to establish the contrary to them.

After all these Councils forenamed, and that of Trent added to them, Anno
Domini 1562. a Synod is called at London, of Two Provinces only of the West,
consisting of about Twenty four Bishops, and Two Metropolitans: And by These,
against all the former Councils abovesaid, it is Decreed, (Articulo 28.) That
the change of the Bread and Wine in the Eucharist, is repugnant to the plain
words of Scripture, and overthrows the nature of a Sacrament. Thus that Article.

Now, in obedience to this their Decree, they tie their Subjects to subscribe,
that they acknowledge it (that is, believe it) to be agreeable to the Word of
God. [See their Synod 1603. Can. 63.] This is an Obedience, which themselves
(though Subjects) do deny to the Decrees of all those precedent Councils;
wherein the judgments of all the Bishops and Metropolitans of the Western World
then concurred; and amongst the rest, Those of these Two Provinces also: And
yet does their Synod require it.

Here let a Sober Christian judge, if Assent be held due to this London-Synod,
is it not to those others much rather? To those others, I say, incomparably
more numerous, accepted by the West for many Ages, and adhered to still by the
greatest part thereof: Having before them the Scriptures, and the Traditive
Exposition of them; weighing the Arguments, that are still on foot; meeting so
often, and concluding still in the same judgment.

But if those other Councils are justified, by the Practice of this English
Synod, in their requiring Assent, and Obedience, then is the Reformation
rendered unlawful; as likewise their Appeal to future Councils; which can afford
us no more just satisfaction, than the forepass'd.

Here you have seen, that for the Deciding this Controversy, a General Council
(that is, the most General that the Times would permit) was Assembled in the
West; nay, of These more than One, as has been showed: A Substantial Conversion
of the Elements, and Real Presence, declared to be the Sense of those
Scriptures, and a reverence suitable required in this great Mystery: Not one
Bishop in these Councils (for any thing we know) Dissenting; and Those of the
Eastern Churches Absent, consenting in the same judgment. What more can be
done? Ought not Sense, Reason, and Philosophy, here, be silenced? And ought not
such a Decree rather be Assented to, than the contrary Decree of the
forementioned Synod called at London?

Now for a further Confirmation of This Doctrine, I will here deliver Evident
Testimonies of the most Eminent Fathers, and Doctors of the Church, concerning
it.

A further COLLECTION Of Matters Relating to Monasteries, And their DISSOLUTION
Under King Henry the Eighth.
Of the Abbey of Comb and its Dissolution, thus it is related by Sir William
Dugdale, in his History of Warwickshire, page 157. col. 2.
THus in great Glory, plentifully Endowed, stood this Monastery little less
than Four hundred years, till that King Henry the Eighth, a Person whose
sensual disposition, suiting so right with that corrupt Age wherein he lived,
finding instruments fit for his Sacrilegious purposes, contrived the
Destruction of it, and all the rest of those pious Foundations, that his
Ancestors and other Devout Persons had made; of whose subtle practices for
effecting that work, I shall in a short corollary, before I finish this Tract,
make some discovery: Amongst which that general Survey and valuation by
Commissioners from him in 26 th. (...) his Reign, at Robin-hoods penniworths,
did not a little conduce thereto: At which time this Monastery, with all its
Revenues over and above Reprises, was certified to be worth 302 l. 15 s. 3 d.
per Ann.

Of their Hospitality to Strangers, and great Charity in daily relief of poor
people, I need not descend to particulars, our common Historians, and the
Tradition of such who were eyes witnesses thereof, before that fatal subversion
of those Houses, may sufficiently inform the World. I shall therefore only add,
what the Certificate upon the before mentioned Survey takes notice of, touching
this Abbey, viz. That by their Foundation, and a decree by a general Chapter of
their Order, they bestowed in Alms on Maunday Thursday, every year 4 s. 8 d. in
Money, Ten Quarters of Rye, made in Bread, at 5 s. the Quarter; Three Quarters
of Malt, made in Beer, at 4 s. the Quarter; and Three hundred Herrings at 20 d.
the Hundred, distributed to poor people at the Gate of the Monastery: Their
principal Officers being at that time these; viz. Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk
High Steward, whose fee therefore was 5 Marks per Ann. (which shows what
respect the great Nobility had to those Religious persons) William Wilcock
Receiver general, whose Fee was 6 l. per Ann. And Baldwin Porter Auditor, his
Fee being 40 s per Ann.

And page 148. col. 1. it is thus said.

As for the Curses which were usually pronounced by the Founders of these
Religious houses, whither they have attended those Violators of what they so
Zealously, and with Devout minds had Dedicated to Gods Service, I will not take
upon me to say: But sure I am, that after King Henry the Eighth had
accomplished this work he thrived but a little (as I shall elsewhere in
particular observe.) And how long such Possessions have been enjoyed by those
that had them, they that have looked into the course of this World may easily
see. For this, whereof I am now speaking, it was by King Edward the Sixth first
granted to John Earl of Warwick and to his Heirs 22 Junii 1 E. 6. and after his
attainder (whereof in Warwick I have spoke) in 3, and and 4. Ph. and M. Rob.
Kelway had a Lease of the Site and diverse Lands thereunto belonging for 40
years, at the Rent of 196 l. 8 s. 1 d. And afterward another for 60 years,
which Robert Kelway, in 23 Eliz. died seized in fee of certain Lands belonging
to this Monastery, Anne the Wife of John Harrington Esquire being his sole Daughter
and Heir, and then 30 years of Age.

Of the Gray Friars in Coventry, he gives this Relation concerning their
Dissolution, page 116. Col. 1.

The next thing whereof I am to take notice, in Relation to this Friery, is
King Henry the Eighth's Survey, in 26 of his Reign: At which time it did
appear, that they had no Lands or Tenements; nor other Possessions Spiritual or
Temporal, but only a liberty in the Country to receive the Charity of good
people. This being so, I expect that some may demand why it was not Dissolved
in 27 H. 8. when the lesser Houses went to wrack? Whereunto I answer, that the
Act for that purpose, extends only unto Monks, Chanons, and Nuns: But if it
be asked, why these were then so sheltred from the first storm? the reason I
think is apparent, viz. There was nothing to be got by their ruin, for as much
as they had no endowment of Lands, etc. tho God was as much dishonored by the
lewd lives of the Friars for want of good Government (as the Preamble of that
Act imports, in case it say true) as by any other whose Houses were certified
to be of less value than 200 l. per Ann. which favor we see gave those poor
Friars liberty to breath here a while longer in expectation of their Ruin;
viz. till 30 H. 8. that all the great Houses were dissolved.

In relation to Coventry Cross, and the stately Monastery there demolished he
writes thus page 96. Col. 1.
But it was neither the Luster of their Beautiful Cross, nor all those large
and easy acquisitions, that did any whit balance the loss this City sustained
by the Ruin of that great and famous Monastery, and other the Religious
Houses, etc. which had so lately preceded: For to so low an Ebb did their
trading soon after grow, for want of such concourse of people that numerously
resorted thither before that fatal dissolution, that many Thousands of the
Inhabitants to seek better lively-hoods were constrained to forsake the City,
insomuch as in 3 E. 6* it was represented to the Duke of Somerset, then
Protector, by John Hales, a person of great note in those days, and whose
memory is still famous here, that there were not at that time above 3000
Inhabitants, whereas within memory there had been 15000.

Of the Dissolution of the aforesaid Monastery he thus continues, page 105.
Col. 1.

But behold the Instability of these terrestrial things; what the Pious
Founder, and all other its worthy Benefactors had, with great Zeal to Gods
glory, so cheerfully given and bestowed on the structure, endowment, and
adorning of this sometimes famous Monastery; and that with such heavy
Imprecations and Curses upon any that should take away or diminish ought
thereof, as the Charters before cited do manifest: Against which Violators of
the Church its Patrimony, the Representative body of this Realm had also so
often, in terrorem, pronounced Solemn Curses in open Parliament, as whosoever
shall cast his eye upon our Statutes, and public Histories may discern; was
subverted, torn away, and scattered, in 30 of King Henry the Eighths Reign,
after it had stood near Five hundred years, the Glory of all these parts: At
which time the very Church it self, tho a most beautiful Cathedral, and the
Mother Church of this City, escaped not the Rude hands of the destroyers; but
was pulled in pieces and reduced to Rubbish: For the countenance of which sad
Act, the then Prior and Covent, seeing the fate of some others that refused,
was no less than to be hanged up at their Gates, were brought to make surrender
of the same into the hands of Commissioners for the Kings use, as appears by
their public Instrument under Seal, bearing date 15 Jan. in the year
abovesaid, with all the names of those that subscribed thereunto.

Of the Charter House at Coventry he has as follows, page 134. Col. 1.
After which, viz. 17 Junii 34 H. 8. was the site of this Monastery (inter
alia) granted out of the Crown to Richard Andrews Gent. and Leonard Chamberlain
Esquire and to the Heirs of Andrews. How short a time these Two kept it I cannot
say: But I do not perceive that they enjoyed it many years; for in 9 Eliz.
Henry Waver, alias Over (a Coventry Mercer) dyed seized thereof, leaving
Richard his Son and Heir 36 years of Age: who in 11 Eliz. sold it to Robert
Earl of Leicester. Neither have any other that did since possess it, continued
owners thereof very long: For from the Earl of Leicester it was sold to one
Tho. Riley; from him to Sampson Baker; from Baker to Edw. Holt of Dudston Esquire
whose Son and Heir Thomas (now of Aston Knight. and Bart. sold it to Rich. Butler
of Coventry Gent. which Richard shortly after passed it away to one Lodge a
Londoner; from whom Edw. Hill Gent. purchased it, whose Son Edward now enjoys
it.

And Col. 2. he has thus.

But it was neither their Devout and strict lives; nor these Charitable
allowances that could preserve them from the common Ruin, which befell all the
rest of the Religious houses in 30 H. 8. as the Instrument of surrender,
whereunto their public Seal is affixed, bearing date 16 Jan. the same year,
and subscribed by the particular persons whose names I have here Inserted, with
the several pensions granted to each of them for life does manifest.

The following account he gives of the Dissolurion of Wroxhall Monastery in
Warwickshire, page 492. col. 2.
But I now return to this Religious house of Wroxhall; from the Ruin and
Destruction whereof, as also of the Church and Altar before specified, no
Consecration or Dedication, were it never so Solemn and Sacred, could affright
that barbarous Generation, which under ^he Power and Authority of King Henry
the Eighth, subverted this and the rest of those Goodly structures of that
kind, wherewith England was so much adorned; as a Preamble whereunto was that
fatal Survey in 26 H. 8. made; whereby it appears, that the value of this then
extended to 72 l. 12 s. 6 d. above all reprises, Sir Edward Ferrers Knight. being
High Steward thereof, and his ^ee 3 l. 6 s. 8 d. per Ann. And that there then
was every Maundy-Thursday distributed to poor people for the Founders Soul in
Bread and Herrings, with 13 d. in Money, the Sum of 20 shillings. After which,
viz. the next year following, it was dissolved with the rest of the small
Houses, by Act of Parliament, Anne Little being then Prioress, and having a
Pension of 7 l. 10 s. per Ann. granted to her by the King during life: But the
rest of her fellow Nuns were exposed to the wide World to seek their fortune:
And in 36 H. 8. granted (inter alia, I mean the site thereof) with the Church,
Belfrey, Churchyard, and all the Lands in Wroxhall thereto belonging; as also
the Rectory and Tithes of Wroxhall unto Rob. Burgoyn and John Scudamore, and
their Heirs: from which Robert is Sir John Burgoyn of Sutton in Com. Bedf.
Baronet, the present possessor thereof, Descended.

And in the same place he takes occasion to make this discourse of the
Dedication of Churches, and of their bearing Saints Names, page 492. col. 1.

Now the reason and signification of all these Ceremonies follows, which I here
for Brevity, omit; resolving to speak a word or two of the cause, wherefore
Churches do bear the Name of some Saint (by which many of them are yet
distinguished) although the Consecration or Dedication were unto none but unto God
alone; wherein I shall make use of St. Augustines Testimony: To them (says he
speaking of Angels and Saints) we appoint no Churches, because they are not to
us as Gods, Again, The Nations to their Gods Erected Temples, we not Temples
unto our Martyrs as unto Gods, but Memorials as unto dead Men, whose Spirits
with God are still living. So that hereby is clearly manifest, that as they
were dedicated to God alone, so was it in memory of some special Saint; either
(as Mr. Hooker observes) because by the Ministry of Saints it pleased God,
there to show some rare effect of his power, or else in regard of Death, which
those Saints having suffered for the Testimony of Jesus Christ, did thereby
make the places, where they died, venerable. Thirdly for that it liked good and
virtuous men to give such occasion of mentioning them often, to the end that
the naming of their Persons might cause enquiry to be made, and meditation to
be had of their virtues.

And here, since these strange confusions began with a Dissolution of the
Religious Houses, I think it will not be amiss to give the Reader an account of
the Institution of these Houses, and of the Methods and Rules observed by the
Monks that made profession in them: And this out of Sir. William Dugdales
History of Warwickshire: And first,

Of the Order of Benedictin Monks.
That the word Monachus, which is derived from the Greek word (...), signifies
such a one as does solitariam vitam degere, I need not stand to demonstrate:
but who it was that may be said to have been absolutely the first that begun
this course of Life, I find no direct certainty. Diverse ascribe it to the
Prophet Samuel; others to Helias and Helyse^s, that lived in poor Cottages and
Desert places near the River Jordan; and long after them St. John the Baptist:
To whom may be added some of the Apostles, as also St. Mark the Evangelist, and
by their example certain others, viz. Paul the Hermit, St. Anthony, St.
Hilarion, St. Basil, and St. Jerome: but of these Paul the Hermit was of
greatest note for his retired living: who, to avoid that cruel persecution
which raged under Decius, betook himself to the vast solitary Wilderness, where
he lived 93 years unknown to any. But in the times of these Men they had no
certain Rule: for every one being free, regulated himself as he saw best for
his spiritual advantage, exercising devout prayers, frequent fastings, hard
studies, with mean and slender diet, which they acquired by the labor of their
hands, thereby giving great examples of pious living to all Posterity. So that
St. Anthony is the first unto whom some do chiefly refer the original of this
Monastic profession, in regard he first so wonderfully raised up the desires
of all to lead this kind of life; and instituted a Rule for Monks, as St. Basil
did afterward in Greece, and St. Hilarion in Syria. Which Anthony lived in the
Desert of Thebes (a part of Egypt) and there built a Monastery; where, with
Sarmatus, Amatus, and Macharius, his disciples, wholly exercising himself in
devout prayers, he fed upon nothing but Bread and Water; being so famous for
his holiness, that Helina the Mother of Constantine, commended her self and her
Son by Letters to him, and dyed in the Wilderness in the year of Christ 360.
aged 105 years.

But about 166 years after the death of Anthony, one Benedictus Nursinus, born
in Umbria, a region of Italy, having long lived in much solitude, at length
came to Sublacum, an eminent Town of the Latins, distant from Rome near 40
Miles: And to avoid company, in regard many for his sanctity resorted to him,
shortly betook himself to Cassinum, a very ancient place in that Country; and
there settling himself, gatherd together the dispersed and singly wandering Monks
into one Monastery, instituting certain Forms and Rules for their observance:
Howbeit, the first that gave Laws and Rules to Monks was Basil, Bishop of
Cesarea in Cappadocea; who about the year of Christ 363. being very famous for
his Learning and Piety, obliged such as should enter into Orders to vow
Poverty, Chastity, and Obedience to their Superior: But Benedict assigned to
his Monks a special kind of habit, and appointed them a certain Form for
praying, slender diet, and a new rule of abstinence: And that, except in case
of sickness, they should wholly forbear flesh. Which sort of Monks increased
exceedingly; yet, differing in some particulars from their first Rule, did in
time subdivide themselves into several companies, whence grew the Cluniacenses,
Camalduenses, Vallis-Umbrenses, Montolivetenses, Grandimontenses,
Cistercienses, Silvestrenses, Celestines, and Heremitanes of St. Jerome. Which
Monks of St. Benet's Rule, as their tradition is, do wear a black Coat loose
and divided down to their heels, with a Cowl or hood for their head, that
falling over their shoulders is shorter than others use: and under all have a
woollen whith Coat; as also a Hair shirt, with boots to the knees; their heads
being shaved with a Razor below the midst by reason whereof the top of the head
so shaved is called Corona.

And now that I am thus come to speak of their shaving, It will not be amiss to
show upon what occasion this custom was taken up by the Monks, Dum beatus
Petrus Antiochiae praedicaret (says my Author) whilst St. Peter preached at
Antioch, the Gentiles, by way of contumely toward the name of Christians,
shaved the very top of his head, which afterward was held a great honor to
the religous, and those of the Clergy. But further of such shaving see P.
Stellartius de coronis and tonsuris, lib. 3. cap. 1. And here might I add
somewhat touching the usage to the Monks of this Order in the time of their
sickness, especially toward the point of death; as also of washing the body
being dead, with the ceremonies of burial, were it proper for this place: but I
will conclude with inserting the form of their admission into the Monastery.
Ego frater A. promitto stabilitatem meam, and conversionem morum meorum, and
obedientiam secundum regulam St. Benedicti Abbatis, coram Deo and omnibus
Sanctis ejus, in praesentia domini Abbatis N. ad monasterium St. Mariae
Coventriae: And shall refer my Reader to Clem. Reinerus his Apost. Bened. in
Anglia, for further satisfaction in the particulars of their Rule.

Touching the beginning of a Monastic life here in England, if we look after
the particular persons, who in time of persecution fled to Woods, Caves, and
deserts for preservation, it will be hard to point out the first that so
retired themselves: but if we consider their first being gathered into any
Covent, then certainly those of Glastonbury in Somersetshire, and Bangor in
Cheshire, will have the pre-eminence; in the later whereof, as Beda tistifieth,
there were so great a number, that being divided into Seven parts, each having
a several Ruler, every part was no less in number than 300, all which lived by
the labor of their hands: Howbeit, these cannot be said (for ought I know) to
have lived under any other Rule than the Esseans in Palestine, of whom Ploydore
speaks. And therefore to come unto those times that the Order of Benedictin
Monks was first transplanted into England, we are not to look higher than
Austin the Monk; who, about the year of Christ 595. (as says my Author) was
sent into England by Pope Gregory; whereupon Episcopal Sees were established in
sundry places and Monastries built for Monks observing the rule of St.
Benedict; so that shortly after there were none in England but of that Order,
which first began to be exercised in the Abbey of Glastonbury; whereas before
that time they lived after the manner of the Egyptian Covents (says he:) And
which was so famous in ancient time, especially through England, that before
the Norman Conquest there was scarce a Monastery of any other, as I have
especially observed.

Of the Cistercian Order, page 145. col. 1.
For its Original, I shall deliver the substance of what an approved Author
has thereof. In Burgundia est locus qui dicitur Molismus, etc. In Burgundy,
says he, is there a place called Molisme, where, in the time Philip King of
France, Robert, an Abbot, having built a Monastery, and thither gathered a
Covent of devout Monks, after a time searching diligently into the strict Rules
of St. Benet, would have persuaded his disciples, that they ought to live by
the labor of their hands, leaving Tithes and Oblations to the secular Clergy,
abstaining from any breeches either of Cloth or Leather: but they incling to
the custom observed in the Western Monasteries, which were instituted by St.
Maure, the disciple of St. Benet, and of St. Columbanus; and of latter time by
St. Odo Abbot of Cluni, said, they would not recede from the same. Whereupon
the said Robert departed from them, with one and twenty which were of his mind,
seeking long for such a place, where they might live and observe St. Benets
Rule as strictly as the Jews did the Law of Moses. And at the length Odo D. of
Burgnndy, favoring their devout purposes, bestowed on them certain Lands in a
place called Cisteaux, in the Bishopric of Chalons, where the said Abbot
Robert, with the rest, for some time inhabited; by example of whose strict and
holy life in that Wilderness, many began to do the like. But, in time, the
Covent at Molisme wanting a Pastor to govern them, complained to Pope Urban,
showing unto him the inconveniences that they sustained by reason thereof; who
having a paternal affection to both places, commanded Abbot Robert to go back
thither, substituting some one of those Monks at Cisteaux to supply his room as
Abbot there: whereupon he constituted one Alberic; to whom afterward one
Stephen an Englishman of great piety succeeded.

This plantation at Cisteaux was in the year 1098. as the same Author
affirms, with whom agrees an ancient Chronical of the Church of Durham;
further manifesting, that this Abbot Robert was an Englishman, his surname
Harding, and a Monk of Shirburne; who in his younger years, forsaking his
habit, went over into France for advancement of his knowledge in learning; and
coming to the Monastery of Molesme, before mentioned, was there shorn a Monk
the second time, and shortly after became Abbot. Which Monks increased so much
by the great conflux of Men to Cisteaux, that from thence almost 500 Abbeys of
that Order were sprung within the compass of 55 years: so that in a general
Chapter held there by the Abbots and Bishops that were of that Rule, it was
ordained, that from thenceforth there should be no more erected of that Order:
for their Monastries were built in Deserts, and Woody places, by their own
proper handywork; unto many whereof they gave special holy Names as Domus-Dei,
Clara-vallis, Curia-Dei, and the like.

Having said thus much of their original, I shall add a word or two of the
strictness in their Rule, and so proceed with my discourse touching the further
endowment of this Monastery.

First of their Habit, they wear no Leather nor Linen, nor indeed any fine
Woollen Cloth; neither, except it be in a journey, do they put on any Breeches,
and then, upon their return deliver them fair washed. Having two Coats with
Cowles in Winter time, they are not to augment; but in Summer, if they please
may lessen them: In which habit they are to sleep, and after Mattins not to
return to their Beds.

For Prayers the hour of Prime they so conclude, that before the Lauds it may
be Daybreak, strictly observing their Rule, that not one jot or tittle of their
service is omitted. Immediately after Lauds, they sing the Prime, and after
Prime they go out performing their appointed hours in work; what is to be done
in the day, they act by daylight: for none of them, except he be sick, is to
be absent from his Diurnal hours, or the Compline. When the Compline is
finished, the Steward of the House, and he that has charge of the guests go
forth, but with great care of silence serve them.

For Diet, the Abbot assumes no more liberty to himself than any of his Covent,
every where being present with them, and taking care of his flock, except at
meat, in regard his Table is always with the strangers and poor people:
nevertheless wheresoever he eats is he abstemious of talk, or any dainty fair:
nor has he or any of them ever above two dishes of meat; neither do they eat
of fat or flesh, except in case of sickness: and from the Ides of September
till Easter, they eat no more than once a day, except on Sundays, no not on any
Festival.

Out of the precincts of their Cloister they go not but to work: neither there
or any where do they discourse with any but the Abbot or Prior.

They unweariedly continue their Canonical hours, not piecing any service to
another, except the Vigils for the decased. They observe the Office of St.
Ambrose, so far as they could have perfect knowledge thereof from Millain: and
taking care of strangers or sick people, do do devise extraordinary afflictions
for their own bodies, to the intent their own souls may be advantaged.

Which Rules were duly observed by the first Abbot and Covent; but afterward
somewhat was abated of that austerity: but their Habit is still white, and
nothing different in the fashion from the Monks of St. Benedict's Rule, except
a girdle, which these wear about their middle.

The Black Friars, page 367. col. 2.
This Order was begun by St. Dominick a Spaniard in the time of Pope Innocent
the III, who being at first a Canon, with a few that he chose to be his
companions, instituted a new Rule of strict and holy living; and lest they
should grow sluggish in the service of God by staying at home, in imitation of
our blessed Savior, he appointed them to travel far and wide to preach the
Gospel, their Habit being a white Coat with a black Cloak over it; which Order
Honorius the III. (who succeeded Pope Innocent) confirmed; and Gregory the
Ninth, canonized him for a Saint. In Anno 1221. (20 H. 3.) they first came into
England.

The White Friars, page 117. col. 1.
The first institution of this Order, as diverse Authors affirm was Elias the
Prophet, at Mount-Carmell in Syria; where; living a retired life in the service
of God, he gave example unto many devout Anchorites to repair thither for
solitude: but these being dispersed over the whole mountain, in private Cells,
were at length by Almeric Bishop of Antioch, reduced into one Covent; at which
time they elected cut of themselves a Superior, and first began the Fountain of
a Monastery, where the Chapel of the blessed Virgin stood, viz. near the
foundation of Helias. Howbeit, the observance of this life began not till the
days of Pope Alexander the Third, about the year 1170. Nor till the time of
Innocent the Third, near 40. years after, had they any direct Order, that
Albert Bishop of Jerusalem prescribed unto them (thus living in the wilderness)
a form out of St. Basills Rule, and a parti-colored Mantle of white and red,
such a one as Helyas the Prophet anciently used; which afterward Honorius the
Third altered; conceiving it not to be so proper; and instead of the
party-color, appointed that it should be all white, calling the Covent of these
Friars the family of the Blessed Virgin; in regard the white color, being
least spotted, does best accord with Virginity.

But the first mention that I find of their propagating in this Realm, is in
anno 1250. 34 H. 3. at which time Sir John de Vescy of Alnwike in
Northumberland (a great Baron in those days) returning from the Holy Land,
brought into England this Order of Friars, and built for them a Monastery at
Holme, (in Northumberland) then a desert place, and not unlike to Mount-Carmel
before mentioned.

The Gray-Friers, p. 113. col. 1.
First therefore, as to their original, we shall find, that St. Francis (a
person famous for his strict and holy life) was the Man from whom this Order
sprung; whose birthplace (being of a noble extraction) is said to have been at
Assise in Umbria (a Province of Italy.) And that, in the very time of his
youth, betaking himself to divine studies, no whit regarding the transitory
pleasures of this present world, he afterward neglected his patrimony, which
was not small, wore a Coul or hair-shirt, went barefoot, and macerated himself
with frequent watches and fastings. As also to the intent that he might make
choice of voluntary poverty, he resolved to enjoy nothing as his own, no not so
much as food for his body, otherwise than what he received in Alms from good
people. And moreover, if he had any thing left, after a slender refreshment, he
ever bestowed it on the poor, reserving nothing for the morrow. That, in the
night time he always slept in his clothes, lying down upon a Matt, having no
pillow for his head but a stone: And thus, going barefoot with an Evangelick
preparation, did embrace an Apostolic life, preaching upon Sundays and
Festivals in Parish-churches; which did so much the more work upon the hearts
of his Auditory, by how much he was a stranger to all carnal desires. The
Statutes of which Order, to this day observed, together with some other strict
Rules, he presented to Pope Innocent the Third: Which together with the
circumstances of his reception, and their confirmation, I shall for brevity
pass by.

To this resolution I shall briefly add what a later Author has of him; viz.
that when he first betook himself to this regular life, he wore Shoos and a
Leather Girdle; but revolving in his mind, that our blessed Savior gave
command to his Apostles, that they should not have two coats, nor any purse, he
put on a single coat of plain wool, girt himself with a cord, and went
barefoot. And at the length, that he might live an Anchorite, betook himself to
the Apenine-mountains, and in Av^rne (at the foot of them) continued in great
solitude; where devoting himself wholly to divine contemplations, he branded
his Body with the marks of our Lords Passion, and called those Minors which he
chose, from the first, to be his companions in that Rule, as a manifest token
of his humility; to the end that they, being mindful of that slender
appellation, should be free from all pride, which is often times the companion of
Sanctity.

His Rule being confirmed by Honorius the Third; and two years after; viz. anno
1229 Gregory the IX. Canonizing him for a Saint, no humane institution
increased so much as this, in a short time, did: for they were soon spread over
the whole Christian world; Terram repleverunt, says Matt. Westminster. In Towns and
Cities they dwelt by tens and sevens in a Covent; and possessing nothing, but
m^erly living by the Gospel, in food and raiment they manifested their
voluntary poverty; and going barefoot, girt with a knotty cord, gave the
greatest example of humility imaginable.

Touching their first coming into England, I find it was in Anno 1224. 8 H. 3.
viz. two years before the death of St. Francis.

The Augustine Friars, page 781. col. 1.
Touching the Original of this Order, there is no absolute certainty, as
Ploydore affirms. Some allege, that St. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, retiring
into the Wilderness, during the rage of the Manichean Heretics, then
instituted it, gathering together into one Covent, those that were dispersed in
the Desert: Others, that, diverse devout persons, desiring to imitate the piety
and singular learning of St. Augustine, even whilst he lived, left all that they
had, and betook themselves to the Wilderness, whereupon they were called
Heremites. By which of these means it was, I shall not farther stand to
enquire; but Mendicants they were, for certain; and for their Habit did wear in
their Cloister a white garment close girt to them, and when they went out, a
black over it, with a broad Leather Girdle, buckled, being shorn on the Head,
as the Dominicans are. These first began to propagate in England, about the
year 1250.

Of the Carthusian or Charter House Monks, page 131. col. 2.
The Author of them was one Bruno, born at Colein in Germany, a very learned
Man, and Philosophy-professor in the University of Paris: Where being present
at the Funeral of his friend that had been a man of good conversiation; and
observing that whilst they were celebrating the office for the dead, the Corpse
raised it self up on the Bier, and uttered at several distances these words,
Justo Dei judicio accusatus sum, Justo Dei judicio judicatus sum, Justo Dei
judicio condemnatus sum: By the just judgment of God I am accursed, By the just
judgment of God I have received sentence, By the just judgment of God I am
damned; he became so astonished, as that considering if such were the condition
of one whose life had been free from any eminent vice, what should become of
himself and many others that were in no better state; he thereupon, with six
more of his company, who were moved at the same apprehension, resolved to seek
some desert place, where they might end their days in an austere and mortified
course of living, without any disturbance of worldly matters. which at length
they found in the Diocese of Grenoble, at a place called Carthuse, in the
mountainous parts of a vast Wilderness; and obtaining an assignation thereof
from the Bishop, erected a Monastery, instituting most severe and strict Rules
for himself and his Covent; viz. wearing hair shirts; never to (...) on flesh;
on the Fridays to eat nothing but bread and water; to live apart in particular
cells, and thither to have their diet singly brought them, except on certain
Festival days when they dined together: Not to converse with each other but at
certain times: None to go out of the Monastery but the Superior and Procurator,
and they only about the affairs of the Covent.

Their Habit a white loose coat, with a coul of the same; but when they go out,
a case of black stuff all over it, being shaved and shorn just as the
Benedictins are. Into their particular Cells, which are low built, and do
contain 3 or 4 several rooms on the ground-floor only, having behind each of
them a little Garden environed with an high Wall, is their diet brought to them
by Lay-brothers, and put in at a little door in the wall, near the entrance
thereof; unto which there is a lock, whereof the key is kept by him that serves
them. At the hours of public prayers they meet in the Quire: But women are not
permitted to come within the precincts of their Monastery, nor a man to speak
with any of them without special license given by the Superior.

The Lay-brothers are not shaven; but their hair on the head is cut short and
round; their habit being the same with the Monks, saving the scapular, which
reaches but a little below the middle, and is girt close to the^.

Which Institution by Bruno was in the year 1080. as Polydore affirms; but
others say in ^nno 1084. Howbeit they observe the Rule of St. Benedict as to
their diurnal and nocturnal offices; yet have not anciently in any one Covent
exceeded the number of 13 persons.

Into England they were first brought by King H. 2. i. (...) ^nno 1181. (27. H.
2.) who founded a Monastery for them at Witham in Somersets^ier, whereof Hugh
Bishop of Lincoln was the first Friar.

FINIS.

