THE NEW DESIGN OF THE Papists Detected: OR, AN ANSWER To The LAST SPECHES OF
THE Five Jesuits lately Executed, VIZ. Tho. White alias Whitebread, William
Harcourt alias Harison, John Gavan alias Gawen, Anthony Turner and John Fenwick.

By Ezrael Tongue, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Boulter, John Hancock, Ralph Smith, and Benj.
Harris, 1679.

Courteous Reader,
TWO very different Opinions are continually past upon the late Executed
Jesuits, and their Traitorous Accomplices, some (upon just grounds as they are
well satisfied they may) disclaim against them, not only for the Horrid
Treasons, of which they were Convicted; and more especially for their Damnable
Impiety, invoking at their last hour the Dreadful Judgment of Gods Eternal
Wrath after that of man's Justice impendent upon their Heads and Souls, if they
were not Innocent as a New born Child, from the Crimes fully proved against
them, to the satisfaction of Judge, Jury, and a numerous Judicious Audience.

Others contrariwise either admit or suppose they may be Innocent, or require
clearer proof, or doubt of their guilt; and that because of those Imprecations,
which seem to others the highest aggravations of exalted Villainy.

1. Because all desperate Villans do not only generally but universally
practice the like Protestations of their Innocence at Death, and rarely Confess
their Accomplices or betray them, which their Confessions might do.

2. These people, even in harsher terms practice and teach their Disciples and
Penitents, so at their Execution to deny all, and protest Innocence,
endeavoring to increase an Odium on Protestant Magistrates and Government, and
to make all Flagitious Persons of their Church, for want of better, pass for
real Martyrs: As on the contrary, it turns to their very great advantage,
because nothing more advances a Cause or Doctrine than a Holy Life and a
Patient Death of them who own it.

As nothing more prejudices Religion, than many Criminals Executed in Public,
and their vicious Lives who profess it. This is therefore one of the most
Hellish Matchivillian Policies of Rome, To turn Arguments into Objections, and
Objections into Arguments, or change by their Artifices Traitors into Martyrs,
and Martyrs into Traitors or Heretics.

3. Their Confessions at this time, beside the Scandal, which is a Crime so
Heinous with them, that all grosser Vices are tolerated whereby to avoid,
would endanger their Chiefs in Custody, hazard the whole frame of their
Design, discourage its Conductors and Followers, quail their Hopes and Faith,
disarm their Worthies, betray their Fame, expose to the hate of all Posterity
all their Orders and Religious gain, or utterly defeat the whole Plot, and
loose the Charges and Counsels bestowed on it.

4. We ought more to admire at the obstinate adhesion of so many where they
Lodged, Conversed, etc. none coming to Impeach them, or for to see the Truth
Testified against them, except Sarah Haine, Mr. Jenison, Bedlow, Dugdale, and
Prance.

5. The Impudence of those who testify Warner and Oats beyond the Sea.
Ireland in Warwickshire, Wales, etc. than which nothing is known to be more
false.

6. The vast hope of having the Wealth and Power of these three Kingdoms, to
Protect, Serve and Promote them and their Designs.

7. The never to be recovered Opportunity of an Heir Presumptive of the Crown
bigoted into their Superstition, if now lost or discouraged.

But let me now hear the Words of their flourishing Orator Gavan, -- Thus he
Brazens it out:

As for Mr. Oats and Mr. Dugdale, who I call God to Witness, have brought me
by false Oaths to this untimely End, I Heartily Forgive them.

This passage if it had been inserted before his Renunciation of Equivocation,
Pardon, Absolution, Dispensation, etc. I confess I am not so well read in their
Morals, as to know how by their own Rules to Digest it; for as it is a Lie, it
must necessarily require some Absolution, or somewhat Equivalent, though it had
been (as he believes it;) for the best Cause ever any Man in his Condition did
Lie or Sin venially, and one nimble Cross (if his hands were not tied) might
Salve it for ought I know. And perhaps some Pater-Nosters of his Dignified
Auditors, as Bundel, Caryl, etc. their Confessors, or some others, might secure
this poor Soul from passing the Dreadful Gulf of Purgatory. At worst their
Affection and Passion in Martyrdom for so excellent a Cause and Design: and
Baptism in Blood did Salve all the bypast Infant Sins, Infirmities or Defects
of these Newborn Martyrs. If any of the Learned Romanists can help me more
Heartily to Interpret this man's Words; I desire his Assistance and Pardon for
intruding into Mysteries scarce ever so practiced, as by these
Master-Polititians and Divines in this present Case.

I cannot but acknowledge this Gavans whole Discourse very Artificially
Composed; For what he affirms of his Innocence, and no Guilt of any Crime that
needed not any Pardon, etc. for the Fact was Meritorious; in his Words
therefore there were no Equivocations so far. And had he said, Dugdale's and
Oate's Oaths had been Malicious, he might have been more Heartily Interpreted,
as one who Judged they had Gain, or other Worldly advantages to prompt them to
what they Swore: but to say they were False in such particular matters of Fact
as his own Conscience Testifies with them to be true; For this, if his
obstinate Death, direction of his intention for Catholic good, or some other
Salvo, which occurrs not to me at present, amongst their many Pious Frauds help
him not: I see not but that he is highly Perjured, and his Soul lost
desperately, only he may possibly with the Irish-Tory-Murderer Repent, Feel and
find Mercy in the Rope: which that my Charity may not be Inferior to his, I
wish to the worst of these Villains, though toward us, we should long ere
this, had not Heaven blasted their Designs, have found their tender Mercies to
have been most Barbarous Cruelties.

But that the True Sense and Artifice of Mr. Gawen's Speech may be rightly
understood, we must observe the Method of it, and the Principles of the Author.

For the Method; He does no where positively deny any matter of Right, or Fact,
charged against him, or his Fellows; nor that the Pope has Right unto, or has
resumed the Kingdom of England; or that he has Excommunicated or Deposed the
King; or delivered to the Secular Arm, the People of England, to be destroyed
by the French, etc. He does only implicitly deny the Matters of Fact sworn by
Oats and Dugdale, when he calls their Oaths false.

But in this his Assertion, he promises not any Sincerity, nor renounces any
Equivocations, nor Absolutions, etc. So that, he seems purposely, and very
craftily to have waved that Protestation where it most needed, and to have
usurped it where he had no need to relieve himself by it: For certainly, he
might very well say (as he believed) That he was not Criminal in what he did,
in obedience, compliance, and concurrence with his Holiness, and the General of
their Order, their Vote, Sense, or Sentence against our King and Kingdom. I
believe, that all the Jesuits that ever did, or shall suffer, may take their
Pattern from his Speech, if it be not some Original and Directory Form; as
their so Rigorous Adhesion to the Pretense of the Innocence of an unborn Child,
smells very rankly of a Form prescribed, from which they might not recede.

And the Truth is, if we consider, it is of vast Importance to their Church,
that every word they speak at their Death, should be made good and irrefragable
to so many several sorts of Men.

As 1. Papist-Bigots, who must be cherished in their blind Zeal to Holy-Church,
and kept in opinion of their good Fathers Sanctity; since to them (perhaps)
such foul Crimes might be somewhat scandalous, and open their Eyes to look
about them, and consider to what strange Conduct they have trusted their Souls.

2. Great Persons, Favorers and Encouragers; as the Lords in the Tower, and
others of Eminent Quality; who would certainly have been disobliged, nay,
further endangered by such a Confession.

3. Moderate Papists, who, should the Plot appear bare faced, would be apt to
start at so hideous and monstrous a Sight; and consequently, abandon a Religion
that allowed such detestable Impieties.

4. The Jansenists, old Enemies to the Jesuits; who would be glad of such an
Advantage, and never fail to upbraid them with it.

5. Simple Protestants, on whom they have Designs; and to have Confessed, had
been for ever to have frightened them from Popery: but thus stiffly to stand it
out, may gain their weak opinion of the Sufferers Innocence; and that Opinion
will conciliate Pity, and that Pity, engage them some steps toward the Party.

6. The Conscious, who will hereby be confirmed to proceed in Traiterous
Attempts, when they see their Leaders go on so Courageously without boggling;
and neither discovering them, nor acknowledging their own Crimes; but rather,
justifying the Attempts, as well-pleasing to Heaven, when they durst so
solemnly make Appeals thereunto of Innocence.

On all these, and diverse others most cogent Considerations, I see not that
they could do otherwise; nor indeed, had been to be trusted by so wise a State,
if they should not have been content to have received, and observe so curious a
Form of Compurgation, as might hereafter be defended against such Heretical
Sophisters, as my self will pass for amongst them.

If some Ancient Orators were so exact, as to pen their Orations with that
Circumspection, that some have dared to say, The Clubb might be forced from
Hercules, sooner than one Word from their Context; I can very easily allow the
Church of Rome, which is so exact and formal in every thing, to have prescribed
some Directory to all her Martyrs, according to which they are to dye, as well
as She has prescribed them Forms very rigorous, to live and pray by; So that,
there is little of Ingenuity left in, or to be expected in the Roman World: And
supposing the imposed Forms universally practiced, it would be equally as great
an Impossibility to know where true Piety were in their Petitions, as where
Truth and Sincerity were in their Confessions. The opus operatum, Lip-labor
and Obedience, salving all to God as well as Man; and it would be as rare, as
to no purpose, to pray or speak what we or others understood or meant by our
Ceremonies or Prayers; provided the Church but understood her self, and God
understood her; whilst never a Soul present, understood themselves, or one
another in what they prayed, what they did, or knew whither or which way they
went.

Suppose then (as we have good cause) these Jesuits had as good order and
warrant for what they propose, of the design of Murdering the King, as they
have had for that of Sir Edm. G. and other Murders; who but men mad and
distracted and not Instructed in their Principles, would expect that they
should confess themselves Criminal? So we imagine that our Captains at Sea with
their Letters of Mart should confess themselves Pirates, or those at Land,
Murderers, when they observe their Princes Orders in intestine or Foreign
Wars: If the Sovereign Power of Princes mutually acknowledged find such Favor,
that none are hanged but have quarter with respect to their Commissions, or
those whom they fight under, sure we may allow the Supreme Majesty of the
Papacy acknowledged so far over Europe, to Justify (though not to us Heretics,
yet) to all the World and themselves, those Acts for which they have Order,
Commission, and Authority, Humane, and Divine, as good as his Title which he
pretends to the Crown of England by both those Rights; and for any Catholic to
doubt of it, were a very great Heresy, and would shake the very Fundamentals of
the Roman Hierarchy, the plenarty of their Power and infallible Conduct in what
concerns the Propagation of their Kingdom and Doctrine.

To Demonstrate, that these Hypocritical Harrangues were directed, and
prescribed by a Certain method and Formulary, be pleased to Consider how
exactly they Tune all their Pipes to one Key. For Example:

Whitebread says,

I go out of the World as Innocent, and as free from any --

Harcourt Innocent -- of any --

Fenwick Innocent

Gavon Innocent

Turner -- To declare upon Oath my Innocence, etc.

Whitebread. Guilt, of those things laid to my Charge in this matter.

Harcourt -- thing laid to my Charge concerning the matter for which I Dye.

Fenwick -- of what is laid to my Charge of Plotting the Kings Death,
Subverting the Government.

Gavon, of those Treasonable Crimes which Mr. Oats and Mr. Dugdale swore
against me.

Turner, -- of that Horrid Crime of Treason with which I am Falsely Accused.

Whitebread, As I came into the World from my Mothers Womb.

Harcourt, As the Child Unborn.

Fenwick, As the Child yet unborn, and that I know nothing of it, but what I
have learned from Dugdale and Oats, and what comes Originally from them.

Gavon, As the Child unborn.

Turner, As the Child that is Unborn.

Whitebread, No body upon Earth can Authorize me so to do.

Harcourt, Renounce, Abhor and Detest License to commit Perjuries, etc.

Fenwick, Utterly renounce Pardons, Dispensations for Lies, Perjury, Regicide

Gavon, Makes no use of Equivocation, mental Reservation, material Prolocution,
nor Dispensation from the Pope, or any else; or of any Oath of Secrecy, nor
Absolution in Confession, or out of Confession, to deny, hide, or Palliate the
Truth, but in the plain sense which the words bear.

Whiteb. Those who have most Falsely accused me.

Gavon, Oats and Dugdale, who (I call God to Witness) by False Oaths have
brought me to this Untimely Death.

Turner, Those which have Falsely Accused me, (...) hand in my Death.

Whiteb. Prays God to Bless (but not Preserve) his Maj^^^^ ^emporally and
Eternally.

Harcou. I pray God bless his Majesty, grant him a prosperous Reign, and his
Consort, the best of Queens.

Gavon, Heartily desire of God to grant him a quiet and happy (but not long)
Reign.

Turner, God bless the King, and all the Royal Family; and grant his Majesty a
prosperous Reign, and a Crown of Glory hereafter.

Whiteb. Never Learnt, Taught or Believed, or any occasion or pretense, etc.

Gavon, Never in my life, did imagine or contrive the Deposing or Death of the
King.

Whiteb. To design or contrive Death or Hurt to his Majesty's Person.

Harcou. We hold it in all cases unlawful to Kill or Murder any person, much
more our Lawful King now Reigning, whose Person and Temporal Dominions, etc.

Gavon, Protests, nor he in particular, nor Jesuits in general, hold
King-Killing-Doctrine, utterly abhor and detest it: i. e. that it is lawful for
a private person to kill a King, Pagan, or Tyrant; but on the contrary, that
all are bound to defend and preserve him.

Fenw. Are ready to defend against any Opponent.

Whiteb. His Sacred Person to the uttermost of their power.

Turner, Should have discovered such a devilish Treason to the Civil
Magistrate.

Whiteb. This true plain sense of his Soul without Equivocation, or mental
Reservation.

Gavon, I do not make use of any Equivocation, mental Reservation, and material
Prolocution.

Fenw. I do utterly renounce all Pardons and Dispensations, etc.

Whereas in their Catholic Sense, the Crimes they suffered for were no
Treason, because the King was Deposed by the Pope; and consequently, so far
from needing a Pardon, that they were matter of Merit.

I will say nothing of the Impudence (for so I must call it) of Mr. Gavon, in
denying that any Jesuit, but Maricana, ever Advanced the Doctrine of Killing
Heretial Kings; whereas all that have been Conversant in the Books of that
Society, know it to be most False; and whoever shall peruse that excellent
Treatise of the Reverend Bishop of Lincoln, lately emitted on that subject,
shall satisfactorily find the contrary thereof proved; and that it is not only
the Tenet of the Jesuits, but the Doctrine of the Roman Church asserted both in
Theory and Practice, by their Popes, Councels, eminent Doctors. Now if a man
could, under such Circumstances, give himself the Liberty of an Assertion so
notoriously False in a matter that did not so nearly concern himself (but only
the Order he was engaged in) what Untruths can we think he would stick at in
the Grand Concern, wherein he had so many Obligations to sway him unto it?

Let not therefore the Papists Triumph on the Hectorly Exit of these their
Traitorous Martyrs; for it is no more than we Expected: Nor let any weak
Protestants be Scandalized, to find those that made it their Practice to
Violate all Laws Divine and Humane in their Lives, act quite Contrary to the
sentiments and deportment of all True Christians at their Death.

Idem manens Idem, semper facit Idem.


