A PLEA For the Life of Dying Religion from the Word of the Lord: IN A SERMON
Preached to the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the COLONY of the MASSACHVSETS at Boston in
New England, May 16. 1683. Being the Day of ELECTION there. By Mr. Samuel
Torrey Pastor of the Church of Christ at Waymouth.

Rev. 3.1. I know thy works that thou have a name, that thou live and art
dead. 2. Be watchful and strengthen the things which remain, which are ready to
dye.

Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call heaven and earth to Record this day against you that I
have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing, therefore choose life
that both thou and thy seed may live. 20 That thou may love the Lord thy
God, and that thou may obey his voice, and that thou may cleave to him,
for he is thy life.

Hosea 6.1. Come let us return to the Lord. -- 2 After two days he will revive
us, and in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight.

BOSTON IN NEW ENGLAND Printed by Samuel Green for Samuel Sewall. 1683.

TO THE READER.
IT was the Importunate Solicitation of many, and more especially of them whose
Request caused the Sermon emitted herewith to be Preached, that prevailed with
the Reverend and Worthy Author, so far to gratify their desires, as to let
others have a Copy of what he delivered on so Solemn an Occasion; leaving it
with them to dispose of, as they should see cause. I have perused it with great
satisfaction, finding it to be not only an affectionate and awakening, but a
rational and judicious Discourse, and than which nothing can be more seasonable.

It has often been affirmed (and truly) that the distinguishing Character
whereby New England is differenced from other Outgoings of the English Nation,
is, in that the great motive inducing the first Planters, to remove themselves
and theirs into a wast and howling Wilderness, was (like that of the Children
of Israel of old) the Interest of Religion, which their Souls were concerned
for. And whilst Men continued faithful to that blessed design (as the Prophet
said to Jehojakim) it was well with them. They that sought first the Kingdom of
God and his Righteousness, had other things added to them which they never
thought, nor could in reason hope to enjoy. Nor did any Weapon formed against
us in those days prosper. The Lord has caused us, and all the World about us,
to see that Religion is our life. That this Interest, without which we our
selves cannot live, has been for many years languishing and dying, is the
observation of all men that have their hearts exercised in discerning things of
this nature.

The complaint is, that N-England is not to be found in N-England, but we are
become like the rest of the Nations, being grown into the same conformity to
the World, with other Plantations, whose Interest and profession never was, as
ours has been. There is a woeful decay as to externals and the Form of Religion
amongst the Professors of it. Hearing the Word as to the public dispensation
thereof, Prayer with Fasting, and other religious Exercises (which reach no
further than the Form of Godliness) are not so frequent as in former days; and
that is a most certain sign that the power of Godliness is much more in a
bleeding and dying state. It is not then to be wondered at, if the tenor of
divine Dispensation has of later times been changed toward us: The hand of
God has been heavy upon many places in the Land, he has smitten us with a
deadly destruction. The killing Sword, a mortal Contagion, and other judgments
have threatened life it self. And since we have let Religion die, we have been
in greater danger than ever of being deprived both of our Political and
Ecclesiastical life. Let us not be high-minded but fear. If we do not in this
our Day know the things of our peace, so as to recover the life of Religion,
the consideration of Gods holy severity toward others, may cause trembling of
heart; lest at last the Lord do unto us as he has done unto them. Are we
better than Shiloh, where the House of God continued almost four hundred Years?
Are we better than Jerusalem, the perfection of Beauty and Joy of the whole
Earth? Are we better than the Churches in Asia, planted by the Apostles
themselves, and amongst whom there was once a gracious and glorious presence of
the Son of God? But those Candlesticks are long ago removed out of their
Places, not so much as one of them remaining. Because they have lost their
Religion they have lost their lives and beings. A late Historian, who about
twelve years ago was in those parts, says, that horror took hold upon him as
he was viewing the doleful Ruins of those once Glorious Churches, fearing lest
the sins of other places, which as yet enjoy the Gospel, might in time expose
them to the like miseries. He says, that in Ephesus, there are now only a few
Cottages, and not so much as one Christian dwelling there. Smyrna, is at this
day a considerable place in respect of Trade, but no settled Inhabitants there,
to uphold so much as the Name of Christians, excepting a few Superstitious
Greeks. In Pergamus, there are but fifteen Families of Christians, and those in
a state most miserable, both as to Spirituals and Temporals. In Thyarira the
Turks have eight Mosches, but very few Christians now residing there. Sardis,
which was once the Metropolis of Lydia, is now a beggarly Village, Earthquakes
and Wars having brought that famous City under horrid desolations. There is
nothing like a Church there. In Philadelphia, there is a greater number of Men
calling themselves Christians, than in any of those Asiatick Churches,
excepting Smyrna. For in that City are two hundred Families of those who are
called Christians, but they are Idolaters, and in miserable slavery to the
cruel Turks. As for Laodicea, which was once a rich and populous place; and the
Buildings in it exceeding magnificent, it is now utterly desolated, not so much
as one Inhabitant there, excepting Wolves and doleful Creatures. Thus did all
these famous Places, and Churches, by losing Religion lose their own Lives and
Beings. Time was when in Africa, there were many thousands of Churches, but the
true Religion being gone out of that vast Continent (thrice as big as Europe)
what but Death is to be seen there? Let us look nearer home: In the Land of our
Fathers Sepulchers, there were Churches amongst the ancient Britains, but when
those sins of Pride Drunkenness, Contention, Worldliness, notwithstanding
Gildas and other faithful Ministers did zealously testify against them, became
common and prevailing Evils: God first sent a sweeping Plague amongst them; and
when that Besom af Destruction could not Reform them, the Lord brought the
Saxons upon them, who rooted them out of their Land. And if we consider the
dispensations of God since the Reformation successfully begun by the Ministry
of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, and other great Champions for the Truth; how many
Protestant Churches in Saxony, Bohemia, Hungaria, Poland, France, and other
places have been dissipated and unchurched, and that because of their
decayings, either as to the profession or practice of Religion? If the
Professors thereof be generally grown Formal and Lifeless, it is a sad
prognostic that a terrible Persecution is near at hand. Upon which account,
wise men do with some dread, behold the present state of the Protestant
Interest in the World, the names of those that are indeed alive being so very
few.

As for the Churches in this Wilderness; I am persuaded Christ will not suffer
them to be made a Desolation as yet. Though Israel was deeply revolted from the
holy ways of God in the days of Jehoahaz, it is said, 2 King. 13.23. And the
Lord was gracious unto them, and had compassion on them, and had respect unto
them, because of his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and would not
destroy them, nor cast he them from his presence as yet. Nevertheless, shaking
Trials may come. We have reason to expect them, and God prepare us for them.
For great Sins are now common in New England, which were rarely (if at all)
heard of but thirty years ago, Profaneness grows bold, and is not easily
suppressed. There is much Hypocrisy and Formality amongst Professors: nay, and
wise Virgins are asleep too. It is beyond controversy, that the late
Judgments which New England has been bleeding under, were an effect of Divine
anger, provoked by the sins of Men. But since God has mercifully removed his
hand, those very sins the Lord has been contending for, are committed as much,
nay more than ever before, It is a most awful and trembling consideration, that
the Holy Lord God almighty (who though he may bear long will not suffer himself
to be abused always) has been mocked and dallied with more than once. In the
day of our late trouble, several things were acknowledged to be Provoking
Evils, and Reformation in respect of them confessed to be necessary; which
since are made light of Austin did in his time, wish that there might be a
Synod called to consider of some effectual course for the suppression of that
sin of Drunkenness amongst men in those days. These Churches, have in a very
solemn manner met together by their Representatives, to enquire into the causes
of the Lords displeasure; and the expedients for Reformation. There was a
gracious presence of Christ guiding his Servants in those Enquiries. But what
does it all come to, more than to leave the present Generation inexcusable
before the World, and before Posterity, and before God in the day of his
pleading with those that have known their Masters Will, but have not done it?
The infinitely patient God has waited for fruit three years since that
endeavor and pretense to Reformation was published. Our English Historians
have Recorded, that when the sins of the times brought heavy Judgments upon
our Forefathers, above nine hundred years ago; a Synod did convene in order to
the redressing of those evils. There were thirty Ministers then found faithful,
who gave their Testimony: but it would not be hearkened to; so that God quickly
sent the cruel Danes, who for a long time brought the Land into miserable
Bondage and Slavery. What hours of Temptation may come upon us, we know not:
Our case is the more dangerous, and the Judgments impending like to be the
more dreadful when (if Repentance prevent not) at last they shall fall down; in
that God has stirred up the spirits of his Servants in the Ministry full many
a time, and with great earnestness to protest against the Sins and Apostasies
of the times; and to press for Reformation before the Decree bring forth: but
Alas! hitherto with little success. The words of that honorable Man of God,
Dr. Owen (in his late Sermons in Luke 13.1, 2, 3. Page 77.) have a great deal
of truth and weight in them. Let us not (says he) pretend that the Repentance
and Reformation called for, respects the public enormous sins of the Nation,
in Atheism, Profaneness, Sensuality, Luxury, Pride, Oppression, Hatred of the
Truth, Contempt of the Ministry of the Gospel, and the like; they do so indeed,
but not only, they respect also the Decays in Faith, Love, Zeal, with love of
the World, Conformity unto it, Luke-warmness, that are found amongst the most
eminent Professors of Religion. This is our present wound; here lies our
weakness; namely, in the want of a quick, active, zealous Ministry, to call and
stir up Magistrates and People to effectual Repentance and turning to God.
Unless this be given unto us, I fear we cannot be saved. If it be otherwise, if
we have a Ministry that really do attend unto their Duty in this matter, then I
shall think it the most pregnant sign of approaching Destruction: Seeing it is
apparent unto all, that their Endeavors have neither Fruit nor Success? Truly
with us it has been so: They that have approved themselves faithful unto
Christ and their own Consciences in this matter, have indeed inward peace. Yet
they cannot but be sensible that they lose the good Word and good Will of some
Men; and are exposed to obloquy and reproaches. For as the Excellent Person but
now mentioned says, ( Page 90.91.) The hardest and most difficult service that
ever God called any of his Ministers unto, excepting only Jesus Christ and his
Apostles, has been in the endeavoring the Reformation of backsliding or
spiritually decayed Churches. These are the two Witnesses which in all ages
have prophesied in Sackcloth. Such was the Ministry of Elijah, which brought
him unto that Conclusion, and an earnest longing to be delivered by Death from
his Work and Ministry, 2 King. 19.4. So was that of Jeremiah, in the like
season, whereof he complains, Chap. 15.10. John the Baptist in the same work
lost first his liberty, then his life, And in after Ages Chrysostom, for the
same cause was hated by the Clergy, persecuted by the Court, and at length
driven into Banishment, where he died. Most men care not how little a share
they have in such a work as this, whose reward will reach them according to the
proportion of their engagement in it. All Churches, all Persons almost, would
willingly be let alone in the condition wherein they are: They that would press
them unto due Reformation, ever were, and ever will be looked on as their
Troublers.

Nevertheless, God has given a spirit of Courage, Zeal and Faithfulness unto
several of his Ambassadors to discharge their Duty in bearing their Testimony,
and so to leave the success, and their own Names also, with that God whose they
are, and whom they serve. And in special this Worthy Minister of Christ, whose
eminent Accomplishments are known unto all unto whom he himself is known, has
a long time approved himself singularly Faithful unto God and the Souls of Men
herein. The strain of his Ministry, in that Congregation, where He that holds
the Stars has seen meet to place him, has been to urge Conversion and
Reformation. And not only so, but when God has given him an opportunity (more
than once) to speak in the Name of the Lord unto this People, (in respect of
the Heads and Representatives thereof) he has delivered his own Soul, by
giving Warning; and what he has spoken shall turn to him for a Testimony. It
is an hazardous thing (as much as life is worth) for men not to comply with the
Word of God, by whomsoever or to whomsoever spoken. If a Josiah regard not the
Word of God spoken by a Pharaoh Necho, he loses his Life for it; and so did
Zedekiah, because he humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet speaking
from the mouth of the Lord. Its true that Ministers in these days, have no
immediate Call or Commission from Heaven; yet if they deliver such Messages as
are according to the Law and the Testimony, it is God that speaks by them;
and many times their hearts are inclined to this or that subject, by a special
operation of the spirit of Christ, who is with his Servants to the end of the
World. Let us then hear that so our souls may live.

God of his free Grace, has seen meet to dignifie an handful of his People,
who are separated from their Brethren, with the chief and choicest of
Blessings. It is promised as an high favor, Jer. 30.21. Their Nobles shall be
of themselves, and their Governors shall-proceed from the midst of them. We
have had these over us, who have been (as the Expression of the Ancient is)
Nobiles genere, Nobiliores sanctitate. We cannot be thankful enough for that
Blessing. Civil Liberty is an invaluable mercy. The Jewish Rabbis have a
saying, that if the Sea were Ink and the Earth Parchment, it would not be
sufficient to write down the praise due to God for liberty. But what then shall
be said concerning the Liberties of the Gospel? we enjoy all at this day. The
way to have them continued, is, for us to approve our selves faithful to the
interest of Religion. For then God will be for us; and if he be for us, who can
be against us.

Boston in N. England. August 31. 1683. INCREASE MATHER.

A PLEA FOR THE LIFE OF Dying Religion.
DEUTERONOMY. 32.47. -- Because it is your Life --


IT has pleased the great and blessed God in his infinite Sovereignty, to
transact with Man about the everlasting Concernments of his immortal Soul; to
dispense both his Mercy and Justice, both Life and Death; to distribute Eternal
Rewards, and Punishments, and to govern Man unto his Eternal State, only in the
way of a Covenant. All Reprobate Sinners are destroyed and damned under the
Curse and Condemnation of the Covenant of Works: All God's Elect are saved by
and through our Lord Jesus Christ, according unto, and under the Covenant of
Grace. God has constituted the Covenant of Redemption, in his own Eternal
Counsel, before the World was; and therein laid the Foundation; both of the
Constitution, and Administration of the Covenant of Grace in, by, and through
that one only great, and glorious Mediator Jesus Christ, whose work it is to
bring a certain Elect number of sallen Man unto God; concerning whom he says,
I will be their God, and they shall be my People. Hence God ever has had, and
ever will have a Vovenant People in the World, until this Dispensation of
Grace shall be consummated in Glory. And when the most High divided to the
nations their Inheritance, and separated the sons of Adam; He set the bounds of
the people according to the number of the children of Israel: For the Lord's
Portion is his People, and Jacob the Lot of his Inheritance. Deuteronomy. 32.8, 9.
This Book it may be (in some respects) most properly called The Book of the
Covenant: because it contains, not only a more full and plain Revelation and
Exposition of the Covenant it self, in the constitution, way, manner, and means
of the Administration, and Confirmation of it; and of the All Sufficiency of
God unto his People therein, as their God in Covenant; but also a description
of that notable Covenant-Transaction, wherein all the Duties, all the
Blessings, and all the Curses of the Covenant, are expressly and in set form
proposed, and the people moved unto the most solemn Restipulation of their
Souls to God under the most sacred and indispensible Obligations to live to
him, and walk with him by religious Fear, Reverence, Faith, Love, and
Obedience, as his Vovenant People, for ever: and this ratified and confirmed by
a most awful Contestation, whereby Heaven and Earth are called to record. Deuteronomy.
30.19, 20. I call Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, that I have
set before you Life and Death, Blessing and Cursing: therefore choose Life, that
both thou and thy seed may live. And now Moses, having thus finished his great
and extraordinary Ministry, wherein he had been accompanied with an
extraordinary presence and power of God, and was eminently a Type of Christ, he
does prepare himself instantly, to take leave of the People, of his Work, and
of the World. The people he incourageth, by a promise of God's Presence, to
make their Progress unto, and Entrance into, and full Possession of the Land
of Promise: His Office and Work he resigneth unto Joshuah, whom he did by
divine appointment ordain his Successor, charging of him with the Care and
Conduct of the People unto their Rest in Canaan; and this upon full assurance
that God would be with him, and that he would never fail him nor forsake him.
The Law which he had received of the Lord, and delivered unto the people,
containing the whole Word and Worship of God, and so their whole Religion,
together with a prophetical Song, showing the diverse State of that Church and
People in succeeding Ages, under the successive Dispensation of the Covenant;
this Law, and this Song he delivers to the Priests and People for their
improvement, charging of them most earnestly and affectionately to set their
hearts unto it, because it was their Life. These words (because it is thy Life)
they are some of the last words of Moses that great Prophet; and therefore they
contain matter of the greatest Importance to the People of God. They are
(together with the Context) his last, his farewell and dying Charge, whereby he
set himself, in a sentence or two, to speak all at once; to deliver unto them
the Sum or a System of all that Doctrine and Duty, which he had before,
throughout the whole course of his Ministry, been delivering unto them; all
that they were to know, to believe, or to practice; the whole both of Faith and
Obedience, that is, more plainly, their whole Religion. And he charge them to
set their hearts unto it; that is, to prise it, love it, keep it, cleave to it,
live and walk in the sincere, pure, powerful Profession and Practice of it,
with all their hearts, with all their minds, with all their Souls, with all
their might, and with all their strength, from Generation, unto Generation,
themselves, and their Children, for ever. And thus he moves them to set their
hearts unto Religion; Because it is their Life. Whence we have this

DOCT. That Religion it is the Life of the Vovenant People of God. Our Text and
Doctrine deliver the great and universal Reason of the Profession and Practice
of our Religion; Viz! Because it is our Life. Religion, in the most full and
comprehensive notion of it, It is that whereby Man is qualified, and
capacitated to live unto God, to live with God, to live upon God, to see and to
enjoy God in Christ, as the Only and All-sufficient Author of Life, and Object
of Blessedness, and Happiness, as his last End, and chief Good. Religion
comprehends Man's Deliverance from all, both moral and miserable Evil; both
Sin, Death, and Hell: as also all, both moral and beatifical Good; Holiness,
Happiness, Grace and Glory. And it is consummated in a perfection of Beatifical
Vision, and Fruition, by the Light and Life of Heaven. In the Explication I am
to show 1. That Religion is Life. 2. That it is the Life of the Vovenant People
of God. 1. Religion it is Life; that is,


1. The true and pure Religion; It is originally, and only from God, the living
God, the God of all Life, who is Life it self in the abstract, and the Fountain
of Life to all living: Religion it arises from, and is founded in the very
Being and Nature of the blessed God. If there were no such God, there could be
no such Religion. Religion it is of God, both in a way of divine Revelation,
and in a way of divine Operation. It is purely of divine Revelation, respecting
both the Doctrine of it, and the spiritual supernatural and saving Knowledge of
it. It is that whereby God has revealed himself unto man, and whereby man has
that saving Knowledge of God, and Jesus Christ his Son which is Life eternal.
Joh. 17.3. It is that whereby God has commanded Light to shine out of
Darkness; and (by the enlightening power of his Spirit) shined into our hearts,
and given us the light of the knowledge of his Glory, in the face of Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. 4.6. It his marveilous Light. 1 Pet. 2.9. Religion, it is also
from God in a way of divine Operation: It is the most powerful Effect of the
quickening power and operation of the Spirit of God as a Spirit of Life upon
the creature: hence it is phrased the Life of God. Ephesians. 4.8. Religion, it is
the most glorious created Emanation of spiritual, heavenly, and divine Light
and Life from God, as the fountain of both. Psalm. 36.9. For with thee is the
Fountain of Life; in thy Light shall we see Light.

2. Religion it is also from Christ the Mediator: It is founded in the Person,
Office, and Work of Christ. The being of Religion, the light, life, good,
blessedness, and happiness of it, it is all from the Merit, Satisfaction and
Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from the power and operation of his
Spirit. Religion, it consists in our Faith in Christ, and Obedience unto Him;
and in our practical, and experimental Union, and Communion with his Person,
and the Application of all his Benefits, even eternal Life. Thus Religion it is
our Life, because thereby we are made partakers of Christ, who is the
Resurrection, and the Life. Joh. 11.25. The Way, the Truth, and the Life. Joh.
14.6. By having of whom, we have Life. 1 John 5.12. and who is our Life. Colos.
3.4. Christ is the great PATRON and PROFESSOR of our Religion. He has
confirmed it by his own personal Profession and Practice, when on earth; and is
himself the great Apostle and High Priest of our Profession. Heb. 3.1. Whence
it is most properly called the Christian Religion.

3. Religion, it is, respecting the Principles of it, Life. The Principles of
it are living Principles, Principles of Life. Religion, it is wrought into the
hearts of men, by the quickening power of the Spirit, in that saving work of
Grace, wherein we are raised from Death unto Life; wherein we are passed from
Death unto Life. 1 John 3.14. Religion, it is our spiritual Resurrection, and
so it is our spiritual Life.

4. Religion in the practice of it, it is the only way of Life. It is by the
performance of Religious Duties, that men walk in the way of Life. Practical
Religion, it is the narrow way which leads to Life. Mat. 7.14. It is that way
of Life which is above to the wise, to depart from Hell beneath Prove. 15.24. It
is the Everlasting Way. Psalm. 139.24.

5. Religion, in the visible external Forms of it, in all the religious
Institutions, Constitutions, and Administrations, which are of divine
Appointment, so it is the only Means of Life, that whereby God gives Life, or
works Life, In which sense it is said, Salvation is of the Jews. Joh. 4.22.
Religion, it is the living Waters, the Waters of Life, the Tree of Life: which
gives Life to the Nations. Ezekiel. 47.8, 9. Zech. 14.8. Rev. 22.1, 2. Where
Religion is, there are all the Means of Life, and the saving Improvement of
those Means. Where Religion is not, there is no Day of Grace, no Means of
Grace, no Life, no Salvation.

6. Religion, it is that wherein and whereby man is brought to God, to Christ,
to God in Christ. It is that whereby we do know God, acknowledge him, fear him,
believe, hope, and trust in him, love, serve, worship, and glorify God; and
whereby we come to God, converse with God, have Communion with God, and receive
all saving Communications from God, through Jesus Christ: It is that whereby
men move and act toward, and upon God; in and by which God dwells with men on
earth; it is that whereby we do apprehend, cleave unto, and live upon God, as
our Life. Deuteronomy. 30.20. That thou may love the Lord thy God -- and cleave to
him: for He is thy Life. Thus Religion, in the Principles of it, it is Life; in
the Practice of it, is the Way of Life; in the visible and external Forms and
Institutions of it, it is the Means of Life; and respecting the original
Object, and Ends of it, it comes from, and leads and brings us up unto God in
Christ, who is our Life. Thus it is demonstrated that Religion is Life.

Secondly, That Religion is Life to the Vovenant People of God: that is,

1. It is their spiritual Life, that whereby they live spiritually. It is that
whereby every single Saint lives the Life of Grace, and Holiness; the Life of
Faith, and New Obedience. The spirit and power of Religion in the heart, it is
Life to the Soul, and gives being to the New Creature. Romans 8.6. To be
spiritually minded, it is Life. Hence Religion, it is that which makes the
People of God a Living People. God's People must be a living People. Whenever
God takes a People to be his People, He quickens them with spiritual Life, and
makes them a Living People. Ezekiel. 37.6. -- And ye shall live' and ye shall know
that I am the Lord. and V. 14. And shall put my Spirit in you, and ye shall
live. Hence Religion, it is Life from the dead to any People. Romans 11.25. --
What shall the Receiving of them be, but Life from the dead? The Conversion of
the Jews shall be Life from the dead to the World, by a general and glorious
resurrection of Religion.

2. Religion, it is the Life of the Vovenant People of God; i. e. It gives them
their spiritual Being, and Constitution under Covenant Relation unto God. It
gives a People their spiritual Standing before God as his People, his
Vovenant People. It is the essence and substance of the Covenant. Heb. 8.10.
For this is the Covenant I will make with the House of Israel after those days:
I will put my Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will
be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People. taken from Jer. 31.33.
Religion in this sense constitutes the Covenant, and is the spiritual
Constitution of the Vovenant People of God. 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a chosen
Generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy Nation, a peculior People. It follows
V. 10th Which in time past were not a People; but now are the People of God.
Without Religion, they were no People: but Religion made them the People of God.

3. Religion, it is the Life of the Vovenant People of God, as to their
Political Constitution in visible Church State and Order, under the
Administration of all Ordinances. Religion gives a People their visible
Standing under the visible Dispensation of God's Covenant, and Administration
of his Kingdom; as in our Text. For it is your Life; and by this thing ye shall
prolong your days in the Land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it. It was
their Religion, which gave them a Standing and Settlement in that Land, the
land of Promise, in the full possession of their visible Covenant Interests and
Enjoyments, as the Vovenant People of God. So that it remains a manifest plain
Truth from the Word of God, that Religion is the Life of the Vovenant People of
God. The Application follows.

USE. I. It is for our Information and Instruction in diverse Particulars.

1. That there is, there can be but One only, true, real Religion, and no more.
Religion has been, is, and ever will be One and the same unchangeably. And
because there is but One God, but One Lord Jesus Christ, One Spirit, One work
of Redemption, One way of Application, One Doctrine of Godliness, One Faith,
One Obedience, One and the same moral Worship, One Covenant of Grace, One
Covenantpeople of God, One Family and Household of God, One State both of Grace
and Glory, One Life, One Heaven; therefore consequently but One Religion. All
the sincere People of God in the World ever have been, and ever shall be One in
the Profession, and Practice of this One Religion; whereby all God's Elect are
gathered together in One, in Christ, and perfected both in Grace and Glory,
unto the completion and perfection of the mystical Body of Christ which is the
fullness of Him who fills all in all. Ephesians. 1.10, and 23. True it is, the
Apostle grants (1 Cor. 8.5.) that there are which are called gods -- as there
be gods many, and lords many. So there be that are called religions, such
religions many: But as the Apostle concludes, V. 6. but to us there is but One
God -- and One Lord Jesus Christ: So ought we to conclude, that to us there is
but One Religion; which is the pure Religion, and undefiled before God, and the
Father. Jam. 1.27. This is the Religion, without which there is, there can be
no Life, or Salvation.

2. That this Religion, it is the Supreme thing in this lower World; viz.
because it is, in all respects, our Life, and that nothing else is so.
Religion, in the full and whole nature and notion of it, is the most glorious
effect and product of divine Wisdom, Power, Grace, Mercy, Goodness, Truth, and
Faithfullness; yea, of the whole divine Sufficiency, and Efficiency, in the
accomplishment of all God's eternal Counsels concerning his own Glory, in the
Salvation of his Elect. Religion, it comprehends all the whole Interest of God,
of Christ, and of his Church and People in this World; all that is heavenly,
spiritual, and divine; all that is of Heaven upon Earth, respecting both State,
Interest, and Enjoyment. It gives a Being and Standing to all Saints, both in
Grace, and in Glory. Oh! Religion it is a mavelous high, and heavenly thing!
All the real worth and excellency that is in the World, it is from Religion.
There would be nothing of God, that is, of the knowledge of God, of the
spiritual, gracious, and saving Presence of God, were it not for Religion.
Those who are without Religion, are without God in the World. Ephesians. 2.12. We
have no more of God, than we have of Religion. Again, there could have been no
Good, or Goodness in the World; had it not been for Religion. The World would
have been a mere Vacuum of all good, nothing else but a receptacle of desperate
Sinners; a very Hell of Sin, and Misery; there could have been nothing of
Light, or Life, or Grace, Holiness, or Happiness; there would have been nothing
but Darkness, and Death, and all kind of woe; no news of Heaven, no hope of
Heaven; yea, there could have been no Heaven unto fallen Man, without Religion.
Religion does in a sense, give being unto Heaven: There had not been such Place
or State of Blessedness unto Man; neither had Man ever been capacitated to live
in Heaven, otherwise than by this Religion. No wonder then, that God by his
Word, does extol it, and advance it, as the most excellent, inestimable,
invaluable, incomparable thing. Prove. 3.15. She is more precious than rubies:
and all the things thou can desire, are not to be compared to her. And it is
advanced, because it is our Life. Prove. 4.13. -- Keep her, for she is thy Life.
V. 21, 22. -- Keep them in the midst of thy heart, for they are thy Life. It is
Religion, that does make the poor despised Saints of God the Excellent Ones of
the Earth. Psalm. 16.3. Prove. 12.26. It is Religion, that does make the Church
of God beautiful, the perfection of Beauty, the Joy of the whole Earth. Psalm.
48.2. Lam. 2.15. Yea, an Eternal Excellency. Isa. 60.15.

3. That it is the Infinite Grace, Mercy, and Goodness of God to any People,
that He does give them Religion. The greatest part of the World, and of the
Nations of the World are most miserable without it, all the Pagan, and Popish
World. O that so great, so much the greater part of Mankind, should so ly
buried in gross Ignorance, and Atheism, without God, and Religion. 1 John
5.19. The whole World lies in Wickedness. So much the more is the Mercy of God
magnified to such People and Nations, unto whom He has granted Religion, in
the light, life, and power of it. It is the happiness, honor, and glory of any
Nation, or People. It was so of the People of Israel. It made them great and
glorious above all other Nations. Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou O Israel: -- A
People saved by the Lord! And great above all Nations it also made them. Deuteronomy
4.7. For what Nation so great, that has God so nigh unto them? High also it
made them above the Nations, in praise, in name, and in honor. Deuteronomy. 26.19. It
made them a Crown of glory in the hand of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the
hand of their God. Isa. 62.3. That God has made our People and Nations (at
least in these latter Ages) so much a Glory among the Nations; and so much the
Bulwark and Defense of Religion in the World, it ought to be acknowledged with
Doxologie. That God has blessed poor New England with so much of Religion;
planted these Heavens, and laid the foundations of this Earth in such an happy
subserviency thereunto, this we ought to commemorate with Thankfulness; yet not
without some, yea much diminution of our joy and comfort, under a sorrowful
sense of our present Defection therein.

USE. II. It ought to be for Admonition. If we are a People of Religion, if
Religion be our Life, O let us then be Admonished to take heed that we do not
destroy our Religion, and so destroy our own Life, destroy our selves utterly
and most miserably, by destroying our Religion. And we are the more concerned
to give most diligent and earnest heed to such an Admonition and Warning;
because our Lord Jesus seems to speak to these Churches, as to the Church of
Sardis. Rev. 3.1. I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and
art dead. That there has been a vital decay, a decay upon the very Vitals of
Religion, by a deep declension in the Life, and Power of it; that there is
already a great Death upon Religion, little more left than a name to live; that
the things which remain, are ready to dye; and that we are in great danger of
dying together with it; This is one of the most awakening, and humbling
Considerations of our present State and Condition. Oh! the many deadly
Symptoms, Symptoms of Death, that are upon our Religion! Consider we then how
much it is dying respecting the very Being of it, by the general failure of the
work of Conversion; whereby only it is that Religion is propagated, continued,
and upheld in being among any People. As converting work does cease, so
Religion does dye away; though more insensibly, yet most irrecoverably. How
much Religion is dying in the very Hearts of sincere Christians, by their
Declensions in Grace, Holiness, and the Power of Godliness! How much it is
dying, respecting the visible Profession, and Practice of it: partly by the
Formality of Churches; but more by the Hypocrisy, and Apostasy of formal,
hypocritical Professors! How much it is dying under the prevailing power of
those Sins and Evils, which are utterly inconsistent with, and destructive of
the Life of it! Those Sins continuing, and prevailing, Religion cannot live, it
must needs dye. Such as are the deep, and general Degeneracy of the
Generations; Unprofitableness under all means of Grace, Unbelief, and
Disobedience to the Gospel; Formality, Hypocrisy, and spiritual Idolatry in
the Worship of God; Profanation, and Pollutions of the House of God; Slighting
and Neglect of Holy Things, Interests, and Enjoyments thereof; Worldliness,
Profaneness, Sensuality. All these Sins, more especially when they are become
the very Spirit of the Times, and Generation; when they are penal, and
judicial, then they will certainly issue in general, and total Apostasy; and so
will destroy, not only the life, and power, but the external Form, Order, and
Interest of Religion also. Hence how is Religion dying in Churches! Churches,
which are constituted on purpose for the propagation, and preservation of the
Life of Religion; that live, and have their being, only by the life of
Religion, how little is there of the life of Religion left in them! and how are
Churches themselves languishing and dying together with Religion! How is
Religion dying in Families! through the neglect of the religious Service and
Worship of God, and of the religious Education of Children and Youth in
Families. Truly, here, and hereby Religion first received its death's wound.
Hence Religion is dying in all other Societies, among all Orders and Degrees of
men, in all ways of Converse, both Civil, and Ecclesiastical. O there is
little, or nothing of the Life of Religion to be seen, or appearing either in
the Frame, or Way; Hearts, or Lives of the generality of the Professors of it.
And that which remains thereof, ready to dye! How much and great cause have we
then to take heed, that we do not quite destroy it. That is,

1. Take heed that we do not exchange our Religion for the World; that we do
not commit that Heaven-astonishing Sin, which God charged his People with. Jer.
2.11, 12, 13. -- But my people have changed their Glory for that which does not
profit. Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid, be ye
very desolate, says the Lord. For my people have committed two evils: they
have forsaken Me, the Fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no water. They had exchanged their God, and their
Religion for the World; they had advanced the Interest of the World above the
Interest of Religion: and thereby Inslaved themselves. V. 14. Is Israel a
servant? is he a home-born Slave? why is he spoiled? God destroyed them by that
worldly Interest, whereby they had destroyed their Religion. If once a People
do set their hearts upon the World, so as to make it their highest and
heart-interest, their preponderating, ruling Interest, which does sway all, and
carry all before it; when the Spirits, Principles, Counsels, and Designs of a
People are all for the World, set for the promotion, and advancement of their
worldly Interest; when the Interest and Concernments of Religion, yea even
Religion it self, is made subordinate, and subservient to the World; yea
prostituted by worldly men to worldly Lusts, and thereby exposed to all kind of
abuse, scandal, shame, reproach, and made an Opprobrium; when the visible
Professors of Religion are, not only in heart alienated from; but are become
secret Enemies to it; when Religion is oppressed, and depressed; when it is
made, not only to serve, but also to suffer under the rising, ruling Interest
of the World: WOE then will be to such a People: for they have exchanged their
Religion for the World: therefore their Religion will dye. The spirit of the
World, and of Worldliness has been, is, and is like to be the most general,
and powerful Principle of Apostasy to the professing people of God: and it is
often, yea ordinarily, the death of Religion: It is always so, when, and where
it prevails.

2. We are admonished to take heed that we do not desert Religion. If we desert
it, it will certainly dye; dye without remedy. That we do not desert it by
withdrawing our hearts from it; or by an Heart-apostacy from God. Religion
always dies by the People's Heart-apostacy. They set not their Heart aright --
Their Heart was not right with Him. Psalm. 78.8, 37. Their Heart was removed far
from Him. Isa. 29.13. Hence God complains so much, every where, of their evil
Heart; their hard, impenitent, unbelieving, stubborn, rebellious, backsliding,
revolting, whorish Heart; whereby they had quite destroyed the life of their
Religion. Again, that we do not desert Religion by slighting, neglecting, and
exposing the visible, external Interest and Concernments of it; and so not only
withdrawing our hearts, but our heads and hands also; I mean our labors and
endeavors in whatsoever ought, and is absolutely necessary to be done and
performed, for the support, upholding and maintaining of the visible Interest
of Religion. Thus the People of old, in their Apostasy forsook the Temple, and
the visible Worship of God, and suffered all to fall into a ruin and
desolation. They deserted the whole Interest of Religion, and so destroyed it.
How much the Spirit, the Sins, and the Temptations of the Times do incline unto
such a deserting, or forsaking of Religion, we may consider, and lay to heart
with deep Humiliation. For the more close Application of this Admonition, let
it be considered.

1. That when Religion is once decaying and dying, is near death, even at the
point, or ready to dye, (as Rev. 3.2.) It is then high time for Professors, and
a professing People to take heed to themselves, that they be no further
Accessory to the death of it. When the Interest of the World rises higher and
higher, and all the Sins of the Times grow stronger and stronger; and Religion
is growing weaker and weaker; is already grown so weak, that it has not life,
strength, or power enough left, to recover it self: It is a fearful question to
such a People, whether Religion be not gone past hope of Recovery, at least in
the ordinary way of the improvement of Means. Whether ever that Church of
Sardis, and those other declined Churches were recovered, or no, by a
resurrection of Religion, is more uncertain. Sure we are, they afterward dyed,
and were buried, (together with their Religion) in their own ruins.

2. When Religion dies, all dies with such a People. The death of Religion
destroys all kind of Life; both the Spiritual, and Political Life: It destroys
Church-constitution, Order, Administrations; yea it destroys the being and
standing of a People before God under his Covenant. When Religion dies, then
Lo-ammi, and Lo-ruhamah are born; then God says, Ye are not my People, and I
will not be your God: And He will no more have mercy -- but that He will
utterly take away. Hose. 1.6, 8. Thus that People destroyed themselves by
destroying of their Religion; and remain dead and buried in their Graves unto
this day. Ezekiel. 37.1 -- 14. If we should destroy our Religion, we should
destroy all our Public Weal; all that wherein we have been peculiarly happy,
as the People of God. If once Religion dye, there will be nothing but Death;
Death in our Hearts, Death in all our ways of Converse: we shall be a dead
People. Sin and Death do always reign, when and where Religion dies and is
destroyed.

3. When a People destroy themselves by destroying Religion, they perish
inevitably, utterly, and most miserably. When God does leave a People to
destroy Religion, then He has no Salvation for them. By destroying Religion, a
People do put away Salvation from them, and render themselves utterly incapable
thereof. If God lot such a Peope alone; and execute no outward, temporal
Judgment upon them, they will soon make a miserable end of themselves: for
they will abuse all their Peace, Prosperity, Means, Mercyes, Interests, and
Enjoyments, unto their own Ruin; and incur all kind of destroying Evils; make
themselves a Shame, a Reproach, a Taunt, a Curse, an Execration, and an
Astonishment to all People. So did that People of old. Jer. 24.9. Jer. 25.18.
And so they continue to be unto this day. No such vile, refuse People under
heaven, as they who have destroyed Religion: Such a People must needs perish
most hopelessly. Ezekiel. 33.10. -- If our Transgressions and our Sins be upon us,
and we pine away in them, how should we then live! Observe, Religion being dead
and gone, they cast away all hope of Salvation, and give up themselves
desperately unto Destruction, saying, How should we then live! It is hard to
produce an Instance of any People recovered, when they have destroyed Religion
by a general, and total Apostasy from it: For it is the utmost height of all
Sin, Transgression, and Provocation, which moves the Wrath of God to arise. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. -- Until the Wrath of the Lord arose against his People, till
there was no Remedy; or no Healing. By destroying of Religion, a People do fill
up their Sin always, till Wrath comes upon them to the utmost. 1 These. 2.16. --
To fill up their Sins always: for the Wrath is come upon them to the uttermost.
Furthermore, to destroy Religion, it is a sin most directly against our Lord
Jesus Christ; because Religion, it is more peculiarly His; His Work, His Cause,
and Interest: Therefore to destroy it, is a sin which does expose a People more
directly to the dreadful Wrath and Displeasure of Christ. It is the greatest
Injury that can be offered or done to Him; and therefore He will avenge it. We
know it was the Lord Jesus who did denounce so dreadfully against all the
Churches. Rev. 2.5. Else will I come unto thee quickly, and remove thy
Candlestick. and V. 16. Else will I come unto thee quickly, and will fight
against them -- V. 23. I will kill her Children with death, and all the
Churches shall know that I am He which searches the Reins and Hearts: and I
will give unto every one of you according to your works. The condition of a
People or Churches is become unspeakably woeful and lamentable when Christ, who
is the only Mediator and Intercessor with God to procure all, both temporal,
and eternal Deliverance, and Salvation, is turned against them, and become
their Enemy: for He is the most dreadful Enemy; concerning whom it is written
( Exodus 23.21.) Beware of Him, and obey his Voice, provoke Him not: for He will
not pardon -- and Psalm. 2.12. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and ye perish
from the way, when his Wrath is kindled but a little: blessed are all they that
put their Trust in Him. Well then may any People or Churches who have any care
or concernment for their own Salvation, be surprised with Astonishment unto
some degree of Horror, under an apprehension of any danger of the death of
Religion. It is the Infinite Mercy of God to New England, that although Religion
does languish; yet if we be admonished, and take warning, there is still hope,
that it may Revive and Live. Hence the

III. USE Wherein the Doctrine is to be improved, and applied in a way of
Exhortation. If Religion be our life, and if there be so much danger of the
Death of Religion. O then let all who love, and desire life; both temporal,
spiritual, and eternal life, and who fear death, so great a death; be moved to
labor with all our hearts, minds, souls, might and strength, by all ways and
means, to recover, and save the life of Religion which is our own life. This
Exhortation proposes and presses all the great and general Dutys of the
Covenant People of God, at such a time, and in such a case as we are. Moses
applied all the whole Word of God at once, to the People by this one Word of
Exhortation. Set your hearts unto all the Words, etc. because it is your life.
It is also the sum of all which our Lord Jesus, propounds to the declining
Churches, Rev. 3.2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things which remain, that
are ready to die. I am (though most unworthy) called forth this day, and set in
this General Assembly, to speak for the life of Religion, to plead in the Name
of the Lord, and by the Word of the Lord, for the life of Religion, to plead
for the life of dying Religion. Oh! were the heart of N-Engl. rightly and fully
prepared, resolved, and set for the recovery and safety of the life of
Religion: God would then most graciously make clear and full discoveries of our
whole way and work therein, and of all the means thereunto: Yea, God himself
would soon bring all to pass for us. To this end we ought to be thoroughly
convinced of, and deeply humbled (even unto shame and confusion of Face) under
the sense of the decaying, dying state of Religion; and withal charge, judge,
condemn, loath and abhor our selves for all that Sin and Apostasy, whereby we
have brought Religion into such a state. Under such Conviction and Humiliation,
we must set our selves to labor, unto the resurrection of Religion, and that
with extraordinary Zeal, Courage, Faith-fulness, and Resolution, in the
improvement of all means, with one heart, and one soul, as one man, even as for
our lives, and more than for our lives; still acknowledging, that when we have
done all that we can, Religion must be revived, not without the greatest
Miracle of Divine Power, Grace and Mercy by God himself, Ezekiel. 37.12. O my
People, I will open your Graves. That we may obtain the accomplishment of this
great promise, it will be necessary;

1. That we do under an humbling, heartbreaking sense of our present, absolute
and extreme necessity of the mighty power and working of the Spirit of God, in
a way of Sovereign Grace and Mercy, for the recovery of the Life of Religion,
labor unto an extraordinary exercise of Faith and Hope in God for it. Plead,
and improve his Covenant, and all his Promises to that end. We have great
encouragement from the Word of God so to do., Hos. 6.1, 2. Come let us return
unto the Lord -- After two days he will revive us, in the third day he will
raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. If we could thus come unto God by
Faith he would revive us: there is nothing more dangerously Symptomatical, than
when a People grow senseless, secure, stupid, sottishly supine in the depth of
Apostasy. None of the declining Churches, so irrecoverably gone, as that of
Laodicea; and that because, utterly senseless and secure, Rev. 3.17. -- Because
thou say I am rich, and increased with Goods, and have need of nothing: and
know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and
naked. So the People of Israel; I mean the ten Tribes, when they were sunk in
their Apostasy, past recovery, God by the Prophet Elijah, put them upon the
utmost trial, by that great proposal, 1 King. 18.21. -- How long halt ye
between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; if Baal, then follow him;
and the People answered him nor a word: Observe, the People answered him not a
Word, which fignifies plainly, that although they were fully convinced of their
Apostasy, and manifested by their silence, that they were judged, and
self-condemned; yet they were so stupid, and sottish under it, that they were
not at all careful nor concerned about it; nor willing to trouble themselves,
their minds, or thoughts with it. God grant it may not be so with us.

2. That we do carefully and very curiously observe and labor to understand;
the Time, the Way, the Work of the Lord, when and wherein, he is graciously
willing, and working to revive and raise up; yielding up our selves unto him,
as the Subject of so great a Work. It is the greatunhappiness and misery of any
declining People, not to understand when, and how God is laboring with them to
revive and raise them, Hos. 11.3. I taught Ephraim also to go; taking them by
their Arms: but they knew not that I healed them. Hence it was, they abused
all, both ordinary and extraordinary means and mercies, unto their own deeper
defection, and utter destruction, as Hos. 7.1. -- When I would have healed
Israel, then the Iniquity of Ephraim was discovered, and the Sin of Samaria;
the more God labored with them to heal them, the worse they were; until (at
last) they became wilfully unwilling to be healed; and even desperately
resolute in their Apostasy: Jer. 2.25. -- But thou said, there is no hope,
no, for I have loved Strangers, and after them I will go. So Jer. 18.12. Isai.
30.15. -- This made the Prophet to lament to dolefully, without hope, Jer.
8.18, 20. When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is faint in me;
the Harvest is past, the Summer ended, and we are not healed, for the hurt of
the Daughter of my People I am hurt, I am black, astonishment has taken hold
upon me: That which broke the heart of his hope, was, they had not known, nor
improved the time, and means of their healing and salvation, and therefore now
their case was hopeless and remediless: this made our Blessed Lord Jesus to
weep out the Bowels of his Compassion over Jerusalem, in that doleful
lamentation, Luke 19.41, 42. -- And when he was come near, he beheld the City,
and wept over it; if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy Day, the
things which belong to thy peace, but now they are hidden from thine eyes.
Verse 44. -- Because thou knew not the time of thy Visitation: So Mat.
23.37. -- O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, etc. How often would I have gathered thy
Children, etc. and ye would not, behold your house is left unto you desolate.
When a People do not, will not observe nor understand the time, way, and work
of the Lord, and so refuse to be healed, and saved, God does then give them up
as a reprobate People, Jer. 6.29.30. -- The Bellows are burnt, the Lead is
consumed of the fire, the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are not
plucked away; reprobate Silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them. Ezekiel. 24.13. -- Because I have purged thee and thou wast not
purged, thou shall not be purged any more from thy filthiness, until I have
caused my fury to rest upon thee; I the Lord have spoken it, I will do it, I
will not go back, neither will I spare, neither will I repent. If a People will
not be healed and saved, they must be, they shall be destroyed: O that we
understood how much we are concerned to discern, know, and improve the present
time; lest the Harvest should be past, and the Summer ended, and the things of
our peace, of our temporal, spiritual and eternal welfare should be hidden from
our eyes.

3. That we do wait earnestly upon God, in an extraordinary way of Humiliation
and Supplication, under the Administration of his Word and Worship, for the
dispensation of his Spirit, and of Converting Grace. No hope, no possibility of
the Resurrection of Religion otherwise than by such a dispensation of the
Spirit and Grace of God, until God shall pour out his Spirit from on High,
Isai. 32.15. -- Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on High, and the
Wilderness be a fruitful Field; that De structions and Desolations were to
remain upon them, until God should work a general work of Conversion, and the
Resurrection of Religion thereby. They were to remain dead and buried in their
Graves, until God should accomplish that great Fundam ental Covenant Promise,
Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. -- A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will I put
within you, and I will put my Spirit within you. So Ezekiel. 37.13, 14. -- When I
have opened your Graves, and brought you up out of your Graves, and shall put
my Spirit in you, and ye shall live. Therefore it is high time for us to seek
the Lord until he rain Righteousness, Hos. 10.12. Of if God shall please to
pour out his Spirit upon our Seed, and his Blessing upon our Offspring; then
there will be a glorious Resurrection of Religion with the rising Generation;
They shall spring up as amongst the Grass, and as Willows by the Watercourse,
Isai. 44.34. O that we could approve our selves an Humble, Penitential,
Prayerful People; prepared for such a dispensation of the Spirit, and waiting
upon God under the promise of it.

4. That we strengthen the things which remain, that are ready to die. This is
our Lord Jesus his Direction, in terms, Rev. 3.2. keep alive and cherish that
of the life of Religion which is left, the remains of it: O Christians, let
dying Religion have a Reviving and a Resurrection in your hearts and lives;
live it up to life again; there is, there can be nothing more of the life of
Religion kept in the World, than what is preserved and upheld in the heart of a
few, (and they are comparatively but a very few) living and lively Christians,
there never has been, nor ever is but a little of Religion in the life, spirit
and power of it in this lower World; it is a very choice, rare thing in the
best of times; but there is never less of it than when sincere Christians are
fallen into a frame and way of Declension; nothing more deadly to Religion than
the declension of Christians, which strikes at the very heart and life of it;
so much the more should you labor to rise to the utmost height of attainment
in Grace and Holiness, even unto a conspicuous eminency therein; that Religion
may not only live, but shine in all your Converses, throughout your whole
Conversations; that you may shine as Lights in the World, Phil. 2.15, 16.
Christians, if you do not thus revive, and raise Religion in your hearts and
lives before you die, you may not expect that it will long survive you: though
Religion cannot die so long as you live, yet if you suffer Religion to live a
dying Life in you, you may fear, that (though it cannot die in you) it may
notwithstanding die with you.

5. That we set our hearts unto and upon Religion. Make it our highest, our
dearest, even our heart-interest; our whole, our all, as to Interest and
Enjoyment in this World; that which we live for, that which we live by, that
which is our Life (viz.) because it is that whereby we live to, with, and upon
God in Christ: let our Souls therefore be drawn forth after, and engaged unto
Religion, in esteem, love, zeal, desire, delight; that our minds may be so
exercised unto the Doctrinal, Practical, and experimental Knowledge of it; as
that we may be raised to real, spiritual discoveries, and apprehensions of the
excellency, glory and perfection of it, with a transcendency above all the
glories and perfections of this lower World: That we may account all Worldly
Interests and Enjoyments but loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of it, as
the Holy Apostle did, Phil. 3.8. And may by Faith also apprehend our own
Interest in it, with most certain assurance that it is ours, our own, and that
nothing is so, or so much ours, our own, as our Religion, that is our God, our
Christ, and our Religion, as it is, and because it is our life. O if we could
thus devote our selves to Religion, become true, real Votaries to Religion,
Religion would then revive and live.

6. That we set our selves in whatsoever we have, are, or can do, in a full,
and direct Subserviency to the Propagation and advancement of Religion. Lay out
our selves, improve all time, strength and gifts, grace and estate, power,
Authority, interest, influence, unto our utmost capacity and possibility for
Religion; and that with utmost Care, Conscience, Zeal, Courage, Faithfulness;
in a way of steadfast perseverance through all incounters and conflicts to the
last; making of it our main design, our whole work and business, in all our
transactions, both with God and Man: That we therefore labor servently, and
instantly with God in Prayer; That for Zions sake we do not hold our peace, and
for Jerusalems sake we do not rest; -- that we never hold our peace day nor
night, give him no rest until he establish and make Jerusalem a praise in the
Earth, Isai. 62.1, 6, 7. That we henceforth transact with God, and one with
another; with religious sincerity, in truth and faithfulness, in and about that
great and most important business of Reformation; in suppressing all the great
and general Sins? and performing the great and general Duties of the times?
that we trifle, dissemble, falsify no more therein, as heretofore we have too
much done; and as the People of old did to their own ruin and destruction, Jer.
3.10. Nothing hastened their utter defection and destruction more than their
formal, hypocritical Reformations. That we also labor to retrieve and raise
the visible Interest of Religion, and advance it above the head of our chief
joy, Psalm. 137.6. That we do cleave by an Heart-Engagement to the Word,
Worship, Ordinances, Administrations, Ministry, Order, Rule and Government of
Christ in his Church, to the whole Cause, Interest and Kingdom of Christ. That
we keep the Word of his Patience, and do not deny His Name, but hold fast that
which we have, which was the Commendation and Direction given to the Church of
Philadelphia, Rev. 3.8, 10, 11. If thus we live and labor for Religion, then
Religion will revive and live.

7. That we stir up our selves to take hold of God, who has hid his face from
us, that is to recover and retain the presence of God, the grace and favor of
God. If we suffer God to depart, Religion will die: If God depart the Glory
will be removed, but if God return, Religion will live; for God is our life,
Deuteronomy. 30.20. That thou may love the Lord thy God, that thou may obey his
voice, and that thou may cleave to him, for he is thy life. O if all those
who have a real interest in God, and who have power with God, would stir up
themselves, and set themselves by Faith in Prayer, to take hold upon him, we
might, we should certainly prevail with him to return to us, to abide and
continue with us, as our God and Savior, for he delights to return and meet
his People in such a way, Isai. 64.5. Thou meetest him that rejoices, and
works righteousness; those that remember thee in thy ways, behold thou art
wroth, for we have sinned, in those is continuance, and we shall be saved. Our
returning unto God, and Gods returning unto us, will infer a blessed
Resurrection of Religion.

That we may labor effectually in all these ways to recover and preserve the
life of Religion; It is necessary:

1. That we do and perform all with Mourning, and deep Humiliation: Mourning
for and over our selves, mourning for and over sinners, mourning over our
Families, mourning over our Churches, mourning over the rising Generations, and
over this whole People; mourning under the sense of our own Sins, and the Sins
of others; all the Sins of the times; mourning under the sense of the dying
state of Religion, mourning under the sense of Gods displeasure, of his
departure, and the woeful effects of both; mourning after God, after the Lord
Jesus Christ, after the returns of his presence, after his pardoning, purging,
reconciling, saving grace, and mercy, and all the effects thereof: O that we
could do all that we have to do, even our whole work, mourning in a frame and
way of mourning, with a spirit of mourning; To that end we should set our
selves apart, retire our selves unto mourning, as that mourning Prophet did,
Jer. 9.1 2. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,
that I might weep day and night, Oh that I had in the Wilderness the
lodging-place of a wayfaring man; that I might leave my People and go from
them; Mourn alone in secret places, Jer. 13.17. My soul shall weep in secret
places. We should be mourning, and always without ceasing, without
intermission, Jer. 14.17. -- Let mine eyes run down with tears night and day,
let them not cease, Lam. 3.49. -- Mine eye trickleth down, and cease not,
without intermission, Mourning with a deep and bitter mourning and lamentation;
sighing, and crying bitterly unto the breaking of our loins, Ezekiel. 9.4. Set a
mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh and cry, Ezekiel, 21.6. Sigh
therefore thou Son of man, with the breaking of thy loins, and with bitterness
sigh before their eyes; With an inward spiritual mourning, with contrition,
humiliation, and much soul-affliction, admitting no comfort, no common or
carnal comfort, Isai. 22.4. Look away from me I will weep bitterly, labor not
to comfort me; Mourning in a way of Prayer and Supplication; Pray and Mourn,
and Mourn and Pray; So Nehemiah, he wept, and mourned, fasted and prayed, Neh.
1.4. So Daniel, Dan. 9.3. We must Sigh and Cry; sighing and crying, to God is
the true voice of mourning and of mourners: Our Prayers must be the voice of
weeping, Psalm. 6.8, 9. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping, we must
mourn unto God; So Nehemiah wept and mourned before the God of Heaven, Nehem.
1.4. So bemoan our selves to him in our mourning, that he may earnestly
remember us still and that his bowels may be troubled for us, and his
compassions moved toward us, Jer. 31.18, 20. So mourn unto him, as that our
tears may drop into his Bottle, and be written in his Book, Psalm. 56.8. We must
follow God mourning, seek him mourning, turn unto him mourning, Jer. 31.9. They
shall come with weeping, and with supplication will I lead them; Observe, this
is the way wherein God promises to revive his People, and to raise them up by
a Resurrection of Religion, out of their deepest defection, Jere. 50.4. In
those days, and at the time says the Lord, the Children of Israel shall come,
they and the Children of Judah together, going, and weeping as they go; they
shall seek the Lord their God; they shall ask the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward: Such a Mourning is the certain effect of the saving dispensation
of the Spirit and converting Grace; and is the only way of turning to God in a
saving work of Conversion and reformation, Zech. 12.10, 11, 12. And I will pour
out upon the house of David, and upon the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit
of Grace and Supplication, -- and they shall mourn, -- in that day there shall
be a great mourning in Jerusalem, -- And the Land shall mourn every Family
apart, etc. Without such mourning, there is no hope or possibility of any
deliverance or salvation, either from sin or judgment: if we will not mourn we
shall perish in our Apostasy, Ezekiel. 24.23. Ye shall not mourn nor weep, but
you shall pine away for your iniquities: it is most fearfully signal to a
People, when God leaves a People without a spirit of mourning; and takes away
his Mourners, Jer. 16.5. Thus says the Lord, enter not into the house of
mourning, neither go to lament or bemone them; for I have taken away my peace
from this People, says the Lord, even loving kindness and mercys. O if God
shall please to frame us to such a mourning, then he will most certainly save
us from our Sin and Apostasy, and turn us unto himself; then he will prepare,
dispose and spirit us unto all his work: we shall go on, and go through with
the work of God (which now we can do nothing in) when we come to labor in it
mourning, God will do all by his Mourners, Isai. 57.18. I have seen his way and
I will heal him, I will restore comfort to him and his Mourners. O that we
could mourn after this spirit of Mourners; God is speaking mournfully to us by
his Word, he is mourning to us by his Ministry, Mat. 11.7. God sets matter and
cause of Mourning before us; the ways and works of God toward us call for
Mourning; Our Land begins to mourn under the sins of the times; God is many
ways calling to weeping and mourning, and baldness, and girding Sackcloth,
Isai. 22.12. O that sincere Christians, who have through Grace received the
spirit and principle of mourning, would stir up themselves thereunto, and beg
this Grace of God; it is your Calling as Christians to mourn to be Gods
mourners, Sions Mourners: O how much might you do for God and these Churches,
in this frame and way of mourning. More especially, if those of the Servants of
God, who are betrusted with the work of God, and the public weal of the
People, and these Churches, were such Mourners, and did labor in their work
mourning; Ezra, Nehemiah were great Mourners, and the work of the Lord
prospered in their hands, whilst they carried it on mourning, Nehem. 1.4. Ezra
10.1, 6. and Joel 2.17. Let the Priests the Lords Ministers weep between the
Porch and the Altar, and say spare thy People O Lord, -- Then the Lord will be
jealous for his Land and pity his People.

2. We must do what we do for the recovery and preservation of the life of
Religion, believing and obeying the Word of God, I mean the Word of God, as it
has been Preached and Delivered unto us by his Servants in the Ministry.

Those particular and extraordinary Messages which God has sent to us by his
Messengers; those full and general Testimonies which God has given by them
against all the Sins of the times, and unto all the duties of the times,
amplified in the delivery of them from the Word of God, by so many solemn Words
for Conversion, whereby God has charged us plainly, expressly and fully with
all our Sin and Apostasy judged and condemned us for it; declared and
denounced wrath and judgment against us, in case of impenitency. Yet withal
most graciously calling of us unto Repentance and Reformation, by many general
Instructions, Exhortations, Directions, Motives, and Arguments, proposed and
pressed by Promises, and Threatenings applied with much instancy and
importunity, and set home in the Application of them, with very severe
Admonitions and Warnings for our awakening: Yea God has made Application of
his Word unto us in an extraordinary way and manner, viz. In that great
Ordinance, wherein our Lord Jesus Christ was extraordinarily present to
discover and to declare the sum of all that has been spoken to us by the
Ministry: And whereby all the Churches have declared their conviction, and
published their confession and acknowledgement thereof: Thus God has spoken to
us all that can be spoken, suitable and proper to our state and condition; we
cannot tell what God can say more to us by the Ministry of his Word; than he
has done; but alas! we have not hearkened, nor believed, nor obeyed those
words of the Lord which have been sent unto us; so that God may justly complain
of us as of them, Jer. 7.25, 26. Since the day that your Fathers came out of
the Land of Egypt unto this day, I have even sent unto you all my Servants the
Prophets, daily rising early, and sending them, yet they hearkened not unto me,
nor incleaned their ear; and this God charge upon them every where as the
great cause both of their utter defection from Religion and of their
Destruction; viz. because they would not hearken unto the Words of the Lord, So
2 Chronicles. 36.16. Jer. 25.8, 4. and 35.15. Zech. 7.12, 13. Yea God tells them
plainly, after their return from Captivity, that it would never be well with
them until they had hearkened unto the words of the former Prophets, Zech. 7.7.
Religion was never revived and raised, they were never able to do any thing
effectually in the work of Reformation; neither did God work savingly for them
by his Spirit, until they had so done: Neither may we expect any recovery of
Religion or Salvation from Sin and Apostasy, until we have hearkened to (that
is) believed and obeyed that word. Those Words of the Lord which he sent to us,
and which he is still sending unto us by his Servants: And therefore O that
Unconverted ones would hearken to the Words of the Lord, which he has sent to
them for their awakening, conviction, humiliation, and conversion, believe and
obey the Gospel? that the work of Conversion might have a general and
prosperous progress, then Religion would revive and live: And that those who
are the sincere People of God would also hearken to the Word of the Lord, which
has been spoken unto you; to awaken and convince you, to bring you to an
humbling sight and sense of your own Sins, and of the Sins of the times, and of
the wrath of God against your selves, and against this People and these
Churches; as also to move and stir you up, to quicken and strengthen you unto
duty, the duty of the times, the work of Christ's Churches, you see all the
general Sins and evils of the times growing and prevailing; you see Religion
decaying and dying; You see this People and these Churches sinking and in great
danger of perishing in this defection and apostasy; you hear God threatening
dreadfully, and have seen his hand lifted up to Execution; and you sit still do
nothing, are able to do nothing; you are unable, weak and feeble as other men,
unto and in the work of Reformation; you fail utterly in all your essays to it,
and the reason is, because you do not hear and obey the Word of God: Believe it
Christians, you will never be able to exercise your Faith, Hope, or Confidence
in God, or to pray to God in good earnest, you will never be able to engage
your hearts in the work of Reformation, you will never find your selves
quickened, sanctified, and strengthened thereunto; and assisted therein, until
you have obeyed, and subjected your very souls to the Word of God; and so do
engage and labor in his work, under the power of his Word; there are none fit
to intermeddle in Religious Reformation but those who tremble at the Word of
God; Ezra 9.4. Then were assembled unto me, every one that trembled at the Word
of the Lord, Ezra. 10.3. Now therefore let us make a Covenant with our God --
according to the counsel of my Lord and of those that tremble at the
Commandment of God: O Christians, did you but once tremble at the Word of God,
you would find your Souls wonderfully raised in love, zeal and courage unto,
and for his work; more especially such of the Servants of the Lord, who have
any peculiar betrustments for others, and for the Public, are more than others
concerned, to subject their Souls to the power of the Word of God: Then they
will find themselves extraordinarily spirited to their work, and assisted by
the Spirit of God: Then they would prosper in their work, Ezra 6.14. And the
Elders of the Jews builded and prospered, through the Prophesying of Haggai the
Prophet and Zechariah, Hag. 1.12. Then Zerubbabel, and Joshua, obeyed the voice
of the Lord their God, and the words of Haggai the Prophet, Ver. 14. And the
Lord stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel, etc. -- O that we generally and fully
understood how much we are concerned thus to hearken to the Word of God; God
has magnified his Word to New England, he has wrought powerfully and
gloriously for this People by his Word; as for his People of old, Hos. 12.13.
Truly God has done all in New England by his Word: as long as we hearkened to
the Word of God, we prospered; if we would now hearken all would be well, 2 Chronicles. 20.20.

3. That we do what is necessary for the recovery and preservation of the life
of Religion; with holy, religious, lively, spiritual Devotion to God in his
Worship, more especially in his House. The loss of which has been, and is one
great, if not the greatest cause of the decay of Religion: for Religion lives
much by such Devotion to God in his Worship, and is kept alive by it. Religious
Devotion it is much of the life of Religion; if we would then recover and
preserve the life of Religion; we must labor to have our Souls raised unto a
very high and dear esteem of, and love unto a most sincere and fervent Zeal for
the House of God, and all the interests and enjoyments thereof: We must labor
to understand, the excellency of the Worship of God, and of the House of God,
and the blessedness and happiness of those who have (not only) visible but a
real spiritual interest and standing therein; we must give up and devote our
selves, our very souls unto God, in a way of holy Fellowship and Communion with
him, in his House in all the ways of his Worship, and uphold the Worship of
God, in the life, spirit, and power of it; we must have our hearts enlarged to
take in a fullness of the spiritual and gracious presence of God, and raised
unto living apprehensions of that presence, with spiritual pleasure, delight,
Soul-solace and satisfaction therein. That our Souls may be drawn forth more
and more after it, with longing desires, and earnest Prayer, as the Souls of
Saints of old were, Psalm. 27.4. and 36.7. and 42.1, 2. and 63.1, 2. and 84.1,
2, 10. We must labor to keep the House of God pure, and holy, and all the
services and administrations of it, and to obtain a spiritual Soul-settlement
therein, Psalm. 92.13. Those that are planted in the House of the Lord shall
flourish in the Courts of our God. If we would have Religion live, we must
really dwell in the House; for there and therein Religion lives, by nothing
have we more endangered and destroyed the life of Religion, than by withdrawing
our hearts from God in his Worship in his House, by our formality, hypocrisy
and spiritual Idolatry therein, by slighting, neglecting, profaning, and
polluting thereof, and by sinning away the presence of God from it; these evils
are deadly, they are death to Religion: so long as these evils remain, and so
long as we remain so estranged to the House and Worship of God, there will be
no hope of the life of Religion; neither shall we be able to do any thing
effectually for the recovery and preservation of it.

4. That we do what is necessary for the recovery and preservation of the life
of Religion, with the special presence, and under the power of our Lord Jesus
Christ: Religion lives only by the presence and power of Christ, who is our
life, and therefore is the life of our Religion. That we have by our sins and
miscarriages moved our Lord Jesus to withdraw and withhold so much of his
presence and power from us; thence it is that we suffer such a privation of the
life of Religion; and unless we obtain a return thereof, Religion will die quite
away. That we may obtain the return of the presence and power of Christ, we
must be sensible of, and humbled for those sins and evils whereby we have
grieved and provoked him; Our unbelief and disobedience to the Gospel, not
subjecting to his spiritual rule and government, and to the ministerial
exercise of his power therein; unfaithfulness to his cause, interest and work,
dissension, disorder and confusion in Churches; the loss of our first love and
life, and the great dishonor to his holy Name: These evils must be repented
of, and removed. Unconverted Sinners must receive him, and give themselves to
him by Faith, in a way of Gospel-Obedience: Christians must awake and rouse up
their sleepy Souls out of carnal ease and rest; follow him, and seek him until
you have found him, and repossest your Souls of him, with a fullness of
spiritual joy, pleasure and delight, in your enjoyments of him, as the Spouse,
Cant. 3.4. The Churches must give him free, full and open entrance and
entertainment, in the greatest fullness of his presence and power, recovering
their first life, and love, doing their first works; in maintaining, integrity
of love, peace, union, purity of communion, regularity and tranquillity of order
within themselves, cleaving to his cause, interest and work, fully, steadfastly
and faithfully; managing all the affairs of his Kingdom, in a way of sincere
soul-subjection to him, for the advancement of his Name and Glory. O if
Christians and Churches could thus prepare and dispose themselves unto the
return of the presence and power of Christ, they would soon feel themselves
enabled thereby, to perform all that is necessary for the recovery and
preservation of Religion; the sad cause why we have hitherto Failed in all our
undertakings, is the want of the presence and power of Christ: O there is woeful
evidence of the want of it, until Christ return it, nothing will or can be
done; the return of the presence and power of Christ will instantly infer an
happy Resurrection of Religion; O let us seek it, pray and cry for it, under a
deep sense of our extreme necessity of it, and of our woeful condition without
it; let us be moved hereunto from the consideration of the gracious disposition
of our Lord Jesus to return; it is yet his voice to these, as it was to those
declining Churches, after he had reproved, charged, threatened them very sharply
and severely; he concludes all, Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and
knock, if any man hear my voice and open unto me, I will come in; by opening to
Christ we shall do all, and obtain all salvation.

5. That we do what is necessary for the recovery and preservation of the life
of Religion quickly, there must be a sudden, quick dispatch, of all that is to
be done for the life of Religion. It must be done presently, instantly, without
delay, as we would do any thing for our life, when in utmost and extremest
danger; if we do not do what we have to do quickly, it may be quickly too late,
and truly it will be Gods infinite mercy, if it be not already too late, as it
was to them, Luke 19.42. Mat. 23.37. O we have lingered and delayed upon utmost
peril already; it is now high time, more than time, if we mean to do any thing,
Hos. 10.12. It is time to seek the Lord till he come, God is now crying to day,
whilst it is called to day, after so long a time, Psalm. 95.7. Heb. 4.7. God
calls for present have, he is every way hastening of us; the dying state of
Religion, and the dangerous state of this People, and of these Churches
thereby, will admit of no further delay; God is hastening in his way and work,
Zeph. 1.14. The day of the Lord is near, it hastes greatly. Christ has
threatened to come against us quickly, except we repent, and do the first works
quickly, Rev, 2.5, 16. In such a case a People must be quick, Numb. 16.46, 47.
And Moses said unto Aaron, take a Censer and go quickly to the Congregation,
and make an Atonement for them; and Aaron took as Moses commanded him, and
ran: O it was well for the poor People of Israel, in that instant of their
extreme and distressing danger, that Moses and Aaron, who had the care and
charge of their public Weal, were so quick in doing what was to be done for
their public safety and salvation. Wherefore:

Let the general Exhortation be humbly proposed to the Servants of God in the
Magistracy; Much Honored, It does in the Name of the Lord, by the Word of the
Lord in most solemn manner bespeak your utmost help, and your very hearts and
souls therein, for the recovery and preservation of the life of dying Religion;
It is your greatest Honor that you are betrusted with so much of the care and
charge of Religion, in the civil concerns of it. It will be both your and our
Happiness, if God shall make you instrumental Saviors of the life of Religion,
and so of the life of this People; and these Churches: It is your highest work,
and (although the heaviest) yet the happiest part thereof, wherein you serve
and subserve more directly, to the honor and glory of God, and highest good of
his People: and which being fully and faithfully performed, will turn to your
highest account in the day of Account, and add much weight and splendour unto
your Crown of glory.

The General Exhortation, It is also proposed to the Servants of Christ in the
Ministry; the whole Order and Office and work of the Ministry it is Religious:
Ordained by Christ as the great Ordinance, for the Ministerial Exercise of his
Power, for the propagation and preservation of the life of Religion, by the
progress of the work of Conversion and Edification among men; and that in a
more direct subordinacy to himself, and subserviency to his Name and Glory in
the World: who is himself the Shepherd and Bishop of Souls; it is cause of deep
Humiliation unto his Servants, that they have been called forth to labor under
the sinking discouragement of the decaying state of Religion; that Religion
should be dying under their hand, and they lament, lest they should be called
to minister under that woeful commission given to the Prophet, Isai. 6.10. Go,
tell this People, hear ye indeed but understand not, -- Make the heart of the
People fat, -- lest their Ministry should in just judgment be made penal and
judicial, and so become a savor of death unto death, and so that they should
Preach Religion to Death, and Preach this People to death, Hos. 6.5. Therefore
I have hewed them by the Prophets, and slain them by the words of my mouth. The
fearful apprehensions of such a danger may move them to labor (though
lamenting as Gods Servants of old) yet with so much the more care, love, zeal,
even unto the spending and consumption of their very souls, by fervency,
instancy and constancy in all their prayers and soul-labours, throughout their
whole work; more especially in traveling in birth with Souls until Christ be
formed in them; until they are born and brought forth to God in a saving work
of Regeneration; which will be the most certain way and means, unto a general
Resurrection of Religion in these Churches. O how should they then make full
proof of their Ministry, and approve themselves thoroughly, in their life, in
their labor, in all their ministrations, in their whole ministerial
Conversations, as those who are more than any other Order of Men in the World,
directly charged and betrusted; yea set for the life of Religion, and the
salvation of Souls.

The Exhortation it is further proposed, as in our Text and Context unto all
Israel, and Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel. It was
his final farewell Exhortation to all the whole Covenant People of God; The
People of these Churches, both the passing, standing, and rising Generations,
are all the visible Covenant people of God; and therefore Religion it is our
life,: we ought generally to care, labor, pray, cry to God for the recovery,
preservation and continuance of it, as for our life. You who are sincere
Christians are here again moved by this Exhortation; (not only (as before) to
keep Religion alive in your own hearts) but also to discharge your selves fully
and faithfully, in whatsoever duty or service, you may, can, or ought to labor
for the general Resurrection of Religion in these Churches: More especially
wherein you may be (any of you) betrusted with any of the concerns of it,
either Civil or Ecclesiastical; Truly Christians, the great incumbency, the
burden of the work it is upon you, the work it is most properly yours; Because
Religion it is peculiarly yours; you are under the most sacred and
indispensible obligations, both unto God, and one unto another to uphold it; it
is the most general duty of that high, holy and heavenly Calling, wherewith you
are called to be Saints, and wherein you are to approve your selves eminently
the Servants of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the defense and
advancement of his Cause, Interest, Kingdom, Name and Glory, wherein we shall
live and dye as Saints, obtaining those glorious promises which Christ made to
those who labored faithfully for the recovery of Religion in those declining
Churches of Asia, Rev. 2.7. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the
tree of life which is in the midst of the Paradise of God: and ver. 10. And I
will give thee a Crown of life: ver. 17. To him that overcomes, I will give to
eat of the hidden Manna, and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a
new Name which no man knows saving he that receives it, Rev. 3.5. He that
overcomes, the same shall be clothed in white Raiment. Ver. 12. Him that
overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, Ver. 21. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, etc. that is in Heaven: O
what exceeding great and precious Promises has our Lord Jesus made for the
encouragement of those who are his Sincere Servants, to labor to uphold
Religion in declining times and Churches; we believe and are upon good grounds
persuaded that there are many, that there are enough Sincere Christians yet
remaining in these Churches, to do and perform whatsoever is necessary for the
recovery and preservation of Religion; and that if you would do what you might
and ought, Religion would not die but live, and flourish with much spiritual
prosperity. Will it not then be a confounding shame and scandal unto this
Generation of New England Christians before the World: If having had Religion
transmitted to us by our Fathers (who through the grace of God, upheld it in so
much of the power and purity of it, while they lived) and being still
privileged with all Religious interests and enjoyments, as the highest
advantages and encouragements, to preserve the life of Religion; we should
notwithstanding, through our carelessness, slothfulness, unfaithfulness; suffer
to decay, languish, and dye away; yea and by our own declensions, therein give
it a mortal wound. Surely if Religion die, Christians will (in this respect) be
more inexcusably guilty of the death of it than others: O let this be
considered and laid to heart.

The general Exhortation speaks also to Churches, as such: Religion, in the
most proper sense of the Text and Doctrine, is most properly the life of
Churches, it is that which gives them being, and which is the great end of
their being. God has constituted Churches both by Religion, and for Religion;
therefore it is the great design, and ought to be the great work of Churches to
propagate and preserve the life of it, that is recovering and maintaining
Holiness and Purity in Ecclesiastical constitution, union, communion,
administrations, both of Doctrine and Worship; by religious fear, reverence,
sincerity, and solemnity, in all Religious Assemblies, Attendancies,
Performances, and Churches transactions in the Name of Christ, by Zeal,
Courage, Faithfulness, in the whole work of Christ, and in the management of
all the Affairs, and the whole interest of Religion; Let him that has an ear
hear what the spirit says to the Churches.

The Exhortation speaks also unto Families; Parents, Masters, Heads of
Families, to move you to keep Religion alive in your Families; by being truly
Religious your selves, in all your Family converses; by training up your
Children and Servants Religiously, unto and for Religion; by exercising and
upholding the Worship of God in all the ways of it, and in the Life, Spirit
and Power of it in your Families: hereby Religion shall live in Families; Thus
Abram, Genesis 18, 19. I know him that he will command his Children and Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.

The Exhortation speaks to all who are the Children of the Covenant, and of
the Promise; though you may at present have no saving Knowledge and Experience
of, or Interest in Religion, and therefore no hearts engagement to it, or
hearty care or concernment for it; but are in your present state and way,
Enemies unto it. Yet O Remember that Religion is your life also; you have been
born and bred up under the visible dispensation of the Covenant and Kingdom of
God, in the House of God for Beligion; and therefore if you have any care of
your Souls, or hope of Salvation; if you would not be cast off for ever, as a
Reprobate Generation, a Generation of Gods wrath; O apply your selves to
Religion, approve your selves Religions, labor by all means to make Religion
your own, in a saving work of Conversion; prepare your selves to undertake and
uphold a pure and sincere Profession and Practice of it, that you may not only
keep it your selves, but transmit it to succeeding Generations; then Religion
shall be your life also; Then the Lord your God will be with you as he was with
your Fathers, he will not leave you nor forsake you, 1 King. 8.57. And now O
that all, who do understand and believe any thing, either concerning God or
their own Souls, concerning good or evil, life or death, Heaven or Hell; may at
lest so far take notice of, and bare this Exhortation, as to suffer themselves
to be moved thereby, no more to slight or set light by Religion; but to have
high and appreciating thoughts of Religion; most seriously and solemnly to
consider of the eternal concernment of your own immortal Souls therein, in the
Being, Life, and Continuance of it, as that whereby you may live spiritually,
live eternally, and without which you will most certainly perish, inevitably,
utterly, and everlastingly.

May we not, ought we not all, in the conclusion, to reinforce this Exhortation
upon our Souls, by that vehement contestation, whereby Moses does in a most
solemn and awful manner (as it were) conjure that People unto Faith and
Obedience, Deuteronomy. 30.19. I call Heaven and Earth to Record against you this day,
that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; therefore
choose life, that both thou and thy Seed may live; that thou love the Lord thy
God, and obey his voice -- and cleave to him for he is thy life. When God does
thus set life and death before his Covenant People; and put them to their full
Trial, as to final choice, O then it is their most important Duty and Interest
to choose life, that both they and their Seed may live; May we not with fear and
trembling apprehend our selves: even these Churches, and this whole People,
New England, as it were standing before God, upon our great Trial for Life and
Death. O that we understood that the great case of Life and Death is now
depending between God and New England, what reason have we to take heed, as for
our lives, how we approve our selves upon this great trial; that God has set
Life and Death before us, all the World is witness, Heaven and Earth may be
called to record against us, that he has done it: God has set Life before us,
by setting the whole way of Life before us; his Law, his Gospel, his Covenant,
his Kingdom, all both Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal good, he has set
Religion before us, and exhibited himself unto us through his Son as our life.
God has also set Death and Cursing before us, by setting all our whole way of
Sin and Apostasy before us, the whole way of Death and Destruction which we
have been walking in, as also by setting both Temporal and Eternal Judgment
before us, in those Threatenings which have been denounced against us.

This proposal of Life and Death has been made in an extraordinary way and
manner, by the concurrent voice and cry of the Ministry; more especially by
such of the Servants of God whom he had made eminently able and faithful, who
have finished their Testimony, and are removed: God has also made this
Discovery and Proposal of Life and Death general, to all Sorts, Orders and
Degrees, to all the Churches, to all the People in all the Congregations; and
God continues thus to set Life and Death before us, by all seasons and
opportunities, but more plainly, expressly, fully, and generally, upon such
occasions, and in such General Assemblies as these, and that with extraordinary
Solemnity: It has been Gods great work of late to set Life and Death, Blessing
and Cursing before us; by the Ministry of his Word, and he is so doing unto
this day; wherein God is yet in infinite Mercy, crying unto us; Choose life that
both you and your Seed may live.

By this Word, God is once more calling after this Generation of Unconverted
Sinners. You who are yet in your sins, in a state and way of Sin and Death,
remaining secure and senceless therein; who have heretofore, and hitherunto
slighted, neglected, and rejected all the Calls of the Gospel, and all the
Ministerial offers of eternal life, through Jesus Christ: After all the
proposals of life, after all the calls, commands, and persuasions that you have
been under, to move you to choose Life. You are now, this day, once more called,
commanded, persuaded; yea entreated, beseeched and prayed, in the Name of the
Lord, and by the Word of the Lord to choose Life. Our Lord Jesus is most
graciously pleased by the Ministry of this Word, to exhibit himself, in all his
fullness and sufficiency, of Grace and Life, all, an Alsufficient Savior, and
is crying in this General Assembly, unto New England Sinners; to choose him, to
come to him, that they may have life: as once he did by his own personal
Ministry, in a General Assembly of that People, far greater than this, John
7.37. -- In the last and great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and cried, if any
man thirst let him come unto me and drink, he that believes on me, etc. -- You
have been set, and have been continued under an extraordinary improvement of
all means, in this your day of Grace, which is continued, and protracted,
beyond the ordinary date of divine patience, by an extraordinary protraction of
longsuffering, in a way of probation and trial; God has been trying, and
proving of you, and waiting upon you a great while: But know that his Spirit
shall not always strive, Genesis 6.3. -- He has limited a certain day, beyond
which he will not wait, Heb. 4.7. and upon a supposition, that God has so
limited a certain day, whereby he has dated his patience and longsuffering,
and the period of the present day of Grace, unto this Generation of Sinners;
you may sadly conclude, that you live under the latest and last, the final and
farewell calls and cries of Mercy, by the Ministry of the Word, that God will
not much longer call and cry after you, nor strive with you, therefore you are
warned to flee from the wrath which is to come, Mat. 3.7, 12. And now also the
Ax is laid to the root of the Tree, therefore every Tree that brings not
forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast into the fire. You are in extreme
danger, under the power and working of that spirit of unbelief and disobedience
to the Gospel, which is the Spirit of the times and whereby the Generation that
is the generality of Sinners are so strongly inclined and carried out to refuse
Life and choose Death. It is much to be feared that many, if not the most, have
already so done, and are accordingly in dreadful judgment, given up by God
unto that fatal choice, Psalm. 81.12. So I gave them up to their own hearts
lusts, etc. O it is high time then; now, now if ever (because you may fear now
or never) to choose life, to choose Spiritual, Temporal, and Eternal Life; to
make that great, comprehensive, unchangeable, eternal Choice, upon which
depends not only the Salvation of your own Souls, but even the deliverance and
salvation of this People, and these Churches: If you do thus choose Life, all
will be well with New England, but if you should refuse generally to choose
Life, you will be likely, not only to destroy your selves; but all posterity:
it would be fearfully signal if any sinners should be so prodigiously hardened,
and heightened in their impenitency and unbelief, as to be raised unto that
presumptuous and desperate resolution with those in the Prophet Isai. 22.13,
14. -- Let us eat and drink for to morrow we shall die; I have no other word to
leave upon such but that which follows in the next verse; And it was revealed
in mine ear by the Lord of Hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from
you, till you die.

God is also by this word calling upon his own Servants to choose Life; though
you have already made the great and most happy choice of Life for your own
Souls, last spoken of; yet you are further to choose life, that is, all the
ways and means of life, whatsoever may any way conduce unto the furtherance of
the work of Conversion, and the progress of Reformation, the recovery of the
life of Religion: Choose indeed, that is, choose it practically, make a practical
choice of it, that is, choose it so, as to make it your work: You are in this
respect, not only to choose life for your selves, but for others, choose life for
your Families, for your Children and Servants, Josh. 24.15. Choose you this day
whom ye will serve -- But as for me, and my House we will serve the Lord. It
was a time wherein all the People were put to their choice; and Joshuah chose
for himself and his House: Again, choose life for the Churches; It is with a few
of the sincere Servants of God to choose life for the, Churches; O choose the way
and work of Church Reformation, and all means and helps thereunto; Life and
Death is in this respect set before Churches; if the Servants of God, in them
choose life for them, the Churches will choose life: Finally choose life for the
People; the Servants of God in their several places and stations, according to
their betrustments, ought to choose life for the People; choose all things that
do conduce to the preservation of the life of this People, in all the
forementioned respects: O it is a great thing to be charged and betrusted with
the life of a People, the visible People of God; the public weal, the life of
a People has great dependence upon the Wisdom and Faithfulness of those who
are, and ought to choose life and blessing for them.

Thus God has set New England between Ebal and Gerazim, he has life and
blessing on the one hand, death and cursing on the other hand and brought us to
a Trial what we will choose; it is Gods way and work with us so to do by all his
dispensations; what the issue will be, what exit we shall make upon this trial,
is awful, considerable. O that it might be the holy will of the blessed God to
choose life and blessing for us, and enable us by his spirit and grace to choose
it for our selves; and not suffer us to run upon our own ruin, by the fatel,
woeful choice of death.

Wherein we shall make our selves most inexcusably both sinful and miserable;
because we have been warned, according to the charge that God has given unto
his Watchmen, Ezekiel. 33.3, -- 8. The Trumpet has been blown, and the People
have been warned: It has been the greatest care and concernment of those of
Gods faithful Watchmen, who have had fullest discoveries of our extremest
dangers, both by sin and judgment, so to discharge themselves as to deliver
their own Souls, that they might themselves be clear from the blood of all men:
Hence all sorts of People and Persons have been warned, Unconverted Sinners
have been warned of their danger of perishing in unregeneracy; Common
Professors have been warned of their danger of perishing in Hypocrisy and
Apostasy; Worldly People have been warned of their danger of perishing in
their Worldliness and Sensuality; Profane Persons have been warned of their
fearful danger of being cut off in their high-handed and presumptuous
Wickedness, and that with more signal instance of the dread and terror of Gods
avenging justice both in their temporal and eternal destruction: Christians
also have been warned of the dangerous effects and consequents of their
declensions, and of their security therein: All Orders and Degrees of Persons
have been warned; Families have been warned, Churches have been warned, all
other Societies have been warned; consequently all New England has been
warned: warned of all Sins, of all Duty of all Danger; we have had full, plain
Warning, many warnings, all kind of warnings; particular, personal, and private
warnings, general and public warnings; warnings from the Word of God, warnings
from the Works of God; some dreadful and terrible warnings God has given us
from Heaven, and in all these ways we have had long warning, many years
warning. The Lord is now by his Word testifying on the behalf of his Watchmen
(more especially those who have finished their Testimony, by faithful warning
given, and have thereby delivered their Souls, and are at rest) that they have
warned us and we have been warned; Yea, God is calling Heaven and Earth to
Record for himself against us, that he has warned us: and therefore if we will
not take warning; to repent, reform, and turn to God, but perish in our Sins
and Apostasy, Our blood will be upon our own heads, the Lord and his Throne
will be clear, and his Servants guiltless, Ezekiel. 33.4. Then whosoever hears
the sound of the Trumpet, and takes not warning, if the Sword come and take
him away, his blood shall be upon his own head -- He heard the sound of the
Trumpet, and took not warning, his blood shall be upon him -- So thou O Son of
Man, I have set thee a Watchman to the house of Israel, therefore thou shall
hear the Word at my mouth, and shall warn them from me, ver. 9. -- If thou warn
the wicked of his way to turn from it, if he do not turn from his way, he shall
die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered thy Soul; This God will have
declared for the vindication of his Justice, in the execution of his
Judgments, and that if we are destroyed by and in our sins, we may be forced
to acknowledge, that God is holy, righteous and just, and that our destruction
is of our selves; wherefore it follows, ver. 11. Say unto them, as I live,
says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of the Wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live; turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye dye, O
House of Israel.

Whence in the close of all, we have comfort and encouragement, in hope that if
yet we will take warning, God is and will be most graciously disposed, in a way
of sovereign and prerogative mercy, to revive, raise us up, and cause us to
live in his sight.

Notwithstanding all that has been spoken concerning the death of Religion: we
must understand, that Religion, it is in it self an immortal thing; it cannot
die nor be destroyed: all the powers of darkness cannot destroy Religion;
although this or that people may lose the life and being of it, and destroy
themselves by Apostasy from it. Yet notwithstanding Religion shall live, and
have its being in the World; and there will be a general and glorious
Resurrection of it, in the successive accomplishment of those Promises and
Prophesies which the people of God in all ages have believed and hoped for: and
God brought forth our Fathers with a gracious design, to give Religion a being
in this Land of Darkness, which was then none other than the Region of the
shadow of Death. We have been Originally a People separated and set apart unto
and for Religion; we have seen as much of the beauty and glory of it,
experienced as much of the light, life, power, grace and blessing of it,
enjoyed as much tranquillity, prosperity, and felicity, in the profession and
practice of it, as ordinarily has been or can be: we may therefore comfortably
and confidently believe and pray, that God will keep Religion alive with us,
and not suffer it to be totally extinguished in these ends of the Earth; which
we believe God has given to his Son for an Inheritance, and for a firm
Possession. We are a People who have yet a Covenant Right unto and Interest in
Religion; yea, God has yet a sincere, faithful People in New England, who have
a spiritual heart-Interest in Religion; and some among them who are his
Mourners: whose very Souls are laboring by Faith and Prayer, in a way of deep
humiliation and mourning before God for the life of Religion. And therefore
(although (we being deeply and generally declined) God may cause us to pass
under purging and refining dispensations: and be unto us like a Refiners fire,
and like Fullers Soap, Mal. 3.2. Turn his hand upon us, purely purge away all
our Dross, and take away all our Tyn, Isai, 1.25. Though God may visit our
transgression with a rod, and our iniquity with stripes, nevertheless his
loving kindness he will not utterly take from us, nor suffer his faithfulness
to fail, his Covenant he will not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out
of his Lips, Psalm. 89.32, 33, 34. Although God does sometimes save his People
in such a way, yet such Salvation will be wrought out by the Resurrection of
Religion; which is the most great and glorious Salvation, which God works for
his People in this World; and wherein he is most exalted, magnified and
glorified: O why may not we then have and profess our Faith, Hope and
Confidence in God for such Salvation, as the Church, Micah 7.7, 8. Therefore I
will look unto the Lord, I will wait for the God of my Salvation, my God will
hear me, rejoice not against me O mine Enemy, when I fall I shall arise, when I
sit in darkness the Lord shall be a light unto me; I will bare the indignation
of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, etc.
We have great encouragement thus to wait for God; because God is waiting, that
he may be gracious unto us, Isai. 30.18. And therefore will the Lord wait that
he may be gracious unto you; and therefore will he be exalted, that he may have
mercy upon you, for the Lord is a God of Judgment, and blessed are all those
that wait for him: O when God thus saves New England by the resurrection of
Religion, we shall rejoice and triumph in his Salvation; as the Church, Isai.
25.9. And it shall be said in that day, lo this is our God, we have waited for
him, and he will save us, this is the Lord we have waited for him, we will
rejoice and be glad in his Salvation; For then we shall sing as heretofore in
the height of Zion, and flow together unto the goodness of the Lord, Jer.
31.12. Then will be (in a measure) fulfilled in us, and for us what is
prophesied and promised, Zeph. 3.12-17. I will also leave in the midst of thee
an afflicted and poor People, and they shall trust in the Name of the Lord; the
remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speaklies, neither shall a
deceitful tongue be found in their mouth, for they shall feed and lie down, and
none shall make them afraid: Sing O Daughter of Zion, shout O Israel, be glad
and rejoice with all thy heart O Daughter of Jerusalem, the Lord has taken
away thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemy. The King of Israel, even the
Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall see evil no more -- the Lord thy God
in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save, he will rejoice over thee with
joy, he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing, and Hos.
14.4. etc. I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, for mine
anger is turned away from him; I will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow
as the Lilly, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon: -- They that dwell under his
shadow shall return, they shall revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine, the
sent thereof shall be as the Wine of Lebanon: Ephraim shall say, what have I
any more to do with Idols. I have heard him, and observed him; I am like a
green Fir Tree, from me is thy fruit found: Who is wise and he shall understand
these things, prudent and he shall know them, for the ways of the Lord are
right, and the just shall walk in them, but the transgressors shall fall
therein.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press (...) Essay for the Recording of Illustrious
Providence^ wherein an Account is given of many Remarkable, and very Memorable
Events, which have happened in this last Age, especially in New England:

By the Reverend Mr. INCREASE MATHER.


