THE NARRATIVE AND CASE OF Simson Tongue, Gent.

BEING A true Account delivered upon Oath before Mr. Justice Bridgeman, in the
presence of Dr. Titus Oats, relating to Capt. Sam. Ely, Monsieur Choqueux,
etc. and my self, who would have induced me to swear that my Father and Dr.
Oats, were the Contrivers of the Horrid Popish Plot, with other material
Passages omitted in the Affidavit, together with some short Reflections upon
Mr. Le'estranges Dialogue between ZEKIEL and EPHRAIM.

HUMBLY Tendered to the Consideration of the Honorable House of Commons.

Published for the Satisfaction of all True Protestants.

LONDON, Printed for c. W. 1681.

To the Candid READER.
BEing ordered to come to my Trial this last Term, but finding it to be
deferred for some longer time, is the reason why I have published my Case, being
informed that some of those Persons with whom I was concerned are gone,
particularly Mr. L'estrange, and likewise that Captain Ely has absented
himself, who is one of the principal Abettors in my Business, and therefore is
particularly mentioned with me, in the Information which is Filled against me on
the Crown Side.

An other Reason which induced me to Print my Case is, that though very few do
understand it, yet every one thinks himself a competent Judge, and with a
clamorous Noise (common to the Rabble especially,) exclaiming against me,
because my Father is concerned in this Affair; which therefore in all Persons
Opinions renders me the more contemptible; I must lay my Hand on my Mouth, and
confess, it is a thing very unnatural, and contrary to the Laws of God and
Nature, which the very Heathens did abhor, that a Son should seek to ruin his
own Parent, who gave him being; Being a Crime of a very black and deformed
Aspect, but hearing that it is commonly reported, that I should swear against
my Father to take away his Life, it is as False as God is True, who ever was
the Author of that lying Rumor; and though my Information upon which I was
committed to Newgate, was drawn up in these Words, For high Misdemeanors, and
endeavoring by false Accusations, and Subornation of Perjury to defame the
Kings Evidence, and all the Prosecution of the Popish Plot: Yet no such thing
as Perjury can be proved against me, as I hope will apparently appear, by the
perusal of these Sheets, in the case of L'Estrange, who would willingly have
sworn me to the Objections I drew up against the Plot; But I would not consent
to it: But the great Reason why I was prevailed upon to write those Objections
was this, that Ely having a very wheedling and cunning Tongue, and finding me
all along very tender of my Fathers Safety, (a Duty incumbent on all Children)
and when ever I mentioned him, with many deep Oaths, and solemn Asseverations
assured me, that my Father should not receive any the least Damage by what I
did; and to use his own Expression (which I have heard him more than once
Repeat) that a hair of his Head should not be hurt, this was the Argument which
ingulpht me in this Labyrinth and Pit of Trouble; and though I do not desire to
palliate my Crime, yet I hope this Information will give some Satisfaction to
all such Persons as have had no true account of it; that as it is my great
Trouble, so it has been my Misfortune, to fall into the Hands of wicked
Persons, who through their Delusions and Instigations, did persuade me to ruin
not only my self, but (that which is more deplorable) likewise my innocent
Relations; and this according to their Logic, under the specious Title of
undeceiving the Kingdom, as to the truth of the Plot; and whilst that I am
confined to a Prison (which is a kind of a living Death) I hope the Truth will
be sought into; that those who have been my Abettors, will not be suffered to
escape Unpunisht, having made an ingenuous and full Confession, desirous ever
since I was first summoned to appear before the Council, to discover the Truth;
whom I have here displayed in her naked Simplicity, without the affectation of
good Language, or the flourishes of Rhetoric; being likewise very
conscientious in the Relation; which I do not question will be very acceptable
to all Persons who love upright and plain dealing: and though an indelible
Character may be branded on me, for being so undutiful to my Father; Yet I make
no doubt that when my Case is weighed in the impartial Balance of an unbiast
Judgment, (though I do not expect to acquit my self from being culpable) yet I
say I do not despair, but those very Persons who have most accused me, will
pass more favorable Censures, on my impious undertaking against the Kings
Evidence, and though I may be condemned for a great Villain, yet withal they
will commiserate my Condition, for hark'ning to such evil Counselors: for as
that Wit is accounted best which is dear bought, so it will make me more
careful for the future, to hearken to the like Advice; who have sadly found
that Maxim true, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, for young men as they are too
soon prevailed upon to act those things which often prove very prejudicial to
them, and their Friends, for want of Judgment, and through inadvertency, being
wholly unexperienced as to the things of this World; so when they embrace good
Counsel, and leave off those ways, it merits Commendation: for it is the
pursuit of an evil Action, which aggravates the Crime, and renders it the more
odious, which Fault must be left to the Law to determine; for where I am
guilty, as it will be to no purpose to make any Apology for my self; so where I
am innocent my own Conscience will acquit me from the malevolent Reproaches of
evil Men.

Da veniam subitis, non displicuisse meretur, Festinat Patriae qui placuisse
suae. Kings Bench December, 13. 1681.

L' Estranges Case coming to my Hands, which he calls a civil Dialogue betwixt
Zekil and Ephraim; and finding several palpable Lies in it, which he endeavors
to throw upon the World relating to my Business; I thought I was bound in
Conscience to vindicate my self, and to satisfy the World, by a public and
ingenuous Acknowledgment, relating to those Persons with whom it has been my
misfortune to be concerned; that when my Case is heartily laid down,
accordingly they will censure; and that they will not pin their Faith upon the
credibility of L'-Estranges Writings; who though he may pass for a man of Wit,
and has slipped his Neck out of the Collar, cannot boast much of his Honesty or
Loyalty, notwithstanding all his fine Flourishes in his Appeal, and other
Pamphlets; for certainly if any Person make it his Business and Study to pick
holes in the Kings Evidence, these things are inconsistent with the Loyalty of
his Sovereign, and the good of the Protestant Religion, of which with so many
Oaths and solemn Imprecations, he tells us he is a zealous Professor; but now
after all fearing to be severely handled by the Hands of Justice, he is fairly
fled for it, which in his Appeal he calls the seeking of an other World, where I
shall leave him to that Beloved Repose, which he tells us he has long desired;
being as weary of the World, as Peevishness it self can be of him, where I
shall leave him be it where it will, in his so much beloved Elysium, and give
you a true and impartial account of all the Transactions which have past
betwixt Captain Ely, Monsieur Choquveux, etc. and my self.

About the Month of May last, my Father did remove out of the Lodgings which he
had in Whitehal, into the City, and I then lodged with one Mr. King, in
Shandoys Street, and being out of all Employment, not knowing well how to spend
my time, having formerly lodged with one Mrs. Lane, I frequently went to her
House, which was to my best remembrance about June or July last, where the said
Mrs. Lane did often ask me what news there was, and what was become of the
Popish Plot; and she said that it was now apparent to all the World, that the
Plot was contrived by the Presbyterians, that her Husband was wrongfully turned
out of his Place, and that her Son Lane in the Kings Bench was Fined and
Pillory'd for speaking the Truth; but she hoped to see that day, when the Truth
would be found out, and that she should live to see Doctor Oats, and Mr.
Bedloe hanged; for they had only been the disturbers of the Nation, instead of
being the Preservers of it: with such like railing and impudent Discourse.

About the midst of June or July going about some Business to Westminster Hall,
I met old Mr. Lane, who desired me to go to his House, which I did, and there
entering into discourse with Mrs. Lane, she told me amongst other Discourse,
which I cannot well remember, that she had something to say to me, which might
make my Fortune for ever, and that no Person was so fit to do what she should
propose as my self; I asked her, what that was, for having been for some
considerable time out of all manner of Employment; I should be very willing and
ready to embrace any honest way to get a Livelihood: Then she replied Mr. Tongue
if you will draw up some Objections against the Plot, you need not fear
sufficient Encouragement, for I can procure several Persons that will stand by
you; and I know a particular Friend one Captain Ely, which is a Person of very
great Interest at Court, who will introduce you to the speech of the King; and
because you may be tender of your Fathers welfare, he being involved with
Doctor Oats, and likely to be mentioned with him in your Papers; I will
procure your Fathers Pardon, by the means of Captain Ely, for truly I did once
look upon your Father, to be a very honest Man, but now I am of the contrary
Opinion, since I am told he is in his Writings so bitter against the Papists;
but notwithstanding I verily believe, he was merely drawn in by Doctor Oats;
so that your Father being innocent, it will be very easy to get his Pardon;
upon which I replied I did not know any thing of the Plot, Mrs. Lane answered
that having written so many things for my Father, I could not be so stupid but
I could raise some Objections out of those Papers, which if I would do, she
would give me what Assistance lay in her Power; after which Discourse I went to
my Lodging, she having appointed me to come and see her again, as soon as I
could, and then she would give me a farther Account of her Sentiments
concerning that Business.

I came not near her House a good while after, but her Husband having got
knowledge of my Lodging, came to me and said, that his Wife had been several
times to seek Captain Ely, but could not find him; but now she had found him
out, and that he promised to be at her House that Evening, and desired me to go
along with him, which at his importuning of me I did, and Mrs. Lane told me she
had found out Captain Ely, who was very glad and willing to embrace the Offer;
and had promised her to come, which Ely did, and calling for Drink fell into
Discourse with me concerning my Condition, and how I lived; I told him my
Condition was not very plentiful, and he replied God help you, and if I would
take his Advice, I might quickly raise my Fortune; and said likewise, come Mr.
Tongue you are an ingenious young Man, and I am persuaded you know a great deal
of this Plot, I mean as to the truth of it, as for my own particular part, at
first I did believe this Plot, and thought thus with my self when I heard that
there was a Plot discovered to his Majesty: God has been pleased to make these
Persons very Instrumental for the good of these Kingdoms; and therefore they
ought to be encouraged and rewarded according to the Merit of such Services;
but when I did afterward seriously consider what the Persons were which
pretended to discover it; being most of them Persons of profligate Life, I was
then quite of an other mind; and now I am so far from being of my former
Opinion, that I do no more believe the Plot, that none being present but you
and I in this Room, any one should endeavor to persuade me that there are a
thousand Persons in company with us; and withal desired me according to Mrs.
Lanes first request that I would draw up some Objections against the Plot. I
told him I was Ignorant of any Transactions of the Plot, only that my Father
brought Doctor Oats into the Council; upon which Ely replied that was nothing
to the Purpose, all the World knew that, but if I brought any thing which might
stand as an Objection against the Plot, it must be matter of Fact that must do
the business; and something of Falsehood and Contrivance must be proved to have
been betwixt my Father and Doctor Oats, and that these must be the measures I
must take to overthrow the Kings Evidence, and was very importunate with me to
draw up some such Papers, and told me he would meet me again at the same place
the next Day.

I having some Business at Westminster Hall, at my return called at Mrs. Lanes
House, expecting Elys coming; but missing of him I went away in the Evening,
and having drawn up a Paper, being very much troubled in my Mind; I went to a
Person whose Name I cannot remember, but was by his Profession a
Tallow-Chandler, and was before the Council, the first time that I was Summoned
to appear before the right Honorable Board. I read that Paper to this Person,
who as soon as he had heard it, told me, Mr. Tongue this is a very dangerous
Paper, and may prove of ill Consequence to you, and therefore as a Friend I
would advise you to burn it, and whoever those Persons are who have advised you
to this, they intend to ruin you, go near them no more, and I took his Advice,
and burnt it, fully resolving never to concern my self any more with Ely, and
absented my self above a fortnight from Mrs. Lanes House; during my absence old
Mr. Lane and his Wife had been upon the hunt to seek me, but could not find me;
but old Mr. Lane having been very diligent in his Enquiry, heard where I was,
and went and told his Wife, who came in great have to me, and said that Captain
Ely had been twice at her House, and was much troubled that I did not come;
that she had left him at her House; I replied I did not care for concerning my
self with Ely, then said she you will never have the like Opportunity, to make
your Fortune, therefore be Courageous, for you have the best man (except one)
in England on your side; and was very importunate with me to write out some
Objections against the Plot. I told her I had written some out already, but
they were burnt! Nay said she if you falter thus at the beginning you will
never do no good on it. I told her I hoped as she pretended to be my Friend, she
would not desire me to act any thing against my Conscience; then she asked me
if I had any Money, I told her no, says she I am but a poor Woman, yet here is
a Shilling for you, and doubt not but you shall have Encouragement enough; so
she made me promise her before she left me, that I would draw up that Paper
again, and come after her to her House where Ely expected me.

That Evening I came to Mrs. Lanes House, and there I found Ely, who said Mr.
Tongue I am glad to see you, have you drawn up that Paper, which you promised
me? I told him I had, and gave it to him; Ely read it over, and smiling said
Mr. Tongue this will do very well, but you must put your name to it, which I
did, and afterward Ely signed it, and to my best remembrance old Mr. Lane and
his Daughter likewise signed it, as being Witnesses; now says Ely you have no
reason to be afraid, for you have done no more, than I do my self, and as he
was going away with the Paper, told me he would see me within two or three
days, but he must first go to carry that Paper to the King, who was then at
Windsore.

Toward the end of July, or the beginning of August, comes old Lane to my
Lodging, and told me that Ely had sent to his House, and told me that I must go
and speak with the King, and that I must go to Ely's House in Holborne: when I
came thither, Ely told me he had hired a Coach for himself, and me to go to
Windsore; that I must go and speak with his Majesty, and said he had proffered
a Guinny for a pair of Oars, but could not have it; I went along with him to
Windsore, and as we were near the Town, Ely said now Mr. Tongue you are going to
speak with the King, pray recollect your Memory, and say something that may
give the King Satisfaction, for his Majesty believes you know a great deal
concerning the Plot, and be sure remember to beg your Fathers Pardon, for I
find you are very tender of his Safety; and I told him he might assure himself
I should not forget to do that; so soon as we came to Windsore, Ely brought me
to the Garter Tavern, and went immediately to find out Mr. Chiffins, where
having had the Honor to kiss the Kings Hand, his Majesty was pleased to ask me
several Questions not convenient to be related, and when I came from the King,
I walked for some time in the next Room with Mr. Chiffins: who said I did very
well to discover it, if I knew any thing of the Plot, for a clear Conscience
was the most excellent thing in the World; then Ely and my self came away
together, and I asked him what Discourse he had with the King, he said it was
nothing relating to my Business; but concerning some Forest Affairs, and he
carried me from the Castle to the Garter Tavern, where after we had drunk
several Bottles of Wine (for by the way you must take this Note, when Ely had
once engaged me in the Business, I was seldom very sober) he told me he
thought I spoke as if I was afraid; I replied, the sight of his Majesty would
daunt any Person; however says he be courageous, and stick to what you have
done, and let me alone to manage the Intrigue: and then began several Healths
to the Duke of York, and made me pledge him; then he told me he had given me
nothing yet to encourage me, and gave me a Guinny, which he said was only an
Earnest, intending shortly to make it up a much bigger Sum, before I was many
days older; while we were drinking, there came in a stranger to us, who told me
he heard I was upon a very good Design, that he for his part did heartily pray,
that God would assist and direct me, and that there was no doubt to be made of
it, but all good Catholics, would likewise unanimously join with him in it,
who did desire the truth of the Plot to be found out; and having drunk two or
three Bottles of Wine with us, he took his leave, then Ely told me that Person
was a Portuguese, and had been the Queens Cook a long time; and is a very
honest man, otherwise, I would not have made him privy to our Concerns; for
Secrecy is now very convenient, therefore lest I should be discovered by my own
Name, he would call me always Mr. Hudibras; and the next day I should go with
him to London, and when I came thither he called a Hackney Coach, and carried
me to his own House in Holborne; and lest notice should be taken of me, he
thought it would be very convenient for me to remove my self to some private
Lodging near himself; to which I replied, Captain I cannot conveniently do
that; for Mr. King with whom I Lodge is a very civil honest Man, and I have not
paid him for my Diet nor Lodging; and I should be thought very rude to go away
and leave him, without giving him the least notice; says he do not trouble your
head for that, give me an account what you owe him, or any other Persons about
the Town and I will see it paid; so I gave him an Account of several Sums of
Money which I owed, and then he desired his Wife to look me out a Lodging,
which she did and brought me to a Smiths Shop in Lion Street near Bloomsbury,
where I had not continued long, but my Uncle found me out, and sent his Man to
speak with me, who told me that by a no less than miraculous Providence he was
informed of the wicked Design I was going about, and asked me what kind of
Person it was with whom I was concerned, I said he went by the name of Captain
Ely, and was a very remarkable Person, for he had a great red Scar down his
Nose, and my Uncle said he knew him, and that he was a great Rascal, and lived
by cheating and sharking about the Town, and therefore not unworthily called by
some Captain Bounce, my Uncle advised me to be ingenuous with him, and to give
him a true account, whatsoever had past betwixt Ely and me; which I did under
my own hand, and my Uncle advised me to have a care of forsewaring myself, and
what a grievous Sin Perjury was, that what I went about was very unnatural,
being against my own Father. I said I was heartily sorry for what I had done,
and was willing to discover whatever I knew, and sent several Letters to him,
of what had past between us from time to time; yet Ely some way or other got
notice, that I kept Correspondence with my Uncle, and was very jealous of me,
and went to enquire what Persons came to speak with me, and the people where I
lodged having informed him that several Persons had been there to inquire for
me; said, Mr. Tongue you do very ill in thus discovering your Lodging, and if
you intend that this business shall ever come to any perfection, pray keep your
self private from all manner of Company, except those who I know you may
confide in, otherwise you spoil all, for such Intrigues as these are, must be
managed with a great deal of Prudence, for we have a great many Eyes over us;
and after Dinner sent me for my Linen, which I left at my Lodging in Shandoys
Street, and sent his Wife to pay what I owed there, and removed me in the
Evening to one Mrs. Nichols House in Ollivers Ally in the Strand; and came
along with me, and told Mrs. Nicholls he would pay for my Lodging, and desired
her to let me have what I wanted; but before he went, gave me a particular
charge, what ever I did to keep my self private; but the next day going into
the Strand, I met one Mr. Cooper who had formerly been my Fathers Servant, who
desired me to go to drink with him, and told me he heard that I was engaged in
a business against my Father. I said I had been with the King, and was
counseled by one Ely, and some others to draw up some Objections against the
Plot; that Ely asked me what Persons did write for my Father; and that I had
mentioned his Name to Ely, and gave him in a list of several Persons Names
besides, that did write for Doctor Oats, and that Ely was desirous to speak
with him, and one Mr. Allen; and told me he would be at a Wine-Celler belonging
to one Monsieur Choqueux a Surgeon in the Savoy, and if he could see such a
Person, he would willingly drink a Glass of Wine with him; and said he was sure
of one Mr. Allen, formerly Doctor Oats his Clark, and one or two more whose
Names I cannot remember; but said, one of them would not declare any thing
without a Protection; but they could swear such things against Doctor Oats,
that it would make a man's Hair stand an end to hear it; Mr. Cooper told me he
would go with me to the Celler, where being very merry, and after several
Healths, Ely asked him if his name was Cooper, and if he had not formerly been
my Fathers Servant, and writ for him, who replied he had written several things
for Doctor Tongue, but had nothing to say against the Plot; says Ely, Mr. Cooper
I do not desire to compel you to any thing, but my thoughts are you might do
very well to join with Mr. Tongue, and recollect your Memory, what Writings have
gone through your Hands, and you shall have all possible Encouragement; and if
you please I will furnish you with a very good Lodging; and here is my very
good Friend Monsieur Choqueux who I am confident will likewise assist you, to
which Mr. Cooper made no reply, but excused himself that he could stay no
longer, having appointed other Business, and took his leave of them; no sooner
was he gone, but Ely replied, this Cooper Simson is a cunning Shaver, I do not
like him, but I hope you have not been so imprudent as to let him know where
your Lodging is; I told him I had, and that I looked upon Mr. Cooper to be a
very civil honest man. Then Ely begun to storm, after his usual rate, and said,
I had no more wit than a Goose; and it was to no purpose for him to remove me
from one Lodging to an other, if I would let all the World know where I was;
and then Mr. Choqueux and Ely consulted over a Glass of Wine, what they should
do with me; and Ely said he thought it best to remove me to one of Choqueux
Lodgings in the Savoy, and Mr. Choqueux promised Ely he would provide me a
Lodging, which accordingly he did; and that I should want for nothing: and says
Ely, since I perceive Mr. Tongue is indisposed, he shall say he is here only for
the good of his health; yes says Choqueux that will do very well, otherwise I
being a Papist may be brought into Question for entertaining him, and then they
both parted, and Choqueux took me along with him.

The next day Ely sent for me to his House, and after Dinner he told me he had
received 10 l. by order from Mr. Chiffins, of which Sum he gave me 3 l. 10 s.
and bid me be a good husband with it, and at the same time sent twenty
Shillings to one Mrs. Fitzgerald to persuade her to swear against my Father;
and though he produced a Note under her Hand before the Council, that he gave
her that Money only out of Charity, she being at that time very infirm, yet
notwithstanding this his plausible pretense he was in hopes to have prevailed
upon her, to have joined with me, to swear against Doctor Oats; this was the
greatest Sum I ever had of Ely, which after I had received, he was still
importuning me to give him more Papers; and coming to my Lodging, he told me he
had hired an excellent traveling Mare, and I must go with him again to
Windsore; which I consented to, and when we came within two Miles of Windsore,
he told me, he must call at a place in the great Park, which belonged to Mr.
May the keeper of the Privy-Purse; and there we were both very kindly and
civilly entertained by one Mr. Nun, Mr. Mays Gentleman, and after Dinner Ely
told me he would seal up the Papers, I had given him, and would convey them to
the King, and I expecting to go along with him, he said I must not, but keep
myself as private as I could, for should I go to Windsore with him, he was
afraid notice would be taken of me; he and Mr. Nun returned again in the
Evening, and Ely told me he had carefully delivered that Paper to his Majesty,
and said it was the materiallest Paper I had written, and told me he must go to
London next morning, but staid two or three Days longer, because he must kiss
the Dukes Hand; then I came to Town with him again, and came to the Savoy,
where Mr. Choqueux made me very welcome, and told me Mr. Tongue if you hold on
thus resolutely, he did not question but he should live to see me a great Man,
and I might assure myself I should want no Encouragement from him; for he would
venture his Blood in the Cause, and for the good of the poor distressed
Catholics; who he said were the most innocent though cruelly oppressed by the
Protestants, that he was confident I believed it, and that he thought I was
very real in what I went about, otherwise he would not have discoursed so much
of his mind to me, and then we entered into other discourse, and he ask't me
what News there was at Windsor, I told him I had not been there, for Ely would
not suffer me to go, and took my Leave of him, and went to my Lodging.

Toward the latter end of August, or the beginning of September, I called at
Mrs. Lanes House, says she Mr. Tongue I thought you might have been more civil
to me. I asked her what she meant by that question, for I never knew any thing
of Incivility wherewith I could be taxed, in respect to herself and her
Husband, but to my Power was willing to give them my Assistance; she replied
Ely had received 100 l. I told her if he had, 'twas more than I knew of, for he
told me he received but 10 l. which he told me was very inconsiderable,
expecting to have received a much bigger Sum, of which I received 3 l. 10 s.
Says she, I took Captain Ely to be a very honest Man, otherwise you may assure
your self I would not have recommended him to you; but now I find he is a
cheating Rascal, yet says old Lane, I beat the Bush and Ely caught the Bird;
and said, he promised him a Sum of Money, but it would be good when he could
catch it, that he had been at his Lodging, but got no more of him than a
Shilling; then she called her Husband old Fool, because he did not go himself
to Mr. Chiffins; for she believed having been one of the Yeomen of the Guard,
his interest was as great at Court, as Elys; and told me, Mr. Tongue if you will
put your Business into my hands, I know a good Friend of mine who is acquainted
with several great Persons, that will procure you Money enough, but then you
must leave Ely off, and come from your Lodging and lie at my House, where you
may be as private as you desire; there being a back Door by her House, that
went into the Privy Garden. I told her I would consider on it, but said, what
between Ely and her, I was almost at my Wits end; and heartily wished I had
never known, or been concerned with either of them; says she never be daunted,
I Will warrant you, be but ruled by me, your Business will go very well, and told
me I must go into Arundel Street, and inquire for Mrs. Cellier, for she was a
Person she went to visit frequently, who had been very kind to her Son John
Lane in the King's Bench, and had promised her to give me what Assistance she
could; I went as she had directed me, and found out Mrs. Celliers Lodgings; she
told me she did not know me, and asked me what was my Business; so I told her
that I was recommended to her by one Mrs. Lane, who told me she was a Person
that was very fit to assist me in my Concerns; she replied Mr. Tongue I am very
glad to see you, I am very sorry you have so little Encouragement in your
Business, I must confess I have been bit already for my Zeal in promoting the
Catholic Cause, and have expended several considerable Sums of Money upon that
Account; but I have a Book to print which will sufficiently vindicate my
Innocence, from all the false and malicious Calumnys which are daily cast upon
me; and will publish to the World the grand Villainies and Rogueries of Oats,
and Bedloe, and his Crew; and shall print nothing but what I have Witness to
Confirm. Then she said she would give me what Assistance she could, and told me
of a great man (but named him not) that would likewise join with her, but what
she did for me, must be very privately managed; and she thought if I met her
any where, the most convenient place would be to go over the Water, and there
we might consult together without any fear of Discovery; and told me when I
came to her, it would be most convenient for me to come in the Evening, for
fear of Discovery, for she said her Name was already brought upon the Stage of
the World, and therefore though she was willing to assist me privately, yet she
would not be seen to appear in countenancing my Business, but if I had any
thing to deliver to her, she would carefully convey away any Papers to the
Kings or Dukes Hands. I told her I had no Papers, and then she appointed me to
come and see her the next Day in the Evening, I came again to her House, but
she not being within, according to her desire I left a Note with her Maid, I
had been there to wait upon her; and went away to find out Ely in Holborne, who
gave me more Encouragement than she did, and never went to her again.

Some few Days after Mr. Choqueux invited one Crawly, Ely, myself and one Mr.
Hays with some others to a Fish Dinner, in the Savoy; where amongst other
general Discourse, Choqueux told me that he would gladly have me acquainted
with Crawly, that he was a very honest man, and a well-wisner to my Business;
and that he had informed him that some time since he got some Papers to be
delivered in to the Duke against my Father; to which Crawly replied he had
given in some Papers against him by one Mr. Sherridon, and should be very glad
to renew that little Acquaintance he had formerly enjoyed, when he writ for my
Father, and that he was very glad to hear that I was imbarqued in the same
Cause with him; that he had heard some whisperings about the Town concerning my
Business, and was very joyful that he had the Opportunity of discoursing me
concerning that Affair; and said he would give me a more large Account of his
Business, and would take a more seasonable time to inform me of it, but assured
me that mine had a very near Relation to his, and appointed me to meet him the
next day at his Lodging, which then was at one Mrs. Yates House in Monmouth
Street near St. Giles in the Fields: and I promised him I would not fail to be
with him in the Evening, for I was very desirous to hear his Business, with
such like Discourse.

The next Day I went to find out Mr. Crawly, and there he gave me an Account of
his Business, which was to my best Remembrance to this Effect, that about two
years since, (which he said he remembered very well because of the general Colds
that were then in Town,) he had some Writings of my Fathers to Transcribe
concerning Parliaments, and a Copy of Doctor Oats his Depositions, to
Transcribe fairly; that Sr. William Waller coming there about to search for
Priests, had notice of him, who was then very bad with a Cold; that Sr. William
Waller asked him what Employment he followed, he said he studied the Law, and
took down some Papers which lay on the Shelf, and looking on them said these
Papers are Doctor Tongues hand, and he knew it very well; to which Crawly
replied they were his Handwriting, and were some Overtures of his about
Parliaments, and he employed him to write them out fair; that Sr. William
Waller took those Papers away from him, and bid the said Crawly go along with
him, but upon his the said Crawlys Request, telling Sr. William Waller he was
very much indisposed by reason of his Cold; Sr. William suffered him to return
to his Lodging, upon Promise that he would come to his House the next Day.

Moreover he told me that he went to Sr. William Wallers House, where he said
Sr. William Waller was at Dinner, and my Father with him, that Sr. William said
to my Father, Doctor Tongue I took some Papers away from this Gentleman last
Night, which he said were your Hand, and was desirous to know whether you knew
him; to which he told me my Father made Answer; That he never saw him before in
his Life, and did not know that he ever gave any such Papers unto him; that
then he said he took his Leave; and I asking him whether Sr. William did
restore those Papers again to my Father; he said he was not certain whether he
did or not; but had he had them in his Possession, his intent was to have given
them in with his other Papers to the Duke; for he looked upon them to be very
dangerous and treasonable Papers; that he was very desirous to speak with Sr.
William Waller concerning it, but could never since have the Opportunity to
speak with him: this Crawly I suppose is a Papist, and is an Irish man, and
would gladly have persuaded me to leave Ely, and would have undertaken to
manage his own, and my Business himself; for he said he had studied the Law
some considerable time, and therefore could give me better Advice than Ely; who
as he was informed (though he might be very Zealous for the good of the
Catholics) was wholly ignorant in the Law; he bid me consider of it, if I
would put my Business into his Hands, I told him I would consider on it, and so
took my leave of him.

Mr. Cooper had now found out my Lodgings in the Savoy, and came often to see
me, and I told him that Mr. Choqueux, and Ely were very importunate to have
Mrs. Fitzgerald removed from her own Lodging, into one of Choqueux best Rooms,
which he said was very well hung, and fit to entertain her, and told me if she
would come thither she should want for no manner of Convenience, and have all
things to her Content and Satisfaction; and proposed to have her brought in a
Sedan, if she could not come by Water; Mr. Cooper said she was so very infirm
that it was altogether impossible she could be removed as yet, without being
very prejudicial to her Health; and then entering into Discourse with me about
my own Business, I told him I could not tell what Choqueux and Ely intended to
do with me: but here they kept me confined to a Chamber, that I saw none but
them, and that I was extraordinary weary of that Melancholy Confinement: and
desiring him to stay a little, I went to call Mr. Choqueux: and when I returned
again Mr. Cooper was gone, and took away two of my Papers, which were brought
to the Council, one of which was read to me, but the other Doctor Oats told my
Lord Chancellor, he could not find: the next Day I mist my Papers, and Ely
coming to see me I told him somebody had taken some Papers from me, and I could
not imagine who it should be: then says he that Rascal Cooper has betrayed us:
I gave you sufficient Warning of him, so did Mr. Choqueux likewise more than
once, but you would not take our Advice: therefore you must remove immediately
out of this Room; but not well knowing whither, he went to his Friend Monsieur
Choqueux to consult with him about it; and they presently hurried me away in
great have to one Mr. Salsburys near the Glass-house in the Savoy; where Mr.
Choqueux bargained with Mrs. Salisbury to pay three Shillings a Week for my
Lodging, and for my Diet, until he could provide for me to Dine somewhere else;
and Choqueux and Ely did both lay a very strict Charge on me, to keep my self
very private, and never to have any more Conversation with Mr. Cooper, for he
would certainly ruin the whole Design; and if I stirred out he would certainly
find me, for he was often seen in the Savoy: I had not been above a Week at
Mrs. Salisburys, but Ely comes to me again: and I ask't him what News there was
abroad, for I lived a kind of Anchorets Life, and saw no body, and should be
extreme Melancholy were it not for the Society I took in some pleasant Books
which Mr. Salisbury lent me: he said there was no good News, for he was
informed that Doctor Oats had delivered a Petition in to the Council against
me and himself, for Subornation and Perjury, and Defaming the Kings Evidence;
but bid me be of good Courage, for all his Huffing and Blustering could do me no
harm, for he was told he found such cold Entertainment, that he believed he
would not appear against me again in have: that Doctor Oats was heard to say,
to a Person of Honor these Words, Now my Lord if you do not stand by me, I and
the Kingdome's ruined: and said because those Papers were all loose, and apt to
be scattered and lost, which I delivered to his Majesty, he thought it would be
very convenient for me to recollect my Memory, and draw all those Papers into
one sheet of Paper; that being informed that my Father was very well acquainted
with several Lords which were thought to be rigid Presbyterians; he bid me be
sure to remember to insert some of their Names, as Contrivers of the popish
Plot; for he said that several Persons about the Town did believe it to be a
Presbyterian Plot, and the Papists had no hands in it, and that he had one of
my Papers and would send it me; I told him I would endeavor to draw up those
Papers into one Sheet, but I had no Coppies by me, which would very much help
me, if I had kept any; he said Mr. Crawly had drawn up his Papers again at
large, that there was at least two or three Sheets of Paper, which he was ready
to depose upon Oath, and did intend when mine were written out, to deliver them
together; that Mr. Crawly was a very zealous Person in my Business, and that I
might help to corroborate his Testimony, which would make his Evidence the more
considerable, the more Witnesses were in it, and did join themselves together
to defend and make out the same thing; and desired me to dispatch my Paper as
soon as I could; but not being very well, I did not then do it, and sent him a
Letter which to my best remembrance was to this Effect, for I have not the
Copy by me; That my Sentiment was I should be looked upon as a great Rascal,
and a very undutiful Person for what I had already done; that I was at present
very much indisposed and could not Write. To which he returned me this short
Answer, a foul Copy of one of the Papers he delivered to the King, being
enclosed in the Letter, the Words of which were to this Effect.

SIR.
I Have here enclosed sent your Paper, pray use your Care and Diligence to
Expedite the Matter (which dubious Words needing some Exposition being so
cautiously worded, It was to Transcribe all those loose Papers into one Sheet
of Paper) against Wednesday Morning, and in the Interim be Merry.

I am yours faithfully S. Ely.


On the Thursday Morning very early comes Ely to me, and having written out
that Paper, he took it along with him; and told me that Mr. Crawly, and one Mr.
Murphy an Irishman, and a Schoolmaster about the Town, and who had formerly
been a Student at Paris for some time, would likewise go along with us to
Windsore, and taking a Sculler we landed as near to Chearing-Cross as we could,
and the Coach not being ready, we went and stayed at a Strong-water Shop near
the Goat Tavern; where Ely changed a Guinny, and there we all three took Coach,
and went for Windsore, and some Strangers being with us, Ely whispered me in
the Ear, and said I was generally too talkative, and bid me have a great care I
did not speak a word of any Concerns we were going about, whilst we were in the
Coach; when we came to Windsor, Ely gave us a Treat at the French Ordinary, and
after Dinner inquiring for a Lodging for us, we were directed to a Pewterers
House near the Garter Tavern, where Ely bargained for our Lodging; and the next
Day Ely took mine and Crawly's Papers, and carried them to the King or the
Duke; and told me that his Majesty said that my Uncle had been with one of the
Secretaries of State, and that I had given my Uncle a Recantation, and declared
in that Paper, that the Papists had set me on to swear against my Father, and
Doctor Oats, that they were the Contrivers of the Popish Plot; and Ely said he
told the King, that he was so far from believing any such thing, that on the
contrary he was so confident of my Reallity; that if it were so he would give
his Majesty's Tooth-drawer leave to pull out all his Teeth one after another;
and when he returned again, he said though it were not true, I should do very
well to vindicate my self to the King from that Calumny and Aspersion (as he
termed it) that my Uncle had cast upon me, so he and Crawly drew up some Words
to that purpose, and carried them to the King; which Words were That I never
had given my Uncle any Recantation: After the Papers were delivered, Crawly
went several times to the Castle to look out Mr. Sherridon, who as he said was
a great Favorite of the Dukes, and one in whom he did very much conside; but
could not as yet find him out, though he was informed he was certainly in Town,
and said he would very gladly have spoken with Mr. Sherridon, because he
faithfully had promised him upon the first delivery of his Papers into his
Hands, (which was some considerable time before he heard any thing of my
business) that he would safely deliver his Papers to the Dukes Hands; but could
never since the delivery of them, hear any thing concerning it; and seemed to
be very much troubled. Ely bid him not trouble his Head with Mr. Sherridon, for
he told Crawly he believed he was much mistaken in him, that he was not so real
in his Business as he took him to be; and that the next Day he would give him
an account of his Papers from the Duke himself; and getting up very early in
the Morning, he told Crawly at his return from the Castle, he had been with the
Duke, and kissed his Hand, and asked him concerning those Papers which were given
to Mr. Sherridon, but that his Royal Highness answered he did not remember that
he had received any such Papers; and Ely said as soon as he came in, all the
rest withdrew to the other side of the Room; and said he had above half an
Hours Discourse with the Duke, but did not mention any Particulars, excepting
Crawlys Papers, which Papers Crawly pretended were transcribed out of my
Fathers Originals concerning Parliaments; and the two Murphys both Papists were
to be Witnesses to those Papers; and one Mr. Bryan, now or very lately a
Prisoner in the Gatehouse, concerning the Duke of Buckingham; was likewise to
be an Evidence, from whom (he told me) he had those Papers of my Fathers,
because (Crawly said) being written very badly, Brian could not read them very
well, therefore desired him to transcribe them. Ely whilst he was at Windsor,
went often to speak with Mr. Chiffins, but he little regarded him, and said he
made him wait many times an hour or two, before he could get admission to speak
with him; so that wanting Money he was compelled to pawn his Silver hilted
Sword, to one of the Drawers of the Garter Tavern for 20 s. and several other
things, his Ring from his Finger, etc. to supply us with Money for Diet,
besides what he borrowed of the Gentlewoman where we usually dined; and said
he would Pawn his Shirt from his Back, where he saw Persons so real as we were,
in such an important Concern as we were about; but finding Windsor very
chargeable, and his Money near gone, he sent a Letter to his Friend Mounsieur
Choqueux to desire him to send him three Pound, otherwise he could not get from
Windsor, for he and his Company were pawned for it; and could not pay for his
Lodging before he received it; Choqueux sent him three Pounds, and told me he
was troubled to get it, being forced to pawn a piece of Plate; then Murphy
seeing I suppose that Ely was only put off with Delays, and that there was no
probability of his doing any good at Windsor, having some Money left, begged
Elys Excuse, and went to London, because his Scholars expected his coming, and
wished him all imaginable Success in his Business; and promised him that his
Assistance should not be wanting, in the furthering of the Business; and that
when it came to the Touchstone he should find it so. After Crawly and I had
staid thirteen or fourteen Days, Ely hired a pair of Oars for us, and gave me a
Crown to bear our Charges to London, and landing at the Savoy Stairs I came to
Mr. Choqueux Lodgings; and told him what had past since our being at Windsor,
and Choqueux said he very much wondered we staid so long; for he did expect us
within two or three Days; and had provided a gentile Dinner for us, and several
Bottles of Wine, to entertain us; I told him the Business went but very crosly
at Windsor, that Ely did nothing but storm and fret since he came thither,
because he found himself so slighted, and met with such perpetual
Disappointments; that he had sent a huffing Letter to Mr. Chiffins to his
Country House called Filburds near Windsor by Mr. Murphy, but Mr. Chiffins was
gone ere he came, and that he thought Mr. Chiffins did very little regard him,
that he told me he would be at London the next Day; but did not come till the
Court removed from Windsor to Whitchal, by reason he was very much indisposed
by a Surffet with drinking too much Clarret Wine, and a great Looseness which
was so violent upon him, that he could scarce sit his Horse, which was the
reason that he staid longer than he intended to do.

After Elys return to London, he came to Mr. Choqueux Lodgings, and told me he
believed my Papers were sufficient to overthrow the Evidence, but would I do
the Business thoroughly, and strike at the Root of the Plot; it must be by
drawing up some Papers relating to the Death of Sr. Edmund-bury Godfrey, for he
said none should make him believe, that those Papists which were generally
believed to Murder him, had any Hand in his Blood, for he said it was much more
probable that the Protestants did it, that they might be revenged upon the
Roman Catholics; and likewise added that there was a Club of Presbyterian
Lords in the City, who plotted the Destruction of the established Monarchical
Government; that the Duke of Monmouth went often thither, and they made use of
him only to promote their own Ambitious Designs; never intending (whatever
might be their Pretensions) to make him King of England, but they only gave him
fair Words to maintain and countenance their Faction, and therefore his Health
was to the Duke of York, and God dam all the Fanatics; he said likewise that
Mr. Praunce was a great Rascal, that he knew nothing of Sr. E. B. G. Death, but
what was extorted from him by several Lords that came to see him; and says he
was ready, and several others that were then in Newgate with him, to depose
upon Oath, that he cried and raved a long time like a mad Man, when he was
visited by several Persons of Quality, and desired to confess the truth of that
barbarous and bloody Murder; that all they could get of him, was he knew
nothing, he knew nothing, he would not be guilty of innocent Blood, no Guilt,
no Guilt oh King; and such strange Expressions, till through the important
Solicitations of those that came to see him, he was prevailed on to save his
own Life, to confess that which according to his own Confession he knew nothing
of; which is much the same Story that the Lady Rampant, Mrs. Cellier the Popish
Midwife, relates in her lying Popish Legend concerning Mr. Praunce; likewise he
said that the right Honorable the Earl of Shaftsbury was the chief of that
rebellious Fanatical Club; and told me a Story concerning a very dangerous and
treasonable Paper, which was supposed to be written by a Person who was kept a
long time a Prisoner in the Tower, because he had thoughts to make Discovery of
the Popish Plot, that there was a great Sum of Money offered for any Person
that could take him; for the Paper was fathered on him; but by the contents of
it, it seemed to relish of Fanatic Principles, and that my Lord Shaftsbury was
by some suspected to be the Author of it; likewise he says that it was by the
Lord Shaftsburys Orders and Directions that the rest moved, he being accounted
by all Persons, an excellent Statesman, and very profound Politician; and said
moreover that he was informed that the Earl of Shaftsbury was come in, and made
some very great Discovery to his Majesty concerning the Designs of the
Presbyterians against the Government, which if it was so he said, then adieu to
the Popish Plot, for if this be true, (which I do not much doubt, having
received it from such very good Hands,) this will help admirable well to back
what you have written concerning some Lords, thought to be well wishers to the
Presbyterian Party; upon several Discourses which we have had together upon
that Subject; upon this Question of these Lords I was examined before his
Majesty, and my Lord Chancellor; that what I writ concerning them was upon the
Instigation of Ely, who said if there were any Plot, it must be a Presbyterian
one, for his part he said, he thought I should do the Nation a very great piece
of Service, by undeciving of them as to that particular of Sr. E. B. G. Death,
by discovering what I knew of it. I told him I was so far from knowing any
thing of his Death, that I was then out of Town, when the first Discourse of
his Death was spread abroad; I told him there was sufficient Circumstances, and
manifest Evidence to prove that the Papists were the Authors of that bloody
Act; I told him I knew one Mr. VVren who was a Gentleman that I had seen
several times with my Father, but had no acquaintance with him; that I thought
did make some considerable Discovery to my Father concerning his Death, after
Mr. Bedloe had declared his; but came in too late, and had no encouragement to
make any farther Enquiry, and Ely asking where that Person Lodged, I told him I
could not tell, having not seen him for some time: he asked me if I could no
ways find out his Lodging, I told him I believed Mr Cooper might direct me, and
he desired me when I saw Mr. Cooper that I would enquire of him where his
Lodging was, and I promised him I would, and so took my Leave of him.

The next morning I went to Mr. Coopers Lodging, and asked him if he knew where
Mr. VVrens Lodging was, for Ely had a great desire to speak with him; he said
he believed he could, with a little recollection of his Memory, for he said
when he lived with my Father, he had been once or twice at his Lodging; then he
said if he were not mistaken, he lodged in Dukes Street in Covent Garden, and
having found out his Lodging, a Maid came to us, and said that Mr. VVren was
gone to the Tower, and they did not expect him that Day, so we both returned to
Ely, and told him we had found out Mr. Wrens Lodgings; then he asked me if I had
ever seen what his Discovery was; I told him I had never read it, then Ely
replied if you never saw it, it is probable Mr. Wrens discovery agrees with
Bedloes, and Praunces Narrative, and that will do us no good, so that without I
were certain what it was he could say, I would have nothing to do with him; so
that Design was quite broke off, Ely being I suppose fearful of Mr. Wren, and
therefore Mr. Cooper nor my self, never went to look after him any more,

In the Evening Mr. Choqueux came to see me, and told me he knew a very
ingenious and civil Person, one Mr. L'estrange, whom he would gladly have me
acquainted with, for he was lately made a Justice of the Peace, and was very
sorry he did not think of him before; for being often abroad about his
Occasions, he could not keep me company, nor assist me so much as he desired;
(and said) he was very much obliged to L'estrange for mentioning his Name, in
his Witty Narrative, (which he calls L'estranges Narrative of the Plot) for
clearing and vindicating him from that lying Story of the Firebal which he kept
by him, in his Chamber, reported that they were for the fyring of the City,
about which he said there was such a Noise, that several Files of Soldiers
were sent from the Council to guard all that long Passage in the Savoy, from
the Gate to his own Door, and were ordered to suffer none to go in and out; he
then asked me if I knew L'estrange, I replied I did not, but have heard several
mention his Name; and told him if I were not mistaken he licenced Books. He
told me it was the very same Person, and he would if I pleased introduce me
into his Acquaintance; I told him Mr. L'estrange had the repute about the Town
of a witty Man, but I never saw him in my life; says Choqueux he was with me
last Night, but did not stay long, but is excellent good Company, and of whose
Society I ever was extreme desirous; I have invited him to morrow about seven
or eight in the Evening to a Collation, and then you may discourse him.

According as Choqueux had told me, he brought L'estrange with him, and there
was none in the Room but my self, before their coming in, though he speaks of
two young Men in his Dialogue, but Lies are accounted small Faults with him, he
can easily swallow them, and he might be pardoned for such Crimes, did he not
err very grossly in very material Circumstances; as soon as Mr. Choqueux came in
he told L'estrange that my Name was Tongue, then L'estrange said Mr. Tongue have
I not seen you formerly at your Fathers Lodgings at Whitehal. I told him that
to my Remembrance I never saw him there, but that I heard my Father mention his
Name more than once, upon the Account of a Book which he wrote called the Royal
Martyr, which he stopped and would not permit it to be Licenced; and that if I
were not very mistaken (and therefore I would not be too confident in what I
said) my Father informed me that he had put out several things in that Book,
and said it was a very dangerous Piece, and unless he would permit him to model
it according to his own Capricious Humor, he could not License it, and
thereupon my Father was much troubled at his Sawciness, and sent for his Book
again; these Words in L'estranges Dialogue, L'estrange makes Choqueux to speak,
for these are his own Words, yes (says Mr. Choqueux) for refusing to License
his Royal Martyr, which he took very ill at your Hands, of which Mr. Choqueux
knew nothing of, but I shall take no farther notice of L'estranges Abusive and
Lying Dialogue, for the whole Book is altogether extravagant and incoherent;
and therefore not worth my while to make more Quotations out of it; therefore I
shall proceed, then Mr. Choqueux Recommended me to L'estrange, as a Person very
worthy of my Acquaintance, and told him I had drawn up several Papers as
Objections against the Plot; and he did presume I should be very glad of his
Assistance therein; L'estrange told me he would to his Power Assist me in what
he could, and asked me where my Papers were, for he would gladly peruse them;
for he was informed those Papers had very material Things in them against the
Plot; that he was a great admirer of all such things, as he did not question he
had demonstrated to the World, by his Collections he had made concerning the
Popish Plot, where Doctor Oats, was pleased to be silent; and said that for
his Part, he found the whole Plot was replenished with nothing else but
Improbabilities, and ridiculous Absurdities; and instanced in several general
Transactions of the Plot, to wit* the unlikelihood of shooting his Majesty with
silver Bullets in a screwed Gun, and L'estrange said he would prove it by
Reason, that if any one shoot off such a Gun charged with silver Bullets, the
silver Bullet would not give way, but come out a Slug; and another ridiculous
Story he mentioned, that if Doctor Oats went over to St. Omers, and discovered
the Popish Plot, by being there conversant with the Priests and Jesuits, he
said it was very strange he could not tell, when he came over for England,
where he first Landed; and then Choqueux and L'estrange fell into other
Discourse concerning the late Wars; and L'estrange told him he did intend to
write Prince Ruperts Life, and asked Choqueux whether he could give him any
Assistance; he said he had some Memorials relating to the late Wars, but they
were at Paris, so they both parted, and going out with L'estrange, I asked him
when I should wait upon him, and if he had any Writing, I would transcribe any
thing for him which he had to Print, but he said he had no such Business, but
that any Evening he should be glad to see me, and Mr. Choqueux at his House in
Holborne, and went his way from us.

The next Day after Mr. Choqueux went to L'estrange his House, and told me he
was newly gone out; but he said to morrow in the Evening I should go along with
him to L'estrange, and Crawly coming to the Savoy before we were gone, went
along with us; whom I suppose L'estrange had no Acquaintance with; but Crawly
went thinking he might have something to say to him in relation to his Papers;
so soon as we came into the Room, where L'estrange was, he desired Mr. Choqueux
and Crawly to withdraw, for he said it looked too much like a Consultation, who
went out and expected my coming out in the Street; then being together, he
asked me whether I had a Copy of that Information which was delivered to the
King; I told him I had not, only some loose Papers relating to it; but I could
recite several material Passages of it; then L'estrange writ them down; and
asked me whether I had no more to say, I told him I had not; and said when he
had more Leisure, and had all my Informations he would swear me to them; I told
him I did not care to be sworn to any of my Papers, for when Ely had often
desired me I always refused it, for I was sufficiently Conscious of the great
Undutifulness, and what an imparalelled degree of Impiety it would be, if I
should swear against my Father, to take away his Life; then L'estrange said he
did not desire to compel me to any thing, but now he was very busy, and had
much Writing to dispatch, and desired me to call on him some other time; so I
took my Leave of him, and he gave me as I was going, one or two of his
Pamphlets, and went to find out Mr. Choqueux and Crawly who expected my coming
out, but being both gone away I went to Elys House, and there I found them both,
and Choqueux asked me what Mr. L'estrange said to me, and how he resented my
Business. I told him I thought he approved of it very well, but said he was
very busy, and took some Notes of what I said in Writing, and desired me to
come some other time; and Mr. Choqueux said it was very well, and that things
of that Nature must not be pusht on too fast, but be managed with mature
Deliberation; and said ere it was long I should wait on L'estrange again; then
Crawly replied he was the likeliest Person that Choqueux could have pitched on
to do my Business; being a Person whose Parts and Ingenuity he much admired;
and Crawly went to his Lodging in Monmouth Street, and I went with Choqueux to
the Savoy.

About a week after or thereabouts, there was a Meeting appointed by L'estrange
and Ely at a Tavern near Chearing-cross, where were in the lower Room Choqueux,
Crawly, the two Murphys and my self, and Ely and L'estrange were above Stairs,
before any of the rest came; where after we had drunk several Bottles of Wine,
Ely came down and said that Letter which was very long, was to be fairly
Transcribed that Night, and sent to the King; L'estrange slipped down Stairs, and
never came into the Room to us, though I was told, he did assist Ely to Indite
it, and was with him above Stairs; then we all parted to our several Lodgings,
and I went with Choqueux to the Savoy.

Not long after this, I was informed by Mr. Choqueux, that there had been one
of the Kings Messengers, with a Warrant for him, and his Friend Ely, to appear
before the Council; at which Choqueux seemed to be very much startled, and said
he had been no ways concerned with me only in relation to my Health; and he did
not question but I would vindicate him before the Council; I told him I could
not surmise before hand what Questions would be asked me by the Lords of the
Council, but he might assure himself I would speak nothing but the Truth, let
it light where it would; and in the Morning Ely, and Choqueux, with Doctor
Oats were before the Council, where was expected I should have been, but did
not come: but the next Week after I was likewise summoned to appear with them;
and the Day before I went I informed Ely and Choqueux that I had a Note in my
Trunck, which I had from Doctor Castle a little before I left him, that was at
Mr. Kings in Shandoys Street, which I thought might do me a kindness, and Ely,
and Choqueux told me it would be very necessary that I should have it; Ely came
the next Morning in a Hackney Coach to the Savoy, and shook me by the Hand, Now
Mr. Tongue says he, you are this Day to go before the Council; and do not fear
but your Business is done, carry your self but courageously this first Brunt,
and you shall have Backers enough to assist you; I wish you good Success, and
said he would meet me at the Council, at the appointed Hour between nine and
ten of the Clock, but I am afraid you have not Courage enough to go manfully
through with it; and I wish I were in your Case, to answer for you before the
Council, in a Business of such general good, and great Importance to the
Nation; you will never have the like Opportunity again to prefer your self as
is now in your Hands; therefore be sure you recollect your self very well
before you go, otherwise you will be trapt in your Discourse, and you may be
sure Doctor Oats will thunder against you sufficiently, who is exceedingly
enraged against you, by what I saw when Mr. Choqueux, and my self, were last
before the Council; when Ely was gone Choqueux gave me a Guinny to fetch that
Paper, and a Gentleman an Acquaintance of Choqueux went along with me in a
Hackney Coach to Mr. Kings to fetch that Paper; and thence he carried me to
Whitehal, and coming before the Council, having been asked several Questions by
their Lordships in relation to the Plot, and three or four times Examined by my
Lord Chancellor; I was committed to Newgate for high Misdemeanors, and
endeavoring by false Accusations and Subornation of Perjury to defame the
Kings Evidence, and all the prosecutions of the Popish Plot; I was first
brought by one of the Kings Messengers into the Press-Yard, and there one Gyles
that stood in the Pillory, insinuated himself into my Acquaintance; and told me
I must not be Melancholy, nor cast down, for many times the Innocent had the
misfortune to Suffer, but said my Business was never the worse, though I was
committed to Newgate; and told me if I would not be wavering, but firm and
Resolute, he did not much question but he could engage Mrs. Cellier, that she
should stand my Friend, and procure me Money, and what else I should desire of
her; whilst I was in the Press-yeard one Mrs. Elmes came likewise to me, and
told me that now all the Eyes of the Catholics were upon me; and requested me
what ever I did not to go back, but strenuously maintain my first Papers; and
said she had a considerable Estate, and I should never want, whilst she had a
Farthing in the World, and by her Interest she said she could procure more
Friends, which would relieve me if they saw me courageous for the Catholic
Interest, to which I seemingly replied I would, so she took her leave; this
Woman is a very zealous Papist, and an intimate Acquaintance of Monsieur
Choqueux.

Whilst I was in the Press-yard, being advised by one of Mr. Choqueux
Acquaintance, to write to Ely for some Relief, during my Confinement, and to
desire him to bail me out of Prison, I did, as I had been informed his Friend
L'estrange was Bail for him, and after some expectation I received this Letter
from Ely, very cunningly and cautiously Penned, but the whole drift of it, (as
any Person may easily perceive) was to draw me into a Snare, to write Choqueux
such a Letter, that what he had done for me, was only for the good of my
Health; and that he was no ways concerned in the Subornation to induce me to
swear against my Father and Doctor Oats, that they were the contrivers of the
Popish Plot; Mr. Chiffins sent Ely a Letter that Mr Choqueux should take care
of me in regard of my Health; and Ely showed me the Letter, nevertheless
Choqueux was continually prompting me on, and was extreme zealous for the
Catholic Interest, and said he was very glad to hear of my forwardness to
vindicate them; and thought I was the only Person in England that might be a
means to make the Catholic Religion Flourish in these Kingdoms; and said he
cared not what he bestowed to further my Business; Elys last Letter to me was
in these Words.

SIR.
I Do not love to add Affliction to Affliction, and yet I cannot but wonder
that you should seek to me either for Relief or Bayl, after such a Requital of
my good Offices and Civilities, both in Relation to his Majesty and my self,
you have made it so dangerous to have any thing to do with you, that common
Discretion obliges me to keep my Distance, even against my inclinations to a
Work of Charity; for I do pity your Condition, but to send you any sort of
Supply, would look as if I were afraid of you, or intended to make use of you,
but my Integrity has kept me out of your Power, and as to any manner of
Correspondence I have done with you.

Only this I think I might securely do for you, Monsieur Choqueux was lamenting
the ill state of your Health, and I moved him to take some care of you, that
way, but his Answer was that he did not know what Construction might be made of
it, but I am persuaded that if you should write to him such a Letter, as might
secure him from being misinterpreted, by some acknowledgment of what he has
already done for you, and such Declarations under your Hand as might be an
Evidence that it was at your own Instance, and only in Order to your Recovery,
I do not know I say but you might prevail with him, to go on with your Cure;
Consider the goodness of God to you, to give you time to repent of your
Wickedness, and set about it seriously, in which good Design God assist you
through the Mercies of Christ Jesus.

September 25th 1680, 7 at Night. Farewell, S. ELY.


After I had received this Letter of Elys, Captain Richardson sent for me, and
said he was informed that several Persons had been to speak with me, I told him
Colonel Mansel, and another Person had been with me, and likewise some
Catholics, and then he bid me fetch my Linen, and removed me out of the
Press-yard into the Master-side Debtors; from whence I was ordered to appear
the second time before the Lords of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council; his Majesty being then likewise present; where my Affidavit which was
taken upon Oath before Mr. Justice Bridgeman being read, and the Lords were
then many of Opinion, that Ely was the main Person, which did instigate me to
draw up those Objections against the Popish Plot; this Account being more large
than the Affidavit, not having then so much time to recollect my Memory, so
fully as I have since done; and this I have performed with all due Respect to
the Persons concerned, without clamorous and abusive Reflections; and with
Conscience to the Truth, without wronging any Person in the Relation, and
though L'estrange has so grossly abused me in his lying and scandalous Dialogue,
yet I only plainly lay down the matter of Fact; and the several Intrigues and
Discourses that past betwixt us, and as near as I could remember the very
Words, and leave it freely to the Judgment of any unbiast Person; whether
L'estrange be so innocent, or made so slight a matter of what I said to him, as
he publishes in his Case, inserting in it what he pleases, and many times
mentioning Persons with us, when there were none, which is but a small Fault,
but he confounds the whole Series of the Discourse which I had with him; as is
sufficiently evident and perspicuous to any Person that will be at so much
Pains, as to compare my Account with his Dialogue; and though he may have more
Wit, I am sure he has not so much Honesty in the Relation.

Since I was committed to Newgate, the last Term a Habeas Corpus was brought
for me, to appear at the Kings Bench, where I moved my Lord Chief Justice
Scroggs, that I might be removed to the Kings Bench; and upon my motion to the
Judges I was committed to the Prison of the Court; And no farther says,

Simson Tongue.
Witness.
Thomas Waller. John Rawlins. Francis Ram. Thomas Castle.


FINIS.

