Jehovah our Righteousness; OR THE JUSTIFICATION OF Believers BY THE
Righteousness of Christ only. Asserted and Applied IN SEVERAL SERMONS. By
Samuel Comlyns, A. M. A Minister of the Gospel in Marleborough.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Sign of the Bible and Three Crowns
at the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercer's- Chapel.

To the Most Illustrious WILLIAM Duke of Bedford, Grace, Mercy and Peace from
God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
May it please Your Grace,
I Cannot forget your Grace's Kindness and Bounty to me in a Troublesome time
of Persecution from Man, and a Dark-day of Visitation from God; when, by a
Disease, I was brought near the brink of the Grave. In Gratitude, I offer your
Grace a Discourse of that Everlasting Righteousness which we have in Christ,
and of that Eternal Salvation we enjoy by him. Some may be wrapped up in the
Skirt of Providence, as the Hair in the Skirt of Ezekiel's Garment, Ezekiel. 5.3,
4. for a few years, yet, at last, be brought forth, and be cast into the
Eternal Fire of God's Wrath, 2 These. 8, 9. It will be sad to have a Reprieve
for time, and then to feel a dreadful Execution for Eternity; but through the
Righteousness of Christ, God may not only, as a Patient Creditor, forbear us
for years; but, as a Righteous Judge, justify and discharge us for ever.
Diogenes Laertius, in vita Socratis, tells us, That Apollodorus brought
Socrates a Rich Garment to put on, and Die in. I here Present to your Grace the
Glorious Garment of Christ's Righteousness, both to Live on, and to Die in. Our
blind Ancestors, at a dear rate, purchased a Monk's Habit to be Buried in: but
I here tender to your Grace the Beautiful Habit of our Great High Priest, to
Adorn and Secure your Soul for Time and Eternity. The builders of Spiritual
Babel are strangely confounded in their Language; they deny the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, yet promise their Benefactors that they will
Communicate to them the Merits of their Order. Sir Edwyn Sands, in his Religion
of the West, Relates, That he heard a Capuchin Preach, and that in his Sermon
(as a high act of Charity) he said, That he would divest himself of all his
Merits, and put them on the Congregation that heard him; but he himself would
stand before God, as the greatest Sinner of them all. But what a high strain of
Pride is this, to deny the Imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and yet allow
the Imputation of their own Merits to others, as if Sackcloth could Adorn, but
not the Son of Righteousness. Tucquet, in his Spanish History, informs us, That
Philip the Second, King of Spain, was (when Sick) directed to take a Crucifix
in one hand, and a Candle Consecrated to the Virgin Mary, that is worshipped at
Monserat, in the other hand, and in this posture to meet Death, the King of
Terrors. But is it not infinitely better, that the Lively Picture of Christ
Crucified, as drawn in the Gospel, should be before the eyes of our Minds? and
the Son of Righteousness be grasped and held fast in the Hand of Faith, that
Death may be disarmed of its Sting, and divested of its Terror. The Doctrine of
Justification asserted in this Treatise, is opposed by many. Socinians deny the
Death of Christ to be the Price of our Redemption: Others seem to overlook the
Active Obedience of Christ, as it were not the matter of our Righteousness. The
Apostle says, That Christ was made under the Law to Redeem us, Gal. 4.4, 5.
This expression, made under the Law, is not to be Restrained to Christ's being
made under the Curse of the Law, the Phrase is otherwise taken in the same
Chapter, Gal. 4.21. You that desire to be under the Law. Surely the Jews did
not desire to be under the Curse of the Law, but under the Commands of the Law,
as a Covenant. We are poor and weak, as well as guilty Creatures: we need not
only that Christ, by enduring the Curse on the Cross, should reverse the
Sentence of Death, but also, that he should obey the Law, and so take it off
from us, as a Covenant of Life. If the Sentence of death should be abrogated
for the time past, and the Law stand in force, as a Covenant of Life for the
time to come, our State would be hopeless and desperate. Some account Faith to
be too small and mean a thing for us to be Justified by; as Naaman thought
Washing in the Waters of Jordan to be too slight a Means to cure him of his
Leprosy, 2 Kings 5.11, 12. and therefore, by Faith, they understand all
Obedience to the Gospel, that flows from it; as when the Jews lost the
Spiritual meaning of the Sacrifices, as they did Typifie Christ, Isa. 53.10.
they thought the Offering of a Beast to be a cheap Sacrifice, therefore they
would arise higher, and Offer the First-Fruit of their Body for the Sin of
their Soul, Micah 6.7. So when some consider not, or overlook the Office of
Faith, as it is an Instrument to receive Christ and his Righteousness for
Justification; they debase Faith as a mean thing, and Introduce all New
Obedience as the condition of Justification. This is to make a Gospel
Justification like a Legal Justification, wherein Men's own obedience was the
Matter of their Righteousness, and the condition of their Justification. The
Wrath of God is Revealed from Heaven against us for our Ungodliness, and
Unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. And how might our hearts sink, if the Righteousness
of God were not Revealed in the Gospel for our Comfort and Support? Cartwright.
Some distinguish between the Righteousness of the Law, and (...) Romans 8.4.
Phil. 3.9. The Righteousness of the Law is in some Measure fulfilled in Saints,
as they have Graces, and do Actions, in some measure, conformable to the Law:
but yet the Scripture denies, and disavows Christians having the Righteousness
that is of the Law, that is, such a perfect and complete Righteousness as the
Law requires for Justification. But it is the Righteousness of God that we must
fly to, and take hold of for Justification. It is this Righteousness that gives
us ground to conclude, that God will turn again and have compassion on us,
Micah 7.19. and that he will not return to destroy us, Hos. 11.9. God will not
execute the Fierceness of his Anger, but express the Heat, and Height of his
Love, in adopting us into his Family, setting us at the Table to Feast, and
placing us in the Throne to Reign with Christ, Luke 22.29, 30. Rev. 3.21. We
cannot break through an Host of sins, and get to the Fountain of Life, or
venture into the Presence of God, that is a Consuming Fire, if we are not Armed
with this Righteousness. That your Grace may continually come into this
Righteousness, as your Fortress and Castle; Live on it as your most precious
Food and generous Cordial, and, at last, be found in it, as your Glorious
Garment, is the sincere desire, and shall be the earnest Prayer of

June 11th, 1696. Your Grace's most humble Servant and Orator, Samuel Tomlyns.

Several SERMONS ON Jer. XXIII. 6.
In his Days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is
the Name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness.
IN the Fifth Verse of this Chapter we have a Prophecy and Promise of Christ;
God says, That he would raise up to David a Righteous Branch. David had too
many corrupt Children, and degenerate Plants, that did turn off from, and walk
contrary to his Piety; but the Lord would raise up to David a Plant of Renown,
a Righteous Branch. Of this Branch it is said, That he should Reign and
Prosper; his Dominions should neither have Bounds or End; his Kingdom should
neither be kept down, or beaten down in the World; he should execute Judgment
and Justice in the Earth, Psalm. 2.4. He should rescue the Elect from bondage
and slavery, and break Satan, the great Oppressor in Pieces; and destroy those
that obstinately adhere to him.

2ly. He should do God right, and execute his Law by writing it in the Hearts
of Men by his Spirit. The Law requires Love to be rendered to God, and our
Neighbor; but our flesh is repugnant to both: Self-Love eats us up, and
devours both what is due to God. and what belongs to our Neighbor: The Law
makes its demand, it calls for the Love we owe God and our Fellow Creature; but
is still contradicted, till Christ renews our Nature, and kindles in us both
fervent Love to God, and sincere Love to our Neighbor. Even thus the Messiah,
born after Moses, and so may be said to be his Younger Brother, raises up Seed
to him, directs men's Hearts into the Love of God, and inflames their Souls to
the Love of their Neighbor. In the words of the Text, we have another Promise
concerning the sweet Effects and blessed Fruits of Christ's Kingdom. In his
Days Judah should be saved, and Israel dwell safely. Christ's Kingdom is for
the salvation of men. In Zech. 9.9. it is said, Rejoice thou Daughter of Sion,
thy King comes: But in Is. 62.11. it is said, Behold thy Salvation comes.
Christ is a saving King to enslaved and perishing sinners.

In the Text we may observe these several parts:

1. Here is a great Benefit promised, and that is salvation; Judah shall be
saved, Mal. 2.3.

2. We have the perfection and continuance of this salvation, Israel shall
dwell safely, Romans 16.20. Spiritual Enemies shall be so subdued, trodden under
foot, and destroyed, that they shall never recover, and lift up themselves to
enslave and oppress the people of God. The uncircumcised and unclean shall no
more, as Conquerours, pass through the Church of God, Is. 52.1. Her Walls shall
be called Salvation, and her Gates Praise, Is. 60.18. Saved and Redeemed Saints
may serve without Fear, Luke 1.74, 75. They shall not be cast out by Christ,
John 6.37. They shall not by Satan, or sinners, be plucked out of Christ's
hands, John 10.27, 28. They shall not, by the mutability of their own Wills,
depart from God, Jer. 32.40. So they have no ground to dread, that Christ will
divorce them, that sin shall enslave them, and that Satan shall ensnare and
devour them.

3. We have the Persons to whom this Promise is made, Judah and Israel: But
does the Sun of Righteousness shine only on Canaan? Is the Salvation of the
Messiah restrained to One Nation? No, Christ is the Savior of the World, John
4.42. We read of a common Faith, Acts 1.9. and a common Salvation, Jude v. 3.
The Hedge is plucked up, Luke 14.23. The Wall of Partition is broken down, Ephesians.
6.14. The Old Enclosures are thrown open, and Christ is God's Salvation to the
Ends of the Earth, Isa. 49.6. But why then is Judah and Israel mentioned? Answ.
1. They were the Ancient, and for some time the only people of God: They were
then in being, to receive and embrace the Promises. God did know, esteem, love,
deal better with them than with other Nations, Amos 3.1. Psalm. 147. and the two
last Verses. 2. They were as it were, the Representatives of, and the Trustees
for the Church Universal; the Oracles of God were committed to them, Romans 3.2.
the Covenant was made with them; the Promises of God were given to them, Romans
9.4. 3. Believers of the Gentiles are now grafted into this stock of the Jewish
Church, they are planted among the Natural Branches; partakers of the Olive and
its fatness, etc. Romans 17.24. they are Fellow-Heirs of the same Body, and
Partakers of God's Promise in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 3.6. and this is both the
meaning, and the fulfilling of that Scripture, Ezekiel. 47.22. You shall divide
the Land by Lot for an Inheritance unto you, and the Strangers that sojourn
among you, and that shall beget Children among you; and they shall be unto you,
as born in the Country, among the Children of Israel; they shall have
Inheritance with you among the Tribes of Israel. Canaan was not only a Type of
the Eternal Inheritance, but also a Shadow of a Spiritual Canaan of the Church
of God, and its Privileges. To sojourn among the Tribes of Israel, seems to
be the same as to be grafted in among the Branches, and to have an Inheritance
among the Tribes of Israel, may well be expounded by the Gentiles being made
Partakers of the Olive and its Fatness; and that Provision that is made for the
Children that Strangers should beget, that they should have an Inheritance
among the Tribes of Israel, seems to me to point out the Church Membership of
the Children of the Gentiles, and that they shall be put into the same Place,
and enjoy the same Privileges that the Children of the Israelites had. This
sense seems at least very probable. We never find that material Canaan was
divided among the Israelites and Strangers, and as this was not practiced for
the time past, so it seems not possible or practicable for the time to come,
that the Gentiles should have a share in such a narrow and short Land, as
Canaan is, and possess it together with the Jews.

4. The Believing Gentiles are now the Israel of God, and Spiritual Jews, Gal.
6.16. Romans 2.29. As there is a Spiritual, Altar, Temple, Circumcision,
Spiritual Sacrifices, so there is a Spiritual Israel and Judah. True Believers
are Israel, for they wrestle with God to obtain an eternal Blessing; Genesis 12.2.
and they are Spiritual udah as they praise God for the obtaining of an
everlasting Salvation, etc. Rev. 12.11.

4thly, We have the time when these Promises shall be most eminently performed,
and that in the Days of Christ, in his Days Judah shall be saved.

5thly, We have an honorable and glorious Name given to, and put on the
Messiah; this is the Name whereby he shall be called, the Lord our
Righteousness. There is something extraordinary imported, and signified by this
Name, that Jehovah that requires Righteousness of us, should himself become
Righteousness to us; that he who has imposed righteous Commands on us, and
has denounced for our disobedience righteous Threatenings against us, should to
secure and preserve us, or be made Righteousness to us: This is admirable and
wonderful, that Jehovah should provide a Laver to wash us, and work out a
Righteousness to cloth and adorn us. This is such a rare and stupendous
thing, that the Son of God by this gracious Condescension to us, by this
merciful Provision for us, has acquired a new, honorable and everlasting Name.

The Words afford us two Points of Doctrine,

1. That in Christ's Days Judah and Israel, Jew and Gentile, shall be most
eminently, and signally saved.

2. That Jesus Christ is, and shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness.

Doct. 1. That in Christ's Days, Judah and Israel, Jew and Gentile, shall be
most eminently saved. For the prosecuting of this Doctrine; 1. I shall show you
what Days are meant and intended by the Days of Christ. 2. What this Salvation
is, that shall be given forth in his Days. 3. Why Salvation is by way of
Excellency said to be bestowed in his days; and then more eminently communicate.

1. What days are meant by the Days of Christ. Ans. The Days that begin from
the incarnation of the Son of God, and continue and run on to his second
coming; these in Scripture are called his Days, Psalm. 72.7. In his Days shall
the Righteous flourish; and these days are Long days, for it follows, and an
abundance of Peace there shall be as long as the Moon endures. So that the
days of the Messiah do run parralel with the Moon as to their duration. God had
promised to him, that he should prolong his Days, and the pleasure of the Lord
should prosper in his Hand, Isa. 53.10. It is a wonderful Condescension, that
he whose goings forth were from everlasting, and was ancienter than days,
should take an Humane Nature, and live a life in it that should be measured by
days: The Time since Jesus Christ was exhibited, and manifested to the World,
is called his days.

2. What is this Salvation that Jesus Christ bestows? I shall show you 1. The
Nature: 2ly, The Properties and Adjuncts of this Salvation. I shall first
explain the Nature of it; This Salvation has two parts, 1. A Privative, 2. A
Positive part.

1. A Privative part. It is Salvation from the most dreadful Evils, 1. It is
Salvation from Sin, Matthew. 1.21. thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall
save his People from their Sins. 2 Tit. 14. he gave himself to redeem us from
all Iniquity. His Blood is the precious Red Ink to blot out our Transgressions;
and the most wonderful Red Seas to drown the Spiritual Egyptians; the Host of
our Iniquities in Christ, was but baptized in the deep Waters of sorrow and
sufferings, but he drowned for ever all our sins. God made war with Christ, to
make peace with us, Zech. 13.7. God saves by Remission of Sins, Luke 77. and by
the washing of Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.4, 5.
God made him an instance of Severity, that we might be eternal Monuments of
Mercy.

2. Christ saves from wrath. Jesus delivers from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1.
last. Being justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath, through him,
Romans 5.9. The Apostle does not mention whose wrath, but means the wrath of God:
This wrath is so formidable, and terrible, that all other wrath is as nothing,
does not deserve the Name of wrath; it is but a false, or painted Fire, a
Bubble, an empty Name and sound. God can array all the Creatures, as his Hosts
in Heaven and Earth, to fight against Sinners: He can awaken and stir up
Conscience, to accuse and condemn the Sinner, and so make him both a Burden and
a Terror to himself. God can remember, and set all our Trangressions before
our Sight, and fix our Eyes on this dreadful and dismaying Object, that they
shall never divert or look off from it. God can pursue Sinners with punishment
in this world, and meet them with more dreadful vengeance in another World; he
can strike and support the Criminal at once; he can blow up the Fire of his
Anger and preserve the Souls and Bodies of Sinners to be eternal Fuel to it; he
can make extremity, and eternity of Misery, to meet in the same Person. It is
amazing wrath to make a bundle of Tares, to subsist, and continue in the
Furnace for ever; to be immortal Fuel to an eternal Fire: It is from this
dreadful wrath that Jesus Christ saves his People.

2. There is a positive part of this Salvation. 1. Jesus Christ saves and
quickens us. The Dead hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it
shall live, John 5.25. As God breathed the Breath of Life into Adam's formed
Body, and he became a living Soul, Genesis 2.7. so Christ breathed on his
Apostles, and said, Receive you the Holy Ghost, John, 20.22. the Life of
Saints, is a Beam of, and a stream from the Life of Christ, Eccl. 2.20. How
noble is their Life? They live by Christ's living in them; through the Spirit
they are ingrafted into Christ, are Branches of the true Tree of Life; they are
in him, who is the true God, and Eternal Life, 1 John 5.20. 2ly, Christ saves
them, and builds them, Zech. 6.12, 13. The Branches should grow up out of his
Place, and he should build the Temple of the Lord; we fell, and were ruined in
and by Adam, and we lay in Ruins and Rubbish, till Christ does lift up his
Feet to our Desolations; does with Pity behold, and in Mercy raise up our
Ruins. Satan dwells in, and rejoices over these Ruins. Those that are pulled
down with respect to God, may be said to be built up with respect to Satan; as
Ruins of a House are of no use to us, so ruined Creatures are altogether
unprofitable to God, Romans 12. O this is great Mercy, for Satan to be dispossed
and ejected, and for Souls to be framed as a holy House, and to be built up as
a Spiritual Temple for God to inhabit, and be worshipped in. Those that are
God's Temples are animated by his Spirit, and are filled with his Glory at
once; they are framed to be a Habitation for God, and fitted to be Inhabitants
with him in the Heavenly Jerusalem.

3. Christ saves waters, and improves our dry Ground, our Barren Land, Isa.
44.3. God, says he, will pour water on him that is thirsty, and Floods on the
dry Ground. And God thus explains the meaning of this Metaphor, I will pour my
Spirit on thy Seed, and my Blessing on thy Offspring. We are by Nature a
wretched, dry and barren piece of Ground; we did ly upon improvement to none,
but to the Heavenly Husbandman; it was the second Adam only that could enrich
such a hungry and dry Ground; he that can give the Spirit, as Rivers of Living
Water, John 7.37, 38, 39. He invites Sinners to come and drink: Thirsty Souls
may here drink in the very Fountain of Grace, the Spirit, and so be enabled to
send forth Spiritual Rivers, to stretch and solace others. Christ can
cultivate, and manure the Wilderness, cause it to be well watered, Isa. 35.6,
7. and so to become a pleasant Eden, a delightful and fruitful Paradise to God;
as God had a River in the Clouds to improve and enrich Canaan, Psalm. 65.6. Thou
visitest the Earth, and waterest it, thou greatly enrichest it with the River
of God, which is full of Water. So Christ has a better River with him in
Heaven, and this River he sends down, and lets it in, and turns it over our dry
and barren Land: When Hannah was delivered from Barrenness, she calls this
God's Salvation, and rejoices in it, 1 Samuel 2.1.

4. Christ saves and anoints, and and perfumes his Redeemed People, Ezekiel. 16.9.
I thoroughly washed away this Blood from thee, and I anointed thee with Oil.
Here is plain allusion to those precious and sweet-smelling-Oyls that great
Persons were anointed and perfumed with, Ester 2.12. Psalm. 23.5. Christ does
not only wash away the guilt of Sin with his Blood, but also anoints his People
with his Spirit, and its sweet smelling Graces. Believers are called
Christians, because they partake of the Ointment of his Spirit, 2 Cor. 1.21.
And the Church is said to ascend as Pillars of Smoke, perfumed with Myrrh and
Frankincense, and all the powders of the Merchant. Cant. 3.6. Christ does not
only take the stink of our Sins, from the Nostrils of God, by his sweet
smelling Sacrifice, Ephesians. 5.2. but also perfumes us with the sweet Odours and
Powders of his Graces. The Ointments, the Garments of Saints, cast out a sweet
smell, Cant. 4.10.

5. He saves and clothes us, Rev. 3.18. he puts white Raiment on us, that the
shame of our Nakedness may not appear. He takes from Sinners their sordid
Garments, and clothes them with change of Raiment, Zech. 3.3, 4. We could not
provide any Wedding Clothes for our selves, if Jesus did not give them to us,
and bestow them on us. To her was granted to be clothed in fine Linen, white
and clean, which is the Righteousness of Saints, Rev. 19.8. Jesus Christ does
not only cover us with the Robe of his Righteousness, but also adorns and
beautifies us with his new Nature; we are made Partakers of Christ, Heb. 3.14.
We have a Spiritual Understanding; we have the Mind of Christ. 1 John 5.20. and
the Bowels or Affections of Christ, Phil. 1.5. We are to put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, Romans 13.14. his Mind must be put upon our Mind, his Will on our Will,
his Affections on our Affections; nothing of our own should be seen or appear,
but all the Faculties of our Souls should be covered with the Livery of Jesus
Christ. This Apparel wears fresher, and will last to Eternity.

6. Christ saves and adopts, John 4.12. To as many as received him, gave he
power to become the Sons of God. He was so far from envying us, or grudging of
us this Privilege of Adoption, that he veiled his own Sonship under the form
of a Servant; he was made under the Law, and died, that we might receive the
Adoption of Children, Gal. 4.4. He does not only save Criminals from Execution,
but also, makes them Heirs of a Kingdom, and an eternal Inheritance, James
2.15. Heb. 9.5.

2dly, I shall now show you the Properties and Adjuncts of this Salvation.

1. It is for the present, mostly a Spiritual Salvation, our Soul's live, Isa.
55.3. our Souls find rest, Matthew. 1.28. our Souls are saved, 1 Pet. 1.9. our
Souls do delight themselves in Fatness, Isa. 55.2. But the Bodies of Saints are
often in this World exposed to Poverty, Hardships, Imprisonments, grievous
Sufferings, and cruel Deaths; and these Evils do cloud the Saints Adoption and
vail their State of Spiritual Salvation. This caused the Heathens (as
Lactantius tells us) to say, De Justitia.
that Virtue was an empty thing. If Men had not Riches, Honors, exemption from
Sufferings, freedom from outward Evils, and Victory over Enemies; but Christ
has not made the Earth, and Plenty of Worldly Enjoyments, as a Jointure to his
Spouse the Church, but tells his Disciples, that in the World they shall have
Tribulations, John 16. last. that those, that will live Godly, must suffer
Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. there is an irrevocable Sentence passed on the Old
Man, on the natural Body, that it shall return to the Dust, and this Sentence
must be executed, Genesis 3.19.

2. This is a Righteous Salvation; this is intimated in the last part of the
Verse, Judah shall be saved, and that, by him who is the Lord our
Righteousness. God is just in punishing sin on Christ, that he may be just in
pardoning it to us, Romans 3.25, 26, 27. God will not tare Believers in pieces,
according to his Threatening, Psalm. 50.22. Because the Vail of Christ's Humane
Nature, his Soul and Body was divided, and rent in twain, Heb. 10.19. God may
in a righteous way, build up Sinners out of their Ruins, because the Temple of
Christ's Body has been destroyed, and pulled down to the Dust. Jesus Christ,
though a Tree of Righteousness, was cut down, that many Branches of
Righteousness might spring out of this precious Root; he was sowed in the Dust,
that he might be multiplied, and many might, from this holy Grain, spring up to
Everlasting Life, John 12.24. God clothed himself with the Garments of
Vengeance, and loaded Christ with sorrows, that he might cloth us with the
Garments of Salvation, etc. Isa. 1.10. As the living Sparrow was dipped in the
Blood of the slain Sparrow and so let fly, Lev. 14.5, 6, 7. so we have liberty
in a righteous way, by being dyed in Christ's Blood. Jesus Christ can marry us,
because his Soul and Body were divorced, to reconcile us to God. And he can
repair and restore the beautiful image of God to us, because his Visage was
marred more than any Man's, and his Form more than the Sons of Men, Isa. 52.14.
This is the excellency and glory of the Christian Religion, above all the
pretended Religions in the World, that it shows how God may pardon sin in a
condecent manner, in a way becoming of himself, and not reflect on his
Holiness, reproach his Justice, or wrong his Law, Heb. 2.10. It became him, of
whom, and for whom, are all things, in bringing many Sons to Glory, to make the
Captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. Such an High Priest
became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sinners, Heb.
7.26. God is more honored, and his Law exalted by the sufferings of Christ,
than if we had fell under the Curse, and lain in Hell for ever.

3. This is a powerful Salvation: God laid the help of Sinners on one that is
mighty, Psalm. 89.19. God has raised up for us an Horn of Salvation, Luke 1.69.
one that is able to pierce through, and to push down all the Enemies of our
Salvation. The Captain of our Salvation is the mighty God, Isa. 9.6. no Enemy
can stand before him, or prevail against him; no Disease is so strong, or
malignant, but the great Physician can cure it; no Dross cleaves so close to
us, but he can separate it from us: Christ is a refining Fire to his People,
and a consuming Fire to their Enemies: As the first Adam corrupts and defiles
inevitably, so the second Adam can renew, cleanse, sanctify irresistibly. And
infallibly he can speak so, as to cause the Deaf and Dead to hear, Isa. 29.18.
John 5.25. He can woo so, as to cause himself to be loved, and chosen; he can
draw so, as to make Sinners to run to him at first, Isa. 55.5. and to run after
him ever after, Cant. 1.4. The spirit of Christ is mighty in its Operations; it
acts as a spirit of Power; it causes Men to pass under Christ's Pastoral Rod,
and brings them under the Bond of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37. It causes Men to
approach to God, and dwell in his House, Psalm. 65.4. It causes Men to walk in
God's ways, and to keep his Statutes, Ezekiel. 36.27. This word (Cause) is
observable and emphatical, and signifies the spirit's mighty and effectual way
of working. It does not only propose Arguments, and solicit the Souls of the
Elect in a moral way, but renews the Will, changes the Heart effectually,
inclines men to yield to, and follow after God. The event is not pendulous and
uncertain, and suspended on Man's free will, but Christ undertakes that his
Sheep shall hear his Voice, and he will bring them to his Fold, John 10.16.

4. Christ's Salvation is a full and comprehensive Salvation, Luke 1.71. That
we should be saved from the Hand of our Enemies, and from all that hate us.
Sin, the World and Death are our Enemies.

1. Sin is our Enemy. Our Lusts do Satan's work, if he should stand still,
James 1.14, 15. A Man is tempted, and drawn away by his own Lust; This is a
Body of Death, Romans 7.24. it deforms our Souls as much as Death deforms our
Bodies; it makes them corrupt, putrify, and stink in the Nostrils of God; it
renders us as unactive for God, as a dead Carcass is unserviceable to Man; it
defiles and enslaves our Souls; lets us only do dead works, Heb. 9.14. such
works as are the fruits of spiritual death, and the seeds of eternal death:
Where it prevails and reigns, it causes us continually to go a whoring from
God, and to rise up in Rebellion against him; it causes us to lead a life of
Vanity here, and prepares us for a life of Misery hereafter.

2. The World is an Enemy: We need the Armor of Righteousness on the Right
Hand, to secure us from the danger of Prosperity, and the Aamour of
Righteousness on our Left Hand, to guard us from the evil of Adversity, 2 Cor.
6.7. Height of Prosperity, and depth of Misery, Romans 8.39. are dangerous
snares, and may prove mortal Enemies to us, if Grace does not prevent. The
World's Music is to draw, and its Furnace is to drive us from God; Satan takes
his Bait, and fetches his Weapons from some thing in the World. How does it
blow up, and inflame our Hearts? fire and fuel our Lusts? How many are made to
forget God, and to think they have no want and need of him, in their Plenty and
Abundance, Psalm. 50.22. Job 1.14.15. Job 22.17. Jer. 3.31.

3. Death is an Enemy to God's People, 1 Cor. 15.26. it strikes them dumb, and
deprives them of the use of their Tongues, in praising God which is their
Glory. Saints as well as others, when they die, go down into silence, Psalm.
115.17. Isa. 38.18. Death disables us from working for God in a body of Flesh;
it gives a Quietus est to one half of us, and discharges it from the service
of God. The Temple in which the spirit dwelt, is now pulled down, and sinks
into Dust and Ashes; and Death that deprives us of so great and glorious an
Inhabitant in our Bodies, and takes us off from such noble service, with our
Tongues and Members, must needs be our Enemy.

But Christ saves from these Enemies: Sin shall not Reign, Romans 6.14. and in
due time it shall cease to be sin, and shall be utterly extirpated out of the
People of God. As Israel's Freedom was begun in the death of the Firstborn of
the Egyptians, and was completed in the drowning of Pharaob and all his Host
in the Red Sea; so the liberty of Saints is begun in destroying the reign of
beloved sins, that are the firstborn of the Old Man, and shall be completed
by the total extirpation and destruction of all sin. We are Baptized into the
Death and Burial of Christ, Romans 6.3. and we must be made Partakers of the
saving Benefit of both. Sin shall not only die, but also be buried: A Dead Man
has lost his Command in the House, yet his Carcass may remain in it; but when
he is to be buried, his Corpse is carried out, and he cease any longer to be
in the House. So sin shall not only cease to reign, but also to be in the soul;
we shall be washed, and free from every spot and wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27.

2. The World is foiled and overcome by Christ; Joh. 16. and last. It could not
divert or draw him from doing his Father's work and will; and this conquered
Enemy shall not have strength to captivate and destroy Believers; they overcame
by the Blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.1. Our victorious Savior has purchased
conquering Strength, and merited Victory for us in the midst of all snares and
temptations. We are more than Conquerors, through the Lord Jesus that has
loved us, Romans 8.39.

3. Christ will save his People from Death, after this Enemy has not only
swallowed them up, but digested them: Christ has abolished Death already in
himself, and will abolish it also in all his People, Hos. 13.14. he threatens
Death, that holds the Rod over, and threatens the whole World; he menaceth
Death, that he will be the plague of Death; a mortal Disease to it. He
threatens the Grave that he will destroy it, and in due time Triumphant Saints
shall sing this Song, O Death, where is thy sting? O Death, what have thou
gotten by killing our Bodies, they are alive again? O Grave where is thy
Victory? what have thou gotten by taking away all the shape of a Body, and
crumbling it into Dust? 3ly. This Body is now restored, our Particles of Dust
are gathered together, and formed into a Body like the glorious Body of Christ,
1 Cor. 15.55.57. Phil. 3.21. Christ will, in Living Saints at the last day,
swallow up Mortality of Life, 2 Cor. 5.4. and, in dead Saints, he will swallow
up Death into Victory, Isa. 25.8.

2dly, There are those that hate Saints; and so wicked Men and Satan do; they
hate them, because they bare the Image, and live the Life, and uphold the
interest of God; but the wicked cannot kill the Souls of the Saints, Luke 12.4.
and Satan, though he may destroy the natural Life, yet he shall not quench the
Life of God in them; and in due time, the Saints shall tread down the wicked,
they shall be as Ashes under the soles of their Feet, Mal. 4.2, 3. and the God
of Peace shall shortly tread Satan under the Feet of Believers, Romans 16.20.

5. This is an everlasting Salvation, Isa. 45.17. Israel shall be saved in the
Lord, with an everlasting salvation; Saints shall have a full, and an eternal
Victory, as God did swear to Abraham, that his Seed should possess the Gates of
their Enemies, Genesis 22.17. When, not only the Field Army is beaten, but the
strong Towns and Cities are taken, then there is a total and lasting Conquest.
Saints shall be saved from Sin, Sinners and Satan for ever; and this Salvation
must needs be eternal, for it is founded on the Everlasting Righteousness,
Psalm. 92.24. and the eternal Redemption of Christ, Heb. 9.12. There is no
possibility for glorified Saints to sin or fall; there shall no Serpent creep
into the Heavenly Paradise to tempt. Saints shall never make Forfeitures of it,
or be driven out of it; they shall there eat of the Tree of Life, and live for
ever, Rev. 2.7.

6. This Salvation. Salvation is joined with Vengeance executed on our
spiritual Enemies, Isa. 35.4. Your God shall come with vengeance; God shall
come with a Recompense, and save you, Isa. 61.2. the acceptable Year of the
Lord, is come with a Day of Vengeance. As Israel could not be delivered out of
Egypt, or be freed from Babylon, but the Firstborn of Egypt, Pharaoh and all
his Host must be swallowed up, and destroyed, and Babylon's Empire must cease,
and her Kingdom be destroyed, Jer. 50.18.26. So the Elect cannot have liberty
and salvation, but Satan himself must be destroyed, Heb. 2.15. and his works
also be rootod out of the Hearts of Men, 1 John 3.5. O what Mercy is this to
Believers, that the wrath of God is turned away from them, and that the
vengeance of God falls on Satan and Sin; that Sin is condemned and executed,
but Sinners are justified and saved, Romans 8.3. with Romans 9.1.33.

3. But why is it said, that Judah should be saved, and Israel dwell safely in
the Days of Christ? why is Salvation so eminently put on Gospel times.

I answer, though Saints before Christ were saved, yet still it was with an Eye
to, and prospect of Christ's coming: If Christ had not been exhibited in the
Flesh, and bled and died in our Natures, no Sinners could have been saved: The
Faith, Hope, Salvation of Saints, did depend on Gospel Times and days; Christ
was a Lamb slain in the purpose of God, and in the Typical Sacrifices from the
Foundation of the World, Rev. 13.3. God took Christ's word, when he became a
surety; he depended on his performance of his Promises, and his Oblation of a
Sacrifice; and the Eyes of Saints was to him, and upon him, John 9.56. Your
Father Abraham (says Christ to the Jews) rejoiced that he might see my day, he
saw it, and was glad. He saw the day of Christ's Birth, in the Birth of Isaac:
He saw the day of his Death, when Isaac was bound, laid on the Altar, and ready
to be offered up in Sacrifice; and in the Lamb that was substituted in Isaac's
Room, which pointed out Christ, that was our Exchange, and so our Ransom and
Redeemer. The words that Jacob spoke, was the Language of Saints in the Old
Testament, Genesis 49.18. I have waited for thy Salvation, O Lord. Our Saints of
the New Testament, have this Privilege and Advantage, that they can speak as
Simeon, Luke 2.29, 30. Mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have
prepared before the Face of all People. The Prophets were but Seeds-Men, they
ministered to the Church a Promise of the Messiah to come, John 4.37.38. but the
Apostles and Ministers of the New Testament are Harvest-men; they relate the
History, and preach the glad Tidings of Christ's Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension into Heaven; and the Saints of the Old Testament
enjoyed no Spiritual Liberty, but with respect to the Ransom to be paid by
Christ; and no Legacies had been bestowed, but in prospect of the Death of
Christ. There is therefore great Reason why it should be said with an Emphasis,
that in Christ's Days Judah should be saved. But what is the benefit of
Christ's Days? What peculiar influence have they on Salvation?

I answer, It may well be said, that in Christ's Days Men are saved, because
1st, That now Christ is incarnate; he that made all things is now made Flesh, 1
John 1.2.14. And we have a twofold Advantage, for our Salvation, by Christ's
Incarnation.

1. He is now become our Brother, Cant. 8.1. and so, has right to redeem us,
as he is our near Kinsman, Lev. 25.47, 48, 49. If an Israelite did sell himself
for a Servant, after he was sold, his Brother, or any that was near of Kin to
him, might redeem him, and so restore him again to liberty. We are by the first
Adam, and since, by our sinful choice, sold under sin; we know of no Kinsman or
Brother that could give to God a Ransom for us. It was God's infinite and free
Mercy, to raise up Jesus Christ, in our Nature, to pay a Ransom for us; we did
not think or dream of such a Brother or Kinsman. No mere Creature should have
undertook the work of Redemption, but he must have miscarried, and sunk under
it; but Christ is fitted now to redeem us, because he is God's Son, and our
Brother.

2. Christ as our Brother, and incarnate Kinsman, is fit to be our God, or
Avenger of Blood; he that was the Kinsman of one that was slain, did claim a
right to avenge his Blood on him that shed it. So Christ by assuming our
Nature, is fitted to avenge us of Sin and Satan, that are our great Enemies, to
destroy those that have ruined and undone us; the same Hebrew Word, (...)
signifies both a Redeemer and an Avenger; so it is said God shall come with
Vengeance and save us, Isa. 5.4.

2ly, Jesus Christ has now made his Soul an Offering for sin, Isa. 53.10. He
came to make atonement, and is a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. he made
Peace by the Blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. and reconciles Enemies to God by
his Death, Romans 5.10. And this is observable, that the Year of Jubilee began
from the day of Atonement, Lev. 25.9.10. Then Servants were restored to their
Liberty and those that had alienated their Lands, recovered their sold
Inheritances. Even so Christ having now made at Atonement, he can and does
proclaim a Year of Jubilee, for the Remission of Sins, and the Releasing of
Sins Servants, God's Prisoners, and the Devil's Captives; Isa. 61.2. as in
David's Days, when a Pestilence was sent by God for numbering the People, first,
God bid the Angel that came to destroy Jerusalem, to stay his Hand, 2 Samuel
24.16. But when a Sacrifice was offered, he bid him to put up his Sword, 1 Chronicles. 21.27. So in the times of the Law, God did but as it were stay his Hand:
Sins were said to be passed by, (...) in the forbearance of God, that Time is
called a Time of Forbearance, and God staid his Hand from punishing those that
did look to Christ to come. But now the great Sacrifice is offered up; God's
Sword is sheathed; and he can magnify Grace, through the sacrifice and
satisfaction of Christ; it may reign through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
Romans 5.20.21. Jesus Christ being lifted upon the Cross, will draw all to him,
John 12.32. All, that is very many, compared with the few, that were drawn
before a Dying Savior.

3dly, Christ has now paid a Ransom, Matthew. 20.28. and purchased a Church by
his own Blood, Acts 20.28. And therefore Christ has now just ground to come to
the Prison Door of Sinners, and to call them forth, Isa. 49.9. That thou may
say to the Prisoners go forth, and to them that are in darkness, show your
selves. Come with boldness into the presence of God; appear and show your
selves with confidence in the Heavenly Sanctuary. He that is (...) a Redeemer,
has just Ground to be (...), a Deliverer, Romans 11.26. shall he Ransom, and not
Rescue? shall he buy, and not possess? has not Christ a just claim to what he
has purchased, to take possession of it?

4thly, Christ has now sealed, confirmed and established his Testament by
means of Death, Heb. 9.15. He that might have given a Sanction to to the
Threatening, by our Blood, and have executed the Curse in our Death, has
ratified the Promises, and confirmed his Testament by his own Death. Christ
has given Vigor and Strength to the Promises, by his being Crucified through
weakness, 2 Cor. 13.4. and has given Life to his Testament by his own Death;
and he is rising again to be his own Executor. Now he can fulfill the Promises
of the New Covenant, and bestow the Legacies of his new Testament, and that
especially because Christ is such a Testator, as by his death does purchase of
God, all the Legacies he bequeaths in his Testament, which no other Testator
does. All the Mercies of the Everlasting Covenant, are the sure Mercies of this
Spiritual David, Isa. 55.3. they are sure, because Jesus Christ is risen from
the Dead to bestow them, Acts 13.34. And certainly Christ may freely and
lawfully give forth his own.

5hty, Now Christ is saved; and therefore in a full capacity to save others,
Zech. 1.9. Thy King comes to thee, (...). Salvatus ipsemet ut de brevi
transitu in locum. Saved. Christ had many Adversaries, and did encounter with
mighty Enemies; they endeavored totally to crush Christ, and wholly to swallow
him up; it was of great concernment to the whole Church of God, that Christ
should be saved. The Holy Ghost therefore dictated that Prayer to the Saints,
to be put up for Christ, Psalm. 118.25. Save now we beseech thee, we heseech
thee now send Prosperity; now was the time of War and utter Destruction, there
were many associated and united against Jesus Christ, Acts 4.25, 26, 27. He is
styled Child Jesus, Enemies thought easily to destroy him; Herod, Pontius
Pilate, the Jews, and the Gentiles. Many Dogs were hunting down this Morning
Heart, Psalm. 22. and the Title of Psalm. 16. And it was that which the Church
desired, and Christ himself also prayed for, that he might be delivered from
their cruel and devouring Mouths, Psalm. 69.29. I am Poor and Needy, let thy
Salvation set me up on high. And Christ was heard in what he prayed for: He was
taken from Prison and Judgment, Isa. 53.8. From Man's Prison, Tribunal, and
Judgment, and God did set him up on high, even in a glorious Throne, far above
the reach and rage of all his Enemies; that Christ that is so perfectly saved
himself, can fully save us. He that did wrest himself out of the Hands of his
Foes, can also rescue us from the Power of all our Enemies; the day of Christ's
Weakness is past, 2 Cor. 13.4. and the day of his Power is now come, Psalm.
110.3.

6thly, Christ is now Perfected, and being made Perfect, he is fit to become
the Author of Eternal Salvation to those that obey him, Heb. 5.9. The Captain
of our Salvation is made perfect through Sufferings, and can lead to Glory,
Heb. 2.10. All the Rounds or Rongs of the Spiritual Ladder, that reaches from
Earth to Heaven, are complete, Genesis 28.12, 13, 14. with Romans 5.33, 34. Christ
has clothed himself with our Flesh, he has died, is risen again, is ascended
to Heaven, is at the Right Hand of God, to make Intercession for us. His
Priestly Garments are sprinkled with his own Blood; and so he is fitted to
enter into the Heavenly Sanctuary, and to appear in the Presence of God; the
Sons of Aaron were to have their Priestly Garments sprinkled with the Blood of
a Sacrifice, before they could officiate in the Sanctuary, Exodus 20.21.
Christ's own Death did consecrate him, as a Priest for ever, and perfect him
for the great work of Intercession, Heb. 7. last.

7thly, Christ is now Victorious over all his, and our Enemies; he has
overcome the World, John 16. last. he has made Reconciliation for Iniquity,
yea, made an end of sin, Dan. 9.24. he has abolished Death, 2 Timothy 1.10. by
tasting it for a few Hours, he has swallowed it up for ever: By Death, he has
destroyed him that has the power of Death, even the Devil, Heb. 2.15. As a
Jailer has the power of the Law to keep a Malefactor in Prison, and the
Executioner has the power of the Law to put him to Death; so Sinners has
broken the Law, and incurred the Penalty; Satan has the power of the Curse, to
cut off, and destroy Sinners. But Christ has spoiled Principalities and
Powers, turned Satan out of his Office, stripped him of his Power, as to those
that believe. The Curse is the Armor that this Strong Man trusts in, Luke
11.22. And Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, by being made a
Curse himself, Gal. 3.13. And Christ has now the Key of Hell, and Death: the
Key of Hell to shut it, that the Souls of his People may not enter into it, and
the Key of Death, to rescue and bring forth the Bodies of his People out of the
Grave. He has led Captivity Captive, Psalm. 68.18. and triumphed over the
Enemies of our Salvation; the Captain of our Salvation is entered in triumph
into his Royal City above; as he has overcome in his own Person, so now he can
overcome in us. His strength is perfected in our weakness: It is discovered to
be most perfect, when we are most weak and low; when we seem as Christ's
Soldiers, to lie in the open Field, and to be exposed to manifold
Inconveniences and Sufferings from the rage and fury of the World, then the
power of Christ is spread as a Tent over us, (...), 2 Cor. 12.9. Christ the
Captain of our Salvation, can be present with, and mighty in all his Soldiers,
and ride in triumph through the World on poor Worms. He that has wounded the
Head of the Old Serpent, and broke the strength of Satan, is able to foil all
his scattered Forces, that yet remain, Rev. 6.2. He rides forth Conquering,
and to Conquer, and turns the Battle even to the Gates of Hell. Isa. 28.6.
Christ the true David does succor his People out of the Heavenly City, 2 Samuel
18.3 and send to his Fighting Soldiers the Supplies of his Spirit, Phil. 1.19.

8thly, Christ is alive, and lives for evermore, Rev. 1.18. And Christ does not
live idly, but to make intercession for all that come to God by him, Heb. 7.25.
He lives to execute his Testament, sprinkle his Blood, and apply his
Redemption. Paul reasons thus, Romans 5.10. If we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son, much more shall we be saved by his Life. Christ has gone
through with the most hard, difficult, and painful part of his work; he gave
his Life a Ransom, he poured out his Soul unto the Death; and will he neglect
or omit the easiest part of his work? He may live and save us; he needs not to
bleed again, to go forth into any more Storms, or to be set up as a Mark of
God; he may sit in his Throne, he may wear his glittering Crown, and reign in
his Glory, and do all the rest that is requisite to accomplish and complete our
Salvation. Because Christ lives, his People shall live also, John 14.19.
Christ lives, and therefore his Interest shall not die in the World. Our
Redeemer lives to quicken our Spirits, Job 19.25, 26. Now by his Spirit, to
receive our departing Souls, and to revive our dead Bodies. Christ is alive to
woo his Spouse, Cant. 8.8. and marry her, Romans 7.4. to assault and subdue his
Enemies, Isa. 42.13, 14. Rev. 6.2.

I shall come now to the use of the Doctrine.

Use 1. Shall Men be most eminently saved in Christ's Days, then we may be
informed of the wonderful Mercy of God; of the admirable Grace of Christ, that
we have such days of the Messiah. The days due to Sinners, are days of
Punishment, days of Vengeance, Luke 21.22. A day of Evil, a day of Destruction,
is properly called a Sinners day, Psalm. 37.13. The Lord shall laugh at him, for
he sees that his Day is coming. Ezekiel. 21.25. And thou Profane Prince of
Israel, whose day is come, when Iniquity shall have an end. By these Passages
of Scripture, we may see what days Sinners deserve, and what days they might
have looked for. If God had dealt with the World according to the rigor of his
Justice, the Threatenings and Curse of his Law there, would have been no other
days, but the days of the first Adam. In his days Sin reigns unto Death, and
Death reigns, Romans 5.14.21. How terrible would it have been, if there had been
no other days, but days for Sin and Death to Reign in? It is through the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we have an Accepted time, and a day of
Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. Otherwise Men would do nothing else but sow the Seeds of
Woe here, and reap a full Harvest of Misery hereafter. They would sin in this
World, and suffer in the World to come; they would walk contrary to God in
time, and God would walk contrary to them to Eternity.

Use 2. If Sinners are saved most eminently in Christ's Days, O then examine
your selves whether Christ's Salvation be applied to you; whether God does
cloth you with the Garments of Salvation, Isa. 61.10. I will greatly rejoice in
the Lord, that has clothed me with the Garments of Salvation. Have you
obtained the Salvation that is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 2.10. Try your selves,
by proposing to your own Souls these following Questions.

1. Were your Eyes ever opened; liberty of sight makes way for liberty of Soul;
the opening of Men's Eyes, is the first step that Christ takes toward their
Salvation, Isa. 42.7. He is appointed to open the Blind Eyes, to bring out the
Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the
Prisonhouse. As those Jews that were born in Babylon, if they were not better
informed, would account Chaldea to be the Native Country of their Fathers, and
that they had always dwelt there, and so be contented to stay in the Land of
their Captivity: They therefore needed to have their Eyes opened, that they
might know that Chaldea and the other Countries under the Babylonish Empire,
were the Land of their Captivity. That God in wrath had slung them out into
this strange Country, Jer. 10.16. That their sins had driven them hither, and
scattered them among their Enemies. Even so Sinners need to have their Eyes
opened, that they may know whose they are, and where they are. Men do not
acknowledge, and consider that they are under the Law of Sin, the power of
Satan, and the wrath of God. Sinners do not know themselves to be Condemned Men
and Women, shut up under a Sentence of Death, and reserved to the Day of Wrath
and Execution, Job 21.30. Men are as careless and unconcerned as if they had
not degenerated and fallen from God; as if their Natures were not corrupted and
depraved; as if Mankind never knew a better state, but were always as vicious,
loose and wicked, as now they are. Could Sinners be so quiet, yea, be so merry
and jovial as they are, if they knew they were God's Prisoners, and that the
Day of Judgment and Vengeance was at hand. Consider therefore how it is with
you; did God ever open your Eyes, and let in Light into your dark Prison? Did
you ever feel the Chains of Guilt that are about you? the burden of Iniquity
that is upon you? Have you ever applied the Threatenings and Curse of the Law to
your own Souls, and so have in the bitterness of your Souls, cried out that you
are undone. None are fit to be Christ's Patients, but such as are broken in
Heart, or are capable of Christ's Comforts, if they be not first Mourners in
Zion, Isa. 61.1.2. The Prodigal came to himself, and was sensible of his
Misery, before he took a Resolution that he would arise and come to his Father,
Luke 25.17.18. Did you ever see your worst and most dangerous Enemies to be
within you? Have you been made sensible of your vain Minds, hard and whorish
Hearts, and carnal Affections?

2. Were you ever effectually called? 2 Timothy 1.9. He has saved and called as
with an holy Calling. Has God called you, so as to save you from your unbelief
and impenitency? Has God spoken to you with a strong hand? Isa. 8.11. Has he
laid the hand of his Power on your Hearts. The Angels spoke to Lot with a
strong hand; they did not only exhort him to hasten and be gone out of Sodom,
but when he lingered, they laid hold on the Hand of Lot, of his Wife, and of his
Two Daughters, and brought them out of Sodom, Genesis 19.15, 16. Even so Christ
speaks with a strong hand to the Spouse, Cant. 5.2.4.5. He not only pleaded,
and used Arguments why she should rise and open to him, but he put in the Hand
of his Spirit by the Hole of the Door. His Hand was as a Key fitted to the
Wards of the Lock; he touched her Breasts, and moved her Bowels, wrought on her
Affections, and then she rose to open to her Beloved. Has Christ ever
apprehended you; as he did Paul, Phil. 3.12. It is said the Converted Gentiles
should follow the Church in Chains, Isa. 45.14. They shall come after thee in
Chains. Has Christ cast sweet Chains of Light and Love about your Souls, and
thereby Powerfully draw you?

3. Did you ever fly for Refuge, and come to Christ? The Heirs of Promise are
said to fly for Refuge, to take hold of the hope set before them, Heb. 6.17,
18. Men will not fly, if they do not see a Cause, and know a danger that is
toward them. Has it been with you, as with Noah's Dove, it did fly Abroad,
but found all to be covered with Water, and that there was no rest for the sole
of her Feet; and therefore she returned to the Ark; and Noah stretched out his
Hand, and plucked her unto him into the Ark, Genesis 8.39. So have you seen
nothing but a Deluge of sin and wrath out of Christ, and therefore have fled to
him, and he has stretched out the Hard of his Spirit, and plucked you into
himself? Have you joined, and given your selves to the Lord, Zech. 2, 11. 2
Cor. 8.5. For in the event Christ will save no more, but those that are in him,
and of his Body, Ephesians. 5.23. He is the head and Savior of his Body. All out of
Christ must certainly sink into the mighty Sea of the wrath of God, and perish
everlastingly. O therefore inquire whether you have ground to conclude, that
you are in him, who is the true God, and Eternal Life. 1 John 5.20. As those
Beasts that God would save, were by him inclined to come and enter into the
Ark, so those that God will, such are drawn to Christ, John 6.44.

4. Have you experienced this Salvation in the several parts of it, to be
executed upon you? Has Christ bound up your broken Hearts, healed your wounded
Spirits? Isaiah 61.1. Has he refined you from your Dross? Mal. 3.23. Has he
circumcised your Hearts, Col. 2.11. Have you felt Christ laying hold on your
Hearts, and cutting off the filthy Foreskin that was upon them? Jer. 4.4. Has
self-love been moderated, reduced within its bounds? The Waters covered all at
first, till God said, Let the Waters be gathered together into one Place, Genesis
1.9. So self-love overspreads the Soul, till Christ does bound and bank it in,
and raises up the love of God in our Souls. What has the Old Man suffered in
you? 1 Pet. 4.1. Have your Lusts received a deadly wound? Or are you made free
from the Law of Sin and Death? Romans 8.2. And does it not reign in your Mortal
Bodies? Do you not obey it in the Lusts thereof, Romans 6.12. God justified
Christ by raising him up from the Dead. So the Gift of the Spirit to quicken
us, it is the Execution of our Justification. When God passes the Sentence of
Life on Men, Romans 5.18. then he breaths and puts the Spirit of Life into them,
Ezekiel. 36.27. As the Beasts saved in the Ark, were planted in the likeness of
Noah's Death and Resurrection, they entered into the Ark, were buried in it, and
rose and came out of it, with Noah, so have we been planted in the likeness of
Christ's Death and Resurrection, Romans 6.5. Has Christ picked up, and purged
out Satan's Leaven out of our Souls, and laid his own Leaven in our Hearts, 1
Cor. 5.7, 8. with Matthew. 13.33.

5. Have you answered Christ's ends in your Salvation? He says, that we being
delivered out of the hands of our Enemies, might serve him without fear, in
Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of our lives, Luke 1.74.75.
Of old in War, those that the Conquerors did save alive, did promise to become
Servants. Serva, and serviam; Save me, and I will serve thee, was the words of
a foiled Enemy, in danger to be destroyed. O has Christ saved us, when he
might have destroyed us, and does not this Grace influence and oblige our
Souls? How much did Christ deny himself, to save us? and shall not we deny our
selves to serve him? Has not Christ's self-denial redeemed us from
Self-seeking? 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. He died, that those that live might not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them. Has not Christ
bought our Souls, and hired our service for ever? Has God clothed us with
Garments of Salvation? Isa. 61.10. these will be also Garments of Praise, Isa.
61.3. Polybius tells us, that if a Soldier was saved from Death in a Battle, by
his Fellow Soldiers, (...). The Tribunes did judge, that he that was saved,
should crown him that saved him, and through his whole Life, he should honor
him as his Father, and do all things to him and for him, as if he were his
natural Parent. Surely, if Christ has saved us from the wrath of God, the Paw
and power of Satan, we shall be induced to Honor, Obey and Glorify our Savior
and Redeemer. Every Day shall he be praised, Psalm. 72.15.

Use 3d. If Sinners are eminently saved in Christ's Days, then I would
earnestly press, and exhort you, to seek after Salvation. For Men to be saved,
is the glory of Christ's Days; and will you cast a Reproach and Infamy on
Christ's Days, by neglecting of Salvation, and running upon Destruction? Will
you envy and grudge to Jesus Christ the glory of saving you? and will you put
this honor on Satan, that in a day of Light he is able to blind you, and in a
day of Salvation to destroy you? and when so much is revealed, to disparage his
Baits, and to spoil his Market, that yet you see Reason to persist in your
foolish and pernicious Choice, and to adhere to your bitter and mortal Enemy?
Shall Death and Hell have a Harvest? shall Satan captivate and inslave in a Day
of Salvation? Two things I shall insist on, to prosecute this Exhortation. 1. I
shall lay before you some Motives to enforce this use of Exhortation. 2. I
shall lay down some Directions as to what you are to do, in order to the
obtaining and assuring this Salvation to you.

1. I shall propound and press some Motives to stir you up to seek after
Salvation.

Motive 1. This Salvation is a very great Salvation; if we consider first the
way of purchasing and procuring of it. The Son of God assumed the nature of a
Creature, emptied himself, and cast a thick Vail over all his Glory: How was
Christ's immensity, his omnipotency, his eternity, his omnisciency veiled, by
taking a Nature so weak, confined to a Place, and that did exist but lately,
and was to grow in Wisdom, Luke 2.52. Christ became a Surety, a Servant, a
Sacrifice; was made Sin, and a Curse to appease God's Wrath, and redeem us from
Destruction. The Son of God was arrested as a Debtor to Divine Justice; was
arrained as a Criminal, sentenced and executed as a Malefactor; he hung on an
infamous Tree, among heinous Sinners; he became the Captive of Death, and lay
in a dark and cold Grave. All this Jesus Christ yielded and submitted to, for
to procure Salvation. And shall we despise or neglect a Salvation that was
purchased by such an amazing Condescension, and such grievous sufferings of the
Son of God? Shall we undervalue and contemn the Travel of his Soul, and the
purchase of his Blood. If the Ocean had been lessened to a Drop, it had not
been so much, as for the Son of God to be made Man. If a Prince should execute
Ten Thousand of his Subjects for a Crime, it had not been so much, as to
adjudge his own Son to a cruel death for an Offense; so, for God's Sword to
awake against his only begotten Son, was a more strange act of Justice, than if
he had executed all Mankind. And will you not set a Price on that Salvation
that is the product of the sorrows and sufferings of the Son of God.

2. This Salvation is great, considering the greatness of the Evils that we are
saved and freed from.

1st, It is a Salvation from the second Death, Rev. 2.11. He that overcomes,
shall not be hurt of the second Death. This is the hurting and killing Death;
the first Death only separates Soul and Body, but this Death separates God and
the Soul for ever. The first Death deprives the Body of any sense or feeling of
Pain, but this second Death is attended with the most acute sense and feeling
of Misery and Torments. This Death kills all that is sweet and pleasant, and
leaves only a Carcass of being; a bare Stock for God to graft Sufferings and
Torments on: It is sad for Men to be, only to be miserable. For to be a
Footstool for God to tread on, and a Mark for him to shoot at: As Grapes when
trod in the Wine Press, all that is grateful and delightful, is squeezed out of
them; only a dry and harsh Husk remains and is left. Even so shall it be, when
Sinners shall be trod in the Wine Press of the Wrath of God, Rev. 19.5.

2dly, Believers are preserved from a dark and dismal Prison. Peter speaks of
the Spirits in Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. All light of Joy and Comfort is shut out of
this Prison; all woe, evil and misery is shut up in it: This Prison is not only
a Place of Confinement, but also of Execution; here is the Furnace of
unquenchable Fire, Matthew. 3.12. Matthew. 13.42. Sinners fall now into the Hands
of God immediately, Heb. 10.31. The Sovereign Judge executes his own Sentence.

3dly, Christ saves from a bottomless Pit: Hell is so called, Rev. 20.3.
Sinners shall fall lower and lower, and sink deeper and deeper into Misery, and
never know when they are at the bottom of their Misery; they shall never say,
that now they know the utmost that God can inflict, or the worst that they can
suffer: As in Heaven there will still be new Visions of Glory, so in Hell there
will be new Scenes of Misery for ever.

4thly, Christ saves and keeps from a Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone
for ever, Rev. 20.10.14. This Expression, a Lake of Fire and Brimstone, alludes
to Sodom's Punishment. God destroyed it with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven,
and turned the Place on which Sodom and the other Cities stood, into a
dead-Sea, or standing stinking Lake. It is dreadful for Sinners to be drowned
in this Lake of Fire, and yet never to die. Lusts are said to drown Men in
Destruction and Perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. and yet they exist, and continue to feel
this tormenting Fire and Brimstone; this Lake of Fire will never ebb away, or
dry up.

5thly, All Sorrows, Pains, Crying, Death, and any Evil whatsoever shall pass
away, be remembered no more, but be forgotten for ever, Rev. 21.4. All the
Reproaches of God's People shall cease, and their Tears shall be wiped away for
ever, Isa. 25.8.

3. This Salvation may well be called great, Heb. 2.3. if we consider that
Believers not only are freed from the greatest Evils, but also enjoy the
highest and best Good. The Apostle Paul joins everlasting Glory with God's
Salvation, 2 Timothy 2.10. that the Elect may obtain the Salvation that is in
Christ, together with Everlasting Glory. As Danicl's Three Companions were not
only called out of, and saved from the Fiery Furnace, but also promoted and
advanced to Honor, Dan. 3. last, so Saints shall not only be delivered from
shame and sufferings, but shall wear the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. sit in the
Throne of Christ, Rev. 3.21. Reign in Life, Romans 5.17. and shine for ever in
the Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13.43. They shall have an Eternal Day, made
by the Light of God's Countenance; an everlasting Feast, by the manifestation
and displaying of his Love, as a Banner over them. Believers are Heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1.14. and Heirs of the Kingdom, James 2.5.

Motive 2. We do exceedingly need this Salvation.

1. We are Children of Wrath by nature, Ephesians. 2.3. and so Hell is our
Inheritance. The Wrath of God might descend, and be poured out on us, as soon
as we draw our first Breath in the World; the Vessels of Wrath are then fitted
for Destruction, Romans 9.22. and it is wonderful Patience, that God forbears
Sinners so long. God had ground for a Controversy, just cause for Enmity
against us, as soon as we were born. God then saw the Plague of, and the evil
Treasure in our Hearts; such Tares might have been rooted up; such Weeds have
been rooted out, such corrupt Trees have been cut down long ago. Do Men suffer
Weeds to grow up and seed.

2. We are Children of Disobedience by Practice, Ephesians. 2.2. and so Hell is our
Purchase. We went astray as soon as we were born, Psalm. 58.3. Our Whorish
Hearts have continually departed from the Lord, our whole unregenerate estate,
has been nothing else but Barrenness and Enmity, Idleness and Rebellion, Jer.
32.23.30. The Children of Israel are said to have done nothing of all that God
commanded them, but had only done eevil, and provoked God to Anger. The Carnal
Mind is Enmity to God, is not subject to him, nor indeed can be. They that are
in the Flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.7.8. Sinners only sow the Seeds of
their own woe, being Fuel to the Fire of God's Anger, and fit themselves for
Destruction. As a Fountain casts out its Water, so they cast forth their
wickedness. An evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart, brings forth
evil things, Jer. 6.7. Matthew. 12.35. All Men's doings, is to undo themselves.

3. Sinners owe God glory to be raised out of their shame and misery. Sins are
called Debts, Matthew. 6.12. Men by transgressing, rob God of his Authority and
Honor, and are bound to make Restitution to him; and God as a Righteous Judge,
owes Punishment unto them. God is a Debtor to his Threatening and Justice, to
take Vengeance on Transgressors; therefore it is said, He will repay Fury to
his Adversaries, Isa. 59.18. He will render Anger to his Enemies, Isa. 66.15.
God will not always forbear Sinners, or be in Debt to them. The Wages of sin is
Death, Romans 6. last, and it becomes the Just Judge of the World, to pay the
Servants of Sin their Wages. Impiety shall not be joined with Impunity. God
will distribute a Portion of Sorrows, and divide an inheritance of Torments and
Misery to Satan's Children, Job 31.23. God will be glorified in their
everlasting shame, Ezekiel. 28.22. Dan. 12.2.

4. Sinners are in God's Prison, they are in Satan's share, they are under the
curse of the Law.

1. They are in God's Prison. There would be no need for Christ to Preach the
opening of the Prison to them that are bound, Isa. 61.1. if Men were not in
God's Prison, there were no need to call them forth into Liberty, Isa. 49.9. if
they were not in Bondage. There is an outer Prison of God, from which Men may
be brought, Isa. 42.7. but there is an inner Prison, a deep Dungeon, from
whence there is no Redemption. Though Transgressors now think themselves to
have liberty, and walk at large, yet God's Eye is still over them, the Chains
of Guilt bind their Consciences: They are Condemned Men, both by the Law for
their Disobedience, and by the Gospel for their Unbelief. God's Hand has fast
hold of them; their Iniquities are before God's Eyes to provoke him to abhor
them; they clamor loud in his Ears to pluck down his Vengeance on them, their
Crimes are both Alledgers and Witnesses against them; they cannot fly or escape
from God: If they run to the ends of the Earth, they go but to the sides of
their Prison. The Jews were in danger of Death, in all the Provinces of
Abasuerus his Empire, by virtue of the Edict given forth against them; yet it
was possible for them to Travel out of Ahasuerus's Empire, where his Law would
not reach them: But Sinners cannot get out of the Bounds of God's Empire, the
whole World is his Dominion, Psalm. 103. last. If Men stay in God's Prison, they
shall be certainly brought forth, to be condemned and executed in the Day of
Wrath, Job 21.30.

2. Sinners are in Satan's Snare, 2 Timothy 2. last, every sweet, beloved reigning
sin, is the Snare of the infernal Fowler, of this cruel Hunter. Woe be to those
that continue in this Snare. There is a time when a Snare is taken up, (as the
Expression is, Amos 3.5.) Satan will visit his Snares, and take the Prey
catched in them, into Hell: In this Den, the roaring Lion will devour what he
has taken in his Snare.

3. Sinners are under the Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. We needed not Christ to
Redeem us from the curse of the Law, if we were not under it; and the curse of
the Law, is the curse of the Lawgiver: This is dreadful for God's Anger to be
so kindled, for his Spirit to be so imbittered, as to curse his own Creature.
God that wishes evil to, and designs evil against his Creatures, is able to
execute his own Curse; his Curse is not a causeless, but a righteous Curse: It
is the Curse of him that is Omniscient, that knows what Men's Offenses are, and
where the Offenders are: It is the Curse of him that fills Heaven and Earth;
there is no flying from him. It is the Curse of him that is wise in Heart, and
therefore can devise the most dreadful Evils, and that is mighty in strength,
Job 1.4. and therefore can execute them. God lives for ever to execute this
Curse, to pour wrath into, and blow eternal Flames over the Soul. The meaning
and dreadful effects of this Curse, is expounded by Christ, Matthew. 25.41. Go,
ye cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Men
curse, when they are weak, and not able to punish us; when David was weak, and
the Sons of Zerviah were too hard for him, 1 Samuel 3.39. and so he could not
punish Joah and Abishai for the Murder of Abner, yet he curses them, 1 Samuel
3.28, 29. But God that curses not without a cause, has an Almighty Arm to
execute his own Curse.

5. There is a black, dismal Storm that hangs over the Heads of Sinners, in the
Clouds of God's Threatenings, Psalm. 11.6. On the Wicked the Lord will rain
Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an Horrible Tempest; this shall be the Portion
of their Cup. They that drink in Iniquity now, Job 5.16. shall drink in Wrath
at last, Joh 21.20. Sinners shall not be able to fly from this Storm; God will
rain Snares to take hold of them, and to hold them fast. God's Ax is at the
Root of Sinners, Matthew. 3.10. his Arrows are levelled at their Hearts; all the
Sufferings they feel now, are but the first fruits of Woe, earnest of a more
grievous Vengeance; Harbingers and Forerunners of an Everlasting Destruction.
It is terrible, when the Sins of Men are yet with them, Isa. 59.12. when the
Breach is open, to let in a Deluge of Misery on them, and the Sentence of Death
stands in full force against them. O should not this affect and affright the
Souls of Sinners, that God is ready to arrest them, and tear them in pieces; to
set them up as his Mark, to pierce their Hearts, and cleave their Reins with
his Arrows, and to consume them with the Fire of his Anger. Though Gods
Judgments are now far above, out of their sight, Psalm. 10.5. yet the Wicked
shall see their Destruction, Job 21.20.

6. Christ will come to execute the Vengeance that the Law denounces, and that
Christ threatens, 2 These. 1.8.9. He that came at first with Beams of Love, will
come a second time in Flames of Wrath, to avenge the Quarrel of despised Grace,
and of abused Mercy. Then Sinners shall feel the truth of God's Threatenings,
that there will be a Day of Vengenance, Isa. 63.5. a Day of Wrath, Romans 2.5. a
Day of Destruction, Job 21.30. Though Christ will appear for Salvation to those
that look for him, yet he will also be revealed to remember and punish those
that forget God, Psalm. 50.22. to burn Adulterous Souls, and to destroy
Obstinate and impenitent Rebels.

7. You can have no true, solid or lasting joy, except you partake of this
Salvation, Psalm. 51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation. This Prayer
of David is observable; it was not his Palace, his Crown, or his Throne that
would afford Joy, when God's Heart did burn with wrath, and his Face was
clouded with Anger. He could not content or satisfy himself with the joy of
Riches, sensual Delights, or Worldly Honor; such joy did not go deep, would
not stay, or last long. It was nothing but the joy of God's Salvation, that
could satisfy him, Isa. 25.9. We will be glad and rejoice in thy Salvation.
Hester could take no Pleasure in her Honor, in her Palace, in all her outward
Enjoyments, when the Decree was passed to destroy her and her People, Esther
7.3, 4. If Sin reign in you, Eternal Death must reign over you, and the wrath
of God abide on you. What outward thing can comfort, relieve or revive you?
Will it cheer a Man condemned to Death, to tell him you will give him one sweet
Draught of Wine, one good Meals Meat before he be Executed.

8. You cannot dwell safely, if you are not saved. In the Text it is promised,
that those that are saved shall dwell safely; and indeed, no others can dwell
safe from the fear of Evil, Prove. 1. last. Those that are in their Sins, and
under Guilt, may fear still to be arrested by God their great Creditor, and to
be arraigned before him as their Sovereign Judge. The dread of the First and
Second Death may torment them, an d hold them continually under grievous
Bondage, Heb. 2.15. Your Tabernacles (Sinners) will moulder down; your Earthly
Comforts will melt away; your Stewardships will be taken from you; God will
change your Countenances, and send you away into a miserable Eternity, into a
dark and doleful Prison. You are Tenants at God's Will, you are not sure of one
Days continuance in the World; God may quickly require, and take away your
Souls. If David panted and longed so much for a short Temporal Salvation, Psalm.
119.81, 82. how much more should we long for a Spiritual and Eternal Salvation,
Psalm. 14. last. We so need this Salvation, that it is absolutely necessary for
us, Acts 4.12. We must be saved, we can have no Pardon, but from the God of
Salvation, Psalm. 51.14. and we can receive no Blessing but from the God of
Salvation, Psalm. 68.10. We must see God's Salvation, Psalm. 11. last, or our own
Destruction, Job 21.20. If we cannot commit our Spirits into the Hand of God as
a Redeemer, Psalm. 31.5. we must fall into his Hand as a Judge, Heb. 10.31. No
outward Enjoyments here, can either be safe for us, or sweet to us, if they
flow not from the God of Salvation.

God does afford us a Day of Salvation, 2 Cor. 6.2. this is caused by the Day
Spring from on high, Luke 1.78. by the exercise of Christ's Prophetical Office,
Psalm. 22.22. John 17.6.20. He declares the Father's Name to us; he teaches us,
that God has chosen and appointed some to Salvation, 1 These. 5.9. 2 These.
2.13. that he has prepared Salvation, Luke 2.29, 30, by anointing, and sending
his Son to obey, suffer and satisfy. God has raised up this Horn of Salvation,
Luke 1.69. he has perfected the Captain and Author of Salvation, Heb. 2.10.
Heb. 5.9. As Christ is saved himself, Zech. 9.9. so he is in a fit and full
capacity to save others. The word of Salvation is sent to us, Acts 13.26. The
Gospel of Salvation is a Supernatural Doctrine, we should have been utterly
ignorant of it, if God had not sent it to us. What Grace is this, that the word
of Salvation should be sent to us, that had destroyed our selves, Hos. 13.9.
that were so blind, that we did not seek after God, and so vile and filthy,
that God might for ever have ceased to seek after us, that are without strength
to help our selves, and yet are ungodly, and so do provoke God never to help
us, or favor us, Romans 5.6.8. That it should be sent to us, that did not seek
after, or send for it. Light came, it was not sent for, John 3.19. O that God
should send it to us, and not to so many other Nations in the World; they hear
not the Trumpet of the Jubilee, the Call of the Shepherd, the Voice of the
Bridegroom. O shall the Spirit strive with us, Genesis 6.3. and Christ's Servants
endeavor to compel us, by Earnest Entreaties and Importunity, and yet shall
all this be in vain; will you not believe their Report, or come to Christ for
Life? Shall a Treaty of Peace, end in an Eternal War, and a day of Salvation
issue in your everlasting Destruction. Salvation is brought near to you, and
placed in Zion, and will you put the word of Salvation away from you, and
thereby judge your selves unworthy of Everlasting Life, Acts 13.16. The Cord of
a Promise is let down into our Dungeon; Christ's Chariot comes among us, Cant.
3.9, 40. He comes near to us, preaching Peace, Ephesians. 2.17. He knocks at our
Doors, Rev. 3.20.

4. You cannot escape, if you neglect this Salvation, Heb. 2.3. There is no
other Physician to heal you, no other Redeemer but Christ to set you free, no
other Fountain in which you may wash; no other Foundation on which you may
build; no other Wing, Shadow, or City of Refuge to secure you. God will not
suffer your contempt of Christ, and neglect of Salvation, to go unpunished. God
will wound the Head of such as go on in their Trespasses, Psalm. 68.21. Christ's
Hand will find out all his Enemies, Psalm. 21.4. those that turn away from
Christ, Prove. 1.32. shall certainly be turned into Hell, Psalm. 9.17. God
brings near his Salvation, offers it, and promises it to all that will look
to Jesus Christ for it, Isa. 45.22. Those therefore are worthy to perish, that
turn away from Christ, and despise his Salvation.

5. Consider there is but a Remnant that shall be saved, Romans 9.27. few that
will walk in the narrow way, that find the strait Gate, Matthew. 7.13, 14. And
those that are saved, will be saved with a great deal of difficulty, 1 Pet.
4.18. The Righteous are scarcely saved, they must bear the Cross, endure many
Tribulations, have frequent Combats and Conflicts, and continual Warfare with
Spiritual Enemies: They must run with the greatest speed, fight with the
greatest zeal against Sin, 1 Cor. 9.26. They have a Civil War with Lusts
within, a Foreign War with the World and Satan without.

6. Consider what a great Mercy it is to obtain this Salvation; it is a most
valuable Grace, for God to choose and appoint any to Salvation, 1 These. 5.9. 2
These. 2.13. when he might have appointed all to perish, and left them to
Destruction. O what a Mercy is this, for God to pluck out of a perishing World,
Gal. 1.4. to fish out of a dead Sea; to cut off from a corrupt Stock; to call
out of an infected House, and a barren Wilderness. The Church represents, it as
a rich Stream of Mercy, and spring of Joy, to be clothed with Salvation, Isa.
61.10. This is a great Mercy, for

1. Such are armed against Spiritual Conflicts, that have for a Helmet, the
Hope of Salvation, Ephesians 6.17. 1 These. 5.8. This may guard their Heads from
all anxious, perplexing Thoughts about their Eternal State. Hope is an Anchor
cast within the Vale; as soon as they set out, and begin their Voyage, they may
cast their Anchor into their Port and Haven, and so have their Hearts
established, Heb. 6.19.

2. Those that have hope of this Salvation, are supported under Afflictions and
Persecutions, 2 Timothy 18.9. Partake thou of the Afflictions of the Gospel,
according to the power of God, who both saved us, and called us. As if Paul
should say, Murmr not at, faint not under the Afflictions of the Gospel, for
God has saved you from the greatest Enemies, and from the worst Evils, and all
your Afflictions shall turn to your Salvation, Phil. 1.19. They shall further
advance, promote it; they shall refine Saints from their Dross, wean them from
their strange Land, and cause them to long more after their Father's House, and
Heavenly Country. Have they any Reason to be discontented, whom God loves, 1
John 4.59. and that are Heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. and of the Kingdom.
James 2.5.

3. These may die with comfort; they have hope in Death, Prove. 14.32. That
which does shipwreck others, shall land them safe on the calm Shores of a
Blessed Eternity; that which impoverishes others, shall enrich them. Though
Death does pluck off the Rags of Mortality, yet God shall cloth them with
Robes of Glory: When their Bodies drop down into the Pit, their Souls shall be
taken up into the Palace; when their Flesh feeds Worms, their Spirits shall
feast with Saints, and Angels; though God does kill them, yet they may trust he
will be their Salvation, Joh 13.15, 16. When the Eye of Sense shall be shut, so
that Saints shall no more see Worldly Objects, yet then God will show them his
Salvation, Psalm. 91. last. They shall see God's Salvation, from Sins
Temptations, Troubles, Afflictions; they shall see a freedom from Spiritual and
Temporal Evils, and also be translated into an Eternal Kingdom. Christ will
receive their departing Souls, and be their Guardian and Trustee till the
Resurrection. O it is sweet, when God adds to the Mercies of Sixty, Seventy,
Eighty Years, the enjoyment of a blessed Eternity. It is Salvation that must
crown Old Age with Glory; Death is the critical time, the Soul must then see
Life or Death; a Heaven must shine from God's pleasing Countenance, or Hell be
rained from his angry Face. O how sweet is it then to see the truth of God's
Promises, in the enjoyment of an Eternal Salvation!

4. Those interested in this Salvation, shall be saved in the Day of the Lord,
1 Cor. 5.6. when Sins will find out others, and Vengeance will take hold of
them, then Believers shall be saved. O what unexpressible comfort will it be,
to point out Jesus Christ at the Great Day, and to say, This is our God, we
have waited for him, and he will save us, and we will be glad, and rejoice in
his Salvation, Isa. 25.9. This is a Salvation that will for ever set Souls
beyond Gunshot, out of the reach of all Dangers, Evils, Enemies: They shall
then fully receive the end of their Faith, even an Eternal Salvation, 1 Pet.
1.9. Christ will appear unto Salvation, to those that look for him, Heb. 9.
last. Then Saints shall be Heirs in full possession of Salvation, Heb. 1.14.
They shall be redeemed from all Evils, or possessed of all goodness, be exalted
to the Kingdoms, and be placed in the Throne.

I shall lastly give you some Directions how you may be saved.

1. You must be enlightened and convinced of your Danger; you must see the Evils
you are under, and the Danger and Destruction you are exposed to. Few do think
themselves to be condemned to Death, and to be sick unto Death. That they are
Children of Satan, and Enemies to God. They will not believe that they are
captivated by the Devil, enslaved by Sin, and chained to the World. The
Scripture teaches us, that Men are held, Romans 7.6. and that they are led, 1
Cor. 12.2. they are held in the Snares of Sin, and led by Satan: Their Lusts
are Bonds, their depraved Wills and corrupt Affections, are the Chains that the
Devil leads them by. Men discourse, see or discern what are the true Evils that
they should be saved from; they are not sensible of the blindness and vanity of
their Minds, the deceit and desperate wickedness of their Hearts; That their
Wills are perverse and rebellious, and the greatest Enemies to God and their
own Souls. They will account that Troubles, Afflictions, Reproaches, Wants and
Death, are Evils, but they do not perceive that their greatest Evils, and worst
Enemies are within themselves. A Root of Bitterness, an evil Treasure, a Body
of Death, a Fountain of Iniquity, that is in their Souls. But Sinners must know
what first cleaves to them, abide in them, do defile and deform their Souls,
and testify against them before God, Isa. 59.12. Our Transgressions are with
us, and as for our Iniquities we know them. Yea, Men have no liking of that
which is the true Salvation. Saints are said to love God's Salvation, Psalm.
70.4. but a Carnal Creature does not love, but loath God's Salvation; to be
delivered from his false Notions, his vain Thoughts, his corrupt Opinions, his
inordinate love of himself, and of the Creatures, to be taken off from his
sensual Pleasures, carnal Delights, to be brought to give his Heart to God, set
his Love on Christ, to delight in Spiritual, Future, Invisible things; this is
a Salvation he dreads and hates, and if he could go to Heaven with this vain
Mind, and carnal Heart, it would be a place of Exile, and of Punishment to him.

You must see your Danger; that you are as Isaac bound, laid on the Altar, and
ready to be sacrificed, as a whole Burnt-Offering, in the Flames of Wrath. You
must hear the just, dreadful Sentence, Matthew. 18.25. The Lord commanded the
Debtor to be sold, and Payment to be made. It is dreadful to be sold into the
Prison, into a Place of Eternal Bondage. Your Heart must be broken, your Spirit
wounded, your Soul burdened under the sense of the guilt and filth of Sin, else
you will not have a due value of the Doctrine and Promise of Salvation, 1 Timothy
1.15. We must account it worthy of all acceptance, more valuable than all the
Riches, Pleasures, Honors of the World. If a Man were sinking, and drowning,
he would not regard a Bag of Gold, or a Box of Diamonds, but prefer a Cord cast
out to save him, a Boat to take him in, more than all the things of the World.
Believe that your Condition is exceeding bad and dangerous. Lot's Wife looked
back, as one that doubted whether Sodom would be destroyed; and Lots Sons in
Law, could not believe that the danger of Sodom was so great, and its
Destruction so near, Genesis 19.14. So Sinners believe not, that to be Carnally
minded is Death; that they that live after the Flesh, shall die; that they that
are far off from God shall perish, Psalm. 73.27. They that go a whoring from
God, shall be destroyed.

2. Consider what is the great hindrance, the grand obstruction of your
Salvation: Whether some Sin is not so sweet, some Lust so pleasant and
delightful, that you will rather venture a miserable Eternity, than part with
it? What is it that holds you? Romans 7.6. And what is it that you hold fast,
Jer. 9.5. There is some Adulterous League between you and your Lusts, between
your Hearts and the Creatures, that hinders a lawful Marriage with Jesus
Christ, and an interest in his Salvation. Do you not delight in some
Abomination, and therefore are unwilling to be made clean, and set free from it.

3. We must fly to Christ, enter into this Ark, get into this City of Refuge.
Men are said to be saved in the Lord, with an everlasting Salvation, Isa.
45.17. We must look to Christ for Salvation, Isa. 45.22. Come to him for Life,
John 5.40. There is a believing to Salvation, Heb. 10. last. Salvation is in
Christ, 2 Timothy 2.10. Redemption is in Christ, Romans 3.24. and everlasting Life,
1 John 5.11. Trust on Christ, and not on the pieces of the Shipwreck, as they
Acts 27. last. Some have Civility, Morality, a little Form of Religion; all
these are but the broken Planks of our old Shipwrackt state; do not mistake a
Truce for a Peace, Embalming for Quickening; it is Christ only that can be our
Salvation, and our Life. We must see the Son, and believe on him, John 6.40.
Acts 16.31, that we may see Salvation, Luke 3.6. Though Noah was a Righteous
Man, yet he must leave his own Home, and enter into the Ark, that he might be
saved from the Flood. So those that have most of an inherent Righteousness,
must not stay at Home, nor trust in themselves, but fly to Christ, the Ark of
Salvation, that they may be delivered from an Eternal Storm of Fire and
Brimstone, Psalm. 11.6.

4. We must repent unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 1.10. wash our Hearts from
wickedness, that we may be saved, Jer. 4.14. We cannot fly from wrath, Mat.
3.7. If we do not escape that Corruption that is in the World through Lust, 2
Pet. 1.4. how can we drink Spiritual Poison, wallow in our Mires, serve those
Lusts that war against our Souls, and yet be saved? 1 Pet. 2.11. We must
crucify the Flesh, with its Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. It is these
hurtful Lusts that do drown Men in Perdition and Destruction, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.
How can we be saved, and yet retain that which keeps open the Breach, keeps up
the enmity between God and us. Lusts do war against our Souls in good earnest,
and we must not be in jest with Sin, or fight as those that beat the Air, 1
Pet. 2.11. 1 Cor. 9.26.

5. We must work out our Salvation with Fear and Trembling, 2 Phil. 12, 13. We
must work upon and about our Salvation, we must work more to perfect it; there
are things lacking in our Faith, 1 These. 3.10. We are defective in our Love and
Holiness; we must nor think we are rich enough, are saved enough, live enough;
we must not set any limits to Christ's Kingdom, or bounds to our growth; God
bids us open our Mouth wide, that he may fill it, Psalm. 81.10, 11. Christ came,
that his Sheep might have Life, and have it more abundantly, John 10.10. Saints
should daily be drawing Spiritual Waters at the Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3.
We must draw, or else be dry; we must draw, or else decay and decline, run
behind hand, and become poor: What pains did Noah take, in preparing for, and
building of the Ark, and yet this was but the means of Temporal Salvation. Noah
was probably longer in building the Ark, then we do live bear in the World; and
he did not give over, till he had wrought out, and finished this Vessel for his
Temporal Salvation; and shall we not all our Life long, be working out, and
perfecting our Spiritual Salvation. O tremble to neglect any means of
Salvation, or to use them slightly. It is God that works in us both to will and
do of his own mere good pleasure; therefore we must not displease, affront or
provoke him by our Laziness or Slightness. This is the great end, and the
proper improvement of God's long-suffering, to account it Salvation, 2 Pet.
1.15. that God spares us not that we might rise to Honor, gather Wealth, drink
in sensual Pleasures and delight, but that we might mind and pursue an
Everlasting Salvation. As God exercised longsuffering toward the Old World,
while the Ark was building, 1 Pel. 3.20. so God lengthens out his Patience,
while the Elect are building up themselves on their most holy Faith, and are
perfecting Holiness, in the fear of God, 1 Cor. 7.1. Be therefore more renewed
in the Spirit of your Minds, Ephesians. 4.23. Let the word of God root deeper, and
let the Temple of God rise higher in you. Let your Weeds be more rooted out,
your Filthiness be more purged away, your Dross be more burnt up; take heed of
minding of, and doting on Earthly things, and of forgetting, and neglecting
your Eternal Salvation.

6. We should order our Conversations aright, Psalm. 50. last, walk with God,
walk worthy of God, to all well-pleasing, 1 Col. 10.11. 1 These. 2.12. We must
keep the way of Salvation, walk in the path of Life, and in the way
everlasting, Psalm. 159. last. If we are guided by God's Counsel, Psalm. 73.
Psalm. 24. and led by his Spirit, we shall be certainly received to his Glory.

7. We should often consider, that our Salvation draws every Day nearer, Romans
13.11.12. We advance in our Race, we draw nearer to the Mark, and Prize; and
this should mightily quicken and influence our Souls. O think often of this,
that you are near the end of Time, the Borders and Confines of Eternity; you
draw nearer to the glorious Presence of God, and to an immediate and full
Communion with him. Should you flag or faint near the end of your Race; should
you grow drowsy, and sleep at the Door of your Father's House, near the Borders
of Immanuel's Land? O, how should you rouse up your selves, and consider you
will soon be gone from the Lion's Den, and Mountains of Leopards? You will get
out of this Barren Wilderness, into the delicious pleasant Canaan, that is
above. Salvation is ready to be revealed, 1 Pet. 1.5. a full, and perfect
Salvation. Christ will come as a Savior from Heaven, Phil. 3.20. His Life
shall then perfectly be derived to the Soul, and his Image be impressed on the
Body, Phil. 3.21. 1 Cor. 15.48. Then you will be satisfied with his likeness,
and be fitted to have an immediate and everlasting Communion with him. O think
upon, and make sure your Interest in this Salvation; you will loose the
greatest good, and suffer the worst Evil, if you come short of this Salvation.
Consider whether you have the things that accompany Salvation, Heb, 6.9. Have
you the Graces that are joined with a state of Salvation? Have you Faith of
God's working, Col. 2.12. Hope of God's begetting, 1 Pet. 1.3. Love of God's
kindling, 2 These. 3.5. Deuteronomy. 30.6. Have you Evidence that you are redeemed,
that is, bought again, 1 Cor. 6.20. in that your Captivity is turned, and that
you are brought again, Isa. 52.8. Has God saved you? 2 Timothy 1.9. Is God's
Salvation in a considerable degree communicated to you, and executed in you?
God's Gifts and Calling are without Repentance, Romans 11.29. Those that God has
begun to save in Time, he will not destroy to Eternity.

Several SERMONS ON Jer. XXIII. 6.
And this is his Namewhereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness.
IN the former part of the Verse, we are informed what the Messiah should do;
that in his Days Judah should be saved, and Israel should dwell safely. In the
latter Words, we are instructed how he should effect this; This is the Name
whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness. Salvation and
Righteousness are often joined together in the Scripture, Zech. 9.9. He is
Just, and having Salvation. My Righteousness is near, my Salvation is gone
forth, Isa. 51.5. I bring near my Righteousness, it shall not be far off, and
my Salvation shall not tarry, Isa. 56.13. Paul says, the Gospel is the power
of God to Salvation, because in it the Righteousness of God is Revealed, 1 Romans
16, 17. The Gospel could not offer and promise Salvation, if it did not reveal
Righteousness. God will not exalt Mercy, and debase and wrong Justice. God will
save in a way becoming of himself, and that shall eminently redound to his
Glory; as he will magnify Grace, so he will exalt Justice; as Love shall shine,
and Grace reign, so God's Holiness shall be crowned, his Law magnified, the
truth of his Threatening be demonstrated. He that is the greatest instance, and
gift of God's Love, shall also be the most Terrible Example of his Revenging
Justice and Severity. In the Words, we may observe, 1. That a Name should be
given to, and put on the Messiah; This is the Name whereby he shall be called.
2. What this Name is, he shall be called Jehovah, our Righteousness.

1. This is intimated, that a Name should be given to the Messiah, God delights
in the Scripture, to give several Names to the Messiah, and that

1. To describe, and set forth the greatness of his Person, Isa. 7.14. A Virgin
shall conceive, and bare a Son, and shall call his Name Immanuel, which
signifies, God with us. God and Man were at the greatest distance and enmity
with each other. What a wonderful thing then is expressed in this Name, that
God is with us, in our Nature, made Man, and manifested in our Flesh, 1 Timothy
3.16. He thus came down to us, to raise us up to himself. He apprehended our
Nature, Heb. 2.16. that he might apprehend our Persons, Phil. 3.12. and espouse
them to himself, Hos. 2.19, 20. There is a wonderful Marriage of the Divine and
Humane Nature in one Person, that the Son of God and Believers might be joined
together in one Body, Ephesians. 5.23.29, 30. An other Name of the Messiah is
mentioned, Isa. 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is given, he shall
be called the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father. Here weak Flesh, and the
mighty God, Time and Eternity, an Infant of Days, and the Ancient of Days, a
Child lately born, and the Everlasting Father, meet in one Person: Though the
Humane Nature did cloud and eclipse, yet it did not abolish, or extinguish the
Majesty and glory of the Divine Nature.

2. God gives the Messiah a Name that points at, and sets out his Office; He
shall be called, the wonderful Counselor, the Prince of Peace. Surely, he is a
most excellent and wonderful Counselor, that can direct and advise, how
Enemies may be reconciled, Prisoners be enlarged, Captives be released,
languishing, dying Souls may be healed; those that are lost and entangled in a
woeful Wilderness, may get into the right way, and return into the Favor and
Family of God, and Strangers may be adopted by, and related to God; and he is
an Admirable Prince, that can speak Peace to Enemies, and give Happiness to the
Miserable, that shall quiet and satisfy their Souls.

3. God gives Christ a Name, that signifies his new Relation to a Spiritual
Seed; He shall be called the Everlasting Father, Isa. 9.6. If we consider
Christ upwards, so he is the Everlasting Son; but if we meditate on him
downwards, so he is the Everlasting Father: He propagates his new Nature, he
raises up an Holy Offspring, he begets Sons and Daughters to God, as a Second
Adam, because the new Nature shall never perish, his Spiritual Life shall never
be extinguished. Christ may well be styled an Everlasting Father; the Seed of
the new Creature is incorruptible, it lives and abides for ever, in that holy
Nature that springs from it, 1 Pet. 1.23.

4. In the Words of the Text, it is said, that the Branch raised up to David
should be called Jehovah, our Righteousness. A Branch should be joined to
Jehovah, and so should work out Righteousness for us, and derive it to us. This
is indeed a wonderful Name given to the Messiah; and Three things are implied
in it.

1. That our Righteousness is not in our selves, but without us; it is a Robe
put upon us, Isa. 1.10. He has covered me with the Robe of Righteousness. The
Righteousness of God is said to be upon all them that believe, not in them,
Romans 3.22. How false then is that Name, that Medina on Thomas Aquinas, in Prim.
Secund. Quest. 113. Artic. 21. by the way of Contempt does put on the
Lutherans, extrinsicarii Haeretici, that is Heretics that assert an outward
Righteousness, imputed for Justification.

2. This Text proves and demonstrates, that Christ is our Righteousness; that
his Obedience is the Matter of our Righteousness, and his Attoning Sacrifice,
the Meritorious Cause of our Justification. God accepts us in Christ the
well-beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. We are blessed in him that endured the Curse; and are
forgiven for his sake, who was made Sin, Ephesians. 4. last. The first Adam was the
efficient cause of our Sin, but the second Adam is the formal cause of our
Righteousness.

3. This truth the Text does further declare and hold out, that this
Righteousness of Jehovah, must be made ours, we must be interested in it, we
must be invested with it; else Jehovah cannot be styled our Righteousness. And
how can this be, but by a Donation and Imputation of this Righteousness to us?
God that made Christ Sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. does also make him Righteousness
to us, 1 Cor. 1.30. We must believe into Christ, and so believe unto
Righteousness. How sweetly do those Phrases answer, he that believes (...), on,
and into the Son, John 3. last, with his Heart, he believes (...), Romans 10.10.
unto, or into Righteousness.

I shall a little further consider of, insist on, and explain this Name of
Christ.

1. It is a new Name that Jehovah the Son assumes; if Adam had not fallen,
broken the Command, defaced the Image, extinguished the Life of God in his
Soul, there had been no need that the Son of God should have assumed this Name.
It does not suit the state of Man standing, but the condition of Man fallen,
and that in order to recover and raise him up. If the Law of God had remained
written, Holiness and Righteousness had countinued flourishing in our Souls; we
should have been styled the Friends of God, and have needed no attoning
Sacrifice to reconcile us to God. But now we are destitute and void of
Righteousness, and so do need that Jehovah should take this Name, and become
our Righteousness. It may be enquired whether Christ does not point at this
Scripture, when he promises to write his new Name on victorious Believers, Rev.
3.12. That this Name shall be openly legible and visible on them, and that they
shall have the honor and benefit of it to Eternity.

2. This is a Name proper and peculiar to Jehovah the Son, and cannot be
extended or communicated to the Father, or Spirit. The Father is said to beget
us again, 1 Pet. 1.3. And to create us after his own Image, Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians.
4.24. And we are said to be born of, and sanctified by the Spirit, John. 3.6. 1
Cor. 6.11. But yet neither the Father, nor the Spirit are said to be our
Righteousness. Our Savior Christ is both the sole Worker, and Subject of that
Righteousness whereby we are Justified.

3. This is a Mysterious Name; it is asked by Agur, who knows the Name of God's
Son, Prove. 30.4. Indeed we should never have been acquainted with this secret
Name of the Son, mentioned in the Text, if the Scripture had not revealed it to
us: The Righteousness of God for our Justification is a great and deep Mystery,
most Remote from the Sentiments of the Natural Man; and if Christ had hid it in
his heart, we should for ever have been ignorant of it, Psalm. 40.9, 10. The Son
that wrought it, does also declare and Preach it to the World. Would it not
have looked like an unreasonable Presumption, and have been reputed
intolerable Pride, for us to call Jehovah our Righteousness? Could we ever
have aspired to, or hoped for such a thing, had not the Scripture given Christ
this Name, and taught us this Doctrine? What an amazing Mystery is this, that
when the Law of God requires us to work out a perfect Righteousness, and
perform a complete Obedience for our own Justification, that now the Son of God
himself has wrought, and brought this Righteousness, that he that might have
exacted Righteousness of us, should give Righteousness to us; that he, who, as
a Lawgiver, obliges us to a full Conformity to his own Law, should become a
Subject to his Father, and a Servant to his own Law? O! how surprising is this,
that he who Teaches us Duty, should himself learn Obedience? Heb. 5.8. and
become obedient to Death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.7.8. If Christ
had not been made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. he could not have been made
Righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1.30.

4. This is a most Honorable Name to Christ; this is promised both as an
Honor, and as a Reward to Jesus Christ, that he should justify many, Isai.
53.11. How glorious is this to Christ, that he is the Righteousness of the
whole Church: that he provides a Garment wide, large, and long enough to cloth
his whole Body? He appears in a Garment down to the Foot, Revel. 1.13. that can
cover and adorn all his Members. Though he be but one Man, yet many may be
justified by his Obedience, Romans 5.19. Though he be but one Sacrifice, yet his
Blood is shed for many, for the Remission of sins, Matthew. 26.28. As the first
Adam could defile thousands more, if the World should so long continue; so the
second Adam could justify thousands more if they did fly to him, and trust on
him. God is as well satisfied as if the Curse had been executed on them that
believe, and they are as safe, as if the Law of God had been Abrogated for
them. Believers are clothed with change of Raiment, Zech. 3.4. This one Garment
is styled change of Raiment; it is as effectual to Clothe, and adorn us, as if
every time we contracted New Guilt or Spotted our selves, we were furnished
with a new Garment: this Righteousness of Christ is the only Righteousness of
Men for Justification since their Fall; It is an everlasting Righteousness,
Dan. 9.24. The Glory of it never fades, the Virtue of it is never Exhausted; it
is a Righteousness that has lasted through all Ages, and will be effectual to
the end of the World: It is so large a Patrimony, so rich an Inheritance, that,
as Noah was, so all Believers may be Heirs of the Righteousness that is by
Faith, Heb. 11.7. and this is glorious to Christ, that he has so filled up the
Breach by his own dead Body, and made it stronger, than if the Wall of our
Innoceny had never been broken.

5. This Name of the Son of God is most comfortable to us; How woeful is our
Natural State? there is none in it Righteous, no not one; none that does good,
no not one, Romans 3.10, 11. All are under fin, Romans 3.9. all have sinned, and
come short of the Glory of God, Romans 3.23. They have failed in the Race of
Obedience, and are fallen short of the Prize of Glory. And O how Refreshing and
Reviving is this, to hear that the Son of God brings near his Righteousness,
Isai. 46.12. The World is a Sea of Wickedness, an Ocean of Impiety; Where could
Righteousness be found, or how could it be attained? But this is a most
surprising and refreshing Truth, that the Son of God Incarnate should be an
Isle of Innocence, and Righteousness, standing up in the midst of a Sea of
Corruption. Theodoret, in one of his Orations concerning Providence, observes
this as a wonderful Work of God, to Create Isles, as so many Inns in the Sea,
for Ships to apply themselves to, rest in, and receive necessary supplies from:
But this is more Grace and Mercy, that we that are void of Righteousness, laden
with Iniquity, and ready to sink into the Deep and Bottomless Sea of the Wrath
of God, may, by Faith, sail and swim to this blessed Isle of Righteousness the
Lord Jesus Christ, and there find rest and safety, from the Tossing and
Threatening Waves of Divine Displeasure: It is dreadful for sin to be always and
ever before the Lord, Psalm. 109.14, 15. but it is most sweet and comfortable
for Christ's Blood to be sprinkled on the Thrones, and to be always before the
eye of God: We were in darkness, and horror, and ready to sink under
desperation, and then does this Sun of Righteousness arise with healing under
his wings, Mal. 4.2. his glorious beams do scatter the thick and black clouds
of our Iniquities, Isai. 44.22. Sin did reign so, as to bring us under the
guilt of Eternal Death: But how comfortable is it that Reigning Grace should
succeed Reigning Sin. Revenging Justice might next follow after Reigning Sin,
but it is Grace that now reigns, through the Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
unto Eternal Life, Romans 5.21. Our Iniquities were as deep Waters gone over our
heads, there was no wading through them: they were a heavy burden, too heavy
for us to bear, Psalm. 38.4. they were ready to sink us down into the deep Sea
of the wrath of God, but in this Righteousness of Jehovah we may be lifted up,
and exalted, Psalm. 59.16. As Jesus Christ once gave himself a Sacrifice of a
sweet smelling savor unto God, Ephesians. 5.2. to God the Father continually gives
Christ most precious and fragrant Incense on the account of his Obedience, and
Sufferings always, to plead before the Father, Revel. 8.3. much Incense is said
there to be given him to offer with the Prayers of all Saints; Christ's
Obedience and Sacrifice makes an everlasting Perfume in the Heavenly Sanctuary.
It is said of the Gentiles, (...), They earnestly catched at they greedily laid
hold of, they strongly grasped the Righteousness that is by Faith. This is the
only Cord cast out to us sinking, and drowning Sinners, which we should catch
hold of, to keep us from perishing for ever.

6. This Name of Christ shall continue, last, be victorious in the World over
all the Reproaches, Slanders, and Defamations cast on Christ: the blind
Malignant World called Christ a Glutton, a Wine Bibber, a Friend of Publicans
and Sinners, Matthew. 11.19. they charged him as a Blasphemer, John 10.33, 36.
because he said he was the Son of God, and so made himself equal with God, John
10.33. they styled him a deceiver, Math. 27.63. The Jews did black Christ all
that they could, they raised Mists, yea thick Clouds, to obscure and hide his
Glory, yet all this should not prevail: this Illustrious Name of Christ should
wade out of all these Ecclipses, and scatter all these Clouds. Notwithstanding
all the endeavors of the World to obstruct his Honor, and cloth him with
shame, yet he should by Multitudes, in all Ages, be owned, acknowledged, and
called Jehovah our Righteousness.

6. This Evidences that the Mighty Power of God did go along with the Gospel of
Christ; that though the Jews at this day do style him (...), the Hanged Man;
and the Gentiles, as Blasphemous Porphyry, did call him (...), the Crucified
Sophister; yet all these Reproaches should be wiped off, and this glorious Name
of Christ should shine out through all these thick Clouds of Infamy; he should
be known, and called, The Lord our Righteousness.

I shall observe, and insist on this Doctrine foom these latter words of the
Text.

Doctrine. That Jesus Christ is, and shall be called, Jehovah our Righteousness.

The Prophet, in the Name of the Lord, promises, That the Lord would raise up
to David a Righteous Branch, one that should be most Holy, and Just in his
Humane Nature; and that this Righteous Branch, the Messiah, sprung from David,
according to the Flesh, should be called, Jehovah, our Righteousness: this
intimates he should be Man and Jehovah too in one Person, and as such he should
be owned and acknowledged.

Four things are to be spoken to for the prosecution of this Doctrine.

First, What Righteousness of Jehovah the Son is here meant, and understood.

Secondly. To Evidence and Demonstrate, that Jesus Christ, God-Man, is our
Righteousness, yea, our only Righteousness for Justification.

Thirdly. How this Righteousness of Christ is made ours.

Fourthly. Who they are that shall call Christ by this Name, The Lord our
Righteousness.

1. What Righteousness of Jehovah is here meant.

To this I shall Answer;

First. Negatively.

Secondly. Affirmatively.

First, I Answer Negatively; It is not the Essential Eternal Righteousness of
the Son of God, as Osiander the Lutheran affirmed; but this cannot be.

For, 1. This Righteousness is incommunicable, it is proper to the Divine
Nature, and cannot pass, or be derived to a creature: To say, that this
Righteousness is given to Believers is to deifie them, rather than to justify
them; that is most certain, that in this sense, God will not give his Glory to
another, Isa. 42.8.

2. This Righteousness is an Adversary; contrary to us, at Hostility with us:
God, according to it, hates the Wicked, and abhors the Workers of Iniquity,
Psalm. 5.4, 5. He is a swift Witness against them, Mal. 3.5. A Terrible Judge to
them, and a Consuming Fire in the execution of his Vengeance on them, Deuteronomy.
4.24. As God is Holy, he lothes unclean Souls; and, as he is Just, he hates
guilty Creatures. If another Righteousness had not been found out, God would
rise up against them as an Enemy, and break out on them for their everlasting
destruction.

Secondly. I Answer Affirmatively. This Righteousness of Jehovah is not a
Righteousness possessed by the Son from Eternity, but acquired in time. It is
not the Righteousness that was his Patrimony, as a Son, but his Purchase, as a
Servant, by the sweat of his Brows, by the travel of his Soul, by the effusion
of his Blood, by the expense of his Life. This was wrought by the Son of God
Incarnate, by the Mediator in the form of a Servant, as Joshua, the Type of
Christ, is called the Minister, or Servant of Moses, Exodus 24.13. Exodus 33.11.
So Jesus Christ was made under the Law, Galat. 4.4. It is said, Isai. 53.11. By
his Knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. This is very
observable, God himself asserts, That by his knowledge his righteous servant
should justify many; and that by virtue of his service, in bearing the
Iniquities of his People. Jesus Christ did exactly perform what as a Servant he
had undertaken, and so he was Righteous. Here we may observe a wonderful
Mystery, that Jehovah is said to be our Righteousness; yet God's righteous
Servant also is said to justify. These two things sweetly conspire in our
Justification. God's servant did perform Obedience, and suffer on the Cross. He
that took our Nature, and was a Servant in it, was only capable of doing, and
dying for us: As Man, he must be subject, and suffer; but yet as he is also
Jehovah he gives an infinite Price, and vallue to his Obedience and Sufferings.
The same Person was God-Man: as Man he served, and performed the Obedience by
which we are justified, Romans 5.19. but as God he gives an infinite worth to his
own Service: So both Jehovah is our Righteousness, and yet God's Righteous
Servant does also Justify. Christ's Righteousness consists in Two things;

First. In his Obedience to the Commands of the Law.

Secondly. In his Subjection to, and enduring of the Curse of the Law.

Jesus Christ took debitum officii, the debt of Duty, as well as debitum
poenae, the dept of Punishment. And suitably unto this object of our Faith is
thus expressed; 1. Our Faith is said to be (...), in the Righteousness of God,
so the word might be rendered; and this Phrase, the Righteousness of God, seems
to be taken, and be proved from my Text, Jehovah our Righteousness. 2. Faith is
said to be in the Blood of Christ, Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth for a
Propitiation through Faith in his Blood. All the Garments of Christ are said to
smell of Myrrh, Aloes and Cassia, Psalm. 45.7. As Christ's Garments are
expounded to be his Graces, so they may also be interpreted to be the Actions
of Christ, that flow from those Graces. Garments signify Actions, so it is
said, they washed their Robes white in the Blood of the the Lamb, Rev. 7.14. So
these Garments point out the Active Obedience of Jesus Christ. It is said also,
That Christ gave himself an offering, and a sacrifice of a sweet smelling
savor to God, Ephesians. 5.2. Zanchy on the place, observes the Emphasis of the
Apostles words; that Christ is said to be first an Offering, and then a
Sacrifice. There were Offerings of First Fruits, and Fine Flower, and of such
things as had not life, but living creatures were offered up in Sacrifice, and
then their blood was spilt, and their lives taken away. Christ's being an
Offering, may point out the Holiness of Christ's Life, and his being a
Sacrifice, did signify his Sufferings, and his Death. How satisfactory and
refreshing is it to us, to Read and Hear of the sweet smelling Garments of
Christ, and the sweet smelling Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus? It was foretold of
our Lord Jesus Christ, that his Ears, both his Ears, should be opened, Psalm.
40.6. one Ear was opened, as he was Man, to hear, and obey the Commands of the
Moral Law; and Christ's other Ear was opened, to listen to, and comply with
that peculiar Commandment that was given to him.

As Mediator, to lay down his Life, Joh. 10.18. Innocent Man owed but a single
debt to God, and that was Obedience to his Law: but Fallen and Guilty Man is
bound to God in a double Bond. He owes God Obedience, as he is a Creature; and
he owes God Glory to be raised out of his Sufferings, Misery and Torments, as
he is a Guilty Creature. Therefore Sins are called Debts, Matthew. 6.12. because
the Transgressors of the Law, for Non-payment of the Debt of Obedience,
contract another, and New Debt, and that is an Obligation to endure Punishment.
As they wrong, and rob God by their sins of Omission, and Commission, so they
are bound to make Restitution to God by their eternal Sufferings, and Torments.

1. Jesus Christ was to obey the Commands of the Law, Joh. 17.4. I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work that thou gave me to do.
Jesus Christ was to Glorify God in the Nature of a Creature, in the Form of a
Servant: he was to be a perfect Pattern of Piety, and an example of
Righteousness on Earth, where there had not been a full and exact Instance of
Righteousness, and Obedience fince the Fall, Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just
Man on earth, that lives and sins not. The Earth has been full of violence and
wickedness before God, Genesis 6.13. How much was it then for the Glory of God,
and the Honor of his Law, that there should be a Man Perfectly Holy, and Just
on Earth? A Virgin-Soul among Whores and Adulteresses? A Diligent Servant among
Drones, and Lazy Loiterers? A Loyal Subject among Rebels, and Enemies? How
little Honor had been given to the Law, if only the Penalty of it had been
inflicted, and its Curse been executed; but the Commands of it had never been
obeyed, and fulfilled? Is it for the Credit, or Glory of an Earthly Prince, to
have no Obedience paid to his Laws, but only the Penalties annexed to them to
take hold of, and be executed on all that are under his Jurisdiction? And shall
God's Laws never be obeyed? Shall the Penalties of them only be executed? As a
Foreign Prince, if he Travels through the Territories, and Dominions of another
King, does owe him a Topical Allegiance, and must needs be subject to his Laws;
so the Son of God (though he was a Rightful and a Glorious King) yet Traveling
through the Dominions of his Father, in the nature of a Creature, to Redeem
Captives, must needs be subject to the Laws that God gave to all Mankind. The
High Priest, under the Old Testament, was an eminent Type of Christ; he was
bound to wear a Plate of Gold joined to his Mitre on his Forehead, Exodus 25.36,
37, 38. This did intimate, and teach us, that the true substantial High Priest
was to be Perfectly holy and absolutely devoted to God. Though God may spy
Faults, and observe Blemishes and Spots in the best of Saints; yet he may look
to the Forehead of Jesus our Great High Priest, and there read nothing but
Holiness to the Lord. The Law of God was perfectly impressed on Christ's Heart,
and fully expressed in his Life. He loved God to the Height of utmost
Perfection. He loved Men, even his own, that were in the World, with the most
pure, ardent, and intense Love, John 13.1. he was so intent, so fixed in
Exalting, and Magnifying God, that when his Soul was troubled in the prospect
of his Sufferings, yet he Prayed thus, Father, glorify thy own Name, John.
12.27, 28, 29. As if he should say, However I am clouded and eclipsed; whatever
bitter Cup I drink; whatever heavy Burden I bear; yet, Father, glorify thy own
Name. As the First Adam ruined us by his Self-seeking; so the Second Adam
raised, and Recovered us by his Self-denial; and Christ's Love to his People
was stronger than Death. He leaped over Mountains of Difficulties, and brake
through Hosts of Enemies, and Sufferings to Redeem them. He did forget himself
for a time, that he might remember us to eternity: He veiled his Glory, and
Majesty, to manifest his Love to us: We are all as an unclean thing, Isa. 64.6.
but Jesus Christ is that Holy Thing that was Born of the Virgin Mary, Luke
1.35. he came into this World without a Foreskin on his Heart, and therefore
was that Holy Seed that was Figured, and Typified by Circumcision, Phil. 3.3.
And we may Glory in him, on this account. The Fountain was pure from his
Conception and Birth, and the Stream that did flow from it was ever after clear
and clean. It was requisite that Christ should be Holiness to God, that he
might be made Righteousness to us.

2. Christ's Sufferings may well be accounted a part of his Righteousness. For,

1. They were the Fulfilling of the Law given to him as Mediator, that he
should make his Soul an Offering for Sin, and pour it out to the death, Isa.
53.10, 12. Joh. 10.18. As the Moral Law belonged to Christ, as a Man, he could
not possess our Humane Nature in Purity, or order his Conversation with Beauty
without submission to it: so the Ceremonial Law belonged to him as a Jew; and
he was obliged to die, as he was a Mediator. He must be obedient to death, even
the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.7, 8.

2. The Sufferings of Christ were part of his Righteousness, because they were
the enduring of what Jesus Christ, as a Surety, did undertake to undergo. If
one Man does bind himself in a Bond to pay the Debt of another, it is but
Justice that he should satisfy it; if he refuse, or decline it, he acts
contrary to the Rules of Righteousness. So when Jesus Christ took our Debt on
him, it was Righteous that he should pay it off. A Surety does first make the
Debt his own, and then binds himself to the payment of it: So Christ first took
our sins themselves, and then became liable to punishment for them. As the
Sacrifices of the Law had first Sins put, and laid on them, Levit. 1. v. 4. and
then thereby were exposed to wounds and death. If Jesus Christ had not been
made sin, he could not have been made a Curse, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Christ's
being made a Curse seems somewhat different from his being made Sin, and was a
Fruit, and Consequent of it. The Curse could not Fall, Fasten, or Abide on a
Person, but where Sin opened the Door, drew, and plucked it upon him. Jesus
Christ, by becoming a Surety, was snared, was taken by the words of his own
Mouth, Prove. 6.2. Jesus Christ said to the Father, Psalm. Chapter 40.7, 8. Lo I
come, that is, to be an Atoning Sacrifice: I delight to do thy will O my God;
that is, to offer up my Body once for all, Heb. 10.9, 10. Now Jesus Christ was
come into the Hand of his Father to be punished, Prove. 6.3. It was just for God
the Father to wound and bruise him; to call the Sword of his Justice to awake
against him, Zach. 13.6, 7. verses; the Cup could not pass from Christ, but he
must drink it: the Debt must be exacted of him, Chastisement must be laid on
him, Isa. 53.5. because Jesus Christ had engaged as a Surety to draw near to
God, sitting on a fiery Throne, holding a flaming Sword, and clothed with the
garments of vengeance, Jer. 30.21. Sins being laid on Christ, Isa. 53.6.
Sorrows and Sufferings were to follow, Isa. 53.4. because he bare our sins, he
must also be burdened with our sorrows. It was just with God, on this account,
to wound the Man that was his Son, and to smite the Man that was his Fellow,
Zech. 13.7. God's Sword had (as it were) slept for a long time in the Scabbard
of his longsuffering: his Justice had been silent, and not roared against
Sinners. But now the Surety was come, the great Atoning Sacrifice was
presented, and exhibited, it was high time for God's Sword to awake. The Times
before Christ were the days of Forbearance (...), Romans 3.26. God took Christ's
Word till then, but now the Day of Payment was come, and therefore Christ could
not be secured from a Dark Hour, or be exempted from drinking of a bitter Cup,
Matthew. 26.39.42. John 12.27, 28. he came into the World to have such a Terrible
Hour, and to walk through the Dark Valley of the shadow of Death: As he was
loaded with our Sins, God must not only forsake him, Psalm. 22.1. but wound him,
Isa. 53, 5. He had not only a dark Night, as the Light of God's pleasing
Countenance was hid from him, but he felt Dews, and experienced the Drops of
the Night, Cant. 5.2. as God's punishing hand was stretched out against him.
Christ had not only a very Dark Night, but a very Stormy and Tempestuous Night;
as we had estranged our selves from God, and had forgotten our Relation to him,
so God estranged himself from Christ, and seemed, for a time, to veil, and
forget his Relation to his Son: to carry it as a Stranger, and as one
unconcerned in the Sufferings of Jesus Christ, Psalm. 22.1, 2. My God! my God!
why have thou forsaken me? Why art thou so far from helping me, and from the
words of my roaring? O my God! I cry unto thee in the day time, but thou
hear not, and in the Night season, and am not silent. O! how strange is
this, that God should thus withdraw himself from his own Son? that the Father
should deliver him up into the hands, and leave him to the Will of his Enemies?
That God's ear should be stopped, and his Bowels shut up against his own Son:
That Jesus Christ should roar out his doleful Complaints, and yet God be, as it
were, deaf and dumb to him, and inexorable toward him, when the Son was not
silent to his Father day or night. Surely Christ's Cup was very bitter, his
Burden heavy, and the Fire that Roasted this Lamb of God was very hot, and
scorching, or else Christ that had the Power of the Godhead to support him,
was now in the midst of his Enemies, and near the end of his Sufferings, would
never thus have roared out. The words of the Psalmist David do exactly Point
out, and Foretell that which Matthew Records, Matthew. 27. v. 46. And about the
Ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, Eli, Eli, Lama Sabachthani;
that is to say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Yet Jesus Christ
justifies the Father in forsaking of him, in not hearing of him; But thou art
holy, O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel, Psalm. 22.3. Though others
taste thy Goodness, admire, and glorify thy Grace, and thou inhabitest their
Praises, yet thou art deaf to me, I feel thy Wrath and Severity. But thou art
holy in all this, I am come into thy hand as a Surety, and must fall under thy
weighty Arm as a God of Vengeance. This was the true reason and cause why Jesus
was wanting to himself, did not plead his own Cause; or more confute the
Slanders, and wipe off the Reproaches his Enemies cast on him, clear and
justify himself from their Calumnies, False and Forged Accusations, Mark 15.3,
4, 5. Jesus Christ kept silence, he Answered nothing to what the High Priest
charged him with. He also Answered nothing to Pilate, so that Pilate marvelled,
that he would not plead for, and defend himself; that he carried it as if he
had no Reply, no Reproves in his Month, to vindicate himself, and silence his
Adversaries. This Silence of Christ was foretold, Isa. 53.7. He was dumb, he
opened not his Mouth. The truth was, that Jesus took our Sins, and bare our
Iniquities, in order to his submitting to Punishment for them, Isa. 53.6. 1
Pet. 2.24. Confusion of face did belong to us, Dan. 9.8.9. Guilt might stop our
Mouths, seal up our Lips. We had cause to lie down in our Shame, to cover our
selves with Confusion, never to open our Mouths to deny, extenuate, or justify
our Practices, Ezekiel. 16. last. Christ now stood in our place, he did, as it
were, assume our Person; Silence did become us; Our Cause was so bad, that it
could not be pleaded or defended. It was Just, now, that Christ should be
Condemned, Executed, Cut off for our Sins, that, as a Surety, he took on
himself: though he was a Green Flourishing Fruit-bearing-Tree, yet all our
Barrenness was charged, all our Corrupt Fruits were hanged on the Tree of Life
by Imputation, therefore a Fire was kindled against him; he was hewed down, and
cut off from the Land of the Living, Isa. 53.8. Christ's submitting to
Circumcision, Luke. 2.21. and to Baptism, Matthew. 3.13, 16. that were
Ordinances proper and peculiar to Sinners, did show, that he took our Sins on
him, that we, in Baptism, might have our Sins put away, and his Righteousness
put on us.

3. Christ's Sufferings may well be called, and accounted a part of his
Righteousness; because, in bearing his Sufferings, he admirably exercised his
Graces, and was most active in fulfilling the Law to the utmost height and
pitch of Perfection. Indeed, mere Innocence is not Rewardable, but as it is
accompanied and attended with an Active Obedience, and Righteousness: He
submitted to the Will of his Father, Matthew. 26.42. If this Cup may not pass
from me, except I drink it, thy will be done. He evidenced, declared, and
demonstrated to the world, that he loved the Father, and would do what he
commanded him: the Threatening of Death against us, was changed into a
Commandment given to Christ, that he should die. Therefore he would go forth to
offer himself to the hands of his Enemies, and to meet Death, John 14. last.
And Christ manifested wonderful Meekness and Patience toward his Enemies, and
expressed admirable Goodness in Praying for his Persecutors and Murderers,
Luke 23.24. Then said Jesus, Father forgive them, for they know not what they
do. Sinners hated Christ without a cause, and he loved them without a cause.
What astonishing kindness did Jesus Christ discover toward his Sheep, in that
he would lay down his Life for them? John 10.11, 15. Was not the love of
Christ, a love passing knowledge? Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Was it ever known, that when
the Butcher came to the Fold to fetch Sheep and Lambs to kill them, that the
Shepherd should offer, and substitute himself in their room, and to be
contented to be slain himself, that they might be spared. Some have thought,
that this was a strain of Love above, and beyond what the Law requires from one
Neighbor toward another. Men are to Love their Neighbors as themselves; but
Christ loved his Sheep more than himself; he forgot, he denied himself: was
swallowed up in most pure and ardent Love toward them. Love is the fulfilling
of the Law, Romans 13.10. So that Christ was highly Righteous, and perfectly
conformed to the Law in all his Sufferings and Sorrows. Thus Jesus Christ did
Answer the Character, that the Church of Old gave of him, that he was white and
ruddy, the chiefest amongst ten thousand, Cant. 5.10. Jesus Christ was White in
his Active, and Ruddy in his Passive Obedience, and so did at once commend us
to God's Holiness, and secure us from his Wrath and Justice. As the First Adam,
in Transgressing the Positive Law God gave him, not to eat of the Forbidden
Fruit, did violate the whole Moral Law, he was unjust to God, injurious to
himself, and cruel to all his Posterity, whom he betrayed, defiled, and ruined:
So the Second Adam, in Obeying a Positive Law, to Die, Fulfilled the whole
Moral Law, in perfect Love to God and Man, and absolute Denial of Himself.

2. The Second thing I am to insist on, is, to Evidence, That Jehovah the Son
of God, is our Righteousness.

First. No other but he that was God Manifested in the Flesh, could now, in
this degenerate state of Fallen Man, satisfy, and fulfill the Commands of the
Law. The word of God is very pure, Psalm. 119.140. The Command is exceeding
broad, Psalm. 119.96. The Law is very Spiritual, Romans 7.14. There is a wonderful
depth in the Law of God, it goes deeper than the actual consent of the Will:
Others of the Ten Commandments, as the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth, do
forbid heart-evils, for the Law is Spiritual. It is the Law of an Omniscient
heart-searching Lawgiver, and therefore it is not only given to the Lip, and
Life, but reaches and extends to the Soul. But the Tenth Commandment is yet
more deep and spiritual, it forbids the First buddings and stirrings of Sin
in the Soul, whereby the Will is Tempted by it self, and solicited to consent
and comply: These are the Neighings of a Carnal Heart after fleshly objects,
Jer. 13.27. I have seen thy Adulteries, and thy Neighings: These Neighings of
an unclean heart do tend to Fornication, and Adultery. In these First
Covetings, and Lustings, the Old Man does (as it were) cast forth its seed into
the Womb of the Heart; but Lust does not conceive, in the Language of James,
James 1.14, 15. till this Seed is received, cherished, and embraced in the Womb
of the Will; till it consents, and yields to a Temptation. Who now of the best
of the Sons of Men can stand before this holy and perfect Law of God? Dare the
best of Saints in the World go to a Trial before God on the account of their
Works? Did not David himself decline such a Trial? Did he not wave, and
deprecate it? Psalm. 143.23. Enter not into judgment with thy Servant, For in
thy sight shall no flesh living be justified. But this is that excellency, and
glory of Christ, that he was a Spiritual Beauty among deformed Ethiopians; an
upright Soul among crooked Creatures: one that did dwell in the Torrid Zone of
Love, when the Hearts of others were Congealed, and Frozen toward God. He had
the highest flame of Love, and not the least spark of Lust. But the obedience
of no others is of sufficient purity, according to the Covenant of Works, to be
Tried at God's Touchstone, or of Weight enough to hold in God's Balance: But
Christ's Obedience, for Purity, and Weight, will be approved before the
Tribunal of God. The Eye of Omnisciency can see no fault in it; the Holiness of
God is not dissatisfied with it, but highly approves of it, and delights in it.
As no mere Creature can satisfy for the Guilt of Sin, and so prevent Eternal
Death; so the obedience of no mere Creature can Merit Eternal Life. The Command
of the Law must be fulfilled, as well as the Curse executed; there must be a
(...), a Righteousness, that there may be (...), a Justification.

2. No other but Jehovah could bear the Weight of Millions of Sins, and endure
sufficient Punishment for them. The People of Israel were a Nation of heavy
Iniquity, Isa. 1.4. Laden with Transgressions. The Earth on which they did
dwell, is said to Reel, and stagger like a Drunken Man; and the Transgression
of it, that is, of the Inhabitants of it, is said to be heavy on it, Isa.
24.20. And if there was Heaviness of Iniquity in one People, What was there in
the Whole World? No other Neck could bear such a Weighty Yoke of Punishment for
Transgressions but Christ's, 1 Lam. 14. No other Shoulder, or Back, could
stand, or bear up under such a load of Sufferings, but the Shoulder and Back of
Christ. If the weak Wood of his Humane Nature had not been overlaid with the
Brass and strength of his Divine Nature; as the Altar for Burnt-offerings was
but of Shittim-wood, but was over-laid with Brass, Exodus 27.1.2.3. the weak
Humane Nature of Christ could not have endured the hot fire of God's Fierce
Wrath, but it must have been consumed. The Mighty God therefore must support
the frail Man Christ Jesus. For God to hide his Pleasing Countenance from
Christ, was (as it were) the loss of a Heaven for a season; and, for God to
turn his Angry Frowning Face against Christ, was the Feeling of a Hell for a
Time. Who could bear this Loss, this Punishment, but he that had Omnipotency to
uphold him? There were several things that were extraordinary in the Sufferings
of Christ, so that none but he could bear, and suffer at that rate, and in that
manner.

First. That Jesus Christ, when he was bruised by God, yet claimed Interest in
him, and Trusted on him: In the depth of his Sorrows and Sufferings, yet he
thus calls him, My God, my God, Psalm. 22.1. and says in Heb. 2.13. I will put
my trust in him. Yea, when all left him; and the Father too is said to forsake
him; yet he says, I am not alone; but the Father is with me, John 16.32. when
God did press down a weight of Sufferings on him, yet he was persuaded, that,
at that very time, he put his Allmighty and Everlasting Arms under him to
uphold him, Isa. 42.1. Behold my Servant whom I uphold, Isa. 50.7. The Lord God
will help me. When God did lay Sins on him, Isa. 53.6. yet he believed he would
Justify him from them all, Isa. 50.8. He is near that justifies me. Though he
was now under a dark Night, yet he did believe, that God would turn his Shadow
of Death into a bright and joyful Morning, Psalm. 16: 11. Thou will show me the
path of Life: in thy presence is fullness of joy, at thy right hand are
pleasures for evermore.

Secondly. That Jesus Christ Loved God, even when he was wounded by him, and
suffered such hard things from him. The Damned suffer from God, and hate him:
they belch and vomit out Blaspemies against him. But Jesus Christ endured the
most bitter, and grievous things from the Father's Hand, yet still loved him:
This was the Fat of the Inwards of Christ's Sacrifice, Levit. 3.14. Levit. 4.8.
that his Soul was filled with the Fear of God, Isa. xi. 2. and had such a
profound Humility, and made such a deep and hearty Submission to the Will of
God, Matthew. 20.42. which did greatly ennoble the Sufferings of Christ. This is
very observable, that Jesus Christ, in the Celebration of his Last Supper,
twice Gave Thanks to God at the Consecration of the Bread, and the Blessing of
the Cup, 1 Cor. 11.24, 26. Matthew. 27. What can we conceive was the subject
matter of his Thanksgiving, but that he blessed his Father for setting him
forth to be a Propitiation, for Sanctifying and Sending him into the World to
be an High Priest, John 10.36. and for Ordaining him to be a Sacrifice, 1 Pet.
1.18.19, 20. For giving him, as Bread from Heaven, to feed Famishing Creatures,
and designing his Blood as a generous Cordial to support fainting Souls. O what
an excellent Spirit did Christ discover in Blessing of God, that made a
Spiritual Feast on himself, as a Paschal-Lamb and Sacrifice, 1 Cor. 5.7.8.

Thirdly. This was wonderful, that Christ that was but one Lamb, Isa. 53.7. 1
John 29. did bear so many Sins, yea Thousands and Millions of Transgressions,
and yet did not sink under them. He was a Tried Stone, Isa. 28.16. Never was
there such a Weight of Sins and Sufferings laid on any one, as on Christ, yet
he did not break, or sink under this Weight. As God put Sins on Christ, Isa.
53.6. so Christ put them away, Heb. 9.26. Aaron did confess all the Sins of the
People of Israel over the Scapegoat, and lay them on him, Levit. 16.21. but
his Memory might fail us to a perfect Enumeration of the kinds, and sorts of
their sins But God laid the Iniquities of all his People on Christ, Isa.
53.6.8. and surely God that knew them all, remembered, and recorded them all;
did not omit, over-slip, or forget to lay any of them on Christ: therefore the
number of Iniquities laid on Christ, was not to be recounted, conceived,
comprehended. These many sins brought such great Sufferings on Christ, that
when he took a view of the Sea of Sorrows he was to pass through, he began to
be sore amazed, Mark 14.33. and wen he came into the Garden he was in an Agony,
Luke 22.44. Hesychius, a Learned Greek Author, says, that (...), which is
derived from (...), properly signifies that vehement fear of Death that falls
on Soldiers, when they are about to join Battle with an Enemy. Jesus Christ was
to encounter the Prince of Darkness, the Legions of Hell, and his Bands and
Troops on Earth; and the sight of the Multitude of Christ's Enemies, and the
Greatness of his dangers and sufferings from above, and from beneath, did put
Christ into Agony. The Lamb of God was to Combat with a Roaring Lion, the
Unicorns of Apostate Spirits were to set on him; the Jews, as Bulls of Bashan,
and the Romans, as Dogs, were to assault Jesus Christ, Psalm. 22.12, 13, 16, 21.
The True Israel was now to Wrestle with the Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law,
the Rage of Hell; yet he prevailed to satisfy Justice, quench the Fire of the
Wrath of God, defeat the Policy, and disarm the Power of Hell; while Satan, the
Old Serpent, nibled at Christ's Heels, he Trod upon, and bruised his Head.

Fourthly. That Jesus suffered so, that he made an end of Sin, finished the
Transgression: he did so take sin on him, that he took it away, John 1.29. so
bare it, that he did bare it away for ever. The words used in Dan. 9.24. are
very emphatical; Jesus Christ Died (...), Lecalleh, to make an end of Sin; that
there should never need, or be any more Offerings for Sin. Some render the word
restrain, or to Imprison: this is our safety, that sin is so Confined and
Imprisoned for ever, that it shall never more be at liberty to come forth to
give Evidence, or Testify against us. (...), Lecathem, signifies to Seal up.
This is intimated, that Transgressions (as Rolls) should be sealed up; they
should be kept private and secret; the Long Rolls of our Transgressions should
be so sealed up, as never more to be opened and Read.

(...), Lecappher signifies to Reconcile, Expiate Iniquity, so as to cover it,
and that not slightly, as by spreading a Cloth over it, that may be easily
taken away; but to cover, by Plaistering over a thing. The word intimates, that
Christ so Covers Sin, that it is never more to be seen: It is so Blotted out by
his Blood, that it is never more to be Read; so Drowned, that it is never more
to appear. Christ by his once Offering has perfected for ever them that are
Sanctified, and put an end to all Sacrifices for Sin, Heb. 10.14, 17, 18.

Fifthly. That Christ so suffered for Sin, that in a short time he removed the
Guilt of it, Zech. 3.9. God says he would remove the Iniquity of that Land in
one day. O! How wonderful is this, that Guilt which had been contracting, Sins
that had been committing many Hundreds, yea some Thousands of years, that these
should be satisfied for in one day, and should be so soon purged away? Heb.
1.3. That what Sinners had been Writing Hundreds of years, that Christ should
blot it out in one day. When Sins had long cried loud, and clamoured in the
Ears of God, that all these should be stilled, and silenced in one day.

Sixthly. For Christ by Tasting death but part of three days, to abolish it for
ever, 2 Timothy 1.10. by a short course of Obedience, to bring in everlasting
Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. and by Temporary Sufferings, to obtain an Eternal
Redemption, Heb. 9.12. this none could do but Jehovah Incarnate. In the
Sacrifices of the Law there was a Remembrance again of Sins every year, Heb.
10.3. though there were Sacrifices offered daily to make Atonement for Sin, and
a Multitude of these were slain in a Year, yet on the Day of Atonement, that
came the Tenth Day of the Seventh Month, every Year, there was a Solemn
Confession, and Remembrance of Sins again, Levit. 16.21, 27, 29. which
evidences the weakness and imperfection of all the Legal Sacrifices, that they
could never take away Sin, or make the comers to those Sacrifices perfect, Heb.
10.11. but Christ, by one Offering, perfects us for ever, Heb. 10.14. Christ's
one Sacrifice was the Truth and Substance of all the Sacrifices of the Law of
the Burnt-offering, 1 John 29. of the Sin-offering, 2 Cor. 5.21. of the
Trepass Offering, Isa. 53.10. Christ made his Soul (...), a Trepass Offering.
Therefore, on the account of this one perfect Sacrifice, God says he will
remember Sins and Iniquities no more. Heb. 10.17. Hence it is very rightly
inferred, very justly concluded, where Remission of Sins is, there is no more
Offering for Sin.

3. The Benefits that we receive by Christ's doing and suffering the will of
God, do Evidence, that Christ is our Righteousness, and our only Righteousness.

1. It was Jesus Christ that gave his Life a Ransom for many, Matthew. 20.28. we
did not contribute toward it, or make up any part of it. We cannot give to God
a Ransom for our Bodies, to prevent Temporal Death, Psalm. 49.78.9. How then
could we provide a Ransom for our Souls to prevent Eternal Death? we could not
satisfy Justice, that our Bonds might be loosed, our Prison door opened, as
God the Father found out the way of Redemption, Job 33.24. I have found a
Ransom; So God the Son paid the Ransom, and found Eternal Redemption, Heb.
9.12. He gave his Flesh for the Life of the World, John 6.51. he was slain, and
Redeemed us to God by his Blood, Revel. 5.9. As the Ram was the Ransom of
Isaac, Genesis 22.12, 13. Abraham's hand was staid, the Life of Isaac was spared,
and the Ram was offered up in stead of him: So we were bound with Chains of
Guilt, the Justice of God was ready to give us the Fatal Stroke, the Mortal
Wound; we were under the Sentence of death, and knew not how we should be
preserved; but then Jesus Christ was substituted in our Room, and this Lamb of
God was offered as a Ransom for us; therefore our Righteousness is wholly of
him.

2. We do not feed on, or live by Food of our own providing; but Christ is
Living Bread, and Bread of Life to us, John 6.48.50, 51. He came down from
Heaven, that we might eat, and not die. Christ speaks of a double giving, John
6.51. First, He gave his Flesh upwards, in Sacrifice to God his Father, so he
gave his flesh for the Life of the World. Secondly, he gives it downwards, as
Food and Sustenance to us. There is neither Sacrifice for God, or Bread for us
to be found in this lower World, but both must come down from Heaven. By our
Fall and Apostasy from God, we have brought our selves into a Barren Spiritual
Wilderness, as the Israelites, when they came out of Egypt into the Wilderness,
they could not subsist there, but by an extraordinary, and Miraculous Provision
that God made for them. God Rained down Manna from the Clouds, and fed the
Israelites with the Corn of Heaven, Psalm. 78.24. But Christ may more truly and
properly be called the Corn of Heaven. This very Bread did first spring up in
the Mind, and grow in the Heart of God: he laid the great Design of a Spiritual
Feast for fainting and famishing Souls. He Predestined Jesus Christ to be a
Sacrifice to himself, and Food to us. This is a great and wonderful Mystery of
Grace, that Bread should come down from Heaven to Nourish us. Bread should
naturally Grow out of the Earth for our Souls, as well as for our Bodies. Our
Righteousness should spring, and grow out of our selves, and be wrought by our
selves; but none of us have any thing of our own to relieve our selves with, to
subsist upon, or to keep our selves alive by, Psalm. 22.29. none could keep
alive his own Soul, we were ready to perish with Famine as the Prodigal, Luke
15.17. Now what astonishing Kindness is this, that Jesus Christ should be a
Sacrifice, that Sinners might have a Feast on him, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Believers are
made Spiritual Priests, Revel. 1.6. and this is their Privilege, Honor and
Happiness, that they have an Altar to eat off, Heb. 13.10. In the Times of the
Law none might eat of a Sacrifice, that was offered for their Sins: if the
Priest offered Sacrifice for his own Sins, he might not eat of any part of it,
Levit. 8.10, 11. those Sacrifices offered for Sin, did not yield any Food or
Sustenance to the Worshippers that brought them. This did evidence, and argue
their weakness, and imperfection, that they could not feed, or nourish those
that brought them, Levit. 6.30. it is ordained, that no Offering, whereof any
of the blood is brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to reconcile
withal in the Holy Place, shall be eaten: it shall be burnt in the fire. But
this is the Excellency of Christ's Sacrifice, that though he was made Sin, and
a Trepass Offering, yet we are called to Feed on, and Eat his Body that was
broken, and Sacrificed for us, Matthew. 26.26. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25. There is still
Food on Christ our Altar, it is never empty. The Altar was called God's Table,
Mal. 1.12. Ezekiel. 41.22. and the Sacrifice is called his Meat. God did, as it
were, Feed at this Table. The Altar Figured Christ, and he Offered his Humane
Nature as a Sacrifice on the Altar of his Divine Nature; and this True
Sacrifice was God's Meat: Here Divine Justice did Feed, and was satisfied. What
an Honor is this for us, to be admitted as Guests, yea, as Children, to God's
Table? and for our Faith to feed on the same Sacrifice, that Justice is
satisfied with; that may well quiet our Consciences, that Pacifies God's Wrath:
The Sacrifice and Meat on the Altar is called the Fruit of it, Mal. 1.12. This
Phrase is very observable, that the Altar is compared to a Field, that did
yield and bear Fruit to the Priests; they had not Lands, and Inheritances as
the other Israelites had; but the Altar was their Inheritance, and their Field,
the part of the Sacrifice offered on the Altar, that was allowed to them, for
their Services was the Fruit of the Altar, that they Fed on, and were sustained
by. So Christ the Altar is our Field; on the Fruit of it, even his Sacrifice,
our Souls must Live, In Romans 10.5. it is said. That he that does the Law, and
the things required in it, shall live by them. But Christ Teaches us another
way of Subsistence for our Souls, John 6.57. He that eats me shall live by
me. Our Drink also is not in, or from our selves; we are in a Pit in which
there is no Water, Zech. 9.11. Jesus Christ was Figured by the Rock that was
smitten by the Rod of Moses, even the Curse of the Law, Exodus 17.6, 7. 1 Cor.
10.3.4. Though Christ was Moses his Minister, as a Servant, made the Law, and
perfectly obeyed it, was Holy to God, Harmless to others, and undefiled in
himself, yet he Felt the Rod of Moses, he endured the Curse. We were in a Dry,
and Barren Wilderness, where no Water was: we must have perished with Thirst,
had not Christ been Smitten. He did cleave, his Soul and Body were separated
from each other, and so Spiritual Waters did gush out for us to Drink. God's
Sword might have devoured our Flesh, and his Arrows have been made drunk with
our blood, Deuteronomy. 32.42. but Jesus Christ gave us his Flesh to be Meat indeed,
and his Blood to be Drink indeed, John 6.53, 54, 55. We are too prone to dig
and seek Spiritual Water in our selves, but we must look for it from Christ.
The Traveling Israelites passing through the Valley of Bacha, did make it a
Well, they dug deep to find Water in the Earth; but yet at last they were
disappointed, and the Rain did fill the Pools, Psalm. 84.6. They sought Water
from beneath, but They received it from above. So we would find Water in our
selves, but we must perish, if Christ does not Rain upon us, Psalm. 72.6. He
shall come down like the Rain on the Mown Grass: as Showers that water the
Earth. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their Tongue
fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not
forsake them. I will make the Wilderness a Pool of Water, and the dry Land
Springs of Water, Isa. 41.17, 18. If any Man thirst, says Christ, let him come
to me and drink, John 7.37. we cannot live by a fullness and sufficiency in our
selves, but we must live by Bread from without, by eating of the Flesh, and
drinking of the Blood of Christ; And this also is given us freely. We reap that
we sowed not, and eat that we did not labor for; as the Israelites lived in
the Wilderness without Plowing and Sowing.

3. We are Healed, not by any Remedy we have invented, or by any Medicine that
we have prepared, but by a wonderful Remedy, that Jesus Christ has provided.
The Israelites Murmured in the Wilderness, and were for it bitten by Fiery
Serpents; and their burning poison did kill many of them: those that were hurt,
were utterly at a loss. They knew no Physical Herbs, no Sovereign Drugs, no
proper Remedies to apply. They knew not how to draw out the Mortal Poison, but
were destroyed by it, Numb. 21.6, 7, 8. The Wilderness they were in afforded no
Medicines; but God devised, prepared, revealed a Remedy: he directed Moses to
make a Brazen Serpent, and to hang it on high upon a Pole, and promised to
bless this Remedy, and render it effectual, that whosoever looked to it, should
be healed and live. So Mankind was bitten by Satan, that Old Serpent, in
Paradise. He drew them to Discredit God's Threatening: he Leavened them with
hard and base Thoughts of God: that he envied their higher Knowledge, and
greater Happiness, and so put a restraint on them, Forbidding them to eat of
the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, and so drew them to Disobedience,
and to cast off the Authority, and Yoke of God. Hereby Humane Nature was
corrupted, and poisoned in our First Parents, and by them this Vermin did
spread, and diffuse it self into all their Posterity, and infected the whole
World. This Bite of the Old Serpent was deadly. Tribulation and Anguish belongs
to every Soul that Sins, Romans 2.9. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6. last. Sin
has reigned unto Death, Romans 5. last. but God has provided a Remedy, that we
could never have imagined, or thought of; and was most remote from the
Sentiments, and Apprehension of the Natural Man: The Son of God came down from
Heaven, took our Flesh, and Suffered in our Nature; was lifted up to the Cross,
and died on it; that whosoever looks to him, and believes to him, and believes
on him, may not perish, but have Everlasting Life, John 3.14, 15. Jesus Christ
was lifted up before the eyes of God, when he was Crucified, and he is lifted
up before our eyes, when his Death is Preached, and he is evidently set forth
as Crucified before us, Gal. 3.1. We are not to compose Medicines, or to
provide Plasters of our own to heal our selves, but we are to look to, and
make use of God's Remedy continually. Ainsworth on Numb. 21. does probably
assert, That the Israelites, as they Journied, and did remove from one Station
to another, carried the Brazen Serpent along with them, and set it up again in
their Camp; and, as often as any one was bitten, he looked to it for Healing.
So we must receive Christ to dwell in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. and
still carry him about with us, that as often as we contract New Guilt, we may
look to him with a Spiritual eye, and be Healed. The Life that we live in the
flesh, we must live continually by the Faith of the Son of God, Galat. 2.20.
All the Healing Remedies are out of our selves, and are in Christ. His Stripes
are Healing, Isa. 53.5. he has healing beams, Mal. 4.2. out of the side of
the Altar there came forth Living Waters, that healed the corrupt and dead Sea,
Ezekiel. 41.1, 2, 8. so out of Christ's side there came forth Water and Blood,
John 19.34. The Blood of Christ is a Sovereign Remedy against the Guilt of Sin;
and the Spirit that was signified by the Water that flowed out of Christ's
side, is a sovereign Remedy against the Filth, and Reigning power of Sin; And
Jesus Christ, the Tree of Life, bears Leaves for the Healing of the Nations,
Revel. 22.2. No other Tree has Healing Leaves, but only Jesus Christ, his
Word, Doctrine, Promises, are Healing Leaves. We do not Work to Cure our
selves; though we are Patients, yet we cannot be our own Physicians, but we are
Justified by Christ's Condemnation, and live by his Death.

4. We are not Washed in any Water of our own providing, or in any Bath of our
own making, but God the Father has opened a Fountain for sin, and uncleanness,
Zech. 13.1. and this Fountain is opened where we could never have thought of,
or imagined any such thing, even in the pierced side, and wounded heart of the
Son of God. His Head was Crowned with Thorns: his Hands and Feet were nailed
to the Cross, his Side was pierced, and Blood did flow from thence to Purify
our Souls. This is noble and precious Blood indeed, that affects Conscience,
and reaches so far, as to purify it. The Blood of Sacrifices, the Ashes of an
Heifer, and Clean Water, availed only to the Purification of the Flesh, to take
off Ceremonial Uncleanness: but Christ poured out his own Blood, and thereby
made a Precious Laver, a Costly Bath. This Blood purges Conscience from sins,
that are dead Works, as they are the Fruits of Spiritual Death, and the Seeds
of Eternal Death. Though Conscience be stupid, and does not feel the weight of
these dead Works, yet if they remain unpurged, they will revive, and sting the
Soul to death; they will return upon it, and sink it to Hell. There is no other
means to purify, and pacify Conscience but this Blood, and we exceedingly
need it. There is a Fountain of Iniquity in us, that continually flows to
defile us, Jer. 6.7. As a Fountain casts out its Waters, so Jerusalem casts out
her Wickedness. It is well for us that there is a Fountain without us in
Christ, to take off that Guilt that is contracted by the Flowings of that
Filthy Fountain that is within us. Christ's Blood, though it is little in
quantity, yet it is mighty in Virtue. There is a deep Sea of Merit in it, Micah
7.18, 19. Thoug it was poured out of his Body but a few hours, yet it is a
Fountain that Flows in all Ages and Generations to take away Sin. And is not
this most sweet and comfortable, that Jesus Christ did not only shed his Blood,
but sprinkles it also, Ezekiel. 36.25. I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and
ye shall be clean from all your filthiness. Clean Water to wash the Body is
common, but clean Water to purify the Soul is rare, and no where to be found
but in Christ. This is wonderful Grace, that Christ would not only shed his
Blood, but undertakes also to sprinkle it. He shed it with unexpressible Pain
and Anguish, but he Sprinkles it with much Pleasure and Delight. As he pitied
Souls, and shed his Blood for them, so he Loves Souls, and Sprinkles it on
them, and Washes them in this Fountain from their Uncleanness, Revel. 1.56. We
are not clothed by our own Works, or Righteousness. Our Webs cannot become
Garments, Isa. 59.6. Our best Performances cannot clothe us. Our
Righteousnesses are as filthy Rags, they cannot hide our Shame, cover our
Nakedness, they are too narrow and short to do it, Isa. 64.6. Shall we be proud
of, or trust upon filthy Rags. Our own Righteousness is but a Garment full of
Patches. So Piscator renders the Hebrew words, (...), Vestimentum frustrorum
panni veteris, and attriti; A Garment of Pieces of old and worn-out Cloth. How
long have we been serving in the Oldness of the Letter, Romans 7.6. and so our
Garment may be called Old Cloth. Sometimes we do good Works, and then are apt
to turn aside and to commit evil Works. There are interruptions in our
obedience: Sin does too often intervene, so that these patches of the Old Man
do much blemish, and disfigure the Garment of our Righteousness. There are
Breaches in our Walls, and Spots in our Garments. As we need clean Water to
Purisie us, Ezekiel. 36.25. so we also want clean Linen to Clothe, and Adorn us,
Revel. 19.8. Jesus Christ invites us to come to him, to buy White Raiment, that
the shame of our Nakedness may not appear, Revel. 3.18. Christ was the Angel
that commanded the Filthy Garments to be taken from Joshuah the High Priest: he
caused his Iniquities to pass away, and Clothed him with change of Raiment,
Zech. 3.4. The Garments of our Bodies do put us in mind of our Sins, and bring
to Remembrance our Transgression; therefore they are called in Hebrew (...),
Bidge, from (...), Bagad, that signifies to Rebel. Because if Man had not
Apostatized from, and Rebelled against God, he had not needed Clothing, or
Garments. But the Righteousness of Christ may well be called the Garment of
Praise, Isa. 61.3. It is a Garment for Beauty, and Glory, and so to be
exceedingly praised; when God puts it on us, then we begin heartily to praise
God. Christ is styled the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. he has healing
Beams for wounded Consciencies. The Church is said to be Clothed with the Sun,
Revel. 12.1. And is not this a Glorious Garment? Does it not deserve praise in
it self, and call for the highest Praises from us. God provided Coats of Skins,
and Clothed our First Parents with them, Genesis 3.21. The matter of those Coats
was the Skins of Beasts, that probably were slain, and offered in Sacrifice to
God. This might instruct and teach them, that the Spiritual Clothing of their
Souls was to be borrowed from the Obedience, and Righteousness of the Great
Atoning Sacrifice. As many as are Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ,
Gal. 3.27. Our First Parents did sow Fig Leaves together, to make Aprons to
hide their shame, Genesis 3.7. but when God provided Coats of Skin for them, then
they threw away their Aprons of Figleaves as useless. So every Man, Naturally,
seeks some Aprons of Works, and righteousness of his own to cover his
Nakedness, when Conscience accuses them for sin, and the Law of God Condemns
them for Iniquity. The Whore, in Prove. 7.14. pleads, That she had
Peace Offerings with her, and that day she had paid her Vows; and with this
Apron she thought to hide the Filthiness of her Adultery. But when Men come
acquainted with Jesus Christ, and have that Glorious Clothing revealed to them,
which he has proved for Souls, then they cast away their Aprons of Works, and
their own Imaginary Righteousness. Paul says, That those things that he
reputed his Gains, that he thought would gain him the Favor of God, Acceptance
with God, a Title to Everlasting Life, these he counted loss for Christ, Phil.
3.7, 8, 9. that is, he cast them away, not only as unprofitable, but as likely
to be pernicious and fatal to him, as they would be to him instead of Christ,
and so rob him of an Interest in him, which would be a Ruining, and utterly
undoing loss to him. Paul says farther, Yea doubtless I account all things but
dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, Phil. 3.8.
The Apostle seems to me to refer to that Scripture, Isa. 53.11. By his
knowledge shall my Righteous Servant justify many. When Paul knew that
excellent Righteousness that Christ had provided for the Justification of the
Ungodly, this made him to Contemn, Loath, and Cast away his own Rigteousness,
as a Man that flotes on a broken Plank, or a piece of a Shipwreck; will cast it
away when he meets with a whole Ship that will take him in, and carry him safe
to the Shore.

6. We are shadowed from the Scorching Wrath of God, and secured from the Storm
of Divine Vengeance, not by our own Righteousness, but by the Obedience and
Righteousness of Christ. The Church says, she sat down under the Shadow of
Christ with Great Delight, Cant. 2.3. Mr. Terry, in the History of his Travels
in the East Indies, observes, That where the Heat is exceeding great, as it is
in the East Indies, there the Trees do bear far larger, and longer Leaves than
in these parts of the World, and that thereby they afford a stronger shadow
against the vehement heat of the Sun. Since the Fall we need a strong shadow
against the Scorching Wrath of God; and it is our Lord Jesus Christ, the Tree
of Life, that has such broad and long Leaves, as to afford a most sweet,
Cooling and Reviving Shadow. When the Israeites Traveled through the Black
Burning Sands of Arabia, where, in some places, there grew no Trees to shadow
them, God did, by a continual Miracle of his Grace, for Forty years, spread a
continual Cloud over them, Psalm. 105.39. and this was design for a Covering,
to secure them from the fiery burning heat of the Sun, that they might not
Faint under it, and be killed by it. Lithgow, that did Travel through Arabia,
does inform us, that the Heat is so great, by the Reflection of the Sunbeams on
those Sands, that he saw two Germans that were of their Company, and in their
Caravan, to drop down dead, being overcome by the Heat of the Sun. This History
instructs us how absolutely necessary God's Cloud was, which he spread over
them: It was not the Tents of the Israelites that were sufficient to keep off
the Burning Heat; else God would not have provided this Miraculous Cloud; so it
is not the Tents of our Works, or Righteousness, that can keep off the
Scorching Wrath of God, but it must be the Righteousness that the Clouded Son
of God wrought out, in the state of his Humiliation and Abasement. As those
that went from under the Shadow of this Cloud, were presently Scorched by the
Sun; so those that wave, and decline Christ's Righteousness, must needs, sooner
or later, feel the Burning Wrath of God. That Cloud that Skreen'd the
Israelites from the Beams of the Sun, was, it self, still exposed to the
burning Heat, but the Cloud did not feel it. But our Lord Jesus Christ, that is
our Shadowing Cloud, had a tender Sense, a sharp feeling of the Wrath of God
for a time, that he might be a lasting and perpetual Cloud to protect and
secure us from it. As the Israelites continually, for near Forty years,
Traveled under the Shadow of this Cloud; so we must, all our days, Journey
under the Shadow of Christ, and his Righteousness. I have Read in Varenius his
Geography, of this Great Wonder of Providence, and Mercy of God to the People
in the East Indies, that they have their Winter when the Sun is over their
heads, and their Summer, when the Sun is most remote from them: Then the Sky is
continually clear, and the Sun shines so hot, that in some places they keep
their Fairs and Markets, and do their Business in the Night, and sleep in the
Day. But when the Sun is in the Zenith, and just over their heads, then they
have perpetual Clouds, and much Rain; and that if it were not for this, the
Country could not be tolerably inhabited, by reason of the Great Excessive
Heat: So, were not the Lord Jesus the Mediator as a perpetual Cloud over us, to
shadow us by his Righteousness, the most Holy Souls could not possess and
inhabit a cool and comfortable place in the Church. It is Christ, and his
Satisfactory Sufferings that is the Tilt and Covering of the Chariot, in which
we Ride with Christ to Heaven. King Solomon, that is Christ, made himself a
Chariot, and the Covering of it was Purple. A Chariot must have something over
it to keep off the Wind, Rain, and Scorching Sun. The Covering of this Chariot
was Purple, that is, Cloth of a Purple Color; and this signified the Obedience
of Christ, which was signally expressed in the shedding of his Blood. His
Righteousness was as Cloth died in Purple Blood; as Christ paved his Chariot
with Love, a soft Seat for Doubting Trembling Souls to sit on; so he Tilted it
over with Righteousness Died in Blood, that Believers might be safe, and have a
sure Covering, that would keep off the Scorching Heat of God's Wrath. We cannot
move toward Heaven, till we get up into Christ's Chariot; so we cannot Travel
safely, but under its Purple Covering, this must be our Protection all our
days. Though the Church be a Garden open toward Heaven, to receive Influences
of Grace from thence, yet it Rides in a Chariot that is Covered, and guarded
from scorching Beams, and dreadful storms from Heaven.

7. We are not secured from Revenging, and Destroying Justice, by any Good, or
Righteousness that dwells in us, but by the Blood of Christ Sprinkled from
without, and applied to our Consciences, Exodus 12.22, 23. The Destroying Angel
did not pass over the Houses of the Israelites, and spare their Firstborn,
because of the Righteousness of the Persons within, but because of the Blood
sprinkled from without. The Israelites were Idolaters in Egypt, Ezekiel. 23.2. and
therefore were not worthy to be delivered from thence, but fitted to be
destroyed there. It was therefore the Blood of the Paschal Lamb, an eminent
Type of Christ, that was their Security from Destruction. Judicious Calvin
thinks, that God alludes to this in Isa. 66.19. God says, I will set a Sign
among them; that is, on those Jews that should escape the Wrath of God, and
Destruction by it. And what is this Sign but the Blood of Christ applied to the
Soul; for we are said to be Justified by his Blood, and so to be saved from the
Wrath to come, Romans 5.9. it is not our Inherent Righteousness that will protect
us from Revenging Justice. The Spirit that dwells in us, even in us Saints,
James says, lusts unto Envy, James 4.5. In me, even in this flesh of mine,
dwells nothing at all that is good, says Paul, Romans 7.18. As Jacob did
Travel toward Canaan, yet he halted on one Foot as he Journied on, Genesis 32.31.
So, though Saints do walk with God, and hold on their way toward Heaven, Job
17.9. yet they halt on the Unregenerate side, and part With my Mind I serve the
Law of God' but with my Flesh the Law of Sin, Romans 7. last. This is a wonderful
Mystery of the Gospel, that Believers are perfected, as to the Conscience, Heb.
9.14. Heb. 10.14. Though the Sacrifices of the Law could not make them that
brought them perfect, as touching the Conscience, Heb. 9.9. they did Shadow
Pardon, they did Typify Reconciliation; but they could not confer and bestow
Pardon, and Peace. But this is the Excellency, and Perfection of Christ's
Sacrifice, that it does Purge and Perfect Conscience; though the Soul, and its
Faculties, are not perfected by a Complete Inherent Righteousness; yet
Conscience is Perfected, and has no more ground to Accuse, and Condemn, than
as if there were no Corruption remaining, no Sin dwelling in us. O what a
Mystery of Grace is this, that Conscience should be perfected, and yet the Soul
remain imperfect in Grace!

8. Our own Inherent Righteousness is so defective, and comes so short of a
full Conformity to the Law, that we cannot dwell at home; but must fly unto,
and inhabit in the City of Refuge. Though the Old Man be wounded in every
Member in the Saints, yet it is not Maimed, no one of our Members on Earth is
perfectly cut off, 3 Cor. 5. And therefore we must not stay at home, or dare to
be found in our own Righteousness, Phil. 3.9. As the Manslayer was not to
continue at his House, Numb. 35.15, 22, 24, 25. He was in have to leave it, and
fly to the City of Refuge, and there to abide till the Death of the
High Priest. Though a Man did, without Enmity, Hatred, or Design, but by mere
Chance Kill his Neighbor, yet he must not abide at Home. Then we that have
sinned knowingly, and that with the bent and purpose of our Hearts have
Transgressed a Righteous Law set before us, do much more need Jesus Christ as a
City of Refuge. We are in more danger of Revenging Justice, than the Manslayer
was of the Avenger of Blood. O! how much Mercy is it, that we have a City of
Refuge to fly to; though we have sined greatly, and heinously? When Jesus Christ
our High Priest died, when the Temple of his Body was destroyed, John 2.19.
then was this City of Refuge built up. It is wholly Inhabited by Creatures,
that have been Guilty of Heinous, and Innumerable Transgressions. O what
encouragement is this, that there is yet Room in the City of Refuge to receive
Guilty Creatures that fly to it? And what great need have we of it, not only
for our Acts, that are mere Sins; but also for the best of our Duties and
Performances? There is Iniquity that cleaves to our Holy Things, Exodus 28.36,
37, 38. We need an High Priest, not only for our Deformed Facts of Sin, but for
our Beautiful Acts of Worship, by reason of the Dross that is in them; our
High Priest did bear the Iniquity of our Holy Things: they lay Heavy on him.
And can we purchase Heaven by those things that we need a Pardon, and Jesus
Christ endured a Heavy Punishment for? If the Manslayer did come forth, and was
found without the Borders of the City of Refuge, the Avenger of Blood might
kill him, Numb. 35.26, 27. So if the best of Saints should go forth of Christ,
the City of Refuge, and think to dwell at Home, by trusting in their own
Inherent Righteousness, God's Revenging Justice might destroy them: therefore
it is our wisdom and safety to abide in Christ, 1 John 2.28. Little children,
abide in him. Because we are but weak little children, not grown to perfect
strength, and full stature in Grace, we are still to abide in Christ. The
Apostle Paul seems to me to refer to that expression of the Man-slayer's; being
found without the Border of the City of Refuge, Numb. 35.26. where he expresses
it as his Great Design, and Desire to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. The
Manslayer, and the Avenger of Blood might converse freely and comfortably
together, without fear of danger, in the City of Refuge. So a God of Vengeance,
and a Believing Sinner may have sweet Communion with each other in the Lord
Jesus. That Just One died for the Unjust, to bring them to God; not as Guilty
Malefactors, to be punished, but as Reconciled Friends, to be Embraced, 1 Pet.
3.19. By the better hope we draw nigh to God, Heb. 7.19. Noah, though a sincere
and Just Man, was not to stay in his Tent or House, but to leave it, and enter
into the Ark, that he might not be Drowned by the Waters of the Flood; so we
must go out of our selves, fly to, and trust in Christ, as God's Ark of
Salvation, that we may be delivered from Destruction by the Deluge of God's
Wrath.

9. We do not ascend up to Heaven by a Lofty Tower, or by a Proud Babel of our
own Building; the Top of our highest Structure cannot reach Heaven as those
Foolish Builders thought theirs would do, Genesis 11.3, 4. Our Sins are increased,
and grown up to Heaven, Ezra 9.6. If our Trespass be grown up to Heaven (as
Ezra acknowledges) if our Sins affront, provoke, and dare God to destroy us,
How shall our Righteousness grow up to Heaven, to enter into it, and take
possession of it? We de serve, by our Iniquities, to be thrown down to Hell,
and do not Merit, by our Righteousness, to Ascend up to Heaven. If Men could
fly to Heaven by the Wings of their own Works, or get up thither by the Ladder
of their own Righteousness, What need was there that God should provide, and
set up a Ladder to Heaven for us? Genesis 28.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Jacob was
Traveling to Padan-Aram, and in a Dream God minds him of the Great Journey up
to Heaven, and discovers to him a Ladder, the Foot of which did stand on Earth,
and the top of which did reach Heaven. By this Ladder was signified both the
Person of Christ, that was to be God-man, and so at once to stand on Earth, and
reach to Heaven; and the Office of Christ, that, as Mediator, was to Reconcile
God and Man, and so join Earth and Heaven together. The Foot of this Ladder
stood in Bethel, which signifies the House of God: In the Church Christ the
Mediator is Revealed and Preached. At the top of this Ladder is the Gate of
Heaven, Genesis 28.16, 17. Heaven is only accessible, and open, over this Ladder,
to those that climb, and ascend up by it. This Ladder is now Complete in all
the Rongs or Parts of it; the Foot of the Ladder stood near the Head of
Sleeping Jacob; this might point, that the Ladder is Raised from Christ's
Sleeping the sleep of Death. Jesus is now not only Born, and has Died, but is
Risen again; and is Ascended to Heaven, sits at the Right Hand of God, to make
Intercession for us, that we may see and share with him in his Glory, and be
with him for ever, John 17.24. The Apostle Paul has, as it were, pointed at
all the Rongs of this Spiritual Ladder, and shows us it is complete, Romans 8.33,
34. Though Satan stands at our right hand, to accuse us for our Sins, as he did
Joshua for his Filthy Garments, Zech. 3.3. yet Jesus Christ is at God's Right
Hand, to Plead, and Interceed for us. Our Sins Cry, and Satan Accuses, but the
Blood of Jesus the Mediator Speaks for us, Heb. 12.24. God that is infinitely
Wise, Holy, and Just, saw our need of this Ladder, else he would not have
provided it by the wonderful abasement, and grievous Sufferings of his Son: we
cannot get up to Heaven by our own Righteousness. Many of the Elect continue
several years in an Unconverted Estate; all these years are lost, and so the
Ladder is too short to reach Heaven; their Righteousness does not begin soon,
and early enough, when they are Converted; there are many stops, and
Interruptions of their Obedience. The Ladder when it is begun, it is much
broken; many Rongs or Rounds of the Ladder are wanting. Who can possibly climb,
or ascend up to a high place, where there are many Rongs or Rounds of a Ladder
broken? This will put a stop to them: much more are we then unable to Ascend to
a Heavenly Habitation and Glory, by the Ladder of a broken Righteousness, and
by Duties or Works so interrupted, blemished and Defective.

10. We do not purchase a Heavenly Kingdom, or Inheritance, by our Works of
Righteousness; but we, as Heirs, possess it by the Testament and Death of our
Lord Jesus Christ, Heb. 9.15. We are Heirs, not by our Doing, but by Christ's
Dying. Job complains, that God made him to possess the Iniquites of his Youth.
Broughton Renders the Hebrew word, Thou make me to Heir the Iniquities of my
Youth. Job puts this Construction on all his Afflictions and Sufferings, that
God made him in them to Heir the fruits of all his youthful sins. If God should
deal with us according to our deservings, by bitter and sharp Afflictions, we
might Heir the Sins of Youth and riper years; and not only Heir them in
Temporal Evils, but in Eternal Punishments. How much therefore do we need to be
made Heirs of Glory by Christ's Testament? This is very observable, that
Isaac, the Son of the Freewoman, a Type of the Children of the Covenant of
Grace, is declared Heir while he was but an Infant, and had done no Works of
Obedience, or Service, to oblige Abraham his Father, Genesis 21.8.10. Sarah
speaks of Isaac, as the Heir; yea, the Sole Heir of Abraham, while he was but
an Infant; and Hagar, and Ismael, after many years service, were turned out,
and cast off; and that with a very poor pittance, a little Bread, and a Bottle
of Water, Genesis 21.10, 14. Hagar and Ismael were utterly cut off from any hope
of Enjoying Abraham's Rich Estate. So, many that do live Civilly, Morally, and
add some Tincture and Sprinkling of Religion; will yet come short of Heaven:
for, as many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse, Gal. 3.10.
That is, those that mainly cleave to, and Build on the Works of the Law for
Justification, are under the Curse by reason of the defects that are in their
Works, Romans 9.30, 31, 32. Israel that followed after the Law of Righteousness,
has not attained to the Law of Righteousness; Wherefore? Because they sought
it not by Faith, but, as it were, by the Works of the Law. (...); that is,

1. They sought it by Works, that had but the shadow, show, and appearance of
Works, but were not Solid and Substantial, Isa. 1.13. Bring no more vain
oblations, or empty Sacrifices, that had only bodily service, but there was no
Spiritual Worship in them; no Faith in the Messiah to come, no Mortification of
the Old Man did attend them, Revel. 3.1.3. Thou have a name to live, but I have
not found thy Works perfect before God; (...), they were not filled up with
Spiritual Worship; and gracious acts of the Soul; they were Specious, and
Glorious before Men, but vile and Contemptible before God; they might be
Precious, as to the Matter of them, but were vile and base, as to the Form of
them: as the Present, and Offering, that the Philistines made to the God of
Israel, even Golden Mice. They were Precious, as to the Matter of them, being
of Gold, but contemptible as to the Form of them, for they were but Mice, Sam.
1.6.4. So the acts of Natural men may be good, as to the matter of them, as
Praying, doing Justly with all, yet may be vile as to the Form of them, because
all does flow from a Mercenary Spirit, and is designed for their own Honor,
and applause; or,

2. Men may be said, as the Jews, to seek Justification, as it were, by the
Works of the Law, because though they may Complement God, and pretend they are
beholding to God's Grace for what they are, and do; as the Pharisee said, God I
thank thee that I am not as other men, Luke 18.11. yet they put the greatest
weight, and stress upon their own Works, and Righteousness for their
Justification before God. So the Pharisee did make an Inventory of his
Spiritual Riches, and drew up a Catalogue of his Good Works; I am no
Extortioner: not Unjust, or an Adulterer, or as this Publican: I Fast twice a
week, I give Tithes of all that I Possess. This was the Foundation that he did
build upon, for his acceptance before God; this was his plea at his Bar and
Tribunal: so that indeed they seek Justification as it were by the Works of the
Law; they give little to Grace, and most to Works: these are the Foundation of
their Confidence, and carry the main stroke with them: but Christ Teaches us
other things; he tells us that when we have done all that is commanded us, we
should say, we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. There is a double sense
that may be given of this Phrase. 1. We are unprofitable servants, that is, to
our selves; we have laid no obligation on God, we have earned no wages, no
reward from him. 2. We are unprofitable servants, that is, if God would deal
with us according to the defects and Sin that cleaves to our best services, he
might deal with us as with unprofitable servants, Math. 25.30. Cast ye the
unprofitable servant into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth. Therefore Men must not trust to their own best Works, for the
obtaining of the Heavenly Inheritance: God does freely give the Kingdom to his
Children; Fear not little Flock it is your Father's pleasure to give you the
Kingdom, Luke 12.32. And Jesus Christ does freely bequeath it, Luke 22.28, 29.
(...), I bequeath to you a Kingdom. Christ's Testament does make both Children
and Heirs, 1. Saints have their new nature from God's Gracious Covenant, so
they are born of the Covenant that promises a new Heart, and Spirit, Ezekiel.
36.26. and on this account are said to be the Children of the promise, Romans
9.8. And they have the Eternal Inheritance from the same gracious Covenant, and
so are styled the Heirs of promise, Heb. 6, 17.11. We cannot obtain a blessing
by our own Righteousness, and Works, but by the Sacrifice and Death of Jesus
Christ, Levit. 9.22, 23. This Text of Scripture is observable, when Aaron had
offered Sacrifice, then he was to Bless the people in the Name of the Lord: the
form of Blessing is expressed, Numb. 6.24, 25, 26. The Lord make his Face to
shine, the Lord lift up the light of his Countenance upon thee. When Christ was
Sacrificed, God hid his Face from him, and did forsake him, Psalm. 22.1.
Christ's Sufferings purchased, and procured this Blessing for us, That God's
Face may shine on us, and the light of his Countenance may be lifted up upon
us. Jesus Christ bare the Curse, Galat. 3.13. He was made a Curse, that the
Blessing of Abraham might come on us Gentiles, Galat. 3.14. God promised to
Abraham, That in his seed all the Nations of the Earth should be Blessed, Genesis
22.18. Christ was the Seed meant and intended, Galat. 3.8. There could be no
Blessing without Redemption from the Curse; and we could not be Redeemed from
the Curse, if Jesus Christ did not endure it. There are blemishes, and defects
in our best Works, and they deserve a Curse, and therefore cannot earn, and
merit a Blessing, but we must seek it in Christ: they that are of Faith, are
Blessed with Faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. It is not said they are Blessed with
working Abraham, but with Faithful, believing Abraham: Abraham himself did not
get the Blessing by Working, but by believing. He did not find that in his own
Heart or Life, that would warrant him to Glory in himself before God. The same
way that Abraham got the Blessing, all his believing seed must attain it.

Object. But here it may be Objected, Is it not said, Psalm. 112.1. Blessed is
the man that Fears the Lord, that delights greatly in his Commandments.
and, Psalm. 119.1, 2. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, that walk in the Law
of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his Testimonies and seek him with their
whole heart.

Answ. No man since the Fall, did ever earn a Blessing by his obedience to the
Works of the Law: therefore Calvin excellently observes, Romans 32. ver. 1, 2.
that all such passages are grounded on the Blessing we have by the free and
full forgiveness of our Sins, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is the man whose
Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is covered. Blessed is the man to whom the
Lord Imputes not Iniquity. Paul asserts, that David describes the Blessedness
of the Man to whom the Lord imputes Righteousness without Works, saying,
Blessed are they whose Iniquities are forgiven, Romans 4.6, 7. No man is blessed
for any Righteousness or works of his own, but as the person is a Believer in
Christ, and freely Justified by Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, Romans 3.24. Fearing God, walking in his Law, keeping his Testimonies, are
sweet Indications, and Comfortable Characters, who the persons are that are
Blessed. But it is the Forgiveness of Sin that is the true cause of our
Blessedness. The Mercies that God bestows are not conferred by our Covenant, as
if we had earned, and merited them; but by his Covenant, as the Fruits of his
mere and pure Grace. Observe well this distinction, which God makes between our
Covenant, which is a Covenant of Works; and his Covenant, that is a Covenant of
Grace; and that Good things are given by his Covenant, but not bestowed by our
Covenant. Weigh well the Importance of this Scripture, Ezekiel. 16.61, 62.

12. We enter into Rest by Faith in Christ, and not by our own Works, Heb. 4.3.
We that have believed do enter into rest: It is not said, We that have wrought
Righteousness do enter into Rest. It was the Speech of Fisher, Bishop of
Rochester; Fides Faeta Justificat, sed ante partum, Treat. of Justiffcation.
Faith that is impregnated with Good Works does Justify, but yet before it
brings them forth: yet Faith does not Justify, as it is adapted, fitted, or
disposed to bring forth Good Works; but as it respects Christ, eyes his
Righteousness and Obedience: The Faith big with Good Works does Justify, but
not because it is so, or as it is such, but by virtue of its respect to Christ,
and the Free Promise. Noah, by Faith, entered into the Ark, and rested there; it
had no Rudder, or Helm, for him to handle, and manage; no Sails for him to
trim, no Rigging for him to look after: he did nothing to Stear, or Sail the
Ark up and down, but he sweetly rested by Faith in the Ark: He believed God
would Stear and Guide it, that it should not be broken, dashed to pieces, sink,
or miscarry. Noah, in this Temporal deliverance from the Flood, saw, and
apprehended an Eternal Salvation from the Flood of Divine Vengeance, in, and by
Christ, the true Ark of Salvation, and that blessed rest and security that is
attained by Faith in him. Hence the Apostle says, That Noah became Heir of the
Righteousness that is by Faith, Heb. 11.7. he did believe, that by the
Righteousness, and Obedience of the Messiah to come (as an Ark) he should be
saved from the Wrath to come. This is much to be observed, that the Sabbath,
Instituted in Paradise, was the Seventh, in order, after Six Working days; and
was suited to Man's State of Innocence, and did most properly belong to the
Covenant of Works, that Promises a Blessed Life and Rest, after perfect Works
of Righteousness wrought by us, Romans 10.5. The man that does those things shall
live by them. But the Christian Sabbath is the First Day of the Week, before
our Six Working days, and therefore is suited and fitted to the New Covenant,
that Promises a Rest to the Consciences of them that believe, before uhey do
Works of Righteousness. Those that are Justified by Faith, have peace with God,
through Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. Calvin does think, that God pointed at this, in
such a severe, and rigid injunction of the Sabbath. He that would not have us
to be weary in well-doing, Galat. 6.9. yet commands us to cease from our own
works, Nonne eo ipso pronuntiat omnia oper a nostra mala esse. And Isaiah
teaching us, that the Sabbath is violated, Quando invenitur nostra voluntas,
Isa. 58.13. When we find our own will and pleasure does show a necessity of
ceasing from our own Wills and Works in our Justification; Calvin thus
Discourses in the 1st and 6th Book against Pighius, concerning Free Will; we
are Justified not by showing our Good Works, but by our Evil Works being hid
and covered, though not from the Eye of Omnisciency, yet from the Eye of
Vindictive Justice.

3. I shall inquire how we are interested, and partake of the Righteousness of
Jehovah manifested in our flesh; how we are Entitled to it, and Invested with
it?

Answ. It is by Faith. The Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus
Christ unto all, and upon all that Believe. The Gentiles have attained unto the
Righteousness which is of Faith, Romans 9.30. With the heart man believes unto
Righteousness, Romans 10.10. The Righteousness of God is said to be Revealed from
Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. This is the Righteousness from first to last that
Faith cleaves to, and builds on: The Just do not for a Day, a Month, or a
Year only, subsist by Faith; but they, all their days, live by Faith. So the
same Righteousness is revealed to Faith at first, when it is weaker, and to
Faith at last when it is stronger. It is said, We are Justified by Faith, Romans
5.1. This Phrase is used of no other Grace. It is not said, We are Justified by
Love, Repentance, or Obedience. It is exceeding observable, that it is not
said, Abraham left his Country, quitted his Idolatry, abandoned his Relations;
or that he Offered his Son, and it was imputed to him for Righteousness; but
that Abraham Believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness, Genesis
15.6. which shows the peculiar dignity, and excellency of Faith. It is
singularly fitted, and suited to take hold of Christ, and his Righteousness, as
a Beggar's hand to receive an Alms. When, as Love brings something to the
Person beloved, it is a grateful Echo to his Love; it does Retalliate, and, as
it were, Recompense, Requite, and Re-pay him that Loves. But Faith brings
nothing, L. Com. cap. 11. Justif.
but receives all things from Free Grace. Love poures it self out, but Faith
takes in. Peter Martyr thinks, that God chose Faith to this Office, because it
is a less noble Grace than Love, and so all the Glory is given by it to God.
Love Gives, and Faith Receives; and it is more noble to Give, than to Receive.
Faith looks to Christ, Psalm. 45.22. Look unto me, all ye ends of the earth, and
be saved. We must look unto Christ, and be healed, John 3.14, 15. we must run
to Christ, Heb. 6.18. we must lean on Christ by Faith, Cant. 8.5. and lean
hard, lean strongly on Jesus Christ; we must put the very stress of our Souls
on Jesus Christ, and not trust partly on our selves, and partly on Christ. As
in the Old Testament, Men stretched out the hand of Faith, and laid their Sins
on the Head of the Sacrifice as a Type, and on Christ in Truth: So we must now
stretch out the hand of Faith to Christ, come, and receive Righteousness from
him, Romans 5.17. We have that Phrase of coming into the Righteousness of God,
Psalm. 69.27. This may be farther cleared by that expression, Heb. 12.24. Ye are
come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, and to the Blood of
Sprinkling. By coming unto Christ, and his Blood, we come into his
Righteousness; we come into it as our Garment, we put on Christ, we are clothed
with the Sun, Revel. 12.1. We come into this Righteousness as into our Castle,
Fortress, City of Refuge, wherein we are secure from the Lash of Conscience,
the Accusations of Satan, the Threatenings and Curse of the Law; God will not
come into Judgment as an Accuser, as a Witness against us, Psalm. 143.2. Come
not into Judgment with thy Servant, Lord. (...) Do not come, Ne Venias, as
Pagnine renders. Lord, come not into Judgment with me; do not bring any Charge,
or Accusation against me. God will not come into Judgment as a Plaintiff
against those that are come into the Righteousness of Christ: These are passed
from Death to Life, and shall never come into Condemnation, John 5.24. When we
are dismayed, by looking down on, and into our selves, when we are full of
Confusion, by reason of the Deformity, Filth, Nakedness, and Diseases of our
Souls; when we know not what to do, and are ready to Despair, Sink, and be
Overwhelmed, then Christ Graciously calls us to look off from our selves, to
him for Righteousness and Salvation. This is the will of the Father, that every
one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have Everlasting Life, John
6.40. It is this sight of Christ, and his Righteousness, that revives us, when
our hearts were dying within us. If we fix the eye of Faith on Christ, God
himself will fix his eye on Christ our High Priest for our comfort and
advantage. The High Priest did bear this Inscription in a Plate of Gold on his
Forehead, Holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28.36, 37, 38. God does now look on the
Face, and Forehead of our High Priest, who is now near to him, always before
him: he beholds him as perfectly Holy, and Devoted to God for us, John 17.19.
For their sakes I sanctify my self. So the eye of a Believing Man, and of a
Righteous God do meet on Christ. Believers Feel, and Run to Christ, Isa. 55.5.
Nations that knew not thee, shall run unto thee. As the Manslayer was to flee
to the City of Refuge, and stand in the entry of the Gate of it, and there
declare his Cause, and claim the Privilege and Benefit of the City of Refuge.
Then the Elders of the City having heard his Case, were to take him in, and to
give him a Place, that he might dwell among them, Josh. 20.4. So an enlightened,
awakened, humbled Sinner, being sensible of his danger, flies to Jesus Christ,
gets to the Gates of this Blessed City of Refuge; there pleads his Cause, God's
Invitations, Offers and Promises, and claims the Benefit of the City of Refuge.
And will not Christ receive, and take such into him? as Noah stretched out his
hand, and plucked the Dove into him into the Ark, Genesis 8.9. God provided, by
his Law, that if a Servant did fly from a hard Master, those that received, and
entertained him, should not restore him again to his severe Master, Deuteronomy.
23.15. Even so Convinced, Brokenhearted Sinners do fly from the Law as a hard
Master. It was given at Horeb, this is derived from (...) signifying Drought,
or Dryness; it gives no Water of Grace, Comfort, or Refreshment. It was
delivered in Sinai, which is derived from (...), Seneh, signifying a Bramble,
or Brier. For the Law Scratches, Wounds, Gores us by its Terrible Threatenings.
Surely those that fly from this hard Master to Christ, shall not be restored
to, or put under the Covenant of Works again. Those that receive the
Peacemaker, shall also receive the Atonement.

But the main Influence that Faith has on our Justification, is, as it joins
us to, and interests us in Christ. By Faith we join our selves to Christ, Zech.
2. xi. Jer. 50.5. and Christ, dwells in our hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. But
how does Faith act toward Christ?

Answ. 1. Faith seizes on Christ, as an Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.11. In whom,
(that is in Christ) we have obtained an Inheritance as of old in the Division
of the Earth, Men got Propriety in land and obtained an Inheritance in
Countries, by first seizing on them, and taking Possession of them: Thence it
was, that when Men sold land, and parted with their Inheritances, they drew off
their shoe, and gave it to him to whom the Right of the land was Resigned, Ruth
4.7. By this Right, this seems very properly to be signified, that the Right
that was first gotten by setting the Foot on land, and first occupying of it
was disclaimed, disavowed, passed over unto another. So Men get a Right in
Christ, by laying hand on him, by apprehending of him, as offered by God in the
Gospel, by taking possession of him, as given by God, John 6.32. My Father
gives you the true Bread from Heaven. As God gave the Earth to the Children of
Men, Psalm. 115.16. so those that first took Possession of a Country, thereby
received God's gift, and got a Right to it; and after Men became Interested in
Land, there came a Law of God, and Confirmed this Property and Possession. God
has forbidden one Man to steal from another, to dis-seize or divest him of his
Goods, House, Lands. Even so when the Soul seizes upon Christ, as offered, and
given by God the Father, Romans 9.32. The Gospel or Law of Grace Confirms to a
Believer an Interest, and Inheritance in Christ: That he that comes to Christ,
shall not be cast out, shall not come into Condemnation, shall not Perish, but
have Everlasting Life, John 6.37. John 5.24. John 3.16. Such shall never be
plucked from Christ, John 10.28, 29. or rejected by him.

2. Faith joins a Man to Christ, as a Member, to be Related to him as a Head,
Ephesians. 5.30. We are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his Bone: and
Jesus Christ is the Head and Savior of his Body Ephesians. 5.23. When persons are
joined to Christ, here is a solid Foundation laid for their Justification, Isa.
45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, In the Lord I have Righteousness. Though we
have no Righteousness in our selves, yet in the Lord we have it. And in the
Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be Justified, and Glory. None out of Christ
can be exempted from Condemnation, and the Curse; but we are made the
Righteousness of God in him. Here is Righteousness in the Abstract, as Abraham,
the great pattern of Justification, is called Righteousness, Isa. 41.2. who
has Raised Righteousness from the East, so it is in the Hebrew; and in the
Margin, it is not said that we our selves have wrought the Righteousness of
God, but we are made the Righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.21. And how
can that be but by imputation, if the Sin of the First Adam be imputed to his
Children, though they did not then Exist? If they were made Sinners by his
actual disobedience, Romans 5, 19. Why may not the obedience of Christ, the
Second Adam, be imputed to those that are called his Seed? Isa. 53.10. Why
should not the Righteousness of the Second Adam affect his Children, as well as
the Disobedence of the First Adam damnifie, and hurt his Children? Especially
considering the advantage lies so much on Christ's Side: He is a greater person
than Adam, he is God-Man. If the Sin of a mere Man did redound to so many
Millions to render them guilty, Shall not the obedience and Righteousness of
Jehovah, manifested in our flesh, redound to many for their Justification.
Adam's Sin was but one short Transient act of disobedience, but Christ's
Righteousness is made up of many acts of Self-Denial, Holiness, Love to God and
Man, and these he continued in for his whole life, that was about Thirty three
years. Those that are in Christ, there is ground for imputing his Righteousness
to them; what the Head in the Natural body contrives, and designs, is imputed
to the whole body. If the head does plot Treason, this affects the whole body;
redounds to its hurt and prejudice: the whole body suffers, and is put to death
for it, because this body is joined to, and united with this head; so Christ,
the Head did Design the glorifying of God by his active obedience, and the
Satisfaction of his Justice, by his (...) and Christ did not only contrive, but
execute and perform both. Now those that Believe are in Christ, who is the true
God, and Eternal Life, 1 John 5.20. Being in Christ they are accepted in the
well-beloved, Ephesians. 1.6. They are Blessed in the Holy Seed, Gal. 3.8. In him
they have Redemption, even the forgiveness of Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. There is no
Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 5.1. Christ can have no
Condemned, or Cursed Members: As it was requisite that Jesus Christ should come
into our Nature, that he might work Righteousness, and make Satisfaction for
us; so it is necessary, that we should come into Christ, and be joined to his
Body, that we may receive and partake of his Righteousness. Of him are you in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Righteousness, 1 Cor. 1.30. Christ is
made Righteousness to those that are in him. These two things may be
distinguished; Christ's being made Righteousness to us, and God's Justifying us
for it: Christ's being made Righteousness to us, is the Foundation of God's
Justifying, or pronouncing us Righteous: God's Judgment is according to truth:
God pronounces those Righteous, to whom Christ is made Righteousness, or that
are made Righteousness by his obedience, Romans 5.19. God does assign, allow,
impute that, which Faith has laid hold of: as Noah entered into the Ark
according to God's Command, Genesis 7.1.13. And when he was gone in, God shut him
in, Genesis 7.16. so that no Water could flow, or get into the Ark to hurt him.
Even so a Beleiver runs, and enters into Christ the Ark of Salvation, that God
himself has Built, and prepared, Luke 2.29, 30. And the Soul that betakes
himself to Christ for Righteousness, God allows, and gives him this
Righteousness, and by imputing of it, God shuts in the Believer into Christ,
and shuts out the guilt of Sin, and the Curse for ever, that it shall never
flow into the Soul more to destroy it.

3. Faith joins the Soul to Christ, as a Husband; I have espoused you to one
Husband, even to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. He that has the Bride is the Bridegroom,
John 3.29. The Church is the Bride, the Lamb's Wife, Revel. 19.7. Revel. 21.9.
and Christ is the Bridegroom. Is not the Name of a Woman changed when she is
Married? Is not the Husband's Name put upon her? And will not Christ
Communicate his Name to his Wife? In the Text it is said, This is the Name
whereby he shall be called, the Lord our Righteousness. The Maiden-Name of a
Woman is swallowed up, and abolished for ever; extinguished and forgotten for
ever. What is our Name, as we are Adam's Children? Does not God, by Isaiah,
tell us? Isa. 48.8. Thou wast called a Transgressor from the Womb. God might
call us Backsliders, Revolters, Rebels and Enemies. And is not our own Name
both reproachful, dangerous and pernicious too, if we keep and retain it? Is it
not then absolutely necessary, that we should lose our old Name, and put on the
Honorable and Glorious Name of Christ, that we may be Justified in it? 1 Cor.
6.11. The Apostle Paul has this expression, Justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus. The Apostle seems to me plainly to refer to the Name of Christ in the
Text; and to this Name, as communicated to, and put on the Church, Jer. 33.16.
in this Name of our Husband must we be Justified. If our old Name stick on us,
and cleave to us, we must surely be Condemned in this Name, and the Wrath of
God will abide upon us. But Christ's Name will draw Salvation on us, and
procure a Blessing for us. As a Husband must Cloth his Wife, so Christ spreads
the Skirt of the Robe of his Righteousness on, and over us, to hide our Shame,
and cover our Nakedness, Ezekiel. 16.8. as a Husband is a cover to the Wife, he
protects her from Debts, Arrests, Law-suites; so the Spouse of Christ is under
Covert, he secures her from the woeful effects of Sin and Wrath.

4. It is by Faith that we become interested in, and related to Christ as a
Surety, Heb. 7.22. Christ is the Surety of a better Covenant and Testament: If
Jesus Christ had not undertaken to stand under, feel and endure the curse of
the Old violated Covenant of Works, Deuteronomy. 27. last. Gal. 3.10.13. and to Merit
for us the Blessings of the New Covenant, as a Priest of Good Things, Gal.
3.14. Heb. 9.11. God would never have made a New Covenant, or Tastament; it is
built on Christ's Suretyship, as a Foundation. Christ, in this, dissers from
all other Testators, that he Bequeaths nothing, in his Testament, but what he
Merits by his Sufferings, and purchases by his Death. For whom is Christ a
Surety? And to whom does the Benefit of Christ's Suretyship redound, but to
those that Believe on him? their Ransom he paid, their Debt he discharged. As
the Payment of a Surety is imputed to the Principal Debtor, so the Payment of
Christ is imputed to all Indebted Sinners that come to Christ, and receive his
Righteousness, Romans 5.17. it availes and advantages no others; but God reckons
Christ's Obedience and Satisfaction to every Believer. Some have conceived
Witsus de Faedere.
, that the word Imputation is borrowed from Arithmetic, and keeping of
Accounts. God does, as it were, keep a Book, Isa. 65.6. Behold it is Written
before me. Our Sins, Transgressions and Provocations, are, as Debts, set down
in one Page of this Book; and the Obedience, Sufferings and Satisfaction of
Christ is set down (as it were) in another Page of God's Book. When God
accounts the Obedience and Sufferings of Christ to us, this Balances the
Account, this Crosses the Book, and makes all even between God and us. God sets
Christ's Obedience against our Disobedience; his Righteousness against our
Unrighteousness, because we come into this Righteousness by Faith, and trust on
his Blood, Psalm. 69.27. Romans 3.25. God now says, Poor Souls, let it be to you
according to your Faith: you trust in Christ's Righteousness; 2. Pet. 1. so let
it cloth, and cover you, and secure you from all your sins, and the Curse of
my Law. As Christ is one with us in Nature, as a Man; so he is one with us in
Law, as a Surety. Christ did put his Name into our Bond, and was, as a Surety,
bound in our Obligation, that in a Righteous way he might blot our Sins out of
God's Book, and Insert our Names into his own Testament. Jesus, as a Surety,
veiled his own Innocence, covered his own Personal Purity and Righteousness,
took on him our Sins, became Heir of our Punishment and Curse, that he might
hide, and cover our Sins, and we become Heirs of his Righteousness and
Blessings. As the Sentence of Death passed against, and was executed on Christ,
our Surety, so we partake of Justification of Life, and reign in Life through
Jesus Christ, Romans 5.18, 21. God punished our sins in Christ, and God rewards
Christ's Obedience and Sufferings in us. Our Sins were punished in Christ's
Condemnation, his Obedience is rewarded in our Justification. There is (...),
the Gift of Righteousness; and for this there is (...), the free forgiveness of
many Offenses, Romans 5.16.17. This Glorious Name, The Lord our Righteousness,
being put on us, the Reproachful Chains of Guilt do fall off from us.

4. Who is it that shall call Christ by this. Name?

Answer. 1. Such as know Jesus Christ, John 5.20. He has given us an
understanding to know him, that is true, By his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many, Isa. 53.11. that is, many by knowing of Jesus Christ
shall be Justified. Faith is called Knowledge, because those that truly know
Jesus Christ, cannot but trust in him, Psalm. 9.10. This is very observable,
that Christians are said to be Justified by the Knowledge of Jesus Christ; it
is not what we know in our selves, or by our selves; it is not by the knowledge
of what we are, or have done, that we are Justified: we must purely look off
from our selves, and wholly fix the eye of Faith on Christ. Such as know the
Insufficiency of their own Righteousness, and the All Sufficiency of Christ's
Righteousness, do call him, The Lord their Righteousness.

2. Such as fly to Christ, lay hold of him, and do know their own Union with
Christ, and Relation to him, such will say, Surely in the Lord we have
Righteousness, Isa. 45.24. A true Believer disclaims, disavows, and denies
Righteousness to be in himself; and Glories in this, that he has Righteousness
in Christ.

3. God may be said to call Jehovah our Righteousness, when Jesus Christ is of
God made Righteousness to us, 1 Cor. 1.30. God the Father, that Loaded Christ
with our Sins, Isa. 53.6. he Clothes us with his Righteousness, Isa. 61.10. I
will greatly Rejoice in the Lord, for he has covered me with the Robe of
Righteousness. God gives Jesus Christ, and with him gives his Righteousness,
Romans 8.32.

Quest. Is not Repentance requisite, in order to Pardon, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, cease to do evll,
and learn to do well. Come now, let us reason together, says the Lord: though
your sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow; though they be red
like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. He that confesses and forsakes his sin,
shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13. Let the sinner forsake sake his ways, and the
unrighteous Man his thoughts: and let him return unto the Lord, and be will
have mercy upon him, and to our God, and he will abundantly pardon, Isa. 55.7.

Answ. Repentance is necessary in its place, as an Antecedent, not as a Cause,
or proper condition of Pardon. Faith precedes, in order of Nature, and
Repentance infallibly follows: when we see the wonderful Grace of God, that he
stops, and heales the Breach our Sins have made, with the Dead Body of his Son;
quenched the Fire of his Anger with the Blood of his Son: made War with him, to
make Peace with us: Sheathed his Sword in his own Son, that he might Draw it
out, Sheath it, and for ever lay it asleep toward us. This Grace of God
softens hard Hearts, melts the Rebellious and Obstinate Wills of Men. When we
believe that God will repent of his Righteous Enmity against us, this indures,
and inclines us to Repent of our unjust and wicked Enmity against him. When we
are persuaded that God is ready to heal us, Matthew. 13.15. this swayes us to
desist from wounding him in his Authority and Glory; when God declares he will
turn from his Anger, this influences sinners to change their minds toward
God, and to turn from their Provocations, and Rebellions against him. How can
Men possibly Love God, or subject themselves to him, if they Believe he is
inexorable, inflexible, will Retain his anger, pursue his Controversy, and take
Vengeance on Offenders for their former Transgressions? If God will never open
his Prison, if he will shut up his Bowels against, and pour out his Fury on
Transgressors, this will harden them against God. But when they see God is not
implacable, this causes them to relent, and induces them to return to God, Jer.
3.22. God says, Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your
backslidings. They Echo to God, Lo! we come unto thee, For thou art the Lord
our God. They believed God would forgive Iniquty, and this influenced them to
depart from Iniquity. As God puts it away, he will not impute it, 2 Samuel 12.13.
So we must put it away, and not obey it, Isa. 2.16, 17. As God will not
remember Iniquity with anger, so we must not remember it with delight; when God
casts Sin behind his back, Isa. 38.17. We must set no wicked thing before our
eyes, Psalm. 101.3. Repentance, in Scripture, is said to be to God, and Faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.21. By Faith, we first return to our
Lord Jesus the great Shepherd, 1 Pet. 2. last. and then by Repentance we return
to God the Father, Jer. 3.22. As by Faith we receive the Righteousness of
Christ, Romans 5.17. So by Repentance we Recognize the Rights of God; the
Dominion he has over us, as his Creatures, and the advantage he has against
us as Sinners. As Faith abases us, in that we must fly to Christ for
Righteousness, so Repentance does lower, stoop, and empty us, that we must have
Recourse to mere pure Mercy for our Pardon. Faith humbles, as to the matter,
for which we are Justified, and Repentance humbles us, as to the manner, in
which we are Justified; as we are Justified by the Obedience and Redemption of
Christ, so we are also Justified freely by the Grace of God the Father, Romans
3.24. A Sinner then advances, and magnifies Grace, when he is cast down in
himself; when a Sinner sees the Plague of his heart, the Spiritual Leprosy of
his Soul, the Filthy Fountain of Iniquity that is in his Nature, he abhors
himself for the evil Treasure, that is within, and loathes himself for all the
evil things that have been brought forth out of it. The offender is now ashamed
to lift up his Eyes to Heaven, Luke 18.13. He blushes, and is ashamed to look
God in the Face, Ezra. 9.6. Innumerable evils now Compass the Sinner about, his
Iniquities take hold of him, that he cannot look up, Psalm. 40.12. As we are
Justified by Faith; so we Justify God by Repentance. 1. In his Commands, Romans
7.12.14. The Commandment is Holy, Just, and Good. Holy, with respect to God,
Just, with respect to Man; Good, with respect to our selves. 2. We Justify God
in all his threatenings, Psalm. 51.3, 4. David did acknowledge his Iniquity, that
God might be Justified when he did Speak, and be clear when he did Judge.
Whatever God had spoken against David, however he had Judged him and his House
by Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11, 12.14. Whatever Judgments he had denounced, as a
War to rise out of his own House, and the defiling of his Wives, the death of
his Child, yet David does Justify God in all this: Guilt did seal up his
Lips, shame did cover his Face, he could enter no Action against God, complain
of no wrong done by him: If God should cut down Barren Trees, if he should
Execute Condemned Creatures, if he should Bury those in the Bottemless Pit,
that have been long Dead in Sin, they confess they cannot spot him with
Cruelty, or blot him with Injustice. Repentance is so far form lessening of, or
detracting from Grace, that it commends, heightens, and exalts it, that God
should Justify a Sinner, that Arraigns himself, and judges himself to be
Guilty of Innumerable Transgressions, and worthy of Eternal Death; that God
should cover those Sins in Mercy, that were laid open, and represented as
exceeding Heinous and Sinful, by the Transgressor himself: the poor Publican
could not plead, but only petition; he could mention no Righteousness of his
within, or good Works without: he had nothing to look, or fly to, but Mercy
only. God be Mercyful to me a Sinner. It is observable, he does not say, My God
be merciful to me a Sinner, but God be Merciful to me a Sinner. Adam accused
Eve, Eve accused the Serpent, and so thought in some measure to excuse
themselves; but the Publican charged himself only; I am the Sinner: he accuses
no other: though Sinning, yet presumptous Israel says, My God we know thee,
Hos. 8.2. But this Publican pleads no relation to God, claims no Interest in
him, yet he ventures to cast himself into the Arms of Mercy; to lie down
prostrate at the feet of Mercy. And was not this Free and Rich Grace, to
cleanse a Spiritual Leper, to wash one that accounts himself a Lump of Guilt
and Filth? To bind up a broken heart, to Raise a Spirit bowed down, and ready
utterly to sink under a weight of Guilt? To take away Filthy garments, and to
bring forth the best Robe? to Cloth a naked Soul, to kill the fatted Calf to
Feast a Famishing Sinner? If the very Redemption of Christ, if his Attoning
Sacrifice does not detract from God's Free Grace, Romans 3.24. Vid. Bolton on the
place.
Surely the Sacrifice of a Broken Heart does not Wrong, or Rob Grace of its
glory; it was the express will and Law of God, that on the very day of
Atonement, when Sacrifices were offered for Typical Expiation of Sin, that the
Israelites afflict their Souls, Levet. 16.29. Much more when we Believe that
Jesus Christ has made a real Atonement for our Sins, we must deeply afflict
our Souls for our Iniquities, that kindled the Wrath of God against us; that
procured so bitter a Cup for, and pluck so Heavy a Burden on Christ, and
exposed him to so grievous a storm and Tempest of Divine Vengeance: That should
not be sweet to us, that was so bitter to Christ: That should not be Light to
us, that lay so Heavy on Christ: Did God forsake his Son? Psalm. 22.1. And shall
not we forsake our sins? Isa. 55.7. The Blood of Christ purges Conscience from
dead works, Heb. 9.14. yet with our Faith in this Blood we must join Repentance
from dead works, Heb. 6.1. As a Guilty, so also a Filthy Conscience must be
purged away, Heb. 10.22. yet here we must be cautious. Repentance does not
interest us in Christ's Righteousness, neither does it earn, or deserve Pardon.
As Moses turned the Waters of Egypt into Blood, Exodus 7.19. so the Law would
turn our very Tents into Blood if there were not a Mediator, and a New Gracious
Covenant. Repentance is the Gift of God, Acts 11.18. 2 Timothy 2.25. If this Gift
does oblige us to God, Can the exercise of it Indebt God to us? We are not
Justified by, or for our Repentance, we shall greatly mistake, if we think that
Repentance, and New Obedience, do come in the Room and place of a Perfect Legal
Righteousness, by Divine Acceptance: but only the wise and gracious God has so
ordained it, that there shall be an Order in disposing of the Benefits of the
New Covenant. God gives Faith and Repentance first to prepare Men to receive
other Benefits of the Covenant. One Grace makes way for another. God strikes
the Rocky hearts of Sinners, and breaks them: he turns the Flint into a
Fountain of Water, Psalm. 114. last. And when God has broken the Hard heart,
then Christ binds up the Broken heart, and drops in the precious Balsom of his
Blood, by wounding Sinners with his Arrows, and the Sword of his Word, he
prepares them to be his Patients, and does a Cure on them. Men must be Mourners
first, before Christ can comfort them, Isa. 61.1, 2. they must become Guilty in
their own eyes, Hos. 5.15. and confess God's Actions to be Just, and his
Indictments to be True, before Christ does purge their Consciences, and roll
away their Guilt. When the Sinner is Plowed with the Spirit of Contrition, then
Christ Sows it with the Seed of his Righteousness, and the Promise of Pardon.

Object. A great Objection is raised from James his Doctrine and words, against
all that I have asserted, concerning Jehovah his being our Righteousness, and
our being Justified by his Righteousness. Was not Abraham our Father justified
by Works, when he offered up Isaac? James 2.21. Was not Rahab the Harlot
justified by works, when she received the Messengers, and sent them out another
way, James 2.25. Again, in the 24th v. it is said, Ye see then, how that by
works a Man is justified, and not by Faith only. Does not James seem to
contradict Paul? Romans 4.9. We say that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for
Righteousness, Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to
glory, but not before God: that is, Abraham has not Righteousness of his own,
or Works done by himself, to glory in before God; therefore he cannot be
Justified by Works. To him that works not, but Believes on him that
Justifies the Ungodly, his Faith is counted for Righteousness. God imputes
Righteousness without Works, Romans 4.5, 6. To this Objection I shall Answer many
things.

1. We must distinguish between the several sorts of Persons that Paul and
James had to do with; Paul's Discourse is bent against proud Justiciaries, that
thought to build up a Righteousness of their own; by which they designed both
to adorn themselves in the eye of God's Holiness, and to secure themselves from
the Sword of his Justice. And therefore Paul Teaches, that no Righteousness of
Man can weigh in God's Balance, or is pleadable at the Bar of Justice. We are
all as an unclean thing, and our Righteousnesses are but as filthy rags. By the
deeds of the Law shall no flesh living be Justified, Romans 3.20.21. Our Works
before Regeneration are all as Brass Money: our Works after Regeneration are as
Mixed Metal: therefore neither of them both will pay our Rent of Obedience, or
satisfy our Great Landlord. But James has to do with Boasting, and
self-deceiving Hypocrites, that pretend to Faith, but it is a barren, idle,
dead Faith. They did say they had Faith, but they had no Works, James 2.14.
they could not show, or evidence their Faith, because they had no Works. As the
Body, (...), that is, without breathing, is dead, James 2.18. so is Faith, if
it does not breath in Works. James his design was, to shame, confound, and
silence these Hypocrites, and to demonstrate, that they had no true Faith at
all, but did grasp a Lie, and hug an Idol of their own, instead of True Faith.
Strong Faith in Abraham did show it self, in Offering up Isaac, James 2.21. and
weak Faith in Rahab did discover it self, in aiding the Israelitish Spies, and
sending them safe away, though this might have proved dangerous to her own
Life, James 2.25.

2. Paul speaks of Faith, as it respects Christ's Righteousness, and builds,
and is acted only on this before God; James speaks of Faith, as it is to come
forth, and to be demonstrated before Men. Luther compares Faith to a Queen,
that is in the Bride-chamber alone with Christ the Bridegroom. But as this
Queen comes forth, and walks abroad before Men, so it is attended with many
Good Works, that are its Handmaids, that wait on it: it is Faith alone that
Justifies, but yet that Faith that Justifies is not solitary, or alone, but
always is fruitful in Good Works, and has influence on the whole Life, to
guide and direct it by the Light of God's Word. The life that I live in the
flesh, I live by the Faith of the Son of God, Galat. 2.20. Faith animates the
very Natural Life, and runs through all the acts and parts of it, and so
subordinates them to God's Will, and refers them all to his Glory. Luther says,
Faith sweeps the House, and Milks the Goats.

3. The Justification that James speaks of, is not a Justification of the
Person, but of the Faith of Abraham, of his sincerity and integrity, Genesis
22.12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy Son,
thy only Son from me: Not that God acquired any new knowledge that he had not
before concerning Abraham; but it is an expression in which God condescends to
our weakness; and intimates, that if God had not known Abraham's Faith and
Sincerity before, this Illustrious Fact, this Eminent Self-denying Obedience of
Abraham, would evidently, and notoriously prove the Truth of Abraham's Faith,
and the sincerity of his heart toward God. When Abraham did show such
readiness to offer up his Son, the Scripture was then fulfilled, That Abraham
believed God, and that it was counted to him for Righteousness. This
demonstrated, that the Scripture had truly asserted, that Abraham believed God,
his Faith wrought with his Works, to evidence him a sincere Believer; and his
Faith was made perfect by his Works, that is, it was provided to be genuine,
the strength and power of it was declared, as God's strength is said to be made
perfect in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. that is discovered to be perfect.

4. Paul speaks of the causes of Justification, he searches after the Springs
of it, viz. Christ's Righteousness, and Faith as receiving it; but James speaks
of the effects of Justification. A Man whose Person is Justified before God,
will certainly Justify his Faith, and Sincerity before Men, by Works of
Righteousness.

5. Paul speaks of the Justification of a Sinner; James Treats of the
Approbation of a Believer. Paul discourses of the Righteousness that must
Justify, viz. the Righteousness of Christ; James Treats of the Faith that must
Justify, of what kind, and sort it must be, not an Idle, Lazy, but a Working
Faith. Paul speaks of Justification before God, Romans 3.20, 21. James, of
Justification before Men, James 2.18. Show me thy Faith; prove it, if thou
can, to be a right Faith, if it bring not forth Good Works.

6. That James does not speak of a proper Justification of the Person of a Man
before God by Works, is evident by several Arguments.

1. The proper Justification of a Man is from Sins, that he has done, not for
Works of Righteousness that he has wrought: Good Works are not showed before
God's Tribunal; but Iniquities are Covered, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose
sin is covered. By Christ we have forgiveness of Sin, and are Justified from
all things, from which we could not be Justified by the Law of Moses: So that a
Gospel Justification is a clearing us not from a false Charge, but from a true
Accusation. Our Consciences do accuse, convince, and condemn us for sin, John
8.9. Romans 2.14, 15. We know our Transgressions, they are with us, Isa. 59.12.
but there is no such charge of Hypocrisy that lies before God against true
Believers, and Saints. They can appeal to God, as Job, Job 10.7. Lord, thou
know that I am not wicked. My witness is in Heaven, my Record is on high,
Job 16.19. Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee, John 21.17.
Therefore there is no proper Justification from a false Charge before God.
Works will only witness, and Justify from a false Charge before Men.

2. Nothing will properly Justify us, but what is Commensurate to the demands
of the Law, and that which will satisfy the Justice of God. But there is no
Obedience of ours that answers the Demands of the Law, or will satisfy
Justice; therefore we cannot be Justified by our Works. Yea, Works are not the
cause by which we are Justified; for he that is Justified, is (...), he that
works not, Romans 4.5. neither are Works a Causa sine qua non; a Cause without
which a Man is not Justified; for he that is Justified, is (...), Ungodly, Romans
4.5. Abraham himself had been an Idolater, Josh. 24.2. and in that sense was
Ungodly.

3. Nothing will properly Justify us, but that which did Justify Jesus
Christ: he could not be Justified except he had been fully conformable to the
Commands of the Law, and endured the Curse also. Nothing will Justify us the
Debtors, but what Justified Christ our Surety: Therefore we cannot be Justified
by our Works, if we could, then would Christ have Died in vain.

4. In a proper Justification we are Justified before God, Romans 3.20, 21. But
our own Works cannot be imputed to us for a Righteousness before God, because
he sees so many Faults, Blemishes, and Defects in them, Philosophers say,
there are no pure Elements, for they are mixed one with another and Divines may
say, there are no pure Duties, and Performances in the best of Saints; Paul
Complains, that he did not (...), go through with, finish, and perfect any Good
Work.

5. Our best works need a Pardon; and therefore cannot be our Righteousness to
Justify us; that which needs Forgiveness, that which deserves Punishment,
cannot earn a reward, and be accepted for a Justifying Righteousness: we need
an High Priest to bear the Iniquity of our Holy things.

6. If we could be Justified by our Good works, we should Justify our selves;
but it is God's act, and not ours to Justify, It is God that Justifies, Romans
8.33.

7. In a true Justification, we receive a Righteousness, Romans 5.17. And an
Atonement, Romans 5.11. But our Works cannot make an Atonement for us, or be a
Righteousness to us.

8. Works both before, and after Faith, are shut out from Justification before
Faith, Romans 4.5, 6. Romans 3.21, 22. The Righteousness of God is Manifested
without the Law, and the Apostle Paul not only suffered loss of all that he
accounted his gain, while a Pharisee, but also after he was Converted; he
Esteemed all but Dung, that he might win Christ, Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. He durst not
then dwell at home, or be found in his own Righteousness.

9. Abraham himself had not whereof to boast, or wherein to Glory before God:
He could not find such a Righteousness in his Heart, or such Works in his Life,
that he durst to trust to. Has Abraham our Father found as touching the Flesh,
Romans 4.1. No surely, he did not find any Righteousness or Works of his own to
plead before God. Therefore he that cannot find this Righteousness in himself,
had need to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. Though Moses was Eminently Holy, yet
when he drew near to God, and saw that Terible Glory that appeared in the
Mount; he said, I exceedingly Fear, and Quake, Heb. 12.21. He could not stand
before the Law that he gave. Saints have waved a Trial before God on the
account of Works, Psalm. 143.2. Though David was the Lord's servant, though he
did set the Judgments of God before him, and was devoted to his Fear, Psalm.
119.30, 38. yet he deprecated a Trial before God on the account of his own
Righteousness: Enter not Lord into Judgment with thy Servant. Why does he pray
so much against God's entering into Judgment with him? The reason he gives is
strong, For in thy sight shall no Man Living be Justified. For by the Law is
the Knowledge of Sin, Romans 3.20, 21. The Law was not given to Fallen Men to
Justify them, but to discover their Sins. By the Law comes nothing else to an
unregenerate Man, but the Knowledge of Sin: it allows such no Good Works at
all. If the Law once discovers Sin in Men, farewell a Justification by the Law
for ever. Faith cannot Justify it self, it is so weak, and accompanied with
such doubts, staggerings, and fears; And how shall Works Justify themselves,
that have such defects and defilements cleaving to them: Observe these four
Weighty Questions proposed in the Scripture, 1. The Heart is deceitful, and
desperately wicked, Who can know it? Jer. 17 9.2. Who can say I have made my
heart clean, I am pure from my Sin? Prove. 20.9.3. Who can understand his
errors? Psalm. 19.12.4. If thou, Lord, should mark Iniquity, who shall stand?
Psalm. 130.3, 4. Though Saints, as Job, in their pleadings with Men, held fast
their Integrity, Job 27.6. yet they have let go all confidence in their own
Works, in their approaches to God: We are all as an unclean thing, and our
Righteousnesses are but Filthy rags, Isa. 64.6.

10. Abraham was long before he offered up Isaac a Beleiver and a Justified
person, Genesis 15.6. Abraham Believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for
Righteousness: it is very observable that we have no mention or Record made of
Abraham's Faith and Justification till now, though he was called effectually
near Twenty years before: And why is the mention of Abraham's Faith and
Justification reserved till now? I answer, God now promises him, that the Son
that should come out of his own Bowels, should be his Heir, and that from this
Son should Spring a Seed as Numerous as the Stars of Heaven, Genesis 15.45. And in
Isaac Christ was Typified, and promised: as Isaac was a Child Raised from the
dead body of aged Abraham, and the dead womb of old Barren Sarah; so Jesus
Christ should be raised from the Dead; the Apostle Paul plainly parrallels
these two things, Romans 4.19.24. Abraham saw Christ's day, in the Promise, and
Birth of Isaac, John 8.56. Therefore it was exceeding proper for Moses then to
record Abraham's Faith in God, when Jesus Christ was promised, by whom we
Believe in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. As Abraham could not Believe in God, but by the
Promised Seed; so we could not be Justified, but through Christ. Now, Would
Abraham go from trusting in the perfect Righteousness of the promised Seed, to
trust in his own defective Works, and imperfect Righteousness? Certain it is,
that there is but one way of Justification: The Righteousness of God is
Revealed from Faith to Faith, Rom 1.17. It is not from Faith to Works; but
Faith at first, and all along, and at last apprehends this Righteousness of
Christ, and builds on it; Therefore the Just is said to live by Faith. Abraham
was a Believer, and Justified at his first effectual call; yet Moses Testifies,
that many years after he Believed in God, and he counted it to him for
Righteousness: so that Abraham's Faith acted on God through the promised Seed,
from first to last for Justification. Here the Apostle might take ground for
his assertion; that the Righteousness of God was revealed from Faith to Faith.
Did Abraham begin in the Spirit, as to his Justification, and would he after
this resort and repair to the Flesh to be perfected? Did the Righteousness of
the Messiah begin his Justification, and was his own Righteousness to complete
it? What would this be but to go from a Son of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. to a
candle of Righteousness? From a complete ship to a broken plank: From a
beautiful and glorious garment to a Filthy Rag, Gal. 3.27. Isa. 64.6. From a
sweet smelling Sacrifice, to stinking and lothsom Dung, Ephesians. 5.2. Phil. 3.8,
9.

11. To assert a Second Justification before God by Works; What is it but to
confound the two Covenants, to blend the Covenant of Works, and Grace together,
and to form up a Bastard-Covenant, that is not purely of Grace, or wholly of
Works, but mixed, and Compounded of both; which the Scripture dis-claims as
inconsistent? Romans 11.6. As Hagar, and Sarah, Ismael and Isaac, could not
quietly Dwell, or peaceably abide together in one Family. Hagar despised Sarah,
Genesis 16.4. and Ismael mocked at Isaac. Hagar first fled, Genesis 16.6, 7. and
afterward both Hagar and Ismael were cast out of Abraham's Tent, Genesis 21.10.
It is this seems to point at, and Type out this great truth, that the Covenant
of Works and Grace (of which these two Mothers were Types, Galat. 4.24.) Cannot
be reconciled, cannot consist together. He that Beleives has Everlasting Life,
John 5.24. John 6.54. And is this Title to Everlasting Life, weak or crazy?
Must it be waved or needs it to be fortified by our Works? Is it a good Title
for one that begins, but must another or better be sought in his progress?

2. Object. A second Objection is Raised by some against Christ's being our
Righteousness, that then we should be as Just, and Righteous as Christ; yea,
that we might be styled Saviors, and Redeemers of the World. I Answer, This
does not follow; for,

1. The First Adam's Sin is imputed to us; yet it is not true, that we are as
Great and Heinous Sinners as the First Adam. We did not Exist in our own
Persons as he did: We did not receive a Law from God Immediately as he did; or
were in our own persons invested with a Lordship over all the Creatures, and
placed in Paradise, as he was; he was a public, but we are particular, and
private persons, he Sinned in his own person, we but in him. Therefore, though
his Sin be imputed to us, yet his guilt was greater than ours: This parallel
between the First and Second Adam may somewhat answer the Objection.

2. Jesus Christ is the Author, and Subject of this Righteousness; but we are
neither; only it is imputed to us, and bestowed on us.

3. Jesus Christ's Righteousness is not imputed to us according to its full
Value; but our particular necessity, as a precious Jewel given for the
Redemption of a hundred Captives: None of them has the whole Jewel given for
him, but it is given for every one of the hundred Captives, according to his
particular Exigence, to obtain his liberty. So Christ is said to give himself
for the Church in general, Ephesians. 5.25.26. yet every Believer, according to his
own need, applies Jesus Christ to himself in particular, as Paul did; Christ
(he says) Loved me, and gave himself for me, Galat. 2.20. The Righteousness of
Christ is not accounted our intrinsic Righteousness, so indeed we should be
Reputed Saviors. It is imputed to us not according to its universal value, but
according to our particular necessity, that we by it may be accounted
Righteous. It is imputed to us as the subjects have benefit by it, but not as
the causes of it, as Amesius does judiciously express it.

Object. 3. Bellarmine further Objects, that we may be perfect in this Life,
and so not at all need Christ's Righteousness. We may see by this from whom our
Quakers have taken their doctrine of Perfection: It came out of Anti-Christ's
Forge, not out of Christ's School.

Answ. 1. This Assertion, that we may be perfect in this Life, is most false,
and expressly contradicts the Scripture, That there is not a Just Man on Earth,
that does good, and sins not, Eccles. 7.20. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the Truth is not in us, 1 John 1.8. We cannot say we
have no sin, for we have Original sin yet remaining, and dwelling in us. The
Leprosy of sin is not perfectly purged out of us, till the House of the Body is
pulled down: How else could it be said, That the Body is dead by reason of sin?
Romans 9.10. If we were perfect, how could we die? Does it suit the Justice of
God to pull and tare a perfect Creature in pieces, and to deliver it up to
Corruption? If there be no sin within, what is that which opens the Door, and
lets in Death? If there be no Bonds of sin on the Soul, how does the Bondage of
Corruption come on the Body? God has wisely ordered it, that Persons shall not
come to the Mark of Perfection, till they also arrive at the Prize of Glory.
How Foolish and False is it for Persons to say they are perfect, and yet have
not attained to the Prize of Glory, but are in a frail and miserable Estate?
God designs not that Persons shall be absolutely perfect in a Natural Body. 1.
That the Threatening may be fulfilled, Dust thou art, and to dust thou shall
return, Genesis 3.19. 2. That Christians may have an Enemy to Wrestle and Conflict
with whilst they are here, Ephesians. 6.12. 1 Timothy 6.12. 3. That Believers may
still act Faith on Jesus Christ, and repair to him for Help, Healing and
Salvation. God will not utterly take away the Fiery Serpents, Satan, and our
Lust, that we may resort to Jesus Christ for a continual Cure, and Christ may
never be out of date or use with us.

1. Use. If Jehovah be the Righteousness of the Church, this may reprove those
that do not stop in, or satisfy themselves with this Righteousness. The
Apostle Paul, in Galat. 3.1. thus addresses himself to the Galatians; O foolish
Galatians! Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth? before
whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth as Crucified. The Apostle
Paul, and others, had drawn the Picture of Christ Crucified, in beautiful and
lively Colors; he had described the Causes, the Ends, the Greatness and
Grievousness of Christ's Sufferings; and he wonders that any should darken
their Minds, and, as it were, bewitch their Eyes, that they should not see the
Loveliness, and Excellency of this Glorious Object, and comply with the Ends
and Designs of Christ's Death. Would Jesus Christ stoop so low? Would he endure
such hard, and heavy things, to have only a share in our Justification? Shall
any put in a joynt-stock with Christ? Shall they contribute to their own
Redemption and Justification? Will Christ be a Partner only with our Works and
Righteousness? Shall a Crown be put on the head of the Creature, as well as one
set on the Head of Christ? Is this the utmost product of all Christ's bitter
Sufferings, to do but half in our Justification? Will not a Man both deceive,
and endanger himself, that sets one Foot on a strong Bough, and another on a
rotten one? Will not such an one fall? So he that leans on Christ in part, and
on his own Righteousness in part, will be frustrated and disappointed; will
miscarry and perish: The Church is thus described, as leaning on her Beloved,
Cant. 8.5. It is this Arm only that can support us, and it is Christ's
Righteousness that must keep us from sinking into Destruction. How ignorant are
Men of their Sins, if they think these Waters are not so deep, but they can
Wade through them, and not need Christ, as an Ark, to carry them over? How
blind are they, that think, their Wounds are not so dangerous, but they can
heal them? or that Judge, their Transgressions are not so heavy, but they can
cast in Religious Duties and Good Works enough to fetch up the Scale from the
Ground, and make a Compensation for their Offenses, and to Ransom themselves
from Destruction? The Papists here are highly guilty of darkening this Glorious
Name of Christ, and of Robbing him of the Honor of it: they assert, that a Man
may do such Good Works before Justification, that render it meet that God
should give him Grace; and that by Good Works done after Justification he may
Merit Glory. They affirm, that we are Justified, not by Forgiveness, or not
imputing our Trespasses, as the Scripture says, 2 Cor. 5.19. but by the
infusion of Righteousness into us. Alensis says, that Justificatio est
rectitudo liberi arbitrii; that is, it is the Reforming, and Rectifying of
Man's Free Will; the bringing of the Soul to love God. But this is a proud and
false Doctrine in this (as well as other Senses) Rome is Egypt, Revel. 11.8. as
it asserts a River of Inherent Righteousness below, and that they need not that
God should Rain an Imputed Righteousness on them, as the Poet said of the
Ground, and Herbs of Egypt, Nec pluvio supplicat Herba Jovi: their Ground and
Herbs did not Pray to Jupiter to send Rain. A part of Egypt is satisfied with
the River Nilus, and has no Rain, as the Scriptures teach us, Zech. 14.18.
They think to climb to Heaven by a proud Babel of their own Building, and not
to ascend thither by the Ladder of Christ's Righteousness. As this is a proud,
so it is a false Doctrine. 1. It destroys the Parallel that the Apostle Paul
makes between Christ's being made Sin, and our being made Righeousness, 2 Cor.
5.21. as Christ was made sin, though he had not Inherent sin, but only our sins
Imputed to him, so we are made Righteousness, by the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness to us, though we have not a perfect Inherent Righteousness of our
own.

2. Nothing Justifies before God but a Perfect Obedience and Righteousness; our
own, at best, is not such, therefore we need Christ's Righteousness. Christ, as
applying himself to us, is the efficient cause of our Righteousness, and
Christ, as applied, is the formal cause of it, as Amesius in his [Bellarminus
enervatus] excellently asserts.

3. If we are Justified by an Inherent Righteousness of our own, there would be
no room, pretense, or color, for that Objection, that the Jews, and all
Natural Men are ready to make against the Doctrine of Justification. Shall we
not sin then, that Grace may abound? Romans 6.1. If God Justifies by pardoning
our sins, and not imputing our Trespasses, then, the more we offend, then the
more Glory Grace will have in forgiving our Iniquities, and so we may let the
Reins loose to our Lusts. But if Paul did assert our Justification to be by
infusing of Righteousness into us, the more Righteousness is Infused into us,
the more we should be restrained from sin, and the less need Mercy to Pardon
our sins; and there would be no color for such an Objection as the Jews did
raise from the Apostle's Doctrine.

2. There are others that we own as Brethren, and account as sound in the main
of the Doctrine of Justification, yet we may modestly enquire, whether some of
their notions, or expressions, are calculated to advance the Glory of Christ's
Righteousness in the Justification of the Ungodly.

1. They assert that Faith and Repentance are proper conditions of the Covenant
of Grace, and of our Justification. A Condition, properly taken, is Influential
into Right; if performed, it gives Right unto the benefit promised; if not
performed, there is no Right: and therefore is a cause, (says Mr. Petto in his
opening of the Old and New Covenant, Page 216.) Faith (as he says) gives no
Right, John 1.12. It receives Jesus Christ, and in him a Right and Title to the
Blessings of the Covenant; but it does not give one. Faith is not reckoned the
least of that Righteousness, whereby we are Justified; but a means for the
Applying of Jesus Christ who is our Righteousness. The Covenant, as to that
Privilege of it, Justification, is not so absolute, as to be without all
means, yet may be absolute, without any condition, properly so called Petto,
Page 217.
. Believing does not now take the place of doing in the Old Covenant, for then
it must be our Righteousness unto Justification; whereas that which Justifies,
is called the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10.6. Phil. 3.9. therefore Faith is
distinct from that Righteousness it self, and is not the least Atom of it Page
198, 199.
. Therefore, not our Believing, but the Obedience of Jesus Christ, is that
which comes in the Room, and Stead, of that doing for Life intended in the
Law, Romans 5.19. Christ is the Lord our Righteousness; but to note, that it
lies wholly out of our selves, that it is not by any of our performances, but
in another, even in Jesus Christ, it is said to be by Faith, as a means of
Application. Faith (though necessary) does receive a Title from Jesus Christ,
does not give one. Page 201.
We do not claim Salvation in the Right of any act of ours, not upon the Rent
of Faith -- we hold and claim upon the Obedience of Christ Jesus alone, Romans
5.18, 19, 21. If Faith be a proper condition, and not an instrument, let it be
considered. 1. Whether we are not then Justified by Faith as a work. Now the
Scripture distinguishes, and opposes Working and Believing, Romans 4.5.
Therefore surely Faith is not considered as a Work in Justification. In a
condition, the dignity, and perfection of the Work is properly to be attended
to, but an instrument respects the Excellency of the object; hence a weak Faith
Justifies as much as a strong Faith, because we are not Justified by our own
act, but by the object that we look to. Calvin in his Antidote against the 6th
Session of the Council of Trent, says, Neque et enim quicquam nostrum fides
affert ad Deum, sed, quod ultro affert nobis Deus, recipit. Faith brings
nothing of ours to God, but only receives what he offers: hence, says he it
is, that Faith, though imperfect, does possess a perfect Righteousness; because
it has no other respect but to the free Goodness of God. 2. A condition is
properly to be done before we have a Right to the benefit promised; but Faith
receives Christ immediately, and feeds on him. In our very Believing, we are
put into Possession of Christ, and have the Son, 1 John 5.11, 12.3. To have a
Right, is a less benefit than we have by Faith; for a Man may have a Right, and
not have Possession, but be put to sue it: but by Faith we receive the
Testimony of Christ, and receive Christ himself, John 1.32, 33. 1 John 12.4.
That which is promised in the Covenant, cannot properly be a condition of the
Covenant. In those words, They shall all know me from the greatest to the
least: Faith seems to be promised, Jer. 31.34. Faith is a manner of knowing of
things upon the Testimony of another, and Faith seems to be called Knowledge,
Isa. 53.11. Besides, it seems too high a thing for us, thus to plead with God;
Lord, we have performed the condition of the Covenant, and therefore justly
claim the benefit as due to us. Surely it seems most humble for us, and most
for the Glory of God's Grace, and of Christ's Righteousness, that Faith should
be considered rather as a Beggar's hand, than as a Working hand: the hand Faith
is not a Working hand to earn and gain a Righteousness; but a Beggar's hand to
receive a gift: we are said to receive the Testimony of Christ, John 3.33. to
receive Christ, John 1.12. To receive Righteousness, Romans 5.17. To receive the
Atonement, Romans 5.17. To receive the remission of Sins, Acts 26.18. All these
Expressions seem to point at Faith, as an Instrument rather than as a
condition; We receive Christ as our Righteousness, as our Food, as our Ransom,
as our Medicine, in the first direct acts of Faith: these things do not come
after believing, but are received in, and by Believing, as a Beggar makes an
Alms his own by receiving it.

And though we own a contrite Repenting Sinner to be the subject of
Justification; yet we cannot own that Repentance does receive the Righteousness
of Christ, this belongs to Faith alone, or that Repentance is a condition that
puts any worth into us, as our act of Obedience, but rather that God requires
it, because it empties, impoverishes, and wholly drives us out of our selves to
God's free mercy, and to Christ's Atoneing Sacrifice: God requires a broken
Heart, not for any worth in the matter of contrition, but because, by
contrition, all conceits of self-worthiness are expelled, and the contrite man
renounceth his own Works, worth, and merit, and despises his own doings as a
broken Vessel. Such an one is most fit to receive the Grace, and free pardon of
God, as Mr. Dickson well expresses it on Psalm. 51.17. A Malefactor, though
never so Penitent, is not thereby qualified to be Justified from that Capital
Crime he has committed; but if just compensation be made, and full
Satisfaction be given to the Law (as Christ has done) this may be pleaded to
prevent Death. Repentance is also promised in the Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new
Heart also will I give to you, and a new Spirit will I put within you: I will
take away the Heart of Stone, and give you a Heart of Flesh, and therefore
cannot be a proper condition of the Covenant of Grace. Faith and Repentance in
their own Nature, do both renounce themselves, as Righteousness, or
qualifications to make us meet to be Justified; the Obedience that Christ, as a
surety, has performed, is the proper condition on which the Covenant of Grace
is built: Has Christ performed the perfect condition of the new Covenant, and
yet set up imperfect ones to be performed by us, to give us a right to the
Covenant and its Blessings?

2. Some Brethren do enlarge the object of Justifying Faith, and make Christ,
as King, as well as Priest, the Object of Justifying Faith; or that we must
receive Christ, as King as well as Priest, as a condition of our Justification.

Answ. We own that the Faith that Justifies, does receive Christ as King; but
we deny that it closes with Christ as King, as it is Justifying. Christ, as
King, subdues us to God, mortifies our Lusts, writes his Laws in our Hearts;
but these things relate to our Sanctification, not to our Justification.
Christ, as Priest only, has a proper influence on our Justification as such;
he was made under the Command, and endured the Curse of the Law. The taking of
Christ for our Lord, the choosing, and accepting of him as our King, is the
root, spring, and beginning of our new Obedience. Our very Subjection to Christ
is an imperfect and a defective act of Obedience; we do not fully Submit to
Christ: There is a Negative vote, there is a Rebellious party; there is a Law
of Sin in our Flesh. And can we look on a weak imperfect act of our Obedience,
as giving us right and title to the perfect Obedience, and complete
Righteousness of Christ? Choosing and taking Christ for King is certainly a
work of ours; and if we are Justified by it, as a condition, Are we not
Justified by a Work of our own? Is not this to bring in our Works in the root
and principle of them into Justification? And must we not beware, that though
we have Works in our Superstructure, yet we have them not in our Foundation?

3. Some set up that, which they call an Evangelical Righteousness of our own,
consisting in the fulfilling the conditions of the new Law, or Covenant; and
that it is this that entitles us to the Righteousness of Christ, which they
call our Legal Righteousness: Our Brethren (I hope) do not mean that our own
Evangelical Righteousness is our immediate Righteousness, and the Righteousness
of Christ our remote Righteousness. Surely Christ's Righteousness is our
immediate, only perfect Righteousness for Justification. By a new Law, I hope,
they do not mean, a Law that requires less duty than the Moral Law, or makes
those imperfactions to be no Sins that the Moral Law does condemn as
Transgressions. All our new Obedience cannot be any proper condition of the
Covenant because the performance of it is the Fruit of God's performing his
promise to us, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit into them, and cause them to
walk in my Statutes, and to keep my Judgments and Commandments. Our Obedience
is defective, and imperfect; And can this be the condition of our Title to
Christ's Righteousness? Persons must beware that they do not Legalize the
Covenant of Grace, yea, set up an easier Covenant of works.

2. Use. If Jehovah be our Righteousness, then we may be informed of three
things.

1. Of the wonderful wisdom. 2. Of the exact Righteousness. 3. Of the admirable
Grace of God.

1. We may learn the wonderful wisdom of God, that he has Reconciled two
things, that seemed contrary, and utterly inconsistent. That the Just should be
Condemned, and the Wicked Justified, Prove. 17.15. yet both these God has
accomplished without any stain to his Holiness, reflection on, or reproach to
his Justice. Jesus Christ that knew no sin, yet was made sin, 2 Cor. 5.21. that
Just one died for the Unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. What was more remote from the
thoughts, and hid from the minds of Natural Men, than that the Son of God
should stoop from Heaven to Earth, be not only clothed with our Flesh, but also
be burdened with our Sins, and the weight of our Curse: That he should come
under our Iniquities, that we might come into his Righteousness. The very
finding out a Surety, and the constituting of a Mediator, is a deep design of
Infinite Wisdom: That another should expiate our sins, and pay a Ransom for our
Souls.

2. We may be informed of the exact Righteousness, and inexorable Justice of
God; How just is God, that he would not be appeased without an Atoning
Sacrifice? that he would not dismiss Prisoners, or release Captives without a
Ransom, or Justify without an Obedience? Romans 3.24, 25. Romans 5.19. The Debt
must be exacted of Christ, the Storm must fall, the Curse must be executed on
him, else he could not be our Righteousness. Christ was set forth for a
Propitiation, that God might be just, and the Justifier of them that believe in
Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26. God's Sword did awake against Christ, else it could never
have been laid asleep toward us, Zech. 13.7. Our Sins were laid on Christ, our
Iniquities took hold of him, our Reproaches, whereby we reproached God, did
fall on Christ, Romans 15.3. he could not be spared, the Cup could not pass from
him: God could not release, or exempt his own Son from Sufferings. The Lord
Jesus was so bound, by his own undertaking, as a Surety, that he could not use
his own Tongue to plead for, and vindicate himself: he could not exert, or
exercise his own power to restrain his Enemies, or to rescue himself from them.
It was just that God should bruise Christ, as he became our Surety; it is now
just that God should Pardon those that fly to Christ, 1 John 1.9. There was a
Redemption of Transgressions by the Death of Christ, Heb. 9.15. Some think this
Phrase, the Redemption of Transgressions, is borrowed from that Hebrew Phrase,
(...), Goel hadam, the Redeemer, or Avenger of Blood. Our Transgressions were
Redeemed by being avenged in the Death of Christ. Sin would have for ever laid
on us, if it had not been bought off by the Blood of Christ. God is said to
Justify the Ungodly, Romans 4.6. but it is because Jesus Christ died for the
ungodly, Romans 5.6. God would not have been at peace with us, if the
Chastisement of our peace had not fallen on Christ, Isa. 53.5.

3. We may be informed of the admirable, and astonishing Grace of God, that
Jehovah, the Son, should become our Righteousness. This Righteousness of Christ
is not derived to us, does not descend upon us as Adam's sin does. Adam was a
Natural Head, we were nearly related to him, as the Father of our Flesh, as the
Root, and Fountain of our Nature; and so we must needs be involved in his
Guilt, and wrapped up in his Transgression: it is our Patrimony, and Inheritance,
for we are by Nature Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. But Christ is a
Supernatural Head, a Second Adam, constituted by mere Grace. We were wholly
strangers, and no way Related to him but by pure Mercy. His Righteousness is
wholly a Gift, Romans 5.17. We were born under Adam's sin; but it is by Faith that
we come into Christ's Righteousness. Guilt is spoken of as that which is past:
By the Disobedience of one many have been made sinners; but Justification is
spoken of as Future, By the obedience of one shall many be made righteous, Romans
5.19. that is, when they fly to him, and are found in him. O what Grace is this
that sinners should be cut out of their Natural Stock, and be grafted into a
Supernatural Stock? that we should not be condemned for our own sins, but be
justified by the Righteousness of another. That God should Rain Vengeance on
him, and Righteousness on us. That Jesus Christ should be cast into Prison
himself, Isa. 53.8. that he might call us out of Prison, Isa. 49.9. that he
should be wounded to heal us, and be bruised to bind us up, Isa. 53.9, 10. Isa.
61.1. that a Vail should be cast over Christ's Innocence, by our Iniquity taken
on him, that a Vail might be cast over our sins, by his Righteousness imputed
to us. There was an Offense committed that might have remained on us, and have
destroyed us: But O what kindness is this, that there should be a Free Gift of
Righteousness to relieve and justify us, Romans 5.15. Christ Redeemed us from
Destruction, by devoting himself to Death for us; in the Hebrew, (...),
signifies to Redeem; in the Arabic, Fada, fignifies to Devote ones self to
Death. This Fada is the same word with the Hebrew Phada; and, by comparing the
two significations of the word in the two Languages, we learn this excellent
Truth Vid. Oriental Lexicon.
, That we are Redeemed by Christ's devoting himself to Death for us. What we
our selves should have fully wrought out, that Christ has bought, and freely
gives us, Dan. 9.24. Romans 5.19. O how should we admire God? Who is a God like
to him, glorious in Holiness? Exodus 15.11. Yet who is a God like to him,
pardoning iniquity, and passing by Transgression and Sin, Mic. 7.18, 19. As he
is Holy, he hates sin; yet, as he is Gracious, he pities Sinners. His Holiness
does not hinder, or obstruct his Mercy.

3d. Use. Examine your selves, whether you can truly call Jehovah by this sweet
and comfortable Name: Is he your Righteousness? Are you invested with this
Righteousness, and discharged from your Sins? Put these following Questions to
your selves for Trial.

1. Did you ever come to your selves? Luke 15.17. Did you ever feel your selves
to be bound with Cords of Guilt, laden with Iniquity, ready to sink into the
Bottomless Pit. Men must be Condemned before they are Justified; be cast down,
before they are lifted up; apply the Curse to themselves, before they apply the
Blessing; hear the Sentence of Death denounced against them by the Law, before
they partake of Justification of Life by the Gospel: as the World was first
without the Law, and then the Israelites were under the Law, and then Christ
came with Righteousness and Peace. So every Justified Sinner is first without
the Law: he is alive, and full of hopes, because he is without the Law, Romans
7.9. he knows not the Spirituality of the Commands of the Law, nor the Severity
of its Threatenings; he has a Calm, and Peace, because he never imputed his
Numerous sins to himself, or bound his Heinous Iniquities on himself. The Soul
is a dead Sea, without motion toward God, and yet is a calm and quiet Sea,
without dread, and fear of God. But when God intends good to the Soul, first
the Commandment comes, Romans 7.9. and then Sin Revives; and a Storm is raised in
the Soul: but, in due time, Faith comes, Gal. 3.25. and then the Soul is
calmed, and quieted, being Justified by Faith, we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5.1. If you were nevere burdened, you cannot be
eased; if you were never broken, you cannot be bound up; if you were never
mourners, you cannot be Comforted; if you never tasted the bitterness of Sin,
you cannot taste the sweetness of the Grace of Christ, and experience his
purifying Blood, and his reviving Righteousness: If you are Justified, How did
you come by Pardon, and Peace? Can you call them Naphtali, that you got them by
wrestling? It is said, Israel shall be Justified, and saved, Isa. 45.17. last.
Jacob wrestled with the Angel for a Blessing: his Conscience might accuse him
for Fraud and Lying in procuring the Blessing from blind Isaac, yet he held the
Angel fast, (said he) and would not let him go except he did Bless him, Genesis
32.26. And for this his Name was changed, and he was called Israel, Genesis 32.28.
When we find Sin stirring in us, when Conscience accuses, the Law curses; God,
according to the first Covenant, condemns; To Believe on Christ for
Righteousness, is, as Peter's walking on the Sea in a storm. If we have ever
felt the smart of our wounds, the Schorching heat of God's Wrath, the Burning
Poison of the old Serpent in our Consciences; If (...) were ever arrested,
arraigned, condemned, shut up, surely in the anguish of your Souls you have
cried out, (We are destitute of Righteousness; and where shall we find it? we
have contracted guilt, and provoked Wrath, And where shall we be Found?

2. Were you ever divorced from, and dead to the Law, and Covenant of Works as
your First Husband, and then Married to Christ? we are first joined to the Law,
and the Covenant of Works, as our First Husband; and it makes us a jointure of
Life upon condition of perfect Obedience. The Apostle compares the Law to a
Husband, but the froward Heart of Man is not subject to this Husband. The more
the Commands of the Law are urged on it, the more it contradicts, and Rebels.
The motions of Sin are said to be by the Law, Romans 7.5. but the Fruits of
Righteousness are by Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.11. The Law cannot Sanctify, or
Justify us; this is the (...), Romans 8.3. the thing that is impossible to the
Law. Have you therefore been divorced from, and become dead to the Law, Romans
7.4. as it is a Covenant of Works? Have you despaired of finding righteousness
in your selves, and of obtaining a Blessing from the Law, and so have looked,
and fled to Jesus Christ Heb. 12.24.
, as those that have been pursued by sin and the wrath of Ged? Paul says, Gal.
2.16. Knowing that a Man is not Justified by the Works of the Law, but by the
Faith of Christ, Even we have Believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
Justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of the Law: For by the
Works of the Law shall no Flesh be Justified.

3. Are you Sanctified? Justification, and Sanctification always go together:
as in the Natural Body, the Blood, and Spirits do flow out together; so the
Blood and Spirit of Christ are always joined, John 19.34. Blood and Water
Signifiing the Spirit came together out of Christ's Side. He comes by Water and
Blood, 1 John 5.6. else he would be but half and imperfect Savior: As the same
day that the Waters went off form the Earth, and were gathered into the Sea;
the Earth was adorned with Grass, Herbs, Flowers, Trees, Genesis 9.11. So when a
deluge of Wrath goes off from the Soul, it is presented, adorned with the
grace of the Spirit, and called a Tree of Righteousness, Isa. 61.2 Those that
are Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, are also Justified by the Spirit
of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. If God Loves the Soul, he makes it Lovely; If Christ
washes you, he also makes you Kings, and Priests, Revel. 1.5, 6. You are no
longer Vassals to your Lusts, but, as Kings, rule in your own Hearts. You check
vain thoughts, control vile affections, subdue and yield your Spirits to God.
You also are Priests, first offering up your selves, and then offering up
Prayers and Praises to God. Under Christ's Priesthood of Atonement, there
Springs up another Priesthood of Gratitude, and Thanksgiving. As on Christ, the
Altar, God presents the Flesh, and Blood of Jesus, as Sustenance to us; So on
the same Altar we offer our Souls, and Bodies, and all Spiritual performances,
as precious Sacrifices to God. Justification is joined with strength to resist,
and overcome Sin, Isa. 45.24. Surely shall one say, in the Lord I have
Righteousness and strength. Jesus at once, Satisfied for Sin, and also
curcified our old Man, Romans 6.6. Christ ruined the Natural Life of the First
Adam, he destroyed that Life and Body that is the Subject of Sin; and the
Members by which it is executed. The animal Life is a great Temptation to Sin:
we are enticed by the Pleasures, Profits, and Honors that belong to it. Christ
therefore abolished it, as an imperfect Life in himself, that he might destroy
it as a Sinful Life in us. He pulled away the Earth in which this weed grows,
and pulled down (as Sampson) the very house in which our Lusts, as Spiritual
Philistines dwell, as the first Adam's corrupt Nature passes with the guilt of
Adam's first Sin, so the new Nature of Jesus Christ, passes to Souls together
with his Righteousness: In the same Testament that Christ does dispose
Remission of Sins, he does also Bequeath a new Heart, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. If God
blots Sins out of his Book, he will write his Laws also in our Hearts. If he
Reverse the Sentence of Death passed on us, he will breath the Spirit of Life
into us. Those that are sprinkled with Christ's Blood, are Redeemed from all
Iniquity, and consecrated to God. As a Redeemed People, they are obliged to be
first Fruits to God, Revel. 14.4. and as a Regenrated People, they are enabled
to be Firstfruits to God, Jam. 1.18. Where Christ washes with his Blood, he
does also anoint with his Spirit.

Are we adopted? John 1.12. Have we power, and right to be called the Sons of
the living God? Hos. 1.10. Are we the Children of the Lord Almighty? 2 Cor. 6.
last. Justification is always attended with Adoption. Those that receive a
white stone, that is, are absolved, acquitted, Justified from all their Sins,
they have also in this white Stone a new Name, Revel. 2.17. What is this new
Name, but the Name of a Child of God? Adoption is an Amplification of our
Justification. We are not only pronounced as Righteous, and owned as Friends;
but reputed and accepted as Sons, and Daughters: are nearly Related, and
greatly endeared to God. Are you the Children of God not by Hagar, the Bond
Woman, but by Sarah, the Free Woman? Do you serve with a free Spirit, and not
as slaves, that have no delight in God, and could wish his Law were totally
abrogated?

5. Do you love God and Christ? Luke 7.47. She loved much, because much was
Forgiven her. When great debts are Remitted, Heinous crimes are Pardoned, deep
Spots and Stains are fetched out, this calls for highest, and hottest Love: He
that covers Transgessions seeks. Love, Prove. 17.9. Then surely God and
Christ have sought our Love, by covering our Sins, Psalm. 32.1, 2. Our
Iniquities are many ways aggravated, and so are of a Scarlet, and Crimson Dye,
Isa. 1.18. And for this deep dye to be washed and fetched out; and for them to
become as white as Snow and Wool, this is wonderful Mercy; For a Sinner to be
as much accepted with God, as if he had never Offended, and Transgressed: Our
Sins as Committed against God are Talents, and as they have been multiplied,
it is a debt of Ten Thousand Talents; and for this whole debt to be freely
Forgiven, 2 Col. 13. And for the Blood of Christ to be the clean Water to purge
away Sin, Ezekiel. 36.25. Revel. 1.5. this must needs warm, and enlarge the Heart,
heighten and inflame the affections toward God. If you do not give your Hearts
to God, if you do not set your Love on Christ, it is a plain Sign that you have
not Tasted of the Grace of God, or experienced the Kindness of Christ in
Forgiving your Sins.

6. What free access have you to God, and what joy and Delight have you in him?
Are your Consciences so perfected, that is, so perfectly purged, that you dare
to draw nigh to God, and that with confidence? Heb. 7.19. Heb. 10.19. It is a
great thing to have boldness to enter into the Holiest Place, and to approach
to the Highest Majesty, Heb. 12.23. Jisus Christ died to bring us to God, 1
Pet. 3.18. Dare we to come to God the Judge of all, as being assured he will
not Condemn us? Heb. 12.23. Do we rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
having now received the Atonement? Romans 5.11. Do we rejoice in what God is to
us, in what he has done for us, and in what he farther designs toward us? Can
we Feast on Mount Ebal, Deuteronomy. 27.7.13, 14, 15. where the Curses were
Proclaimed? Can we there Triumph, because Christ Jesus has redeemed us from
the Curse of the Law, by being made a Curse for us? Gal. 3.13. Are we so
Justified in the Lord as to glory? Isa. 45. last. In the Lord shall all the
Seed of Israel be Justified, and Glory: Can you Glory over all Accusers, and
Accusations? Do you glory in the Person in whom, and in the Righteousness by
which you are Justified? there is no exception against the Person that
Justifies, and there is no flaw or defect in the Righteousness that is
imputed: Surely shall one say in the Lord I have Righteousness; so it is in the
Hebrew, (...), There is a full and complete Righteousness in Christ: as Christ
Rising from the dead did carry away our Sins, so he propagates a new Nature to
the Redeemed. Is our Justification matter of greatest joy to us? Isa. 61.10. I
will greatly rejoice in the Lord, and joy in my God, for he has covered me
with the Robe of Righteousness.

7. Do you much Praise and Bless God for Reconciling, and Pardoning of you?
Psalm. 103.12.3. Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me Bless his
Holy Name -- who forgiveth all thine iniqutites. O Lord I will Praise thee, For
thou wast angry with me, but thine anger is turned away, and thou do comfort
me, Isa. 12.1. In the times of the Gospel it is said, Men shall show forth the
Praises of the Lord, Isa. 60.6. The time of the Gospel is as a Pleasant and
Delightful Spring; The Winter is past, the Rain is over and gone, the time of
the Singing of Birds is now come, Cant. 2.11, 12. The Spring is (as it were) a
mediator between the extreme cold of Winter, and the excessive heat of Summer,
and so is a fit Emblem of the times of the Gospel in which Christ is Revealed
as a Mediator between us that are so cold, as destitute of the Love of God, and
God that is a consuming Fire to Sinners, and therefore this is a fit season for
the Singing of Birds. Justified Souls will sing Praises to God that heals their
Backslidings; and to Jesus Christ that is their Righteousness and Ransom: The
Redeemed of the Lord shall return to Zion with Songs, Isa. 35. last. Though the
Ark was heavy laden with Noah his Family, all the Birds, Beasts, living
creatures, and suitable Food for them that was laid up in the Ark, yet it did
not sink, but was born up by the Waters; so what matter of Praise is it, that
we that are heavy laden with Iniquity are born up by the blood of Christ, and
do not sink into Predition? We are guilty Creatures, our mouths are stopped as we
are Sinners, Romans 3.19. But, O! what a wonderful and amazing change is this,
that we should be so Justified by the Grace of God, and thorugh the Redemption
of Christ, that the mouths of Spiritual Enemies, and accusers are stopped? Romans
8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect, it is God that
Justifies? Who shall condemn, it is Jesus Christ that has died? Our Lips were
sealed up with Guilt; now the mouths of Accusers are stopped by Christ's
Satisfaction, And shall not our Lips be opened, and our Tongues loosed, to Sing
aloud of God's Grace, and of Christ's Righteousness?

8. Are we willing to go out of this World, to die, and to be with God, and
Jesus Christ? those that are Justified have Peace with God, and rejoice in hope
of the Glory of God, Romans 5.1, 2. Those that are in a Storm do dread the Shore,
least they should be Shipwrackt; but they that have good weather do desire it.
Though Condemned Sinners shall be cast away on the Shores of a miserable
Eternity: yet Justified Souls shall be landed safe in the Harbor of a blessed
Eternity. When others pass into the Prison, Justified Persons enter into the
Palace of God. When the Tares are reaped for the Furnace, Believers are reaped
for, and gathered into the Garner, Matthew. 3.12. Will Justified Persons shun the
Glorious Presenc of God, or slavishly dread his Tribunal? Shall Pardoned and
Adopted Persons be afraid to go home to their Father, and be put into the
possession of their Heavenly Inheritance? Are you therefore willing to be
absent from the Body, and to be present with the Lord? 2 Cor. 5, 6, 8. It is a
great thing to be willing to part with the Body, that is one half of us, to
leave it in the dark Chamber of the Grave, to feed Worms, to crumble to Dust,
to sleep for a long Night, till the Morning of the Resurrection. Yet Paul
says, We are always confident, and willing to be absent from the Body, and to
be present with the Lord. The sight of Christ's Face, the enjoyment of his
Glory, is more to me, then Union with the Body. Can you therefore conquer the
Fears of Death? Are you willing to leave your place on Earth, to enjoy the
Place prepared for you in Heaven? to put off the Rags of Mortality, that you
may be clothed with the Robes of Glory? to quit your Tabernacle for a Heavenly
House?

4. Use. O! desire earnestly, and seek diligently to partake of this
Righteousness of Christ.

2. If you are interested in it, if Jehova be your Righteousness, O be thankful
for it.

1. O seek that Jehovah may be your Righteousness: For the prosecuting of this
First Branch of the Use of Exhortation, I shall do two things. 1. I shall lay
down some Motives to quicken, and urge you to seek an Interest in Christ's
Righteousness. 2. I shall lay down some Directions how you may partake of, and
be Invested with the Righteousness of Christ.

1. Consider the great want, and need you have of this Righteousness.

1. In your Natural State, you are far from Righteousness, Isa. 46. Ye
stouthearted, that are far from Righteousness: and, You are free from
Righteousness, Romans 6.20. that is, a Carnal Man has nothing to do with it:
they are not under the Empire, Dominion and Command of it. Men are dead Trees,
and therefore can bring forth no good fruit; but they are corrupt Trees, and
are laded with evil Fruit. As they are alienated from the Life of God, they
cannot act for him, or please him, Ephesians. 4.8. Romans 8.8. but as they have a
Carnal Life, they cannot act against him, and walk contrary to him. Men's
thoughts are evil from their youth, Genesis 8.21. yea, they are born flesh, John
3.6. yea, the Holy Ghost goes one step farther, In sin they are conceived, in
iniquity they are shapen, Psalm. 51.5. they are not only idle, and do not work,
Matthew. 20.6. but they are dead, and cannot work for God, 2 Col. 13. A corrupt
Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, Matthew. 7.17, 18. The carnal mind is enmity
to God, it is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be; they that
are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8. A Natural Man is so far from
being Sanctified by his Religious Services, that he pollutes them all, Hag.
2.14, 15. The Sacrifice of the Wicked, that is, his best Actions, and the way
of the Wicked, that is, his common Actions, are both an Abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 15.8, 9. The Law will not acknowledge in, or allow to an
Unconverted Man one good Work, Romans 3.20. by the Law comes only the knowledge
of sin. The Scripture, that is the Law, has concluded all, (...), all things
of an Unregenerate Man under Sin: all done by him, all that flows from him: all
the Thoughts, Intentions, Affections, Words and Actions of such. The Mind is
darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. And can a blind Archer aim right at the Mark? The Heart
is Whorish, Ezekiel. 6.9. And will a Whorish Heart love God, or direct any action
to please him? Can a corrupt Fountain send forth sweet waters? Men, till
Regenerate, do nothing else but sin: the Plague of the Heart infects all; the
Leprosy of the Soul defiles all that a Man does, 1 Kings 8.38. as a Fountain
casts forth its water, so they cast forth their wickedness, Jer. 6.7. The whole
Life of Men is cursed barrenness, or wicked fruitfulness. Christ is said to be
the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the World, 1 John 29. it is
expressed in the singular number, the sin of the World; to Note, and signify
to us, that the whole Life of an Unregenerate Man is one continued sin: wholly
a course of Enmity, Provocations and Rebellions against God, Zech. 3.3, 4* We
have that expression, Take away the filthy garments. This Notes, that all the
acts of an Unregenerate Man are filthy, and only filthy Garments. They are all
over defiled, and therefore wholly to be taken away. But the expression is
otherwise concerning the Saints, that they washed their Garments white in the
blood of the Lamb, Revel. 7.14. the Garments were not wholly cast off, or put
away, but washed. There was some good in them, and yet they had Spots, and
Stains to be washed out. This is the difference between an Unregenerate, and a
Regenerate Man, that an Unregenerate Man needs to be dipped wholly into the
Red Sea of the Blood of Christ. All is corrupt, and defiled: he needs a general
Pardon for his whole Life, for all his Thoughts, Words and Actions. But as
Christ says to Peter, A Believer that is washed, needs not to save to wash
his Feet; but is clean every whit, as one that has been in a Bath, and there
washed his whole Body; yet, as he comes out, and walks to his Lodging, he may
defile his Feet, and need to wash them. Believers need not Pardons for their
whole State, as the Unregenerate have; but for their particular Failings, and
Defects in their Actions.

2. All your Sins are Recorded till you are Justified. They are Written in
God's Book; Behold it is written before me, Isa. 65.6. The Great King Writes
the Chronicle of all his Subjects, and of all their Thoughts, Words and Actions
throughout the World, and all Ages. That must needs be an Infinite Mind that
can Know, and Remember so many things. Men's Iniquity is said to be Written, so
to be marked before God, Jer. 2.22. and there is a Counter-part of this Record
kept in the Sinner's own Conscience, Jer. 17.1. The sin of Judah is graven with
a Pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond. But where? It is answered, In the
Table of their heart. From hence the sin did flow, and hither did the guilt of
it return. When a sin is committed, and when a Debt is contracted, Conscience
keeps the Bond, and, in due time, will bring it forth, and join with the Judge
in his Charge and Accusation. Conscience is now loaded with dead Works, yet
stupid Sinners do not feel it; a Mountain of Guilt is upon them, yet they are
not sensible of it. Sinners cannot cross God's Book, or Cancel their own Bond:
but the time is at hand, when the Guilt of Sin will revive, when Men shall
taste the bitterness, and feel the burden of their Iniquities.

3. Till Christ becomes your Righteousness, your Souls are shamefully naked,
Revel. 3.17. As Men are poor, they are void of an Inherent Righteousness; and,
as they are naked, they are destitute of an imputed Righteousness: they have
nothing to Cloth the Soul, or hide its Sins. God's eye is a pure eye, Habb.
1.13. and a glorious eye, Isa. 3.8* But how do Men's sins offend this pure, and
affront this glorious eye of God? What a Loathsome, Hateful and Abominable
Creature is a Soul deprived of the Image of God, and depraved after the Image
of Satan. Thy bodily nakedness would be abhorred by Men; And will not thy
Soul-nakedness be more detested by God? How naked is the Mind without the
Knowledge of God? And how naked is the Will without the Love of God? the Image
of God is the Glorious Clothing of the Soul; the want of this Image is the
shameful nakedness of the Soul. Till the Righteousness of Christ is spread over
the Soul, the Glorious Image of God is not put on it.

4. Till we are Justified there is a Breach between God and us; and this Breach
stands open, and we need a Mediator to stand in this Breach, Psalm. 106.23. When
the Wall of our Innocence is broken, we are exposed to the Inrodes and
Invasions of Revenging Justice. Sin makes a large and wide breach between God
and us; God, as an Enemy, may enter at this Breach to destroy us; a deluge of
Wrath and Misery may pour in at it, to overwhelm us. None can stand in this
Breach but Jesus Christ, as a living Advocate: and nothing can stop this Breach
but the Dead Body of the Son of God. If the Sea makes a Breach in the Banks of
Holland, the Law of the Country encourages them to throw Beds, or any other of
their valuable Goods into the Breach to stop it, and they shall be recompensed
for them. Sin has made a Breach, and nothing but the Precious Life of the Son
of God could stop this Breach. The awakened Sinner considers how he shall
appear before God; he inquires whether he must not bring and offer the Fruit of
his Body for the Sin of his Soul, Mic. 6.6, 7. this is indeed chargeable, to
offer to stop the Breach with the Sacrifice of a Child. But this is but vain;
For, it is not our Firstborn, but God's only Begotten Son, that must stop, and
fill up this Breach, John 3.17, 18.

5. There is a dreadful storm that in the Cloud of the Threatening hangs over
the heads of Sinners, Psalm. 11, 6. God will Rain Snares, Fire, Brimstone, and a
horrible Tempest on the wicked, this shall be the portion of their Cup. This
Cup shall come to their lips; this storm shall fall on their Souls. If God
Rains, the storm must needs be Terrible, Genesis 7.4. I will Rain, so it is in the
Hebrew. This intimates this Rain should be extraordinary; it should fall with
great voilence; it should not be as an ordinary Rain, that is, as a gentle
sweat through the pores of the Clouds; but now the Windows of Heaven should be
opened, Genesis 7.11. The Sinners of the old World did not believe that God had
such vast Treasures of Waters in the Clouds, so, secure Transgressors do not
now Credit that there are such Treasures of Wrath laid up to punish them; and
as the Fountains of the great deep were then broken up, Genesis 7.11. So these
depths of Guilt, and Terror that are in Conscience will one day be broken up.
If God Rains, the storm is inevitable: He Rains Snares, that as Sinners cannot
hinder this storm form above, so they cannot fly from it below. If God Rains
Fire and Brimston, the storm will be Eternal, the Cloud of God's anger will
never be wearied or wasted. If Christ be not Men's Passover, 1 Cor. 5.7. They or
their Sins connot be passed by, or passed over, Micah 7.18.19. If their Sins
did not fall on Christ, they must come down on their own heads, Psalm. 68.21.
Though by reason of unbelief, God's Judgments are now far above, out of the
sight of Sinners, Psalm. 10.5. yet their Eyes shall see their destruction, and
they shall drink of the Wrath of the Almighty, Job. 21.20. The long, and large
Roll of the Curse will in due time fly to them, Ezekiel, 52.2, 3, 4, and then will
stay, and lie upon them for ever, Deuteronomy. 29.20. All the Curses in this Book
shall lie upon him.

6. All the Sins of Men are as so many Evidences and Witnesses against
Transgressors; these Evidences are preserved, and kept safe; their Sins are
hid, that they may not be lost, Hos. 13.12. The Iniquity of Ephraim is bound
up, his Sin is hid. Their Iniquity is bound up, that in due time it may be
bound on them: their Sin is so hid, that it shall be found, brought forth, and
charged on them. As the Depositions of Witnesses, and the Confessions of
Criminals are sowed up, and sealed up in a bag to be produced at the Trial of
an Offender; so are the Sins of Men, Job 14.17. So many Sins as Men have
committed, and are unpardoned, so many witnesses have they provided against the
day of their Trial. Jer. 14.7. O Lord our Iniquities testify against us. Read
Isa. 59.12. Our Sins are not only as dead records, but as living witnesses; not
only as matter of accusation, but as accusers; they cry to Heaven to kindle
wrath against us, and pluck down vengeance on us, Genesis 18.20, 21. Sodom's Sins
did cry to Heaven against it. Little do Sinners think that they are daily
filling Gods Book with complaints, and accusations, and filling his Treasury
with Wrath, and piling up Fuel to burn, and Torment themselves. It is nothing
else but the speaking Blood of Christ, that can stop the mouths of these
witnesses, and silence the clamours of their Sins.

7. Every Sin deserves Eternal death, Romans 6. last. Death is (...), the wages
of Sin. The word signifies Soldiers wages, Luke 3.14. They that cleave to
Satan, as their General, that stay in his Tents, Fight on his side against God,
shall have Eternal death as wages paid to them. Tribulation is due to the Body,
Anguish to the Soul and Conscience of every Transgressor, Romans 2.9. God will
repay fury, Isa. 59.18. he will render anger to his adversaries, Isa. 66.15.

8. Consider there is Judgment to come, Heb. 6.2. God sees all Men's
Provocations, Hos. 5.3. Prove. 15.3. Jer. 13. last. And he will be a swift
witness against them, Mal. 3.5. God has not in vain Registered the Sins of Men,
the Book of God, and the Eye of the Soul shall be opened, no Sin shall be
forgotten, Amos 8.7. all shall be brought to light, Eccles. 11.9. 1 Cor. 4.5.
and be brought into Judgment, Eccles. 12.14. There will not only be a
Resurection of Bodies, but a Reviving and Remembrance of Sins. If your Sins are
not pardoned, but remain before God's Face, Psalm. 90.8. They will shortly be
reviewed by God, and set in order before your face, Psalm. 50.21. If you inherit
the Sins of your whole life, Job 13.26. you will be Heirs of Shame, Misery,
and Eternal Torments.

2. Motive: Consider what great advantages we have in these times of the
Gospel, as to a participation of this Righteousness of God.

1. It is now wrought out, and perfected. Jesus Christ has been a Faithful
High Priest, Heb. 2.17. And a Righteous servant, Isa. 53.11. God devolved the
greatest trust on Christ, and he undertook took the hardest and most noble
work, even to make Restitution to God for the wrong we had done him, and to
make Reconciliation for us; to appease the Wrath we had provoked, and to divert
form us the Punishment we had deserved: The Jews thought of old, that their
High Priest was trusted with their greatest concerns; and for fear he should be
a Sadducee, or out of heedlessness, neglect any part of his Office on the day
of Atonement, they used Solemnly to swear him to a full, and faithful discharge
of his Office, in the great Work of that day. But our Lord Jesus Christ was by
fervent love to his Father and his People, Heartily and thoroughly engaged in
this great Work he undertook, and has fully discharged it. He glorified God on
Earth, he finished the Work he gave him to do, John 17.4. He would not dye till
he could say all was finished, John 19.30. (...). How honorable a word is this
to Christ? And how Comfortable a word is this to us? Jesus Christ, as the slain
Goat, did bear our Sins, and as the Scapegoat he did bear them away. As God
did lay Sins on Christ, Isa 53.6. so he purged them, Heb. 1.3. and put them
away. He has been a most Righteous servant to God, his very Sufferings, that
in a Moral sense, were Punishments, yet, in a Legal sense were Righteousness.
Jesus Christ is perfected himself, Heb. 5.9. And he has by one Offering for
ever perfected us, Heb. 10.14. There is signal evidence and demonstration, that
Jesus Christ has finished his Work; for he could not else have confidently
commended, and committed his Soul to his Father, Luke 23.46. He would not else
have been welcome to him, and Received by him, John 16.10. The World was to be
convinced of Christ's Righteousness by this argument, that he did go to the
Father, and they did see him no more on Earth: How could he have ventured into
the glorious Presence of God, if he had not Righteously performed what he
undertook? Would not the Father have sent him back again into the World, if he
had omitted, or left any thing undone? But Christ, says he, should be seen on
Earth no more in the form of a Servant, to do any Work in a state of
Humiliation. 2. The Father Raised him up from the Dead, 1. Pet. 1.21. He
Released our Surety out of the Prison of the Grave; which he would not have
done, if the debt had not been fully paid: Therefore an Angel came down from
Heaven to roll away the Stone from Christ's Grave, Matthew. 28.2. This was an
Officer from the great Judge of Heaven and Earth, to free our surety, and to
evidence, that God was satisfied, and did allow Christ's Resurrection. 3. The
Father exalted Jesus Christ by his own right Hand, Acts 5.31. And gave him
Glory, that we might be encouraged, and emboldened from thence to act our Faith
and hope in God, 1 Pet. 1.21. 4. Jesus Christ is sat down at the Right Hand of
God in the Heavenly Sanctuary, Heb. 1.3. Heb. 12.2. What an honor was this to
our High Priest, to sit down in the true Holy of Holies? When the High Priest
under the Law might not sit down in the Typical Holy of Holies. And Christ's
siting down did show he had done his Work, and might now take his rest. This
the Apostle makes the great difference between Christ, and the Priests of the
Law; If they stood daily Ministering, and Offering Sacrifices that could never
take away Sin; But Christ, When he had Offered one Sacrifice for ever, be sat
down on the Right Hand of God, Heb. 10.11, 12. The Priests of the Law did go on
in their Ministry, they stood Offering Sacrifices, their Work was never at an
end; they could never sit down. But Christ has Finished his Work, and
therefore is sat down, and expects that all his Enemies shall be made his
Footstool, Heb. 10.13.

5. Jesus Christ as he is released, so he Preaches the opening of the Prison to
us, Isa. 61.1. God's Prison is not Forced, or Broken, but opened in a Righteous
way, our Ransom being paid, Matthew. 20.28. Christ therefore now comes to the
Prison-door, and says to the Prisoners, Come forth, you that were hid in
Prisondarkness, now show your selves, and appear with boldness and confidence
in the Heavenly Sanctuary, Isa. 49.9.

2. The Righteousness of Christ is now brought, Dan. 9.24. To bring Everlasting
Righteousness, Eternal Redemption is now found, Heb. 9.12. (...), Jesus Christ
has found that, and brought that which is the great Foundation of our Faith,
and Hope.

1. Jesus Christ has brought this Righteousness near to us, Isa. 46.13. I
bring near my Righteousness, it shall not be far off. The Saints of the Old
Testament saw the Promises a-far off, Heb. 11.13. But we see Eye to Eye, Isa.
52.8. The Manna came down from Heaven and lay about the Camp of Israel, Ezod.
16.14. It was near to them, and prepared Food for them, and easy to be gathered
by them. So Christ Typified by it, says, I am the Bread that came down from
Heaven, that a Man may eat, and not dye. As this Bread was in Heaven, it was
high above-us, and far off from us; but now it is come down from Heaven it is
near to us, it is easy to come at. So the Rock is smitten, and the Spiritual
Water flows out, follows us, is near to us, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4. As God clave the
Rocks, and gave Israel drink, as out of the Great Depths, Psalm. 78.15. The
Water was deep in the Earth, but it bubbl'd up, and gushed out of the Rock
plentifully, as if a great deep Sea, or the deep Waters that did lie low in the
Earth did now rise, and spring up, and break out at the clefts of this Rock.
The Israelites could not come at those deep Waters that lay in the Bowels of
the Earth, till God did cause them to ascend, and made a vent for them. So the
saving Mercies of God were a great Deep, we had neither Bucket nor Rope to
reach them, or to come at them; they were far off from us. But Christ now being
smitten, this Rock now being cleft, deep Mercies ascend, flow forth, follow us,
come near to us. Christ's Righteousness is brought so near to us, that we may
easily come at it, and enjoy it, as the Manna was prepared Bread, some derive
the Word from (...), Manah, he has prepared; this was Bread that God provided
without their labor, they did not Plow or Sow for it. So Christ is God's
Salvation, that he has prepared, Luke 2.29, 30, 31. As the Manna was Rained
down near to the Israelites Camp; so Christ's Righteousness is brought near to
us; we may gather, receive it, take it to our selves by Faith. It is not
difficult to obtain. Look unto me all ye ends of the earth, and be saved, Isa.
45.22. Is not that easy to be had, that may be obtained by a look? the word of
Faith is nigh to us, Romans 10.8. Christ's Righteousness is not remote, or a-far
off, but brought very near to us, and easy to come at. And is not our
Spiritual Drink near, and easy to be had? The Rock in Exodus 17.6. was to be
smitten; but the Rock mentioned, Numb. 20.8. was only to be spoken to, and it
should give out Water. Jesus Christ Typified by these Rocks, was to be Smitten
but once, to Die but once. That which now remains to be done, is not to Smite,
but to speak to the Rock by the Prayer of Faith, and it will give forth
Spiritual Drink to us, Romans 10.12. The Lord is rich to all that call upon him;
that is, he is not only rich in the Possession, but also rich in the
Distribution and Communication of Grace: he is not only Rich for himself, but
for us; and those that call on him, that speak to this Rock, do receive
abundance of Grace, and of the Gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. They that call
on the name of the Lord shall be saved, Joel 2. last.

2. This Righteousness is brought near to God. The Blood of the Typical
Sacrifices was not carried into Heaven; it was too mean, and vile, to be
brought thither. But the Blood of Jesus Christ is carried into Heaven it self,
Heb. 9.23, 24. Our High Priest is entered thither, and has carried his Blood
into Heaven, to present it to, and plead it before God. The very Throne of God
(as the Mercy-seat of old, the Type of it, was sprinkled with the Blood of the
Typical Sacrifice, Levit. 16.14.) is sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. As
Christ brought his Righteousness into the Church, as a Cordial to Revive us, so
he brought it into Heaven as a Plea before God. As it is said, The
Burnt-offerings should be continually before God, Psalm. 50.8. and did burn day
and night on the Altar, it was never without a Fire, and a Sacrifice burning on
it; So Christ's Sacrifice is now always before the Lord; Jesus Christ still
represents it to, and pleads it before God: It is dreadful for our Sins to be
continually before the Lord, Psalm. 109.14, 15. but it is sweet for Christ's
Sacrifice to be always before the Lord; by virtue of this our Prayers may be
nigh to God day and night, 1 Kings 8.59. till he Answer and Fulfill them.

3. This Righteousness of Christ is established to continue for ever, Heb.
10.9. God takes away the first, even the Sacrifices of the Law, to establish
the second, even the Sacrifice of Christ. This Sacrifice is fixed as the one,
and only atoning Sacrifice, it is never to be removed, or to give place to any
other. God has Sworn Christ to be a Priest, Psalm. 110.4. God will never
repent, or change. He will never put Christ out of Office, or substitute any
other in his place. It is the higest pride to clash with God, and for any to go
about to establish their own Righteousness, as the Jews did, Romans 10.3. and so
to oppose God's Establishment. And, as this is Pride, so it is pernicious
Folly, because nothing can establish the Heart, or Conscience, but the Grace of
God, through the Atoneing Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.9. It is good for
the heart to be established by Grace.

4. This Righteousness is now openly revealed to us. Jesus Christ is evidently
set forth as Crucified before our eyes, Gal. 3.1. God's Salvation is prepared
before the Face of all People, Luke 2.31. This is the Glory of the Gospel, that
the Righteousness of God is revealed in it, Romans 1.17. And the Righteousness of
God is now manifested without the Law, Romans 3.21. We have now received the
Atonement, Romans 5.11. God has now reconciled us, Col. 3.2. there is a great
Emphasis in the word now: The Righteousness of God is now manifested; we have
now received the Atonement, God has now reconciled us. It intimates, that this
Righteousness is now wrought out, manifested and exhibited, that God should be
Righteous, in Justifying us without the Works of the Law performed by us, and
without the Curse of the Law executed on us, is a deep Mystery, and a great
Secret. But Christ has not hid this Righteousness of God in his heart, but he
has declared, and preached it, Psalm. 40.9, 10. This is such a Mystery, that we
should never have known, if Christ had not declared it. Surely it is most
wonderful, that God, in the nature of a creature, should be subject, and obey:
that he that Instructs us should learn obedience himself, Heb. 5.8. The Father
that laid Sins, inflicted Punishment, executed the Curse on Christ, was as the
Master; and the Son that endured all things, was as the Scholar. He learned, by
experience, what a hard and difficult thing Obedience was, how costly and
painful it was to subject himself to the Father loading him with Sins and
sorrows, chastising him for our Iniquities, bruising him for our
Transgressions: that such an Obedience should be rendered by the Son, is a deep
Mystery, and we should never have known it, if Jesus Christ had hid it in his
heart: As the Israelites did not know Manna, Dent. 8.3. he fed thee with Manna,
which thou knew not, neither did thy Fathers know; when they found it, and
saw it first on the ground, they wondered, and cried out, What is this? Exodus
16.4. So the Margin renders the word very properly, and this is most suitable
to the following words; for they wist not what it was. To say, they called it
Manna, for they wist not what it was, is not so good, and fit a sense. Some
have conceived, that the phrase, hidden Manna, was borrowed from the Israelites
Question, and Ignorance of Manna; indeed the Jews were, and all Natural Men are
ignorant of the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. The Wrath of God is indeed
revealed from Heaven to all Men by Afflicting Providence, Desolating
Destroying Judgments, as War, Famine, Pestilence, Inundations and Earthquakes;
but the Righteousness of God is only revealed in the Gospel. God might have
stopped in the Revelation of his Wrath, and have gone no farther: but he has
proceeded to reveal his Righteousness in the Gospel, that he is Just, and the
Justifier of them that believe in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26. The Fountain is now
opened, in which we must wash; the Ransom is now paid, for which we must be
Released; the Obedience is now performed, by which we must be Justified; The
Sun of Righteousness is now risen with Healing under his Wings, Mal. 4.2. The
glorious beams of this Sun of Righteousness dispels not only the thinner Mists
of lesser Sins, but the thickest Clouds of Heinous Iniquities, that not only
hide the Light of God's Countenance from us, but would pour down a storm of
Vengeance upon us.

5. The Gospel is the Ministration of Righteousness, 2 Cor. 3.9. and the
Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. Christ, in sprinkling Nations with the
dew of the Gospel, Isa. 52. last. he does also sprinkle them with the drops of
his Blood. Jesus Christ is Justified himself, Isa. 50.8. and so in a full
capacity to Justify us; and that because he has born our Iniquities, Isa.
53.11. He that has loosed his own pains of Death, Act. 2.24. can loose our
bonds of Iniquity. There is an exhibiting, and Communication of Righteousness
for Justification, in the Dispensation of the Gospel.

3. Consider the Excellency of this Righteousness, it is clean water to wash
us, Ezekiel. 36.25. It is clean Linen to adorn us, Revel. 19.8. Saints are but a
Candle, or Lamp of Righteousness, but this is a Glorious Sun, Mal. 4.2. It is a
during lasting Righteousness, it is styled Everlasting Righteousness, Dan.
9.24. This garment never wears, or decays: It has been of price and virtue in
all Former Ages, and it will last till the end of the World; yea, we may
consider whether Saints shall not call Christ by this Glorious Name (The Lord
our Righteousness) to Eternity. A Candle wastes and consumes, but so does not
the Sun. So this Sun of Righteousness will never decay, or lose his light and
glory. The Blood of Christ is still fresh, he appears, even now, as if he had
been but a Lamb lately slain, Revel. 5.6. And because his Blood is still so
fresh, and the virtue of it so lasting, therefore the Redemption that flows
from it is Eternal, Heb. 9.12. But more particularly I shall set forth the
excellency of Christ's Righteousness, and the pretiousness of his Sacrifice in
these Following propositions.

1. Jesus Christ's Obedience, and Righteousness, was one whole entire piece; it
was a continual Series of Holy acts, without any interuption: our Righteousness
is made up of patches, and pieces; there are interuptions in our obedience, but
Christ obeyed during his whole Life, and at last became obedient to the Death
of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. As Oxen of old did draw in the Yoke, and at last were
Offered in Sacrifice. 2. Christ did neither stop or pause in his Work, or stray
at all from his way, John 8.29.

2. Jesus Christ did not pay our debt by halves, but discharged it at once; in
an entire sum. The Damned are always Suffering, and yet never satisfy God: But
Jesus Christ offered one Sacrifice, the virtue of which lasts for ever; and, by
this one Sacrifice he perfected us for ever, Heb. 10.12.14. Christ has, by
this one Sacrifice, put an end to all Offerings for Sin, Heb. 10.18. Bloody
Sacraments do cease in the Church, and Bloody Sacrifices are much abolished now
out of the World.

3. Jesus Christ, by his Sacrifice, has taken down the Vail, and opened a way
to the Heavenly Sanctuary. This showed that the Sacrifices of the Law were weak
and defective; that though they were still offered, yet the Vail still stood,
and the way into the Holiest of all was not yet made manifest; those Sacrifices
could not give access to God, and entrance into Heaven: But this discovered the
excellency and efficacy of Christ's Sacrifice, that when he Died, Matthew. 27.50,
51. The Vail of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom; To
intimate, that now a way to Heaven was made by the renting the Vail of Christ's
Flesh, and by separating of his Soul from his Body, Heb. 10.19. Christ, by
traveling to Heaven, has made a way; by entering into it, he has made a door;
by landing on the Shores of a Blessed Eternity, he has made a Harbor; this is
a way still new, a living way: This way is never stale, dead, or out of date;
the High Priest of old did kill a Sacrifice, and with the Blood of it he entered
into the Typical Holy of Holies, Levit. 16.11.14. But the virtue of that
Sacrifice was exhausted, and the way made by it was dead, so that he could not
enter again a Second year, without killing of a new Sacrifice: But Christ's
Sacrifice is of such virtue, that it makes a way always new, a living, lasting
way into the Heavenly Sanctuary; that Believers in all ages may make use of.

4. Jesus Christ has carried his Blood into Heaven, and Sprinkled the Throne
of God with it. The Mercy-Seat was sprinkled with the Blood of the Sacrifice,
Levit. 16.14. and this did figure, and teach, that the Throne of God must be
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, and how admirable a change does it make? by
turning a terrible Tribunal of Justice into a sweet and amiable Throne of
Grace, Heb. 4. last. Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, Dan. 7.9, 10.
God's Throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as burning fire. God's
Throne has wheels to pursue Guilty Creatures, a fiery stream issued, and came
forth from before him. This is a dreadful description of God's Throne, as a
Tribunal of Justice: But now as it is sprinkled with the Blood of Christ, we
have a most sweet discovery of it, Revel. 22.1. There is a pure River of Water
of Life, clear as Crystal, proceeding out of the Throne of God, and the Lamb,
and there is a Rainbow round about the Throne, Revel. 4.3. signifying the
flood of God's Wrath is abated; and that Christ is near the Throne to prevent a
condemning Sentence issuing out of it, and a storm of Vengance falling from it.

5. Jesus Christ's Blood is still speaking in Heaven and never silent, Heb.
12.24. And this speaking Blood drowns the voice of the accuser, and the cry of
our Iniquities. Christ's representing, and pleading his Sacrifice in Heaven, is
his burning Incense before the throne, Revel. 8.3. to take away the stink of
our Sins from the Nostrils of God.

6. Christ by his death, has dedicated, consecrated, and confirmed a new
Testament, Heb. 9.15, 16. The threatenings were in force before for our
destruction, but the promises could not be in force for our Salvation, but by
the death of Christ. God might have confirmed his threatenings by our death, but
he has confirmed his promises by the death of Christ. How different is the
Language of the Law, and of the Gospel? The Law says, where there is an
Offense, there must be of Necessity the death of the Offender: But the Gospel
speaks thus; where there is a Testament there must of Necessity be the death
of the Testator. Though Christ seemed to die as a Malefactor in the eye of the
World, yet he died as a Testator in the eye of God, and Believers: Though he
was emptied and impoverished, stripped of all; of his Liberty, Garments, good
Name, and Life, by his Enemies; yet even then he did Bequeath all good things,
and died as a Testator to enrich others. O! that Jesus Christ should as it were
put himself out of Possession of all, to put us into Possession of all good
things, Heb. 9.11. A Covenant could not be made between God and Sinners, but by
Blood, Heb. 13.20. Those words may be rendered (...), the Shepherd of the Sheep,
great, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant. That Shepherd was indeed
great, that by his blood could Establish an Everlasting Covenant. Covenants
used to be made by killing Sacrifices, and cutting them in twain; and the
Covenanting persons passed between the pieces of the Sacrifices, Genesis 15.9,
10.17, 18. Jer. 34.14. Now Christ the great Sacrifice was cut in twain, his
Soul and Body were Separated from each other, and by our passing through the
parts of his Sacrifice by Faith we pass (as the Hebrew phrase is) into Covenant
with God, Deuteronomy. 29.12. God might have torn us in pieces for our Covenant
breaking, Psalm. 50.22. But O! what Grace is this that Jesus Christ should be
cut in twain for the Renewing of the Covenant between God and us. Christ's
Blood is of such efficacy, that it makes the Covenant Everlasting, always new.
It is styled a New Covenant, Heb. 8.8. that which will never be Antiquated, or
Abrogated. God has now put his Covenant into the best, and most Excellent
form. It was first a promise, then a Covenant, but now it is styled, a
Testament. God has finished his Covenant-Dispensations, (...); I will finish,
or perfect a New Covenant. It is so finished, that there is never to be any
other Edition of the Covenant, Heb. 8.8. it has its last and final Sanction;
it has the strongest Confirmation, by the Blood and Death of Jesus Christ. God
has spoken in these last days by his Son, Heb. 1.12. and there is nothing
beyond this, but seeing Face to Face.

Jesus Christ, by his Righteousness, has Merited the application of his Blood,
and the bestowing of all good things on us; this seems the fairest sense of
those words, in 2 Pet. 17. (as they ly in our Translation) Simon Peter, to
those that have obtained like precious Faith with us, through the Righteousness
of God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; that is, through the Mighty Merit of
Christ's Righteousness the Elect obtain Faith it self, the Spirit or
Sanctification, the New Heart; these are the good things that our High Priest
brings, Heb. 9.11. Christ having fulfilled to the Father his Promise, in the
Covenant of Suretyship and Redemption, he gives to the Elect a right to all the
Promises of the Covenant of Grace.

8. This Righteousness of Christ gives us a Title, and Right to the Heavenly
Inheritance; it is called, Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. The Righteousness
of God and his Kingdom are joined together, Matthew. 6.33. God's Righteousness
gives us a title to, and a fitness for God's Kingdom. Glory it self seems to be
styled, The Hope of Righteousness, Galat. 5.5. This Righteousness of God gives
us ground to hope for Heaven, and the possession of it is Executive
Justification in the fullness of it. Ainsworth understands those words of the
Psalmist as meant of imputed Righteousness, Psalm. 17. last. In Righteousness I
will behold thy face. This Righteousness of Christ assures us we shall see
God's Face: we must first come to the Fountain set open for sin and uncleaness,
that we may arrive at the Fountain of Life. We must touch at the Purifying
Fountain, that we may have access to the quickening Fountain, Psalm. 36.9. We
must first draw Waters at the Wells of Salvation, Isa. 12.3. and then the Lamb
will lead us to Living Fountains of Water, and God will wipe all Tears from our
eyes, Rev. 7. last.

4. Consider the great benefits that they obtain, who have the Lord to be their
Righteousness. 1. They are not only Pardoned, but Justified. Pardon may be
given by a Prince's Prerogative, where there is no Compensation made for a
wrong, but Justification is properly by an Obedience given, and satisfaction
made to the Law. Our Pardon is not only a Fruit of Mercy, but an Act of
Justice. God is Just in Justifying, Romans 3.25, 26. Blood is sprinkled on the
Mercy-Seat, Levit. 16.14. to intimate, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. God did not, in a way of Sovereign Prerogative,
reconcile the World to himself. He did it not alone by himself, or by a mere
act of his own Will; but he was in Christ, reconciling the World to himself.
Grace reigns, but it is through Righteousness, Romans 5. last. God is highly
pleased by Christ, he honored God's Holiness by Obedience to the Commands of
the Law, and Glorified God's Justice by his enduring the Curse. Christ is the
end of the Law for Righteousness to them that believe, Romans 10.4. All that the
Law could aim at, or require, is fulfilled in Christ: he obeyed the Precept,
and felt the edge of the Threatening; because Believers are Justified in such a
Righteous way, therefore they may Glory, Isa. 45. last, against all Accusations
and Accusers; against all Dangers and Threatenings.

2. The Justified are Redeemed from the Curse, and delivered from the wrath to
come.

1. They are Redeemed from the Curse, by Christ's being made a Curse, Gal.
3.13. The Apostle used the Abstract, taking it from Deuteronomy. 21. last. (...), He
that is Hanged is the Curse of God, God did take order for the Burying of him
the same day that he was Hanged, Deuteronomy. 21.22, 23. Cocceius does think, that
this very Law pointed at Christ, and does Teach us, that Jesus Christ by
bearing the Curse, so abolished it, that it was Buried with him the same day in
his Grave. As sin is covered, and hid, Psalm. 32.1. so the Curse also must be
Buried out of God's sight.

2. They are delivered from Wrath, and that because Jesus Christ was delivered
up to Sufferings and Death. God delivered up Christ to Death, Romans 8.32. and
therefore Jesus Christ can deliver us from Wrath, 2 Thessalonians. 1. last. The sins of
the Elect met with Christ, and fell on him with great violence; the Reproaches
of them that reproached God fell on him, Romans 15.3. The Ark was sitted to save
Noah from the Flood, that drowned others: it was Pitched within and without,
Genesis 6.11, 14. so that no water could come in. So Christ was pitched within
with a perfect sinless Righteousness, and without with a spotless Obedience;
and so is able to protect us from the Deluge of God's Wrath.

3. Those that are Justified have peace with God, and may dwell safe from the
fear of evil, Prove. 1. last. As in the Text it is said, Israel shall dwell
safely. The chastisement of our peace was laid on Christ: We may put away our
sins, because God laid them on Christ. It is a great thing to have Conscience
purged from dead works, Heb. 9.14. and to be purified from an evil Conscience,
Heb. 10.22. not to have Conscience as a continual accuser and tormentor.
Augustine, in his Confessions, says, He could remember his old sins without
horror. A Man does not fear a Cancelled Bond. The Israelites did not dread the
drowned Egyptians, when they saw them dead on the Seashore, Exodus 14.30. The
smart, the anguish, the burden of an accusing Conscience is not to be
expressed. I have Read of one Pausanias, a Lacedemonian Captain, that killed a
Virgin that was brought to him, but would not be exposed to his Lust: After
this Cruel Fact, he was seized with such Horror, that though he being a
Heathen himself, had tried all the ways of Purification in use among them, yet
he could not recover any Peace, but was a continual Terror to himself.
Pausanias, a Grecian Writer, has this History in his Laconica. Varenius, in
his History of Japan, cap. 5. tells us of one Angarus, a Native of Japan, that
Murdered a Man, and was seized with such Terror and Anguish of Mind, that he
could not shake off, or get rid of: But, hearing of a New Religion Taught in
China, and in the East Indies, he took a Voyage, and Sailed to meet with
Francis Xavioeur, that by his Instructions he might get some Healing of his
wounded Conscience, and was the first Instrument to bring the Christian
Religion into Japan. O! what an excellent Fruit is this of Christ's Blood, to
be delivered from the beginnings of Hell in Soul Torments, and to have the
First Fruits of Heaven in Spiritual Peace and Joy.

4. Those that are clothed with Christ's Righteousness, have a sure and
permanent state of Justification; so that new Acts of Guilt shall not subvert
and destroy it, or lay their Persons under the Sentence of Eternal Death. There
is a simple hatred and guilt; and there is a hatred and guilt redounding on the
persons of Offenders. Believers, by, and for new acts of Sin, deserve to be
hated of, and condemned by God; but guilt and hatred do not redound on their
Persons, but fall on their Sins. It is very observable, that though Simeon and
Levi had been guilty of heinous crimes, in killing the Shechemites; yet they
being probably Good Men in the Main; Jacob does not Curse their Persons, but
Curses their Anger, and their Wrath, Genesis 49.7. this was so cruel, that it
might have brought a Curse on them; but Jacob, that was guided by the Holy
Ghost, lays the Curse on their evil and extravagant Passions, but not on their
Persons. It is expressly said, There is no Condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. Jesus Christ can have no Accursed, or Condemned
Members; such are passed from death to life, and shall never come into
Condemnation, John 5.24. Jesus Christ has Merited for Believers the Pardon of
all their Sins, and Christ still appears in the Presence of God, to Answer
Accusers, and to prevent Condemnation, Heb. 9.23, 24. It would be very hard for
any to assert, that New Acts of Sin do stop, or obstruct the Intercession of
Christ for Believers; If any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous, 1 John 2.12. His Righteousness does render his
Intercession powerful and prevalent for their pardon: the Lamb of God is (...),
taking away the sin of the World, John 1.29. The Blood of Christ, (...), does
cleanse away sin. It is God, (...), Romans 8.33. that is, Justifying, or that
Justifies. These three expressions do note a continued act of God and Christ,
that Christ is still taking away sin, cleansing from it, to distill Justifying
Believers from their Iniquities. The Israelites that were the Church of God,
had an Atoning Sacrifice day and dight Burning on the Altar, Numb. 16.9. Psalm.
50.8. which did not only signify their continual need of Pardon, that sin
might not fix and settle on them; but did also import the perpetual influence
and efficacy of the Blood of Christ; for the keeping of Believers in a
Justified State, and acceptance with God. If by reason of wrong steps taken,
God cease to Justify, and the Blood of Christ to speak on the behalf of
offending Believers, they must certainly be Condemned: If the guilt of one sin
redounds on the person, and sticks on the Soul, a state of Justification is
destroyed: For how can a Man be Justified, and Condemned at the same time? if
every new sin redounds on the Person, and shuts it up under Guilt, Then how can
there be any such thing as a state of Justification continuing one hour? But it
is said, ordinary Infirmities are pardoned without explicit or particular acts
of Repentance, but it is not so with greater sins. But should not persons do
well to consider, whether God has two ways to pardon? whether a General
Repentance will serve to remove some Sins, but a more particular Repentance is
requisite, that God may pardon more heinous and grievous sins: if these affect
the person, and lay him under Condemnation till deeper Repentance, and more
explicit acts of Faith be put forth, What is become of a state of
Justification? Was David under Condemnation, and the Curse, while he lay long
in a stupid state? Surely he was a Justified Man, or else he was out of Christ,
and fallen under the Curse. It is said that God has given Believers
everlasting life, 1 John 5.11. and, that he who believes has everlasting
life, John 5.24. Is the Sentence of life, Romans 5.18. revoked by new acts of
sin? Is this gift of life retracted? Is the blood of Christ wiped away from the
Conscience by new Transgressions: We read that the blood of Christ purges away
sin, 1 John 1.7. but never that sin purges away the blood of Christ, and wipes
it off from the Conscience. Let not any here mistake me, I am no Patron of Sin,
I do not plead for careless and loose walking; if any indulge the Flesh, they
shall feel to their smart and cost, that God has Fatherly Anger, Justice, and
Severity, and the fruits of it are terrible: God hides his Face, suspends the
comfortable and quickening Influences of his Spirit, so that the heart is
hardened, Isa. 63.17. the Church thus complains, Why have thou hardened our
hearts from thy Fear? Jesus Christ withdraws himself, and leaves the Soul in a
dark, doubting, and disconsolate state, Cant. 5.45.6. There are also sharp
Temporal Afflictions laid on believers, as that the Sword should not depart
from David's House, and that his Concubines should be defiled by Absalom, 2 Samuel 12.10, 11. yea, there may be much Trouble, and Terror of Conscience,
because Unbelief is strengthened by this new Guilt contracted, and the Spirit
of God is grieved, and does not powerfully apply, testify, and seal Pardon,
till explicit acts of Faith and Repentance be put forth. Yet I must assert this
with the Scripture, That Believers do not again, a second time, or more,
receive the Spirit of bondage to fear, Romans 8.15. The Spirit in the Word does
not testify to a Believer, that he is a Condemned Man, in a state of Hostility
with God, and that God is his Enemy, as it testifies to Unregenerate Men.
Besides, this is much to be considred, that a Believer does not Sin according
to the New Man, but according to the remainders of the Old Man: It is not the
new Graft that bears corrupt fruit, but the old Stock, Romans 7.17. Now it is no
more I that do it, but Sin that dwells in me. The New Man hates Sin, consents
to, and delights in the Law of God as good, Romans 7.15, 16.19.22.25. I my self
serve the Law of God. He that is born of God commits not Sin: He cannot Sin,
because born of God, 1 John 3.9. How then can guilt redound on the whole
person, when the New Man, that is the predominant party, does not Sin? If it be
said, that Sin committed redounds on the person according to the Old Man, this
will amount to no more than Fatherly anger, and Temporary Chastisements that
fall on the Old Man, that must decay, be pulled down to the dust, and perish;
but they shall not hinder the Salvation of the person, according to the New
Man. It is true, that Christ does direct us daily to pray for Pardon of Sins,
Matthew. 6.12. And David did earnestly, and frequently solicit for Forgiveness,
Psalm. 51.1.7.9. But these Scriptures may be thus understood, that Believers
(for it is of them only that I speak) do deprecate the Fruits, and effects of
Gods Fatherly anger, both in Temporal, and Spiritual Judgments. They petition
for the turning away of God's Fatherly displeasure, the removing of outward
Afflictions, and Spiritual Punishments, the return of the sweet sense of Gods
Favor, the lifting up of the light of his Countenance on them; the shedding
abroad of his Love in them. The removing of Temporal, and Spiritual Judgments,
is both a proper, and excellent Pardon. If any be otherwise minded, let them
Answer a little Piece of Mr. Gilbert's written on this Subject.

Justified persons have a sure, and strong standing in the Grace, and Favor of
God, Rom 5.2. By Faith we have an entrance into this Grace, in which we stand
and rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. Justified persons are Established
firmly in the favor of God: Though Hagar and Ismael were cast out of Abraham's
House, Genesis 21.10, 12, 13. yet Isaac, the Child of the promise, was still
retained. God loves Believers with the same love, that he loves Christ with,
John 17. last. And God's love to Christ is not mutable, and changeable, but
fixed, and certain. Justified persons may therefore challeng all accusers, Who
shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect; It is God that Justifies? Is
there any higher Judge? Is there any other Superior Tribunal, to which the
person may be cited, and his cause drawn? It is Jesus Christ that Died, and
Rose again: He was arrested, and is released, and discharged. He was Baptized
in a deep Sea of Sorrows, and Sufferings, yet was not drowned, but Swam out to
the Shores of a Blessed Eternity: Yea, he is ascended into the Heavenly.
Sanctuary, to plead his blood, and Represent his Righteousness; And will not
this stop the mouths of all gainsayers, and Silence all accusers? We may now
draw near to God the Judge of all, as being assured, he will not only Justify
us, but also plead our cause against those that wrong us. Christ now being
ascended, he lives to execute his own Testament, and bestow his own Legacies,
Acts 5.31. To give Repentance, and Remission of Sins. The Mercies of the new
Covenant are sure Mercies, Isa. 55.3. Acts 13.34, 35. Because Christ is Dead,
and Risen again to give them Faith. Jesus Christ in Heaven asks for the Travel
of his Soul, and the Purchase of his Blood, and cannot be denied: He interceeds
with Authority. There was a Crown of pure Gold about the Altar of incense,
Exodus 30.3. to intimate, that our High Priest does interceed effectually, and
with Authority, John 17.24. Father, I will, that those thou have given me, may
be with me, that they may see my Glory. The Apostle Paul proposes a Farther
Question; Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? and he thus answers
it himself: I am persuaded that neither Life, nor Death, things present, or
things to come, shall be able to separate us from the Love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord. The Love of God is fixed, the Heart of God is centred on
Jesus Christ, and shall never depart, or remove from him. Christ is the strong
and everlasting bond whereby Gods Love is secured, and assured to us. What
greater security can God give us than his Oath to persuade us of the
Immutability of his counsel: God has twice sworn, that the Heirs of promise
might have strong Consolation. God says thus to the Church, I have sworn that
I will not be Wroth with thee; that is, to destroy thee, nor Rebuke thee, so as
to disinherit thee, Isa. 54.9. And as God has Sworn to secure us from the
greatest Evils, so he Swears again to assure us of the greatest good. By my
self have I Sworn (says God to Abraham) that in Blessing I will Bless thee,
Heb. 6.13, 14.

Those to whom Christ is made Righteousness, do also receive the Holy Spirit.
The clean Water of Christ's Blood, and the Spirit do go together, Ezekiel.
36.25.27. Tit. 3.5. 1 Cor. 6.11. Psalm. 51.12. Some call the gift of the Spirit
Executive Justification; they mean that God executes the Sentence of
Justification by bestowing the Spirit, to break off our Chains, burn up our
Dross, purge away our Filth, and make us free from the Law of Sin, and Death,
Romans 8.2. Though the Law of Sin be a strong, and powerful Law to inslave us;
yet the Law of the Spirit of Life is more mighty to set us free; as Jesus
Christ, by his Blood, redeems us to be the Temple of God, so by his Spirit he
comes into his Temple, takes Possession of it, and fills it with his Glory. As
we live by the Sentence of Justification, so Christ lives in us by the Spirit
of Sanctification, Gal. 2.20. The Spirit is given as a Tree of Life, and all
Graces are the Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. The Holy Ghost is given as the
well of all Living Waters, and Spritual streams, John 4.14. John 7.37, 38, 39.
By Faith we drink in the very Well it self, and therefore Believers can never
be totally dry: He that Believes on me shall never thirst, John 6.35. Observe,
and compare the words of God the Father, Zech. 13.7. with the words of the
Church, Cant. 4. last. As God said once, Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd,
against the Man that is my Fellow; smite the Shepherd: so the Church now says
daily; Awake, O North wind! and blow O South wind! upon my Garden, that the
Spices of it may flow forth. Because the Sword of Justice has awaked terribly
against Christ, the Spirit may sweetly awake, and blow on our Souls, excite,
quicken, and draw forth Grace into act and exercise. Christ gives his people
the Glory that the Father gave him, John 17.22. Musculus understands this Glory
to be the gift of the Holy Ghost. The Spirit was on Christ, Isa. 61.1. and
given to him, John 3.34. And Christ communicates this glorious Spirit to his
Members, as the soul of the whole mystical body, and this makes them one with
the Father, and the Son, and perfects them in one, because they participate of
the Spirit that proceeds from the Father and the Son, and have by it a new
divine Nature, and do aim at, design and seek the Glory of the Father and the
Son, as they do design their own Glory.

6. The Prayers of Justified persons are acceptable to, and powerful with God;
for the Spirit that testifies God's Grace to Believers, does make Intercessions
in them. As a Spirit of Grace it gives Encouragement to Prayer, as a Spirit of
Supplication, it gives assistance in Prayer, Zeck. 12.10. Romans 8.26. This is
the Fire from Heaven, that warms our cold hearts, and kindles all our
Sacrifices, that they may flame upwards. The Prayer of a Believer is, (...)
James 5.16. A deep in-wrought Prayer, it is not born in the lips, but springs
from the Soul. Luther on Genesis well expresses it, it is not Spuma oris, sed
singulus cordis; The Foam of the Mouth; but the Throbbing, and Sighing of the
Heart. The Holy Ghost breaths in Holy Affections, and the Soul then breaths out
holy desires, and expressions. Saints pray as (...), as those that are
possessed, and acted mightily by the Spirit of God; hence it is that they so
strive, and wrestle with God; and their prayers are so much valued and desired
by Christ. Those are wonderful words, Cant. 2.14. Christ says to the Church,
Let me see thy face, let me hear thy voice. He that sees his Father's Face
above, desires to see Petitioners Faces below: He that hears the Songs, the
Hallelujahs of Angels, of Saints in Heaven; desires to hear the Voice, the
Suits of Believers on Earth. And as their Prayers are desired, so they are
accepted. The Prayer of the upright is God's delight, Prove. 15.8. They Pray in
Christ's powerful Name, John 16.23, 26. and he adds the Incense of his Merits
to the Prayers of all Saints, Rev. 8.3. and so takes away the Iniquity of their
Holy Things. The Altar had a Grate of Brass, Exodus 27.4. the use of it was, to
separate the Earthy, and Grosser part of the Sacrifice, and to let the Ashes
through. So Christ is an Altar that has a Grate, he separates our sins, our
defects, our weaknesses, from our services; yea, he is the Altar on which our
Offerings must be laid, and that renders our Sacrifices acceptable to God, Isa.
60.7. It is said, that the Offerings of Believers shall ascend (...), upon
Good Will my Altar. God speaks, and puts this glorious Name on Christ:
Good Will my Altar. What an encouragement is this to Saints, that are Spiritual
Priests to offer Holy Sacrifices? seeing they have Good Will for their Altar?
God is so pleased with, and delights in Christ, that he calls him, Good Will my
Altar.

7. All the outward and Temporal Mercies of Justified Persons are heightened
and sweetened to them by the Spring from whence they flow, and they have a new
taste. He delivered me (says David) because he delighted in me, Psalm. 18.19. In
love to my Soul (says Hezekiah) he has delivered me from the pit of
corruption, having cast all my sins behind his back, Isa. 38.17. Even Temporal
Mercies are Glasses, in which they see their Father's Face, and are Stairs, or
Ladders, by which their Hearts are raised to God. Jehoshaphat had an
Established Kingdom, Riches and Honor in abundance; And what was the fruit and
effect of this? his heart was lifted up in the ways of God, 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 6.
Earthly Enjoyments do usually fuel Men's Lusts, but they fed and inflamed
Hezekiah's Love to God: they are, to Carnal Men, Weights that press them down:
the Prosperity of Fools does destroy them, Prove. 1.32. but, through Grace, they
are Wings to raise Saints Souls to God. Believers enjoy their outward Mercies
by a Spiritual Right; they have them by Promise, Heb. 11.9. Canaan was the Land
of Promise, and Abraham was Heir to it by the Righteousness of Faith, Romans
4.13. Sacrifices were slain that Typified Christ, and then God entered into a
Covenant with Abraham, gave, and assured Canaan to him, Genesis 15.8, 9, 10, 17,
18. Believers have a Right to Earthly things by God's Promise, and Christ's
Death, who is the Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. Earthly things are but as
Ciphers; but God adds a great Figure to them, to make them signify something,
Genesis 17.8. I will give thee the Land of Canaan, and I will be thy God: they are
to Believers but additional things, as an overplus cast into the Kingdom of
God, as the Principal, Matthew. 6.33. So the Country of Sihon, and Og the King of
Bashan were given to Israel, that they might have a passage to Canaan their
Inheritance, Deuteronomy. 2.30. Deuteronomy. 3.1. So God gives the Earth to his People, that
they may have a passage through it to their Heavenly Country.

8. All the Afflictions of Justified persons, 1. Are allayed, and mitigated.
Saints do acknowledge, that God punishes them less than their Iniquities do
deserve, Ezra 9.13. the Wind is not so high, the Furnace is not so hot, the
Burden is not so heavy, as their sins do Merit: yet God, as a Father, accounts
the Sufferings of his People to be too much, Isa. 40.1. Thou have received
double at the hand of the Lord for thy sins. These Sufferings, that are not
enough to Rigorous Justice, are too many to Fatherly Mercy: He stops his Hand,
sheathes his Sword, throws away his Rod, when yet our Sins call for more
Strokes and Stripes. He refines us, but not with Silver, Isa. 48.10. he does
not so long keep us in the Furnace of Affliction till our Dross is quite
separated and consumed; for then our whole life would be nothing else but a
Series of Misery, and Sufferings. 2. Our Afflictions have a new face; they are
not the fruits of pure Vindictive Justice, or Wounds from an Incensed
Implacable Judge; but Chastisements from a Father: who, though he Corrects in
time yet is pacified, and reconciled for Eternity: Yea, Afflictions spring from
God's Care of us, and Love to us. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every son whom he receives. If you endure chastening, God deals
with you as sons, Heb. 12.6, 7. Those that are without Chastisement are
Bastards, and not Sons: those that are an Illegitimate spurious seed the Father
is ashamed to own, and acknowledge them, or to take any care about their
breeding and education, and regards not to correct them when they do amiss: but
a Lawful Posterity are better bred, duly taught, and timely corrected; and God
Chastens them with Judgment, not in Anger, Jer. 10.24. God may be said to
Correct with Judgment when he considers their Relation, and the Nearness of his
People to him, Lam. 2.20. Behold! O Lord! and consider, to whom have thou done
this? and, when God considers, rather how little his People can bear, than how
much they deserve; and God has gracious ends in Afflicting his People, 1. That
they may not be Condemned, and perish with the wicked World, 1 Cor. 11.32. We
are judged and chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the
World. 2. God Afflicts to purge away sin, to separate us from our dross of
Iniquity, and sin of Hypocrisy, Isa. 1.25. this is the fruit and end of
Corrections to take away sin, Isa. 27.9. to drive away that Spiritual folly
that is in our hearts. God is a Refining Fire, that he may not be a consuming
fire, as a Physician takes away Blood, to allay a Fever, and cure a Disease.
3. God designs, by Afflictions, to make us partakers of his Holiness, Heb.
12.10, 11. that we might learn more to live to him, and be brought more to live
on him, that we might less solace our selves in the Creature, and more delight
in himself: that we might be more conformed to him, and be better fitted to
converse with him. Though Afflictions are Punishments to the Old Man, to pull
it down; yet they are Mercies to the New Man, to build it up. A poor Man would
quietly suffer his Lord to pull down an old decaying sinking Cottage, if he did
believe that he designed to raise, and build up a strong and better House: all
Afflictions tend but to wast, and extinguish the life of the First Adam in the
Body, to make room for, and to let in the glorious life of Christ into it at
the Resurrection. 4. This is a weighty and powerful consideration, to lessen,
and lighten the anguish and bitterness of our Afflictions; that Justification
gives a Fatal and Mortal Blow at the root of them. The time is coming, when the
Inhabitants of Zion shall not any more say, that they are sick, for their
Iniquities shall be forgiven them, Isa. 33. last. God shall wipe away all tears
from the eyes of Saints: there shall be no more pain, sorrow, or crying, no
more Death, Revel. 21.4. No more Curse, Revel. 22.3. The days of Saints
mourning shall be at an end, Isa. 60.20. All Afflictions are but short and
momentary, and therefore but light, 2 Cor. 4.17.

9. Death is an Advantage to Justified Persons. Death is theirs, 1 Cor. 3.22.
To die is gain, Phil. 1.21. In Death the Wicked Fear the greatest evil, but the
Righteous hope for the greatest good, Prove. 14.32. When the Body falls under
the Bondage of Corruption, the Souls of Believers are perfectly freed from the
Bondage of Sin. Though it be a Mournful Seed-time to our Flesh, it is sown in
corruption, 1 Cor. 15.42. yet it is a Joyful Harvest to the Spirit, for it
reaps Everlasting Life, Gal. 6.8. Death, that is in it self, the most terrible
thing, has Color put into its pale Cheeks; and it is changed into a
comfortable thing. Death in Christ is the purchase of all our happiness; and
Death, to Believers, is the way to possess it: by Christ's Death they are Heirs
in Reversion; by their own Death they are Heirs in Possession: that which
utterly impoverishes others, greatly enriches them: that which kills the Body,
perfectly cures the Soul. When our baser part shall return to the Dust, feed
Worms, dwell in the darkness of the Grave; our better part shall be called up
to the Marriage Feast, to see the Face of God, and dwell in glorious Light, and
Reign in a Blessed Life. Christ has made Death Mortal, and threatens to be a
Plague, a Deadly disease to it, and to be Destruction to the Grave, Hos. 13, 14.

10. Justified Persons shall Rise by the Power of Christ their Head, and Second
Adam, 1 Cor. 15.22. His Spirit will find out the Ruins and Rubbish of its old
Temple, and build it up again, as a Glorious, and Everlasting habitation for it
self, Romans 8.11. in Saints that shall be found alive at the last day; mortality
shall be swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5.4. Dead Saints shall be raised, and, in
them, Death shall be swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15.54. a Body shall be
formed up again; so the Grave shall lose its Victory, this Body shall be
animated, and alive, so Death shall lose its sting, 1 Cor. 15.55. when the Soul
bears the Image of Christ in Holiness, 2 Cor. 3. last. and the being in a
Glorious Immortality, 1 Cor. 15.49. then we shall be satisfied with his
likeness, Psalm. 17. last. then Christ will give his Members clear and full
Evidences of their Adoption, Romans 9.23. when their Bodies shall be redeemed
from the Bondage of Corruption; and Soul and Body both shall possess a lot in
the Heavenly Canaan, Dan. 12. last. As Saints die to the Lord, Romans 14.8. sleep
in him, 1 These. 4.14. so they shall be made alive in Christ, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22.

11. Christ that is our Righteousness, will be our Judge, Acts 17.31. and will
he not clear, and acquit those, that he has already Justified, Isa. 53.11.
Christ now over-looks the Failings of his People, he calls the Church
Undefiled, when she confessed her Infirmity, that she Slept, Cant. 5.2. He
says to his Disciples, you have abode with me in my Temptations, Luke 22.28.
He might as truly have sald, you are those, that will presently fly, and leave
me in, and under my greatest Temptation; but Christ passes over this in the
great day he mentions; the Fruits of his Peoples charity to their honor,
Matthew. 25.35, 36, 37. He rips not up their failings and defects in Love, to
their disgrace. Is it likely, that he who is our Savior, our Mediator, our
Advocate, our Bridegroom, will bring forth to Light all our Sins? Will he not
own his own Righteousness imputed to them; Recognize his own Blood Sprinkled on
them, and do Right to it? Will he not give forth the White Stone to them, that
are clothed with Linen white, and clean? Revel. 2, 17. Revel. 19.8. The new
Covenant pardons, Jer. 31.34. Ezekiel. 36.25. And as there has been Sententia
Legis, the Sentence of the Law of Grace; so there shall be Sententia Judicis,
the Sentence of the Judge, to confirm, and fully execute it. Sins shall be
blotted out, not only out of God's Book, and out of our Consciences, but also
out of our conditions, that in them shall Remain no Footstep of Sin, or mark of
Wrath. Believers could not be safe, or set beyond danger, if he were not their
Judge, who was made Sin, and a Curse for them; and procured Reconciliation and
Remission, and Eternal Life to be bestowed on them: The last Act of Christ is,
not only a Kingly, but a Sacerdotal, or Priestly Act: After the Priest of the
Law had offered Sacrifice and Burnt Incense, then he came forth and Blessed the
people: For this Reason the people waited for the coming forth of Zechary the
Priest, Luke 1.21. So our great High Priest will Crown his Sacrifice and
intercession with a Blessing, Matthew. 25.34. Come ye Blessed of my Father,
Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World.

5. Consider the woeful condition of those, that are not Interested in this
Righteousness.

1. It is wished as the worst Curse, and denounced as the greatest Evil, for
Men not to come into the Righteousness of God; Add Iniquity to their Iniquity,
and let them not come into thy Righteousness, Psalm. 69.27. It was the Sin of
the Jews, that they Submitted not to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. and
this is inflicted as a suitable punishment; Let them not come into thy
Righteousness. Their own choice is turned into a dreadful imprecation; for,

1. Such will add Iniquity to Iniquity: as it is expressed in the Psalm. 69.27.
They will do nothing else but multiply provocations, increase guilt, heighten
and inflame Wrath; run further from God, and harden themselves more against God.

2. Such as Reject Christ, and his Righteousness, are under the Law as a
Covenant, Gal. 4.21. This is their choice, this is their desire, they would be
under the Law; and this is a bad state; for,

1. The Law gives no strength, or Life, John 1.17. The Law came by Moses; but
Grace and Truth by Jesus Christ. It is only an urging Letter, an exacting
Command; all the Grace to obey comes by, and from Jesus Christ: The Law does
not quicken our dead Souls, it is only a sound of words; it gives us no power.
Therefore when the Israelites heard it they could not bear it, but desired that
the word should not be spoken to them any more, Heb. 12.19.20. Hereby they
confessed their guilt, impotency, insufficiency, and utter despair of keeping
the Law, as it ought to be obeyed. Hagar was a young Woman, and bare Ismael by
Natural strength. So the Law supposes, that we should have kept the strength,
that God bestowed at our first Creation, and by it render perfect obedience to
its Commands: But the new Covenant restores Life, and gives strength. So Sarah,
though she was barren, and now past age, yet by Faith received strength to
conceive Seed, Heb. 11.11. But the Law gives no strength, furnishes us with no
new stock to trade again with: It does not change the Table of the Heart, it is
still a Stony, hard Rebellious Heart. The Law is weak as to its commands,
because our Lusts are so strong, and its Promises are weak and ineffectual;
because our Flesh is so powerful, and predominant, Romans 8.3. Moses did only
hew, smooth, and plain the Tables, Exodus 34.1. but he did not make them soft,
they still remained Stone: So, however the Law may smooth, and polish Men's
Conversations, yet their wills are still perverse, and obstinate against its
Spiritual Commands, Isa. 48.4. I knew thou wast obstinate, and have an Iron
sinew. Moses did Conquer the utmost Borders, and the out-skirts of Canaan, as
the Country of Sihon, and Og the King of Bashan; but did not pierce into the
Heart of the Country, and subdue it: This was lest to Joshua, a Type of Jesus
Christ. The utmost the Law does, is but to restrain Sin in the Conversations,
and to Reform the Life; when Men serve in the oldness of the Letter; but Sin
still keeps its Throne in the Heart: Proud Hypocrisy, or raging Despair is
usually found in Legalists. Though the Israelites heard the Law given by God
himself, saw his dreadful, terrible Majesty, and Glory, in the giving of it,
yet they presently fell to Idolatry, Exodus 32.1.4, 5, 6. This Idolatry so soon
Committed, did show, that the Law gave no power to obey and fulfill its own
Commands.

2. The Law abates nothing, remits nothing of its demands on the account of our
weakness: It requires as much service of Sick and weak Man, as if he were
sound, and strong: It calls for as full payment of the poor Bankrupt Creature
as if it were Rich: The Law makes no composition with, or allowance to decayed
and insolent debtors; yea, though it does Curse us for our Disobedience to, and
Enmity against God, yet, at the same time it Requires us to Love God with all
our Heart, Mind, Soul and Strength, Matthew. 22.37.

3. The Law, by woeful experience, is found to stir up Sin, when it is most pure
and Spiritual Commands are urged upon the Conscience: The motions of Sin are
said to be by the Law, Romans 7.5. When the strict Commands of the Law are
pressed on the Conscience, indweling Sin rouses up it self; grows more
Violent, and Outrageous. A Bridge, set over, and giving some check to a stream,
causes its smooth calm waters to rage, and make a noise; so Sin becomes more
impetuous by that opposition that it meets withal from the Law of God. The
Apostle Paul says; That Sin taking occasion by the Law deceived him, and so
slew him, Romans 7.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. When the Commandments came, Sin revived;
raised up it self more to resist, and contradict the Law of God. This was very
strange, and surprising to Paul, he was decived in this, he thought the Law
would have repressed, beaten down, and mortified Sin; but it rather fortified
it. As a Man that does not know the Nature of Burning Lime, thinks, by pouring
a little water on it, to quench it; but when he sees that this water makes it
to burn more vehemently and fiercely; How would he, as amazed, cry out, How am
I deceived, that the water should increase the Fire, that I thought would
extinguish it? So, the Law does not weaken Sin, but rather strengthen it, and
render it more violent.

4. The Law punishes every Sin with Death. Every Lust is mortal, every wrong
step is fatal, and corrupt Fruit is pernicious, and destructive. Though Ismael
might be guilty of many other offenses, yet for a weighty reason Moses mentions
but one, and that was his mocking at Isaac, and for this he was cast out, and
cast off, Genesis 21.8, 9, 10, 11. Ismael was Hagar's Child, and, so, a Type of
them that cleave to the Covenant of Works. The Law Curses for every act of
Disobedience, Deuteronomy. 27. last. One offense according to the Covenant of Works,
is enough to undo, and Ruin a Man to Eternity.

5. There is no access to God by the Covenant of Works. When the Law was given,
Bounds were set about Mount Sinai to keep off the people of Israel, they were
charged not to break through. Death was denounced as the Punishment of those
that touched the Mountain, Exodus 19.12.13.21. The people therefore removed, and
stood a-far off, Exodus 20.18. None of the other Priests, or Worshipping
Israelites might enter into the Tabernacle till Atonement was made for their
Sins by Aaron the High Priest, Levit. 16, 17. But after that Sacrifices were
Slain, Offered, and their Blood Sprinkled on the Altar and the People; then
Moses, Aaron, and Seventy of the Elders of Israel ascended Mount Sinai, and saw
the Glory of the God of Israel, Exodus 24.4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. These Sacrifices
were but Types of Christ's Death: he died, the Just for the Unjust, to bring us
to God, 1 Pet. 3.18. else we are shut out of the Glorious Presence of God, and
cut off from all Gracious and Blessed Communion with him. God is not
accessible: by the Covenant of Works guilty Creatures are kept off from him.

6. The Law genders to Bondage, Galat. 4.22. a Spirit of Bondage to Fear
attends it, Romans 8.15. as Hagar and Ismael had a slavish Fear of Abraham, as a
Master, rather than a Conjugal Love to him as a Husband, or a Filial Love to
him as a Father. Those under the Covenant of Works are still doubting of God's
Favor, questioning his Love, dreading of his Wrath: They do not know whither
Death will carry them, and where Judgment will fix them; and therefore, through
the Fear of Death, they are all their Lifetime subject to Bondage, Heb. 2.15.
the fear of the evil that is future does embitter to them all present Good. The
Law was given in such a Manner, that it was designed to strike Fear and Terror
into Sinners. The Israelites were then alone with God in the Wilderness,
separated from all other Nations. This might intimate, that God and the Sinner
shall be alone together, and all pleasing Company and delightful Enjoyments
shall be shut out. The Thunder did roar in their Ears, and the Lightning did
flash and flame in their Eyes, and the Earth did tremble under their Feet,
Exodus 19.16, 18. Whither shall a Guilty Sinner betake himself, when the Heavens
do threaten Vengeance over his head, and the Earth seems sinking under his
feet. The Mountain did burn with fire, Exodus 19.16, 18. with Deuteronomy. 5.23. this
did represent the fiery Throne of God, and his burning Wrath, wherewith, as a
Judge, he is Armed, to punish and destroy those that trust in their Works, and
will have to do with God according to the Covenant of Works. But though the
Mountain did burn, yet it was not consumed. So, guilty Creatures shall burn in
the fire of God's Wrath, yet never be consumed, or cease to be. There was
Blackness, Darkness and Tempest, Heb. 12.18. These pointed at the perplexed
state of a Sinner, the horror and consternation of the Soul, when God, the
Judge, does show his Justice and Wrath for the Violation of the Condition of
the Covenant of Works. O what black darkness will cover Sinners! O what a
Terrible Storm and Tempest will one day be raised in, and fall upon their
Souls. The sound of the Trumpet, that was exceeding loud, Exodus 19.19. Heb.
12.19. did signify, that Sinners must be cited to, and presented before the
Tribunal of God; neither can any decline, or avoid appearing before God's
Justice-Seat: Yet the Apostle calls this Mount Sinai, a Mountain, that was in
it self Tangible, or might be touched, that so it was an Earthly and Material
Mountain, because the Dispensation of the Law, and Covenant of Works, is but a
low Dispensation: A Natural Man may Touch, and Reach this; that God will
inflict evil on those that rebel and do evil. When as the Covenant of Grace is
a Spiritual, and Invisible Mountain, far above the reach and comprehension,
above the sight and ken of a Natural Man. And what did all this Terror, in
giving the Law, tend to, but to raise a Spirit of Bondage in sinners, and, by
Fear, to drive and force sinners to some External Obedience to the Letter of
the Law, which yet they perform with Regret and Reluctance, and not with Love
and delight.

7. There is no enjoyment of the Eternal Inheritance by the Law; the Bondwoman
and her Son were to be cast out, Galat. 4.20, 21. Genesis 21.8.10. Ismael was not
admitted, or allowed to be an Heir with Isaac. He did not Inherit Abraham's
Rich Estate. Moses could not bring the Israelites into, or give them possession
of the Land of Canaan; this, Joshua, the Type of Christ, did. Hagar and Ismael
were turned out with a small pittance: they had but a few Loaves, and a Bottle
of Water. It may seem strange, that Rich Abraham should provide no better for
his Wife and Child; but there was a Mystery in it: it served to instruct us,
that those that are of the works of the Law, cannot be Heirs of Heaven: cannot
possess any Spiritual Riches, or an Eternal portion in Glory; but are put off
with Temporary, Momentary Comforts and Enjoyments. What are the best things
that this World affords? What are Earthly Riches, Honors or Pleasures,
compared with an Eternal Happiness? they are but as a few Loaves of Bread, and
a Bottle of Water. When Hagar and Ismael were turned out, they wandered in a
Wilderness, Genesis 21.14. O what a difference was there between the plenty and
abundance of Abraham's Family, and the wants of a Barren Wilderness? The World
it self is but a Wilderness, compared with the Paradise of God, Revel. 2.7. A
Legal state under the Covenant of Works, What is it but a wretched Barren
Wilderness? In our flesh dwells no good, Romans 7.18. and therefore the Law
promises us no good. And may not this state be fitly compared to a Wilderness,
in which we are destitute of all good.

8. Though the Law be Ancient, yet it is not Abrogated, but still stands in
full Force against those that are out of Christ. Though Moses was old, yet his
Eyesight did not decay, neither did his Natural Force and Vigor abate, Deuteronomy.
34.9. This seems to point at the Perpetual Strength and standing Obligation of
the Law. Men's Laws grow absolete, and out of date: by age they are silently
Abrogated and Repealed: but it is not so with God's Law. As God required
Moses's his Life when he was in full strength; and then Buried him, Deuteronomy. 34.5,
6. So Christ puts an end to the Law, as a Covenant of Works, and Buries its
Curse, when it was in its full strength. As many as are of the Works of the
Law, are under the Curse, Gal. 3.10. though they are not grossly wicked, but
seemingly obedient to the Letter of it, yet they cannot decline, or avoid the
Curse, it will take hold of them, and be executed on them.

It is dreadful to be under the Law, though some inconsiderately desire to be
under it, Gal. 4.21. Dr. Addison, in his Book of the Customs of the Jews in
Barbary, cap. 2. tells us of a proud Jew that said, He would stand upon his own
Legs: he would not be beholding to any to Fulfill the Law for him, or to
satisfy for his sins, but he would do it for himself, and go to Heaven on his
own Feet. How many are there of the same mind with this Insolent and Ignorant
Rabbi? But those that stick to the Covenant of Works do put on themselves a
Yoke, Acts 15.10. that they are never able to bear: they bind on themselves a
Weighty Burden, that will make their Backs to bow down always, Romans 11.10. and
cause their Loins to shake, Psalm. 69.23. Can you pay your Debt of Obedience, or
endure when God shall inflict upon you that Debt of Punishment that he owes
you? Can you stand, when he does mark your Iniquities? Psalm. 130.3. Can your
hands be strong? Can your hearts endure in the day that God shall have to do
with you? Ezekiel. 22.14. and contend with you? Job 9.3. Though you are now secure,
Will not your Peace then end in War? Your Calm issue in a Storm? your present
silence terminate in the Loud Thunder of Wrath and Vengeance.

3. If you are not Interested in this Righteousness, and so not Pardoned; God
can take no Good out of his Treasury to give you in Mercy, Hos. 14.2. These two
things are joined together to take away Iniquity, and make Good that which our
Translators have rendered, Receive us graciously, it is in the Original (...),
and take Good; that is, take it out of thy Treasury to bestow it on us. Good
cannot be taken, and given to us, till Iniquity be taken from us. Guilt is that
mighty Damm, that stops the Current of God's Goodness: It is a Lock on God's
Treasury it is a Seal on the Fountain of Life: it separates between God and us,
and hinders Good things from us, Isa. 59.2. Jer. 5.25. Do any find a Drought of
Mercy, a Famine of Blessings, let them thank their Iniquities for it? these are
the great Impediment, the grand obstruction of Good things.

4. God accepts no Service, or Worship with Good Will from Persons Unjustified.
God's eye must first be opened on the Person, as accepting him; before his Ear
is opened to his Prayer, as regarding and approving it: It may seem a strange
expression, that God's eye should be open to a Supplication, yet this phrase is
used, 1 Kings 8.52. It intimates, that God's eye must first be opened on the
Person, before his ear is opened and inclined to hear his Prayer. God first had
respect to Abel, and then to his Offering, Genesis 4.4. but God had no respect to
Cain, or to his Offering, Genesis 4.5. it is very probable at least, that God's
rejecting Cain, and his Offering, was plainly to be discerned by some outward
visible Sign, or Token. When God, of old, accepted a Sacrifice, he did send
Fire from Heaven to consume it, Levit. 9. last. 1 King. 18.38. but it seems God
did send no Fire from Heaven to consume Cain's Offering, and so to Testify
that he was well-pleased with it, and did accept of it. Cain might take it away
again, and employ it to a common use, God did not value or regard it. The main
Ingredient that is requisite to season acts of Worship, and to render them
savoury to God, was wanting. Faith, in the Promised Seed, was necessary to
endear the Person, and commend the Offering to God; but, where this is not
found, God says to Worshippers, I have no pleasure in you, neither will I
accept an Offering at your band, Mal. 1.10.

5. All their Blessings are Cursed to them, Mal. 2.2. Their prosperity does
destroy them, Prove. 1.32. Honor heightens their Pride; Riches Fetter and Chain
their Minds and Hearts: The Cares of the World are as an Over-burden, or Lading
to a Ship, that hinders them from Sailing toward the Port of Heaven; and sinks
their Souls into Perdition: Cares and Lusts are as Thorns that choke the good
Seed of the Word, and hinder it from bringing any Fruit to perfection, Matthew.
13.22. The Pleasures of the World do fuel their Lusts, increase their
Sensuality, and exceedingly Carnalize their Minds and Affections.

6. Every Attribute of God is terrible to them; God's Holiness loathes them as
unclean, God's Justice hates them as Rebels and Enemies, that press all the
Creatures to take up Arms against their Maker; but they themselves are
Volunteers in this wicked Warfare. Infinite Wisdom does devise devices against
them, Jer. 18.11. does invent means to punish, and destroy them; for God is
wise in Heart, and mighty in strength, Joh 9.4. Infinite Power executes, what
Infinite Wisdom has contrived. God lives to Eternity to pour out the Vials of
his Wrath on them, and to measure out the Revenges of his Justice to them. A
Contending time will come, Job 9.3. God's angry Face will be unvailed, and his
punishing Arm be made bare: his Fury will come up in his Face, Ezekiel. 38.18. and
will be terribly Executed by his Hand, Psalm. 21.8. His ears will be stopped
against their cries: His Bowels be shut, his Heart be hardened against their
misery. They shall never see the Light, Psalm. 49.19. They shall never see Life,
John 3. last. They shall never taste of Christ's Supper, Luke 14.24. Worms that
die shall prey on their Bodies, the worm that never dies shall feed on their
Souls.

7. Consider how bad it will be with those in a dying hour, that have no
Interest in Christ's Righteousness: If Men are not Judicially blinded, and
hardened, they cannot but be somewhat concerned about their Future state, when
they walk on the Borders, and stand on the Brink of Eternity. How much are Men
dismayed, and terrified at the Thoughts of Death? Therefore they are very
unwilling to step beyond Death in their thoughts, or to Travel into Eternity in
their Meditations. They Fear to meet with a terrible Host of Sins, an Ocean of
Wrath, a Lake of Fire and Brimstone. They bode no good to themselves at their
departure out of this World. God the great Creditor Records their debts, and
Conscience, his Officer, does sometimes charge them, and arrest their Souls:
They have no Spiritual Balsom then to heal their wounds; No arm to lean on, to
support their Souls: None to roll away the Burden of their Guilt, to pacify, or
quiet their accusing and condemning Conscience: To Bail them when they are
arrested for a debt of Ten thousand Talents; they cannot look inward, but they
see an Evil Treasure, and a Conscience loaded with Dead Works: They cannot look
upward, but they see God's frowning Face, and Fiery Throne: They cannot look
forward, but they see a deep pit, a dark Prison, and Revenging Justice armed
for their destruction. The Covenant of Works is a continual Root of doubts and
fears; Legalists are still questioning, and asking, Who shall descend into the
Deep, to satisfy them? That the Gates of Hell are shut, that they shall not
enter by, and pass through them into the Regions of Darkness, and Misery: Or,
they inquire, Who shall ascend up to Heaven, to assure them that the Doer of
Heaven is open, to let them into Glory? Romans 10.6, 7. They have still perplexed
minds, and anxious thoughts, they cannot see themselves secured from a
Miserable, or assured of a Blessed Eternity: They fear they shall make a
ruining, and undoing change; be totally Shipwrackt, and cast away, Body and
Soul for ever. They cannot totally suppress the thoughts of Eternity, or
Comfortably entertain them: They can neither stupify nor pacify Conscience.
How often are Sinners terribly awakened, and alarmed when Death looks them in
the Face? O! what a bitter cry of Destruction do they then lift up, Isa. 15.5.
All their Sins (as the adversaries of Zion once did) Lam. 1.31. do overtake
them between the Straits, when they walk through the narrow Valley of the
shadow of death; as Jesus Christ himself was in an Agony near his end, Luke
22.44. When he saw what an Host of Infernal Enemies he must Fight through, what
an Ocean of Wrath he must Swim through, this put him into a Bloody sweat: When
he beheld the Frowning Face of God, the Fiery Throne, and the Flaming Sword of
Justice, this drew strong Cries and Tears from Christ, Heb. 5.7. So if Sinners
be not stupefied, if they see themselves going to an Eternal execution, that
they will be ever Suffering, and never die: That there will still be Food for
an Everlasting Worm, and Fuel for an Eternal Fire; This will fill them with
Consternation and Horror. Condemned Transgressors must bear their Iniquities,
yet cannot stand, or bear up under this load: They cannot stay, yet dare not to
depart; they cannot hide, yet are not fit to appear; they must stand before the
Judgment Seat of Christ, Romans 14.10. yet cannot stand in the Judgment, Psalm.
1.5. They must appear before that Tribunal, Cor. 5.10. where yet they cannot
Confidently, or Comfortably appear, 1 Pet. 4.18. They dread the next step they
shall take, when out of the Body: where their Lot will fall, and what their
Treatment will be to Eternity. Beleivers indeed do confidently commit, and
commend their Souls into the Hands of their Redeemer, Psalm. 31.5. But wicked
Men full sorely against their wills must fall into the Hands of an angry
Creditor, and of an inexorable Judge, Heb. 10.31. They must answer for their
own Sins; there is no other to pay their Debts, Satisfy for their Offenses,
Plead for their Reconciliation: All their Iniquities will overtake them in
another World, and meet them at the Tribunal of God: None of them are blotted
out, or passed over. God has Sworn by himself he will never forget any of
them, Amos 8.7. God will open the Treasury of his Wrath, and shut up the Bowels
of his Mercy; he will remember Iniquity, and therefore forget to be Gracious:
God will enter into Judgment with Sinners, and stand up to plead against them,
Isa. 3.13, 14. Delinquents must appear, Criminals must be brought unto
Judgment, Eccles. 11.9. and all their thoughts, words and actions must appear,
and be brought into Judgment, Eccles. 12. last. God will pass a Just
Condemning Sentence, and terribly Execute it on them. As the Sun was Eclypsed,
and darkness covered the Earth, when Christ Died; so the Gracious Countenance
of God will be Eternally Eclypsed toward Sinners. Christ met with Affronts,
Indignities, Blows before the Tribunal of Men; And what must Sinners look for
at the Tribunal of God? Jesus Christ was denied any refreshment when he
thirsted; So Sinners shall not obtain a drop to cool their scorched tongues,
Luke 16.22, 23, 24, 25. As the Waters did pursue all, that were out of the Ark,
till they were drowned; So, Sin shall hunt, pursue, find out and overtake
Sinners for their Eternal Destruction, Psalm. 140.11. Ezekiel. 35.63. Numb. 2.23.
All that is grateful, and sweet in the being of Sinners shall be consumed; yet
they themselves shall still exist to suffer more Punishment and Torment. God's
Controversy with Sinners will never be at an end: His Sword will never be
sheathed: The dreadful storm of Vengeance will never cease. God's Eternity will
be dreadful, for he ever lives to punish: and the Soul's own Immortality will
be terrible to it; For it shall ever exist to be punished: So that Sinners
would rather sleep in the dust for ever, than to have a Resurection to
Condemnation, John 5.28. and had rather be annihilated, than suffer the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire. If departing Souls did see whither they were going,
and know what they must suffer, Would not their Chambers sound with these
dreadful words? We must dwell with Everlasting Fire! we must inhabit with
Eternal Burnings!

8. It is bad not to have Christ to be our Righteousness; if we consider how
many foolish devices sinners seek out to quiet and ease their Consciences; and
yet, by all these, they do but delude and cheat their Souls. Some Fast often,
eat course Food, wear Hair-cloth, Whip themselves severely, lie on the Ground.
Those that have not rest in Christ, they are (...), such as are still walking
about in devices, and inventions of their own, Heb. 13.9. to pacify God the
Judge, and to bribe Conscience his Officer. How woeful is the Case of some
ignorant Protestants, of the blind Papists, of the deluded Jews, the deceived
Mahumetans and Heathens? Papists think, by severity, and cruelty to their
Bodies, to expiate the sins of their Souls: Some go in Pilgrimage to the Images
of Saints; some build Churches and Chapels, and appoint Priests to Pray for
their Souls, while they live in Sensual Pleasures, and serve their Lusts. Some
endow Religious Houses with Lands, that Masses may be said, and Supplications
made for their Souls. Dr. Addison of the Customs of the Jews in Barbary.
The Jews, in the beginning of the New Year do run into Rivers, and there think
to wash away their Sins: if they see a fish in the water, they will shake
themselves, and, as it were, endeavor to unlade their sins on the Fish, that
he may swim away with them. On the day of Atonement, the Men break the neck of
a Cock, and the Women of a white Hen; as if those Birds should bear and expiate
their Sins. Some of the Jews, as Buxtorf relates in his Synagoga Judaica, do
offer this Cock to the Devil to Bribe him, that he may not Accuse them, or
hinder their Prayers. When a Jew is sick, and dying, the Rabbi changes his
Name, and then Prays for him; that if God were offended with one that did bear
the first Name, that yet he would be pacified toward him that now passes under
a New Name: as if the change of a Sick Person's Name, did make him another
Person. Indeed, the Sinner must change his Name, that he may be Pardoned; but
it is Christ's New Name that must be put on him, that he may be Justified, 1
Cor. 6.11. Yet these things do not quiet the Minds of the Jews; but, when they
come to die, they Pray to God, That their Death may be the Expiation of all
their Sins. But, how foolish is this, to put their own Death in the room and
place of Christ's Death. Yet this does not allay their Fears; they further own,
that all, or many of them, must suffer pains in another World, for Eleven or
Twelve Months; and that they need the help of their Living Friends to Pray
them out of this place and pains. The Bannians, in the East Indies, are
Baptized in the River Ganges, for the cleansing away of their Sins (as Mr. Lord
relates in his History) some do bring the Dead Bodies of their Friends ten days
Journey, or more, to wash them in the River Ganges, that they may be purified
from guilt; others do stand in painful postures, with one Leg up; others do Vow
they will never eat any thing but what they find on the Highway. There is a
Tree in the East Indies, which the Natives do call Adam's Tree; on the Boughs
of it they do hang up sharp Irons, much like such as our Butchers do hang dead
Beasts on; the Boughs of the Tree being low, they leap up with their Naked
Bodies against these Iron Hooks, and if they do take hold of their Flesh, they
hang on them till the weight of their Bodies does tear them off from these Iron
Hooks: this they do, as they pretend, to Expiate Adam's Sin, in eating of the
Forbidden Fruit. These things Tavernier Relates in the History of his Travels
in the East Indies. The Mahometans do Fast, go on Pilgrimage to Mecha, to
Mahomet's Tomb; they draw Water out of a Well there, and in the Water of it
they think they Wash away all their sins.

Many more of such Foolish Inventions and Practices I could Instance in, at
what painful, or costly service, or suffering, will an Awakened Sinner stick,
to pacify God's Wrath, and to be rid of the Fear of Eternal Torments. But
there is no other Shadow for Scorched, or Rest for Weary Souls, but in Jehovah
our Righteousness.

I shall now give some Directions how Persons may be driven to seek
Righteousness in Christ, and partake of it through him.

1. We must consider, that we have to do with God. We must appear before his
Tribunal, and be weighed in his Balance: we must not, as Hypocrites, only look
at the Eye, Judgments and Praise of Men, Luke 16.15. Ye are they which
justify your selves before Men, sought honor one of another, John 5.44. but
it is to God that you stand or fall; he weighs Spirits, Prove. 16.2. He
searches the heart, and tries the reins, Jer. 17.10. Men may commend a fair
Show, a Beautiful Tomb of outside Religion, when God sees the Dead Souls and
rotten hearts that is underneath, Mat. 23.27. Acquaint your selves with the
Holiness, Purity and Justice of God; God is a pure Light as he is Holy, and a
consuming Fire as he is a Just God. He takes pleasure in Uprightness, he hates
Iniquity, the Foolish shall not stand in his sight, Evil shall not dwell with
him, Psalm. 5.45. An Hypocrite shall not come before him, Job 13.16. He will not
clear the Guilty, Exodus 34.61.17. or Justify the Wicked, Prove. 17.15. He not
only weighs the Actions, 1 Samuel 23. but he also weighs the Spirits of Men,
Prove. 16.2. He has Eyes that are exceeding pure, Hab. 1.13. His eyes also are
as a flame of Fire, Revel. 2.18. to espy the secret filth of Hypocrites. God is
Jealous of his Honor and Glory, Nahum. 1.2. He is a consuming fire to
Impenitent Unbelieving Sinners. We have to do with God, are to present our
selves in his sight, and at his Tribunal. The Righteous Judge of the World
cannot be blinded, will not be Bribed or Biased: Shall I count them pure with
the wicked Balances? Micaah 6.11. Should I receive comfort in these corrupt,
Idolatrous Services? Isa. 57.6. God will not pervert Judgment, accept or
approve what Sinners would impose, and obtrude upon him. Will God allow a
Faulty and Defective Righteousness? Will he admit, and impute it for a Full,
Perfect and Satisfactory Righteousness? Will any other Righteousness but our
Savior Christ's please God's Eye, weigh in his Balance, or be pleaded at his
Tribunal? Those that have not this Righteousness will be rejected as Reprobate
Silver, Jer. 6. last.

2. Study the Purity, Spirituality, and Perfection of the Law of God. The Law
of the Lord is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. The Word of God is very pure, Psalm.
119.140. The Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. Though we may find
out the utmost perfection that is in the Creature, yet we cannot discover the
depth, and breadth of the Law of God. We cannot say we have found out the
utmost of Duty that the Law requires, or the utmost of that Transgression and
Iniquity that the Law forbids and condemns: it obliges to the height, of Love
to God, and forbids the least and lowest Lust to the prejudice of Men, Matthew.
22.37, 39. Romans 7.7. The first and last Commands do eminently discover the
admirable purity, and perfection of the Law of God: Can you Answer, Obey, Stand
before this perfect Law of God? Should not the Terrible Trumpet of the Law (
Exodus 19.16.) cause you to prize, and long for to hear the sweet Trumpet of the
Jubilee, Levit. 25.9. The Law was not given to stop or detain us, in it self,
but to drive us to Christ. This was the Glory of the Law, yet this Glory of it
was Veiled and hidden from the Jews: This was intimated by the Vail on Moses
his Face. The Jews did not see God's end in giving the Law, 2 Cor. 3.13. God
did not intend to Justify us, but to Accuse and Condemn us by by the Law. By
the Law is the Knowledge of our Sin, not of our Righteousness, Romans 3.20. It
discovers nothing but Sin in us, shuts up all of ours under Sin, Gal. 3.22. all
the inward Operations of our Souls, and all the Outward Acts of our Bodies it
Condemns: we are (as it were) put in Prison, and shut up, under Condemnation,
by the Law; and all this is to cause us to find our need of, and to make us
Sigh, and seek for a Redeemer to open our Prison-door, and give Liberty to our
Souls, Isa. 42.7. Isa. 49.9. Isa. 61.1. The Law, if rightly understood, drives
us from it self. I, through the Law (says Paul) am dead to the Law, Gal. 2.19.
As the Glorious Light that did shine in Moses his Face did Terrisie the
Israelites, and drive them from him, discourage, or deter them from coming near
to him, Exodus 34.30, 32, 33. So, that Glorious Purity and Holiness, that
Impartial and Severe Justice, that shines in the Face of the Law, should drive
us from Resting in, or trusting on the Law for Righteousness, and despair of
ever being pronounced Righteous by it. Shall the Law, that was intended but for
a Schoolmaster, to direct us unto Christ, (Gal. 3.24.) be made a Father, to
give us an Inheritance of Righteousness? But how many have grossly erred, and
grievously mistaken about this? they have Enervated, and Dispirited the Law of
God: they have pared off a great deal of its Purity, cut off much of its
Spirituality, and made it to look like the Civil Law of Man, as if it were
given to check words and restrain outward acts, but was not prescribed to the
heart: but the Law is like the Lawgiver: as he sees the Motions of the Mind
and Will; so, his Law forbids all evil Thoughts, and Vile Affections, and on
this account it is called Spiritual, Romans 7.14. But the Jews, especially the
Pharisees, did think the Law of God did not reach to Regulate, or Condemn those
Evils, that were the mere Creatures of the Heart. How else could the Elder
Brother, signifying the Pharisee, say to God his Father, Lo these many years
have I served thee, neither at any time have I transgressed thy word, Luke
15.28. Paul, when a Pharisee, thought himself, as touching the Righteousness of
the Law, to be blameless, Phil. 3.6. These accounted themselves to be such Just
Men, that they needed no Repentance, Luke 15.7. To these the Gospel is
Foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.14. Is it not folly to speak of Reconciliation, Healing,
Liberty, to those that never thought themselves to be Enemies to God, to be
Sick, Prisoners, or Captives? How does the Papists at this day pervert, and
corrupt the Law of God? they call the most Spiritual part of it, not a Command,
but a Counsel: to Love God sincerely, some of them will allow to be a Command;
but, to Love him with all the Mind, Soul, Heart and Strength, this they assert
to be but a Counsel, and not a Command. And without this Wicked Opinion, they
cannot Maintain their other Errors, that Men may be perfect in this Life, and
truly fulfill the whole Law of God. Thus Men do at this day by their Corrupt
Glosses, False Distinctions, Perverse Interpretations of the Law of God,
Undermine its Purity, Spirituality and Perfection; and so clap a Vail on Moses
his Face, that the Law may not be Terrible to them, but that they may draw near
to it, and trust on it for their Justification. Thus Men go about to establish
their own Righteousness by derogating, and detracting from the Extent and
Obligation of the Law: they Lower the Law, that they may Heighten and Exalt
their own Righteousness.

3. Come to, and descend into your selves, that you may find out that evil
Treasure, that Root of Bitterness, that Fountain of Iniquity, that is in your
selves. Abraham, as touching the Flesh, did not find a Righteousness in himself
to boast of, and Glory in; And can we find that in our selves, that Abraham
could not find in himself? Romans 4.1, 2. If we cannot find Righteousness in our
selves, do we not need to be found in Christ, Phil. 3.9. To stay, and trust on
that Righteousness which is of God by the Faith of Christ, we must desire God
(as Luther says) not only to turn away his Eyes from our Sins, but also from
our Services; not only to forgive our wrong steps out of the way; but also our
slow steps in it; when we are bought with so great a price, and encouraged to
run with so Glorious a Prize set before us. We may see enough in our selves to
Condemn us. We are Children of Wrath, by nature, and Children of Disobedience
by practice. Every faculty is diseased, and perverted, every Work of ours is
corrupted and defiled. God threatens the Jews to spread the dung of their
Solemn Feasts on their faces, Mal. 2.3. The Beasts that were brought into the
Courts of the Temple on the Feast-days, did dung in them. God seems to compare
the faults and failings in the Jews Spiritual Sacrifices to the dung of those
Beasts that were Offered up in Sacrifice. Perhaps Paul may allude to this
expression, when he accounts his own Righteousness and privileges to be but
Dung, there is some of the Dung of the Old Man that is vented in, and mixed
with our best performances; that does stain, defile, and, in part at least,
render them unsavory before God. Sin dwells in us, is present with us: We can
never shake it off, shut it out, or totally leave it behind us, when we draw
near to God: We cannot put God in mind of one perfect duty, but he can put us
in mind of Thousands of defective Services performed by us. If we dwell at
home, and trust in our selves, Revenging Justice will break in upon us, and
destroy us: If we stay abroad, do not fly to, and House our selves in Christ, a
storm of Fire and Brimstone will be Rained on us, Psalm. 11.6. We needed
Christ's Death on Earth, and we want his Intercession in Heaven, that the
Iniquity of our Holy things may not be charged on us for our Condemnation and
destruction.

4. We must beware of unbelief, as to God's threat'nings, and take heed of
Carnal security. Sinners are too apt to take the shield of unbelief, and to
quench all the Fiery Darts of God's threat'nings, which he casts at them. How
prone are presumptuous Sinners to give God the lie? He says, There is no peace
to the Wicked, Isa. 48. last. yet Sinners do promise themselves peace, though
they walk in the Imaginations of their own evil Hearts, Deuteronomy. 29.19. God says
of an ungodly Man, That his eyes shall see his Destruction, and he shall drink
of the Wrath of the Almighty, Job 21.20. yet he flattereth himself with vain
hopes, as those, Jer. 5.12. Evil shall not come on us, neither shall we see
Sword or Famine. How dreadful is it when a Spiritual Lethargy is added to other
diseases? and (...), the Spirit of slumber falls on Men, Romans 11.8. Some
conceive that the Apostle alludes to those that are bit wit an Asp; if that
Serpent does prick them they doze slumber, and die away. The Old Serpent did
not only Poison us by his bite, but also stupifie us, that we might not be
sensible of our danger. Some are so deep asleep, that though they are pricked,
yet it will not rouse them up, even so, many are in such a profound sleep, that
though God pricks them daily with his Threat'nings, yet they are not awakened
to a serrious Consideration, and dread of approaching destruction: God
threatens it as a sore Judgment to the Jews, that the Prophet Ezekiel should
be dumb, and that he should not be a Reprover to them, Ezekiel. 3.26. And how long
was he dumb? it was till Jerusalem was taken, and smitten, Ezekiel. 33.21, 22. It
was but the Evening before a Messenger came with these bad tidings, that
Ezekiel's mouth was opened, and he was no more dumb: Ezekiel was dumb till the
Judgment denounced was executed on the Jews, and then it was too late to warn
and Reprove them. And will thou provoke God to lay thee under such a Spiritual
Judgment? Shall Conscience be dumb, and not Reprove thee, til Divine Vengeance
fall on thee for thy destruction? Take heed that thou do not fortify, and
entrench thy self in Natural Religion, Morality, and Formal Duties, and so bear
the Siege, and storm of powerful Preaching. God complains of the Jews, by
Zechary, that they made their Hearts as an Adamant Stone, least they should
hear the Law. The word, (...), Signifies a Stone that keeps it self from being
broken, though it have knocks, yet it preserves it self: Even so the Heart of
Sinners keeps it self from being broken under the many Admonitions, and
Reproofs of the Word. Beware, that such a Heart be not found in thee: Do not
make light of, or a mock at, Sin. Do not put the thoughts of thy Iniquity, and
of God's Wrath far from thee. Sin lies at the door, if not sooner, it will
arrest thy Soul when it goes out of the Body, Genesis 4.7. Solomon says, That he
that rolleth a Stone it shall return upon him, Prove. 26.27. So if you
Presumptuously roll away your Sins from you, God will Righteously return them
upon you. God's Threat'nings are not an empty sound: Sinners shall know, to
their cost, that God has not said in vain, That he would pour out his Fury on
them, Ezekiel. 6.10. The day of Vengeance is in God's Heart, Isa. 63.4. The Cup of
Fury is in his Hand, Psalm. 75.8. Though there be a mixture of all fatal and
deadly ingredients, yet it is without any mixture of Mercy, Rev. 14.10. The
storm of Vengeance hangs over the Heads of Sinners. Though it is said, that now
God's Judgments are far above out of the sight of Sinners, Psalm. 10.5. yet they
shall be so visible, that their eyes shall see their Destruction, Job 21 20.
thy breath is in thy Nostrils, Isa. 2. last. and may soon go forth; the Judge
stands at the door, and may quickly enter in, James 5.9. Will thou run on the
point of God's Sword? Will thou venture into Eternal Burnings?

5. Beware and take heed of Carnal Reason; that is enmity to God, and to the
Righteousness of God. As the Israelites slighted the Bread that God gave them
from Heaven, did account it as no Bread, Numb. 21.5. There is no Bread; and
then they call it light Bread; as if there were nothing solid in it; or, as if
it did afford no substantial nourishment: yea, Numb. 11.6. they complain; that
their Souls was dried away: as if they did grow lean, weak and feeble, by
reason of this poor and low sort of Food. So Carnal Reason misrepresents the
Righteousness of Christ, as if it were nothing solid or substantial. The
Blasphemous Papists call Imputed Righteousness, Putative Righteousness as if it
did only spring up in, and were born from the Fantasies of Protestants. Proud
Nature thinks the Righteousness that is wrought, and brought forth by our
selves, to be the only substantial and valuable Righteousness; but the
Spiritual-minded (as Paul) do account the Righteousness of God; the
Righteousness that is by the Faith of Christ, to be the most Rich Possession,
and valuable Food of the Soul, Phil. 3.8, 9. My flesh, (says Christ) is Meat
indeed, and my Blood is drink indeed, John 6.55. This is the true Bread, John
6.32.

6. Beg the Spirit to convince thee of sin, John 16.8, 9. to cut thy stock,
that the Graft of the Free Promise of Righteousness may be let into thy heart,
to raise a Storm in thy Soul, that all thy Carnal Confidence and Fleshly
Righteousness may be Ship-wrackt. In a great and dangerous Storm, Mariners will
throw Silks and Satins overboard, rather than perish themselves. Confidence in
thy best Works must be cast out, that thy Soul may be preserved, and brought to
the desirable Haven of Christ's Righteousness: As the Angel, that was the Son
of God, Wrestled with Jacob, and put his Thigh out of Joint, Genesis 32.25. even
so Christ, by his Spirit must powerfully Wrestle with us, to Mortisie our
Carnal Confidence, and put our Thigh out of Joint. We are apt to trust in our
selves, that we are Righteous, as those, Luke 18.9. While we thus trust in our
selves, our Bone is in Joint, we are at ease, and have a Carnal Feace; but our
Bones must be put out of Joint, that we may have no confidence in the flesh,
Phil. 3.3. Our Heaven of Religion, and our Earth of Morality must be shaken to
pieces, before we will come to Christ, Hag. 2.6, 7. we must see our selves cast
away, or else we will not enter into Christ as an Ark of Salvation.

7. We must fly to, and trust on Christ for Justification, Gal. 2.16, 17. as
God is said to pardon Iniquity, Transgression and Sin, Exodus 34.67. so it is
said of Christ, That he came to finish the Transgression, to make an end of
Sins, and to make Reconciliation for Iniquity. God Pardons, but it is through
Christ: He remembers Iniquity no more, Jer. 31.34. but it is because the clean
Water of Christ's Blood is sprinkled upon us, Ezekiel. 36.25. We must look off
from our selves, and look only to Christ: there is not any thing Inherent in
us, or performed by us, that is our Righteousness: we are not Justified by what
we find in our selves, but by what we know in Christ, Is. 53.11. not by what we
have done, but by what the Lord Jesus Christ has suffered. Christ's Obedience
and Righteousness is contradistinguished from, and opposed to our Inherent
Righteousness, Phil. 3.8, 9. we are not to stay in our selves, but to be found
in him; We are to be made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. Christ
did not Merit or procure that we should have a Righteousness of our own, and in
our selves to be Justified by. We are to renounce our own Righteousness as
filthy rags, and to trust only on Christ's Righteousness, as our next,
immediate and only Righteousness for Justification. Christ is not only the
Meritorious cause of our Justification, but the very matter of our
Righteousness. The Israelites did not look to the Brazen Serpent in part, and
partly to a Plaster of their own providing, for help against the Bite of the
Fiery Serpents, but wholly took off their eye from themselves, and Fixed it
only on God's Remedy. The Man that brought a Sacrifice, was to lay his hand on
the head of it, Levit. 1.4. The Hebrew word (...), is rendered Fulciet, he
shall, prop up his hand, by leaning strongly on the Head of the Sacrifice: the
same word is used of Aaron laying or leaning his hand strongly on the Head of
the Scapegoat, Levit. 16.21. So we must trust steadfastly on Christ our
Sacrifice; we must stay our selves from sinking and falling, by leaning on the
Obedience and Righteousness of Christ; this must be our only support. The Names
of the Twelve Tribes of Israel were put and carried on the two shoulders of the
High Priest, Exodus 28.12. to point at these sweet Truths, that we must be born
on the Shoulders of Christ our Great High Priest, that we may not fink down to
Hell, but be carried up to Heaven by him. We must therefore greedily catch at,
and strongly take hold of the Righteousness of Christ. It is said of the
Gentiles, (...), Took hold of the Righteousness that is by Faith, as a Racer
that grasps, and holds fast the Prize. We must strike the Root of Faith deep
into the Righteousness of Christ. An Anchor will not hold a Ship fast, if it
only ly on the ground, and do not pierce deep into it: So Faith will not
establish our hearts, if it does not penetrate, and pierce deep into Christ. We
must Marry Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. that he may spread his Skirt over us,
Ezekiel. 16.8. and cover our Nakedness: that he may secure us from our Debts: and
protect us from God's Arrest. By Faith we must Feed on; and eat Christ, and be
Incorporated into him, John 6.53, 54, 57. Surely then, Christ's Righteousness
will Cloth and Cover his own Body. We must be engrafted into Christ as our
Stock, and then we shall partake of Christ's Righteousness as the Fruit that
this Noble Vine does bear: as we partake of the Vital Sap of Christ for our
Sanctification, so we feed on the Food of Christ, his Active and Passive
Obedience, for our Justification. If the Guilt of Sin does not set close to,
and press hard on our Consciences; the Hand of Faith will not press, and lean
hard on the Head of Jesus Christ our Atoning Sacrifice.

8. We must be Humble and Repent.

1. We must be Humbled. We think our selves to be Rich, and to want nothing,
Rev. 3.17. till the Spirit does (as it were) sue out the Statute of Bankrupt
against us, and show us our Poverty, that we are nothing, have nothing, can do
nothing that is Spiritually Good, till Christ does quicken us, and live in us.
We have a Mountain of Pride, and Carnal Confidence that must be levelled, Isa.
40.4. Men are naturally so high and stout, that they are not willing to stoop,
submit, and be beholding wholly to the Righteousness of Christ, Romans 10. v. 3.
The Israelites in the Wilderness did Murmur, and Complain, because it was no
place of Seed, Numb. 20.5. But did they not receive Bread in a more easy way?
Was it not Rained down from Heaven on them? yet they speak as if they had
rather to go to Plow, Sow, earn and get their Bread by their own Labor, than
to receive it of God's free gift. God is said to humble them, and feed them
with Manna, Deuteronomy. 8.3. they did not get their Bread by the Sweat of their Face,
but received it as a daily Alms from God; and, in this sense, God humbled
them, when he fed them with Manna. Proud Sinners, (like the Israelites) had
rather Plow, Sow, raise Bread and Righteousness out of themselves, than to
receive it as a Gift from Heaven. But this Tympany of Pride must be pricked, our
Rags, our Figleaves, our Plasters must be plucked away, that our Shame,
Nakedness and Sores may appear. We must come to God in the most submissive
manner: A Beggar must not Cloth himself with Satins, or Silks, or put on
Rings, or Chains of Gold; this is a Garb that contradicts his Requests as a
Beggar, and will frustrate his design. We must come to God in the most humble
way to beg an Alms, and sue for the gift of Righteousness, Romans 5.17. we must
not boast of any Righteousness, or plead any Works of ours; but acknowledge our
Sores, Nakedness and Poverty.

2. We must Repent, and turn from Sin. If thou will not renounce the filth and
dominion of sin, God may justly retain the Guilt of it, and bind it on thee. We
must not love what we should loath; retain that, which we should cast away;
continue in that which we should break off from. We must feel the weight, and
taste the bitterness of sin. Christ only did bear our sins for Expiation, but we
must bear them by Remorse and Godly sorrow; Ephraim said, When he Repented, he
bear on him the Reproach of his Youth, Jer. 31.19. We must take our fins to us,
charge and bind them on us, before Jesus Christ will put them away: if we see
but little evil that we have committed, we shall account that God had but few
Faults of ours to lay on Jesus Christ; and so we shall make light of Christ's
Sorrows and Sufferings. How can we desire God to put away our sins, 2 Samuel 12,
13. if we will keep sin, and not put it away? Job 20.12, 13. Isa. 1.16, 17.
Jer. 44.15, 16, 17. Was Christ's Body broken for sin? 1 Cor. 11.24. And shall
not our hearts be broken for it, and from it? Psalm. 51.17. A broken heart will
set a price on, and be a meet Patient for a bleeding and broken Christ. Christ
has little Practice, and few Patients in the World, because Men are so
hard-hearted, and so few are broken in heart. We must cast out our Lusts, as
Jonah, that we may not be drowned in Perdition: we must suffer in our flesh,
that is, in our corrupt Nature, 1 Pet. 4.1. that we may not suffer in our Souls
and Bodies to Eternity. Though God will be Reconciled to Sinners, yet not to Sin:
though Christ came to show Mercy to Offenders, yet his design is to exercise
Severity on the Devil's Work in us, and to destroy Iniquity, 1 John 38. yet it
is not Repentance, but Faith, that receives God's Gift and Christ's
Righteousness, Romans 5.17. Acts 26.18. yea, Repentance being Christ's Gift, Does
not Faith receive it? Some say, there cannot be a Fiducial act of Faith before
Repentance. But must we not trust, on God, through Christ, for a new heart of
flesh to be given to us? Ezekiel. 36.26. And is not this a Fiducial Act of Faith?
Can we trust on Christ for any Spiritual Grace or Good, till we trust on the
Righteousness of Christ, by which we procured and receive all good things.

2d. Branch of the Use of Exhortation: Is Jehovah become our Righteousness? O!
admire Grace in it, and bless God and Christ for it, that you have such a
Foundation to Build on; such a Sacrifice to Feed on; such a Precious Remedy to
be Healed by; such an Excellent Fountain to Wash in; the Clefts of such a Rock
to dwell in. Our Justification seemed impracticable, yea impossible; we could
not raise up our low Valley, or fill up the wide Breach that our Iniquities had
made; we had not wrought that Righteousness, or performed that obedience that
the Law requires: We could neither make a Present to God's Holiness, or pay a
Ransom to his Justice; yet God compares the Rejection of his People, to that
which is to us impossible, Jer. 31.37. Thus says the Lord, If Heaven above can
be measured, and the foundations of the Earth be searched out beneath, I will
also cast off the Seed of Israel for all that they have done, says the Lord.
O! how wonderful is this? that when the Reception of Sinners might have been
compared to things impossible, their Rejection is compared with things
impossible to us. Has God covered us with the Robe of Righteousness? Isa.
61.10. This should be a garment of Praise: when we put it on, we should break
out into the sweetest Songs, and highest Praises of God and Christ: Meditate
seriously on these following particulars;

1. We live in the last days of the World, and in the best days of the Gospel.
And this is the very season, and time, when this Scripture should be most
eminently fulfilled, that Jehovah should be called our Righteousness. The
excellency of Christ's Obedience, and the efficacy of his Sacrifice is now
signally manifested. This Name of the Messiah is now most eminently known, his
Glorious Titles and style Blazoned; we are plainly told that Christ has
condemned Sin, Romans 8.3. and that God Justifies the ungodly, because Christ
Died for them, Romans 4.5. Romans 5.6. Not only Sins are blotted out, Isa. 43.5.
but Names are written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. Things were more dark in the times
of the Law, though God promised remission of Sins; yet there was a daily
remembrance of Sin in the Sacrifices Offered up, Heb. 10.3. The day of the Law
was God's forbearing time, Romans 3.25. but the day of the Gospel was Christ'
bearing time, 1 Pet. 2.24. Who himsel bare our Sins in his own Body on the Tree
And Christ did so bear them, that he did bear them away. He died for our Sins
and he Rose again for our Justification Romans 4. last. he purged and put away
Sin Heb. 13. Heb 9.26. Though God promised of Old to be the God of his people
Genesis 17.7. yet the Vail stood up in the times of the Law, as if Men should be
shut out from Heaven, from God and his Glorious presence, but the Vail is now
Rent, and the way laid open to the Heavenly Sanctuary, therefore we have more
matter of, and motives to Praise, than the Church of God had of Old.

2. That we are Justified freely by God's Grace, Romans 3 24. O! what a wonder is
this that we that were called Transgressors from the Womb, Isa. 48.8. should
call Jehovah our Righteousness to Eternity; That we that have not wrought
Righteousness, yet should be made the Righteousness of God in Christ, 2 Cor.
5.21. That we should be Justified without the Law! Romans 3.21. That our Sins,
that are our own, should not be imputed, but that the Righteousness, that is
not our own should be imputed. We have peace with God, not because we have
committed no Trespasses, but because they are not imputed, 2 Cor. 5.19. There
is much in our Hearts and Lives, that is Odious and Abominable before God, only
it is hid and covered, Psalm. 32.1, 2. We have contracted a vast debt, but it is
remitted, Psalm. 103. c. 1. v. 2 We have committed Heinous Crimes, but they are
not charged on us. There is that dwelling in us, and done by us, that
exceedingly displeases God's eye and provokes his anger; but this is not
remembered against us, or put to our account. The Law imputes nothing to us, but
what is our own, is inherent in us, or done by us; but here is the
Righteousness of another given, and therefore imputed to us: it does not grow
in us, or spring out of us, but is rained on us. As God commended his Goodness
to Israel, that he brought them into Canaan, to possess Houses they never
built, Vineyards they never planted, Wells they never dug, Dout. 6.11.12. So
God commends his Grace to us, that he gives us a Righteousness that we never
wrought our selves: The Gentiles that did not follow after Righteousness, yet
attained to Righteousness by Faith, Romans 9.30. O what astonishing Grace is
this, That we that have not run the race of Obedience, should yet win, and
attain the prize of Righteousness! Though Abraham was an Idolater, Josh. 24.2.
yet he is styled Righteousness in the abstract, by reason of his Justification;
who has called Righteousness (so it is in the Hebrew) from the East, Isa. 41.2.

3. That yet it should cost Christ so dear to be The Lord our Righteousness:
How greatly did the Soul of Christ Travel, Isa. 53.11. that our pardon and
peace might be born? As he was God, he suffered much in our commission of Sin;
he was greived, wearied, vexed, pressed under our Iniquities, as a Cart is
pressed under the sheaves, Amos 2.13. and that, after this, he should suffer so
much more for the Expiation of them; He was wounded, pierced, bruised, Isa.
53.10. O how wonderful is this, that Christ, so freely, and without our
solicitation, did so readily undertake to be a Surety! Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. Lo I
come! I delight to do thy will, O my God! yet this was the will of God, that
the Body, Heb. 10.10. yea, the Soul of Christ, should be Offered up, Isa.
53.10. God himself seems to speak of this undertaking of Jesus Christ with
Admiration. Jer. 30.21. Who is this that ingageth his Heart to approach to me?
It was no small matter to approach to God as Priest, and to be a Sacrifice, to
draw near to God that was a Jealous God, and Furious, as it is expressed, Nahum
1.2. To approach to God, sitting on a Fiery Throne, holding of a Flaming Sword,
Clothed with the Garments of Vengeance: If Christ's Love had not been Fervent,
and his purposes fixed, he would never have engaged his Heart to draw near to a
God so terrible, and to undertake so hard a service, to make Reconciliation
with an angry, and to make restitution to a wronged God. O how amazing is this
Fruit of Christ's undertaking, that we may draw nigh to God, that is a
consuming Fire, and yet not to be hurt, but be refined by him! This was a great
Miracle that Daniel's three Companions walked in the midst of the Fiery
Furnace, and yet had no hurt, but good; for their Bonds were broken, or
consumed, Dan. 3.23.25. And is it not as great a Miracle of Grace, that
Believers walk with God, that is a consuming Fire, Heb. 12. last. and yet have
no hurt, but good? God is for them, Romans 8.31. How low did Jesus Christ stoop,
that he might be the Lord our Righteousness? He thus represents his own
Sufferings, Psalm. 22.14. I am poured out like water; this seems to point at his
Bloody Sweat on the ground; All my bones are out of Joint: This did intimate,
that Christ's Body was so stretched out; and extended on the Cross, that all
his bones were put out of Joint. He further complains, that his Heart was
melted as wax within him; and this was by the sense he had of the Heat, and
Fire of Gods Wrath. The Manna which came down from Heaven was ground in a Mill,
or beaten in a Mortar, and then baked in a pan to be Food for the Israelites,
Numb. 11.8. So Jesus Christ was Bruised, Isa. 53.10. as Manna, in the Mill, or
Mortar; yea, this Lamb of God was roasted in the Fire of his Father's Wrath,
Exodus 12.8, 9. The Sacrifices of the Law were not only killed, but burnt
afterward; which was a kind of second death to them, Levit. 1.13. yea, there
were whole burnt Offerings, Psalm. 51.19. and this whole Burnt-Offering did
signify not only that Christ's Body was wounded; but his Soul did suffer, and
was made an Offering for Sin, Isa. 53.10. The sense that Jesus had of his
Fathers displeasure; and forsaking of him, was a kind of second death to
Christ. As Adam was a Criminal, cast out of paradise; so Christ was as a
prisoner led out of the Garden to suffer Death; He became a Servant, that he
might Justify us, Isa. 53.11. O how would this affect our Souls, that where we
deserved all the Creatures should be withdrawn, and should serve us no more, as
God threatens! Hos. 2.8, 9, 10. That when the Lord of Glory should take on him
the form of a servant, 2 Phil. 6.7, 8. we deserved that the Flower, and the
Wine Press would feed us no more, Hos. 8.2. yet that then the Son of God should
come down from Heaven to feed us with his Flesh, and cheer us with his Blood,
John 6.53, 54, 55.57. Flesh is weak, and because of this, Christ is said to be
Crucified through weakness, 2 Cor. 13.4. yet this Flesh of Christ is set forth
by bread that strengthens Man's Heart, Psalm. 104.15. Christ's Blood is figured
by Wine in his last Supper. Though the Blood of Christ was shed with
unexpressible Anguish and Pain, yet this is set forth by Wine that chears Man's
Heart, Psalm. 104.15. Our strength comes out of the weakness, our comfort comes
out of the Sorrow of Christ. Christ was the true Rock smitten by the Rod of
Moses, the Curse of the Law: As that Rock being smitten did cleave, so Christ
being smitten with the Curse, his Soul and Body did part, that water of Life
might flow forth to us, and that we might enter in, and dwell safely in him,
Cant. 2.14. O my Dove, that art in the clefts of the Rock. We had vastly run in
debt with God, and that God should pay himself out of the Sufferings and Blood
of his Son: We had proudly exalted our selves against God, and that Christ
should debase himself so low to satisfy for our pride; and that his Selfdenial
should make a Recompense to God for our Self-seeking. We dishonored God,
Reproached, Blasphemed him, as a poor portion, as a hard Master, as a Righteous
Lawgiver: And how wonderful is, that the Reproaches, wherewith we Reproached
God, should fall on Christ, Romans 15.3.

4. Though we are Justified so Freely, yet so Righteously. The Mercy-seat that
covers the Curse of the Law, is sprinkled with Christ's Blood, Levit. 16.13,
14. We are Justified through the Redemption that is in Christ, Romans 3.24. The
prison is opened to them that were bound, because the Life of Christ is given
as a Ransom, Matthew. 20.28. Christ died as a Testator, that we might not be
executed as Criminals, and Malefactors. When Christ became a Testator, he
stripped himself (as it were) of all good, Peace, Liberty, and exposed himself to
all Evil, to Sufferings, Pain, Reproaches, and Death it self, and all this was
to enrich us, 2 Cor. 8.9. and that all good things might come to us in a
Righteous way, that all Blessings might Swim to us in the Blood of our
Testator. Christ would have had nothing to give to us, if he had not bought off
our Transgressions from us, and purchased all good for us. As Moses lifted up
his Rod over it, and the Red Sea was divided, Exodus 14.16.21. So we may by
Faith lift up the Cross of Christ over the deep Sea of the Wrath of God, and it
will divide, and give us passage to the Heavenly Canaan; Grace shall Reign
through Christ's Righteousness to Eternal Life, Romans 5. last.

5. What Praise does this call for, that God and Christ do so often call us,
and so earnestly invite us to come into this Righteousness of the Son of God?
Come to me all ye that Labor, and are heavy Laden, and I will give you rest,
Matthew. 11.28. Look unto me, all the ends of the Earth, and be saved, Isa.
45.22. Christ tells us, that, This is the Work of God, that you Believe on him
whom he has sent, John 6.29. This is the great Work that God requires, and is
best pleased with. It is a pleasure to Christ to see his Seed, and to behold
the Travel of his Soul, Isa. 35.11. This satisfies Christ when he sees Souls
Feed on the Bread that he gives, to wash in the Fountain he has opened, and to
use Remedies he has provided, and to put on the garment of Righteousness he
has prepared. He hungers after the Justification, and Salvation of Men; and he
is satisfied when Sinners trust on him for Justification, and look to him for
Salvation. That Christ does thrust forth Laborers into his Harvest to reap
perishing Sinners, though they are under many fears, difficulties, dangers,
discouragments, yet Christ thrusts them out into his Harvest, Matthew. 9. last.
And then does charge his servants by their earnest importunity to compel guests
to come in, Luke 14.23. God's pleasure has been fulfilled in Bruising of
Christ, and now it is God's pleasure that Men should listen to, and obey his
call, and run to Christ. O that it should be the pleasure of God to Bruise
Christ, and to Heal us, to Condemn Christ, and to Justify us! O that it should
be the pleasure of the Lord to exercise Severity on Christ, and extend Mercy to
us. Christ charges his Servants, by their earnest importunity, to compel Guests
to come into his Feast, Luke 14.23. Famishing Sinners do not feel their wants,
and they do not press into Christ's House: but the Servants are commanded by
urgent and continual Solicitations, to compel them. Christ would have his House
filled with Guests, and his Provisions eaten by them; Christ counts it an
Honor to him when we come to feed at his Table, and Feast on his
Righteousness, then his Name is Glorified in us, 2 These. 1.11, 12.

6. What Grace is this, that Jesus Christ should not only prepare, and bring
Righteousness, but also apply it; as Parents provide Clothes for their little
Children, and also put them on. Christ is God's Righteous Servant, that
Justifies many, Isa. 53.11. Christ's Righteousness Merits the very Faith that
applies it; that sense seems to be offered by Peter's words, as they ly in our
Translation, We obtain precious faith through the Righteousness of God, even
our Savior Christ, 2 Pet. 1.1. this procures the Spirit to plant and work
Faith. Jesus Christ, by his Spirit, draws us to himself, John 12.32. he not
only opens the Fountain, but also washes Souls in it, Zech. 13.1. Revel. 1.5.
he not only provided the Medicine, but also dresses the Wound, and binds up the
broken in heart, Isa. 61. Christ presents his Sacrifice and Sufferings
continually before God, which is his Burning Incense in the Heavenly Sanctuary,
Revel. 8.3. his Blood speaks in Heaven, Heb. 12.24. and by the Spirit (as the
Finger of our Great High Priest, Levit. 16.14.) it is continually, without
intermission, according to the Promises, sprinkled on the Consciences of
Believers on Earth, Ezekiel. 36.25.

7. O Bless God for the admirable effects, the excellent fruits that are joined
with, or do follow after Christ's being made Righteousness to us. 1. That there
is not only Peace, but Good Will, Luke 2.14. not only Enmity is quenched, but
Love burns. Sin's place, and the Believing Sinner's too is changed. Sin was
before God's Face, Hos. 7.2. but is now cast behind his back, Isa. 25.17. and
Reconciled persons are set before his Face, Psalm. 41.12. This is matter of
Praise, that there are such admirable effects, or consequences of Christ's
being made the Lord our Righteousness. 1. That though the Curse do fall on the
Creatures for our sakes, yet it falls not on those that are Justified. When God
made a Promise of Christ to Adam, he does not say, Cursed art thou; but Cursed
is the Ground for thy sake, Genesis 3.15.17. God speaks to Cain (a Reprobate) in
other Language; Now thou art Cursed, Genesis 4.11. God may Curse the Creatures for
our Sin, yet the Curse may not light on our persons and Souls. 2. That we are
not only pardoned for the present, but secured for the future; God did not only
preserve Noah from being drowned by the Flood, but does assure him that his
Sins and the World's, should not provoke him to send a Second Flood on the
World, Genesis 8.10.21. Genesis 9.11. So here, Christ stands in the breach, to keep
out an Inundation, and Flood of Venegance, and appears at the Bar to prevent
the going forth of a Condemning Sentence: As God does see his Rainbow in the
Clouds, and looks on it, and remembers his Covenant, Genesis 9.13, 14, 15. So
Christ is a Rainbow round about the Throne, to secure us from future storms,
and Floods of Evils. That God does not only hide his Face from our Sins, but
also blot out our Iniquities; that they may not, cannot be seen, or read for
the time to come, Psalm. 51.9. 3. That not only God pronounces a Justifying
Sentence in the Court of Heaven; but the Spirit also pronounces this Sentence
in the Court of Conscience: Causing the penitent Believer to hear the voice of
Joy and Gladness, Psalm. 51.8. and sheds abroad the Love of God in the Heart,
Romans 5.5. and seals him unto the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. 4. As Jesus
did Engage his Heart to come nigh to God as a Surety, and Priest, Jer. 30.21.
so he now came, and does bring us near to God, as Friends, Supplicants and
Worshippers, 1 Pet. 3.18.5. That there is not only Peace; but also Good Will,
Luke the 14. There is Grace to Establish our Hearts against the dread of
Vengeance, and the horrors of Eternal Death, Heb. 13.9. It is sweet when no
storm of Vengeance hovers and hangs over the Sinners Head; no matter of
Accusation springs up in his Heart, to make him a burden to himself, and a
terror to others; O what sore Temptations are guilty Creatures, in the anguish
of their minds exposed to! Sometimes they could wish there were no God; or
desire themselves rather to be annilalated, then to see his frowning Face, and
feel his punishing Hand to Eternity: But the Grace of God guards, and
Establishes the Heart against such dreadful wishes as these.

2. That we are precious in God's eyes, Isa. 48.4. Though we are vile in our
selves, yet we are presented to God as Precious Stones on the Shoulders and
Breast Plate of our High Priest, Exodus 28.12, 21, 28, 29.

3. Though we are unclean in our selves, yet by virtue of Christ's
Righteousness we are undefiled. The Church confesses her Infirmity, and
acknowledges her Sin, yet Christ calls her Undefiled; no spot or blemish did
cleave, to her, because She had put on Christ for Righteousness, Cant. 5.2.

4. Jesus Christ gives an Inherent Righteousness, as well as an Imputed
Righteousness; as God gives us for our Clothing both Flax and Wool, to cover
our Nakedness, Hos. 2.9. Flax is for inward, and Wool for outward Garments.
Inherent Righteousness may be compared to Flax, this is near to, and dwells in
the Soul: Imputed Righteousness may be compared to Wool, as it is a warm
upper-Garment. We need Christ's Righteousness, as a Garment, over all our
Graces, to cover the Imperfection and Defects that are in them. Our own
Righteousness is compared to a Breastplate, Ephesians. 6.14. (...), yet above all,
over all, or upon all, we are bid to take the Shield of Faith, Ephesians. 6.16.
Faith that takes hold of Christ's Righteousness is compared to a Shield; this
is a Guard, and Defense for all the other Pieces of Armor. We are liable to
many Accusations, because of the weakness of, and the defects that are in our
Breast Plate of Righteousness. This may be pierced by Satan's Darts, and our
Souls be wounded with Trouble and Terror; but it is the Shield of Faith,
taking hold of the Righteousness of Christ, that must Ward our Accusations, and
Guard us from Terrors. Surely, shall one say, in the Lord I have Righteousness,
Isa. 45.24. in the Hebrew it is, I have Righteousnesses, in the Plural Number.
We have a Robe of Righteousness, Isa. 61.10. this is Righteousness Imputed; and
we have a Breast Plate of Righteousness, Ephesians. 6.14. and this is Righteousness
Imparted. When we call the Lord our Righteousness, then we our selves are
called Trees of Righteousness, Isa. 61.3. as we cannot stand alone, but are
carried on the Shoulders of Christ our High Priest, Exodus 28.12. and in the
Arms of Christ our Shepherd, Isa. 40.11. so we do not grow alone by our selves,
but, as Branches, on Christ our Root and Vine, John 15.1.5.

5. It Is a great Mercy that our Sins are blotted out, Isa. 43.25. and God will
not enter into the City, Hos. 11.9. it is an Allusion to the Angels entering
into Sodom, to find out matter of Accusation against the Sodomites, Genesis
19.3.5.18, But as God blots out Sin for the present, so he seeks not out
occasions for the future: but when God blots out our Transgressions, only our
Good Deeds are Remembered and showed, Mal. 3.16, 17. A Book of Remembrance was
Written for Good Thoughts, Words, Actions, when Sins are expunged, and
forgotten for ever. Our sins are removed far from us, as far as the East is
from the West, Psalm. 103.12. but our Good Works do follow us, to testify our
Sincerity, and to obtain a Reward, Revel. 14.13. God will never remember our
Iniquities, Jer. 31.34. but he will never forget his People, Isa. 49.14, 15.
nor forget the least of their Services: If it be but a Cup of cold Water given
to a Disciple of Christ, it shall not be forgotten, but Rewarded, Matthew. 10.
last. the greatest Sins are forgotten, and not Revenged on us; the least
Service is Remembered and Rewarded in us, John 5.29. They that have done good
shall come forth to a Resurrection of Life. Though they did many evil things, yet
they shall be blotted out, and covered, and they shall be pardoned as if they
had only done good, and nothing but good. God is Righteous to forgive us our
Sins, 1 John 1.9. But God is not unrighteous to forget our Labor and Service
of Love, Heb. 6.10.

6. What Praise does this deserve, that our Justification is so inseparably
joined with Glorification, Romans 8.30. Whom he has Justified, them also he
Glorified. Justified persons cannot miscarry, or Perish. The Righteousness of
Christ, is called Everlasting, Dan. 9.24. and this Everlasting Righteousness is
the Foundation of an Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20. Because the Blood of
Christ is still fresh, therefore the Covenant of Grace, and the way to the
Heavenly Sanctuary is still new, Heb. 6.8. Heb. 10.19. they that do wash their
Robes white in the blood of the Lamb, do enter into the Heavenly Sanctuary, and
are before the Throne, Rev. 7.14.15. As Jesus Christ being first Justified,
Isa. 50.8. 1 Timothy 3.16. was soon after Glorified, John 17.5. And now Father
glorify me with thy own self. So sin being blotted out, what remains to shut
out Justified Persons from the Kingdom, and Glory of God? Not to see God, is
the greatest loss and penalty. Where Sin is Forgiven, How can such a Penalty
remain?

7. Bless God that Jesus Christ is Revealed to thee, and bestowed on thee as
the Lord thy Righteousness. How many Thousands of Persons, yea, how many
Nations do not hear of this Glorious Righteousness of Christ, are utter
strangers to this precious Name of his, and have no Interest in this
Righteousness of Christ. The Soldiers took Christ's Coat, and four of them did
cast Lots for it, but only one of the four did obtain it, John 19.23, 24. So I
may truly say, that scarce one in four of those, that are called Christians, do
get this Spiritual Garment of Christ's Righteousness to put on, and wear. It as
a sweet Expression of Augustin's on Psalm. 31. Ego Sort perveni ad tunicam
Christi. I by Lot came to the possession of Christ's Coat: O happy Souls on
whom the Lot of free Grace falls, and that get and possess this Coat of
Christ's Righteousness; Ephesians. 1.11. in whom (that is in Christ) we have
obtained an Inheritance: In the Greek it is, (...), that is, we obtained an
Inheritance in Christ by Lot. The Apostle does humble himself, and other
Christians, and Magnify God: he did not deserve a Portion in Christ, but the
Lot of Grace fell on him. The Ephesians did not earn any thing, but the Lot of
Grace fell on them. O Admire God, Glorify Christ, that you should sit under
the shadow of his Righteousless, when others are exposed to the Schorching heat
of the Wrath of God: that your Iniquities should be covered, when the Sins of
others are naked, and open before God: that your Transgressions should be
blotted out, when all the Wickedness of others stands upon record against them
till the Judgment of the great day. That you (as Noah) and his Family, should
be born up, and carried above the Waters, when others, like the Men of the Old
World, do sink into the deep, and Bottomless Sea of the Wrath of God. O what
Mercy is it that God should Cloth thee with the Garment of Salvation, and cover
thee with the Robe of Righteousness! Isa. 61.10. when others have no Ragg to
hide their Shame, but will be abhorred by God, be loathed by Angels, and Saints
to Eternity. O what Grace is it, that thou, like Aaron, art hid in a Cloud of
Christ's Incense, Levit. 16.13. when others Stink in God Nostils, and shall be
covered with a black storming Cloud of anger for ever! O that Jesus Christ
should die for you as a Lamb, and then seek you out as a Shepherd, to Cloth
you with the Fleece of his Righteousness, and to feed you with the Flesh of his
Sacrifice, when others Famish their Souls by the Neglect of Christ's Feast, and
Poison their Souls by doting on, and glutting themselves with Carnal dainties,
Sensual, and Sinful delights! O what Grace is this, that Jesus Christ should,
as a Surety, undertake for your debts, and as a Sacrifice bear, and bleed for
our Sins: That as a Forerunner should take up, possess, and prepare a place
for you in the highest Heavens; that by your Iniquities deserved a place in the
lowest Hell. Worthy is the Lamb that was Slain to receive Blessing, Honor,
Glory, and Praise, Revel. 5.9. Debtors are the Redeemed Reconciled, and
Justified to Render, and ascribe it to his and Time and to Eternity.

THE Humble Sinners Supplication for Pardon, Opened and Applied, IN A SERMON
PREACHED On the late FAST, June 26, 1696. By Samuel Comlyns, M. A. a Minister
of the Gospel in Marleborough.

London, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercer's Chapel. 1696.

To the Right Honorable the Lord JAMES RVSSEL, Son to the Duke of Bedford,
Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied, from God our Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ.
My Lord,
EVery awakened humble Soul should with the Publican, cry earnestly, God be
merciful to me a sinner. Without a pardon God's Armoury cannot be shut, or his
Treasury opened. God cannot take us for his Inheritance, Exodus 34 9. Times of
refreshment cannot come to us from the presence of the Lord, if our sins are
not blotted out, Acts 3.19. If our Consciences are not purged from dead works
with the clean water of Christ's Blood, we cannot now walk in peace, go out of
the world with comfort, enter into the heavenly Sanctuary with confidence. How
therefore should pardoning mercy endear God to us, and engage us to God? We are
naturally without strength to help our selves, and are also ungodly and so
provoke God to withhold and deny his help to us. We had robbed God, and an
Arrest should have followed, and an Execution have taken hold of us. It is
God's Right and Royal Prerogative, That his Will should be our Supreme Law, and
his Glory our last End; but how have we debased God to exalt our selves? how
have we as it were spoiled him of his Soveraignity, and justled him out of his
Throne to establish our wicked wills, and obtain an absolute, unlimited and an
independent liberty. But Jesus Christ died to make satisfaction for the wrong
Man had done God, Psalm. 69.4. Then restored I that which I took not away. The
first Adam affected to be as God in Knowledge and Independency; the second Adam
was condemned for saying he was the Son of God, Mat. 27.64, 65, 66. and making
himself equal with God, John 5.18. John 10.36. So Christ paid the Debt he did
not contract, and pacified the Wrath be did not provoke. And how much should
pardoning mercy engage our hearts to God? The best of men are but reconciled
Enemies, released Prisoners, pardoned Malefactors. What mercy is it that he who
sees our sins with indignation, should yet himself cover them in mercy, Jer.
13. last. Psalm. 85.2. That the God that wrote down sin, Isa. 65.6. should
himself blot it out, Isa. 43.25. Sin is a terrible writing it self, and it
draws after it another more dreadful writing, Job 13.25. Thou writest bitter
things against me, and make me to possess the sins of my Youth. The Sentence
of Death did use to be written, and then read to Criminals. Sin recorded will
procure a written Sentence of Condemnation. Punishment is the Echo of sin. In
this sense Sanctius takes the Hebrew word, Isa. 59.12. Our sins answer to us.
How bad will it be to possess the sins of Youth? The word rendered Youth, Job
29.4. (...), signifies also Reproach. It is too often that Youth is perverted
so that it is a Reproach to God and to us too. How necessary therefore is a
Pardon to cross God's Book, cancel our Bond, and reverse the Sentence of Death?
God that wounds us with the threatenings of his Law, heals us by the stripes of
Christ. He received Wounds that God might be Just in justifying them that
believe in Jesus, Romans 3.25, 26. How gracious is God that at once removes from
us the Incentives of Wrath, and presents to us the Fuel of Love, Luke 7.47, 48.
How precious should Justification be to us, that has a sweet retrospect to
Election, and as accompanied with, a comfortable prospect of Glory; Whom God
predestined and called, them he justified. Thus we may with admiration look
back; And whom God justifies, them he glorifies, Romans 8.30. And so we may with
Joy look forward: Pardon springs from everlasting Love; flows to, and issues in
eternal Life. What Thankfulness therefore does it call for? If he justifies, we
are no more to fear Crimes past, so they are no more to go on in sin for time
to come. Has not Christ born sufferings enough on the Cross, that men will
load him with new Affrints and Provocations? Those do not think Christ's
Sufferings to be bitter and heavy, that can make light of, and take delight in
sin. The Heart is to be Christ's habitation, Ephesians. 3.17. and not the receptacle
of any sweet and secret Lust. We that daily need mercy, should not daily
provoke anger. As the work of Creation is attended with providence, which is a
continual Creation, so the new pardon we need, and God bestows, is a continual
Justification; as the Creation would sink without a day by providence to uphold
it, so Justification would cease without a daily pardon to continue it. There
may be a Pardon before a Trial, to prevent Condemnation, as well as a pardon
after Sentence to hinder Execution. That the Blood of Christ, which
meritoriously purged sin on the Cross, Heb. 1.3. may be applied to you, and
sprinkled on you, to purge your conscience from dead works to serve the Living
God, is the unfeigned and servent desire of,

Your Lordship's most Humble and Obliged Servant, SAMVEL TOMLYNS.
Hilcot, July 1. 1696.
A SERMON PREACHED On the late Fast, on the 26th Day of June, 1696.
PSALM. LI. 9. Hide thy Face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities.


IN the Text we have the Psalmist's Petition for Pardon; but it may be
objected, 1. What need had David to beg Pardon; had not God given it already?
Nathan told David, the Lord had put away his iniquity, 2 Samuel 12.13. I answer,
Though God had pronounced the Sentence of Justification by his Prophets, yet it
seems not to be pronounced in, and sealed to David's Conscrence by the Spirits.
Peace is the Fruit of the Lips, as spoken by God's Ministers, yet it is the
Effect of the Spirit, as created in the Soul by it, Isaiah 57.19. The Priest
did use to sprinkle the Leper, Lev. 14.7. But though David looked on himself as
a Spiritual Leper, yet he was not satisfied with the Priest's sprikling him
with the Blood of the Sacrifice; but he sues to God himself to sprinkle him
with the Blood of his Son, the thing signified; so it is not enough for
Ministers in God's Name to pronounce Pardon; but the Spirit must Ratify it, and
Establish Peace in the Soul, else the storm will not cease, the wound be
healed, the burden be removed, and the Soul land at the Port of Assurance. The
Psaimist in the Text does in an humble way Address to God, That he would hide
his Face from his Sins, and blot out his Iniquities; he does imply, that if
God's Eye was fixed on his Sins, his Anger might be fired by them; there was
Fuel for God's wrath, if God would but behold it; there was matter enough for
Accusation, cause enough for Condemnation, if God would but read it; but he
begs God would turn away his Face, and shut his Eyes, not observing, or
imputing what would be destructive to him; the latter expression in the Text
enlarges and increases the Sense, and heightens the Mercy; he does not only
Pray that God would hide his Face from his Sins, but that he would blot out all
his iniquities: A Man may turn away his Face from an Object, and yet the thing
still remain as it was, and be as visible, as legible as before; but David sues
to God, not only to hide his Face from seeing sin, but that he would so blot it
out, that it may not any more be visible, legible, or remain to be imputed.

Doctrine. Awakened humbled Souls do cry for this, as the most valuable Mercy,
that God would hide his Face from their Sins, and blot out all their
iniquities: But what is it for God to hide his Face from Sin? Answer. It is not
to see and observe it with the Eye of Vindictive Justice. So it is said, God
does not behold Iniquity in Jacob, nor see Perverseness in Israel, Numb. 23.21.
God passes by Sin, as if he did not see it, Mic. 7.18. and he passes over the
sinner, as if he did not observe his iniquity, God covers all their sin, Psalm.
55.2. that it may not be seen; he remembers it no more, that it may not be
Pnnished, Jer. 31.34.

Quest. But how can such a request be made to God? How can he hide his Face
from Sin? Is this Practicable? For,

1. God is Omniscient, he sees all the Neighings, Lewdness, Whoredoms of
Souls, Jer. 13. last, Prove. 15.3.

2. God is Holy, and has a most pure Eye, Heb. 1.6, 13. tho he cannot behold
Evil with Approbation, yet he must needs behold it with indignation, as it
provokes his Glorious Eyes, Isa. c. 3. v. 8.

3. God is a Just God, he is not regardless of his Honor, careless of his
Glory, but he is said, to be Jealous and Furious, Nahu. 1.2. He has quick,
lively, warm Resentments of what grates on his Authority, and affronts his
Majesty; he beholds mischief and spite to requite it with disdain, Psalm. 10.14.
As he is the Judge of the whole World, vengeance belongs to him. Psalm. 49.1, 2.

Answer. God could not hide his Face from our Sins, if there were not a most
pleasant, grateful, lovely Object provided, toward which he might turn his
Face, and on which he might fix his Eye on Mountebul, where the Curises of the
Law were pronounced; there the Law was written on Stones, Plaistered over, and
there an Altar was Built, and Burnt-Offerings presented to God, Deuteronomy. 27.2,
35.6. and we have the Truth of both in Christ, the Law is written in his Heart,
Psalm. 40.8. and he gave himself an Offering, a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling
Savor to God, Ephesians. 5.2. and this Sacrifice did smell the sweetest in God's
Nostrils, because it was bound only with Cords of Love, and burnt in Flames of
Love. Jesus Christ is the True High Priest, Exodus 28.36, 38. that was perfectly
sanctified, purely and absolutely devoted to God. Holiness to the Lord was
engraven on Christ's Heart, and was written on all his Actions, impressed on
his whole Life; and when he died for our sins, he rose again for our
Justification, and ascended up to Heaven, and appears in the glorious presence
of God continually, Heb. 9.23, 24. He has sprinkled the Tribunal of Justice
with his Blood, and burns Incense continually before his Throne. God may turn
his Face toward this Grateful and Lovely Object, and behold it with
Complacencv and Delight, Isa. 42.1. Matthew. 3.17. Christ's Undertaking as a
Surety, was the very Foundation of this Petition; Hide thy Face from my sins,
and blot out all my iniquities. Sins must be covered with somewhat, that they
might not be seen; and what could this be but the Righteousness of our
Mediator. Iniquity must be blotted out with something; and what is that but the
Blood of our Surety and Sacrifice?

Quest. But why is it so desirable and valuable a mercy for God to hide his
Face from our sins, and to blot out our iniquities? I shall answer to each of
these distinctly.

Answ. 1. It is most desirable that God would hide his Face from our sins: For,
First, It is a most dreadful Evil for God to set our sins before him; for them
to be remembered by him, and to be continually before him, Psalm 109.14, 15.
This is there mentioned as the most terrible Imprecation: Moses sadly complains
thus, Psalm 90.8. Thou have set our iniquities before thee: our secret sins in
the light of thy countenance. It is sweet for Souls to walk in the Light of
God's countenance, Psalm 89.15. but it is dreadful for sin to be set in the
Light of God's countenance: for God to use and exercise his Omnisciency, to
view sin well, to countemplate to the utmost the Evil, the Filth, the Deformity
that is in it, and all the Aggravations of it, and to set all in a full, clear
and perfect Light. Here are Two Expressions, our sins, and our secret. There is
no more in the Original, (...), but our secret. Chemnitius, in Exam. Council.
Trident. cap. de pec. Orig. does by, our secret, understand Original Sin.
Though the Fruits of it are Evident and Notorious to the World, yet the Root is
secret and hidden to most in the World. One Butler that lived in London, and
was for Murder Condemned to Death, being discoursed with in Newgate by Alderman
Titchborn, did ingenuously confess he was an utter stranger to Original Sin; he
knew nothing of it till he was by the Alderman instructed about it. Taking the
words of Moses in this sense, this Interpretation is to be given, That God took
a full View both of Original and Actual Sin; of the Root, and its Fruits; of
the Fountain, and all its Streams; of the evil Treasure that is in the Heart,
and all the Corrupt Thoughts, Words and Actions, that were as Pieces Coined out
of it: God observes also the actual Sins that are Secret to, and hid from Men;
that are either wholly concealed, or palliated, and flourished, and painted
over with specious excuses and pretenses; Hos. 11.7. Tho there be a Beautiful
Tomb of Professions above, yet he sees the corrupt rotten Heart that is
underneath, Matthew. 23.37. Yea; God sees which way the Heart does hang and sway
before sin is actually conceived and brought forth, Deuteronomy. 31.21. I know, says
God, their imagination, which they go about, even now, before I have brought
them into the Land; God did know the Bent, the Bias, the Propension, and
inclination of the Israelites Hearts toward Idolatry, before he brought them
into Canaan, he knew what they would be, and do: This God did set in the light
of his Countenance. Now it is Terrible for God thus to set sin before him.

For, 1. Sins thus set before his Face, do provoke him to turn away, and hide
his gracious Countenance from Sinners, Deuteronomy. 31.18. I will surely hide my Face
in that Day, for all the Evils they have wrought. He does threaten the same,
Deuteronomy. 32.20. If God does but turn away his Face, Enemies will break in upon us,
and Evils will over-whelm us, Ezel. 7.22. Yea, by our Sins, we deserve forever
to be cast away from God's Gracious and Glorious Presence. Cast me not away
from thy Presence, says David, Psalm. 51.11.

2. Sin set before God's Face, does provoke God's Anger against the Soul; it
kindles Displeasure against the sin, and it stirs up God to pour it out on the
sinner, Ezekiel. 38.18. My Fury came up into my Face. Fury may be kept secret some
time in God's Heart, but it will come up into his Face, and be openly
manifested and expressed by the Judgments inflicted by his hand.

1. God will set his Eyes on sinners for Evil, Amos 9.8. Behold the Eyes of the
Lord are on the sinful Kingdom to destroy it from off the Earth, Psalm 34.16.
The Face of the Lord is against them that do Evil, to cut off the Remembrance
of them from off the Earth.

2. God will remove sinners out of his sight, Jer. 15.1. Cast them out of my
sight, Jer. 23.39. I will cast you out of my presence, 2 Kings 17.23. The Lord
removed Israel out of his sight, and cast Judah and Jerusalem also out of his
presence, 2 Kings 24.20. And God removed Judah out of his sight, 2 Kings 24.3.
because the King and the People did evil in his sight, 2 Kings 24.9, 19. They
were not cast out of the sight of God's Omniscient Eye, but from the Eye of his
gracious and Fatherly Providence.

3. God will at last Rain a Hell from his Angry Face, 2 These. 1.9. Those that
known not God, and obey not the Gospel, shall be Punished with everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, (...), from the Face of the Lord;
the same Face shall shine a Heaven of Happiness into the Souls of the Saints,
and shall Frown an Hell of Misery into the Souls of the Wicked.

2. If God hide his Face from our Sins, Love will come up into his Face, and
look out at his Eyes on Believers, and Saints, Psalm. 4.6. Lord lift thou up the
light of thy Countenance on us; the Love that was secret, and hidden in the
Heart, comes up into his Face, and is manifested to, and shed abroad in the
Hearts of Believers by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. Cant. 8.10. I found Favor in
his Eyes, Love and Kindness sparkles in, and looks out from the Eyes, God looks
with a pleasing Countenance on his People; the Spiritual Day does break and
Dawn, and the Sun of Righteousness does Arise, and Shine in the Hearts of
Believers, Malachy 4.2. Psa. 130.5, 6. and the Countenance of God is said to
behold the upright, Psalm. 41. last. that is, with complacency and delight; he
withdraws not his Eyes from the Righteous, Job 36.7. He sets his Eyes on them
for good, Jer. 24.6. I will set mine Eyes on them for good. If Sin be not set
before God's Face, God may take good out of his Treasury for us, and bestow it
on us, Hos. 14.2. yea, God will set us before his Face for Ever, Psalm. 41.12.
That we may still dwell in his Presence, Psalm. 140. last. and behold his Face
in Righteousness, Psalm. 17. last. Psalm. 16. last.

2. It is most desirable for God to blot out all our Iniquities; for,

1. It is the most dreadful Evil and Curse that can be wished, for Sin not to
be bloted out, Psalm. 109.14. Let not the Iniquity of his Mother be blotted out.

2. If God do not blot out Iniquity, he may by sudden Judgment, and sore
Vengeance, blot persons out of the Land of the Living, Genesis 7.4. Every Living
Substance that I have made, I will destroy, in the Hebrew it is, (...), I will
blot out. Corrupt Men are Evil lines of being, and it is said, It repented God
that he had made Man on the Earth, it greived him at his Heart, Genesis 6.5. Man
is so cross, and contrary to the very end of his Creation, that God did blot
out the Old World of Men by the Flood; if Men are bloted out of the World in
their Sins, Where must they be lodged but in a miserable Eternity?

3. If we consider what Sin is, What a valuable Mercy is it for it to be bloted
out?

1. It is a mist, a thinner, or a thicker Cloud, according to its Nature, and
aggravations, Isa. 44.22. I have blotted out as a thick Cloud thy
Transgressions, and as a Cloud thy Sins. Sin is as a hiding Cloud, it hinders
the light of God's Countenance from shining on us, Isa. 59.2. Your Sins have
hid his Face from you.

2. It is as a storming Cloud, Psalm. 11.6. The Lord will rain Fire and
Brimstone on the Wicked, this shall be the portion of their cup. If Men suffer
here, They are cast into the hand of their Transgression, Job. 8.4. In the
Hebrew it is, That God did cast Job's Children into the hand of their
Transgression. If their Iniquities are punished hereafter, they do for them
fall into the hands of God, Heb. 10.31.

2. Sin is a debt, Matthew. 6.12. Forgive us our debts. These debts are recorded
in the Creditor's Book. God says, Behold it is written before me, Isa. 65.6.
and it is registered also in the debter's Book, Jer. 17.1. It is written, it is
graven (that is the Sin of Judah) on the Table of their Heart. Sin is called a
debt, because the Sinner owes God Glory to be raised out of his Sufferings, and
Eternal Torments. And it is desirable this debt should be blotted out to
prevent God's arrest, and our Eternal Imprisonment.

3. Sin is a crime, a capital crime, and that which is kept safe as matter of
accusation against the Sinner. It is as it were sowed up in a bag, Job 14.17.
As the depositions of Witnesses, and the confessions of Malefactors are kept
safe, against the Assizes and day of Trial. Yea, Men's Sins are sealed up among
God's Treasures, Deuteronomy. 32.34. God speaks of the Israelites bitter and corrupt
Fruit, and then puts this question, Is not this laid up in store with me? Is it
not scaled up among my Treasures. God has a Treasury of knowledge of all past
things, and Sins are sealed up among these Treasures. But what a kind of
capital crime is Sin? I answer;

1. It is Rebellion against God. I have Nourished, and brought up Children, and
they have Rebelled against me. A Rebellious Subject with us, a Rebellious Son
among the Jews, was put to Death: What Homage do we owe to God our King? What
Obedience should we render to God our Father?

2. Sin is Spiritual Whoredom and Adultery, Hos. 4.12. They have gone a Whoring
from under their God: Thou have destroyed such as go a Whoring from thee, Psalm.
73.27. Adultery was capital, it was punished with death by the Law of God; Men
loath God, and love the Creature.

3. Sin is Robbery and Stealing, Mal. 3.8. Ye have Robbed me. God says, My Son
give me thy Heart, Prove. 23.26. But the Heart of Men goes after their
Coveteousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. Though they are by Baptism, and a Solemn Covenant,
devoted to God, yet they Sacrilegiously alienate themselves from God, Isa 24.5.
They broke the Everlasting Covenant. Is it not our benefit to have our Crimes
blotted out?

4. If Sin be not blotted out, God cannot write his Laws in our Hearts, Jer.
31.33, 34. God promises to write his Laws in the Heart. And why? It is thus
answered, verse. 34. For I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will Remember Sin
no more. Forgiveness of Sin is the root of all the Promises, and
Covenant-Blessings.

5. God cannot record any Good thoughts, words or works of ours, if Sin be not
blotted out, Mal. 3.16. A Book of Remembrance was written before him for those
that feared the Lord, and thought on his Name. Sin does so corrupt, and stain
our best Works, that, nothing might be recorded for our honor or advantage.
Nehemiah prays, that God would not wipe out his good deeds, Neh. 13.14.

6. If Sins be not blotted out, the time is coming when God's Book will be
opened, Revel. 20.12. God will review Men's Sins, look on them, and read them
over to Sinners for ever. Yea Conscience also will repeat them over, upbraid
with them, Condemn, Lash and Scourge for them to Eternity. This is the Worm
that never dies, Mark 49.46, 48. Job says, That his Heart should never
Reproach him, Job 27.6. But the Hearts of Unpardoned Sinners shall ever
Reproach them for their folly; Ingratitude, Perverseness, and Obstinacy against
God, that they had a Heart of Stone that would not relent, Ezekiel. 36.26. An Iron
sinew that would not bow and yield, Isa. 48.4. I come now to the use of the
Doctrine.

1. Use. This may inform us of the great difference that is between Saints and
the Wicked of the World. David desires nothing more, than that God would hide
his Face from his Sins, and that, both in a way of Mercy and Righteousness;
they long to have somewhat offered to God's Eye, that may indeed pacify his
displeasure and turn his angry Countenance away from their Sins, and they know
nothing can do this but the Obedience and Sacrifice of Christ, Romans 5.19. But
the Wicked do harden themselves in Sin, and quiet themselves under guilt quite
another way. He thus feeds his unbelief, Psalm. 10.11. He has said in his
Heart, God has Forgotten: He hides his Face, he will never see it, verse 13.
The Wicked contemn God: he has said in his Heart thou will not Require it.
They think God lies on a Couch of ease, not that he sits on a Throne of
Majesty, and a Tribunal of Justice: they foolishly imagine, that God will not
call for an Account from Men, or call for a Sword of Justice to awaken against
them. They think there is no danger from God's Frowning Face: that no Storm is
to be dreaded from his Angry Countenance: they account that God is not
concerned about their Transgressions: that he dislikes them as little as they,
or forgets them as much as they, Faith Cures the Wound in Saints: but Unbelief
Skins it over in the Wicked.

2d. Use. 1. I would Exhort you to make the same Petition, to pursue the same
Request with David, That God would hide his face from your sins, and blot out
your Iniquities.

2dly, If God has blotted out your Iniquities, O! be Thankful for so great a
Mercy.

1. Consider the Evil that will follow, if God hide not his Face from our Sins.

1. Our Sins must and will be set in order before our Faces, Psalm. 50.21. I
will reprove thee, and set the things thou have done in order before thee: As a
skilfulful Lawyer that is to prosecute a Traitor, he draws up the Charge, opens
the Evidence, aggravates the Crime of him that is Impeached and Arraigned;
branches out all the particulars that may Black and Burden the Malefactor: so
God himself will be Plaintiff, the Accuser, the Witness, and the Judge too,
Isa. 3.13, 14. Micah 1.2, 3. Isa. 3.22. God will search out the Iniquities of
those he does not pardon, Psalm. 10.5. God will not omit, or forget any of them,
Amos 8.7. The Lord has Sworn, Surely I will never forget any of their works.
Sinners must see their folly, their deformity, their ingratitude, all their
horrid Crimes committed against God, and their eyes shall be fixed on this
dismaying and terrible Object, as they shall never look off from it, or see any
thing else to comfort them.

2. Thou must be cast out of God's gracious presence. The Jews that submitted
not to the Righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. and so lay under Guilt, are said to
be cast away, Romans 2.15. God threatened Israel to drive them out of his House,
Hos. 9.15. and to cast them away, Hos. 9. last. The dreadful casting away is at
last, Matthew. 13.48. the bad Fish, to their eternal Infamy and Reproach, are
cast away. This is an evil that David did most dread, and deprecate; Cast me
not away from thy presence, Psalm. 51.11. This was that which even Cain, a
Reprobate, had some sense of, as a bitter evil, From thy Face shall I be hid,
Genesis 4.14. if our sins are, and remain before God's Face, we shall be banished
out of his gracious Presence for ever.

3. These must behold God's Angry Frowning Face. It was terrible to Zedekiah to
see the Face of the King of Babylon, that he had highly provoked; this Jeremiah
threatens, Jer. 32.4. Thy eyes shall see his eyes. But how much more dreadful
is it to see the Face of an Angry God? David was not able to brook, and bear
this: therefore he cries out, Hide thy Face from my sins. Every Frown of God
was as an Arrow piercing his Heart; as a Sword wounding his Soul. If the
displeased countenance of a Father be so terrible? What will the Ireful Look of
an Incensed, and Inexorable Judge be? Job 34.29. When he hides his Face, who
can then behold him? If God hide his Pleasing Countenance, who can behold his
Angry Face, Psalm. 76.7. Who may stand in thy sight, when once thou art Angry.

4. If God hide not his Face from thy Sins, thy eyes must see thy Destruction,
Job 21.20. Thou that would not believe the Threatenings of Vengeance, must
see the Fury of God poured out on thee: thou shall see thy Judge come in the
Clouds, Revel. 1.7. thou shall be brought forth to Judgment, Job 21.30. and
then soon be hurried away, and led forth to Execution, Psalm. 125. last. thou
shall be presented before the Face of God, and then fall into his Punishing
hand.

2. Consider what Mercy will follow, if God hides his Face from thy Sins.

1. If God does hide his Face from your sins, he will no more hide his Face as
an Enemy from your Souls, Ezekiel. 39. last. I will no more hide my Face from
them: For I have poured out my Spirit on the House of Israel. God can never
totally withdraw from those, on whom he poures out his Spirit; yea, the Spirit
holds and establishes their hearts, that they can never finally depart from
God. Where the Blood of Christ is sprinkled on, his Spirit is also put into the
Soul, Ezekiel. 36.25.27. if God hides his Angry Face, he shows his Pleasing
Countenance: when he does abscond hel^ from us, then he manifests Heaven to us.
The Angry look of God on the Sins and Souls of Sinners, is a Hell; but the
lifting up of the Light of his Countenance makes a Heaven.

2. If God hide his Face from our sins, he will not hide his Commandments from
us, Psalm. 119.19. but will teach us his Statutes, Psalm. 119.102. Thou will
guide me by thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory, Psalm. 73.24.

3. This will be the end of God's afflicting of us, to hide Pride from us, Job
33.17. to hide that from us which we are so prone to seek after; he will hide
the filthy Matter of, and Temptations to Pride from us.

4. Adversaries shall be defeated in their hopes and designs, Jer. 50.20. The
Iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the sins
of Judah, and they shall not be found. Who should seek for Israel and Judah's
sin? I Answer, Satan, the Babylonians, the Enemies of the Church of God. The
Chaldeans said, they did not offend in Killing and Captivating the Jews,
because they sinned against the Lord, Jer. 50.7. And as their sins brought them
into Captivity, so they thought they would still have held them in Bondage:
they sought for their sins to hold them in perpetual slavery, and to keep the
Yoke on them. Satan resisted Joshua the High Priest, and seems not only to
charge him, but also to accuse the Jews; and therefore Christ the Angel says,
The Lord that chose Jerusalem rebuke thee, Zech. 3.1, 2. The filthy Garments
are taken from Joshua, and his Iniquities did pass away, Zech. 3.4. And God
promises to remove the Iniquity of the Land in one day, Zech. 3.9. and so
though the Babylonians sought the Jews sins, yet they were not found.

5. God himself will be a hiding place to those, from whose sins he hides his
Face, Psalm. 119.114. Thou art my hiding place, and my shield, Psalm. 143.9. I
flee unto thee to hide me. The Judge himself is a Hiding Place.
As the Secret of God is with their Souls to comfort them, Psalm. 25.14. so the
Secret of God is on their Tabernacles, Job 29.4. to protect them. They are the
most likely Persons to be hid in the day of Wrath, Zeph. 2.3. yea, God hides
them in the very Grave, Job 14.13. O that thou would hide me in the Grave
until thy wrath be past. We must come to God to hide us from his own Wrath. As
the Souls of Saints are hid in Heaven from eternal evils, so their Bodies are
hid in the Grave from Temporal Sufferings. The Grave, that is a Prison to the
Wicked, to reserve them in for Eternal Vengeance, is to Believers a
Hiding Place from Temporal Afflictions.

6. If God hide his Face from our sins, we shall see his Face in Ordinances
here, and in Glory hereafter.

1. They shall see God's Face in Ordinances here. David longed to see God's
Power and Glory, as he had seen it in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 65.2. They may call
on God, and he will be gracious to them, and they shall see his Face with joy,
Job 33.26.

2. They shall see his Face in Glory, Revel. 22.4. They shall see his Face, and
his Name shall be in their Forehead: As for me (says David) Psalm. 17. last. I
will behold thy Face in Righteousness.

3. We have in these days of the Gospel great Encouragements, strong
Inducements to prefer this Petition. God did, for a time, cloud and hide his
Face from Christ, did cut him off, and blot him out of the Land of the Living,
Psalm. 22.1. Isa. 53.8. Jesus Christ entered into deep waters, Psalm. 69.1, 2. the
floods of Sorrow, Reproach and Sufferings did overflow him: and now we may cry
to God out of our depths, Psalm. 130.1. Out of the depths have I cried to thee,
O Lord, out of a depth of Guilt, Trouble and Anguish. Jesus Christ came into
the Depths, and we may confidently cry to God to raise us out of our Depths.
The Blood of Christ, as to Worth and Merits, is a deep Sea; and we may trust on
God, through Christ, to drown our sins in the depth of this Red Sea, Micah
7.19. Thou will cast-all their Sins into the depths of the Sea. Christ has
provided Spiritual Red-ink enough. Though Christ shed his Blood but once, yet
God may 1000 and 10000 times over dip his Pen in the Blood of Christ and blot
out all our Sins we Commit. It was painful to Christ to shed his Blood, but it
is pleasant to him to wash Souls in it. A dark night came on Christ, but we may
wait for the dawning of a Comfortable and Joyful Morning, Psalm. 130.5.6. The
Righteousness is brought by which we may be Justified, the Blood is shed in
which we may be washed from all our Sins, 1 John 1.7. Men did hide their Faces
from Christ under his Sufferings, as a ghastly ungrateful object, Isa. 50.3.
Being so Buffeted, Spit on, Crowned with Thorns, but we may lift up our Faces
to him being now Justified by the Father, Seated in his Throne, and Crowned
with Glory.

I shall speak something by way of Direction, both how we may obtain the
blotting out of our Sins, and how we ought to walk suitable, and answerable to
so great a Mercy.

1. We must see and know our Sins, be sensible of them, afflicted for them,
burdened under them, Psalm. 51.3. I acknowledge, or as others Render the Hebrew
word, I know my Iniquity, Isa. 59.12. As for our Iniquities we know them. Why
did the Psalmist so earnestly beg that God would blot out his Transgressions,
and wash him from his Iniquities? He renders this reason of his petition, I
know my Transgressions, that is, how much they offend and provoke thee, and how
much they defile and deform me. He, that is not burdened, will not cry to be
eased: he, that is not wounded, will not sue to be healed: he that beholds not
his debt, will not press for the cancelling of his bond. And we must see Sin,
and abhor and detest it, and forsake it: Shall we seek to God to put it away as
Evil, and yet we harbor it in our Hearts, and indulge it in our practice, as
good? It must be hid not only from the Eye of God's vindictive Justice, but
also from the Lustful Adulterous eye of our Souls.

2. You must see Christ, and Believe on him, John 6.40. He that sees the Son
and Believes on him shall not perish, but have Everlasting Life. The Curses of
the Law are Amen to those that are out of Christ, Deuteronomy. 27. last. But the
Promises of the Gospel are Yea, and Amen to those that are in Christ, 2 Cor.
1.20. If Christ had not carried our Sins upon the Tree, 1 Pet. 2.24. we must
have born them, and they would have sunk us down into the Bottomless pit.
Though God does pardon, and put away Sin Judicially, as a King, 2 Samuel 12.13.
yet it is Jesus Christ that puts it away Meritoriously as a Priest, Heb. 9.26.
As you know your Iniquities, so, you must know Christ to take them away, Isa.
53.11. By his knowledge shall my Righteous servant Justify many: for he shall
bear their Iniquities: He did bear them for a time, that they might not be
bound on us to Eternity.

3. We must earnestly desire God, not only to hide his face from our Sins, but
also to turn our eyes from beholding vanity, Psalm. 119.37. How sweetly do these
two petitions harmonize, and agree? Lord hide thy Face from my Sins, and turn
away my eyes from beholding vanity. Lord sheath thy Sword toward me, and lay
thy ax to the root of in-dwelling Sin. Lord forgive all my wrong steps and
wanderings, and Lord order my steps in thy word, and let no Iniquity have
Dominion over me, Psalm. 119.133. Lord blot my Sins out of thy Book, mortify
them in, and root them out of my Heart. I have wandered from thee, I have walked
contrary to thee, too Long already, but now Lord quicken, and lead me in the
way Everlasting, Psalm. 119.37. Psalm. 139. last.

4. Your Sins must still be before you to humble you, Psalm. 51.3. Though they
are not before God's Face to destroy you, Psalm. 109.14, 15. Though God will not
Remember them, to throw you down to Hell for them, Jer. 41.14. yet you must
Remember them, Ezekiel. 36.31. to cast you down to the dust for them.

5. You must set no evil thing before you, Psalm. 101.3. you must not delight in
any Sin, or practice it. Shall God cast Sin behind his back, and shall you set
it before your Face?

6. You must still Set the Statutes and Laws of God before you, Psalm. 119.30. I
have chosen the way of truth, thy Judgments have I set before me. As a Scholar
sets his Copy before him, orders his pen, and shapes his Letters by it, so we
must eye the Rule, and govern our actions by the Law of God.

2d. Branch of the use of Exortatiom: Is the blotting out of Sin so valuable a
Mercy? Is the hiding of God's Face from your Transgressions so desirable a
thing? O then be exceeding thankful for it, Hos. 14.2. Take away Iniquity, so
will we render the calves of our lips. Ascribe Glory to him that has loved
you, and washed you from your Sins in his own Blood, Revel. 1.5, 6. This is a
Mercy that seems to work things that are contrary: it shuts the Mouth, Ezekiel.
16. last. and yet it opens the Lips, Psalm. 51.15. it shuts the mouth from
boasting, or pleading our own works, Ezekiel. 16. last. That thou may Remember
and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more: Because of thy shame,
when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done. But pardon opens
the lips to praise God, Psalm. 51.14.15. Deliver me from Blood Guiltiness, and
my Tongue shall Sing aloud of thy Righteousness, open thou my lips, and my
mouth shall show forth thy praise. Guilt seals up the lips, and deads the
Heart, as to praising of God. The Gentiles were unthankful for all their common
benefits, Romans 1.21. but it was God's great design to bring them to Glorify
him for Reconciling, Justfying, and pardoning Mercy, Romans 15.9. that the
Gentiles may Glorify God for his Mercy. O therefore Glorify God for pardoning
of you.

1. That Sin which was before God's Face, Hos. 1.2. should be cast behind his
back, Isa. 8.17.

2. You have hid your Faces from God and his Laws, Jer. 2.27. Ezekiel. 22.26. God
charges the Isarelites that they hid their eyes from his Sabbaths, turned to
him the back and not the Face, Ezekiel. 23.35. that they cast his word behind
their back, Psalm. 50.17. and cast himself behind their backs; And is not this a
strange return, a wonderful Retaliation, that God should cast the Sins of
Transgressors behind his back? Isa. 38.17.

3. If God had not in Mercy hid his Face from your Sins, he would in Wrath have
hid his Face from your Souls, Psalm. 27.9. Hide not thy Face far from me, put
not away thy servant in anger. This we deserved if God not turned himself from
his fierce anger, Psa. 85.3. he might have been angry with us every day, Psalm.
7.11. we might have spent all our days in his Wrath, Psalm. 90.9. yea, God might
have been angry with us for ever, and drawn out his Wrath to all Eternity,
Psalm. 85.65. What Grace is this that God will not keep anger for ever? Jer.
2.13. but will keep Mercy for ever, Psalm. 89.28.

4. If God's anger had not been turned away, Hos. 4.4. our Sins would have hid
God's Face, Isa. 59.2. and have turned away good things from us, Jer. 5.26.

5. That God should hide his Face from Christ for a time, Psalm. 22.23. that he
might not hide his Face from us for Eternity. Christ by his Suretyship made a
breach for Sorrow and Suffering to flow in upon himself, that he might stop the
breach that Wrath, and destruction might not break in, and overwhelm us.

6. Our Lusts would have drowned us in destruction, but Christ has drowned
them in the deep Read-sea of his own Blood, Tim. 1.6. Micah 7.18.19.

7. That God that hides his Face from ous Sins, desires to see our Faces as
Supplicants and petitioners, Cant. 2.14. yea Jesus Christ Interceeds, that we
may see and partake of his Glory, John 17.24. 2 These. 2.14. That Clouds of
darkness may be for ever scattered, an Inheritance in light, and Crowns of
Glory be obtained.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Tho. Parkhurst.
THe Great Duty of Christians to go forth without the Camp to Jesus, in several
Sermons on Heb. 13.13.

Supplication to the Sovereign Judge, the Duty of the best of Men, in several
Sermons on Job 9.15.

A Discourse, in several Sermons on 1 Pet. 3.19. by which also he went and
Preached unto the Spirits in Prison --

A Discourse of Christ's 2d. Coming, and the purging of his Kingdom, in 2
Sermons on Mat. 13.41.

ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 9. dele or, p. 10. l. 25. dele in, p. 12. l. 26 for Eccles. 2.20.
r. Gal. 1.14. p. 14. l. 25. for stretch, r. refresh, p. 20. l. 6. for dyed, r.
dipped, p. 27. l. 8. dele 3dly, p. 28. l. 18. for Psalm. 92.24. r. Dan. 9.24. p.
29. l. 1. dele Salvation, p. ibid. l. 25. for Romans 8.3. r. Romans 9.33. p. 31. l.
7. for our, r. but, p. 33. l. 7. for God r. Goel, p. 34. l. 19. r. (...), p.
35. l. 19. r. (...), p. 36. l. 9. for rising, r. risen. p. 36. l. 28, 29. r.
Ludovae de Dieu in locum, p. 37. l. 20. r. the Title of the Psalm, p. 39. l. 6.
for Exodus 20. r. Exodus 29. p. 40. last l. r. (...), p. 47. l. 13. for Hearts r.
Breasts, p. 49. l. 17. after will, r. save, p. 60. l. 20. for being r. bring.
p. 61. l. 27. for share r. snare. p. 62. l. 25. for alledgers r. accusers, p.
74. l. 21. for vale r. Vail, p. 78. l. 1. r. few, p. ibid. l. 18. for first r.
sins, p. 86. l. 12. for Jeopardy r. Leopards, p. 109. l. 22. add a Pet. 11. p.
144. l. 16. r. under the Law, p. 154. l. 2. r. Bride, p. 160. l. 15. add Cant.
3.9, 10. p. 164. l. 8. for Cor. r. Collos. p. 189. l. 13. for right, v. rite,
p. 208. in the Margin, for Bolton r. Rolloc, p. 212. last Line, for aiding r.
hiding, p. 214. l. 26. for provided r. proved, p. 222. for we r. he, p. 249. l.
26. for form r. from, p. 250. l. 4. for Justified r. Sanctified, p. 270. l. 6.
for form r. from, p. 296. l. 3, 4. for to distill, r. God is still, and l. 8.
for Numb. 9. r. Levit. 6.9. p. 314. l. 15. for being r. body, p. 327. l. 9. for
absolete r. obsolite, p. 362. l. 9. r. he procured, and we received all good,
p. 370. l. last, for righteous r. unrighteous, p. 380. l. 26. for Pardoned r.
Rewarded.


