THE PRINCIPLES OF THE PAPISTS, By which their Leaders put them upon bloody and
treacherous Practices, plainly demonstrated by the Scriptures to be most
erroneous and wicked. And a few better Principles briefly laid down, for them
(or others) to meditate on, tending to a peaceable Life among Men, etc. And
also a few Quaeries left them last of all, to satisfy their Consciences in.
Partly for the sakes of those among them whose Consciences have some tenderness
in them, and are not quite seared: Partly also for those who through ignorance
are too much inclining to them. Also there may be some service of these things
to others. By a Lover of Truth, Mercifulness, Plain-heartedness, Humility and
Fidelity, W. T.

Every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth comes to the light, that
his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God, Jo. 3.20, 21.
LONDON, Printed for, and Sold by Benjamin Clark, in George-yard in
Lombard Street, Stationer. 1679.

A PREMONITION TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Have fully expressed my sense, who they are that by me are comprehended in
this Treatise, where I speak to the fourth Principle following. But lest that
should not be sufficiently minded, I have here prefixed the same in effect;
namely, That by Papists, Church of Rome, or Roman Catholics, or the Pope's
Train, or Pope's Children, and such like expressions, I do not understand the
whole Body of the Papists, or every individual among them, but the Leading
Ruling part, who overtop and overruled all, in carrying on mischievous Plots
and Designs, and those who walk after, or give their assistance and consent to
such Leaders, and own those Principles hereafter expressed. If there be any among
them that consent not thereunto, they are not comprehended in this Treatise:
And such I hope God has among them; for I do believe, that God has a People
even in Babylon the Great, otherwise I shall not understand what that means,
where he says, Come out of her my people, lest ye partake of her sins, and
that ye partake not of her plagues.

Nor do I write these things following, in bitterness and envy against those
evil workers, that are acted on to such wickedness; but (though I may use
sharpness sometimes, yet) it is to open their eyes to see what they do, that
they may repent of such their evils, and incline their hearts to better things.
And therefore writing nothing against them in emnity, or scurrilous lightness,
but in sincerity, and a weighty sense of truth, my Conscience gives me the
boldness in the Lord, to own what I have written with my Name, leaving the
event to the Lord.

William Tomlinson.

The Principles of the Papists, by which their Leaders put them upon bloody and
treacherous Practices.
1. THAT the Pope is substituted by Christ, as the Head of his Church upon
Earth, and his Vicar, and Peter's Successor, and so has power to rule the
Church, and all ought to be subject to him.

2. That he is in his place infallible.

3. That he has power to forgive People their sins.

4. That the Church of Rome, whereof he is Head, is the only true Church,
(namely the Roman Catholics, so called) and all others that depart from them
are Heretics.

5. That out of the Church (that is, out of their Church) is no Salvation.

6. That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics.

7. That it is no sin to kill Heretics; or at least wise it shall not be
imputed to them as a sin, but rather is a meritorious work to destroy them, so
it be for the advantage of their Church.

That they are led by these Principles, their Actions make so manifest to all
men, that we need not produce their Authors or Writers for them.

Now I confess if I were a Papist, and made fully to believe these things, I
know not what I should stick at, and not venture upon, to obtain an everlasting
Inheritance, and Glory thereby in Heaven for ever. Therefore I cannot but pity
them who are bred up in these Principles, and so misled by them; and especially
because,

To these their Principles two great Bulwarks are added, to guard and defend
them, and so to bind their People to themselves thereby, lest they should
depart from them.

One is, Their bloody and cruel Practices, which indeed spring naturally from
such bloody Principles.

The other is, The taking away the Key of Knowledge from People, and keeping
them in ignorance: For Thieves and Robbers, and Liars and Murderers, hate
nothing more than the light, because that discovers them, and their wicked
deeds.

With what brevity I can I shall discover the erroneousness, rottenness and
falsehood, of these their Principles, together with the wickedness and danger of
them, and of their Practices according to them.

1. As to the first, That the Pope is substituted as the Head of the Church of
Christ upon Earth, and his Vicar, and Peter's Successor, and so has power to
rule the Church, and all ought to be subject to him.

To this I say first, If it be overthrown, all the rest will tumble down with
it; for it is the Basis or Foundation of all the rest, upon which they stand,
and also the Top stone that binds all their Building together. And as Goliath of
Gath headed the Army of the Philistines, as their great Champion, whom little
David brought down grovelling to the ground, with a smooth stone slung at his
Forehead, and so the whole Army was scattered: So is the Pope the great
Champion, heading this People of Blood, his Romanists; and if he be brought
down, the rest must of necessity be scattered, as having no standard to repair
to. I speak not of a particular Pope, as this man, but of that power he
arrogates to himself, and others attribute to him, and of him whoever he be,
that stands invested therewith. I shall content my self with a few Arguments
against him: And the first is taken from his pretended Rock, even from Peter,
whom they so much boast of; and it is this:

Argument 1. If the Pope be found in the state and condition of Simon Magus,
for which he was rejected by Peter, from having any part or lot in that matter
of dispensing the spiritual Gifts of God, then is he not the Head of Christ's
Church upon Earth, nor his Vicar, nor Peter's lawful Successor, nor has he any
part or lot in dispensing the spiritual Gifts of God. And this I presume no
body will deny, that has any common sense or reason in them; because they may
as well affirm, that Simon Magus was once the Head thereof, as one that is in
his case and condition.

But that the Pope is such a one, I prove thus; Because the same carnal mind is
fully in the Pope which was in Simon Magus, for which he was rejected by Peter,
from having any part or lot in this matter of dispensing the spiritual Gifts of
God.

For the manifest proof of this, let us take notice what it was that Simon
Magus was rejected for. See that plainly expressed, Act. 8. I will therefore
set down the very words at large, and then take my Observation from them. The
words are these: Verse. 18. And when Simon saw, that through laying on of the
Apostles hands, the holy Ghost was given, he offered them money. Ver. 19.
Saying, Give me also this power, that on whomsoever I lay hands, he may receive
the holy Ghost. Ver. 20. But Peter said unto him, Thy money perish with thee,
because thou have thought that the Gift of God may be purchased with money.
Ver. 21. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the fight of God. Ver. 22. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness,
and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Ver.
23. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity. These are the words of the Text: From whence it is easy for any to
take this Observation with me, That the only thing wherewith Peter charged
Simon Magus, as the only cause of his so severe sentence against him, and the
only thing whereby the carnality and wickedness of his heart was discovered to
Peter, was this, namely, That he thought that the gift of God might be
purchased with money; nothing more is objected against Simon Magus. And this
thought of his heart (which was hereby discovered, namely, by offering money)
is twice mentioned against him, viz. in ver. 20. and 22. Thy money perish with
thee, because thou have thought that the gift of God may be purchased with
money. Thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray
God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee. Thus Peter named
that thought of his heart twice to him, and nothing but that, whereby he
perceived that he was in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity.

Quest. Well, But what is this to the Pope, may some say?

I Answer, If he be found having the same thought of heart with Simon Magus,
for which alone he was rejected by Peter, and under sevore judgment by him,
then he is also in the same condemnation, and has neither part nor lot in this
matter of dispensing the spiritual gifts of God, but is in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, and his heart is not right in the sight of
God, and so he is far off from being Christ's Vicar, and Peter's Successor.

If my one consent not to this, then let them show a reason why he should not
be under the some sentence and judgment, seeing he is in the same state of
wickedness, and in the same evil thought of heart. Do not think that Peter
spoke rashly or unadvisedly, when he pronounced such a sentence against such a
wickedness, but in that spirit that passes the same sentence upon the same
wickedness or evil thought, where it shall be found; for God is no respecter of
persons.

But if this be granted, (which indeed cannot be denied by any that has
reason) That if the Pope be in the same evil thought of heart with Simon Magus,
then he must be under the same sentence with him. Yet some may stick here, and
say thus:

Object. The Pope is a Christian, and Simon Magus was a Sorcerer, and we cannot
imagine him to have such a carnal and evil thought in him as that Sorcerer had.

Answ. To that I say, first, That Simon Magus was as much a Christian as the
Pope is, when Peter so rejected him, and excluded him from having part or lot
in this matter: For he was baptized, and continued with Philip, and wondered,
beholding the Miracles and Signs which were done, as it is expressed in the
13th. Verse of this 8th. Chapter of the Acts; Then Simon himself believed also,
and when he was baptized he continued with Philip, etc.

Secondly, Whatever Simon was or had been, though he was a Sorcerer, yet Peter
took no notice of that to him, but only of that thought of his heart, that the
gift of God may be purchased with money.

Object. But now the main Objection follows, which is this; But how does it
appear that the Pope has any such thought, namely, that the gift of God may be
purchased with money?

Answ. To this his Practice makes Answer: Because he sells the Pardons of sins
and Indulgencies for money, and makes his people believe that these gifts of
God may be purchased with money; yea, Pardons are sold and bought for certain
prices, and at certain times, from the Popes Agents, who are employed in that
Work. And this was the first thing against which Luther appeared so openly,
when he began to break off from Popery, being grieved and stirred up with zeal,
against that abominable profaneness of the Pope's Agents, who went about
preaching up the sale of Indulgencies and Pardons for money, and so abusing the
holy gifts of God for filthy lucre. This was under Pope Leo the 10th. and by
his appointment, Anno Christi 1517. Polydor. Virgil. lib. 8. cap. 4. The like
was done by Alexander the 6th. 17 years before that: But it is needless to prove
a thing so common and manifest. Therefore none need doubt of this, that the
Pope has the same thought with Simon Magus, viz. That the gift of God, even
this spiritual gift of God, may be purchased with money.

If any one be so far transported with zeal for their Pope, that they will
still affirm, that the Pope has not so wicked a thought as Simon Magus, in
thinking that the gift of God may be purchased with money, then by so defending
him, they make him still worse, for they make him the greatest Deceiver in the
World, in setting that to sale for money, which he thinks cannot be purchased
with money. And look to it you Romanists, whether it be so or no; for which of
these twain soever he is found in, you who buy Pardons and Indulgencies of him,
you are cheated both of your money, and of the thing you expect for it: For if
he verily thinks that the gift of God, the pardon of sin, may be purchased with
money, then is he where Simon Magus was, and cannot give you that; and if he
have not that thought of heart, he is a Deceiver, and cheats you to fill his
own coffers, and so both ways you fall short of your hope. Therefore leave him,
and humble your selves before the Lord, and seek the pardon of your sins from
him, and break off your sins by repentance, and turning to the Lord with your
whole heart, and he will be gracious and merciful unto you, and forgive your
iniquities. But to buy a liberty of sinning to your selves, is most abominable,
and looks as if you would set the Lord's righteous Judgments against sin at
defiance, and betake your selves for shelter to a corrupt deceitful man, who
had need to repent and pray God, that the thought of his own heart may be
forgiven him.

Argument 2. I come now to a second Argument against the Pope, and to show that
he is no true Successor to Peter; which I prove by showing, that he is not of
Abraham's spiritual seed, which of necessity every one must be, that succeeds
either Peter, or any of the holy Apostles of Christ Jesus.

To make this clear, let us take notice of these two things: 1. What manner of
Succession is cut off. 2. What manner of Succession does remain.

First, What manner of Succession is cut off. There was a Succession once which
was lineal in the same seed outwardly; and so from Abraham to Christ they
succeeded one another, as the Son succeeds the Father: But this was cut off, as
the Scripture plainly shows, Romans 2.28 29. For he is not a Jew which is one
outwardly -- but he is a Jew which is one inwardly. Again, Romans 9.8. The
Children of Promise are counted for the seed. So also Gal. 3.7. They which are
of faith, the same are the Children of Abraham. And again, the Apostle speaking
of the cutting off of the Jews through their unbelief, shows, that we who are
of the Gentiles, are grafted in into Abraham's stock only by faith, and so by
faith we stand. Romans 11.20. Well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and
thou stand by faith, be not high-minded but fear. So then you see, that
outward succession in Abraham's line was cut off through unbelief. Hence I
argue thus, If God has laid aside that outward succession in Abraham's line,
who was called the Friend of God, he will not take up any outward succession
again to entail his promises upon; and if succession be cut off from that
natural seed, for want of faith, then all outward succession, as from place, or
any other outward thing whatsoever, will not hold where true faith is wanting,
but will fail him that depends upon it, as well as it failed the Jews. So then
whosoever pretends a succession in Abraham's seed, (without which he cannot be
a Successor to Peter) he must establish his Succession in another thing, than
either in an outward seed or in place, or any such like outward thing.

Therefore secondly, let us now take further notice, what manner of Succession
that is which abides, and wherein that is established, which makes one a
Successor in the seed of Abraham. This does not stand in any outward thing, but
in that faith which follows the steps of Abraham. Romans 4.11, 12. Faith was
reckoned to Abraham for righteousness before he was circumcised, (as the
foregoing words do show) That he might be the Father of all them that believe,
though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imported unto them:
And the Father of Circumcision, to them who are not of the Circumcision only,
but also walk in the steps of that faith of our Father Abraham, which he had
being yet uncircumessed. Here you may see plainly, who are Abraham's Children
now, and so Christ's, namely, they that walk in the steps of that faith of our
Father Abraham, and they only: For it is said, Romans 11.20. Thou stand by
faith, he not highminded but fear. Ver. 21. For if God spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee. Ver. 22. Behold therefore the
goodness and severity of God, on them which fell, severity, but toward thee
goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also shall be cut
off. So here you may see it is plainly expressed, what cuts a man off from the
seed of Abraham, and so from Christ; and also what establishes him in that
seed: It is walking in the steps of that faith of Abraham, and continuing in
the goodness of God, that establishes a man; and he that continues not therein,
shall be cut off.

Now examine and apply these things to the Pope. Does he walk in the steps of
the faith of Abraham? Surely his works loudly proclaim the contrary. If ye were
the Children of Abraham, ye would do the works of Abraham, says Christ Jesus,
Joh. 8.39, etc. But now ye seek to kill me, this did not Abraham. Ye are of
your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye will do. He was a
Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth. That the Pope is in
this murdering spirit, many Nations have felt it, and the Earth rings of it.
How many Massacres, how many bloody and inhumane Butcheries have been acted
under him? How many private Murders, and secret Conspiracies, to destroy men's
Lives? How many stabbings and poisonings of persons of all degrees, many
Countries can witness. Is this to walk in the steps of the faith of Abraham? Is
this to continue in the goodness of God, who lets his Sun shine on the good and
on the bad, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust?

The Pope does hereby clearly manifest himself, to be cut off from walking in
the steps of the faith of Abraham; for thus did not Abraham. Or does he
continue in the goodness of God, who walks in the steps of him that was a
murderer from the beginning? I desire you poor captived Souls to consider it,
who are under his yoke, and deceive not your selves in trusting to him; for you
may plainly see by his works, what Spirit your Pope is ingrafted into, namely,
into his Spirit, who was a murderer from the beginning, and not into his
Spirit, who came not to destroy men's lives but to save. They who have been
ingrafted into Abraham's faith, and so into Christ the true seed, were never
such murderers and bloody creatures, but merciful and tenderhearted. Nay, if
we go no further than the common Body of the Protestants, they never were so
bloody to you, as your Pope has taught you to be to them. When did they commit
any such Massacres upon you, (though you have highly provoked them) as you have
done to them, even without provocation? And still you hold on to attempt the
like, and repent not of your wickedness; which shows plainly, that they have
more of the true spirit and faith of Abraham among them than you have; and you
partake more of the spirit of him that was a murderer from the beginning, which
is infused into you, with the Principles that you suck in from your Pope and
his Church.

I will tell you who your Pope is by the fruits he brings forth; He is a great
Agent of that Apollyon, that is, Destroyer, spoken of, Rev. 9.11. Who is King
over them that have power to hurt men, and he is the outward head of that
mystery of iniquity which was to arise; and you cannot find another like him,
to act such horrid wickedness, and yet under the pretense of Christianity, as
if Christ, that innocent Lamb of God, (who came not to destroy men's lives but
to save) were now become a Patron to devouring Wolves. Here is the mystery of
wickedness, shrowding it self under the pretense of Christianity; but the Lord
will pluck off his vizzard from off his face, and let people see, that no
murderer has any inheritance in the Kingdom of God. 1 John 3.15. No murderer
has eternal life abiding in him. And Rev. 21.8. it is said, The fearful and
unbelieving, and the abominable and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers,
and idolaters, and all liars, shall have their part in the lake which burns
with fire and brimstone. Again Chapter 22. it is said, Without are dogs and
sorcerers, and whoremongers and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves
and makes a lie. All these you see are without; they are not within, neither
in the Kingdom of Christ, nor in the seed of Abraham, nor of the true Body of
Christ, which is his Church. These very sins actually cut them off; If thou
continue not in his goodness, thou also shall be cut off, says the Apostle. So
they that are such, they actually cut off themselves, there needs no other
testimony against them, than the current of their own evil deeds. Pray consider
a little you that are Papists, and give me leave to reason the case with you,
who are led by this man of sin into such abominations. Will the disguise of a
Name stand you in stead, when God shall judge the World in righteousness by
Jesus Christ? Will it serve your turn to say, We were called Christians by thy
Name? Will not he say for all that, Depart from me, I know you not, ye workers
of iniquity? What will the Name of Christians do you good, if you be not found
in his nature, but in a quite contrary nature, doing the will and work of him
that was a murderer and liar from the beginning? What! Christians in Name, and
Murderers in Nature? and think that the Name or your Pope will bear you out,
when the righteous Judge shall judge every man according to the things done in
the body, whether good or bad, and when his all-piercing eye shall search and
judge the secrets of all hearts. I aver, that neither he nor you that obey his
will in bloody Murders and Massacres, are Christians further than in Name, any
more than the persecuting Jews were the true and spiritual seed of Abraham:
They were of their Father the Devil, *as our Savior told them) because they
had murder in their hearts; and are not you of the same Father, who have
murders, and such horrid murders too, not only in your hearts, but also in some
of your hands? How will you excuse your selves in the day of the Lord's
Vengeance, when he shall make inquisition for blood? Will it serve you to say
then, We did as we were instructed, and put on, and led by our Teachers? When
as Christ himself has told you aforehand, That if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. No, you shall then curse your King and your
God, even your Pope, whom you have taken to be so to yourselves, and followed
him into those evils that are excluded out of the Kingdom of God. Or will you
think to say, We did what we did in a good intent? Will that excuse? Whenas you
are admonished, not to do evil, that good may come thereof, and that admonition
is left upon record also. Will you say, We knew it not? Then see your
blindness, see how your Leaders have kept you in blindness, lest you should see
and know the truth and deliver your selves from under their yoke. What has God
given you reason and understanding for? Is it that you should throw it away, or
lay it aside, or be led as a Horse or Dog is, wholly by the will of another?
Wherein then do you differ from Bruits? Do you not hereby manifest your selves
to be those staves and souls of men mentioned to be in Babylon, Rev. 18.13. I
do not speak these things so plainly to you to vilify you, or in a way of
despising of you, but to open your eyes, that you may see where you are, even
at the pits brink, and that you may retreat before it be too late, and may obey
that voice from Heaven which calls out of Babylon, out of such confusion of
wickedness and abominations, as you are admonished, Rev. 18.4. And I heard a
voice from Heaven, saying, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Her plagues will follow
her sins, therefore beware and take warning: You your selves cannot but know
what abominations be in her, what whoredoms, and murders, and lies, and
perjury, and such like, all countenanced and indulged by him that is King over
your Consciences, the Pope. So that I say, he walks not in the steps of that
faith of our Father Abraham, he is not of him, but of Apollyon, the Destroyer,
the Murderer, and so is cut off from being of Abraham's seed, and consequently
from being related to Christ, as his Vicar, or to Peter, as his Successor.

And for you his Disciples or Followers, it is no marvel that you run on to such
horrid abominations, beyond the very Infidels and savage people of the World,
who know nothing of Christ, since you throw away your own reason, and give up
your selves as slaves, to be led (as Horses) and acted by those, who teach you
to outface Conscience, and to outdare the checks and scruples thereof, and even
to strive against the principles of good nature and humanity, (as I am
persuaded some of you must do) who also to quiet your Consciences, make you
believe, That a Pardon or Indulgence from the Pope will clear all.

Oh, the execrable wickedness that your Leaders prompt you on unto! Lying,
Hypocrisy, Perjury, Plots, Treasons, Murders, Massacres, to be
Truce Breakers, false accusers, and what not! Will you not hereby in the end
(besides the just judgment of God against such things) bring your selves also
into that Odium with men, that no Man or Nation will trust any thing you say or
swear, or confide in any Truce that you can make with them, and so make your
selves fit to be spewed out of the Earth? Ponder these things, I beseech you,
and do not stubbornly destroy yourselves, but exercise reason as men, and
hearken to the checks of your Consciences, if they be not seared, and cast away
lying, and speak truth, that you may be believed; and take heed of sighting
against God, whose hand you may see is against your designs of wickedness and
darkness; and learn to be inoffensive, and without blame in the World, as the
true Disciples and Believers in Christ were, and still are to this day. I have
a little digressed for your sakes, who are led as captives by this Man of sin,
and instigator to Murders and Massacres, that you might be convinced that he
walks not himself, nor leads you on to walk in the steps of Abraham's faith,
and so you should beware of him.

3. A third Argument now against the Pope, I take from this Scripture, 2 Thessalonians.
2. where the Apostle speaking of a falling away, and the revealing of the Man
of Sin, the Son of Perdition, he describes him thus, Ver. 4. Who opposes and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, so that
he as God sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. Hence I
argue thus:

If the Pope be found in this state of the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition,
then he is none of God's Vicegerent, or Christ's Vicar, or Peter's Successor:

But he is in the same state or condition with this Man of Sin, here spoken of,
and therefore he is none of God's Vicegerent, or Christ's Vicar, or Peter's
Successor.

For the clear demonstration of this, that the Pope is in the same state with
this Man of Sin here spoken of, we need go no further than this Chapter, and
the Pope's answering of it, as the impression of a Seal answers the Seal. There
be two expressions here which show, that this Man of Sin must be within the
profession of Christianity, but fallen from the life of it: For his rise must
be from a falling away, which in the Apostle's language, signifies a falling
from Christ, the life and power of Christianity, though they retain the Name of
Christians. Then the other expression is, that he sits in the Temple of God; he
does not flee from an outward profession of the Worship of God, but makes that
his Seat or Throne; which also distinguishes him from all Secular Powers. So
that you see, he must be as to outward show a Christian, and worshipper of God;
and in that he is exalted and has his Throne there, there he sits: And from
hence it is, that the Pope (who is one with him) arrogates to himself such
Titles, as import a near Relation to Christ, and his holy Apostles. These
things thus far are clearly fulfilled in him; he is fallen away from the life
and power of Christianity, from the innocence thereof, to the height of
wickedness, as by his life, and actions, or works, make appear; and yet he
retains the Name of a Christian, and will pretend to be a Worshipper of God,
and has his Seat in his Temple, where his worship is professed.

Then further. This Man of Sin is said to appose and exalt himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped. Magistrates in Scripture are
sometime called Gods; I said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like men. And again,
God stands in the Congregation of the mighty, he judges among the Gods,
Psalm. 82. Now this Man of Sin, and so the Pope, is exalted above all that is
called God, above all Magistrates, Judges, Kings, Emperors. I think none will
deny this, it is so well known in the World, since that the Pope has taken
upon him to crown them with his foot, and make them wait attendance at his
gate, and to discharge Subjects of their obedience to their Princes, and to
depose whom he pleases, and give the Crown to whom he pleases. Here Is
opposition enough contained also in this his Exaltation, while he deals thus
with Kings and Emperors.

Thus these three Marks or Discoveries of the Man of Sin, are fully found in
the Pope. He is risen up in the fallen state; being fallen from the life of
Christianity; from a merciful spirit, to a cruel bloody spirit; from a faithful
spirit, to a deceitful treacherous spirit; from speaking truth, to speak lies
in hypocrisy; from humility, to the highest exaltation of pride that a man can
be at in this world. For this last, it is evident enough, for he is exalted
above all; and for the rest, that is also manifest by his Disciples; for what he
teaches his Disciples to do or be, he must be that himself. Thus he is in the
fallen state, yet he sits in the Temple of God, he professes worship to him.

Now let us take notice of some other expressions in this place; He is called
that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition. For the Man of Sin, can we find the Pope
worthy of that denomination? I wonder who can look upon him otherwise,
(notwithstanding his great Title of Holiness) when we find him to be a Patron,
nourisher and cherisher of the most inhumane Practices that are in the World;
witness the Cruelties and barbarous Actions of his people, in seeking to
destroy Nations, and their Governors, to overturn Governments, by Plots of
darkness, and open butcherly Massacres, without any pity or mercy to Age or
Sex. Witness also his cruel Inquisitions, which are places invented for
tormenting them, that will not stoop to his yoke; such Engines as Christ Jesus
never appointed or countenanced, but was against all such merciless tortures.
Witness also his encouraging of his Children to take Oaths or Tests, that they
may not be discovered, and so restrained from doing mischief, and from carrying
on his hellish designs, promising them pardon aforehand, for any false Oaths
or Perjury, so it be for the advancement of his Church. Shall we not count him
a Man of Sin, who walks thus fully in the steps of him, who was a murderer and
a liar from the beginning? I desire to know where we shall find one that
outstrips him. And for that word, The Son of Perdition, this also is not amiss
applied to the Pope; for it signifies a Destroyer, who is also appointed for
destruction; and it bears the same sense with Apollyou, Rev. 9.11. Who is King
over them that have power to hurt men.

There is another word also that hints something to us, for further discovery
of this Man of Sin; namely, that the Day of Christ shall not be, till the Man
of Sin be revealed. This implies, that he shall be so hidden in the Temple of
God, under the profession or pretense of his worship, that he shall not be seen
to be what he is till God reveal him. And this also is very applicable to the
Pope; for not only Nations, but their Kings also, have been deceived with him:
But now God has in a great measure revealed him to be what he is; and he has
revealed him by the same means, whereby Christ Jesus reveals false Prophets,
and whereby he teaches us to know them, even by his works; so that his own
works discover what he is. And as the Apostle makes this a discovery of evil
men and seducers, that they shall grow worse and worse, so it is with the Pope,
and his train of Murderers, they have grown worse and worse. Formerly they
would bring men before their Courts, and there let them have free liberty to
plead and argue for their Religion; but of later years nothing will satiate
their cruelty, but quick dispatch, and ridding them out of the way by speedy
Massacres. Thus now you see how fully these Discoveries of the Man of Sin, the
Son of Perdition, are found in the Pope.

Now put all these together, and let the Leaders of the Papists see, where they
will find one that answers all these Characters and Discoveries, as the Pope
does.

A Man sprung up under the profession of Christ, but fallen away from him, into
the very dregs of wickedness, opposing, and persecuting, and murdering the
innocent, who do him no harm.

A Man that sits in the Temple of God, whereby he is distinguished from all
Civil Magistrates, who have their Seat or Throne in the Civil Government.

A Man exalting himself above all Magistrates and Principalities.

And yet a Man of such eminent note for sin, that if I may not say he is
deservedly called, That Man of Sin, yet I may say, He is deservedly reputed to
be of that Man of Sin.

A Son of Perdition, as Judas was, who is for destroying, stabbing, strangling,
poisoning, murdering, massacring, and so for destruction; For the righteous
Judge will give to every one according to his deeds.

A Man hidden from the vulgar Eye, under pretense of his Holiness, until the
Lord has revealed him, being now manifest by his own wicked Practices; By
their fruits ye shall know them.

Find all these concurring in one Man, and exhibit him as representing the Man
here spoken of, that Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition. Where you will find such
another besides the Pope, I know not. This I am certainly convinced of, that
your Pope is such a one: He sits in the Temple of God, challenging the Power
over all in Ecclesiastical Matters, yea, and over Civil Governments too: He is
a Man of Sin, a promoter and instigater of abominable Sins, Murders, Lying,
Perjury, and Idolatry, etc. He is a Son of Perdition, if destroying the
innocent make one such, as it did Judas: He is exalted above all that is called
God, above all Principalities and Magistrates: He is a Man sprung up under the
profession of Christ's Name, but is fallen away from him and his Doctrine, and
turned an opposer. Therefore until his Champions can find out another like
him, in whom all these Characters may concur, let them rest upon him.

Object. I do not question but some will say, That Simon Magus was such a one,
and this Scripture was fulfilled in him, and so some have understood it.

Answ. To this I Answer, It Is true enough, that much of it was fulfilled in
him; and therefore well might some of the Ancients think, that he and his
followers were forerunners of the great Antichrist: Surely they were ingrafted
into the same spirit with the Pope, because they both have had the same carnal
and earthly thought of the gift of God, viz. That it might be purchased with
money, as I have showed. But then consider, that if Simon Magus fulfilled this
Scripture, in exalting himself over the Consciences of many, as if he were
above all, (although he never arrived at that height that the Pope is got to)
then the Pope, in exalting himself over all Principalities and Dominions, Kings
and Emperors, not only in opinion, but in real Power of deposing and setting
up Kings and Emperors, he fulfils it much more For this height, I say, Simon
Magus never came to: Therefore if Simon was a Son of Perdition, what is the
Pope, who walks so much after his steps, yea in actual exaltation above him, in
bloodshed and murders, and burning and massacring, far beyond him? If they who
lived near the primitive Ages, (who saw not this Son of Perdition as yet
appearing in their time) thought Simon Magus, or Marcus Valentinianus, or any
other, or all of the Gnostics, as one Body, to be that Son of Perdition, and
Great Antichrist, they might well be excused in thinking so. But we, who have
seen the Rise, and of later years the Discovery, of this great Man of Sin, for
us to turn off this Scripture from him, by limitting it to them, that never
came to so great exaltation over all, I think in us it would argue great
blindness. For though that Simon Magus endeavored to make men think him a God,
and many were deceived with him, yet he never got into the Saddle, to ride over
all by his Power, as the Pope does: And therefore after the appearing of those
men, the Ancients still looked for another to appear as the Great Antichrist.
For when the Bishop of Constantinople began to affect the Title of universal
Bishop, others said, He that shall affect the Title of universal Bishop, is a
forerunner of Antichrist: He that shall but affect it, was counted a
forerunner; therefore they looked for another to rise besides Simon Magus, or
any that were gone before. And if affecting of that Title discovered a
forerunner, what must he be then that obtains the Title and Power of universal
Bishop? And that Bishop of Rome that quickly succeeded Gregory the Great,
namely, Boniface, he obtained it, and it was of Phocas, a wicked Emperor, that
he obtained it; of whom it was said, Deteriorem alium inveniri potuisse nullum,
that a wickeder could not be found. He gave the Precedence to the Church of
Rome, and granted to Boniface, that it should be called Caput omnium
Ecclesiarum, the Head of all the Churches. And then the Bishop of it began to
be the Head of all the Bishops; contrary to the Command of Christ, who forbad
that thing in express words, Mat. 20.25, 26, 27. It shall not be so among you,
says he, when the Mother of Zebedees Sons would have had her Sons exalted
above the rest. Therefore Christ Jesus never gave this Greatness to the Pope
over all, seeing he forbad it; but it was obtained of wicked Phocas, about the
year 607. after the Nativity of Christ. For till that time the Bishop of Rome
was not exalted so very high, though he was high enough; but after this they
grew by little and little so high, that they got above the Emperors themselves.
Then was fulfilled this Scripture which I have quoted, He exalted himself above
all that is called God, or that is worshipped. And so now he is become the head
of that great mystery of iniquity, which began to work in the Apostle's days,
but was let by the Heathen Persecutors; and therefore till that which
let, (being an enemy also) was taken out of the way, it could not rise to
its height: For the perfecuting Emperors let, by keeping down the very
outward formality and name of Christianity, as much as they could; under which
name and outward profession, the mystery of iniquity was to arise, after there
was a falling away from the life and power of godliness. Now the Name of
Christianity becoming famous, and the Nature of it lost in a great measure, and
the greatest abominations of the World, (Lying, Perjury, Ambition, Murder,
Superstition and Idolatry, etc.) practiced under that profession, with pretense
to promote it, and yet quite contrary to the Nature of it; this is the mystery
of iniquity. And of this mystery the Pope stands in the Head: For where can one
find the like Spirit of Lies and Slanders? of Perjury, which they think they
salve up with equivocations, and mental reserves; of Ambition, as in the Pope
and his retinue; of Murder, by poysonings, treacheries, massacres; of
Superstition and Idolatry, in falling down before Images and Pictures, etc. I
might name many more gross abominations, all indulged by the Pope their Father
and Patron, Vicar (not to Christ, but) to him, that was a liar and murderer
from the beginning.

Object. If any one here object and say, That these and such like wickednesses
are practiced among others, as well as under him, Look among the Protestants,
and you shall see Murders, Adulteries, Thefts, Robbing, Drunkenness, Swearing,
Lying, etc. are frequent among them, as well as under the Pope's Government.

Answ. I Answer, These and such like sins are too frequent among them, for
which the Lord may chastise them, as also he has done. But yet observe how
great a difference here is: The Protestants by such evils, bring themselves
under the danger of Penalties by their Laws; The Papists can act the greatest
wickednesses, under hopes of indulgence, and memorable reward of honor among
them; so the Protestants do that in danger, and are discountenanced, where the
Papists are countenanced in the same evils. Again, It is the looser sort of
Protestants that do such things; but the Leaders and principal Men among the
Papists, (from the Pope to the lowest Graduate) are chief Incendiaries therein.
Again, The Protestants do such things against the Principles of their Religion;
but the Papists do them according to the wicked Principles of their Church,
that is, from iniquity established by a Law; and if Satan rule any where, sure
it is there, where he has got iniquity and murder, etc. into a Law, and so
under a mantle of Piety, to escape the censure of the purblind Eye. So that the
Papists Church is become a very Spring of wickedness, through their principles,
and leading men, who with deliberation, counsel and contrivance, instigate
their people to the most inhumane wickedness, and make them believe it is good
service done to God and his Church.

Other Arguments might be produced against the Pope, to manifest him to be none
of Christ's Vicar, or Peter's Successor; but I rest in these, as sufficient
testimony against him: Seeing he is one with Simon Magus, in that evil thought
of his heart, That the gift of God may be purchased with money: And secondly,
Because he is not of the faith of Abraham, and so not of the seed of Christ,
but one that walks in the steps of him that was a murderer from the beginning:
And thirdly, Because he walks parallel with that Man of Sin, that Son of
Perdition or destruction, who exalts himself above all that is called God, and
yet sits in the Temple of God, as if he were God, laying his own Impositions
upon the Consciences of men, thereby bearing show of God among them, and over
them.

2. I come now to the next Principle, which is this, That the Pope is
infallible: But these things foregoing, being manifestly proved against him, by
his own practice, quite overturn his Infallibility. For who will say that he is
infallible, who is guilty of that sin, which excluded Simon Magus from having
any part or lot in dispensing the spiritual gifts of God, and which discovered
him to be in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity? Who will say that he
is infallible, who walks not in the steps of Abraham's faith, but in his steps
who was a murderer from the beginning? Who will say that he is infallible,
that exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, who
sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, and yet is called,
That Man of Sin, and Son of Perdition? How can the Popes be infallible, when
the makers of them are so fallible, that they have sometimes made two at a
time, who have continued excommunicating one the other, as Alexander tertius,
and Victor quartus did, about the year 1159. We may well say of them, as it was
formerly said of Images and their makers, They that make them are like unto
them. Was that poisoning Pope Alexander the sixth infallible, who poisoned
Joannem Michaelem, a Cardinal of Rome, and afterward attempting to poison
Cardinal Adrian, his familiar friend, with a cup of poison at a Banquet, was by
the just hand of God poisoned himself with the same; for the cups being
mistaken by the servants, that cup which was appointed by him, to be given to
Adrian, was given to himself, and so he died therewith? This was about the year
1503. as Chronicles tell us. Will you say, this Murderer was infallible?

But not to expatiate too far in this, it being so gross a thing to conceit
that such men are infallible, I proceed to the next Principle, viz.

3. That the Pope has power to pardon sins. And here as I said of
Infallibility, so I may say of this: If Simon Magus, if the murtherous Jews, if
the Man of Sin, that is exalted above all, have power to pardon sins, then may
we grant the same power to the Pope, but not else; for all these conditions are
his, as has been showed. But if the Pope have all those sins lie at his door,
that are committed by his order, or instigation, or countenancing of them; if
he lie under the weight of them all, and be found guilty of them all, let him
first repent and pray to God, that if it be possible, his own sins may be
forgiven him. David was charged with the death of Vriah, because he ordered and
contrived it, and this one man's blood lay heavy upon him, and the sword was
never to depart from his house therefore, 2 Samuel 12.9, 10. Now how many Murders
are committed by the Pope! What multitudes of innocent Souls have been slain by
the Cruelties of Popes, in the barbarous massacring of many Thousands, whose
innocent blood cries to Heaven for vengeance! For all the blood shed by his
approbation, and suggestion, and instigation, and indulgence, will lie as a
mighty Mountain upon him, and his Confederates who promote such things. Let him
first get from under the guilt and weight of his own sins, before he pretend to
pardon others. Will any man think, that Judas who had betrayed the Lord of
Life, had power to remit sins? No surely, none are so destitute of
understanding. Now if Christ our Lord will look upon that which is done to one
of the least of them, which believe in him, as a thing done to himself, then
how often will the Pope be found guilty of killing the Lord of Life in his
little ones, who believe in him! The innocent blood of multitudes will rise up
in witness against him, being shed under his patronage. How many thousands in
Ireland! How many thousands in France! How many thousands in Piedmont, and
other places, have been slain, under the mystery of iniquity, wherein he is
Head, being King over them that have power to hurt men, and might restrain such
Insolences and Cruelties, if he did disallow thereof! Therefore all these,
besides the secret Murders and Conspiracies done by his Indulgences, and
besides all the hidden works of darkness done in his cruel Inquisitions, will
all press upon him. And yet this Man, whose Sins and Cruelties, and unmerciful
Massacres reach to Heaven, he must be the Man to forgive men their sins! Oh the
blindness and besotted condition of men whom the Lord has given up to strong
delusion! I beseech you let us understand, who they are that are given up to
strong delusion to believe a lie, if they be not that train that follows the
Pope, and depends upon him for the pardon of their sins. For the strong
delusions are to come upon them that follow the Man of Sin, the Son of
Perdition, who exalts himself above all that is called God, and who sits in the
Temple of God, as the Pope does. And so you may find these deluded ones spoken
of, as the train of that exalted Man of Sin in the same Chapter with him, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

But the Pope pretends to have power to pardon sins, because Christ gave that
power to his Apostles; for he boasts of his Succession to them, especially to
Peter. But I aver, that he that is departed and fallen away from the Apostles
Spirit and Doctrine, is no true Sucessor to them, nor has that power which
they had. The Apostles were innocent, holy, humble men of heart, not seeking
the glory of this World, as the Pope does; not exercising dominion over men's
Faith and Conscience, as the Pope does; nor lording it over God's Heritage, as
the Pope does; but were ensamples of piety and holiness to the Flock of Christ.
But the Pope walks contrary to their Example, and to their Doctrine, being a
devouring Wolf, where he cannot exercise dominion over men's spirits. He indeed
arrogates to himself the title of Holiness, but is far from the life of it,
being a ringleader into wickedness, murders, massacres, perjury,
dissimulation, and wicked fraud, encouraging his Children to take Tests or
Oaths, so that they may lurk among us like Foxes, under Sheeps clothing, until
they can seize upon their prey. Is not here plainly a departing and falling
away from the upright and innocent spirit, and wholesome doctrine of the
Apostles? When will your eyes be opened, you that are his Subjects and Slaves?
When will you be sensible and understand, what manner of Holiness you have set
before you to follow! I pray you consider, what is it above and beyond these
wickednesses, that he shall live in, who is such a Man of Sin, and Son of
Perdition? See if you can find out grosser abominations among all that profess
Christianity, for which those titles may be put upon any man more justly. So
then, seeing he is thus departed and fallen away from the Apostles spirit and
doctrine, who will trust to him for the remitting of their sins, who have any
good understanding or sound reason left in them, and are not given up to strong
delusion to believe a lie?

4. I proceed to a fourth Principle of the Romish Church, viz. That the Church
of Rome, whereof the Pope is Head, is the true Church of Christ, and all that
depart from them are Heretics.

That there was once a true Church, and a precious Church of Christ at Rome I
grant, while they followed the Doctrine and innocent Life of Christ and his
holy Apostles: But since they are fallen therefrom, into the murdering and
lying treacherous spirit, they are become degenerate, and thereby cut
themselves off, as a Branch withered is cut off from the Vine.

But here by the way, before I proceed any further, I desire to be rightly
understood, that the bent of my Discourse is not against those that are
simple-hearted, and harmless among them, and honest according to their
knowledge; but it is against the ruling and leading part, (who lead the rest
into evil) these are fallen away from Christ, and hold others in bondage, and
keep them in captivity, as the Israelites were kept captives in Babylon of old.
So there is a people that God calls his people in Babylon the great, the Mother
of Harlots, and abominations of the Earth: For says the Scripture, Come out of
her my people, which words were insignificant, if he had not a people in the
midst of Babylon. This being premised, which I desire may be minded all along.
I shall now for the finding out of the truth or falsehood of this 4th.
Principle, put the Question thus, viz.

Whether the present Church of Rome (that is, the ruling leading part, and the
ruled part, from the Pope to his meanest Minister or Subject, who are spirited
to teach, or actively to put in practice the destructive principles of their
Church) be the only true Church of Christ?

Now for the readier finding out of the truth or falsehood in this Question, I
shall set another by it, which may run parallel with it, to give light to it;
namely,

Whether a people teaching, or by principles practicing lying, perjury or false
swearing, hypocrisy and dissimulation, Plots and conspiracies, to destroy
others, assassinations, secret murders, and open massacres, and other such like
abominations, and all this with consent and approbation of their Church:
Whether such a people be the only true Church of Christ, and all that withdraw
from them be Heretics?

Thus the Question is truly stated concerning the present Church of Rome, as
their actions make it manifest; and being thus stated, I think I may leave the
deciding of it to the meanest capacity, where there is any grain of honesty
left in their hearts toward Christ Jesus, the Head of his Church: for
certainly none will say, that such a Church is the only true Church of Christ,
and all others Heretics, except they have sold themselves to speak wickedly.

Now that the Pope and his Romanists are such a people, they themselves prove
by matter of fact; and by their actions they sufficiently declare it to this
present Age, which is constrained for its own security to use the best means it
can, to preserve it self from their assassinations, stabbings, stranglings,
sinothering of their persons, burning of their Houses and Cities, and from
their bloody hands, and merciless massacres.

The Church of Christ in the Apostles days was the pillar and ground of truth,
upholding and holding forth truth in the World, by teaching it, and by living
in it, and so by living a just and innocent harmless life among men, so that
they were of no danger to others among whom they lived. But the Church of Rome
is come to that, that she is become the pillar and ground of lies and slanders,
of equivocation, false accusations, truce-breaking, hypocrisy, to seem one
thing and be another to deny or hide their own Principles for wicked ends; she
is so far fallen from an innocent harmless life, that she is become the pillar
and ground of Plots and wicked designs, to contrive the blowing up of
Parliaments, the ruin of Nations, the destruction of Kings and Rulers, the
massacring of multitudes, and butcherly murdering of thousands of innocent
people, that do them no harm. This is the Pope's Roman Church. And here we may
stay our selves, and wonder with great admiration, as John did when he saw the
Woman drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus, Rev. 17.6.

This is she that would be counted the only true Church of Christ, and holy
Church, and mother Church, and brands all for Heretics that abhor her
abominations. Well might the Apostle wonder with great admiration, when in
vision he was showed by the Angel, that such a degenerate bloody people should
rise up under the Name of the Church of Christ.

But is not this she in whom (as it was foretold) there was to be a falling
away, to make way for the revealing of the Man of Sin? And so she is become
Mother indeed, but a bloody Mother, not holy Mother; what if we say, Mother of
Harlots, and abominations of the earth, according as the great Whore is called,
Rev. 17.5.

Whether the present Church of Rome, whereof I speak, be that very great Whore,
spoken of in that Chapter or not, I refer it to further judgment; but this is
plain, that many if not all of those Characters whereby the great Whore is
discovered, do meet together in the Church of Rome: It will not therefore be
amiss, or beside the mark, to view some or most of them a little, as they are
expressed in that 17th. Chapter of the Revelations.

In the first Verse she is called by the Angel, The great Whore that sits
upon many waters. Come hither (says he to John) and I will show thee the
judgment of the great Whore that sits upon many waters: And what these
waters are he expounds to John, Ver. 15. The waters which thou saw where the
Whore sits, are Peoples and Multitudes, and Nations and Tongues, which shows
the large Dominion that the great Whore shall have; which well enough answers
the state and greatness of the Church of Rome, which calls her self Catholic,
for her Dominion has reached far and near. But as for the title of great
Whore, how does that any way answer to Rome's condition? What ground is there
for that title in her? This is worthy of consideration. Therefore consider,
That a Woman that is married to a Husband, and prostitutes her self to another
man, is called a Whore. And so by way of similitude, the Israelites were often
charged with whoredom, because they being a people owned by the Lord, and as it
were married to him, yet went a whoring after their own inventions, Psalm.
106.39. They went after Baalim and Ashteroth, and the Gods of the Heathens, and
did not keep loyal to the Lord and his Commands. This was imputed to them for
whoredom. The like thing being done by a people professing themselves to be
married to Christ, as his Church, is also counted and called whoredom in them,
because they are not faithful and loyal to him, but prostitute themselves to
other Inventions. This is spiritual whoredom. Now where is there a people that
are run out into so many Inventions of their own, as the Romish Church is run
out into? Inventions that have no ground at all either from the Doctrine or
Practice of Christ, or any of his Apostles. Where have they ground for their
daily mumbling over so many Prayers, so many Pater-Nosters, so many Ave-Maries,
etc. that they need Beads to number them by as they say them, and as if God
were delighted with Lip-labor? Where have they ground to forbid Marriages to
their Priests? Where have they ground to forbid Flesh-meat as a case of
Conscience, on such and such days? Where have they ground for their Idol, the
Mass? for Invocation of Saints and Angels? Where have they ground for carrying
about their Host or Sacrifice, and making all do obeisance to it, and worship
it? Where have they ground for their idolizing the Cross, and the Pictures of
the holy Servants of God, falling down and praying before them, if not to them?
Certainly God will avenge his holy Apostles and Prophets upon them, for thus
abusing them, so contrary to that spirit that was in them, who could not endure
that men should fall down to their persons, while they were upon Earth, much
less now to their Images. In these and many such like things the Pope's Church
have run out, after their own Inventions. And this is whoredom against Christ,
who was faithful in all his house, (that is, in his Church) as Moses was in
his, to teach them the whole counsel of God. Besides all this, the Church of
Rome has taken off her love from him, who is the great Friend of Mankind, and
would have us so as he is, and she has placed it upon him, who is the great
Enemy of Mankind, and follows his steps. For they have shut out that Spirit in
which Christ comes, and makes his abode with his people, and whereby he forms
his own Nature in them, and makes them innocent, humble, lowly, meek, merciful,
etc. and instead of that, they have let into their bosom the Spirit of the
wicked one, whose works Christ came to destroy, and so by that Spirit they have
the nature of him that was a murderer and liar from the beginning, formed in
them, and so uphold the works of the Devil, which Christ came to destroy in
man. What greater whoredom from Christ than this?

Now she that outstrips all others in such like whoredoms, she is the greatest
Whore against Christ, if she profess his Name. And how sully the Church of Rome
falls under these things, I let others judge, and pass on to further
Discoveries.

Verse 2. It Is said, With whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication: And the Inhabiters of the earth have been made drunk with the wine
of her fornication. This great Whore has had power over the Kings of the
earth, to bring them into the same state of fornication or whoredom with her
self, even to fall down and prostitute themselves to her Inventions, and
Traditions, and Idolatries, and so to partake of her Spirit. Let the Reader
apply it; as also what follows, And the Inhabiters of the earth have been made
drunk with the wine of her fornication. She has mingled a cup of her own
Inventions and superstitious Idolatries, and so sweetened it to the palate of
earthly-spirited people, that they have drunk it down with delight like wine;
but it has intoxicated them, and made them drunken, so that like drunken men,
without any rule over themselves, they are for killing and slaying, and like
savage beasts, for pushing down, and trampling upon all that shall withstand
their drunken humors, and senseless imaginations and superstitions, and they
need but a watchword from the Pope to set them on.

Verse 3. Another mark of the great Whore is opened: And he carried me away
into the wilderness in the spirit, and I saw the woman sitting upon a scarlet
colored beast, sull of names of blasphemy, having seven heads, and ten horns.
This Verse, with the Angel's interpretation of it, will give us much light in
the matter in hand: Therefore mind the Angel's interpretation, Ver. 18. He
tells John what that woman is, The woman which thou saw is that great City,
which rules (or has a kingdom) over the Kings of the earth: So that you see
this woman which is the great Whore, is a great ruling City, reigning over
Kings. Then add to this the Angel's interpretation of the seven heads, Ver. 9.
The seven heads are seven mountains upon which the woman sits. So then thus
far is plain, That the great Whore is a great ruling City, that reigns over the
Kings of the earth, and is situated upon seven mountains. This so fully points
out Rome, that their own Writers cannot deny it; for it is famous in all
Nations for its situation upon seven mountains or hills, which are these, viz.
Mons Palatinus, Quirinalis, Aventinus, Caelius, Viminalis, Aesquilinus,
Capitolinus. Hence this City is called Septiceps, and Septicollis. that is, it
has seven heads, or seven hills Therefore Ovid speaks thus of it,

Sed quae de septem totum circumspicit Orbem Montibus, imperii Roma Deumque
locus. Rome, which from her seven mountains views round the World, is the place
of the Empire, etc.

That Is one opening of the seven heads, they are seven hills. The Angel gives
it also another opening, ver. 10. And there are seven Kings, five are fallen,
and one is, and the other is not yet come, which also still further points out
Rome. These seven Kings are seven Governments; as some observe, Brightman; Rev.
17.10.
and five of these were fallen when John wrote the Revelations, and one then
was, and another was not yet come at that time, which they thus interpret; Rome
from its rise or first original had these Heads: 1. Kings. 2. Consuls. 3.
Dictators. 4. Decemviri. 5. Tribunes; and these five were then fallen when John
writ the Revelations. 6. Emperors, and that was the then present Government.
And the 7th. was not yet come, which was by Popes. Thus both these opinions of
the seven heads, meeting together so patly upon Rome, do still confirm that to
be the place of the chief residence of the great Whore, where she sits or is
seated. Some indeed take these seven Kings to be seven particular Emperors, and
in that they vary, yet they meet in this, that they belonged to Rome; but in my
understanding the first is most apt, and so Learned Brightman takes it,
quoting, The History of Cornelius Tacitus, for those several Governments of
Rome, until the Emperors, for he lived and writ in the first Century after
Christ. But I place not much weight upon this, which may admit of dubious
disputation, but pass on to other things.

Again, It Is said in this same Verse, that this Woman or great Whore sits
upon a scarlet colored Beast. Beast is used in Scripture for Dominion and
Power, as Dan. 7.3, 17. These great beasts which thou saw are four Kings, or
four Governments, etc. Now this beast which the Woman sits upon, is said to be
scarlet colored, the color of blood; so the Church of Rome is born up upon a
bloody power, being upheld by bloody Cruelties, Inquisitions, Murders,
Massacres; so that her sins are as scarlet, wherewith she is clothed: This is
true enough of Rome. Or if we take this scarlet color to set forth the
splendour, magnificence, and greatness of the beast, or power that upholds the
great Whore, this also is answered by Rome's Equipage and Pomp.

So put these together now: Scarlet colored beast relates to that potent and
bloody power that upholds the Whore: And great Whore relates to Religion or
Worship, and the temper of her Spirit, which is degenerated and adulterated
with traditions and superstitions, and inventions of men: And the seven heads
or mountains relate to her outward situation, or chief place of her residence,
which the seven Kings or seven sorts of Government also confirms, the Angel
thereby pointing as with a finger, where to find her chief seat outwardly in
the World.

This beast in whom the power resides, is also further described hereby, that
it is full of Names of blasphemy. To bring this home to Rome, this I say, That
the Names of Holy Father, his Holiness, God's Vicegerent, Christ's Vicar upon
Earth, Universal Bishop, Peter 's Successor, Holy Church, Holy Mother, Mother
Church, Abbots, (which signifies Fathers) Jesuits, (which signifies Disciples
of Jesus) and many other such like Names and Titles, whereby men would show
themselves eminent Servants of God and of Christ, nearly related to him. I say,
these and such like Names and Titles, being put upon most unholy and ungodly
men, upon superstitious and idolatrous Worshippers, upon bloody and inhumane
Butchers, and slaughterers of men, upon such as are teachers and animaters of
lying and dissembling, and speaking lies in hypocrisy, upon truce breakers,
false accusers, encouragers of men to forswear or perjure themselves, under a
cloak of Equivocation, instigaters of acters of Massacres, of Plots and
Conspiracies against Rulers and Nations, upon such persons as know these
abominations aforehand to be sins, and yet (having their Consciences seared as
with a hot Iron) will presumptuously encourage men thereunto, or in defiance of
Conscience will rush into such sins, and depend upon the Pope's Pardon. I say,
such Names and Titles upon such persons, or such a people, is high blasphemy
against God, against Christ, and against his holy Servants, to whom they
challenge Succession; because such Titles of so near relation, render the God
of Christians as a Patron to all ungodliness; they render Christ as a generater
and nourisher of a brood of wicked people; they render Christianity as a
Nursery of more than heathenish absurdities, and inhumane abominations; they
render Christ Jesus, and Peter, as Teachers of wicked Plots and Conspiracies.
What can tend more to blaspheme, that is, to defame that holy Name of God and
of Christ, whereby we are called? What can more blast the Fame (as the word
Blasphemy imports) of that innocent Lamb of God, and of his holy Apostles, by
whom the profession of Christianity was planted in the Earth? Well may the
Jews, Turks, Infidels, abhor the Name of Christianity, looking upon it through
the corrupt lives, and deceitful and savage actions of those, that by such
Names and Titles profess themselves, to be so great Masters of that profession,
and the chief upholders of it. Thus the Name of God and of Christ is greatly
blasphemed, by the ruling Party of the Romish Church, who dignifie themselves
with such Names and Titles, so nearly relating to Christ, and yet live in such
abominations, as are so abhorring to his Nature.

Again, This scarlet colored beast on which the Whore sits, is said to have
ten horns, that is expounded by the Angel to be ten Kings, ver. 12. And these
must agree to give their kingdom unto the beast, until (an appointed time, that
is, until) the words of God shall be fulfilled, ver. 17. And then they shall
hate the Whore, and make her desolate and naked. She has reigned over the
Kings of the Earth, and they have committed fornication with her; but God will
put it into their hearts at last to hate the Whore, and make her desolate; and
good cause, when there is no fidelity to be found in her, except they be
absolute slaves to her, to do what she will have them to do.

Object. Thus this 3d. Verse, together with the Angel's interpretation of it,
does so fully point at Rome, that seven-headed, or seven-hilled City, that the
Popish Writers have confessed it to be Rome; only they frame this evasion,
(which stands need to be answered, before I pass from it) viz. That this great
Whore is not Rome present, but Heathen Rome, that is, Rome under the Government
of the persecuting Emperors, (who were before Constantine the Great) who in
their time persecuted the Christians, and shed much blood: Which thing, say
they, put John to great admiration, as is expressed ver. 6. And I saw the woman
drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and
when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. This, they say, was to see so
much Christian blood shed by the persecuting Emperors.

Answ. But, I pray you, what great admiration, or new admiration, could that
put John to, to see open Enemies of Christians drunk with their blood? Or what
new thing was this to John, who was a companion in tribulation, with those that
suffered persecution in those times, which he had seen before he writ this Book
of the Revelations? This could not procure such new admiration, to make him
wonder so much; but the ground of so great admiration lay here, To see a people
(in vision) to rise up under that Name, that was then persecuted, and under a
great profession of Christianity, to have them represented to him to be drunk
with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, while
they so highly professed Jesus; here was ground indeed of astonishment to John.
But it is a weak and silly thing to turn this off from Rome present, to Rome
heathen, under the persecuting Emperors, as some of no small Note do, whom at
present I forbear to name. Suppose any of us had lived in the days of John, and
had seen such persecutions as he had seen, and had been a companion in the same
tribulation, under open professed Enemies, would this be such a matter of
wonder to us, to have it represented to us over again in vision? No, the
frequency of a thing takes away the wondering at it, especially with so great
admiration. But to see a new thing, so strange a thing, so contrary to the
nature of the thing: In plainer words, to see Christians drunk with the blood
of Christians, to see so high professing Christians, who would honor almost
every thing that appertained to Christ; honor his Mother, honor his Apostles,
honor his very Sepulcher, and the very Cross upon which he was crucified, yea,
the very images of a Cross for his sake, if I may not say adore them: A people
that should keep days in memorial of the Birth, of the Suffering, of the
Resurrection and Ascension of Christ; keep days in memorial of his holy
Apostles, and sing forth their praises in their solemn Assemblies and public
Worships, and magnify themselves as the only Church of Christ, and count all
others who join not with them in these things to be Heretics: To have such a
people represented as drunk with the blood of Christians, drunken with the
blood of Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus, (a thing so contrary to what they
bear a profession of) here was matter of wonder indeed, to cause John to wonder
with great admiration, as is expressed, ver. 6. And this now aptly agrees with
the title of the great Whore, which title the persecuting Emperors did not so
fitly bear, seeing they never owned Christ as their Head and Husband, nor
themselves to be his Spouse. But Rome that now is, does challenge this near
relation to him, and yet does these things against those that profess him, as
well as her self.

Thus you see how fully the Spirit of the Lord does discover the state of
degenerate Rome, by what has already been signified to us: And I might here
pass on to other Principles; but because they are so highly exalted in this
conceit, and it is so rooted a Principle among them, that they are the only
true Church of Christ, I shall desire the Reader's patience, to view also what
further discovery is left us upon record, in the two next following Verses of
this 17th. Chap. viz. in ver 4. and 5.

Ver. 4. And the woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet color, and decked with
gold, and precious stones and pearls, that is, with all the glory of this
World, with which bait the Devil would have catched Christ himself, but could
not. But the Church of Rome has swallowed down the bait, and for the glory of
this World has stooped to his terms, to bow down to him, and let in his
Spirit, who was a liar and murderer from the beginning, and so she has her
reward, the pomp and glory of this World. And she holds forth also a golden cup
to the Nations, to make them drink of the same cup of fornication with her, as
it follows in this Verse; Having a golden cup in her hand, full of
abominations, and filthiness of her fornication. This aptly sets forth the
Worship of the great Whore, and the wine wherewith she makes the Nations drunk.
This wine is the wine of her fornication, and it is in her Cup, which Cup is in
her hand, and beautiful to look at, being golden, or gilded with gold. She
carries the Cup of her worship in her hand; it is external or outward for a
show, not internal and in the spirit; it lies in that which her own hand has
formed, and carved out to her self, according to her own devices. And it is
always ready, being composed and bundled up for any one in Orders, even the
vilest and wickedest person among them to carry in his hand, and offer up. And
it has a fine golden outside to look upon, to please the eye; her worship is
sumptuous and glorious enough outwardly to the eye; and she has also gilded
it with all the daintiest expressions that she could pick out of the Scriptures
to please the ear; and composed Songs, and Anthems, and Hymns, and prepared
Organs and musical Instruments, and Quires of Singers to accompany them, to
elevate the minds of people, as if they were wrapped up in a heavenly melody for
a while. But look within the Cup, and what is there? There Is Fornication,
Superstition, Will Worship, Idolatry, falling down before Images, and Pictures,
and Crucifixes, worshipping of Saints and Angels, which God never commanded,
nor they ever suffered men to do to them, but forbad them. They come not behind
Nebuchadnezzar in their worship, when he caused all to fall down and worship
the Image which he had set up, when they heard the sound of the Cornet, Flute,
Harp, Sackbut, Psaltery, Dulcimer, and all kinds of Music; nor much behind him
for Fire and Faggor, to devour those that will not worship with them. We read
but of one Furnace that he caused to be heated, to burn dissenters in; but they
have burnt multitudes of dissenters, who would not consent to their worship,
witness Smithfield, and other places in Queen Mary's days. Add hereunto the
many Murders done otherways, by Inquisitions, and bloody Massacres, her
unsatiable bloodthirstiness, and blood-guiltiness. So that you see, although
the Cup of Rome's worship be a golden Cup to look at, yet within it is full of
filthiness of her fornication, it is full of dead men's bones, and all
uncleanness, like the painted Sepulchers of the Pharisees. Israel's worship,
which was of God's own appointment, became an abomination to him, (so that his
soul hated it) for these two things, (which Rome is eminently guilty of) one
was, Because their hands were full of blood, Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. The other was,
Because they had chosen their own ways, and their soul delighted in their
abominations, Isa. 66.3. Now for Rome's worship, it is of her own forming, not
of God's institution; and for blood, her hands are fuller of that than ever
Israel's was; and for superstitious inventions, Israel cannot compare with her.
Therefore her worship must needs be more detestable and abominable in the sight
of the Lord, than Israel's was; being also aggravated hereby, that whereas
Israel was but under types and shadows, as under a Schoolmaster; but she lives
in the days of greater light, under the ministration of the second Covenant, or
new Covenant, which far excels the first Covenant in the glory of its light, 2
Cor. 3.10. So that for her now with bloody hands, and with deceitful
dissembling hearts, to approach to worship the Lord, this must needs be an
abomination. Judge in your selves, I desire you, ye of the Romish Church, what
acceptance this can have with the Lord; for a people that plots and contrives
the subversion of Kingdoms and sticks not to poison, or stab, or murder those,
that they fear may hinder their wicked designs, who barbarously massacre people
more merciful than themselves, who are manifested thereby to partake more of
the heavenly nature than they: For a people that sets up to themselves Stocks
and Stones, Images and Pictures in abundance, and falls down before them, and
bows themselves to the work of their own hands, and prays to them that are no
Gods, nor present in all places with them to hear their prayers; a people that
turn away in their hearts from the living God, and think to make Men and Angels
their Intercessors; for such a people to approach before the Lord, and sing
forth their Anthems and Allelujahs unto God. Judge ye if this worship be not
abominable, and like the painted Sepulchers, which appear beautiful outward,
but within are full of dead men's bones and filthiness, yea, and full of dead
men's blood too, which cries to the Lord under the Altar, How long Lord, holy
and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth?

And yet Rome would paint over all these abominations, to blind the eyes of
men, that she may seem holy in the practice of all these things. She will tell
you, that all these that she kills, are Heretics, and it is no sin to kill
them. She will tell you, that she does not worship Pictures and Images, (though
she bow down to them) but she does it in honor to God; and such like shifts
and mists she casts over her actions, to blind the carnal eye, and leave it in
a mist. And therefore how fitly does the Spirit of God meet with her juggling
evasions, and fixes this as one of the marks of the great Whore upon her
forehead, as a Name written, viz. Mystery, as it follows in the next Verse,
which comes now to be considered.

Ver. 5. And upon her forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon the great,
the Mothes of harlots, and abominations of the earth.

This is the Name that the Spirit of God fixes upon the forehead of the great
Whore, Mystery. She commits Whoredom and Idolatry in a mystery; she sheds
innocent blood in abundance, and yet in a mystery. She would not be thought to
be an Idolatress, nor to commit Whoredom, nor to be a Murderer; she would
juggle you out of a belief of that which your eye sees, and your ears
sufficiently hear of her; here is mystery indeed, but it is the mystery of
iniquity, not the mystery of plain-hearted godliness. And this Name is set in
such a place, that it is easy to read it; it is set where she cannot hide it, if
she do but show her face, it stands upon her forehead. The Front of all her
Zeal carries Blood and Idolatry written in it, but yet veiled, and you must not
believe it to be so. Though you should see her prostrate her self before her
Idols, you must not take her to be an Idolatress; though you should be
attempted to be slain by her hands, and though you should see many massacred
round about you, yet you must not take her to be a Murderer; and though you
should hear her Children lie to your face, and prove themselves liars by their
actions, yet you must not take this to be lying; yea, though they forswear and
perjure themselves, yet you must not take this to be swearing out of truth: But
you must take her to be a holy Mother, and pious worshipper of God, under
Idolatry; and a charitable tenderhearted Mother, in the midst of Massacres;
and a maintainer of truth by lies, and perjury, and equivocations. She is an
exact observer of the footsteps of her grand Champion, to walk thereafter, who
though he be never so wicked, yet you must reverence his Holiness.

Again, Another part of her Name is Babylon the great. Names of many things
under the Old Testament, are applied to like things under the New: As Prayers
and Thanksgivings are sometimes called Sacrifices and Incense; New Covenant is
called Mount Sion, and Jerusalem, etc. So Babylon, and Sodom, and Egypt, are
words sometimes used to express a like people by. There be three or four things
remarkable in Rome, for which the Name Babylon is put upon her: 1. Confusion,
and so the word Babylon and Babel signify; for Rome has confounded all things
under the New Covenant, with her traditions and superstitious inventions. 2. As
Babylon of old was a place of great Idolatry, so also is Rome: Read but the
Epistle of the Prophet Jeremy to them, that were captives to be carried to
Babylon, and you may see how like they are; you may find it in the Apocrypha,
Baruch 6.4, 5. Ye shall see in Babylon, gods of silver and of gold, and of
wood, born upon shoulders, which cause the Nations to fear. Beware therefore
that ye in no wise be like to strangers, neither be ye afraid of them when ye
see the multitude before them and behind them worshipping them. Thus it is also
in the streets of the great City, mystical Babylon, Rome, and among her
Children, when they go about the streets with their Host, besides all the rest
of their Idolatry committed in their places of Worship, and in secret. 3. As
Babylon of old was exalted above all, and called Lady of Kingdoms, Isa. 47.5.
and the glory of Kingdoms, Isa. 13.19. So Rome exalts her self in like manner,
and calls her self Mother Church, and Caput omnium Ecclesiarum, i.e. the Head
of all the Churches, and sits as Queen over all in her own exalted mind. But
then 4 thly and lastly, Rome is most fitly called Babylon, because she holds
the seed of God in bondage and captivity. Whom she leads captive once, she will
hardly let them escape without danger of their lives, or cruel torments in her
Inquisitions; they must become perfect slaves to her Superstitions,
Will-worships and Idolatries. And what bondage is like to this? that people to
whom God has given reason and understanding, shall not make use of it, but lay
it aside, and submit wholly to the understandings or rather wills of others,
though it be against their own, and so be urged to submit to that which is
against the light in their own Consciences: And this is the greatest bondage
and captivity of all; and therefore well may Rome be called Babylon the great.

She is also called Mother of Harlots, and abominations of the earth. She
brings forth Harlots, that is, such Children as go a whoring with her after her
Inventions. Those that in tenderness of Conscience, and in subjection to the
words of Christ, (who said, In vain do you worship me after the traditions of
men) will not join with them in their invented traditions and superstitions,
such she owns not for her Children; she will be no Mother or Nurse to such, but
seeks to murder them in cold blood, as none of hers: she will be only Mother of
Harlots, that can prostitute themselves with her, to her Idolatries and
Inventions; and if they can do that, it shall not break the band between them,
although they be common Harlots in the vulgar sense; but she will remain their
Mother.

She is also Mother of abominations in the earth. Not only Mother of
abominations in Worship, and superstitious Inventions, but also Mother of
abominations in the earth; abominations as to the civil life of men, without
the consideration of worship; abominations to men, as they are men living upon
the earth. To manifest this, I shall quote one Scripture, and then her own
actions will testify the truth of it against her: It is Prove. 6.16, 17, 18,
19. These six things does the Lord hate, yea, seven are abomination to him: A
proud look, a lying tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, an heart that
devises wicked imaginations, feet that be swift in running to mischief, a
false witness that speaks lies, and him that sows discord among brethren.
Now see and judge, if Rome be not Mother of these abominations. Who more lofty
in spirit, than the Pope and his Romanists? Can any compare with him who exalts
himself over all, makes his Cardinals as Princes, his Bishops and whole Clergy
as great men, and makes his whole Train despise others, as Heretics, not
worthy to live in the earth? Here Is a proud look indeed. And for a lying
tongue, Rome's Children are so pregnant with that, that one cannot tell how to
believe either what they say, or what they swear. How miserably were the
Protestants in Ireland cheated by them, by fair promises and deep oaths, that
they would secure their Goods for them, (in the time of that bloody Massacre)
and yet when they had got them into their hands, refused to restore them, yea,
and afterward murdered them? And so 3dly, They have hands that shed innocent
blood, none like them for that. 4thly, An heart that devises wicked
imaginations. Whose hearts are so full of wicked imaginations, Plots,
Conspiracies, and devices of Cruelty, as Rome's Children? 5thly, Whose feet are
swifter in running to mischief than the Papists, who in one brunt can cut off
so many thousands by Massacres, before they make an end? Their feet are speedy
to do mischief, when they get but the opportunity. 6thly, Another abomination
is a false witness that speaks Lies. If we go no further than this year, how
have they endeavored to choke all true reports among us, with their lies and
falsehoods? Witness the false reports and lying stories that they gave forth,
about the death of Worthy Godfrey, till the truth appeared by Evidence, and
could no longer be hid. 7thly and lastly, He that saweth discord among
brethren, is also one of the abominations in the earth. This is one of Rome's
Principles, Divide and impera, Divide and then command: Divide, what is that but
sowing of discord, destroying of concord, setting one against another, that she
may fish in troubled waters? Whether she made the former division and discord
between the late foregoing King, and the People, or no, I will not say; but if
they did, it is but according to their Principle. Thus you see Rome is a
fruitful Mother of abominations of the earth.

And now you may also at leisure view all these things over again, and see how
pertinent all these Characters of the great Whore are to Rome; they fit her as
a garment that sits close and complete upon a man's back. And why then we
should be afraid to look upon her, as that great Whore here described by the
Angel to John, I know no reason; especially if we add that which follows in the
6th. Ver. of this 17th. Chap. viz. And I saw the Woman (that is, the great City
seated on seven Hills) drunken with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus: And when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration. But
having spoken of this before, and showed that it must be Rome professing
Christianity, and not heathen Rome, that caused this great admiration; I
forbear to speak more of it now.

I say, till Rome show the contrary to these Characters, by a better lise and
conversation, they will rest upon her. And it is not by her poisoning and
stabbing, fire and faggot, Inquisitions and Massacres, that she can clear her
self: No, that way confirms and fixes these marks more fully upon her; the more
she seeks to wipe off the stains of blood that are upon her, by such means, the
more and greater they still appear.

And now for the deciding of the Question in hand, which all that I have said
tends to: Let any that have any reason of their own to make use of, and any
honesty and faithfulness in their hearts toward God and Christ Jesus our Lord,
judge and determine the Question; Whether this Church of Rome, so guilty of
these things, be the only true Church of Christ now, and all others that draw
from her be Heretics? I hope whosoever considers these things, will easily be
convinced, that the withdrawing from this Church of Rome, does not make a man a
Heretic. I also further affirm, That he is no Heretic that does justly, loves
mercy, and walks humbly with God, because these are the weighty things which
the Lord requires in man. He is no Heretic that abides in the Doctrine of
Christ, and in the innocent life of Christianity; but he is the Heretic that
strives against these things to overthrow them, to overthrow the Doctrine of
Christ, to overthrow innocence, truth, just and upright walking, and mercy. In
every Nation, he that fears God and works righteousness, is accepted of him,
therefore cannot be a Heretic; but he that casts the fear of God behind his
back, and works the works of him that was a Liar and Murderer from the
beginning he is the Heretic, because he has chosen Inventions and false
Doctrines of his own to follow, contrary to the Lord's requirings. Having done
now with this Principle, wherewith they so magnify themselves, and would
frighten others, I proceed to the next.

5. The 5th. Principle I named is this, That out of the Church is no salvation;
Extra Ecclesiam non est salus, say they.

This is to be understood of their Church: And that being sufficiently laid
open by their own practice, I think it needs no further evidence to disprove
it, unless people will needs believe that there is no salvation but among
blood-thirsty Murderers, and Liars, and false Swearers, and such like.

But observe the craft and cunning of this Principle, which Rome makes use of
to her own advantage. First, It serves as a Decoy to draw in the simple among
them, under hopes that there they may find salvation. Secondly, It serves as a
Jailer to keep them in, when they are in; for thereby they terrify them, as if
it were damnation to depart from their Church, yea, or to entertain thoughts,
that others who are out of their Church can be saved; for out of the Church,
say they, there is no salvation, and they would have you believe that there is
no true Church but theirs, and so out of their Church there is no salvation.
This they would make men believe, although by their fruits the Lord has made
them manifest to be a Nursery of abominations.

But put case that the Church of Rome were the only true visible Church; or
understand any other true visible Church, any people whatsoever, gathered and
constituted into a visible body; yet even in such a case, I do not see how it
can hold true, that out of that Church there is no salvation. Let those that
are otherwise minded prove it; for my part, it is plain to me, according to the
Scripture, That in every Nation he that fears God and works righteousness,
is accepted of him: And that God will render to every man according to his
deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality, (to them he will render) eternal life, Romans 2.6, 7.
And again upon this occasion, when a Centurion (being a stranger as to Israel,
which was then the Church) came to Jesus to have his Servant healed of the
Palsy, and desired him but to speak the word, and his Servant should be
healed; hereupon Christ said, I have not found so great says, no not in
Israel. And then he adds further these words, And I say unto you, that many
shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and from the
South, and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
Heaven; but the Children of the Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness,
Mat. 8.11. Luke 13.29. What signifies this, but that many Children of a visible
Church shall be cast out, when as many others that appear not of it, shall come
from all parts, and sit down in the Kingdom of Heaven with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob?

Sixthly, Another of their Principles is this, Fides non est servanda cum
Haereticis, that is, Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. If Joshua had been
under the Church of Rome's Doctrine, he would not have kept faith with the
Gibeonites, when they obtained a league with Israel by craft: But he had a
better instructor than the Pope, and gave better instruction; and therefore
both he, and the Princes of Israel, would not that the Gibeonites should
perish, because of the league and peace made with them, and because they had
sworn unto them, yea, although these Gibeonites were of the Nations that were
to be rooted out. So great authority had an Oath and Covenant, and did so
greatly oblige at that day, as you may read, Josh. 9. But the Pope, he can
trample upon all Solemn Oaths, Leagues and Covenants whatsoever, and break all
bonds at pleasure, yea, and all bounds of humanity, and solemn Engagements,
when he pleases, if he do but say, They are Heretics with whom the League is
made. What is it that can bind him, or his Disciples? Therefore in the end who
will trust the Papists, to make any league with them, or at leastwise depend
upon that league with security, and not rather secure themselves against them
as well as they can? Time was when an Oath or Covenant gave rest to people; but
now it can give none to people of another profession, that have to deal with
the Papists, because faith is not to be kept with them, as they say: Thus they
are fallen from the fidelity of mankind, to the deceitful tricks of Satan.
Formerly men rested in one another's friendship, and ceased from strife and
controversy, and fear one of another, when they had passed their Oath, because
it was then an immutable thing among men, and so an Oath was the end of all
strife, as you may read it was so between Laban and Jacob, Genesis 31. And the
same immutability and weight that was in an Oath among good men, the same
immutability and stedfastness Christ Jesus did require in words under his
Ministration, Let your yea be yea, and nay be nay: But the Papists hold to
neither of these, neither to truth in Words, nor truth in Oaths. So that you
may plainly see, that herein the Pope and his Children, and Confederates in
Antichristianism, are fallen away, not only from Christ's Doctrine, but also from
the fidelity of that first Ministration, which said, Thou shall not forswear
thy self. We are commanded to put away Lying, Ephesians. 4.25. But false Swearing and
Covenant breaking is the height of Lying: Lie not one to another, seeing that
you have put off the old man with his deeds, says the Apostle, Col. 3.9. But
the Pope teaches his Children to put on the old man and his deeds, and to give
themselves up to Lying, and false Swearing, and Covenant breaking; whereof many
instances might be produced; take these two or three: About the year 1444. (if
Bucholcer compute aright) when the Turk and Christians had confirmed a Truce
between them, by solemn Oaths on both sides, Eugenius the Pope writ to Cardinal
Julian thus, Nullum valere faedus quod se inconsulto cum hostibus Religionis
percussum esset; that is, That no Covenant was of force, which was made with
the enemies of Religion, without his advice. Whereupon the Truce was broken
with the Turks, and they thought perfidiously to have surprised them; but the
vigilant Turk Amurates was too nimble for them, and had prepared a great Army
to meet them, which was done so suddenly, that it was first seen before it was
heard of, which struck great terror into the Pope's Army; and after a great
slaughter on both sides, the Turks went away Conquerors, whereby providence
would have taught them, That faith was to be kept with enemies, though enemies
of Religion. And so Aeneas Sylvius was convinced, before he was made Pope; for,
says he, speaking of this War, Victores evadunt Turcae, qui juramenta non
solum domesticis fidei, sed etiam hostibus servanda demonstrant: The Turks go
a^ Conquerers, who show, that Oaths of fidel^ eye to be kept not only with the
households of faith, but also with enemies. Whether this Aeneas might condemn
the same again afterward or not, I know not; for he writ things before he was
Pope, which he condemned after he was made Pope; whence this scoff was put upon
him, Aeneas probavit, Pius damnavit; Aeneas approved it, but Pius condemned it,
for he was called Pius secundus after he was made Pope: Sure there is a curse
of Error adheres to the Pope's Chair, and not a blessing of Infallibility. But
to keep to the thing in hand: How treacherously was the Noble Admiral Coligni
slain, and thrown out at a Window at Paris, contrary to promise, and Oaths of
security! And at the same time many thousands of Protestants murdered. Parry a
Papist, and Servant to Queen Elizabeth, though he had several times sworn to be
true to her, yet for all that sought to kill her, Because faith is not to be
kept with Heretics. You see how safe it is for Protestants to keep Papists
about them; for such murtherous actions is one of the Papists works of
Supererogation, for which they merit to be canonized for Saints among the
Pope's Catalogue. This Perfidiousness of the Roman Catholics is so notoriously
known among Protestant Nations, and especially of late among our selves, that
there needs no further demonstration thereof, than the treacherous concealed
Murders of several among us very lately, who, it is very probable, have been
trappann'd, under fawning and fair pretenses, into snares, where they have lost
their life, as Worthy Godfrey loft his.

I am now come to the last Principle which I named, which is as the close of
these bloody Principles and Practices of the Papists, viz.

7. That it is no sin to kill a Heretic, or at leastwise it shall not be
imputed to them as a sin; but rather is a meritorious work to destroy
Heretics, whether they be Kings or People, Noble or Ignoble, so that it be for
the advantage of their Church.

This serves as a Spur to prick forward the Pope's Train to such bloody work;
especially when they see such as are most active therein, canonized for Saints,
and so highly magnified.

I question not but many of them may be spurred forward in themselves, with the
desire of gain, to enrich themselves in the ruin of others, and with other the
like sordid and earthly Considerations. But I let that pass, and apply my self
to this Principle of theirs, as a Case of Conscience only.

I suppose they will not deny this Principle to be theirs: If they do, their
practice will make them liars; by their murtherous actions, and wicked Plots
and Designs against the Protestants to destroy them, together with their Honor
that they put upon such wicked practitioners.

To overthrow this Principle of theirs, there is no need of much labor
therein: For it so fully manifests it self to be contrary to the Spirit of
Christ, and end of his Coming, and also opposite to the Doctrine and Command of
Christ, that every Boy that can read the Scriptures may easily perceive it.

First, As to its contrariety to the Spirit of Christ, and end of his Coming,
he himself shows it plainly. When James and John, out of their great respect
and love to him, and zeal they had for him, would have called for fire down
from Heaven, to consume those that did not receive him, He turned and rebuked
them, and said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of: For the Son of man
is not come to destroy men's lives but to save them, Luke 9.54, 55, 56. What can
be more plainly spoken to show, that this way of destroying men's lives, for his
sake, or because they do not receive him, is contrary to the Spirit of Christ,
and end of his Coming. Therefore suppose that the Pope's Church were infallibly
in the truth, (which yet is not granted, but admit so) and that the Protestants
were most certainly in error, yet for them to destroy the Protestants upon that
account, this is far worse than James's and John's action; for they did but
desire, with subjection to Christ, to do what they would have done; but these,
not subjecting themselves to Christ's words, kill and burn the Protestants, and
destroy men's lives, out of a blind, incorrigible, furious zeal, whereby they
greatly aggravate their wickedness.

Secondly, This Principle and Practice of theirs, is directly opposite to the
Doctrine and Command of Christ, which he taught his Disciples, Mat. 13.24, etc.
where he first teaches the People by a Parable, and then gives his Disciples
the Interpretation of it. The Parable is of the Tares of the Field, which
sprang up among the good Seed. And the Servants of the Master of the Field came
to him and said, Sir, did not thou sow good seed in thy field? from whence
then has it tares? He says unto them, An enemy has done this. The servants
said unto him, Will thou then that we go and gather them up? But he said, nay;
lest while ye gather up the tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let
both grow together until the harvest, and in the time of harvest I will say to
the reapers, Gather ye together first the tares, and bind them in bundles to
burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn. This Parable is as a Question
stated on purpose, and determined by Christ himself, to put an end to all such
thoughts or doubts, Whether the Children of the Kingdom, may root out the
Children of the wicked One, out of the World. Mind therefore how Christ
expounds his own Parable; and it is a presumptuous wresting of the truth of it,
to divert it to any other sense; for who knows the meaning of a Parable so well
as he that gives it, especially as the Lord that gave it. At the request of his
Disciples, who said, Declare unto us the Parable of the tares of the field, he
opened it to them, ver. 37. and so forward. He answered and said unto them, He
that sows the good seed is the Son of man; the field is the world, the good
seed ar^ the children of the Kingdom; but the tares are the children of the
wicked one; the enemy that sowed them is the Devil; the harvest is the end of
the world; and the reapers are the Angels. Now read the Parable as Christ has
expounded it: The Servants of Christ the Son of man discover tares, (that is,
Children of the wicked one) sprung up in the field ( the world) where Christ
sowed good seed (that is, Children of the Kingdom.) They state this Question to
Christ, and ask him, Will thou that we go and gather them up (or root them
out?) here is the Question: Now Christ's determining of it follows, But he said,
nay; and withal gives a reason why they should not, lest while ye gather up
the tares, (the children of the wicked one) ye root up also with them the wheat
(the children of the Kingdom.) Then he gives a positive Precept or Command, Let
hoth grow together until the harvest (the end of the world.) And to satisfy
his Servants, and stay their minds from further enquiry, or doubt in this
matter, he tells them upon whom he will put this work: In the time of harvest
(at the end of the world) I will say to the reapers, (the Angels) Gather ye
together first the tares, (the children of the wicked one) and bind them in
bundles to burn them, but gather the wheat, (the children of the Kingdom) into
my barn. What can be more clearly expressed to show, That the Children of the
Kingdom, are not to root up or destroy the Children of the wicked one out of
the World? But they are hereby plainly commanded to let both grow together in
the Field, (that is, in the World) until the end of the World. Now admit,
(which yet is not granted) That the Papists were in very deed the Children of
the Kingdom, and that the Protestants were the Children of the wicked one, and
pestilent Heretics, as they please to term them; yet you see what Rebels these
Papists are against the Doctrine and Command of Christ, in seeking to root them
out; and what incorrigible usurpers and intruders they are, who thrust
themselves upon that work, which Christ has declared shall be the work of the
Angels by his appointment.

So now you may plainly see, that the Papists, as they are fallen from the
Spirit of Christ, so also they are fallen from the Doctrine of Christ, into
plain disobedience, and rebellion against him. And therefore if any of them
shall out of zeal seek to destroy Heretics, you see their zeal is but a blind
zeal without knowledge; they that do so, are ignorant of God, and of Christ,
and his Doctrine; for that is the reason that Christ gives of a bloody zeal;
These things will they do unto you, because they know neither the Father nor
me. It may be they can talk high things of God and of Christ with their
tongues, but I say they know him not; they know not the divine Nature, nor are
partakers of it, and therefore are they of a bloody zeal. Let the Priests,
Jesuits, Monks, Confessors, or Pope himself, scorn it as much as they will,
yet, I say, such know him not; bloody-minded men know not God the Father, nor
Christ Jesus; they have no fellowship with his Spirit, being acted by him that
was a Murderer from the beginning.

I have now done with these their unsound and erroneous Principles, whereby
they animate their people, and harden their Consciences to run on into
mischief: And I hope the error and wickedness of these Principles will be plain
to the meanest capacities, by the Scriptures of truth produced to disprove them.

I shall now set before you a few better Principles, for them to meditate on,
which will better abide the trial, being according to plain Scripture, and
which will bring more peace at the last, to those that are found walking
according to them; whereby also you may take some Prospect of the dangerous
Paths of the Leaders of the Papists.

1. That Jesus Christ came into the world to save men's lives; not to destroy
them, and therefore would not suffer his Disciples to be destroyers, Luke 9.56.
From this Principle it is easy for any to draw this Inference, That therefore
destroyers and murderers are not of him, but of their Father, that was a
murderer from the beginning.

2. That Jesus Christ came a light into the world, that whosoever believes in
him, and follows him, should not abide in darkness, Joh. 12.46. But should
have the light of life, Joh. 8.12. Hence you may safely infer, That he that
keeps people in darkness, and makes them believe that Ignorance is the Mother
of Devotion, does not walk in the steps of Christ, but opposes this end of his
Coming, to enlighten the World.

3. That the not knowing the Scripture, and power of God, is a cause of error,
for so Christ taught, Mat. 22.29. Hence it is plain, That depriving people of
the use of the Scriptures, which testify of Christ, (the power of God) is not
the way to keep them out of error, but to keep them in it.

4. That Christ Jesus our Lord came to establish truth in the Earth, and to
extirpate falsehood not only in Oaths and Covenants, according to the first
ministration, but even in every little word, without swearing; therefore he
teaches, Let your yea be yea, and your nay be nay, Mat. 5.37 This Inference
easily follows hereupon, That they that speak lies in hypocrifie, do not give
heed to him, and his Spirit, but to seducing Spirits and Doctrines of Devils,
as the Apostle witnesses, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2. And therefore Liars are excluded the
Kingdom, Rev. 21.27. and Gh. 22.15.

5. That our Lord and Master Christ Jesus humbled himself, and became of no
reputation, and we are bid to be like minded, Phil. 2.5, 6, 7. He was meek and
lowly in heart, and bids us learn of him, Mat. 11.29. Hence we may take notice,
That exalted Spirits, fierce and high-minded Spirits, who seek the greatness
and glory of this World, are no good examples to follow, because they have not
learned that of Christ.

6. That he that humbles himself as a little Child, the same is greatest in the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18.4. Then he is not the greatest, that exalts himself
above all, as the Pope does. God beholds the proud afar off, Psalm. 138.6.
Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased, Mat. 23.12.

7. That Christ Jesus our Captain and Lord, came to set up a peaceable Kingdom,
consisting of a people, peaceable, harmless and innocent in the World. They
shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, says he, Isa. 11.9. Then
he came not to beget or bring forth a turbulent fort of Plotters, Contrivers,
and Actors of mischief and violence, so contrary to his own nature. Where will
such hurters and destroyers find place in all God's holy Mountain?

8. As ye would that men should do unto you, so do ye unto them; this is
Christ's Doctrine, and the sum of the Law and the Prophets, Mat. 7.12. Ponder
this you destructive Plotters, Jesuits, Priests, Confessors, etc. Would you
have others seek your ruin? Would you have others to lie to you, to deceive
you, till they could destroy you? Are your Consciences so far seared, or your
Understandings blinded, that you are not able to judge aright in this case
concerning your selves, and then concerning others? Or do you see these things,
viz. that you do those things, which you would not have done to you, and yet in
defiance of Christ's Doctrine, will continue to go on in doing so? Consider
your ways, and take warning; you will find it hard kicking against the pricks.
How far are you from doing as you would be done by, when as you use them
despitefully that harm you not!

9. The Ministers of Christ, they used only spiritual weapons, for the
propagating of the Church of Christ: The weapons of our warfare are not carnal
but yet mighty, (being spiritual) says the Apostle; and so they were such as
reached the Understanding and Conscience, to bring down high imaginations, and
every thought, into obedience to Christ, 2 Cor. 10.4. The Pope's Ministers seek
to propagate their Church with carnal weapons, such as cannot inform the
Understanding and Conscience; therefore they are altogether unlike the true
Ministers of the Gospel in their way. In what rank of the Ministers of Christ
then will you appear, that use such weapons for your work, when every man's
work shall come to trial?

10. Christ Jesus sets before us the example of our heavenly Father to follow,
in doing good against evil, that we may be worthy to be accounted his Children,
Mat. 5.44, 45. How far then are they from doing good against evil, that do evil
to them that seek not their hurt! How shall we account them Children of our
heavenly Father?

11. We are to follow men as they follow Christ, 1 Cor. 11.1. Because he left
us an example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. Hence we may infer,
That it is needful that men know the Scriptures, that they may be acquainted
with the life and conversation of Christ, and so knowing his spirit and life,
they may be able thereby to judge of the steps of those they follow; for
otherwise how shall they judge of mers steps by his? Is not this the reason
then, why you leaders of the Papists, keep your people from the free use of the
sincere Scriptures of truth, that they being ignorant thereof, you may lead
them as you please?

12. Christ Jesus is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; the faithful and true
Witness, whose words were so established in truth, that though Heaven and Earth
pass away, yet his words shall not pass away, Mat. 24.35. Solomon also
witnesses, that the lip of truth shall be established for ever, but a lying
tongue is but for a moment. How long then will your deceitful tongue bear you
out, whose words are full of lying and slandering reports, and whose oaths are
full of equivocation and mental reserves; to make your tongue utter to the
Understandings of men a false thing? Is this the lip of truth, that belyes the
Mind? Is not speech given for this end, to utter the Mind? Where have you any
example, or precept, or consent for this deceit, either from Christ, or any of
his followers? Who then that would follow Christ, can follow you? Are not you
to be turned away from, as persons leading out of the footsteps of him, that
was and is the faithful and true Witness?

I shall not multiply more: These few Principles, if men did live in them, (as
they ought to do if they be Christians) how peaceably, how securely, how
comfortably might they live together in the World, though of several
persuasions in many points of outward observations about Worship. But what
peace, what security, what rest can men have among those who are bloody-minded,
and deceitful, and treacherous, giving themselves up to speak lies in
hypocrisy? who are among men, as Beasts of prey among the Flocks? as Lions
lurking in their dens, watching for the prey? If there be any room left in your
hearts, ye Romanists, for consideration of your ways, I entreat you, for your
own good, ponder with your selves a little, and consider your latter end, and
the Judgment that will follow, when the impartial Judge will bring every thing
to light, and render to every man according to his deeds done in the body. What
plea will you then have, when he shall say to evil doers, Depart from me, I
know you not, ye workers of iniquity?

The wickedness now of the foregoing Principles of the Papists being laid open,
and upon good grounds rejected, and some better Principles, according to
Scripture, set before them, yielding more peace among men, and in a man's own
Conscience also, and better hopes of future happiness; I shall now touch a
little their great Bulwarks or Props, whereby they uphold this their Kingdom of
darkness, upon these rotten Principles: And they are these two principally,
namely, Cruelty and Ignorance; and these are like two Arms, wherewith they hold
fast their Subjects.

There be many other things accompanying these, as Lies, Slanders, Defamations,
scornings of others, proud boasting of their Antiquity, and of their
Succession, to those whose lives and spirits they have quite deserted,
wrestings of truth and true reports, making people believe falsehoods, false
glosses put upon their own wicked actions and designs to do mischief, and a
great deal of such like stuff they raise a mist with, to blind peoples eyes.
What a pudder did they lately make about the Death of that Worthy Godfrey, whom
they most barbarously murdered in Somerset House? covering their Cruelty every
way, by turning it upon his own head, as if he killed himself, or as if he were
killed by Robbers, etc. But God infatuated them in the action, and made it
manifest, that neither he himself had done it, nor was he killed by Robbers;
for they that rob by the Highways, take away Money, not only Writings: And for
killing himself, they could not make that hang together neither; for he could
not fall upon his own Sword after he had broke his own Neck, and how could he
break his own Neck after he had fallen upon his Sword? or how could he do both at
once, as some would have excused it? Yet these and such like Forgeries, how did
they fly about, and were backed with that confidence, that they dazzled the
minds of many, especially of great persons, among whom the Papists most
conversed? Thus they manifest their Kingdom to be a Kingdom of Crnelty, backed
with lies and falsehoods, and other works of darkness. But Godd has been
pleased to force out the truth, of this bloody action, from some that were
privy to it, and could relate the circumstances of it, so that it is blazed upon
the housetops, in spite of all their windings and turnnigs to hide it.

Their Cruelty, I say, accompanied with such things as I have named, is one of
their main guards or supports of their Religion. It is like a wall of fire
round about them; so that if any among them shall but attempt to get out from
them, what can they look for but Fire and Faggot, or a most hellish
Inquisition, if they catch them? And what tortures and torments are acted
there, may sufficiently affright and terrify such as think of deserting them.
This Cruelty is innate to their Religion; for finding themselves defective of
truth to uphold it, they make it up with cruelty, and with lies, when they have
done, to hide it. That horrid piece of Cruelty intended by the Gunpowder-Plot,
and carried on so far as it went, by their Creatures; though those Actors in
that work of darkness be honored by them at Rome, yet they would have you
believe, that it was only a trick of State, so impudently shameless are they in
forging lies. They would also make you believe, that the Book of Martyrs is
full of lies, and no better than a Fable, because it records the abominable
Butcheries and Cruelties, which by them were acted upon conscientious people:
And all the ground they have to belie it is from hence, that there was a
mistake or two in it, which Fox himself, who was the Composer of that Book,
first discovered, having had some wrong information given him in those
particulars. Thus they are not ashamed to act Cruclties, but are ashamed to be
apprehended therein; for indeed their actions are so barbarous, that even
humane nature may blush to be found guilty thereof. And yet they are fain to
fly to this refuge of defense to uphold their Religion, and also for the
propagating of it: For indeed to speak properly, it is not the Kingdom of God
and of Christ, (having truth for its foundation) which they uphold; but it is a
Kingdom of pride, luxury, and wantonness, and debauchery, which wants a
foundation in truth; therefore fly they to Cruelty for their support. And their
Cruelty so rings over the World, that all but themselves and their slaves,
dread to come under their power: For there is no mercy in them to old or young,
male or female, to innocent Babes, or Women with Child. Oh the tortures, and
the invented devices of Cruelty, that they put people to in Ireland, since our
memory, in the year 1642. driving them into Rivers by droves, and keeping them
therein from getting-forth till they were drowned! This was the easiest death
they put them to. Some they hanged, some they ripped open, and let out their
bowels, some they starved to death, some they buried alive, ripped up Women with
Child, dashed the heads of Infants against the stones, commonly stripped Men and
Women naked, and caused them to perish with cold and hunger; many most beastly
and barbarous tortures they put both Men and Women to. And this now is their
way of defending and propagating their Religion, which their God, who was a
Murderer from the beginning, acts them violently forward in.

Time was when they were something more moderate in their bloody ways, when
they cited people into their Courts, and gave them a Trial at their Laws, and
suffered them to argue for their Religion: But now they are become violently
savage, and brutish beyond all humane modesty; whereby we may take notice of
two things: 1. That they are Seducers; and that we need not doubt of, because
they wax worse and worse, according to the Character which the Apostle gives of
Seducers, 2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse,
deceiving and being deceived. 2. We may hence also have strong hopes, that they
have but a short time to reign and rage in the World; for therefore Satan is
come down among them with great rage, knowing that he has but a short time.
This their Cruelty now (and not Truth) is one of the grand pillars, by which
their Kingdom is upheld.

Secondly, Another pillar upon which their Irreligion (as I may call it) or
Kingdom of Darkness stands, is Ignorance. They take away the Key of Knowledge
from men, and keep them in blindness, that so they may be led by them as they
please. And to color this piece of policy, they would persuade their people,
that Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion, and that the Scriptures make men
Heretics; as some of them in the Massacre in Ireland got an English Bible, and
trampling upon it in the dirt, (as is informed) cursed it, saying, that that
was the cause or ground of all the Difference; and therefore it is a thing not
to be born with, (by them) that any of their Laypeople (as they term them)
should have the Bible or Testament, except it be as they have corrupted it. So
they keep them from that, that they may keep them in ignorance, and they keep
them in ignorance, that they may rule them as they please, and the people being
deluded by them, are willing to have it so; for they see not the Serpent's
subtilty, that lies hidden under that Maxim, That Ignorance is the Mother of
Devotion: It is indeed the Mother of Devotion, but to whom? Not to God, I
testify, but to the Pope, and his superstitious and idolatrous Worship:
Ignorance keeps men devout to him, and his Will Worship; but Christ Jesus came
to raise up a people, that should worship God in spirit and in truth; and his
Spirit is the Spirit of a sound mind, not a Spirit of blindness and ignorance.
The devoutest men upon Earth have always been a knowing understanding people,
witness Noah, Daniel and Job, Samuel, David, and the rest of the Worthies
renowned in Scripture, yea, and the Son of God himself, who was filled with
wisdom and truth, who sometime spent the night in prayer to God; and he that is
born again, is in his measure renewed in knowledge after his image. Col. 3.9,
10. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have put off the old man with his
deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the
image of him that created him. Mind this, that the new man is renewed in
knowledge; he is not kept in darkness and ignorance, to make him devout to God.
When Paul came to Athens, and beheld their blind devotion in their ignorance;
to rectify this their devotion, he endeavors to bring them to true knowledge,
not to keep them still in ignorance; for that was his work, (as also the work
of the rest of the Apostles and Ministers of Christ) to turn men from darkness
to the light, and so from the power of Satan (whose Kingdom is in darkness)
unto God, (who is light) that so they might receive forgiveness of sins, and an
inheritance among them which are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus, Act.
26.18 Now he that stops up the light from men, must needs be a Thief and a
Robber, which comes to steal: 1. To steal away the hearts of men from Christ to
himself, and from devotion to God to devotion to himself, to serve his own
turn. And 2. he thereby robs people of their deliverance from the power of
Satan, who rules in darkness, as God rules in light. And so 3. and
consequently, he robs people of receiving forgiveness of sins, and inheritance
among them that are sanctified by faith in Christ Jesus; for that is the end of
turning men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, namely,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among God's
sanctified ones. But this will not stand with the Interest of him, who seeks
the glory and greatness of this World, and an uncontrollable Kingdom over all,
without questioning what he does; and therefore Ignorance must be the nourisher
of blind obedience to him, which he blasphemously calls devotion to God. And in
this work now, though he seek to be as high as Lucifer, yet has he made
himself a slave to the Rulers of the darkness of this World, whose principal
drudge he is, in laboring to keep men in darkness, where Satan's power is. We
find in Scripture, that darkness is the perishing state, out of which God calls
his people: Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometime darkness, but now are ye light in the
Lord, walk as children of the light. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ye are a chosen generation --
that ye should show forth the praises of him, who has called you out of
darkness into his mavelous light. Col. 1.12, 13. Giving thanks unto the
Father, which has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the
Saints in light, who has delivered us from the power of darkness -- And
therefore to abide in darkness, and to abide in a perishing state, is all one
in Scripture Language; as also to be rejected of the Lord, is expressed by
being cast out into outer darkness. 1 John 2.9, 10, 11. He that hates his
brother is in darkness, and walks in darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes: And Darkness is the place
where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12. and 22.13. Now
then it is easy for any to judge, whose Minister he is that hides light from
men, to keep them in the darkness, and whose work he does: He is none of
Christ's Minister, nor does his work to promote his Kingdom, which is a Kingdom
of light; but he does the work of the Rulers of the darkness of this World, and
his own work, to keep men in slavery to him, who seeks the glory of this World.
And this now is one of the stratagems of the mystery of iniquity, and one
principal prop of Antichrist's Kingdom, and a chief guard about the Pope, to
let him sleep at quiet.

Thus the Sword or carnal Weapons of Cruelty and Ignorance, and such like
means, are the props and guards of this Kingdom, which the Papists are Subjects
to, and not the pure and uncorrupted Truth recorded in Scripture. And therefore
that some of them may deliver themselves from that mystery of iniquity, (if the
Lord please to open their eyes) is the end of my writing these things. And
though some expressions in this Treatise may perhaps seem too harsh to some of
them, yet having to deal with such bad Principles, in persons who pretend to be
invested with authority and power derived from Christ, in the work of his
Ministry, and in his service, I could not use easier language than I have done.

And as I have here manifested the destructive Principles of the Papists to be
most erroneous and wicked, I say the same against the destructive zeal of any
professors of Christianity, upon what Principles soever they go, and under what
Name soever they stand; and likewise affirm, That no destructive zeal is
renewed after the image of him that has created us, and made us new creatures;
for as God sent not his Son into the world to destroy, so he came not a
destroyer, but a Savior, to save men's lives. Therefore would he not suffer
James and John to destroy, nor Peter, when he drew his Sword, and cut off
Malchus his Ear, but bid him put it up, and then healed the Ear again which he
had cut off; and has left it upon record, that his Servants shall not go about
that Work, to root out the tares out of the field, (that is, the World) that is
a Work reserved for the Angels at the end of the World.

I shall now, for conclusion, leave a few Queries, for the Papists to satisfy
their own Consciences in, rather than to expect an Answer to them; and I desire
them to be impartial while they consider them.

1. Whether the Lord has taken up an outward Succession again, since he laid
aside Abraham's natural Succession?

2. Whether any be a true Successor of Peter, or of the rest of the Apostles,
who does not walk in the same Spirit and Doctrine?

3. Whether Christ has substituted a Patron of Lying Perjury, Plots,
Conspiracies, Cruelty and Murders, to be his Vicar, to represent him upon
Earth, and to be the Head of his Church, and an example to the Flock? And
whether it be not great blasphemy to affirm it?

4. Whether he be a friend or an enemy to Christ, who opposes the main ends of
his Coming? As namely in these particulars: 1. In point of Enlightening. 2. In
point of Innocence. 3. In point of Worship. First, Because Christ came to
enlighten the World, and to bring them out of darkness; but the Popes stop the
light, and keep men in darkness. Secondly, Christ came to raise up a harmless,
inoffensive, quiet, innocent people, and of them a Kingdom of Peace, where
nothing should hurt nor destroy; but the Popes bring forth a people quite
contrary, harmful, offensive, unquiet, disturbers of the Civil Peace, by Plots,
Conspiracies, Murders, etc. Thirdly, Christ came to bring forth a people that
should worship God in spirit and in truth, such as the Father seeks to worship
him; but the Pope requires such Worshippers, as will stoop to his Superstitions
and idolatrous Worships, after the Formality that he prescribes, or else they
must expect an Inquisition, or some other usage as bad. Now consider, whether
he that thus opposes the Ends of Christ's Coming be not an Enemy?

5. Whether he that knows sin aforehand, and yet entices or encourages his
Children into it, by promising them pardon and indemnity if they do it, does
not very aptly follow the steps of that old Serpent that deceived Eve, who told
her, Ye shall not die though ye eat?

6. Whether those Roman Casuists do err, that say, It Is no sin to swear a
falsehood, if they have a Reserve in their mind to salve it with? Or it is the
Pope that errs in promising Pardons for such Oaths, so making them sins? For
Pardons are Relatives to Sins.

7. Whether Equivocations and mental Reserves will stand as a good plea for
Lying and Perjury, at that day when the righteous Judge of all the World shall
judge every man according to his deeds? And when a greater plea shall have no
acceptance; as namely, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and in
thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name have done many wonderful works?
But Christ shall say unto them, Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity, Mat.
7.22, 23.

8. Whether ever the true Christian Church, or any members of it, standing
faithful, dissembled their profession, by denying, or swearing against their
Principles in open words, to save themselves thereby from men?

9. Whether that be not a denying of Christ before men, to deny that Truth,
which he has left us to profess and hold forth in the World? And whether he
will not deny such, and be ashamed of them before his Father? You that think
you are in the truth, and yet deny it, apply this to your selves.

10. Whether they who dare not avouch their Religion and Principles before men,
in truth and sincerity, when called to it, have any Religion in them worth the
owning?

11. Whether a mercyless people or a more merciful people, be nearer to the
true Church of Christ?

12. Whether a people degenerated from the true, upright, humble, inoffensive,
peaceable, quiet, sincere, holy life of Christianity, and fallen to Lying,
Treachery, Plots, Murders, Massacres, and such like evils, be the only true
Church of Christ? And whether all others are Heretics, who shall depart from
their Communion? Let your Consciences speak, as it will do before the Tribunal
of the Lord.

13. Whether a people, that make the Times perilous, through their Plots,
Assassinations, Murders, Treacheries, and such like evil courses, (although
they should retain a form of godliness in outward show) be not such as are to
be turned away from, according as the Apostle admonishes? 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, 4,
5.

14. Whether a people full of violence, as the old World was, and as Sodom of
old was; a people full of Slanders and Lies, to hide their works of darkness,
as if they were afraid that the World should see their treacherous intents,
before they put them in execution? Whether such a people be not well-nigh ripe
for destruction?

These Queries I leave with you, to satisfy your Consciences in, if there be
any fear of God remaining in them; and let me entreat you not to deal
deceitfully with your own Consciences, which will be witness against you at the
great Day, when the Pope's Indulgences and Pardons will do you no good.

As for Answer to me in these things, I cannot rationally expect any from the
Scriptures of Truth, for they are not contrary to themselves. I know the Pope
and his Romanists have one Catholic or universal Answer for all Objections,
Arguments, Doubts, Oppositions, Questions, etc. whereby to prevent discoveries
of their weakness, or rather wickedness: And that any one may expect, that
writes or speaks against their mystery of wickedness, and it is the same
wherewith they have silenced Godfrey. For they are sensible that their Cause
will not abide the light, and therefore they flee from that, to this work of
darkness, to murder, which they back with Lies and Slanders. And therefore let
this be a Testimony to all that have any understanding, That they are Children
of darkness, and not Children of the light* for it is the testimony of our Lord
himself, That he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be
made manifest, that they are wrought in God: But every one that does evil
hates the light, neither comes to the light, lest his deeds should be
reproved, or made manifest, Joh. 3.

POSTSCRIPT.
FOr the sake of some honest-minded People' who perhaps may think that I too
much limit the Mystery of iniquity, or the Great Whore, or Babylon the great,
in seeming to fix them to any particular People; to such I give this Account in
short; That the Mystery of iniquity, and Great Whore, which carries that
Mystery written on her forehead, and Babylon the great, and such like Titles,
are not given in Scripture to the universal or general Kingdom of Satan, but to
a limited Mystery both as to time and place. For 1. That Mystery of iniquity
had not its rise or beginning, till after the appearance of Christ in the
flesh; it began but to work in the Apostles days, but was not then revealed
openly. 2. It was to follow or accompany a falling away from Christ, in life
and power, though not in profession. 3. It was let for a time by an Enemy,
namely, when Satan in his open hostility raged against Christianity in the
persecuting Emperors, and so by them let or kept down the rising of the
Mystery of iniquity, until that Enemy was taken out of the way. 4. It is also
limited or bounded as to time of discovery, and consumption, and after that of
rooting out; for the Kings of the Earth, who have given their power to the
Beast, and so to the Whore, and so also to the Mystery, (for they are all
linked together in a Chain) they shall survive or outlive it; for they shall
hate the Whore, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire, and make her
desolate, Rev. 17.16. 5. Lastly, It is limited as to place, thus far, That the
chief Seat of it where it is to be found, is particularly described by the
Angel, though its influence may extend far. And therefore it is not that
general Dominion or Kingdom of Satan, which he has had in wicked men from the
beginning, and in all wicked men, and shall have every where among them until
the end: But it is a certain circumscribed Mystery, limited both as to time and
place of its chief Seat, though extended far for place, and long for time.

FINIS.
Books Printed for a general Service.
BArclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, as it is held forth and
preached by the People called Quakers, being a full Vindication of their
Principles, by Arguments deduced from Scripture and right Reason, and the
Testimony of famous Authors, both Ancient and Modern.

Robert Barclay's Apology for the true Christian Divinity, vindicated from John
Brown's Examination, and pretended Confutation thereof.

R. Barclay's Epistle of Love and friendly Advice, to the Ambassadors of
several Princes of Europe, met at Nimeguen, to consult the Peace of Christendom.

G. Fox and John Burneat, A New England Firebrand quenched, being an Answer to
Roger Williams, of Providence in New England, which he dedicateth to the King:
As also an Answer to his Appendix, wherein are Testimonies of Ancient and
Modern Authors, concerning the Light, Scriptures, Rule, and the Soul of Man.

William Shown, The true Christian's Faith and Experiences briefly declared,
concerning God, Christ, the Spirit, the holy Scriptures, the Gospel and
Doctrines thereof, with a few words concerning Conscience: To which is added a
small Treatise concerning evil Thoughts and Imaginations, and good Thoughts and
heavenly Meditations.

G. Keith's Quakerism no Popery.

G. Keith, Immediate Revelation not ceased, or Jesus Christ the Eternal Son of
God revealed in Man, revealing the Knowledge of God: With an Appendix
containing an Answer to some further Objections.

G. Keith, The true Christ owned, as he is true and perfect God, and true and
perfect Man; being an Answer to a Pamphlet called the Quakers, concerning the
Man Christ, writ by a nameless Author, in Answer to a Book called, The Way cast
up, and the stumbling Block removed from before the feet of those, who are
seeking the way to Zion, with their faces thitherward: By G. Keith.

George Keith, The way to the City of God described, or a plain Declaration,
how any man may within the day of Visitation given him of God, pass out of the
unrighteous, into the righteous state, as also how he may go forward in the way
of holiness, and so be fitted for the Kingdom of God.

Stephen Smith, The true Light discovered to all who desire to walk in the day;
being a Collection of his Writings in a small Volume. 8o.

Compendium trium Linguarum Latinae, Graecae and Hebraicae.

A Compendium or Abridgment of three Languages, the Latin, Greek and Hebrew,
couched and exhibited in a short and easy method, for the studious and
Christian Youth


