A DISCOURSE OF Christ's Second Coming, AND The Purging of his Kingdom. In Two
SERMONS on

Matthew. xiii. 41. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and shall gather
out of his Kingdom all things that ^ffe^d, and them that work Iniqui^y.

By SAMVEL TOMLYNS, A. M. Preacher of the Gospel at Marleborough.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercer's Chapel, 1695.

FOR MY Much Honored Friend Sir William Ashurst, Knight; Alderman of the City
of LONDON.
YOU were lately so signally Instrumental in Reforming the Manners of the City
of London in your late Mayoralty, that I have thought it proper to dedicate to
you this small Treatise concerning Christ's purging and cleansing his Kingdom
from all scandalous Persons and Workers of Iniquity. It is a great Reproach to
Christianity that so many pretend to it, that enervate in Principles,
contradict and subvert its great Designs. How uncomely is it to be Clay
Members, under a Golden Head; for carnal Creatures to claim Relation to a
spiritual and heavenly King? God promises to lay all Sion's Borders with
pleasant Stones, Isa. 54.12. Sanctius in his Commentary conceives, the Holy
Ghost alludes to those Stones that did divide and distinguish one Man's Land
from another, in a common Field: And so this great Truth it taught by this
Promise, That the Church and its true and genuine Children should be
distinguished from the rest of the world, not by ordinary and common things,
but by pleasant and precious Stones. It is the precious and saving Knowledge of
God in Christ, precious Faith in him, a precious Divine Nature received from
him, that puts a difference between the Church and the World. Notin^ and
Speculative Knowledge, a cold and barren Profes^es, a Form of Godliness, a Name
to live, a Lamp of Pr^^esion, are low and mean things to distinguish between t^
Church and the World. The Lord Jesus Christ will ^^^^ly appear, and sit on the
Throne of his Glory: it (...) then brand Persons with eternal Infamy and
Ignominy, (...) be disowned as no Members, to be disclaimed as no S^^jects of
Jesus Christ, to be plucked up as Tares; to be (...) away as dross, cast away
as bad Fish, and winnowed any as Chaff, to be found such as have lied to Jesus
Chri^ and have woefully cheated and deceived their own S^^^ It concerns us
therefore to look well to it, that we experience the Fellowship of Christ's
Sufferings, and know (...) power of his Resurrection, Phil. 3.10. These are
(...) i^portant and most necessary things, to have our Lusts killed, and our
Souls quickened; Romans 6.5, 6. Col. 3.1. Romans 6.13. 1 Pet. 2.24.
to have our Old Man nailed to the Cross of Christ, the the Body of Sin may be
destroyed, that a may no more serve Sin, and to be pl^^^d in the likeness of
Christ's Resurrection^, so that we rise with him, yield our selve to God as
those that are alive from the dead, live (...) Righteousness, and seek the
things that are above; s^ Christ will recognize us as his Members, and
acknowledge us as his Subjects, and we shall not be turned out of the House of
God, but stay and abide in it for ever, and when others burn with the Tares in
the Furnace, we seal shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father. If
this small Treatise may contribute any thing to your spiritual Good, and
eternal Salvation, it will be very greatful and acceptable to

June 1^th. 1695. Your Affectionate, And Humble Servant; Samuel Tomlyns.

THE Purging of Christ's Kingdom.
Mat. xiii. 41. The Son of Man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them that work iniquity.


IN the words we have 1st. A Subject spoken of, and that is, The Son of man.
2dly. We have what is related and affirmed concerning this Subject, viz. That
he shall send forth his Angels. 3dly For what end? Answ. To gather out of his
Kingdom; to Purge and Cleanse it. Some have no Right to be in Christ's Kingdom;
they are a Dishonor and a Reproach to it; they lie to Jesus Christ, they cheat
and deceive their own Souls. 4. Who they are that shall be gathered out of
Christ's Kingdom? rooted out of his Fields? driven out of his House? Answ. All
Things, or all those that do offend, and them that work iniquity. They are
(...), mere Stumblingblocks: They offend, grieve and trouble those that are in
Christ's Kingdom; they prejudice those that are without; possess their Minds
with hard and bad thoughts of Christ's Kingdom, and so hinder them from
entering into it, from embracing the Christian Religion, and from subjecting
themselves to Christ's Yoke (...) Government: And all they that work ^^quity,
and so serve Christ's Enemies, (...) undo and destroy their own Souls.

The wo^^ may be handled as a Doctrine Proposition.

I. Doct. The Son of Man shall send for his Angels, and they shall gather out
of his K^^dom all things that offend, and them that w^ iniquity.

1. I shall consider the Subject spoken (...) the Son of Man. Who is meant by
the (...) of Man? Answ. Jesus Christ: He that ^ called the Son of God, Joh.
9.35. Do the believe on the Son of God? Yea, he is style the only begotten
Son, Joh. 3.16. and Joh. 1.^. God has many Adopted Sons: Many S^^ are led to
Glory by the Captain of Salvati^^ Heb. 2.17. But God has but one begott^^ Son:
He is therefore, by way of Emph^^ and Excellency, called his own Son: Romans 5.^.
God spared not his own Son, but gave him (...) to the Death. This Son of God,
in the T^^ is named the Son of Man: He that was (...) Son of God from Eternity,
became the (...) of Man in time: He that was the Bright^^ of his Father's
Glory, was veiled and clou^^ with a Humane Nature: This was as co^^ Sackcloth,
and as a Dark-Lanthorn ab^^ the Son of Righteousness: He that made (...)
things, was made Flesh, 1 John 1.2.4. ^e that was the Creator, debased himself
and stooped to become a Creature. Which was more than if the Ocean had been
lessened ^o a Drop, or the Sun had joined a petty or ^im Lamp to it self; or
the greatest Emperor ^n the World had been made a Worm, to be rushed and
bruised, to redeem Worms from Destruction. He that was the Head of An^els, lay
under the Feet of Sinners.

This Title, The Son of Man, deserves fur^her to be considered. For, 1st. It
seems (...) look back on the Old Testament, and to be borrowed from Dan. 7.13.
I saw in the night ^^is^ns, and behold one like the Son of Man ^ame with the
clouds of heaven, and was brought (...) before the ancient of days. This is a
Pro^hecy of Christ's glorious Exaltation and ^scension into Heaven: The Father
then ^noured him, and said, Sit thou on my right^nd, till I make thy foes thy
footstool, Ps. 110.1. The New Testament explains the Old Testament, and the
old Testament confirms the ^ew. Daniel prophesied of the Coming of (...) Son of
Man, and the New Testament ^^lares Christ to be that Son of Man that ^s
foretold to come into the Worldly. Christ is styled the Son of Man, with ^pect
to what he was to do, in Purging Church, and Judging the World. The raze here
points at the great Exaltation of ^ist, and the Glory put on Him. The of Man
should send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all
(...) offend, and work iniquity. This is a g^ and glorious Work, to purge and
(...) his Kingdom, to put away Dross, to (...) up Weeds, to banish the Workers
of In^^^ out of his Kingdom, to confine them to (...) proper place, and cast
them into the ^ nace, and shut them up in the Prison. (...) evidences that
Christ has a higher (...) than a Humane Nature; and that (...) doing of this
great Work, he will p^nour and Glory on the Humane Na^ which he was humbled and
abased. (...) has appointed a Day to Judge the (...) by the Man that he has
(...) Act. 17.31. and has given Christ ^^rity to execute Judgment, because
(...) Son of Man, Joh. 5.27. (that is) (...) the Son of God did stoop, did
(...) empty and abase himself to be the (...) Man, and to suffer and die in
this (...) therefore God will put Honor on (...) mane Nature, and exalt it, to
try the censure the Actions of Men, and (...) them to their Eternal Place. He
(...) sentenced at the Tribunal of M^^ arraign the whole World before (...)
ment-Seat. The Son of Man is (...) nently dignified, when he shall (...) his
Angels, and by them shall purge^^ and cleanse his Vineyard.

2. I shall now apply my self to open what is affirmed of the Son of Man. It is
said, He shall send forth his Angels. 1st. Observe, The Angels are called
Christ's Angels. 2dly. The Work they are employed in, viz. To gather out of his
Kingdom those that have neither Right or Fitness to con^inue there. 3dly. The
Fitness of the Angels to that Work.

1. This is Honorable to Christ, that the Angels are called the Angels of the
Son of Man. Here we may observe, That our Humane Nature is so exalted in
Christ, that it is Lord over the Angels, does commissionate, send forth and
employ them on his Errands, and in his Service: 1 Timothy 3.16. It is said to be
part of the Mystery of Godliness that God manifested in the Flesh, was seen of
Angels. They saw him first debased, and made lower than themselves; Heb. 2.7.
Thou ^ast made him a little lower than the Angels: That He might be capable of
Sufferings, and feel the Edge of God's Sword, and drink the Wine of his Wrath.
This was matter of Wonder, That the Lord of Angels should in the form of a
Servant be subjected to the ^age and fury of Men. And then the Angels saw him
exalted, and lifted up by God very much above them; and this did greatly
astonish them, That he entered into Heaven, Angels, Principalities and Powers
being made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3. ult. When he was but a Babe in the Manger,
then the Angels of God were called to pay their Homage, and perform their
Adoration to him, Heb. (...). When he brought the First Begotten into (...)
World, he says, Let all the Angels of Gaworship him. And if they adored him
lying in the Cradle, much more may we thir^^ they will worship him sitting on
the Thro^^ Mat. 25.3. When the Son of Man shall co^ in his glory, and all the
holy Angels w^^ him, then shall he sit on the Throne of^ Glory. When the Son of
Man shall thu^ on the Throne of his Glory, the Angels (...) be ready to give
their Attendance, to ren^^ their Obedience, in gathering elect Members to their
Head, in presenting Crimin^^ to his Bar, and in executing his Sentence (...)
them in these following Scriptures, Mat. 24.^. Luke 19.27. Mat. 13.42. The
Angels the gather the Elect to their Kingdom, b^^ Offenders before their Judge,
and cast (...) Tares into a Furnace of unquencheable Fi^^

2 I shall a little dwell on the Work asen^^ to the Angels, in the Text: They
shall g^^ Men out of Christ's Kingdom. 1. This is ve^^ observable, That those
whom Men-Ang^ do gather into the Church, into the Vi^^ Kingdom of Christ, those
Spirit-Ange^ shall gather out of it. The Officers (...) Pastors are called the
Angels of the Church. The Seven Stars are said to be the Angels: the Seven
Churches, Rev. 1.20. So we read (...) the Angel of the Church of Ephesus,
Smyrna, and Pergamos, in the 2d. of the Revelations. And what is the work of
these Men-Angels? They gather Souls into the Church, and they bring in many
Hypocrites among the Sincere, Mat. 22.10. Christ's Servants go forth into the
Highways, and gather together unto the Feast as many as they find, both Bad
and Good: so the Net gathers and encloses Fish of all kinds, both good and bad,
Mat. 13.47. The Good Fish are the Upright, and the Bad Fish are those that are
Unsound, and merely Nominal and Titular Christians. But there shall be a
Separation, when the Net is drawn to the shore; then Spirit-Angels shall gather
these bad Men out of the Church, which Men-Angels did gather into it. Men may
be imposed on, and be deceived, but Angels will not be cheated and deluded.
What does it advantage Hypocrites, to blind the Eyes of Pastors? They cannot
cast a Mist before, or put a Veil on the Eyes of Angels: Those that are
passable Pieces, and current Coin among the Saints, will ye be discovered to
be reprobate Silver, and counterfeit Coin, by the Angels: They will know those
that Ministers cannot discern.

2. Good Angels will gather out of Christ's Kingdom, those that Bad Angels do
gather into it: Mat. 13.25. While men slept, an enemy came and sowed tares
among the wheat, and went his way. Who is this Enemy? Christ, in Mat. 13.39.
tells us, it is the Devil. What are the Tares? Christ erpounds this of the
Children of the wicked one, Mat. 13.38. The Field of Christ is the Universal
Visible Church, spread through the World, Mat. 13.38. The same that is called
the Kingdom of Christ in the Text, i^ the World in Mat. 13.38. It is not to be
understood of the World at large, but the Cultivated, the Manured, the Tilled
part of the World; and that is the Universal Visible Church spread through many
Nations of the World. So that it is plain from this Scripture, that Satan
brings and sows many of his Children in the Church: But is it (...) strange,
improbable, and almost incredible that Satan should bring Men into the Church.
Is not this a dangerous Place for his Subjects to be in? May he not lose them
Answ. Satan does bring many into the Church with a deep Design, and for
politi^^ Ends. 1. Satan counts this for his Ho^^^ and Glory, to have Subjects,
Servants and Children of his even in the Church, a well as without; That he has
Vassals for (...) service, among the Vessels of Honor the are for God's use.
As this exalts Christ, (...) he rules among his Enemies, Psalm. 110.2 Rule thou
in the midst of thine enemies; so the advances Satan, that he also rules among
(...) Enemies, that he can retain his Prey, kee^ his Captive, preserve his
Subjects fast, and close to him among his Enemies, even where God and Christ
rule, and Saints do yield obedience; That he can maintain an interest for
himself, where the Light shines, Grace beams, the Laws of Christ are
proclaimed, and the danger of rebelling against them is openly declared; That
yet his Soldiers will not leave his tents, nor his Subjects cast of his yoke,
nor renounce their obedience to him. 2. Satan is content and willing that many
of his Children should creep into and be joined to the Church, that they may be
more secure; that now they may slatter themselves that they are safe from
danger, and may bless themselves in the hope of a Place in God's Kingdom, and a
Portion among his Sons and Daughters. How many do betake themselves to the
Church, as a City of Refuge, as a Sanctuary to preserve themselves from
Destruction, though they go on in their wickedness? God, by Jeremiah,
complains, Jer. 7.12. That the prosane Jews did use the Temple as if it were a
Den of Robbers: as Robbers do spoil Travelers, and then retreat to their Dens,
as places of safety and security; so they did steal, murder, commit Adultery,
swear falsely, and then come and stand in the Temple, offer some Sacrifices,
and then conclude a Compensation was made to God for all the wrong they had
done him; that now they were delivered liver'd from the guilt they had
contracted, and secured from the punishment they had deserved. So Augustine, in
his 22d. lib. de Civitate (as I remember) speaks of many Christians in his
time, That though they did lead lend and loose lives, yet they thought they
should be saved at last, because they believed the true and right Doctrine. And
how many in these days do cast their cold and formal Prayers, their blind and
heartless Devotions into the scale, to balance and weigh down all their gross
and notorious Wickedness. Thus is a false Notion of the Church and Kingdom of
Christ, a great Means, and a mystical Instrument to uphold Satan's Throne, and
keep the Crown on his Head. The Name of Christianity encourages many to persist
in the practice of Iniquity, without fear of Misery and Destruction. 3. Satan
brings Men into the Church, that they may do him more service in the Church,
than they could do out of it. The Tares did draw away the Sap and Strength of
the Earth from the good Corn, did entangle and harle about the Wheat, pull it
down, keep it low, hinder its growth and flourishing: so Satan's Children in
the Church, they aspire to, and reach after the highest places, they grasp the
Honors and Prosits that were designed for better Men, they keep the sincere
People of God low, they pull them down, and lay such under them, they will
hardly allow them a place and subsistence in the Church, they traduce and
reproach them as Puritans, Praecisians, Fanatics, that make the Way to Heaven
narrower, and the Yoke of Christ heavier, and the Commands of Christ stricter
than indeed they are: They think they call Men to hard services, and bind heavy
burdens on them, when Christ gives larger allowances, and Men may go to Heaven
without such strictness, without so much ado, without keeping so strict a rein
on the flesh, without continual curbing of their lusts, and denying their
natural appetites and inclinations; and when these Men have advantages on their
side, and carnal Rulers that will comply with them, they are ready to
persecute; they are forward to execute Penal Laws, and persecute those of the
same Nation, City, Neighborhood, to the utmost, that they may ruin and undo
them; as in Abraham's Family, Ishmael persecuted Isaac: Gal. 4.29.30. It is now
they that are born after the flesh, persecute those that are born after the
spirit. Calvin would say, That a Man need go no farther than Geneva to be
persecuted. I have heard that some profane Ones in that City, would, in
contempt and hatred of Calvin, call their Dogs Calvin. This holy Man chose
rather to leave Geneva, and to go into voluntary exile to Strasburg in Germany,
than to admit loose and profane Men to the Table of the Lord. The Tares do much
mischief to the good Corn, and much service to Satan, by being in the same
Field, the same Church with the sincere and upright Servants of Christ.

But those that Satan has thus, and for these Ends introduced into the Church,
vailing their Enmity against Christ, and his People, under the name of
Christianity; these the Good Angels will separate and gather out of the Church,
that they may suffer for mocking of Christ, for hating and hindering his People.

3dly. Let us consider how meet and fit Good Angels are for this Work to which
they are designed, and in which they are employed.

1. They excel in Judgment, Wisdom and Understanding. To be Wise as an Angel
of God, was grown to a Proverb in Israel, 2 Samuel 14.20. My lord the king is
wise as as angel of God. As the Angel that destroyed the Egyptians Firstborn,
could observe and distinguish between the Israelites Houses that had Blood
sprinkled at the Door of them, and the Egyptians Houses that had no Blood
sprinkled on them, though it were in the midst of the Night: So the Angels of
God do know and will understand, who are sprinkled with the Blood of Christ,
and so must stay in Christ's Kingdom; and who are not, and so must be gathered
out of Christ's Kingdom, and destroyed: They will discover those that have
escaped the Observation of Pastors, and have deluded them with their fair
Pretenses: They will be able to wash off the Paints, and pull away the Veils of
Hypocrites, and so will pull them out of the Kingdom of Christ: They know that
they were not sent forth to minister to the Wicked, but to the Saints, Heb.
1.14. that Hypocrites were no part of their charge; that they did not attend on
them, and therefore can distinguish and mark them out, to be gathered out of
the Kingdom of Christ.

2. The Angels do excel in Strength: Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that
excel in strength. As Nebuchadnezzar employed the most mighty Men in his Army,
Dan. 3.20. to bind Shadrach, Meshach and Abed-nego, and to cast them into the
Fiery Furnace; so the Angels are the mightiest Soldiers in God's Host, the most
valiant of his Army, and these he charges to reap the Tares, to bind them in
bundles, and to cast them into an Eternal Furnace, Mat. 13.30, 39, 42. The
Angels are strong and mighty Reapers. Can the Tares stand before the Hook, or
withstand the Sickle of these mighty Reapers? Can the Tares hinder themselves
from being bound up in bundles, and cast into a Furnace of unquenchable Fire?
Though wicked Men are many, a huge multitude, and great in power, and high in
authority here in this world, yet their numbers, strength or force cannot
secure or protect them from these mighty Reapers.

But who are those that shall be gathered out of the Kingdom of Christ? This is
for Christ's Glory: If the whole Church is the Kingdom of Christ, it is his
Dominion; and this is farther for his Honor, that he will purge this Kingdom
of his, that the Beauty, Purity, and Holiness of it may appear. As Jesus Christ
is fairer than the Children of Men, Psalm. 45.2. So the Church is to appear as
the fairest among Women, 1 Cant. 8. The Church is styled the Mountain of
Holiness, Jer. 31.23. and vastly differs from the Kingdoms of the World, that
are called Mountains of Prey, Psalm. 76.4. That Society that is set forth as the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 25.1. and is indeed the Suburbs of Heaven, should not
be clogged with foolish Virgins, and be defiled with the Workers of Iniquity.
Wicked Men and Hypocrites are called Dross, Psalm. 119.119. Reprobate Silver,
Jer. 6.30. Brass, Tin, Iron, and Lead, Ezekiel. 22.18. And what does such base
Metal do among the Vessels of Gold and Silver? 2 Timothy 2.20. Should not Christ's
Floor be cleansed from Chaff? Mat. 3.12. Should not bad Fish be plucked out of
the Net, and cast away? Mat. 13.47, 48. What should those do in God's House
that are not Sons of God, John 8.35. but are Children of Satan, John 8.44. and
Servants of Sin? John 8.34. What should they do among the Guests at the Feast,
that have neither Appetites, nor Wedding-Garments, Mat. 22.10, 11. Can carnal
Creatures partake of spiritual Blessings? Men are born Flesh, John. 3.6. and
spiritual Blessings are to be enjoyed in Heavenly Places, Ephesians. 1.3. Can
Earthly Men and Women inherit a Heavenly Country, Hebr. 11.16. they whose
Thoughts and Hearts dwell on Earth, Luke 21.35. they that pant after the Dust
of the Earth, Amos 2.7. they that mind Earthly Things only, Phil. 3.19. that
seek nothing higher, than what they shall eat, what they shall drink,
wherewithal they shall be clothed? Mat. 6.31, 32. Can these live in the pure
and sine Air of spiritual Comforts, Delights, and Enjoyments? Can dead
Creatures converse with the living God? Can those that wear fordid and filthy
Garments present themselves with acceptance before a God that is of purer Eyes
than to behold Iniquity? Hab. 1.13. An Hypocrite shall not come before him,
Job. 13.16. The Foolish shall not stand in his sight: Evil shall not dwell with
him. God hates all the Workers of Iniquity, Psalm. 5.4, 5. What should profane
Ones do in the Mountain of Holiness? Jer. 31.23. What should the Unrighteous do
in the Habitation of Justice? What should corrupt and stinking Creatures do in
the Mountain of Myrrh, and in the Hill of Frankincense? Cant. 4.6. Such
gangreen'd Members must be cut off from the Body: Such Spots must be washed
away out of the Face of the Church.

But more particularly, I shall address my self to consider the Words in the
Text: The Angels shall gather out of Christ's Kingdom^d things that offend, and
them that work iniquity 1. The Angels shall gather out (...) that is, all the
Scandals, all the Stumbling blocks, all that offend others, and obsh^^ their
entering into the Kingdom of Ch^^ It is sad to be in the Church only as
Sunbling-blocks to disgrace the Faith, to reproa^^ the Doctrine of Christ, to
stop or cool other in the way everlasting, to turn them out o^ the Paths of
Holiness, and to hurry the^ headlong to destruction. How do the (...) Examples
of some influence, and learn others! one Man's wicked Life and Do^^ infects
another's: If some Neighbors a^^ Drunkards, are Swearers, are Whoremast^^ are
Liars, are Sabbath Breakers, negl^^^ Prayer in their Families, do not instra^^
their Children, or restrain their Serva^ from Wickednesses; if they are Mock^^s
Religion, Scoffers at Godliness, and H^^ of Good Men that will not run with
(...) to the same excess of Riot, 1 Pet. 4.4^ These evil Precedents do easily
and qui^^ prevail on others. It was grown to a (...) verb in Israel, Ezekiel.
16.44. As is the (...) so is her Daughter: So I may say, As is (...) Father, so
are his Children; as is the ^ster, so are his Servants; as is the Neighbor, so
are his Companions, and those that converse with him. Ezekiel. 20.18, 21. God said
to the Children, Walk ye not in the statutes of your Fathers, neither observe
their Judgments: Yet they walked not in God's Statutes, nor observed his
Judgments, but persisted in a conformity to the evil Practices of their
Parents, that were so powerful, that they had the force of Statutes, Judgments,
and binding Laws. How hard, how rare is it to cast off, or desist from a vain
Conversation, delivered by Tradition from Forefathers and Neighbors, 1 Pet.
1.18. How pernicious, fatal, and destructive, are such Scandals! For 1. Such do
teach others the way of Sin and Wickedness: Jer. 2.33. Therefore have thou also
taught the wicked ones thy ways. When Christians ought to teach Transgressors,
Psalm. 51.13. by their Doctrines and Examples, God's ways for their Conversion,
and Salvation, they teach wicked Ones their own corrupt ways for their
destruction. 2. Such do justify the Wicked of the World in all their lewd
Practices: Ezekiel. 16.51. Thou have justified thy sisters in all thine
abomination, which thou have done: 46, 48. Samaria was her Sister, and Sodom,
and these Sisters, Jerusalem had justified by her Abominations O that those
that pretend to be Christ's Subjects, should justify his open and professed
Enemies, and approve the Heathen World in all their Drunkenness, Lyings,
Injustice, and Adulteries! 3. Such do comfort Sinners in their ungodly
Practices: Ezekiel. 16.54. That this may bear thine own shame, and may be
confounded in all that thou have done, in that thou art a comfort to them. If
so be those that are not of the Church, but Strangers and Enemies to it, do see
Christians roll in Filthiness, and drink in Iniquity like Water, How will they
be encouraged to, and comforted in their sinful Practices? Such will conclude
there is no danger in their ways, or judgment toward their Persons, but that
they may sin without fear of punishment, or dread of vengeance.

4. How great a Scandal is it, when those that profess themselves the People of
God, and pretend to be of the Church, shall out go, and outstrip Heathens in
their Wickedness! Jer. 5.28. They overpass the deeds of the wicked; that is, of
the wicked Heathen! Ezekiel. 5.6. She has changed my judgments (...) wickedness
more than the nations, and my statute more than the Countries that are round
about (...) Ezekiel. 16.48. God confirms this truth with a^ Oath, As I live, says
the Lord God, Sodo^ thy sister has not done, she nor her daughter, as thou
have done: Ezekiel. 16.51. Neither (...) Samaria committed half of thy sins. How
horrible a Scandal is this, when the Heath^^ are ashamed of, and reflect on the
Sins of those that call themselves of the Church Ezekiel. 16.27. The daughters of
the Philistines are ashamed of thy lewd way. I have heard from one that lived
at Smyrna, That the Turks will laugh, and make Tricks at the Grecian Christians
there, when they are drunk. These blind Mahometans do dislike and are ashamed
of Drunkenness.

5. Such Scandals, or scandalous Persons, cause the Name of God to be profaned
and blasphemed among the Heathen: Ezekiel. 36.20. When they entered in to the
Heathen whither they went, they profaned my holy name, when they said to them,
These are the people of the Lord, and are gone forth out of his land; that they
committed such Wickednesses, and were for this cast out of their Land. This
caused the Heathen to think basely of God, that he was like them, and did
approve of their Wickednesses, or that he was weak, and could not preserve his
pretended People in their own Land; but the Heathen prevailed against them, and
led them captive: Romans 2.23, 24. Thou that make thy boast of the law, through
breaking the law dishonourest thou God? For the name of God is blasphemed among
the Gentiles through you, as it is written. Salvian tells us how much the
Vandals reflected on Christ's beholding the wicked Life of Christians; Si
Christus Sancta docuisset, Christiani Sancte vixissent: That Father says, The
Christians were Drunkards, Whoremasters, Unjust; when the Vandals were
Temperate, Chaste, and more Just in their Dealings. It is ordinary, if you
question a Turk in his Dealings, Whether what he says of the price or value of
Goods be true, to break out into a Reproach of Christianity thus, Do thou
think I am a Christian, and that I will lie and cousen in my dealings? How much
were the Indians in the West Indies prejudiced against Christianity, by the
barbarous and cruel dealings of the Spaniards with them? An Indian asked a
Spaniard, Whither the Spaniards did go after Death? and the Spaniard answering
that they went to Heaven: the poor Indian Heathen replied, He would not go to
Heaven, to meet such a cruel and bloody People there; but would rather (...) to
Hell, where his Ancestors and Fath^^ were. Yea, these poor Heathen Idolater
justified themselves, and said, Their Gods were better than the Spaniard's God:
Fee the Indians worshipped Gods of Gold and Silver; when the Spaniards
worshipped tw^ Sticks across; that is, they adored a woode^ Cross.

6. These Scandals do foment Atheism, e^crease and spread it in the World: 1.
(...) their teaching pernicious, and Heretical Doctrines, contrary to the Truth
of Christ, (...) so divide Christians, crumble them into little Parties, and
Factions, cause them so to clash and interfere one with another, to oppose,
decry, contradict, judge, and cens^^^ each other. Grotius takes in this as part
of the sense of the Words, That there are Scandals in Doctrine, in Locum.
as well as in Manners. The Apostle Paul speaks of (...), Romans 16.17. Scandals
other than the Doctrines he and others had preached: Mat. 18.7. Christ faith,
It must needs be that (...) Offenses come: Which Paul expresses thus, 1 Cor.
11.19. For there must be also Heresies among you. Gretius does parallel these
two Texts, and thinks they intend the same thing. Certainly variety of
Opinions, rotten and corrupt Doctrines, do much contribute and conduce to
Atheism. How many resolve only to stick to Morality, and just Dealing with Men,
accounting that all Religion is but a Fable, or Fiction, because Men have such
contrary Notions, such contradictory Sentiments about it. 2. Scandals in
Action: A lewd and wicked Life does exceedingly advance Atheism. I have heard
of a Woman that fell off from all Religion, and turned a professed Atheist; and
when the Minister of her Parish went to discourse with her, and rebuke and
reprove her for her Atheism, she smartly replied, That he was the cause of it;
when she heard what he preached in the Pulpit, and observed how contrary he
practiced out of it, what a loose and wicked Life he led, she was tempted to
conclude that all Religion was but a Cheat, a mere politic Contrivance; for if
he himself believed what he spoke in the Pulpit to be true, he would never lead
such a scandalous and bad Life out of it, he would restrain himself from vice,
and order his Conversation aright. How many would incline to Atheism, and think
the Christian Doctrine but a Fable, if it brought forth no better Fruits in the
Lives of others, than these? And that Heaven were but a Fiction, if none were
more fitted and prepared for it than these carnal and profane Christians are?
How righteous and requisite is it then, that Persons that so offend others,
dishonor God, and reproach Christianity, should be gathered out of the Kingdom
of Christ.

2dly. Those that work iniquity shall be plucked out, and for ever separated
from the Kingdom of Christ. First there are some that pretend to be Members of
the Church that do work iniquity. 2. I shall show what a heinous Evil, what a
crying Provocation it is to work iniquity in the Church; that is, the visible
Kingdom of God and Christ.

1. There are some that are got into the Visible Church, and are called God's
People, that yet work Iniquity. 1. They early begin this Employment, Zeph. 3.7.
They rise up early, and corrupted all their doings. How cross and contrary are
Men to God? He did rise up early, and send his Prophets to instruct them in
their Duty, to dissuade them from Sin, and to exhort them to Righteousness; the
Prophets came early in the Morning to teach the Jews in the Temple; yet all was
in vain; no Damms would stop, no Banks would bound in the Torrent of their
Sins: The Imaginations of Man's Heart are evil from his Youth, or Childhood,
Jer. 3.25. We and our fathers have sinned against the Lord our God, from our
youth unto this day: Jer. 22.21. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that
that thou obeyedst not my voice. 2. They do this work diligently, Mich. 7.3.
They do evil with both hands earnestly, Jer. 9.5. They weary themselves to
commit Iniquity: They drink in iniquity like water, Job 15.16. Like as a
thirsty Man drinks in Water, and can hardly satisfy himself, they draw
iniquity to them with cords of vanity, that is, with sinful, corrupt,
unbelieving Reasons and Suggestions: those indeed are false and very weak, and
therefore may well be called Cords of Vanity; yet on wicked Men they have the
force of a strong Cart-rope, Isa. 5.18, 19. They think God will not draw near
to them in Judgment, or show his work of Vengeance and Severity on them. 3.
They only follow this work and no other: A corrupt Tree can bring forth no
other but corrupt Fruit, Mat. 7.17, 18. An unclean Fountain, night and day
vents no other but polluted Streams, Jer. 6.17. Satan's Mint is still going in
the Soul. An evil Man brings forth evil things out of the evil treasure of his
heart, Mat. 12.35. God accuses the Jews by Jeremiah, That that they had done
nothing of all that God commanded them; That the Children of Judah had only
done evil before the Lord; That the Children of Israel had only provoked him to
anger, Jer. 32.23, 30. 4. They persist, continue and go on in this work: Ezekiel.
23.43. I said unto her that was old in adulteries, W^^ they now commit
adulteries with her, and she with them? Yet in ver. 44. it is said, She
continued in her whoredom, and did not give off. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may they that are accustomed to do evil,
learn to do well, Jer. 13.2. The Hearts of Sinners are bent to backslide, Hos.
11.7. They have loved Strangers, and after them they will go, Jer. 2.25. They
are of their Father the Devil, and his lusts they will do, Joh. 8.44. This they
are sixed in, this they are resolved on; and tho^ it be the Duty of Men to
receive the Law from God's Mouth, Job 22.22. yet they declare they will do
whatsoever proceeds out of their own mouth, Jer. 44.17. and so they oppose
their own mouth to the mouth of God. 5. They rejoice to do Evil, Jer. 11.17.
When thou do evil, then thou rejoycest. Sinners choose their own ways, and
their Soul delights in their Abominations, Isa. 66.3. They count it pleasure to
riot in the daytime, 2 Pet. 2.13. Thus deceived Sinners imagine and conceit a
Heaven in that which indeed fits them for Hell, and prepares them for
everlasting Torments. The day is coming, when they that shall review all their
sensual Delights, and draw their greatest bitterness out of that which has
been most sweet to them; Oh, how terrible will it be, to draw a Real Hell of
Misery out of their Imaginary and Momentary Heaven of Felicity! Their present
Pleasures will be a seed of Pain, and of eternal Torments.

2dly. I shall show you what a heinous and provoking thing it is, to work
Iniquity in the Kingdom of Christ. For, 1. They that are of the Church, they do
profess and avow the Lord to be their God, Hos. 8.2. Israel shall cry unto me,
My God, we know thee. Yet in ver. 3. it is said, Israel has cast off the thing
that is good. And Aholah (says God) played the harlot when she was mine, Ezekiel.
23.5. How treacherous are they that say, God is their Father? Joh. 8.41. We
have one Father, even God; yet they partake of Satan's corrupt Nature, bear his
Image, and do his Lusts: John 8.44. Ye are of your Father the devil, and the
lusts of your Father ye will do. How abominable is this, to wear God's Livery,
and yet do Satan's drudgery? How does God complain, and call Heaven and Earth
to witness against Israel! I have nourished and brought up Children, yet they
have rebelled against me, Isaiah 1.2. The Heaven and the Earth, and all the
Creatures, serve Man, yet he denies Obedience to his Maker. Those that are in
the Church are under more Ties and Obligations than others: Amos 3.2. You only
have I known of all the families of the earth: When it is said of the Gentiles,
That they were a People that Christ did not know, Isa. 55.5. Yet Christ came to
his own, and his own received him (...), John 1.11. Who should welcome him,
(...) open their Hearts, and receive him, if not his own? Yet Christ's own
rejected him Not only they shut the Door against hi^, but also poured out their
Fury on him, and cut him off from the Land of the Livi^^. God complains, Psalm.
81.11. But my pe^^ would not hearken to my voice: Israel would b^^ none of me.
And indeed, would be none o^ his. 2. Those that are in Christ's Kingd^^ they
are near to God, and in his special P^^sence; and it is therefore more heinous
(...) such to work Iniquity: 1. They are near (...) God, Jer. 13.2. God bids
Jeremiah to ^e him a Linen Girdle, and put it on his Lo^^^ and God expounds
the meaning of this Sig^ ver. 11. For as the girdle cleaves to the (...) a
man; so have I caused to cleave unto me (...) whole house of Israel, that they
might be (...) me for a people, and for a name, and for a pra^e, and for a
glory: but they would not hear. God speaks here of Israel as his visible
Church: And by the Covenant that was between God and them, they were as a
Girdle put on bound to him, and were to cleave to him, both for God's Honor
and Glory. As a Girdle is an Ornament to a Man; so those that are truly God's
People are his Glory, Isa. 46.13. I will place salvation in Zion, for Israel my
Glory: 2 Cor. 8.23. The Apostle speaks of the Messengers of the Churches, that
they were the Glory of Christ; such Church Members ought to be. Yet those that
work Iniquity in the Kingdom of Christ, are a Dishonor, a Disgrace, a Reproach
to Christ. 2. A Girdle is put on and worn about the Loins of a Man; and this is
an Honor to the Girdle it self, that it is so near to a Man, and is worn as an
Ornament by him: So God is the Glory of Men, Isa. 60.13. Thy God shall be thy
Glory. For Men to be brought under a Covenant with God, and by this means to be
joined to God, this is the Glory of Men, Psalm. 50.5. Gather my Saints together,
that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice. To be God's Confederates is the
Honor of Men; but those that work ^niquity in Christ's Kingdom, do turn this
Glory into Shame. This is their Infamy, To break the Marriage-Covenant, Hos.
4.12. to go a whoring from under their God; to dote on Creatures, and
prostitute themselves to Idols: Such shall bear the Reproach (says God, Micah
6.16.) of my People: They shall be exposed to everlasting Infamy, for mocking
of God, and lying to him, Psalm. 50.16, 17. What best thou to do to take my
covenant into thy mouth? Seeing thou hate instruction, and casts my words
behind thee. Though they were call^^ Saints, by reason of their profession and
coligation to be such; yet, Psalm. 50.16. they are called wicked, by reason of
their hating Instruction, and casting God's Words beh^^d their Backs. 2. Those
that are in Christ's Kingdom, they are in God's special Presence For God
dwells in Zion, Joel 3.21. The Name of Spiritual Jerusalem is Jebo^^ Shammah,
The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48.3^ And this is a great Affront, to provoke God to
his Face, to sin under his Eye, and in (...) special Presence, Isa. 65.3. A
People that (...) voketh me to anger continually to my face. Go^ Temple and
Habitation was among the and thereby their Guilt was exceeding heightened and
aggravated; they did d^ God, and Affront him to his Face: wh^ as the Gentiles
might be said, comparati^ly, to sin behind God's Back, because (...) special
Presence was not among them. (...) Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his
D^nion, Psalm. 114.2. And how much d^ this increase Guilt to be Rebellious,
(...) work iniquity in God's Sanctuary, and in (...) peculiar Dominion: Zeph.
3.5. The just (...) is in the midst thereof.

3dly, It is a heinous Evil to work iniquity where the Rule of Righteousness is
professed, pressed and taught. I have written to them the great things of my
Law, but they counted them strange things, Hos. 8.12. The just Lord brings
Judgments; that is, his wise and holy Laws to light every Morning, and sets his
Laws before Men, Dan. 9.10. And they ought to choose them, and set them before
themselves, Psalm 119.30. I have chosen the way of truth, and thy judgments have
I set before me: Yet those that work iniquity turn to God their Backs, and not
the Face, Jer. 32.38. And cast God's Words behind their Backs, Psalm. 50.17.
Hide their Eyes from it, and are willingly ignorant of it. O what a Shame and
Reproach is this to Men, that Beasts and Birds are better governed by Sense and
Instinct, Isa. 1.3. Jer. 8.7. than Men are by Reason, and a written Law of God!
How do Men pervert and abuse their Reason and more than Brutisie themselves!
When as God taught them more than the Beasts of the Earth, and made them wiser
than the Fowls of Heaven, Job. 15.11.

4thly, It greatly burdens and provokes God, for Men to work iniquity in a
Land of Uprightness, and where others do work Righteousness: Isa. 26.10. The
Wicked in the land of uprightness will deal unjustly: The Land of Canaan, where
the People of God dwelt, is called the Land of Uprightness, and the People of
Israel are called Jesherus, Deuteronomy. 33.26. There is none like to the God of
Jesherun. This Name is derived from (...) Jashar, which signifies to be right;
because this was the People that were taught, and professed Uprightness, and
Righteousness. Those that are truly the People of God, are said to have wrought
his Judgment, Zeph. 2.3. Now this augments Guilt, when Persons shall work
iniquity in a Land of Uprightness, where Righteousness is professed and
practiced by many. These, by their Example, show, that the Yoke of Christ is
not intolerable, and that Godliness is not impossible or impracticable: These,
by their Strictness, Holiness, and Zeal, do condemn the looseness, profaneness,
and coldness of the work^^ of iniquity: The circumspect and exact Li^^ they
lead, should stir up and awaken other that behold them, to a serious, exact,
and powerful Religion. The very Examples of Saints do teach, and should
mightily affect others.

5thly, It is heinous to work iniquity, when Men are taught, That Jesus Christ
ga^e himself to redeem Men from all iniquity, Titus 2.14. and from a vain
conversati^y 1 Pet. 1.18. These Men clash with, and co^tradict the great End
and Design of Christ's Death: They frustrate the Sufferings of Christ, and
resolve still to be the Servants of Sin, the Portion and Possession of Satan,
as if Christ's Blood were no valuable Price to purchase them, or to oblige them
to cease to be their own, and to engage them to be the Lord's Servants and
People, as if Christ's Blood should purchase all for them, but buy nothing of
them, nor from them.

6thly, It is very provoking to work iniquity where the Lord uses many means
to purge Men from Iniquity, Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged, thou shall not be purged any more from thy silthiness, till I
have caused my fury to rest upon thee. Instructions in Righteousness, Reproofs
for Sins, Afflictions without, and the Strivings of God's Spirit within, when
it counsels Duty, warns of Danger that attends the practice of Iniquity, are
all means to purge Men from their Filthiness. But when God shows Men what is
Good, and dehorts them from Evil; when he puts them into the Furnace, and
kindles the refining Fire, and yet the Dross of Wickedness cleaves close to
them, and is not removed from them. This renders the workers of iniquity more
obnoxious to Wrath, and revenging Justice. When Men will not stop and cease
from Sinning, then the Fury of God will rest upon them, and they be exposed to
Torments without end.

7thly, It mightily provokes God, when Men bear corrupt Fruit, and work
iniquity in his own Vineyard. God sets a great Price and Value on every spot
and inch of his Vineyard-Ground. Shall that then be clogged and pestered, not
only with empty Vines, Hos. 10.1. but with strange and degenerate Vines, Jer.
2.21. such Vines as bear Grapes of Gall, and bitter Clusters, that yield Wine;
that is, the Poison of Dragons, and the crude Venom of Asps? Are these Grapes
fit for the Lord of the Vineyard to eat of? Is this meet Wine for his to drink?
Would it not be intolerably bad for a Child to present such Wine to as Earthly
Father to poison him? And is it not infinitely worse for Men to render such
Wine to their Heavenly Father? Is there any thing he does more abhor than these
Clusters, or more detest than this Wine. W^^ God bear always such corrupt and
pernici^^^ Trees in his Vineyard.

The Use of this Doctrine is Fourfold: 1. For Terror. 2. For Examination. 3.
For Exhortation. 4. For Caution.


1. Use is, For Terror to loose, scand^lous, and profane Christians; they
shall not still continue in the Kingdom of Christ: The time draws near when
Christ will send forth his Angels, and gather them out of his Kingdom. The
Harvest is at hand, when these Tares shall be cut out of God's Field The Net
will quickly be drawn to the Shore; and if bad Fish be cast away, God will not
value or regard them to all Eternity, but cast them off, and reject them for
ever. Consider, and weigh all these following Particulars, that speak much
Terror to the workers of iniquity.

1. You shall be known: Prove. 10.9. He that perverteth his ways shall be known.
Though he veil, disguise, endeavor to conceal himself, yet the day will reveal
every Man's State and Work, 1 Cor. 3.13. Though Hypocrites are as Graves that
appear not, Luke 11.44. their Rottenness and Wickedness appears not to Men, yet
God knows their Hearts, Luke 16.15. He inspects their Souls, and discovers all
the Filth and Wickedness that is there. How terrible is Light to Malefactors?
How bitter and unwelcome is it to Adulterers, and Thieves? They desire, and
affect Darkness, that they may be concealed, and a Veil cast over their
Wickedness: Job. 24.17. The morning is to them as the shadow of death: if one
know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. Does God, the
Judge, know Men? And will he bring to light all the hidden Things of Darkness,
and make manifest the very Counsels of the Heart, all the secret Principles,
carnal Motives, corrupt Ends that have biased and fway'd Sinners in their
Actions? And shall not this Light of Divine Knowledge, this Day of Divine
Judgment, strike Horror into the Hearts of secure Sinners! Their inside is so
bad, that it is a terrible Threatening, that God says, They shall be known.
They have been called by the Worthy, Lovely, Honorable, Glorious Name of
Christ; they have been styled Christians: but they have profaned, stained,
reproached this Excellent Name; therefore they shall be divested, and stripped
of it; all their Veils, Cloaks, Pretenses shall be plucked off; they shall be
known what they are, and be called by their own Name. The Wife of Jeroboam did
disguise her self, and feigned her self to be another Person; yet she did not
deceive the Lord: He knew her, and informed his blind Prophet Abijah of her, 1
Kings 14.2, 5, 6. God was acquainted with her Design; so that when she came to
the Prophet's Door, he presently calls her by her Name, Come in thou Wife of
Jeroboam, W^y feignest thou thy self to be another? So God will know Sinners in
all their Disguises, and under all their Veils: He will call them by their
proper Names; he will style them no more Christians; but say, You Infidels, you
pros^^^ and ungodly Swearers, Drunkards, Wh^r^masters, Liars, Oppressors, and
unjust Persons, appear in my presence, give your Account at my Bar, and
Tribunal: You Backsliders in Heart, you rebellious Creatures, hear your Doom
and Sentence: You Lying Children, you perfidious Apostates, receive your
Portion from me. God will call you Dross, and Reprobate Silver. This shall be
your Infamy and Reproach, that all the Creatures are God's Servants, Psalm
119.90, 91. But you have been Rebels and Enemies. God's Word has run very
swiftly on Earth, Psalm. 147.15, 18. All do yield to it and comply with it; but
you workers of iniquity have stopped it, resisted it, opposed it, and rebelled
against it. You have been mirey Places and Marshes, where the Waters of the
Sanctuary have been staid and stood, Ezekiel. 47.11. Though Men call themselves of
the Holy City, Isa. 48.2. yet God will call them Revolters, Corrupters, Brass,
Iron, Reprobate Silver, Rebellious and Lying Children, Jer. 6.28.30.

2. This will be their great Shame to be known, when it shall appear, that all
their Religion has been but embalming a Carcass, painting the Cheeks of a dead
Man, and building a beautiful Tomb of Profession over a corrupt and rotten
Heart, Matthew. 23.27. O how ignominious will this be, when it shall be
manifested, that in your best Performances you have but compassed God with
Lies, Hos. 11.12. Ephraim compasses me about with Lies: With a lying
Profession, lying Services, lying Prayers, lying Praises, lying Obedience.
Those whose Hearts are not sound in God's Statutes, shall be ashamed, Psalm.
119.80. They shall be ashamed of all the Profession they have made; of all the
Works they have performed; of all the Hopes they have entertained; of all the
Relations they have pretended: Even in the Great Day they shall arise to Shame
and everlasting Contempt, Dan. 12.2. How will Confusion cover them, when these
Graves shall be opened? when all Veils shall be pulled off, and all the
artificial Paint shall melt and vanish away? when the Filth, Nakedness,
Deformity of their Souls shall appear? When Satan's Image shall be discerned in
them, and his Law shall be read in them, in vain have they endeavored to blind
the Eyes of Omnisciency. They could not cast a Mist before him, or put a
Fallacy and Cheat on him: Hos. 5.3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from
me Jer. 13.27. I have seen thy adulteries, (...) neighings, and the lewdness of
thy whoredem. Sinners only blind their own Eyes, that the^ may not know what
they are, and see whther they are going, but that Satan may lea^ them the more
tamely, quietly, and peaceably unto Destruction.

3. O what an amazing Disappoint^^^^ will the workers of iniquity meet with,
wh^ they shall be gathered out of the Kingd^^ of Christ! They will look for
Light, and God will turn it into gross Darkness, and i^ to the Shadow of Death:
Jer. 13.16. What dreadful Frustration will this be instead of a Inheritance,
among the Saints in Light, (...) have a Portion with the Wicked in the Regions
of Darkness, and under the horrors of an eternal Night! How tormenting will
this be, to look for Favor and to meet with Fury! to expect Salvation, and
then their Eyes see their Destruction; and instead of drinking new Wine of Joy,
to drink the Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, Job. 21.20. It was terrible to
Israel, for God, as a Token of his Displeasure, to send Thunder and Rain in
Wheat-Harvest, 1 Samuel 7.17. And will it not strike more horror into the
workers of iniquity, when they think to reap a Harvest of Happiness, for God to
thunder Wrath and Vengeance on them; and to rain Fire and Brimstone, and an
horrible Tempest on them; and to allot this to them, as the Portion of their
Cup? Psalm. 11.6. Were not the Syrians amazed and terrified, when their Eyes
were opened, and they saw themselves in the midst of Samaria, in the Hands, and
under the Power of their Enemies? 2 Kings 16.20. But will it not more astonish
Sinners, to have their Eyes opened at last, and to see themselves in the midst
of Devils and damned Souls, under the Power of Satan, and under the Wrath of
God? Sinners do drouze and Sleep now, but they will, too late, lift up their
Eyes, as Dives did, in Hell, Luke 16.23. when it will be too late to decline
the fatal Blow, to prevent Misery, and fly from Destruction. O how will this
cut Sinners to the Heart! for Jesus Christ to profess that which is directly
contrary to their Profession, Matthew. 7.23. Then will I profess unto them, I
never knew you; depart from me ye that work iniquity. They profess, Isa. 58.2.
to work Righteousness, and to yield Obedience: And this they counted their
Glory. But Christ will profess to them, Ye are workers of iniquity: And this
will be to their Ignominy and Reproach Christ's Profession concerning Men, is
more to be credited than what they profess concerning themselves. Those spoken
of here, seem to be workers of iniquity in a more spiritual, secret, and
mysterious way: They acted from old and carnal Principles; they served in the
oldness of the Letter, not in the newness of the Spirit; they did some things
materially Good, but with regret and relectancy, not with pleasure and delight,
Romans 7.6. They were acted by base Principles and selfish Ends; and so served
themselves and their Lusts, rather than the Lord Jesus Christ. They failed in
the manner of these working, and so are called workers of i^quity. The
Pharisees thought they well observed the Laws of God, Luke 15.29. L^^ these
many Years do I serve thee, neither tr^^gressed I at any time thy Commandments.
Yet how contrary to this Boasting is the Charge and Accusation of the Prophet
Jeremi^h, Jer. 32.23. They have done nothing of all thou commandedst them to
do. Israel does cry unto the Lord, My God, we know thee, Hos. 8.2. Yet here
Christ professes the contrary, I never kn^w you, Luke 13.27. Christ expresses
himself thus, Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity. That Phrase, all ye
workers of iniquity, is emphatical: Christ will pass the same Doom on workers
of iniquity in the Church, as he does on those that are out of the Church: He
is no Respecter of Persons; he hates Iniquity wherever he finds it. Such as
turn aside into crooked Paths in the Church, shall be led forth with the
workers of iniquity: They shall be joined to them, ranked with them, Psalm.
125.5. shall be accounted of the same Body, shall receive the same Sentence,
and feel the same, or rather worser Punishments. O how will this vex and
perplex, proud Hypocrites! that have thought themselves, for many Years, to be
Members of God's Family; and that they have had much acquaintance and long
converse with Christ, to hear him to reject them as utter Strangers to him, and
that he never knew them? O, what a wounding and killing Word will this be to
them? Surely Strangers shall not dwell with God, or inherit with his Children;
they that have served Sin in God's House, John 8.34, 35. will be discovered and
cast out. God that says, Ye are not my people, and I will not be your God,
Hos. 1.9. does also threaten, Hos. 9.3. They shall not dwell in the Lord's
land. The Lord's Land is for the Lord's People: If those that were not the
Lord's People should not dwell in the Lord's Land, that was but an Earthly
Canaan, much less shall they dwell in the Lord's Land, that is a Heavenly
Country and Canaan.

4thly, They that be gathered out of Christ's Kingdom shall be deprived of the
best Good, of True Happiness; they shall not taste of Christ's Supper, they
shall not sit in his Throne; they shall not feast at his Table, in his Kingdom,
or partake of his Glory. To have no part with Christ, John 13.8. is threatened
as the worst and greatest Evil; And not to taste of his Supper, Luke 14.24. On
the other hand, To see Christ's Glory. John 17.24. to sit with him in his
Throne, Revel. 3.24. to sit with him at his Table, and to eat and drink with
him in his Kingdom, Luke 22.30. is promised as the chiefest and best Good. But
ye workers of iniquity, O what will ye do in the Solemn and Great Day, and in
the day of the Feast of the Lord! Hos. 9.5. Your present Pleasures and Delights
will cease, your Banquet will end and be removed, Amos 5.7. you will Famish.
And when others seast, you will be slain with Thirst, Hos. 2.3. When others
shall drink of the River of God's Pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. yea drink abundantly
at the Fountain of Life. You will roar and howl, when others shall sing and
rejoice. Job complains, Job 9.25. That his Days did slay away, they saw no
Good: But workers of iniquity will more dreadfully and dolefully complain, That
Millions of Years do pass over them, yet in them all they see no Good.

5thly, Those that are gathered out of Christ's Kingdom, are without hope of
ever returning to it, or being let in, and received into it for ever, Luke
13.25. When once the Master of the House is risen up, and has shut the Door,
he will never rise up again to open it; then it will be too late to knock, or
plead for Admission; the Bridegroom has done Wooing; the great Shepherd will
call no more; the gracious Physician will practice no more; the Ladder which
joins Heaven and Earth together will be drawn up, and all Treaties of Peace
will be at an end: As when God did shut the Door of the Ark, Genesis 7.16. Noah
was included, and his Family, and all the rest of the World were excluded,
though they did cry never so bitterly, groan never so deeply, plead never so
earnestly, yet, they could not be admitted, they could not be received; the
time of God's Patience was at an end, and the Day of his Wrath and Vengeance
was come. So Christ will not be entreated, will not relent; as Sinners hardened
their Hearts in time, so Christ will harden his Heart to Eternity; as they had
no love for Christ, so he has no Bowels to yearn toward them, no Bosom to
receive them: Their Condition was once hopeful, but now it is desperate, Isa.
5.2. The Hands of Christ were once stretched out, Prove. 1.24. to allure and
receive them; but now the Arms of Christ will be stretched out to punish them:
They did their own and Satan's Will in time, and they must now suffer God's
Will to Eternity: They were once invited, and importuned earnestly to come into
his Kingdom; but then they shall be violently thrust out of it, and
everlastingly debarred from it. There is a vast difference between these two
Expressions, Luke 14.23. Compel them to come us and that in Luke 13.28. And you
your selves thrust out. They that have wearied the Patience, and slighted the
Grace of God, shall be eternally cut off from seeing of him, and conversing
with him. Mercy will issue in Severity, and Patience will end undeterminate in
Fury.

6. Those that are gathered out of Christ's Kingdom, shall behold the
Happiness, Feast, and Glory of the Saints of God, and gnash their Teeth for
envy and rage, seeing what others enjoy, and they themselves are deprived of,
Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, and you
your selves thrust out. This shall heighten the Saints Felicity, to see the
Misery and Torments of the Damned. Isaiah 66.24. They shall go forth, and look
upon the carcases of the men that have transgressed against me: for their worm
shall not die, neither shall their Fire be quenched: thus Esau, and other
Reprobates shall eternally serve Jac^b, and the other Elect, the misery of the
Damned, shall cause them more to admire the Mercy extended to them: their
weepings and howlings shall heighten Saints Songs, Praises and Thanksgivings,
Psalm. 58.10. The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: so on the
other hand, this shall increase and heighten the Misery of the Workers of
Iniquity, that they shall see the Feast, the Honor, the Glory of the Saints,
that they are deprived of, 2 Kings, 7.1, 2. Elisha prophesies of a sudden
plenty the very next day in Samaria, where they had been under a long and
grievous Famine: A Lord in Samaria would not believe it, the Prophet tells him,
that yet he should see it, but should not eat thereof: So Sinners now will not
believe what Rest, what Honor, what a Feast Saints shall enjoy, when they sit
down with Abraham, Iaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 8.11. but yet
they shall one day see it, but shall not share in it, nor partake of it. O how
will their Hearts fret and rage, to see those that they have so much despised,
hated, and abhorred, to sit in the Throne, when they shall be made Footstools;
to enjoy the greatest Plenty, when they shall lie under eternal Penury, and
want of all Good.

7. This may affright and terrisie the Workers of Iniquity, that they, as vile
and worthless Creatures shall be cast away, Matthew. 13.48. the bad Fish shall be
cast away as those that God has no esteem of, Love to, o^ Delight in; they
have cast away the Law of the Lord, Isa. 5.24. and now they themselves shall be
cast away; they would not put away the Lusts of their Hearts, the Evil of their
Doings, and now therefore they must be put away as Dross, Psalm. 119.119. Thou
put away all the wicked of the Ea^^ as Dross: But this is not all; the
Tares shall be cast into a Furnace of unquenchable Fire, Matthew. 13.12. It is
honorable to be Trees for Fruit, but it is disgraceful and reproachful to be
Trees for Fuel; Hay serves for Food to Cattle, but Tares do serve only to heat
the Oven, and to burn in the Furnace. O how dreadful is this for to be cast
into a Furnace heated by the Anger and Fury of God? Can we imagine how terrible
that Fire is, which is kindled by incensed Justice, and blown up by the Breath
of an angry God? a Fire that will indeed devour all that is pleasant, and
coniume all that is sweet and grateful in Life, yet leave still a Being to
feel Misery, and endure Eternal Torments. We should be amazed to see a Wisp of
Straw, a Bundle of Tares to hold out one day, and not be consumed; but this is
a great Miracle of the Power of God, to uphold and preserve Sinners to be an
eternal Mark for God to shoot at, an eternal Footstool for him to tread on:
Eternal Vessels for him to drop his Wrath, and pour out his Fury into: The Evil
of Sin, does not consume, is not expiated by all the Torments of the workers of
iniquity; and so their Misery cannot abate, their Punishments cannot lessen,
nor the Fire go out: they suffer from God and hate him; they endure Blows and
Wounds from him, and blaspheme him for them: they Rebelled against God, they
suffered Sin and Satan to Rule in them, and now full sore against their Wills,
God will Reign over them with an outstretched Arm, and Fury poured out, Ezekiel.
20.33. they would not come under Christ's Pastoral Rod, Ezekiel 20.37. but they
must be forced to fall under Christ's Iron Rod, Psalm. 2.9. their Sin did grieve
God, and God's Sentence, and the Execution of it will eternally sting, and vex
them. Oh, it is dreadful for Sinners to be preserved in being, for their hurt;
to have an immortal Existence, that they may feel an immortal Punishment,
Misery and Torment! If Christ that was a green Tree, Luke 23.31. that was full
of the vital Sap of Holiness and Righteousness, and did continually abound in
spiritual Fruit, had yet such a Fire of Wrath burning against him, and kindled
on him, when as Evil Fruits were only hanged on him by imputation, but did
never grow in, or on him, what must dry Trees expect that are destitute of the
Life of God, and did never bear Fruit to Christ, what an everlasting Furnace,
what an Eternal Fire will be their Portion? Christ could pass the Cup from him
by his drinking of it, Mat. 26.42. but workers of iniquity shall drink of the
Cup of God's Fury, yet it shall never pass from them, but stay at their Lips,
and be sucked and soak into their Souls.

2. Use. I would now put you on the Search, Trial, and Examination of your
selves: Are you truly Members of, and sincere Subjects in this Kingdom of God?
Are you such as shall stay in the Kingdom of God, or such as shall be gathered
out of it? There is a great deal of difference between treading in God's
Courts, Isaiah 1.12. and growing in God's House, or being planted and
flourishing in God's Courts, Psalm. 92.13. those that only tread in God's
Courts, may not stay in his House, John 8.35. but may be driven out of it. Hos.
9.15. I will drive them out of my house; I will love them no more: but those
that are planted by God, and are green Olive Trees in the House of God, they
shall never wither, or be rooted up, Psalm. 52.8. they trust in the mercy of God
for ever and ever, and mercy will follow them all their days, Psalm. 23.6. and
mercy will be built up for ever, Psalm. 89.2. It is worth the while to enquire
what we are, and whose we are, that we may not flatter and deceive our own
Souls. In a Family there are Sons and Servants John 4.35. in a Great House
there are Vessels of Gold and Silver, and Vessels of Wood and Earth: in great
Cities, as in Rome of old, they did distinguish the Inhabitants into two sorts,
the Advenae, or Strangers; the Cives, or Citizens that were born and bred
there. O consider, Are you Titular or Real? Are you Transient or Abiding
Subjects in Christ's Kingdom? Are ye rescued and delivered from the adverse
Prince, and contrary Kingdom? Men are born under the Law of Sin, Romans 8.2. and
under the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. the God of this World is their Father,
John 8.44. the Prince of this World is their King. Oh therefore ask this
serious Question, Is the Prince of the World cast out of your Hearts? John
12.31. now shall the Prince of the World be cast out: And are you plucked out of
his Paw, rescued out of his. Kingdom,? Col. 1.13. Who has delivered us from
the power of darkness, (...): the Father has by a strong hand, by a mighty arm
plucked, and snatched his Redeemed from the Power of Darkness: Ignorance and Sin
are Darknesses, and Satan is the Power and Prince of Darkness; he rules Men by
their Ignorance and Lusts; and therefore he is styled the ruler of the darkness
of this world, Ephesians. 6.12. Ignorance and Sin have a strange Power over Souls,
as if they were rightful and lawful Powers, and Satan's Kingdom is grounded and
built on them: Sinners know not what they do, whither they go, whom they serve;
and hence it is they do so readily and willingly yield themselves to obey the
Commands of these Enemies, that hoodwink them, and hurry them on to
Destruction: Are your Eyes opened? Are Satan's Snares and Sin's Bonds broken?
Are you turned from darkness to light; from the power of Satan to God, Acts
26.18. are you made free from the law of sin and death? Romans 8.2. darkness did
chain the Egyptians in their Places, that they did not remove, or go about,
Exodus 10.22, 23. but when the Light returned, then they were set at Liberty to
walk about, and work: so have you known the Truth of Christ, and been made free
by it, John 8.32. Is the Veil of Ignorance drawn off from your Minds? And are
the Chains of Lust fallen off from your Wills? A Veil is a Restraint and
Bondage on the Eye. Those that do not see the Evil of Sin, will not fly from
it; they that behold not the Excellency of the Kingdom of God will not press
into it.

2ly, Are you translated into the Kingdom of Christ? Col. 1.14. We are born in
Satan's Kingdom as our Country and Natural Soil; but by Grace we are led forth
as a Colony into the Kingdom of Christ, which is, to a natural Man, a strange
Land, and a new Soil. But how are Men translated into the Kingdom of Christ?
surely it is by effectual Calling, and Regeneration. We are called as rational
Creatures, and we are regenerated, as corrupt and impotent Creatures. God is
said to call us to his Kindom and Glory, 1 These. 2.12. Except a Man be born
again, he cannot see, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, John 3.3.5. He
cannot see, or understand that there is such a Kingdom, or be willing to enter
into it, or be fitted to enjoy the Benefits and Blessings of it: As Children
must be born to be the Subjects of Earthly Kings; so Men must be re-born to be
the Subjects of the Heavenly King. This is for the Honor and Glory of Christ's
Kingdom, that none can pass into it, but by Regeneration: Those that are the
genuine, and true Citizens of Zion, and Members of the Church, are said to be
born there, Ps. 87.4, 6. Those that God writes up as Citizens of Zion, are such
as are born there. God's Register, and the Church's Roll, or Catalogue, do many
times much differ. The Church owns those for her Children, that God does not
acknowledge for his Sons and Daughters: The Church takes in those that God will
turn out: God will repute none his Jewels, call none his own, but they that are
born again of his Word and Spirit, Mal. 3.17. 1 Pet. 1.23. John 3.6. And
indeed, How can Men possibly be Subjects in God's Kingdom, except they have
spiritual Minds, converted Wills, heavenly Affections? A vain Mind, a carnal
Heart will only flatter and lie to Christ, Matthew. 3.2. Repent, for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand: Men cannot be Subjects in, or Heirs of the Kingdom of
God, without Faith and Repentance. The good Seed are the Children of the
Kingdom, Matthew. 13.35. Those that receive the Word, are begotten by the Word of
Truth, John 1.18. that have it rooted in their Souls, spreading and prevailing
in their Hearts, these are good Seed: Jesus Christ does not only sow Doctrinal
Truths, but living Christians: He begets Sons and Daughters to God; by the Word
they are changed by, and born of the Word, and so are called Seed. That Word is
styled the Good Word, Heb. 6.5. and they that are born of it, are therefore
called Good Seed. Divine Chrysostom, a Grecian Orator, in one of his Orations,
derides the Folly of the Grecians, that did call that one Man's Statue, which
was carved to resemble, and set up to the Honor of another. There was no new
carving of, or alteration in the Statue, but only the Title of it was changed.
And do Men so easily pass out of the Kingdom of Satan, into the Kingdom of
Christ, only by the changing of a Name? No, there must be another kind of
Alteration: There must not only be a new Name, but a new Heart, a new Nature,
Ezekiel. 36.26. 2 Pet. 1.4. O descend into your Hearts! What Experience have you
of the Work of the Spirit, in dethroning Satan, and inthroning Christ in your
Hearts; destroying the Kingdom of Sin, and exalting the Kingdom of God. Consult
your own Souls about this: Can you be totally ignorant of it, if such a change
has been made in you? Does not every one take notice of public Revolutions in
Government, if one Prince dye, or be deposed, and another succeed, and be set
up in his Place? And has there been so great a spiritual Revolution in thy
Soul, has Satan been cast out, and has Christ entered to dwell and rule in thy
Heart, and have thou no knowledge of it? Have thou no experience of a new light
set up in thy Mind? a new Bias put upon thy Will? new Motions raised in thy
Affections toward spiritual and supernatural Objects?

3dly, Are the Laws of this Holy King, and of this Heavenly Kingdom writ in thy
Heart? according to that promise of the new Covenant, Jer. 31.33. I will write
my laws in their hearts, and put them into their inner parts. This is the Glory
of Christ, that he writes his Laws in the Table of the Mind and Will, 2 Cor.
3.3. His Subjects not only know, but love and ask his Laws. Their Obedience to
them is not forced or feigned; but they obey from the Heart. Romans 6.17. They
delight in the Law of God according to the inward Man, Romans 7.22. God's
Subjects are thus described, That the Law of God is in their Hearts. It is not
an urging Letter without, but a vital Principle within: Psalm. 37.31. The law of
his God is in his heart: and Isa. 51.7. Hearken unto me, ye that know
righteousness, the People in whose heart is my law. Christ plants such
Dispositions, such Inclinations as are suitable and agreeable to the Law of
God, and may be styled a counter p^^t of it, and do answer to it: Psalm.
119.112. I have inclined my heart to perform thy Statutes always, even to the
end. This is a writing that does exact and ennoble the Table, th^^ is, the
Subject of it: And this is an high Act of Grace, when God does not only write
his Laws to us, but in us. Do you approve, allow, delight in the Laws of God*
Do your Souls break for the Longings ye have to, and after them? that they
might be more revealed to you, and impressed on you. Psalm. 119.20.

4thly, Are you led by the Spirit of the King? Romans 8.9, 14. If any man has
not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. As many as are led by the Spirit
of God, are the Se^^ of God. This is a wonderful and a great Mystery, that the
Spirit of the King is in his Subjects, and they all make but one mystical Body;
and the Spirit is as the Soul that animates this Body. Were ever King and
Subjects so nearly linked, united, related to each other? Christ is not only a
politic Head that gives Laws, but as a natural Head that gives Life. The
Spirit that influenced Christ, acts them; the Spirit that resides in Christ,
dwells also in them. The People of Christ must needs therefore be a free and
willing People. Do not the Members of the natural Body, without Regret or
Reluctance, obey the Dictates of the Head? How powerful, yet how easy and
sweet is the Government of the Head over the Members? Christ's Spirit does not
only teach and direct, but powerfully bend and incline the Will to walk, yea to
run in the way of God's Commandments, Psalm. 119.32. Saints do not desire the
way to Heaven to be made broader, but their Hearts to be made larger; to have
their light and love increased. The Spirit is styled, A Spirit of Revelation,
Ephesians. 1.17. A Spirit of Life, Rom 8.2. A Free Spirit, Psalm. 51.12. A Spirit
that makes us free and forward in our Obedience. We are not only restrained
from Sin by an outward Prohibition, but we hate it; our Nature is averse from
it, and abhors it. We are not merely constrained by an imperious and urgent
Command, enforced with terrible Threatenings, but sweetly and powerfully
inclined by an inward Disposition and vital Principle. Do you love your
Heavenly Master, and would not go free from him, but be more subjected to him?
when others do break the Yoke of God, and do burst his Bonds, Psalm. 2.3. Jer.
5.5. Do you put your Necks into Christ's Yoke? Matthew. 11.29. and bend your
selves with his Laws, as pleasant, light, and ornamental Chains? Isa. 45.14.
They shall come after thee in Chains. Kings and Nobles are willingly bound with
these Chains, Psalm. 149.8. As the desire of Israel was to Saul, and to have him
to rule over the^, 1 Samuel 9.20. so the Nations did run to Christ, Isa. 55.5.
and desire him to rule over them, Isa. 11.10. The Gentiles are said to seek to
him: And also the converted Jews Hos. 3.5. should seek to him, as a King, that
he might give Law to them, and rule over them. Christ's Kingdom is not forced
and obtruded on his People, but voluntarily chosen, and freely submitted to.

5thly, Examine how are your Hearts and Lives ordered: 1. How are your Minds,
Wills, Affections ordered, Isa. 9.7. Jesus sits on a spiritual Throne to order
it: The Soul is Christ's Throne, and till he sits and rules in it, all is
disorderly. The Thoughts are ^ain, the Will rebellious, the Assections vile and
inordinate, as at first the Water overwhelmed and covered all, Genesis 1.2. till
God said, Let the waters be gathered into one place, Genesis 1.9. and then dry
land appeared; and a Place was prepared for Men's Habitation^ So while there is
nothing but a spiritual Chaos, Self-love, as a Sea, covers all, swallows up all
true Love to God, and Man: But when God, by his Grace, does gather the
Affections into their proper Channels, and unto their right Objects: When God
bounds, banks, and limits them, then dry Land, in a spiritual sense, appears
for God's Habitation in the Soul; then room and place is made for him. Are your
Hearts directed into the Love of God? 2 These. 8.5. And are you taught of God to
love your Brethren? 1 These. 4.9. Then Self love is ordered, and is confined
within its due and proper Bounds.

2. Are your Conversations ordered aright? Do you set God's Laws before you,
Psalm 119.30. as the Rule of your Hearts, Words, Actions? Is it your true and
greatest design to please God, 1 These. 4.1. and to be accepted with him? 2 Cor.
5.9. When Christ comes into the Soul, he Judges, Isa. 2.4. he Reproves, Isa.
11.3. Jesus Christ censures what is contrary and displeasing to God: He rebukes
Men's Lusts; he puts a new Bias on the Will, and enclines the Soul to a new way
and walk, Jer. 3.17. They shall call Jerusalem (that is, the Church; that
(...), Spiritual Jerusalem) the Throne of the Lord, and all the nations shall
be gathered unto it, to the name of the Lord, to Jerusalem: they shall walk no
more after the Imaginations of their evil hearts. But they that walk in the
light of the Lord, Isa. 2.5. and in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of
his holy Spirit, Acts 9.31. If thou do still walk in thy own Counsels, and in
the Lusts of thine own Heart, Psalm. 51.12. and in the common way of the World,
Isa. 8.11. and, as other Gentiles do, in the Vanity of thy Mind, Ephesians. 4.17.
besure thou have had no Experience of the Kingdom of Christ come into, and set
up in thy Heart: If thy Heart be cast into a new Mould, Romans 6.7. and brought
under a new Lord and Law, thy Soul must needs stee^^ new course. As Heaven and
Hell do vastly differ, so do the narrow and broad way exceedingly differ, that
lead to a blessed, and miserable Eternity: You reproach and disgrace the
Kingdom of Christ, if your Hearts are not leavened with Faith and Love, and if
your Conversations are not ordered better than others. Christ's Sheep come and
go at the Direction and Command of the great Shepherd; but others, out of
Christ's Kingdom, are as wild Beasts that run to and fro, move here and there at
their own Pleasure; they are turned up and down by the dictates of a vain Mind,
and wicked Will: but yet if you are Christ's true Subjects, you will not be
brought under the power of tempting Objects without, or reigning Lusts within,
1 Cor. 6.12.

3. Use, Shall the workers of iniquity be gathered out of Christ's Kingdom,
then I would Exhort you sincerely to subject your selves to the Lord Jesus
Christ, as your King. Let not your Lips slatter, and your Tongue lie to Jesus
Christ; but indeed take Christ's Yoke, come under his pastoral Rod, enter into
his Fold, and into the Bond of the Covenant, Matthew. 11.29. Ezekiel. 20.37. John
10.9.

1. Consider, Jesus Christ is not sond of, or sets a value on, neither is he
pleased and delighted with empty Names and Titles: Matthew. 7.21. It is not every
one that says Lord, Lord, that shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Christ
will not own, approve, admit such in the Great Day; a form of Godliness will
yield but a vain Image of Happiness. Would an earthly King be satisfied, if
Rebels did call him their Lord, and would receive his Picture into their City,
but did shut out his Person? And will the King of Glory be appeased and quieted
with a Picture of Piety, or with a cold and dead form of Religion? We are bid
not only to give the Hand to the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 30.8. (so it is in the
Original, and so in the Margin, with allusion to those that did make Bargains,
and to conclude them, did strike or give their Hands to each other) but we are
also required to give our Hearts to the Lord, Prove. 23.26. The Life of the
natural Man is but a vain show of Life, Psalm. 39.6. Surely every man walks in
a vain show: And will it advantage us to add a vain show of Religion to a vain
Show of Life? Can Men make up a Sum to enrich them, by multiplying Ciphers?
And Hypocrite is styled a vain Man, James 2.20. But will thou know, O vain man,
that faith without works is dead. And the formal Prayers of Hypocrites are
called Vanity, Job. 35.12, 13. Men cry, but none gives answer. But why are
Prayers this fruitless and ineffectual? the next Words toll us the Cause:
Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it. Both
natural and instituted Worship is to be a Winepress, Matthew. 21.33. and so to
squeeze and draw out the Juice and Quintessence of Grace that is in the Soul,
else Christ will not regard Lip-labor, and bodily Service. The Heart is
Christ's House and Throne; the Mind and Will are the Tables he writes his Laws
in, 2 Cor. 3.3. He requires the best Room, the Guest Chamber: It is an Affront,
and an Indignity to Christ, to be thrust into the Stable again, or to be
entertained only in an out Room. Will a Master reward a Servant, that only
wears his Livery, but does not his Work.

2dly, Jesus will look into the Souls, and see through all outside Shows and
Appearances, Isaiah 11.3. Jesus judges not according to the sight of his eyes,
nor reproves according to the hearing of his ears. Jesus Christ does not stop,
or stay on the surface and outside of things, neither does he receive
Intelligence and Information from others that may be mistaken themselves, and
so might deceive and abuse him, but he has a Window into the Breasts and
Bosoms of Sinners, he searches the Hearts, he tries the Reins, he weighs
the Spirits of Men, he detects inward Poverty, Emptiness and Filth, Matt.
12.44. he finds it out, if the House be empty of Grace, and destitute of the
Spirit, at best but swept from grosser Sins and Crimes, and garnished with
Morality, and a Form of Godliness; but rather it was swept and garnished, and
fitted for the return of the unclean Spirit into it, Matt. 12.45. Christ
discerned the House of the Soul to be swept from all spiritual Good, and
garnished in Satan's Eye with ungodliness and unrighteousness. Christ will
discover those that make a fair Show of Religion; that have a Name to live,
that yet they are really dead, Rev. 3.1. he looks through the beautiful
Sepulcher and Tomb, and sees the Filth and Rettenness of a carnal and dead
Heart underneath. The Jews did account that Men were defiled by touching or
walking over a Grave; and therefore when a Grave was sunk, and did not appear,
Luke 11.44. they used to go forth in the Day before their Festivals, and cast
Lime, or Chalk on them, and so by whiting the ground, to give notice of a
Grave, that Persons might not come near it, and be polluted by it. A Learned
Man does think that Jesus Christ alludes to this Custom, when he calls the
Hypocritical Scribes and Pharisees graves that did not appear; but he by his
Reprooss and Discoveries of them, did white them, that so Persons might know
them, beware, and take heed of them. There is not the closest Hypocrite in the
World, but Christ can find him out, and white him, Isaiah 11.3. Christ is of
quick understanding, or of quick scent and smell, (as it is in the Hebrew) in,
and about the Fear of the Lord, he does wind he does scent Hypocrisy, though
it be veiled and cloaked over with a beautiful Show of Religion and
Righteousness. If you are Hypocrites, and think to blind Christ's Eyes with a
specious Form of Godliness without the Power of it, you are guilty of a kinded
Blasphemy. If you think that Christ may be couzened with your Cased Pieces, and
does not know your counterfeit and brass Money, Rev. 2.9. I know the blasphemy
of them that say they are Jews and are not, (...) are the Synagogue of Satan.
It is no less than Blasphemy for thee so to think to put a Fallacy and Cheat on
Christ, who knows all the hidden things, and will bring to light all the deep
Counsels of it, 1 Cor. 4.5. he will lay open all the secret Lusts, all the
corrupt and base Ends that insluenced and swayed Men under a Profession of
Religion and the practice of some outward Duties.

3dly, Men may call Christ Lord, and yet repeat, and act over all the
Indignities that were offered to Christ by the unbelieving Jews, that were his
Enemies; they Crowned Christ, but it was with Thorns; they put a Scepter into
his hand, but it was a Reed; they saluted him, and said, Hail, King of the
Jews; but all this was but in mockery and derision, for they smote Christ on
the head, Matt. 27.29, 30. and are not many nominal and outside Christians
guilty of the same things in a Mystery, their hearing some Sermons now and
then, with a wandering and roving Mind, with a drousie Ear; their repeating some
Forms of Prayer in a cold and heartless manner, without Understanding, or
Faith, without inward Groans, spiritual Wrestlings and Importunities; their
owning some Doctrinal Points of Religion, and practicing some just things as to
the Matter of them, is the Reed they put into Christ's Hand; some outward
Acknowledgments they make of his Lordship and Dominion over them, but in the
mean time they Crown Christ with Thorns, by their Oaths, Curses and Lies; they
smite Christ by their Drunkenness, their Uncleanness, their scorning at
Godliness, their Reproaching them that will not profane the Lord's. Day as they
do, and will not neglect God's Worship in their Families as they do, and will
not run with them to the same Excess of Riot, drink in Iniquity, and roll in
Filth and Uncleanness as they do; they take no care to engage their Hearts to
Christ, to keep them with all diligence, to watch over their Tongues, to order
their Conversations aright, and spend their Time well. As the Jews were
incensed against Christ, Isaiaha^. 24. they pretended he did forbid to pay
Tribute to Caesar, and would justle him out of his Throne: when as the true
Cause of their Controversy with, and Enmity against Christ was, that he would
thrust Satan out of his Throne, and did forbid Sinners to pay Tribute to their
Lusts: So Men now are enraged against Christ for the same Reason, because his
Holy Will crosses their cornat wills, his Commands clash with their Lus^, and
he restrains them from the Pleasures of Sin that are so sweet to them, and
calls theat to Purity and Strictness in Religion, which is so bitter and
unpleasing to them. Will Christ accept of Honor in Words, when it is joined
with Reproach in Deeds? Wist verbal Friendship be regarded, when accompanied
with real Enmity? Will Christ repute those his Subjects, that serve his
Enemies, and gratify Satan and their own Lusts? Shall pretended Obedience
bring Men unto Heaven, and real Disobedience not throw them to Hell? Shall a
Lie ingratiate Men with God, and true Impiety not render them odious to God?

4thly, Consider Jesus Christ will set up his Kingdom in the World, and at last
Rule over you, whether you will or no: As none can hinder the rising of the
Sun, or obstruct the blowing of the Wind; so all the opposition, and rage of
the World shall not hinder the rising of the Son of Righteousness Mal. 4.2. and
of the Glory of the Lord, Isa. 60.1. nor obstruct the blowing of the Wind of
the Spirit, Acts 2.2. This mighty rushing Wind filled the World with the
Doctrine of Christ, as that Wind at Pentecost filled the House where the
Apostles of Christ were sitting. Though Kings, and the great Men of the World,
did join their Counsels, and unite their Strength and Force to keep down
Christ's Kingdom, and to suppress the beginnings of it, yet he that sat in the
Heavens did laugh at all their Policy and Power, and had all their Attempts and
Endeavors in derision, and did prevail, notwithstanding all their Malice, to
set his King on his Holy Hill of Zion, Psalm. 2.4, 5, 6. And Christ did reign
over his Enemies full fore against their Wills. They designed and endeavored
to break Christ's Bands in sunder; but Christ did break them with his Rod of
Iron, and dash them to pieces as a Potter's Vessel, Psalm 2.9. The Jews
persecuted Christ's Apostles and Servants, and sent many of them to Heaven on
this Message and Errand, to tell Christ how the Jews are bent against his
Kingdom, and would not have Christ to reign over them, Luke 19.14. yet Jesus
Christ did gather, subdue, and convert many of their Nation to be his Subjects;
and as for the Body of the People that continued in their Unbelief and
Disobedience, this Glorious King sent forth his Armies, that is, the Romans,
and destroyed them, and bunt up their City, Mat. 22.7. And at the last Day, he
will severely sentence and punish the Rebellious: Luke 19.27. As for these mine
enemies that would not have me to rule over them, bring them before me, and let
them be slain in my presence. Though they do not allow Christ a Throne in their
Souls, yet Christ will erect his Tribunal, and sit (...) Judgment on all that
oppose and stand o^^ against him. Where Grace does not reign, Justice will
reign: If Christ does not coedemn and execute Sin in us, he will condem^ and
execute us: Either Satan's Works and Lusts must be crushed and destroyed in us,
or we must be cut off, and perish for ever. Those that Christ does not prune,
he will fell; those that he is not a refining Fire to, he will be a consuming
Fire; if the Old Man be not pierced and wounded by Christ's Arrows, the Souls
of Men must be Christ's Mark, and feel the edge and point of his glittering
Sword. If Christ does not rule to save Men, he will rule to destroy them. The
Civil Law mentions some Malefactors that are called Vid. Paciamin: 1 Lib.
institut. Tit. 12. Sect. 6.
Servi Poenae, such as were condemned to row at the Oar, or to dig in the
Mines; because they did not obey the Law, and live honestly, they were
subjected to hard Service, and did live miserably: So those that are not
Subjects to Christ, as a King, shall be Servants of Punishment; they shall
serve the Glory of God's Power and Justice, in their eternal Misery and
Sufferings.

5thly, Consider the Nature and Advantages of the Kingdom of Christ. There are
sweet Fruits of the Kingdom of Grace, and there are enriching Benefits of the
Kingdom of Glory. It was prophesied of Christ, as a King, That Men should be
blessed in him, and Nations should call him Blessed. What a Glory is this to
Jesus Christ, that Men are blessed, and shall bless themselves in this King,
that ever they were conquered by the Sword of his Word, that ever they were
brought under the Scepter of his Grace: They shall rejoice that ever they were
bound with the Cords of his Doctrine, and Laws, and subjected to the Yoke of
his Government. They call their King Blessed, that is raised above the reach
and rage of all his Enemies, and is now victorious and triumphant over them;
that reigns so righteously, so peaceably, so prosperously; that dethrones Sin
and Satan, and inthrones God in the Souls of Men; that preserves his People
from sinking into an extremity of Misery, and exalts them to possess an eternal
Felicity. They call him Blessed, that has all Power in Heaven and Earth given
to him, and that has the Key of Hell and Death, Matthew. 28.18. Rev. 1.18. that
has such an unbounded Empirt, and so large, and such an extensive Kingdom;
has power over all Flesh, that he might give eternal Life to as many as the
Father has given him, John 17.2. and is made Head over all things to the
Church, Ephesians. 1.22. that nothing may hinder the Salvation, or obstruct the
Happiness, but all things may promote the Good and Welfare of the Church.

1st. Consider who Jesus Christ is: He (...) God's Righteous Servant, Isa.
53.11. and he Well-beloved Son, Matthew. 3.17. Is it not better to be in the
Kingdom of God's Righteous Servant, than to be under the power of a wicked,
hardened, obstinate Rebel? Is it not more desirable to be translated into the
Kingdom of God's dear Son, Col. 1.13. than to be at the beck and command of
God's bitter Enemy, and implacable Adversary? Christ, the Son of God by nature,
grants the Privilege of Adoption to all his Subjects, John 1.12. This is such a
Mercy, as no Son of an earthly King vouchsafes to his Subjects.

2dly, Jesus Christ reigns to do Right to God, and to establish his Throne in
the Souls of Men. He was designed to raise up those that fell off from God, and
sunk into Ruin, Isa. 49.6. Christ is God's Servant to raise up the Tribes of
Jacob, and to bring back those that were gone astray from God, Isa. 49.5. and
to restore such as were alienated from God, Isa. 49.6. Christ retrieves,
recovers God's Right; he establishes his own Throne by Justice and Judgment,
Isaiah 9.7. and he is said to execute Justice and Judgment in the Earth, Jer.
23.5. Christ executes Justice, in restoring and giving back to God that which
is his own: and he executes Judgment in destroying Satan's Works and Lusts, 1
John 3.8. in mortisying the vile Affections of Sinners. This was one great
Benefit of the Jubilee, that the Servant returned to his Family, Levit. 25.10.
He that was alienated from his Father, and served Strangers, now returned to do
his Duty, and rendered Obedience to his Parents: Even so Jesus Christ restores
Men to God's Family, and grants unto them, as a great Favor and Privilege,
that they may serve him without slavish Fear of Destruction, in Holiness and
Righteousness all the Days of their Lives, Luke 1.74, 75. Yea Christ restores
the Creatures unto God: The Subjects of Christ use them purely; they did not
feed and fuel their Lusts with them, but receive them with thanksgiving, as
their Father's Goods, and Gifts, and use them to strengthen and support them in
the Lord's Work and Service. It is a great perverting, abusing, inslaving the
Creatures, when they victual Satan's Garrisons, and feed his Soldiers: But then
the Creatures are rescued from Bondage, when they nourish God's Priests, and
feed his Worshippers.

3dly, Those that are in Christ's Kingdom are nearly related to him, and to
each other.

1. They are nearly related to Christ: They are his Seed and Children, Isa.
53.10. He shall see his seed. -- Behold, I and the Children, whom God has
given me, Isa. 8.18. Jesus, as a second Adam, as an everlasting Father, begets
them, Isa. 9.6. He is made Sanctification to them, 1 Cor. 1.30. They receive of
his fullness, Grace for Grace, J^^s 1.16. They are Christ's Brethren, Psalm.
22.22. I will declare thy name unto my brethren He is not ashamed to call them
Brethren, Hebr. 2.11. They are the Lamb's Wife, Rev. 19.7. They are the Members
of Christ, Ephesians. 5.30. We are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bone. As Eve was taken out of Adam, as to her human Nature, so we are taken out
of Christ, as to our new and divine Nature. Water and Blood came out of
Christ's Side, John 19.34. The Blood of Christ is the meritorious Cause of our
new State of Justification, and the Water signified the Spirit that gives a new
Nature in Sanctification. And how Honorable is it for Subjects to be so nearly
related to the King of Glory? And how sweet, easy, and gentle, is Christ's
Government over his Children, over his Brethren, over his Spouse and Members?
Surely Christ will not carry a hard, a heavy, a rigorous Hand over those that
are so near and dear to him: He shall spare the poor and needy, Psalm. 72.13.
And, as a Shepherd, shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40.11. Was there ever
such an Honor put on a Flock, as that they should be Members, and Brethren,
and Children of the Shepherd.

2. Christ's Subjects are nearly related to each other; and this is a most
sweet Truth, as well as a great Mystery: They are not only Fellow Servants in
the same House, and Fellow-Citizens in the same City of God; but they are
Brethren in the same Family, and Members of the same Body, and animated, or
influenced, and acted by the same Spirit, and therefore have the greatest
Obligations laid on them to love each other, to seek one another's Good, and
promote one another Welfare. Shall Brethren clash with one another, or Members
fight against each other? He that for Christ's sake is hated of his Father,
Mother, Brethren, Sisters, he does, by virtue of his Interest and Union with
Christ, recover a hundred fold more Kindred and Relations: Elder Christians are
as his Fathers and Mothers, younger Christians are his Brothers and Sisters,
Mark 10.29, 30. yea as his Children to serve and cherish him. O what a blessed
Kingdom is this! when the Subjects are so endeared to each other, that they
have not only sold their Lands to relieve their spiritual Brethren, Acts 2.4,
5. Acts 4.34. but have also jeoparded, and hazarded their Lives, to preserve
the Lives of their Holy Kindred, Romans 16.3, 4. Aquilla and Priscilla laid down
their Necks, exposed themselves to the greatest Dangers, to preserve the Life
of Paul: Rahab ventured her own Life, to preserve the Spies that were the
People of God, Joshua 2.15.

4thly, If we consider the great Benefits that we receive from Christ's Kingdom.

1. He heals, washes, refines, anoints, his Subjects. A Governor is called a
Healer, Isa. 3.6, 7. Jesus Christ, as a King, is a Healer, a Physician to his
whole Kingdom, and to all his Subjects, Matthew. 9.12. Our Souls are diseased,
weak, feeble, ruined; and woe be to us if this Ruin be not under Christ's
Hand! Never was there such a Physician that died to provide a Remedy to recover
and restore his Patients: By his Stripes we are healed, yea by his Death we
live, If a King, that is but a political Head, be the Breath of his Subjects
Nostrils, Lam. 4.20. much more is Christ the Breath of our Nostrils; as he is a
natural Head that gives Life, and continual influences of Grace.

2. Jesus Christ washes, John 13.8. Except I wash thee, thou have no part with
me; that is, in the eternal Inheritance in the Kingdom of Glory. None washes so
powerfully as Christ; he can wash away a Backsliding, Revolting, Rebellious,
Whorish Heart; he can wash away our Spiritual Leprosy, and Plague-Sores; he
can wash our Ethiopian Skin, and our Leopard Spots, Jer. 13.23.

3. Jesus Christ Refines, Mal. 3.23 and there is no such Refiner as Christ, no
such refining sire as Christ's is. A Refiner, or his Fire, cannot change Iron,
Brass, Tin, or Lead, into Gold and Silver; but Christ, by separating our Dross
from us, renders us precious, and makes us Vessels of Gold and Silver, 2 Timothy
2.20.

4. Jesus Christ anoints his Subjects, Ezekiel. 16.9. And I anointed thee with
Oil. This is an Allusion to the sweet smelling Oils, that Persons were purfiied
with, Esther 2.12. The Graces of Christ's Spirit are fragrant, and cause us to
smell sweet in the Nostrils of God and Man. Saints are called Christians,
because they partake of Christ's Ointment, 1 John 2.20, 27. You have an unction
from the Holy One, that is, from Christ: As the Mediator is anointed himself,
so he is styled Christ, and as we are anointed by this Anointer, so we are
called Christians: And this is peculiar to Christ's Subjects, that they are all
anointed, and partake even of the unction of their King. If we have not the
unction of the Spirit of Christ, he will not own us to be Subjects in his
Kingdom; or to be Members of his Body: Romans 8.9. If a^ man have not the spirit
of Christ, he is none of his. Christ's Unction does purisie us from Sin,
consecrate us to God, teach us the sublime Truths, and wonderful Mysteries of
the Kingdom of God, 1 John 2.20.27. The Prophets were anointed, 1 Kings 19.16.
and they, by the unction of the Holy Ghost, were Seers, 1 Samuel 9.9. They did
see sarther, and know more than others. From hence I conceive the Phrase is
borrowed, That the anointing teaches us; and Christ, by anointing us, fits and
exalts us to be spiritual Kings, Rev. 1.5, 6. He has made in Kings. Saints do
command and rule their own Spiri's govern their Thoughts, order and bound their
Affections, curb, restrain, and keep under their Passions; and, as of old,
Wrestlers were anointed, Fabius Agonisticon.
that the Hand of the Adversary might slip off from them, and take no fast sure
hold of them, to throw them; so Christ by anointing us with his Spirit, Satan
is defeated, he is disappointed, he cannot fasten on us, and have Advantages
against us; first to throw our Minds to the Earth, and then to cast our Souls
to Hell.

2dly, In Christ's Kingdom, we have Rest, Matthew. 8.11. Many shall come from the
east and west, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the Kingdom of
God. Souls travel up and down, traverse the Earth to and fro, disquiet
themselves in vain, and weary themselves to no purpose; they never come to sit
down till they press and get into the Kingdom of God, and here is a most
honorable rest to sit in the Throne with Christ, Rev. 3.21.

3dly. In Christ's Kingdom is a Feast; but in Satan's Kigndom Souls famish,
starve and perish with thirst, Luke 22.29, 30. that you eat and drink at my
table, in my Kingdom. God makes a Feast in his Holy Mountain, Isa. 25.6. Saints
have the first Course in this World, and so it is a Dinner, Matthew. 22.4. they
shall enjoy the second and third Courses in Heaven; and so it is the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, Rev. 19.9. Did ever any Shepherd feed his Flock
with his own flesh and blood? Is there any that is a Pastor, and a Pasture too?
yet so is it here, John 6.53, 54, 55, 56, 57. we here eat the flesh, and drink
the blood of the Son of Man in this Life; and in Heaven to all Eternity we
shall feed on the delicious Fruits of Christ, the Tree of Life, Rev. 2.7.

4thly, In Christ's Kingdom is Liberty, John 8.36. If the Son does make you
free, th^^ you shall be free indeed. Christ reigns to destroy the reigning
Power of Sin and Satan, to cast the Prince of this World out of his Throne and
Kingdom, John 12.31. N^^ shall the Prince of this World be cast out. Christ
reigns to tumble down the God of this World from his Heaven, Luke 10.18. Is^^
Satan falling as Lightning from Heaven Christ breaks this oppressor to pieces,
Psalm. 72.4* he bursts the Yoke of Sin, snaps in sunder the Snares of Satan, and
delivers from the bondage of Corruption.

5thly, In Christ's Kingdom is safety. This great Shepherd keeps his Sheep, and
watch^^ over his Flock in this Night of Time, in this Wilderness of the World,
John 17.1^ While I was with them in the World, I kept the^ in thy Name, and
none of them is lost. Saines are said to be preserved in Christ Jesus Jude 1.
Christ guards his Flock, and is a wall of fire round about them, Zech. 2.5. no
Lion shall be there, nor any ravences Beast shall go up thereon, it shall not
be found there: but the Redeemed shall walk there. Satan, that roaring Lion,
shall not prey on Christ's Lambs, or Sheep; they shall be as safe, as if there
were no Beasts of Prey about them; they shall lie down safely in the
wilderness, and sleep securely in the woods, Ezekiel. 34.25. Satan shall not be
there to hurt them, because their Shepherd is still with them to save them,
Psalm. 23.4. Thou art with me in the Valley of the Shadow of Death; I will fear
no evil, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me continually. As David, when a
Shepherd, did fight with a Lion and Bear, and slew them, to rescue a poor Lamb
of his Flock, 1 Samuel 17.34, 35, 36. so Christ did once in his own Person
encounter with, and destroy Satan, Heb. 2.15. and he does by his Spirit and
Grace in his Members, daily sight with him, and foil him, 1 John 2.14. ye are
strong and have overcome the wicked one. Christ stands, feeds and keeps his
Flock in the strength of the Lord, Micah 5.4. and so this one Shepherd is
stronger than all the Beasts of Prey, whether they be wicked Men, or evil
Spirits: as he is omniscient he understands all the difficulties and dangers of
his Sheep; and as he is omnipotent, he can rescue, save, and preserve them.
Though this great Shepherd has a numerous Flock scattered through the World, yet
he knows all his Sheep, and does hear all their Cries and Prayers, Psalm. 72.12,
14. He shall deliver the needy when he cries: the poor also, and hi^ that has
no helper. He shall redeem their S^^ from deceit and violence, and precious
shall they blood be in his sight. Spiritual Enemies (...) attempt against the
People of God, by P^licy or Power; yet Christ frustrates the^ Adversaries in
both: he redeems the Souls (...) his People both from Fraud and Violence no
earthly King can know every Subject^ or hear the Cries and Petitions of all
that are oppressed.

5thly, Jesus Christ strengthens and en^bles his True Subjects to obey him, as
Chr^^^ dwells in their Hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17. so he strengthens his
People, Phil. 4.13. (...) can do all things through Christ that streng^^^^ me.
I will put my Spirit into them, and (...) them to walk in my statutes, Ezekiel.
36.2^ Christ gives Influences, Aids, and Assistan^^ for every Act of Obedience,
because he is (...) a Natural Head that communicates Sp^^^ to his Subjects, as
Members, and as a Ro^^ that derives Sap to all his Branches. T^^ Subjects of
Earthly Kings have no such nee^ of them, or dependence on them, (...) strength
to yield them Obedience. But i^ was prophesied of Christ, Psalm. 72.6. (...)
shall come down like rain on the mowen gr^^ as showers that water the Earth.
This Scripture teaches us how great a Dependence Christ's Subjects have on him,
and how precious a Benefit they receive by him; the ^owen Grass cannot spring
and grow with^^t Rain from Heaven: so Christ's Subjects cannot spring up in
Holiness, or bring forth any Fruits of Righteousness, except they have a Rain
of Influences, a Shower of gracious Communication from the Lord Jesus Christ.
Every Subject of Christ is a dry ground, Isa. 42.3. and needs watering from
that River, yea from that Fountain of Grace that is above in Christ. We cannot
take one step in the way toward a Blessed Eternity, but leaning on Christ,
Cant. 8.5. the Church comes up out of the wilderness, and travels toward the
Heavenly Canaan, leaning on her beloved. Ezekiel. 45.17. the King there spoken of,
was to provide and prepare all Sacrifices, as Burnt-Offerings, Sin Offerings,
and Thank-Offerings, for the People his Subjects. By this King I understand
Christ, as he did give himself for us, a Lamb for a burnt-offering, John 1.29.
as a sin-offering, 2 Cor. 5.21. so he furnishes us with Thank-Offerings, he
kindles Love in our Hearts by his own Beams, he circumcises our Hearts, Col.
2.11. cuts off the filthy foreskin of sinful, inordinate Self-love, that did
hinder and intercept our Love to God, and it is by virtue of our Marriage-Union
with him, that we bring forth Fruits to God, Romans 7.4. all the fruits of
righteousness are by Jesus Christ to the praise and glory of God, Phil. 1.11.

6thly, Jesus Christ receives the Souls of (...) Subjects at last; as he
committed his ow^ Soul at death, to the hands of the Father Luke 23.46. so now
he has merited and ^^tained this Honor to be the Receiver a^^ Guardian of
departing Souls, Acts 7.5^ Stephen called upon God, saying, Lord Je^^ receive
my Spirit: he called upon God, t^ it was through Christ the Mediator; God would
not receive, but reject, and ab^^^ our Spirits, were they not joined to, (...)
accepted in, and had access to him thro^^^ Christ: Oh how desirable a King is
Je^^ Christ, that will be a Friend to us, when (...) forsake us, or can do
nothing for our So^^s Oh what a Trust does Jesus Christ undert^^e, to keep
departed Souls till the last day, and then restore them to glorious Bodies. O^^
departing Souls must fall into the hands (...) an angry Sin-revenging God, were
the^ not such a gracious King in whose Hand we might deposite and trust them.

7thly, Jesus Christ is such a King that (...) conquer and destroy Death, 1
Cor. 15.^^ he threatens it, Hos. 13.14. O death I will (...) thy plague: O
grave I will be thy destruction here is a promise in the Verse to the Sain^s I
will ransom them from the power of the gr^^^ I will redeem them from death: and
this promise is joined with a threatening against Dear^ and the Grave. How
wonderful, ho^ great and mighty a King is Jesus Christ, that threatens so
powerful and victorious a King as Death is! How long has Death reigned, and
how large an Empire has it had in the World! it is said Romans 5.14. Death
reigned from Adam to Moses; yea, we may extend the duration of its Kingdom
further; it has reigned from the Fall of the first Adam to this day; and how
many conquered Subjects has it had? 1 Cor. 15.22. in Adam all died. Death is
such a King as shakes its Black Rod over, and brandishes it is sharp and
glittering Sword against the whole World; it has threatened, arrested, and cut
off the Greatest Kings and Conquerors; it has been very Terrible to them that
by Oppression, Violence, and Cruelty, caused their Terror in the Land of the
Living, Ezekiel. 32.23. none of the Kings of the World can prevent the Fatal
stroke of Death on themselves, much less can they divert it from their
Subjects: but Christ is such a King as combats with Death, and overcomes it;
he tasted Death indeed himself once, Heb. 2.9. but it was to abolish it, 2 Cor.
1.10. he became a Subject to it for a time, that he might swallow it up for
ever, and be a Lord over the dead to raise them up, Romans 14.9. and rescue them
from this Enemy. And how strong, yet how sweet are these Words of Christ, I
will be the plague of death; I will be a Discase, yea, a mortal Disease to kill
Death it self: and, Grave, I will be thy destruction. Christ fulfills his
threatening, when he seeks out the Dust of his People, and forms it up into a
Body: this defeats and disanuls the Victory of the Grave, that it may be said,
O Grave* where is thy victory? though thou did corrupt, putresie, and
dissolve our Bodies, th^^ thou did devour our Flesh and crumble it into Dust,
and take away the very shape of a Body, yet we have new Bodies formed and
organized again, and when these Bodies shall receive their Souls, and be
quickened by them, then it may be said, O death, where is thy sting? 1 Cor.
15.55. What ha^^ thou gotten by stinging and killing our Bodies? behold, they
are alive again! The^e is a Day when the Lord will make upon Jewels, Malachy
3.17. And then God's Jewels are made up, when immortal Souls shall be joined
to, and set in the Rings of Glorious Bodies. Christ is such a King as will
conform all his Subjects to himself, both is Soul and Body: When he regenerates
the Soul, then it bears the Image of the second Adam; when he raises the Body,
this is ^s proper Regeneration to be begotten, and born from the dead, as
Christ was, Col. 1.1^. Revel. 1.5. When old Adam's Tenor is out, and quite
abolished; when Christ, b^ his Spirit, quickens the Body, Romans 8.11. then it
bears the Image of the Heavenly Adam, and is held of him, 1 Cor. 15.49. Saints
are the Children of God, as they are the Children of the Resurrection, Luke
20.^6. This is a new Ground, and Reason, why they should be called the Children
of God, the Seed of Christ. When Saints awake out of the Dust, they shall be
satisfied with God's likeness, Psalm. 17.15. When they are begotten again into a
lively Hope, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. they bear God's Image in their Souls; but when they
shall be raised, or be begotten from the dead, then they shall also bear
Christ's Image in their Bodies, and so shall be satisfied with the Image of
Christ as an Everlasting Father. O what a precious Merby! What an incomparable
Privilege is this! that Jesus Christ will not forget or reject our Dust for
ever, but seek it out, and form it up as an Habitation for our Souls, and an
everlasting Temple for his Spirit to dwell in.

8thly, Jesus Christ is such a King, as will gather and draw up all his sincere
Subjects to him, to be with him for ever, 1 These. 4.17. As he receives their
Souls in a dying Hour, Psalm. 49.15. Acts. 7.59. so he will come again to revive
their Bodies, and then he will receive their whole Man to himself, John. 14.3.
What wonderful Grace and Kindness is this, that where the Master is, there the
Servant shall also be, John 12.20. That the Sheep shall for ever dwell with the
great Shepherd, and all the Subjects of this Glorious King shall abide with
him, and see his Glory, so as to share in it, and partake of it, John 17.24. 2
These. 2.14. Christ, the King, is the Harbinger and Forerunner of his Subjects,
Hebr. 6.20. He is gone into another World to choose an Eternal Inheritance for
his Brethren, Psalm. 47.4. He shall choose our Inheritance for us: And Christ,
by interceeding with his Father, that his People may be with him, does prepare
a Place for them, John 17.24. John 14.2, 3. Christ's Intercession is so
powerful, that it cannot be denied.

I would now give you some Counsels and Directions, that you may stay and
contin^e in this Kingdom, and not be gathered (...) of it, and deprived of the
Blessedness and Glory of it.

1st. O come forth and see King Solom^^, Cant. 3.11. This King Solomon is King
Jesus; he has made him a rich and glori^^ Chariot to ride forth in, and to
visit Kingdoms, Nations, and People. The Gospel as preached in the World is the
Spiritu^^ Chariot, that Christ sits in, and the wh^^ Horse he rides on, Rev.
6.2. The Church in her Ministers may be, and is compar^^ to the Horses in
Pharaoh's Chariot, Cant ^.9. The Church, by her Ministers, does dr^^ Jesus
Christ about the World. O consider this, the Gospel is not fixed to one Nation;
the Chariot of Christ is moving, and may quickly pass by us and be gone from
us. It is a great Mercy, that Christ's Chariots come to us, that he appears
among us. O slight not the Opportunity; neglect not the Day of Grace: Come
sorth from your Ignorance and Night of Darkness; come forth from your slight,
low, and contemptible Thoughts of Christ: O fix the Eye of your Minds on him,
look with a steady Eye on Christ, John 6.40. (...), We should contemplate the
Son, our Minds should dwell on him; we should not content our selves with
seldom and transient Glances on Christ, but our Thoughts should be conversant
about Christ. Do we not need Christ? Is he not absolutely necessary for us?
Must we not wander, if Christ does not guide us, and fall if he does not
support us; and be a Prey to Satan, if he does not guard and protect us? Must
we not famish, if he does not feed us; and perish, if he does not fold us? And
be Friendless and Harbourless at last, if he does not receive us? How will you
look Death, or the Judge in the Face, if you do not first see Christ, and his
Salvation? O view, and look well on Christ. Is there any thing in him to be
disliked, to be excepted against? Is he not altogether lovely, Cant. 5.16.
Whatever is desirable, all meets in Jesus Christ, and there is nothing in him
but what is lovely; what may kindle Love, draw Hearts, captivate Souls. If you
dislike any thing in Christ, if you harbor any Prejudice, cherish any
Objection against him, it is because Satan has blinded your Minds, and cast a
Veil over your Hearts, 2 Cor. 4.4, 5.

2dly, O run to Jesus Christ: Isa. 55.5. Th^^ shall call a nation thou know
not, and people that knew not thee, shall run unto thee, because of the Lord
thy God; because of the holy one of Israel that has glorified thee. O will you
not run to him who is the Seat of Beauty, the Fountain of Honor, the Treasury
of all spiritual Riches, the Subject and Center of Life? Will you not run to
the Captain, the Author, the Wells of Salvation? Hebr. 2.10. Hebr. 5.9. Isa.
12.3. O will you not fly from Sin, Satan, and Eternal Death, by running to
Christ? Is there any shadow from scorching Heat, but Christ's? Cant. 2.2. Any
Wing to cover you from Birds of Prey, but his? Psalm. 36.7. Any Fold to protect
you from Beasts of Prey, b^^ Christ's Fold? John 10.9. He that enters by me
(that is into the Fold) shall be saved. (...) Sinners can give no Reason why
they will Dye, Ezekiel. 18.31. surely they can give ^ Reason, why they should not
run to Jes^^ Christ. That Text, Isa. 55.5. affords cogent Arguments, mighty
Reasons why we should run to him.

1. God is his God: If ever we would have any comfortable Knowledge of God, any
honorable Relation to God, any sweet Communion with God, we must run to Jesus
Christ. God is only to be found, and enjoyed in Christ. Will you cut your
selves off? Will you estrange your selves for ever from God? Will he not be a
satisfying and an everlasting Portion, when all other Comforts fail, all other
Friends forsake, all our Lamps are put out?

2. God the Father has glorified him: He has exalted him. And shall we
depress, debase him, and keep him still in a state of Humiliation? Has the
Father given him a Throne in Heaven; and shall we deny him one in our Hearts?
Are Angels, Principalities, and Powers made subject to him, 1 Pet. 3.32. and
shall we lift up our selves against him? Do the noblest Creatures worship at
his Footstool, and execute his Commands; and shall we reject his Yoke, affront
his Authority, and trample his Laws under our Feet? Is Christ glorified; and
will you despise and slight him? Is not a glorified Redeemer worthy of our
Love, Praise, and Obedience? Shall vile and dunghill Objects draw away our
Affections, and a glorified Savior be denied our Hearts? Would we not commend
our Spirits to him at last, and shall we not give our Hearts to him now, Prove.
23.26. Shall our last Act be our first Gift to Jesus Christ? Will thou commend
thy Soul to Christ only, when thou can keep it no longer in the Body? Is it
not dreadful for a Glorified Christ with his Omnipotent Arm to fall on thee for
Destruction? Is it not desirable that a Glorified Christ by his Almighty Power
should draw thee up to him for Salvation?

3. Kiss the Son, Psalm. 2. last. this is a spiritual Act of Homage, 1 Samuel
10.1. Samuel did anoint and kiss Saul, thereby recognizing his Authority, and
obliging himself to Obedience and Subjection to him, as his Sovereign: The
Promise is the Mouth of Christ, and Faith is the Mouth of the Soul, and when
the Mouth of Faith is applied to the Mouth of Christ in the Promise, then we
give Christ a spiritual Kiss; when Christ speaks, and offers himself, we should
come in with our Amen of Faith, 2 Cor. 1.20. to the word of him who is the
Amen, and the faithful witness, Rev. 3.14. our Obedience and Subjection to
Christ should not be seigned, or forced, but begin in a faithful and loving
Kiss to him that is Love it self, Cant. 3.5. when Christ applies his Words and
Promises of Grace to us, then he kisses us with the kisses of his Mouth, Cant.
1.2. when we apply our Mouth of Faith to Christ's Word of Grace, when we
sincerely declare our Assent and Consent to it, then we kiss Christ.

4. We must press into the Kingdom of Christ, as it were force a Passage into
it, and take it by violence, Luke 16.16. Matthew. 11.12. we must have a Room, a
Place in Christ's Kingdom, he must reign over us, or else Sin, Death, and the
Devil, will reign over us: We must enter into Christ's Palace, or be shut up in
his Prison: we must press into Christ's Kingdom, that we may avoid a future
eternal Storm of Vengeance. Those that are hungry and famishing, will force
into a place where there is Plenty of Bread. Poor necessitious Soldiers will
storm, will break into a rich City with the hazard of their Lives, and shall we
not be urgent to get into Christ's Kingdom, where there is a Royal Feast, a
sweet Rest, unsearchable and eternal Riches? if you are not Christ's, you will
be Satan's. Do you not fear to see God's frowning face, to feel his punishing
hand, to drop into the bottomless Pit, to be cast into the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone for ever. Be not cold or indifferent whether you get into
Christs's Kingdom or no. Do not content your selves with loose hopes,
ungrounded and presumptuous Confidences, lukewarm and lazy Endeavors. It is
said, the Gentiles should fall down to the Church, and make Supplication to
her, that is to prevail with her, to be admitted and received by her into the
Kingdom of Christ, it is further foretold, Zech. 8. last, That ten men of all
Languages of the Nations should take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew,
and so is a True Believer and a spiritual Worshipper, and say, we will go with
you, for we have heard that God is with you. They would not be put by, they
would not be shaken or cast off, they resolved they would join themselves to
the Church of God, and not be excluded, kept, or thrust out. It is said, the
Gentiles should flow as waters to God's Holy Mountain, Is. 2.23. and should fly
as clouds, and as doves to their windows, Isa 60.8. this expresses serious,
earnest, and spiritual Violence.

5. That you may be thus Earnest, you must desire Christ to cast chains of
Light, and Love about you; to subdue, conquer, and overcome you, Isa. 45.14. it
is promised that the Gentiles should come over, a^^ come after the Church in
Chains. Christ must fasten those Chains on, and about the Souls of Sinners, and
draw them that they may run after him, Cant. 1.4. though Christ's Name be as a
fragrant Ointment, Cant. 1.3. as a strong perfume, though there be a drawing
Beauty, Excellency, Treasure, Love, in Christ, yet all these will not prevail
without an Almighty and drawing Arm, such is out averseness and perverseness.
It is prophesied of Christ, That he should subdue the Peoples and the Nations
under the Feet of the Church, Psalm. 47.3. so that they shall bow at the Feet of
the Church, and worship God at her Feet as her Disciples and Children, Revel.
3.9. And we cannot be subdued to Christ, if our Iniquities are not subdued,
Micah 7.19. Christ cannot rule over us, if Sin do reign in us; the Law of
Christ, and the Law of Sin are contrary and inconsistent.

6. We must openly own and avow Christ, and most strongly engage our selves to
him. 1. We must openly own, confess, and avow Christ. It is prophesied of
Egypt, That there should be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the Land, and
also a Pillar at the Border, to declare to all, That Egypt was converted to,
and become a Worshipper of the Lord, Isa. 19.19. Those that stood with the Lamb
on Mount Zion, had their Father's Name written in their Forehead, Rev. 14.1.
Cyprian says, That when Christians were apprehended, they did not deny, but
confessed themselves Christians, always to the danger, and sometimes to the
loss of their Lives. 2. We must most solemnly and strongly engage our selves to
the Lord. It is said, That the Egyptians should swear to the Lord, Isa. 19.18.
and so as it were take an Oath of spiritual Allegiance to Christ, Psalm.
119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments. Another remarkable Expression we find, Isa. 44.5. One shall say, I
am the Lord's, another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord. Converts
should as it were draw Indentures, and give it under Hand and Seal, That they
would be the Lord's Servants; That they would not start, recoil, or go back
from him, Jer. 50.4, 5. Let us join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
covenant that shall not be forgotten. As a bought, a redeemed People, they are
devoted, and consecrated as First Fruits to God and the Lamb, never to be
alienated, or put to a common use any more, Revel. 14.4.

7. We must daily grow in Grace, and be adding new Cubits to our spiritual
Stature, 2 Pet. 1.5. The new Creature must, as a Tree, spread and strike its
Roots deeper into our Souls, Hos. 14.5. The Water that Christ gives us, must,
as a Well, spring up higher and higher in our Souls, John 4.14. Worldly Men are
still coveting more Earthly Treasure, to add House to House, and to join Field
to Field, that they might be plac^^ alone in the Earth, Isa. 5.8. And is the^^
not more reason, that we should add Grace to Grace, one degree of Grace to
another that Christ and the new Creature might be placed alone in our Souls,
without Riv^'ss Competitors, or Enemies. By growth i^ Grace, we pass and get
farther into Christ's Kingdom, we have an abundant Entrance into it, we press
even into the very Heart and Center of Christ's Kingdom, and do not stay in the
Out skirts and Borders of it. God has promised to Christ the increase and
enlargement of his Kingdom, Isa. 9.7. with Zech. 9.10. And (...) we restrain
and straiten the Kingdom of Christ? As this Stone grows and fills the Earth
without, Dan. 2.35. so it should increase, and sill the Soul within. It was
prophesied of Christ, That he should reign and prosper, Jer. 23.5. That he
should ride forth conquering and to conquer, Revel. 6.2. Let these Prophecies
be fulfilled in thee; do not stint, stop, or bound Christ's Kingdom in thy Soul.

8. We must be diligent, active, industrious Servants: Trade with Christ's
Talents, improve his Stock, increase his Pounds. Our Lord that is gone into a
far Country, yet has disposed his Goods, has bestowed Gifts on his Servants,
and enjoined every one his Work, Mark 13.34. with Luke 19.13, 15. Christ would
have no idle, no lazy, no droneish Servant in his House. All these Talents and
Gifts are bestowed, that we might act for Christ, enlighten, and draw in others
to Christ, promote and advance his Kingdom, and increase the number of his
Subjects. Our Candle of Knowledge should tind and light many other Candles: Our
Fire of Love and Zeal, should warm and inflame many others. While the Church
gave a Character of Christ's Worth, a Description of his Beauty, Cant. 5.9, 10,
11, 12, 13. the Daughters of Jerusalem apprehended and conceived that he was
some extraordinary Person; one transcendantly Excellent, that she had such
fervent Love to him, and did so earnestly enquire after him. And this so
wrought on them, that their Hearts did burn with desires after Christ, and they
would seek him with the Church, Cant. 6.1. We should say as the godly Jews,
Cant. 8.8. We have a little sister that has no breasts, What shall we do (that
is to promote a Marriage between Christ and her) in the day she shall be spoken
for, and be wooed to be espoused to Christ? The Church promises she would cause
Christ's Name to be remembered in all Generations; that is, by the preaching of
the Word, and thereby bringing forth a Holy Seed to continue, and perpetuate
Christ's Name in the World, Psalm. 72.17. His name shall be continued for ever:
(...) Jinnon (that is his Name) shall have Sons. Thou art concerned in, and
bound by this Promise: Every true Member of the Church is obliged by it, to do
what he can to propogate Christ's Interest, to promote his Kingdom, and
continue his Name in the World.

9. We must be willing to suffer for the Kingdom of God, 2 These. 1.5. The
Apostle John joins the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, Revel. 1.9. but
Paul joins the Kingdom and Glory of God, 1 These. 2.11. First we must pass
through the Kingdom and Patience of Christ, before we pass into the Kingdom and
Glory of God. We cannot enter into, and continue in the Kingdom of Christ, but
the World will hate and persecute us: John 8.14. I have given them thy word,
and they have received it, and the world has hated them. Saints suffered so
freely, so willingly, so joyfully for the Kingdom of Christ, that the World was
amazed. Cyprian tells us, That Christians, when their Enemies offered to
apprehend them, they did not resist; when they asked them of their Religion,
they did not tell a Lie, or deny their Faith; they took joyfully the spoiling
of Goods, Heb. 10.34. rejoiced that they were counted worthy to be beaten for
Christ, Acts 5.41. If they were to be offered up to confirm the Faith of
others, and to evidence their own Faith, they did rejoice, Phil. 2.17. They
endured exquisite Torments with such undaunted Courage, and such unrelenting
Spirits, that Natural Men would rather have denied things clear by mathematical
Demonstrations, than have exposed themselves to such Tortures. As In his
Preface to his Disputations on Thomas Aquinas.
Medina truly affirms.

10. You must lead Holy Lives your Light must shine before Men, Matthew. 5.16.
you must hold forth the Excellency, Power, and Efficacy of the Word in your
Actions, Phil. 2.6. when Paul had asserted his Faith, that he did believe a
Resurrection of the just, and the unjust, he presently declares the Fruit of
this Truth, Acts 24.15, 16. In this I exercise my self, to keep a Conscience
void of offense both toward God and man: he did act and practice according to
this Truth, it had a prevailing Influence on his Heart, a commanding Anthority
over his Actions; you must much converse with God here, Psalm. 139.17. when I am
awake, I am ever with thee: and how fitly do those Two Expressions agree; Devid
was ever with the Lord on Earth, and Paul says, Christians should be ever with
the Lord in Heaven, 1 These. 4.17. there must be a walking with God on Earth,
Genesis 8.24. Enoch walked with God, and God took him, and why did God take him,
and for what End? was it not to walk with him in Heaven, Rev. 3.4. those that
had not defiled their Garments should walk with Christ in white, we must shine
as lights in this world, Phil. 2.15. that hereafter we may shine a the sun, in
the king dom of our Father, Matthew. 13.43. Jesus Christ must be glorified in us
now, John 17.10. I am glorified in them, that we may be assured he will be
glorified and admired in us hereafter, 2 These. 1.10. when he will be revealed
from Heaven, he will be glorified in his Saints, and be admired in them the
believe. Christians must not be like the Heathen Philosophers. Athenagoras in
his (...), or Apology for the Christians, charges the^ that they sought and
aimed at (...), an Art of Words, but not a Demonstration of Works; but he
says, that Christian Handicrafts-men and Old Women that could not discourse
for their Religion, did yet demonstrate its Excellency in their Works. When
they were beaten, they would not strike again; when they were wronged in their
Estates, they would not go to Law; they would pray for them that persecuted
them, and love those that hated them.

11. Consider how great Guilt you will contract, and what hateful and
abominable Creatures you will be, if you reject the Word of the Kingdom, and
enter not into it. Christ bid his Disciples to shake off the Dust of their Feet
against such, Luke 10.9, 10, 11. for a Testimony against them. They that refuse
the Gospel of the Kingdom, and turn away from the King of Glory, are such
unclean Creatures, that Christ's Ministers were not to defile themselves, or
their Feet, by carrying away any of their Dust; but to shake it off, and leave
it as a witness there, that Christ's Ambassadors had been there, had preached
to them, and been rejected by them. This very Dust should remain with them to
testify, and give in Evidence against them in the great Day, that they would
not open their Ears to Christ, speaking in his Ministers, but obstinately
hardened their Hearts, both against the Master and the Servants, against the
Lord and his Subjects. Tas^ heed therefore, that you reject not him that speaks
from Heaven: Be jealous over your own Souls, that you receive not the Doctrine
of Grace, the Word of the Kingdom in vain, 2 Cor. 6.2. as the Highway, the
stony, and thorny Ground did. Let Christ's Word root in your Hearts, shine and
reign in your Lives: Do not think to blind your Eyes, stupifie your
Consciences, and cheat your own Souls with an outside Religion. Great was the
Sin of Ananias and Saphira, that pretended to devote the whole Price, that they
sold their Land for, to the Service of Christ and his Church, yet kept back
part of it; and so lied to God, and tempted the Holy G^o^^, Acts 5.3, 9. O do
not dare to tread in their Steps: Will you tempt Christ and his Spirit, whether
they are omniscient? Or try when there you cannot put a Fallacy or Cheat o^ them?
Will you make a costly and dangerous Experiment, whether they cannot find out
your base Metal, your counterfeit Coin, your hypocritical Services: Though you
pretend to know God, Hos. 8.2. yet without sincerity, Christ will not approve
and know you, Matthew. 7.23. Let not Christ's Word be received only into your
Memories, but let Christ himself be entertained in your Hearts, to order your
Affections, and direct your Conversations. If you do not open to Christ your
Hearts below, he will not (...) pen to you his Heaven above.

4. Use, For Caution: Take heed you do not rashly judge, and hastily pass a
Censure on the Kingdom of Christ, and on the Church of God. Turks, Jews, and
Heathens, that see the loose and wicked Lives of some Christians, do presently
condemn all Christians, as if there were no sincere Piety, powerful Religion,
or Beauty of Holiness among them; and thereby take an advantage to reproach
Christ himself, and to reflect on his Gospel, as if it did allow, and he did
approve such things: When as Christ loves Righteousness, and hates Iniquity,
Psalm. 45.67. He forbids all Sin, he dislikes and abhors all Iniquity, Matthew
22.10, 11. Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding garment.
Christ has spoken plainly enough, Except a man be born again, unless Men
repent and be converted, John 3.3, 5. Matthew. 18.3. they cannot enter into the
kingdom of God: That without Holiness Men shall not see God, Hebr. 12.14. These
Instructions and warnings of Christ are plain, yet many presume, and thrust
into the Church of God, and give the Lie to Jesus Christ, as if they should
live in Glory, though they be dead in Sin; and see God, though they are ^oid,
and utterly destitute of Holiness. But ^^ere will shortly be an end of all
their Pre^^^ptions and ungrounded Confidences, of (...) their deceitful and
treacherous Hopes; and those that stumble at the seandalous Persons that are in
the Church, let them wait but a little, and these Spots shall be washed off
from the Face; these Wens, these gangreen'd Limbs shall be cut off from the
Body of the Church; this Dross shall be p^^ away for ever. Jesus Christ has a
shaip Sickle to cut those Tares, Rev. 14.14. An Ax to hew down those barren
Trees. a Fan to purge his Floor, a Furnace (...) unquenchable Fire to burn up
the Chaff Matthew. 3.12. The Goats and the Sheep go in the same Pasture in the
Daytime, b^ when the Evening comes, there is a Separation; the Goats go to
their Penn, and ^e Sheep to their Fold: So Jesus Christ, when he comes to judge
the World, shall separate the Goats and Sheep, Matthew. 25.31, 32 Though they are
now in the same visible Church, yet Jesus Christ shall part them, and set the
Sheep on his Right Hand, and the Go^ on his Left. Christ will disown Hypocrites
and exclude them out of his Glory: He will own the Sincere, and call them to
inherit (...) Kingdom, Matthew. 25.34. Do not rashly judge those to be related to
Christ, that will be rejected by him. They that Feign, that Flatter, that Lie
to Josus Christ, will be detected and abhorred by him; his Eyes will be as a
flaming Fire to discover them, and his Wrath will be as a consuming Fire to bum
them up. But then the true Church of Christ shall be as a Bride adorned for her
Husband, Revel. 21.2. She shall shine with beautiful Holiness, and glorious
Righteousness, and be without spot and wrinkle, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. mete to be
presented and fit to be married to Christ, and to be an Object of his Love for
Christ to rejoice in, and delight himself with to Eternity. Then shall there be
no more a pricking Briar, a wounding or piercing Thorn, no stinking Weeds, no
empty Vines, no barren Fig Trees in the Garden of God. Nothing shall any longer
desorm, or defile the Church. The People of the Church shall be all righteous,
the Branch of God's planting, the Work of his Hands, that he may be glorified,
Isa. 60.21. The Image of God shall be fully drawn on them, the Law of God shall
be perfectly transcribed into them, no Fooesteps of Sin shall remain on them,
no dross of Corruption shall cleave to them; they shall be transformed by the
perfect renewing of their Minds: Then they will appear as Trees of
Righteousness, Isa. 61.3. and bear all pleasant Fruits, and the chief of
Spices, Cant. 4.13, 14. And those that have flourished in God's Nursery below
for a time, they shall at last be transplanted into, and so grow in the
Heavenly Paradise for ever.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
These BOOKS are Published the Author of this Book.
1. THE Great Duty of Christi^ to go forth without the Ca^ to Jesus: Set forth
in several Serm^ on Hebr. 13.13.

2. Supplication to the Sovere^ Judge: The Duty of the best M^ Set forth in
several Sermons (...) Job. 9.15.

3. A Discourse in several Serm^ on the 1 Peter 3.19. By which also went and
preached unto the Spirits Prison.


