Christ's Ministers must shortly put off their TABERNACLES.

Set forth in a Funeral Sermon: Preached at Hungerford, at the Interring OF Mr.
Ric. Moor, Late Minister of the Gospel there.

By Samuel Tomlyns, M. A. and Minister of the Gospel at Marlborough.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Threee Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel, 1694.

THE Epistle Dedicatory, TO The Honorable Sir HEAL HOOK, Baronet, of Chilton,
in the County of Wilts; Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied, from God the
Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
THE Sermon that I preached at the Funeral of my Worthy Friend, and your near
Neighbor, Mr. Richard Moor, late of Hungerford, I here present to you, with
some small Enlargements. I did not think of publishing it, but the importunity
of some has prevailed with me to transcribe and print it. The Subject insisted
on, is weighty; it treats of putting off our Earthly Tabernacles. It is that
which must certainly be, and it can be done but once; It is appointed for all
men once to die, Heb. 9.27. and it is said, The Master of the House will once
Rise, and shut the Door of his House, Luke 13.25. He will rise to shut it
against the slothful and Negligent, against the impenitent and unbelieving. And
when he is once Risen, and has shut the door, he will never rise again to open
it. Those that are once excluded are excluded, and undone for ever. The Errors
committed in this Life cannot be redressed or mended, by living again; and
Christ will never revoke his Sentence that he has pronounced against those
that have trifled away their day of Life, and sinned away their day of Grace;
it is your Duty and Interest to think of and prepare for the putting off your
Earthly Tabernacle. If a man be warned out of one House in this World, he will
consider how to furnish, and provide himself with another. Our Souls must
dislodge out of these Cottages of Clay, and Tabernacles of Flesh; and shall we
not think of another habitation? How will God dispose of us, where will he six
us for Eternity? Then we begin to be wise, when we number our days, and think
of, and prepare for our Removal into an Everlasting State; Heb. 6.19.
then we establish our hearts, when we cast Anchor within the Vail; then we
provide never-failing Springs of Consolation, when we look not at the things
that are seen, but at the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4.18.

How unreasonable is it for an immortal Soul to mind only its Tabernacle-state
in this World, and to put all its Comforts and Happiness upon an inch, a moment
of time, and on days of an hands breadth? Would it not be Folly and Madness for
a man to be careful how he should live for one day, and be careless of all his
other days? And is it not worse to be solicitous for the one short day of Time,
and to be regardless of the innumerable days of Eternity? O why should we be so
dim, so short sighted, as to discern only the Objects of Sense, and things near
to us, and not to behold things that are afar off; the Feast that is to be
enjoyed, the Treasure that is to be possessed, the Country that is to be
inherited after death. Solomon speaks of it as bad for persons to be born into
the world, and have nothing; to be Heirs of Poverty and Beggary, Eccles. 5.14.
He begets a Son, and there is nothing in his hand: But it is much worse to
be born into Eternity, and to have nothing; to have interest in no Friend,
Title to no Inheritance, Claim to no suitable, and satisfying Good, to live on
for Eternity; for nothing to remain but the sin of men, and the wrath of God,
1. John last, 3. John last. By the Fall of the First Adam we were all
captivated to seen things, and fell under the power of the Life of Sense. It is
the mighty, and rich Grace of God that must raise us from this low and base
life of Sense, to an higher and Nobler life of Faith; converse with, and dwell
on invisible and eternal things in our thoughts and affections, tho we have all
sinned, and so come short of the Glory of God, Romans 3.23. Yet it is possible we
may be justified by Faith, have peace with God, and rejoice in the hope of the
Glory of God. The Son of God has proclaimed a Spiritual Jubilee, Isa. 61.2.
that not only our lost liberty may be retrieved, but also our alienated
Inheritance may be recovered. The Lord fix your Eye and center your Heart on
invisible and eternal things that when you shall be a Steward out of Office,
you may be an Heir in possession. These are the unfeigned desires of,

Your Affectionate and Humble Servant, S. T.

A Funeral Sermon, Preached at Hungerford at the Interring of Mr. Richard Moor,
late Minister of the Gospel there.
2 Pet. 1.14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as
our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me.
IN the Text we may observe these several Parts, a Name given to the Body, it
is called a Tabernacle; and this Name imports its frailty and weakness; there
is a vast difference between the present and future Estate of it; now it is a
Feeble Tabernacle, but hereafter it shall be a strong and everlasting House, 2
Cor. 5.2. In this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed with our houses
which shall be Raised by the second sinless Adam, (...); or this Name implies
that Men continue in this Tabernacle but a little time, while they are Warring
with Enemies below, and Traveling to their Fathers House above.

2. We have a description of Death; it is the putting off this Tabernacle; we
are but Temporary Sojourners in the Body; by sin our first Parents Sold the
Fee-simple of life, and we have now but a short Lease of it, yea, are Tenants
at the will of our great Landlord, when he removes us out of our Tabernacle we
must depart and be gone; that Body which to standing Adam would have been an
everlasting House, to Fallen Man, is but a Temporary Cottage; but this
expression of the Apostle, to put off this Tabernacle, may seem a Catachrisis,
or bold Metaphor; yet if we stop not in the surface, but search deeper into the
Expression, we shall find great Emphasis, and Elegancy in it. A Tabernacle is a
standing Garment, and a Garment is a movable Tabernacle, they both serve for
the same end and use, to keep off the inconvenience or hurt the Body may
sustain by being exposed to the open Air, to Rainy, or cold Weather.

3. The Apostle Peter intimates, that the time for his departure out of the
Body was app^^^^ning, and near at hand, I must shortly put off this Tabernacle.
If Violent hands do pull down this Tabernacle, it will be shortly put off; if
it be suffered to continue till it fall of it self, that then it will be
shortly put off, this Clay Cottage will soon moulder down, this Lamp of Life
will quickly go out, if no violent strong breath does blow it out, we shall of
our own accord within a little time, drop from the Tree of Life, if no violent
Wind does shake us down, or cruel hand does a little sooner pluck us from it.

4. Peter tells us his especial ground why he did know that shortly he must put
off his Earthly Tabernacle, because the Lord Jesus Christ had told him so;
Jesus Christ could not be mistaken about a future Event. He knew what Cruel Men
would endeavor to commit, and what he himself would permit, and therefore
certainly warned Peter of that violent Death that did abide him. Peter in these
words seems to relate to, and reflect on what is Recorded in the 21 John 18,
19. That when he was old another should Gird him, that is, with Bonds of
Chains, and carry him whither he would not; that is, he should be led to such
Hard Sufferings, and cruel Death as Nature was averse to, and did recoil from.
Peter had lived several years since this Prediction, and therefore the
fulfilling and accomplishing of it, could not now be far off.

The Doctrine that the words offer, and offered to us is this.

Doctr. Christ's Ministers must shortly put off their Earthly Tabernacles.
Peter an Eminent Apostle was to submit to, and fall under the Fatal Stroke of
Death: To Die indeed is common to all Men, but to be put to Death for the
Gospel, this is peculiar to Christians and Saints. Death makes War against the
Ambassadors of Peace, blows out the Sacred Lamps of the Sanctuary, silences
the very Friends of the Bridegroom; so that they can no more Solicit a
Marriage between the Lord of Life, and poor Perishing Sinners. This King of
Terrors not only Executes Saints, but also cuts off even Christ's Se^^es-men,
and sows them in the Dust, Reapes the Lords Harvestmen, and Removes them into
the Barn of Heaven, and gathers them into the Garners of Glory; that sad
Providence that is the occasion of this Solemnity, is an evident Proof, and
clear demonstration of the Truth of the Doctrine, one of the Lords Messengers
in the Flower, and Prime of his Days, has quickly put off his Tabernacle.

In the handling of the Doctrine I shall 1. Take notice of the Name given to
the Body, 2. Insist upon the Name given to Death. 3. I shall show you why even
Ministers must put off this Tabernacle. 4. I shall evidence what ground they
have to conclude, that shortly they must put off their Tabernacle.

1. Let us consider the Name put on the Body, It is called a Tabernacle, as I
hinted before.

1. To express its weakness; on this account it is Styled an Earthen Vessel, 2
Cor. 4.7. By a little knock this Earthly Vessel may easily be dashed to Pieces,
a little Sickness looses the Cords, pulls up the Stakes, and overthrows this
Tabernacle. A Disease of a few days pulls it down to the dust, as grass we
spring up and wither, as bubble we rise and fall, as vapors we appear and
vanish away, 4. James 14.14. Job 1. We act a short part on the Stage of Time,
and retire within the Curtains of Eternity.

2. It is called a Tabernacle, to Note the short continuance of the Soul in it;
it must soon dislodg, and remove to another Habitation. The Traveller had his
Tent; so Jacob when he journied toward Canaan, he pitched his Tent in Mount
Gilead, Genesis 31.25. And Soldiers when they Camped in the open Field they had
their Tents, 2 Samuel 11.11. When Israel and Judah did Besiege Rabbah, they did
abide in Tents. The word Tent and Tabernacle are used promiscuously for the
same thing, 1 Chronicles. 16.1. David is said to pitch a Tent for the Ark of God,
but in 2 Samuel 6.17. it is said, they brought the Ark of God, and set it in its
place, in the midst of the Tabernacle that David had pitched for it: For this
Reason the Patriarchs are said to dwell in Tabernacles, or to sojourn in Tents,
Heb. 11.9. to show that they had no long time to stay in this World; that they
accounted themselves to be but Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth, Heb. 11.13.
that they look for an abiding City, that they desired a Country above, Heb. 11.
and were Traveling toward an invisible and glorious World, our welfare will
soon be accomplished, and then the Soldiers Tent is taken down our Pilgrimage
will quickly be at an end, and then the Travelers Tent ceases, and is gone;
Saints not only have no abiding City in this World, but they would have none,
they desire none below.

2. Death is here called, the putting off this Tabernacle; this Phrase may
instruct us, and teach us three considerable Lessons, and weighty truths, 1.
The Nobility and Excellency of the Soul, the Body is but a Tabernacle, the Soul
is the Tenant, and Inhabitant in it; how much better is the Tenant, than the
Tabernacle, therefore Souls should be most highly valued, chiefly thought of,
cared for, and attended to the Soul does not follow the state of the Body, but
the Body follows the state of the Soul, either for a blessed or a miserable
Eternity: Will a man lay out all his Time, and waste his Estate to beautify,
flourish, and fine out his House, and will he neglect, famish and Starve
himself? And that we feed, heal, cloth our Bodies, but for get all the
concerns, wants and necessities of our Souls, and that we dote on our baser,
despise, forget, and famish our better part.

2. This expression of putting off our Tabernatle, may teach us the immortality
of our Souls; the Body is but the Tent of the Soul, a Traveller, or Soldier
has no such dependence on his Tent, but he can go out of it, and yet live,
there is no such necessary connection between the Tent and the Traveller, but he
can exist and subsist, tho his Tent be taken down. Aristotle, de anima, tho a
Heathen, did acknowledge that the Soul came, (...), from without; by this
expression he seems to intimate that the Soul is of a higher Original, of a
more Noble Extraction, than to derive its Pedigree from Progenitors below: Man
is so great and noble a Creature, that he came from two Worlds, and therefore
must needs be for two Worlds; our Flesh was propagared from Parents below, but
our Spirits descend, and derive our Original from a Father above, Heb. 12.9.
This lower world is but a passage for Traveling. Souls to journey through, but
the upper world is the home and rest for Holy and Blessed Souls to dwell in;
the Body is but the Garment of the Soul, as a man can live, tho he put off his
Clothes, so the Soul can continue its being, tho it be stripped of the Garment of
the Flesh; a naked divested Spirit can live in the World of Spirits, tho it
leave the World of Bodies. Death in Scripture is often called a Sleep, 1 Kings
2.10. Job 7.21. this Phrase is used only concerning Men, nor concerning Beasts,
Plants, or Trees, these Creatures have a Sensitive, or Vegetative Life; but
when they die, they are not said to sleep, because their Life is utterly
extinguished, and totally abolished; but when Men Die, they do but Sleep; the
Senses of the Body are indeed sealed up, it becomes a Carcass without Sense or
Motion, but the Soul is alive, the Light is snatched out of the Lanthorn of the
Body, but is not exringuished; Life is still preserved in the Soul as the root;
and tho men sleep yet there is one that will a wake them; Christ the first born
of Gods new Family is up first, he is raised out of the Grave, and will call
out, and rouse up all his Spiritual Brethren and Sisters, out of the long sleep
of Death.

3. Peter's saying, He must put off his Tabernacle, does further mind us of, and
instruct us in a great Duty, that Saints ought to Die in obedience, and
willingly to lay down the body; tho Christians are snatched by a violent death,
and cut off by cruel hands; tho their fleshly Garment be plucked off, and their
Earthly Tabernacle by barbarous Enemies be plucked down; yet God expects, and
Christ looks for submission to the fatal Stroke; and that we should choose
Sufferings, and Death, rather than sin; this is to put off our Tabernacle: when
God takes away the Souls of Hypocrites, Job. 27.8. we must commit them into his
Hands, Psalm. 31.5. when others are driven away out of the World, Prove. 32. we
must desire to depart, and to be with Christ, Phil. 23. We must die to the
Lord, Romans 14.8. that is, we must breath out our Souls, and give them up when
he calls for them, and requires them; we must die in compliance with his will,
to be more subject to him, to (...) more possessed by him, to enjoy a Peace;
and fuller Communication with him; not so much to be freed of Sufferings, as to
be rid of Sin: To be perfected in the Image and Life of Christ.

3. Why must Christ's Ministers, as well as others, put off their Tabarnacles.

Ans. 1. They have contracted, and are involved in guilt, all have sinned, Romans
3.23. As they are not free from the Contagion of Iniquity, so they are not
exempted from the Sentence of Death, Genesis 3.19. Sin dwells in them, and this
opens the door, and lets in Death upon them; they as well as other Christians
do want the Soader, the Glue, the Cement of a perfect inherent Righteousness,
and therefore their Building does moulder, and the Stones of it sall one from
another; Death is compared to a Flood, Psalm. 90.5. Thou carriest them away as
with a Flood, this Flood is very general, it carry; away High and Low, Rich
and Poor, Saints and Sinners; we read but of two little Islands, Enoch and
Elias, that have not hitherto been over whelmed with this Flood, all the rest
of Mankind shall be carried away with this Plood, except those that shall be
found a live at the last day. It is appointed for all men once to die, Heb.
9.27. This is a Law not to be Repealed, a Se^^ not to be Reversed, the Body is
Dead by Reason of Sin, Romans 8.10. Death passes over all men, because all have
sinned, Romans 5.12.

2. Ministers must die, that sometimes by their Death they may Eminently
Glorify God; Christ foretold Peter's Martyrdom, and by his being girded, and led
whither he would not did signify that violent death whereby he should Glorify
God, and John 1.18, 19. that he durst not lay down his Lise, that is most
sweet, and submit to Death that is most bitter to Nature, in obedience to an
invisible God, and in hope of an unseen World; this signally Glorifies God, and
benefits his People. Paul speaks of his being offered on the Service and
Sacrifice of the Philippians Faith, 2 Phil. 17. (...), the word signifies a
Drink Offering; the Drink Offering used to be annexed to the Sacrifices, and
these were of Wines. On this account the Vine in the Parable says, That by its
Wine it cheared the Heart of God, Judge. 9. as well as of men; the Apostle with
allusion to the Sacrifices of the Law, was willing that his Blood should be
poured out by cruel hands, that God might dispose his true Offerings to this
Holy and Gracious end, to promote and advance the Faith of the Philippians; the
sufferings of the Pastors for the true Religion do so greatly tend to Edify
their Flocks, and to strengthen their Belief of the Gospel. Paul would not have
Died for an uncertain Doctrine, or for a Fable invented by men; he was fully
persuaded of the truth of the Gospel of Christ, that he durst to venture his
Life, his Soul, his all for Eternity on the credit of this Doctrine; so Christ
was Magnified by him, and Saints were confirmed, and established by his
sufferings, Phil. 1.12, 13, 20.

3 Christ's Ministers do put off their Tabernacle, to show that God is not
stinted, or confined to particular Ministers; he can bare up his Name, support
his Kingdom, carry on his Interest, tho he cut off eminent Ambassadors, and
gives a quiet rest to painful Laborers; God has absolute need of no person,
if he cut off some, he can raise up others; if the day and work of some be
done, he has a residue of the Spirit, and can furnish, fit, and thrust out
other Laborers into his Harvest; if Pillars be pulled away, yet the Church,
that is the Temple of the Living God, shall not fall; God has others to
substitute in the room of those that are snatched away, as God renews the
Face of the Earth by sending forth his Spirit, Psalm. 104.30. tho Plants and
Trees decay, Birds die, Beasts perish, Men give up the Ghost, yet Gods great
Farm is not unstocked, his House unfurnished, or destitute of Inhabitants; so,
tho Saints die, and Ministers are snatched away, yet God sends forth his
Spirit, and begets a new Generation of Saints, and raises up a new Stock, and
suptly of Ministers, and so, renews the Face of the Church. God will not want
Friends to woo for that Bridegroom, Ambassadors of Christ for Peace, Heralds
to Proclaim Christ the King of Glory.

4. God calls his Ministers home, to receive the Reward of their Labors, to
reap the fruits of all their pains, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. Paul says. That after Death
there remnined for him a Crown of Righteousness, God designed it toward him,
God laid it up for him; Ministers go hence to set on the Throne, to wear the
Crown, to possess the Eternal Inheritance, to partake of the everlasting Feast
promised to them; when God says to the Body, Return to thy dust, Genesis 3.19.
then he speaks to the Soul, as God did to Jacob, Genesis 31.3. Return to the Land
of thy Fathers, and to thy Kindred, and I will be with thee; when the Soul is
turned out of an Earthly Tabernacle, it is taken into an Heavenly House, when
the Flesh is Sown in the dust, the Spirit reaps up the Fruit of its Faith, in a
state of Glory.

5. Ministers put off their Tabernacle, because the Lord intends to Glorify
himself, by raising them, and the Bodies of all his Saints again, tho they
sleep and have a long dark Night in the Grave, yet a bright and comfortable
morning will come, Psalm 49.14. tho they put off the Garment of the Body, yet
Jesus will dress them, and put on these Clothes again; tho they go out of their
Bodies as a Tabernacle, yet they shall return to them again, and dwell in them
as a house for ever, these their vile bodies shall be changed, and made like
the glorious Body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. The bodies of Saints are but sowed in
the Earth, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43, 44 they must appear and Spring up again to
everlasting life. Jesus Christ is a Second Adam and an Everlasting Father, Isa
8.6. He must therefore beget the Bodies of his People from the Dead: They must
bare the Image of the Heavenly Adam, 1 Cor. 15.48, 49. old Adams Holding and
Tenute must cease, and be utterly extinguished, and we must be Regenerated in
our Bodies, as well as in our Souls, and then we shall hold them from Jesus
Christ; our Bodies are now as knocked, bruised, or broken Vessels, that are
cast into the Furnace, that they may be melted, and new molded, and framed, as
the Tabernacle was taken down in the Wilderness, but was set up again in
Canaan; so tho the Tabernacle of the body be dissolved, and taken to pieces in
the Wilderness of this World, yet it shall be joined together, and set up for
ever in the Heavenly Canaan: those that dwell in this Tabernacle do groan,
being burdened: but those that dwell in the Body, as a House built by the hand
of the Lord stretched out from Heaven, shall Sing, Rejoice, and Triumph for
ever.

4. Ministers have ground to conclude, that shortly they must put off their
Tabernacles, tho we cannot say as Peter, That we have a particular Revelation
from Christ, of the Kind, or Time of our Death, yet we may say, that our God
has showed us that it must be shortly.

1. Gods Threatening does evidence it, Genesis 3.19. Dust we are, and to dust we
must return; what God said to the first Adam, that he repeats, and says over
to his Children, return ye Sons of Men, Psalm. 90.3. when he requires us to
return, we cannot stay here, but must be gone. God will change our
Countenances, and send us away, Job 14.20. we know not how soon, how suddenly
God may speak this word, return ye Sons of Men: we cannot foresee when that
Wind of Sickness or other accident will arise, that will blast our Flower, and
blow out our Lamp of Life, Death sometimes lays in Ambushment and break forth
unexpectedly on persons.

2. The Death of other Servants, and Messengers of God, that daily are called
away, and drop into the Grave before our Eyes, does show us that shortly we
must follow them into the dust, Zeck. 1.5. Your Fathers, where are they; and
the Prophets, do they live for ever? Those holy Men, that were inspired by the
Spirit, were yet mowed down by the Sith of death. Many Thousands of Famous
Ministers have taken the Grave for their House, and have made their Bed in
Darkness. And must not we travel in the same Road, and take the way of all the
Earth? Will not our Glass be quickly run, our Sun set, and the Thread of our
Lives be (...) cut?

3. The Distempers that we feel, the Infirmities that exercise us, the Diseases
we groan under, do sensibly teach us, That shortly we must put off our
Tabernacles; All Pains and Distempers are Deaths working in us, and warring
against us. These are the Harbingers of the King of Terrors, that come to take
up Quarters and Lodgings for Death in our Earthly Tabernacles: All the painful
Maladies thou do complain of, are Deaths Batteries against the Fort of the
body, are strokes toward the Felling of the Tree; are Warnings to remove out
of this Earthly Tabernacle; as one Post, one Messenger, should go after
another, to inform the King of Babylon, that his City was taken at one end,
Jer. 51.31. So the decays of our strength, of our sight, of our hearing, of our
taste, does plainly tell us, that Death has taken us at one end. This King of
Terrors is lodged already at the Cinque Ports of our Senses, with a design to
conquer the whole Country of our bodies.

The only use that I shall make of this Doctrine, is an Use of Exhortation. And
here

1. I would humbly direct, and earnestly press a word of Exhortation on you my
Reverend Brethren in the Ministry that are here present; Must we that are the
Messengers and Ambassadors of Christ shortly put off our Tabernacles? O then
le^^^ ^ll improve our short time, bestir and put forth our selves to the
utmost, while our day lasts, and our strength continues; it is better for a
Knife to wear away by continual use, than to rust away by disuse; why does God
shine into our Hearts, but that we should set forth, and impart the light of
the knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ to others, 2 Cor. 4.6.
what will it avail us if we be large ponds our selves to hold much water, if we
are not spiritual pipes to convey the water of Life to thirsty and perishing
Souls, as the Bread that Christ did break to distribute to others, was
multiplied, and did increase in his hands, Matt. 14.19, 20. so while we divide
the word of Truth, and break the Bread of Life to others, our own knowledge in
the Mystery of Christ will increase, and our own Spiritual Life and Strength
will be improved. O strive to break hard Hearts with the hammer of the word,
and to cut off the Members of the old Man with the sword of the Spirit: labor
to awaken sleepy drowsy Sinners, to reduce those that are gone astray, to sput
sluggish and loytering Souls, pluck brands out of the Fire, snatch the prey
from the paw and mouth of the roaring Lion; Christ bids his Disciples to go to
their lost sheep of the House of Israel, Matt. 10.6. Christ awakens their pity,
stirs their bowels, draws forth their him passions by the name he gives to
poor sinners, they are lost sheep, perishing sheep, such a are sinking into
Hell, dropping into the Bottomless Pit, and will you not bestir your selves to
step, rescue and save them? O let us consider, the danger, the distress, the
necessities of Souls, and be instant, urgent, pressing upon them in season, and
out of season; let us sound the Trumpet, and brandish the flaming Sword of Gods
threatenings, to alarm and rouse up sullen and presumptuous sinners. Let us
shoot the keen and sharp Arrows of the word to wound the Hearts of the workers
of iniquity, that they may fall down as a Conquered and submitting People under
Jesus Christ, Psalm. 45.^. yet let me beseech you to Solicit Heaven, that the
Hand of Christ may be on your Hearts and Hands, as the Hand of the Prophet
Elisha was on the Hand of the King of Israel when he did draw the Bow to shoot,
2 Kings 13.16, 17. If Christ's hands be not on our hands, when we draw the
Spiritual Bow, we shall neither shoot far, or hit right, or wound deeply; when
we have affected, and wounded the hearts of those that were secure, let us
display the banner of Christ's Love, to encourage drooping, disponding and
sinking Souls: Let us bind up the broken hearted, and comfort the Mourners.
Brethren, our work is great and difficult; it is no easy matter to level
Mountains of Carnal Confidence, Isa. 40.4. and then to fill, and lift up
Valleys; to cheer, relieve and encourage Doubting, Dejected, Despairing Souls;
the Lord must give us the Tongue of the Learned to speak a word in due season
to him that is weary, Isa. 50.40: Let us plead Christ's cause with all our
might, and let us attack and storm Satan's Kingdom with our utmost strength. O
that we might wound and crush the head of the old Serpent, and destroy his
works, and build a Temple and Habitation for God through the Spirit. We may see
Peter making this use of the Doctrine of Mortality, and thus to improve the
thoughts of his approaching death, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. I will not be negligent to
put you always in remembrance of these things. Yea I think it meet as long as I
am in this Tabernacle to stir you up by putting you in remembrance. Though
Death quenches Life, yet the thoughts of it quickens Christ's Ministers to their
work; though the putting off their Tabernacles does stop their Motions, and end
their Labors, yet the clear apprehension, and daily consideration of this,
does enliven and hasten their spiritual Motions, and double their diligence in
the work of Christ. John 9.4. I must work the Works of him that sent me while
it is day; the night comes when none can work.

2. I would speak a word of Exhortation to you the Auditors that hear me this
Day. Peter would put those in remembrance to whom he did write; O give me leave
to put you in remembrance of some great and weighty truths that may affect your
hearts, and benefit your souls. I must shortly put off my Tabernacle; therefore
I would earnestly address my self to you about the weighty concernments of your
Souls, and of Eternity.

1. Let me mind you of your Reconciliation to God. We are Ambassadors for
Christ; as tho God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, to be
reconciled to God, 2 Cor 5.20. Will you not dread the Enmity, and desire the
Favor and Friendship of an Infinite Majesty! O let not the breach be kept
open, and the Enmity be kept up between God and your Souls. Will you not fear
an Immortal Adversary, and an Eternal Anger? will you not tremble when the
storm of Vengeance hangs over your heads; the Ax of God is laid to your Root,
his Arrows are levelled at your hearts. God has committed to us the Word of
Reconciliation, and we must press and urge your Reconciliation to God. We are
the Lord's Agents and Ambassadors. Is not this a wonderful Condescension, that
the King of Glory will send Ambassadors to his Subjects; that the God of Glory
will send to his Creatures; an infinite offended Majesty will send first to
Rebels and Enemies? Will you listen to our Message, and be reconciled to God?
Consider, God has been at great cost and charge, he has made wonderful
preparations to establish peace; God's Anger could not be quenched, nor our
Pardon written out in the Blood of his Son; Enmity could not be slain, except
Christ were crucified; the controversy between God and us could not be buried
but in the Grave of his Son; a City of Refuge could not be built for us, if the
Temple of the Godhead were not pulled down to the ground, God's Sword could not
be sheathed, or sleep toward us, if it did not first awake, smite and cut off
his Son, Zech. 13.7. The debt could not be remitted to us, if not first exacted
of Christ; God has delivered up his Son to the death, Romans 8.32. that he might
deliver us from the wrath to come, 1 These. 1. last. Has God done so much, and
acted ^o far, that he might lay aside his Righteous Enmity against us; and that
we will not yet be persuaded to lay aside our wicked Enmity against him. 2. God
has no need of your Friendship, neither does he fear your Enmity. 3. Your
Enmity is most foolish; Shall Stubble challenge consuming Fire? or Potters
Vessel dare to contend with a Rod of Iron? 4 Your Enmity is causeless; God is
the habitation of Justice, Jer. 50.47. but sin dwells in us, Romans 17. Our ways
are perverse but God cannot take a wrong step, draw a crooked line, nor do an
act of injustice; his very strength loves Righteousness, Psalm, 99.4. God is
love, 1 John 4.8. but your arn al mind is enmity against God, Romans 5.7. O will
you not be ashamed; will you not be humbled that you have such hard hearts,
such rebellious wills, that though God is willing to be reconciled by the Death
of his Son, yet you are not willing to be reconciled to him by the death of
your Sins.

2. I would put you in remembrance of a Fountain that is opened, Zech. 13.1. it
is opened where we could never have thought of, imagined, or expected it did
ever enter into the Heart of man, that God should open a Fountain in the
Pierced side, in the wounded heart of his own Son: that a Laver should be
provided, a Bath be made of the Blood of the Son of God; O will you neglect,
will you despise the Fountain that God has opened? the Blood of Christ has
such an everlasting Virtue, to purge Consciences, to cleanse from sin and
uncleanness, that it may well be compared to a Fountain flowing, and never dry.
Christ has offered a Sacrifice of an Eternal virtue, and brought an
everlasting Righteousness. O finners, will you not be convinced of your great
need of this Fountain, is there not an unclean, corrupt, pernicious Fountain in
you, Jer. 6.7. As a Fountain casts out its water, so Jerusalem casts out its
Wickedness, God does not speak this of Babylon, of Memphis, of Damascus, but of
Jerusalem, that professed to be the Servants and Worshippers of God. Do not
flatter thy self, be not deceived, though thou art a Christian by Name, yet
thou art a Child of Wrath by Nature, thou have a Fountain of iniquity that
flows still, to defile all that thou do, yea to pollute all the good
Creatures of God that thou enjoyest. A Fountain is flowing continually: day and
night it is venting its Waters, so out of the evil Treasure of thy heart, thou
art still bringing forth evil things, Mat. 12.35. Out of the heart proceeds
evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, and many more evils, Mat. 25.19. and shall
the guilt of all, the burden of all rest upon thee? will thou keep thy filthy
Garments, and retain thy spots and stains? will they not then render thee
loathsome, and abominable: is the Fountain so near, and will thou not have
recourse to it, and make use of it?

2. Take heed that thou do set up any in opposition to, or Competition with
this Fountain. Do not put thy penitential Tears or Reformation in the place of
the Blood of Christ. God has established the Sacrifice of Christ, Heb. 10.9.
This is the only Meritorious cause of Justification, and means of atonement;
beware therefore that thou do not mistake and tread in the steps of the blind
zealous Jews, that went about to establish their own Righteousness, and did not
submit to the righteousness of God. Here was man's establishment directly
contrary to Gods Establishment, as if they must build a proud Babel of their
own to get up to Heaven by, when God had provided Jesus the Mediator as a long
complete spiritual Ladder for men to ascend to glory by, it is the greatest
curse not to come into this Righteousness of God, Psalm. 69.27. this is a horrid
Imprecation on the unbelieving Jews, Let them not come into thy Righteousness;
and will thou bring this curse on thy own Soul. He that come into Gods
Righteousness, shall never come into Condemnation, Joh. 5.24. It is by Faith
alone that we come into, and are Interested in this Righteousness. The
Righteousness of God is revealed from Faith to Faith, Romans 1.17. Faith begins
to apprehend, goes on to apply this Righteousness, and at last does terminate,
center and rest in it.

3. I would put you in remembrance of the great Physician of Souls, Jesus
Christ, Mat. 9.12, 13. Never was there Physician like to him, he first died
himself to provide a sovereign Remedy, and then visits the dead and applys it
to them. You are sensible of bodily Diseases, you complain of them, you groan
under them, yet they do but separate Soul and Body, but will you not resent and
be affected with your spiritual Maladies, which will part God and their Souls
for ever. To all other Diseases, Sinners add a Lethargy, they are stupid,
senseless of their Misery and danger. Though the world be full of sick Folks,
yet how little practice has the great Physician? How few apply themselves as
Patients to him, or seriously commit their sick dying Souls to him to be
recovered by him; Is the Fall of Adam and the sin and corruption of the world
that flows from it, but a Fiction or Fable, that you have no sense or feeling
of these things? will you say you are not siek or diseased till you suddenly
drop down to Hell? Are you resolved to continue and dye in your sins? What an
aggravation will this be of your wilful obstinacy, that you will perish when
the Physician is so near, and the remedy is at hand.

4. I would put y ou in remembrance of a great Supper, Luke 14.16. of an
excellent Feast that God has provided, Isa. 25.6 and has invited you to. God
the Father gives you the true bread from Heaven, John 6.32. There wants nothing
to your participation of it but a due Esteem, and thankful acceptance of it.
This is an excellent Supper, (...) Fire on an Altar, Heb. 13.10. and Feast on a
Sacrifice offered by the Son of God, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. The Lord's gracious Call,
if you echo to it; his free Invitation, if you comply with it gives you a right
to all this spiritual good cheer; tho you are poor, maimed, halt, and blind,
yet all your Defects shall be passed over, none of them shall exclude you from
the Feast, Luke 14.21 God is so set upon filling his House with Guests, Luke
14.23. that he has commanded us to compel you to come in. This is strange
Aversness, Corruption and Rebellion in poor and Famishing sinuers, that they
need to be compelled to come in to a Feast, and this is wonderful goodness in
God, that he charge us to compel you, both by remonstrating your sin and
danger, if you do not come, and by representing to you the Excellency, Riches,
and Grace of Jesus Christ, to invite and allure you to come On do not famish
your Souls by neglecting to feed on Christ, do not poison your souls by
drinking in the pleasures of sin that are but for a season. O that we could so
press these things on you, and that with such warm hearts, and lively
affections, that our importunity might answer our Commissions, and savor of a
kind of Violence and Compulsion.

5. I would put you in remembrance of a spiritual Market that the Lord himself
has set up, and keeps. O improve this spiritual Market day.

1. Here is food brought from far, that is not of the growth of this world;
there is bread of God that comes down from Heaven, and gives life to the
world, John 6.33. the bread is living bread, John 6.51. and therefore well may
it be bread of life, John 6.48.

2. Jesus Christ imports spiritual food by the precious River, or Red Sea of
his own blood. If there were not such a Red Sea, there would be no Traffic or
Commerce between Heaven and Earth. Christ is a Priest of good things, Heb. 9.11.

3. Jesus Christ keeps a Market for the Poor, Isa. 55.1. he encourages those to
trade with him that can bring neither money nor price. If there were a Market
kept in a City for the poor, how would all flock to it? And will you not that
are spiritually poor, come and buy of Christ without Money or Price? It was
observed of Attica, that it was one of the poorest, most hungry, and barren
Soil in Greece, and that therefore the Inhabstants of it were most given to
Trade and Merchandise. So your poverty should press you to deal with Jesus
Christ, that is so liberal and free to those that come to him, and will
traffic with him; He requires you to part with nothing that will impoverish
you or enrich him.

4. You are undone for ever, if you buy not of Jesus Christ, and obtain not his
goods; your Eyes will be blind, if not anointed with his Eye Salve; your Souls
will be naked, if not clothed with his white Raiment; your Spirits will be
poor to Eternity, if you buy not his Gold tried in the fire.

5. I would put you in remembrance of your work in God's Vineyard, that you are
hired to mind and prosecute, Matthew. 20.1, 2. The Kingdom of Heaven is like to
an Householder that went forth to hire Laborers into his Vineyard. You cannot
pretend, or excuse your selves as the Heathen World, and say, None has hired
you, and therefore you stand idle, Mat. 20.6. God has come forth several times
in the day of your life to hire you. Tho Ministers have a larger Vineyard to
cultivate, yet every particular Christian has a lesser piece of Ground to
manure, and employ his labors on; You have your own Hearts to keep, your own
Families to watch over, your Neighbors to have on Eye toward, to instruct,
exhort, warn, reprove, as opportunity is offered, or Necessity requires. The
work that God calls you to is great; you must prune, weed, water, improve your
Vineyard; The work is Noble and Honorable, to render your own Souls and the
Souls of others, fruitful Vineyards to God, to yield such Wine as he delights
in, as will cheer the heart of Christ, and of Saints; The work is profitable;
you will record in Heaven what you do on Earth for his glory; by your diligence
and faithfulness Fruit will be brought forth, that will abound to your account
in the great day of the Lord, Phil. 4.17. Suffer not therefore your Vineyards
to be overrun with Nettles, Briars or Thorns, or to lie open and unfenced.

6. I would mind you of your Race, Heb. 12.1, 2. as there is Hope set before
you, Heb. 6.18. so there is a Race set before you, Heb. 12.1. Keep your eye
stedy on the Mark, and bend your course directly toward it. The Apostle says,
(...) I follow on, I press forward in a strait line, toward the mark, 1 Cor.
9.26. I do not sometimes move one way, sometimes another; this would be (...)
to run as if we were uncertain what course to steer, what mark to aim at, what
Prize to run for. He that is a double-minded man, and pursues Two Objects, does
run so obscurely, sometimes inclining to one Object, sometime following
another, as if he were uncertain which is the best Master, which is the chief
Good. Again, persons may be said to run as uncertain, or not to run with any
Evidence, when they make no visible progress, when they do not get ground, and
advance in the way everlasting. Persons run (...), darkly, when they do not
manifest any proficiency in the Knowledge and Grace of Christ, when they
neither root deeply in him, or manifestly grow up into him, 2 Col. 6.7. Ephesians.
4.15. look to it that you not only hold out as Travelers, but also that you
may have as Racers; as you are to beware of wrong steps out of the way, so also
of slow steps in it; the mark is perfect Holiness, the prize is glorious
Happiness; there is an excellency in the Mark, as well as in the Prize, yea,
the very Mark here may be accounted a Prize; we profit and advantage our selves
when we have our fruit to Holiness, Romans 6.22. O! therefore forget what is
behind, and reach forth to what is before, Phil. 3.13, 14. let not any
seize in Grace slacken your pace, cool your Zeal, abate your diligence or
fervency; but be as earnest, as if you had but just now started, or were taking
your first steps in the Spiritual Race; this is properly to forget what is
behind, tho the Eternal Inheritance be properly a Legacy bequeathed in Christ's
Testament, Heb. 9.15. yet the Lord to encourage, and honor our diligence, and
to reward our obedience, proposes it as a Prize to be won by us, Phil. 3.14.
tho we live, move and act by the strength and influence of Grace continually.

8. Let me put you in remembrance of your Account; we must all stand before the
Judgment seat of Christ, and every one of us must give an account of himself to
God, Romans 14.10, 12. the account is long and large, there are innumerable
thoughts, words, actions, to be accounted for; there are Registers, and Records
of all kept above, Isa. 65.6. behold it is written before me, God would not
have been a Lawgiver, if he designed also to be a Judge: The Divine Records must
be (...) viewed, the Books must be opened, the Accounts of Sinners stated, and
the Sentence pass on them, Rev. 20.12. 2 Cor. 5.10. Our Lord will come and
reckon with his Servants, and summon Stewards to give an account of their
Stewardships, Luke 16.1, 2. O! therefore let not your Lords Stock, Talents, or
Pounds lie idle, and dead in your hands; as one Candle will tind or light a
thousand Candles, so let that knowledge you have received, be improved to
enlighten many others; let the Love of Christ so burn in your Hearts, so flame
out in your words, and Actions, that all those may be heated that come near to
you, or Converse with you; let your Loins be girt, work strenuously, and
diligently; let your Lamps be burning, act wisely, and skilfully, Luke 12.35.
yet when you have done all, confess your selves to be unprofitable Servants,
that you have not merited, that any reward or profit should redound to you from
such sick Service, from such defective and imperfect Obedience. Lay all your
Offerings on Christ, as an Altar; let all your sins be drowned, and your
Service washed in Christ's Blood, how else can you account with God for Years,
Months, or one Day; the Lord Jesus will certainly return to take an account,
Luke 19.12. He is the Nobleman that is gone into a far Country, (...) receive a
Kingdom, and return; and shortly your Spirits must return to God, to give an
account, Eccl. 12.7. All you have done will follow, overtake, meet you in
another world, Think on, prepart for your account; set this Sentence on the
Head of your account, The Blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanses from
all sin, 1 John 1.7. then this passage may be put at the Foot of it, There is
no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1.

I have done with the Text of Scripture that I pitched on, and I shall now
proceed to speak something on that Text of Providence that the Lord has chosen
to be the Occasion of this mournful solemnity.

Two things I would propose to you on this Occasion.

1. O consider of, reflect upon, and be duly affected with this sad, sudden,
and unexpected stroke of Providence: should not this make deep impressions on
your hearts, that a faithful and skillful Labourer is in the midst of his days
discharged from his work, when a great Door is open for Service, and the Fields
are white to the Harvest; when the Necessities of Souls are so great, and the
Laborers are so few to attend them Pause, and stay your thoughts on this sad
dispensation; a Star is taken down from the Orb, and Firmament of the Church, a
Lamp of the San^^uary is put out, a Shepherd is removed from his Flock, an
Amba^^dor of Peace is recalled by (...) King of Glory. It is true, the hand of
the Lord has done (...) but may not your sins have been the meritorious and
procuring cause of it? have not many of you heard the Word from him with
drousie Ears, cold Hearts unconcerned Spirits! have you not made light of the
Travel of Christ's soul, of the purchase of his blood, of the Legacies of his
Testament? have not your hearts been frozen within you, tho with respect to the
warm dispensation of the Gospel among you, you have lived in the Torrid Zone of
Love? have not some of you drawn out the Fatal Web of your iniquity, even under
his Ministry, and so provoked God to cut short the precious thread of his Life?
and have not the looseness of some, and the barrenness and unthankfulness of
others, snatched your Pastor away out of the World, silenced and laid him in
the dust? have not your Ears and Hearts been stopped from hearing the word, and
so you have provoked God to shut his mouth from Preaching it any more among
you? do not sooth, or flatter your selves, this is a loud speaking reproving,
rebuking Providence to you.

2. O! cry earnestly and fervently to God to supply your wants, and to fill up
this breach; plead with the great Shepherd to raise you up a Pastor according
to his own heart, to feed the flock of God among you, with knowledge and
understanding, Jer. 3.15. it is a great work skilfully to feed the Flock of
God, rightly to divide the word of truth, and to give every one his Portion,
terror to sinners, comfort to saints, instructions and exhortations to both,
pray to the Lord of the Harvest to provide you a Labourer, Matt. 9. last. so
great are the discouragements to this sacred Function from an ungrateful World,
that the Lord of the Harvest must thrust forth Laborers, Matt. 9. last. And so
great is the Carnality, and averseness of People from the Feast of Jesus
Christ, that Ministers must compel guests to come in; it is the Lord of the
Harvest that must fit and furnish men to be Laborers; it is he that must
enrich them with Grace, and fill them with the Spirit: It is such Pasto^^ (...)
that become an Exalted Glorified (...) bestow on the Church, Ephesians. 4.10, 11.
Christ (...) take them in his own Net as Fish, and then fit them to be
Fishermen; he must first gather them into (...) own Fold as Sheep, and then
render them meet to (...) Shepherds; he must first espouse them to himself,
(...) then Enlighten their Minds, and inflame their (...) to Woo others for
himself; he that has not (...) Embraced Christ's Offers, and consented to
match (...) him, will but coldly Prosecute Christ's Suit, to gain others to the
Lord of Glory. In the judgment of a learned man, Dr. Stil^^^^leet in (...)
Irenicum.
Ministers, Pastors and Teachers are called Saints, Ephesians. 4.12. (...); which
he thus renders, For the perfecting, or fitting of the Saints for the work of
the Ministry; that is, for the per^^^^ing or fitting of Ministers, that are, or
should be Saints, for the work of the Ministry. As the Priests Court (...) in
the Temple, by some steps higher than the Peo^^^ Court, so Christ's Ministers
should be higher, and (...) above the People, both in Knowledge, and in (...):
Be earnest Solicitors to the Father of Mer^^, that he would not leave you
desolate, as sheep with^^ shepherd; as in some Games among the Grecians, (...)
did run carrying a burning Lamp, and then deli^^^'d it to another to run also
with it; so this Servant of the Lord how deceased, did in his Lifetime run
a^^^^ you, carrying the sacred Lamp of the Gospel. O (...) to God to raise up
another to take his Lamp, and (...) it further before you, to direct your
hearts into the (...) of God, and to guide your Feet in the way of Peace.

FINIS.

