A NEW-YEARS-GIFT FOR Doctor WITTY; OR THE DISSECTOR ANATOMIZED: Which is a
reply to the Discourse Entitled, An Answer to all that Doctor TONSTALL has
writ, or shall hereafter Write, against SCARBROUGH Spaw.

Aeger non quaerit Medicum Eloquentem sed sanantem.

Seneca. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for the Author. MDCLXXII.

TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.
SIRS,
IF there were no Judges to determine Controversies, Disputes would be endless.
Dr. Witty having said all he can, in answer to my Objections against Scarbrough
Spaw, He makes his ultimate and highest appeal to the Right Honorable Lords,
to whom he Dedicates his Book, saying, What fitter Judges of this Controversy,
can be found out, than their Lordships. And in the conclusion of his Preface,
he seems to refer the difference betwixt him and me, to the major Vote of the
Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful.

Thus he prefers Alexander for a more Competent Judge of A Philosophical
question before Aristotle; as if Titles of Honor were infallible Amulets and
Charms against mistakes; and that none of those were to be imposed upon, by the
common Tricks and Juggles of one, who, with confidence, would persuade them.

1. That the Water (notwithstanding the great proportion of Sand and Clay in
it) will leave none of this in our Bodies, because he has let them see (Page
42.) That it will pass, when newly taken out of the Fountain, through the
filter, leaving nothing behind: or,

2. That the Water cannot possibly occasion Obstructions, because it moves to
stool, (p. 108.)

3. That it cannot breed Stones in the Kidneys, because it provokes to Urine,
(p. 37.)

4. That it must be good to prevent and cure the Gout, because it purges, (p.
109.)

5. That it is a most innocent Water, and good for all, because some who are
strong in their distributive faculty, have quitted themselves from the Sandy
faeces, without taking harm.

So confident he is in the strength of these reasonings, that he concludes ( p.
126) Nor do I think that there is a more innocent Water in the world of this
kind, in the very particulars he has charged it withal. Self-opinion is a
thing so natural to all men, that it may be found in those that say, they know
not what, and that do like him, Magno conatu nugas agere; but his ipse dixit,
can neither satisfy you, nor silence me.

Seeing therefore you have avowed to examine all opinions in Natural
Philosophy, by the test of Experiment (a foundation for truth that will never
fail) and that I desire to be tried thereby, I make mine appeal to you; were it
a matter of small concernment, not worth your cognizance, I should not be so
rude, as to beg, that sentence may be pronounced by you; according to the merit
of the Cause, so let your judgments be. I have evidenced the Quiddity of
petrifying waters, agreeable to Kirchers definition, by experimenting the
droping Well at Knaisbrough, which Dr. Witty says, is the most famous
petrifying water, by far, of any that this Kingdom does afford, (p. 54.) Of
that Water, before it came to the Rock, I distilled a quart, and there was half
a dram of pure Nitrous Salt remaining. The Cattle he says drinks of it, neither
is there any Symboles of a petrifying property in it. It Is very true, for it
has been tried by several; but as soon as it runs into the Rock, and comes
distilling forth on the other side, then it petrifies, because the Nitrous
Water has now dissolved stone, which it had not done before; I distilled a
quart of this Water also, and it gave, as I said, a dram wanting Ten Grains, of
Stone Powder and Nitre.

Here let it be observed, that the surest way to discover whether a Water be
petrifying or no, is to distill, or boil it in a double Vessel, to see what
Sediment remains, or is cast down to the bottom; if it be Sand (which is stone
powder) that Water is certainly petrifying. As for trying it by putting moss or
sticks in the Water, to see if it will lay a crust of stone upon them, valeat
argumentum affirmative; but it is a fallacious Experiment, negative, to deny it
to be a petrifying Water, in case it do not incrustate.

Because there are other circumstances requisite, besides a petrifying property
in the Water, to perform this incrustation, the main requisite (I judge) is,
that the Experiment be made, whilst the Water flows immediately out of the
Rock, and is in its act of Corrosion. I dare affirm, that all the trials had by
things petrifyed, were thus obtained; whereas if the same things were left in
the Current of these petrifying Waters, after the act of Corrosion were fully
completed (I suppose a mile or two distant from the Rock) from whence the
Water took its petrifying property) they would not then be Crusted over.

It Is more than probable, that this is the case of Scarbrough Water, wherefore
it does not lay a Crust of stone upon the things put in it, notwithstanding it
be a petrifying Water. For it runs out of the South, and in a direct line
Southward, a mile or two distant beyond the great Mountains, there is an
Hydrophilacia, a stately Lake abounding with Fish; here is the Springhead of
Scarbrough Spaw, it passing forthwith through the Roots of those Stony Hills,
first, Dissolves the stone, and has performed fully the act of Corrosion on
it, before it come to the Cliff. This being done, it then Corrodes Allomstone
and in this second act of Corrosion, the Spaw appears at the bottom of the
Cliff, after the Corrosion is completed; which happens in a day or two; it
settles to the bottom the Glebe of Allom. See for this, what I say to ( p.
102.) the Tenth Proposition. A second requisite for incrustation is, that the
Saline water, which has newly dissolved stone, do penetrate through the pores
of what is laid in it, that thereby it may leave a crust of Stone upon it; that
this is necessary also, appears by this. The more porous any thing is, that is
put into all petrifying waters the sooner, and more perfectly is it
incrustated. There is a Water, a mile distant from the dropping Well, that will
petrifie neither Leaf nor Stick, or other thing, save Moss only; and that is
grown so hard upon the Surface of that Water, that one may go over it, as on a
Bridge.

The cause, sine qua non, of all petrifying Waters is, that the Saline Water
passes through the Stone, whilst it is in Embryone, and therefore dissolves
it. If it were not so then, all Saline Waters (which must be supposed to pass
through stone, before it appear above ground) would be petrifying, but we know
the contrary; for the Sulphurous Salt Well at Knaisbrough, and the Allom Well
at Malton, has not a grain of stone powder in them.

It Is a memorable thing, which the Lord Thomas Fairfax told to me; he cut away
an high Rock near his house, at Denton, above the ground; and a good way within
the Earth, 'twas very hard, but the nearer they came to the root of the Stone
(his Lordships own expression) the softer the Rock was, even till at last it
was nothing but Sand, that had not contracted the firmness of a Stone. Removing
the heap of Sand, they came at last to Water and Clay, the mother of all that
great Rock.

That Stone which is subject to Corruption, may also be generated. I need not
waste time to prove before you, it is visibly to be observed, that Stone has its
seed, by looking upon the Rock of the Dropping Well, where the Water runs out
of the same Chinks, where it has done from the beginning, and will do to the
worlds end. Notwithstanding the Water (as Dr. Witty has described it) running
into the River Nidd (a little way distant from it) has Corroded so much Stone,
that it has made a Rock that stretches some yards into the River; which shows,
that the Nitrous Water would have consumed the Rock, which it continually
Corrodes, unless Nature do supply it by a continued act of Generation.

Not to give you any further trouble, I say, all Spaws have their name, and
natural property from the Minerals, or Metals they have dissolved. As we call
Knaisbrough Spaw a Vitrioline water, because it has dissolved Iron; so may I
properly call Scarbrough Spaw a petrifying water, because it has dissolved
Stone.

If there be any doubt remaining unresolved, touching the petrifying property
of Scarbrough Spaw; I beg but to know it from you, (that I may have no more to
do with this man of words) and I shall be ready to give you that satisfaction,
which reason will prompt me to.

I shall only add a word of Apology for my freedom, with Doctor Witty, the only
provocation that I gave him, to all that uncivil language which he used toward
me, was my opposing his opinion (which how fairly and heartily, the Book it
self can witness for me. But finding him in his return, showing his strength,
rather in reviling, than disputing; I was necessitated (contrary to my Genius)
to use such a way as might make him a little sensible of himself; and yet in
this I have not abounded too far, because (for the most part) what might seem
harsh, are but his own reflections, laid at his own door, as the proper Father
of them; and if there be any thing further, I am sure it may be abundantly
justified by his expressions toward me.

Your Honors Humble Servant, George Tonstall.

TO THE READER.
ALL that I have writ against Scarbrough Spaw, is but the Symptom of a
Melancholy sancy (Page 125.) in the Judgment of Dr. Witty: to cure me of this,
he has sent me a bitter Pill; see now how finely he has gilted it over; these
are his last words, I do still profess my self to be a Friend to Dr. Tonstall,
and am ready to make it out, in any civil kindness; only (I hope) he will not
henceforth expect that I tell him any Secret. To reply to this, having dealt
with him (as he says truly) like as Hanun did with David's Servants; he raises
this note from 2 Samuel 10.4. But this did so exceedingly disoblige King David,
that it became an occasion of breaking the Bond of Friendship that had been
betwixt them. Now may I trust him for a Friend, think thou? As for mine
expectance that he should tell me any Secret, Alas, Mr. Culpepper has deluded
mine hopes long since; for he having Translated the London Dispensatory, has
rifled the Dissectors Cabinet Counsels, and has laid open all his Secrets, to
the view of all Englishmen and Women; therefore let him be assured, I shall
expect none from him.

Another thing I desire to note is, if the Dissector rejoyn, he does consute
his own Title. He calls his Book, An answer to all that I have writ, or shall
hereafter write against Scarbrough's Spaw. There is but one remedy for this
great Evil (he hints at it in the Epistle) He may choose a Second, to reinforce
the Combat; and I shall take another, and let them fight it out, if there be
any life left in his Cause. And that his Champion may have a fair Field to
exercise his Valor in, and the most advantage imaginable, to rally up his
scattered Forces; I have presented, (in answer to p. 102.) Twelve Propositions,
the Summa Totalis of all my Writings, concerning Scarbrough Spaw. Let him
confute any one of these, and then I shall recant the Twelfth Proposition,
which is the necessary consequence of them all.

I have a word, or two more, to tell thee of Dr. Witty; First, (It is an
observation of many years standing) he commends Scarbrough Spaw good for all
Diseases; take these Instances for it. A Gentlewoman came from Lincolnshire to
Scarbrough, and had a Letter from her Physician to Doctor Witty; yet she sent
for me, desiring to know my opinion. After she had related her case, and asked
whether I judged the Water to be good for her, or no; I demanded a reason of
her, why she sent for me, for resolution of that question, being a stranger,
and not of Dr. Witty, who was recommended to her by Letter; says she, We know
the answer Dr. Witty gives to every one that comes to these Waters, before it
be asked him; from hence is it (making the Spaw a Catholic remedy) that he
asserts Philip Transel 10.51. That it cures the Asthma, inveterate Catarrhs,
Hecticks, and Consumptions. I suppose, no otherwise, than as the King of
Terrors does; that is, a Cure for all Diseases. Mr. Lampleugh liveing a few
Miles from Scarbrough, consulted Dr. Witty, what he should do to prevent an
Hectic and Consumption, which he feared only he was inclined to; the Doctor
forthwith advised him to drink the Spaw, and kept him a fortnight at Mr.
Sanders house there, which suddenly brought upon him the thing he feared, who
shortly after dyed of a Consumption. This his Mother-in-Law related to me,
weeping. As for the Asthma, the Lord Cr. came last year to Knaisbrough, (who
had sound the Evil Scarbrough had done to him before) and related to me, how
his Nephew was gone to Scarbrough, for cure of his Distemper, the Asthma; I
then told his Lordship, and desired him to take notice of what I said, that if
the Squire drank a fortnight of those Waters, it would undoubtedly destroy him,
or else let him believe, that I have no judgment of the nature of Scarbrough
Spaw. Coming to York after Spaw time, I enquired of Dr. Witty, how the Waters
did with him; he gave me no other answer, but that he was very ill. I asked his
Physician in Ordnary concerning him, and he told me, that the Waters did
utterly disagree with his Distemper, and as soon as he came to Scarbrough, he
did forbid him to drink of it. Mr. Atkinson, formerly troubled with a Heat and
Scalding of Urine (caused, according to Galen, by defluxion of sharp Humors)
advised with Dr. Witty last year, for prevention of this Distemper; he directs
him to drink Scarbrough Water, which did so exceedingly aggravate his Malady,
that he was necessitated to undergo the strict rule of a Milk diet, complaining
to me of Dr. Witty's bad counsel.

As Scarbrough from its petrifying property is bad for the Stone, Gout, and
Jaundice, so from its Saline Quality of Nitre and Allom, it is an utter Enemy
to all that are inclined to a Rheumatism, or that have an acidity in their
blood; especially if they be of a thin habit of body. This was the case of Two
Gentlemen, that nearly escaped a mischief by drinking of it; the one is Mr.
Westby, who came to Scarbrough. Dr. Witty did prepare him for drinking the
Waters, and though he submitted to all his directions, yet the Waters did so
exceedingly disorder him, that he was glad to desist. Ever since he used
Knaisbrough, and himself told me, that if he should drink Scarbrough one
fortnight, he was sure it would absolutely kill him.

Mr. Westro (the other) came to us at Scarbrough, only to visit his Friends,
the two or three days he drank the Waters (not above two quarts at a time) did
so far put him out of Tune, that he made his complaint to me, he could neither
Eat, nor Sleep. It took me a weeks time before I could reduce him to the state
of Health, which he had before he meddled with the Waters.

Let it be here noted the large difference between the Acidity of either Nitre,
or Allom, which Scarbrough partakes of; and that of Vitriol, Knaisbrough is
endewed with. This is so Connatural to the Ferment of the Stomach, that it
agrees with all Constitutions, and offends none, the other does not so.
Besides, the Acidity of Nitre and Allom frets; but this Heals from the property
of Iron.

Mrs. Shaw of Ferrihill was (judged) gone in a Consumption, having a continual
Cough, and Expectorating little else but Blood, I advised her to Knaisbrough
Spaw; A Professor of Divinity and Physic, told her Friends, 'twas the ready
way to carry her to her Grave; yet she followed my Counsel, and in a Fortnights
time, the solutio continua in her Lungs was healed, she perfectly recovered,
and to this day continues healthful, and well-liking. So for this Balsamic
property of Knaisbrough (in Mr. Stanhope his Catalogue of Cures, performed by
this Water) A relation of Mrs. Barker of Doar, and Mrs. Ellis of Beverley, both
cured by it of a dangerous Vleer in the Kidney.

A second Observation of Doctor Witty is, that what Distemper soever any brings
with them to Scarbrough, if they drink the Waters, and find no present harm by
it, but rather their Appetites mended, then must this be Registered for a Cure
done by Scarbrough Spaw.

Sir J. Br. first Lady, was afflicted for several years with the Jaundice, she
consulted a Learned Physician in York, who, by good helps, supported her,
against the Extremities of that Distemper; her Ladyship took a resolution,
without the consent of her Physician, to go to Scarbrough. Whilst she drunk the
Waters, she apprehended her self a little lightsomer, and her stomach to meat
better; hereupon Doctor Witty records this in writing, as a cure of the
Jaundice; the Lady getting notice thereof, with much ado, got her name
expunged, telling Dr. Witty, she would not be in Print. After her departure
home, the Distemper returned violently upon her, in sew weeks, her Ladyship
dyed: This relation I had from her Physician.

Mr. Thornton of Newton (his own Patient) was advised by him to drink the
Waters, for the Paralitical Scurvy; which was done, says Dr. Witty, (page 166.)
with eminent good success, his strength being increased, and his spirits
revived, so as he does now enjoy again his perfect health. The next year I met
with this Gentleman at Scarbrough, who told me himself, that though he drunk
the Waters, because the Doctor would have him to do so, yet he found no good at
all by them, but feared rather a declining in his condition, which fell out so,
for soon after he dyed of his Distemper.

I hope (Reader) though Dr. Witty be pleased to charge me with Levity,
Dis-ingenuity, Double dealing, and base ends, (and these repeated so often,
that they become (like a Cramb recocta) troublesome, and nautious to any
Judicious person) For what I writ of Scarbrough Spaw, yet thou see that the
common good of men, the prevention of many evils may happen to the Sick, upon
the frequent use of these Waters; and the vindication of a Truth of no small
importance, are the motives that have inclined me to this undertaking. If he
had (as becomed him) discoursed the difference betwixt us calmly, I had used no
other dialect in this reply, than I did in my first Book, which is a sufficient
evidence, that I gave him no provocation, for all the Raileries he gives me;
save only, that I became his Enemy for telling him the truth; which touches
his Copyhold so nearly, that he fell into a fret, as he confesses, (page 81.)
Seeing therefore (to use his own expression to Dr. S.) I am urged to go merrily
on with him, I crave thine excuse.

As touching the answer Dr. S. gave a year ago, I shall only say, it is pity
such Green Fruit should be plucked from the Tree; some further experience in
his Library, and a little more time in his Library, will, I hope, produce riper
fruit, and pleasanter to the taste of Judicious men, and Scholars. He writ in
haste, and had not leisure, nor opportunity to make trial of two Experiments;
concerning both which, I have now saved him a labor, averring from Autopsia,
first, that it is Glebe of Allom, that participates in Scarbrough, and not the
minera of Iron. And Secondly, That it is a needless thing to distill the Urine
of Scarbrough Spaw Drinkers, to seek for the Sabulous matter; for (if he take
the Dissectors opinion to be true) as it passes all through Cap-paper, he
makes no doubt, but it will do the like through our Bodies; so shall he find
all the Sand in the Urine, which the Water did contain. If he believe his own
Experiment, that the gentle Heat of Evaporation, will precipitate the Stone
powder to the bottom of the Vessel by a parity of Reason, much more will our
Natural Heat (the acid fermence of the first and second Concoction, furthering
the separation of Heterogenious parts of the Water) precipitate it in our
Bowels.

His disputing against Allom to be an Alkali, and Nitre to be an Acid, if all
were granted to him, does not so much as touch against the reason I gave, why
Scarbrough does not petrifie wood put in it, after the manner of other such
like Waters. For (by his own confession) there is an Acid and an Alkali in
Scarbrough Water, which is all I demand to be granted; the thing therefore he
has gained, by opposing me in this is, that he has occasioned the Dissector
to break a jest upon us both.

That Nitre is Filius solis, seen by his Red Garment. That a pound of Nitre
will afford by distillation, a whole pound of an extreme Acid Spirit; that it
is, a Sulphurious inflamable Salt, that mixed with the Alkali of Tartar, it
causes a great Ebullition, are such evidences to prove Nitre an Acid, that I
judge Chemists will not deny them.

That a Saponary quality is proprium Quarto modo, to an Alkali, is granted of
all. That Allom has such a Lixiviate property, I may have a subscription of all
the Dyers in England to aver the same: Why then should my Friend say, that it
is no less than a palpable mistake of me to say so.

But I will not contend with him further, only let me remember him, what is the
saying of Cato, Nulli tacuisse nocet.
Nocet esse Locutum.


THE Dissector Anatomized.
THE first appearance of Doctor Witty against me, ( page 1.) puts me in mind of
a Soldier, that was justly bastinaded for his faults, and when his haltings
discovered his maims and hurts among his Country Neighbors, he thought it his
best policy to halt down right, more than he needed, and then to boast, that
these hurts, were the evidences of his Valor, the tokens of his Prowess and
Manhood. Thus comes the Doctor upon the Stage, limping and halting, complaining
of his bad usage, but improving it as a badge of his Honor and Virtue, in the
rare discoveries he has made of Scarbrough Spaw; and this he sets off with the
saying off Themistocles, That while he was young, he was wont to say, that he
had not yet done any thing notable; forasmuch as he had not contracted envy,
nor met with any opposition.

If a man may contract envy for having a lame Leg, or for want of one Eye, then
may this saying be applicable to Doctor Witty: I have only put to my hands, to
keep these out of harms way, whom he by his Writings, would seduce into it.
What I have done therefore, is properly a seasonable opposition to his errors;
and consequently here is no evidence of his notable virtue.

2. He next tells us ( p. 2.) how he had some thoughts of answering my Book,
with a vidi and Risi, and makes as if it had deserved no farther Consideration;
because weak in the Argument, and mean in the Design. This is a short and easy
way of Answering, and such as I might bestow upon his Book in the words of C.
Hoffmannus to Romulus.

Legisti nostrum, Risisti Romule librum
Vt vidi, and Risi, Romule dive tuum.
Quae causa affectus paris, in tam dispare causa,
Risisti ingenium tute, ego stultitiam.
Yet if he had contented himself herewith, as indeed, he says, at the first he
had thought to have done, then had he lost his jest of the Cuccow, and (what is
as considerable) an opportunity of telling the world the Pedigree of Galen; and
how he has Crowned him King, and made Proclamation, that all pretenders to
Physic, who will not subscribe to him the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy
also, shall not be called Sons of Art, but Basebegoten, Quacks, Pseu,
Dochymists, Mountebanks, etc. These two Thunderclaps, begets all the
Frightments I met with in his Book. As for his pickering here and there with
false Reports, fallacious Experiments, and frothy Repartees; they are no more
to be valued, than a flap with a Fox tail, which Witty-like, he has laid upon
my back, and Dr. Simpsons in his Epistle to the Reader.

3. The Dirt and Sand, which by Anatomizing the Water, I discovered to be in
Scarbrough Spaw, Dr. Witty undertakes, that he will cleanse away, and says,
though his work be like that of Hercules, when he purged the Augaean stable,
yet his labor is nothing like his. In truth no, but like that of Sisiphus, in
rolling the stone up Hill, which returned upon himself again.

Now he begins with his Dissecting work; Dr. Witty's Whittle, and Scanderbags
Sword, are both of a Metal. Had the Doctor an arm like him, I should be in more
danger by this Dissection, than when I was cut for the Stone.

The first Pass he makes is, ( p. 3.) I have called him out to a public
Encounter, without any previous provocation given on his side. It seems he may
give stones instead of bread, yet must not be told on it. Is it not as free for
me to declare mine Opinion, as for him to proclaim his. In writing of
Scarbrough Spaw, I only meddled with his Reasons, forbearing unhandsom
expressions; yet had I been sharper toward him, I could have justified it from
his Provocation; for I was deluded by his Hyperboles, and Male-description of
it, to drink of those Waters, to the hazard of a return into my former Disease,
the Stone, enough to ruin me and my Family. I suppose he did not thereby
design my coming thither, yet the harm I received, by drinking of it, was,
Finis operis ejus, though not operantis. He tells us, ( p. 4.)

4. He will in point of Friendship, mildly endeavor to clear up mine
eyesight. I thank him for his love, but shall entreat him to make use of his
own Spectacles; I need them not; a proof whereof I have given in that, during
three days time, by Anatomizing the Water. I have discovered stone filings in
it, which he could not see, in all the Thirty years he has been looking at it.

He repeats what I said, in reference to my self, of Hippocrates and Helmont.
In reference to him, I say, they are too great lights for his weak Optics; for
in this case it is true, that minium sensibile destruit sensum. See p. 34. of
Dr. Witty's answer.

5. The Marginal note is, Galen is slighted by me. I desire the Reader to
observe how he seeks, occasions to pick a quarrel; unless he expects I should
put off my Hat every time I name Galen, I know no reason for his saying so; my
words are these. Galens method of Physic, may justly be named rational, so far
as he writes after the old man, his Masters Copy; I dare not speak further for
him. Where is Galen slighted by this? I give him the same commendation that Dr.
Witty gives him, in his Dispute with Dr. S. all along he seems so to
appropriate the word Rational to the Galenical method, as if Rational and
Galenical, were Synonyma and convertibilia; it is true, he intends to exclude
the Chemical method, as Empirical, which cannot be allowed him; for if those
Diseases be cured by this method, which the Galenical method leaves as
incurable; certainly such Natural effects must be produced by most rational
mediums. But that Galen has opposed Hippocrates, in ascribing so much to the
four first qualities, both as to the causes and method of curing Diseases, is
so vulgarly known by his Book, De antiqua Medicina; that I need not mention it
to the Learned; neither does Doctor Witty's Encomium of Galen, ( p. 12. where
he says, He was the prime star of the first magnitude in his Orb) any more than
eclipse his Honor. It Is no less than treason in him, to speak so slightingly
of Galen; for if but a Star, from what Sun has he borrowed his Splendor?
surely from one of my two great Lights. Thus good Wits jump; I shall not
trouble the Reader to Comment upon this his Digression, to p. 14. All which is
translated out of Lambesius; only let this vain brag be noted, p. 11. Galen has
brought the Art of Physic to such a Perfection, as no Art in the world can
pretend to. Mr. Stubbs is modest in his Writings, against the Royal Society,
compared with this one position of the Dissector; which if true, proclaims all
those of their Society, that are Physicians, Fools and Madmen. 'Twere happy for
the City and Country of York, if Doctor Witty's practice could confirm their
belief, of this perfection in his Art. If others cannot understand (Galen)
well, as he says (I suppose) he means in the Greek Copy, to be sure he does;
but I desire to treat him as a Friend, and therefore do commend to his reading,
Petrus Severinus Danus, his Idaea Medicina, and so set him right in his way to
Perfection.

Doctor Witty, (p. 15.) Cavils at my expression of se defendendo, and thus he
vents it; Really I wonder at this expression, whoever offended him that he
should stand upon his defense, etc. May not the Reader see by this, how hardly
he strains to get something to talk; I refer it to the construction of any man,
if more could be intended by that innocent expression, than to signify that I
meddle not with his Books, further than was necessary to defend this one
position, That the nature of Scarbrough Spaw is petrifying: In the same Page,
he shows his displeasure at this passage; Dr. Witty's failure was, that he left
off where he should have begun. I persist in the same mind still, he should
first have Anatomized the Water, that he might have viewed what was contained
distinctly in its bowels; but this work he leaves to others. Doctor S. gives a
reason for his so doing, ( page 145.) Not for want of Ignorance, says he, in
the Critical Analysis of the water.

But why should Dr. Witty be so angry for this charge truly laid against him?
does it not argue much ill Nature, and little Judgment, to reject necessary
advice. But wherein am I to be blamed that gave it? except only that it came
too late.

The next Marginal Note ( p. 16.) is, Dr. T. Disingenious toward the Author. I
know who it was that laid on these black patches, intending, thereby to
beautify the face of Dr. Witty's ill-favored discourse; it is an ugly
Epithet, which I hate worse, than to be called a Phanatick, I shall therefore
clear my self of it. I said in my Preface, that Dr. Witty, after he had
observed what was most conspicuous about the Spaw, and tried that the Gall
Tinctured the Water, contents himself with fair probabilities for asserting his
Five Principles. I appeal to the Reader; if I have dealt disingeniously with
him, in saying so, I have given the Title of fair probabilities to his proofs;
but he is not pleased therewith, but will have them called Arguments of
Demonstration. Though they were all proved to be Fallacies (as may be seen in
my Book) touching Vitriol and Iron, the Principles in difference betwixt us. As
for Salt, another Principle of his, he says, for it, ( p. 19.) The propinquity
of the Sea gives ground to many wise men, to think it may have Salt, though he
knows there are several fresh Springs about Scarbrough, which are as near the
Sea, as the Spaw is. Besides, see Norwoods Relation to the Royal Society, (p.
565.) affirming, that at Bermudas they dig Wells of fresh Water, sometimes
within twenty yards of the Sea.

He concludes ( p. 20.) that I have dealt with him, as Hanun did with King
David 's messenger, citing the place of Scripture, 2 Samuel 10.4. How can I help
that? Truth is not ashamed to appear naked in public, though the Dissector be;
it is true, he received an answer against Vitriol and Iron, being in the Spaw,
importing no less than the shaving of the half of his Beard, enough to render
him ridiculous; and the laying open the stone filings by the Anatomy of the
water, was like the cutting of his Garments in the middle, even to his
buttocks. It seems, indeed, he was ashamed hereat, and therefore he writes a
Letter to the Royal Society, presenting them with seven or eight Extracts and
Spirits, which he took out of Scarbrough Spaw; yet has the confidence to say,
it was not Heartily done of me, to mention that of trying with Gall, and to
leave out the rest of his Experiments (expressed in this Letter) for other, I
know none. This letter was Printed four months after my Book come forth, yet he
blames me for leaving it out; I beg his pardon, because I do not pretend to
that infallible Prophetic Spirit, which Doctor Witty assumes to himself; so as
to answer all that he shall hereafter write, before I read what is written: But
I owe him the kindness of a Friend, and therefore shall now take notice of it,
N. L. First, he is not pleased with Dr. Foot, in mentioning his principles of
Scarbrough, (Iron, Allom, Nitre) that he pretermitted Vitriol; yet he presumes
it was not upon design; as if Water could partake of Iron, and yet Vitriol be
absent from it; it is a grand Solaecism in Chemistry. Secondly, As touching
Vitriol, he refers to his Book; yet (says he) it is most conspicuous at the
Well. A loud untruth, for it is a Nitrous Salt only that is so; for all that
sproots out of the Hill, shoots in Stirias, the sign which he himself gives for
Nitre, there being no difference betwixt that which he calls Vitriol, and that
he calls Nitre, but Color only. Now I demand, seeing his leisure did permit
him to step to Scarbrough to renew his Experiments, there resolving to be more
Critical, why he omitted to present this he calls Vitriol, so conspicuous to
the Royal Society: doubtless his return with this, would have been more
satisfactory to them, than the seven or eight sorts of Extracts, and Spirits,
which now I come to examine. His first Extract. Exhale Scarbrough Water, till
all the moisture be consumed, and there remains a Body of Minerals signed. A.
See his Book ( p. 10.) and how he defends it in his answer, (p. 22.) to be an
Extract. Will not the Apothecary Boys laugh at him for this? if when he
prescribes to them Extract of Rudy, they should send Pillulae Cochiae; the
Patient will find a difference between them, though Dr. Witty makes none. His
second Extract. Dissolve the first Extract in water, and filter it, there will
remain a little Jusipid-earth. Pray why did he not sign at B. Oh the cunning of
Dr. Witty, this is the very Critical Point, the foundation of all the dispute
betwixt him and me; the main pillar on which I build all my discourse; an
Extract which I made out of Scarbrough Spaw, not before so duly taken notice
of; yet must it be hid from the eyes of the R. S. whose satisfaction he is
ambitious to court, and only pass it over with this slight remembrance, but not
present it to them; calling that a little Insipid earth, which is a great deal
of Gretty stone powder. How justly may I retort his own words upon him? What
makes all this doubledealing for advantage? He proceeds, Evaporate that Water
away, there is the Body B. this I judge to be for the greater part Nitre:
dissolve this Body in Water, and filter it, and there remains in the paper
powder C. which seems to be the aluminous part. Why so? may not the Aluminous
Salt in the Water, as easily pass through the Filter, as the Nitre; This is
sometimes found to be like a Chrystalline Sand, C. C. Take heed of it, it is
better expressed ( p. 64.) the grosser part of the Minerals or Metals which the
fire fixes. Evaporate this Water, and there is a Salt Dor, that D. D. the
difference betwixt them, is in the degrees of Heat; this dissolved again, and
evaporated, there is a Salt D. D. D. When the Spaw Water is first set on the
fire, there falls to the bottom a Yellowish Powder E. He cannot say what it is
I told him ( p. 56.) of my Book, that it was the Glebe of Allom, which appears
in a Black Powder, if the Water be set by cold, after two or three days, N. L.
Dr. Witty being reproved for asserting his Five Principles, before he had
Anatomized the Water; he now (to make amends) will dissect it into more parts,
than makes up the whole eight Extracts signed, A. B. C. C. D D. D. E. he should
have proceeded in the Alphabet to Witty, that the R. S. might see he had not
his name for naught. Now I appeal to the Reader, what more he has made to
appear, by all these, then a Nitro Aluminous Salt (which is impossible, by Art,
to separate asunder) except Sand and Clay, which Doctor Witty will not have
spoken on. He calcined also the Body of Minerals signed F. I demand if there
were any Flakes of Iron intersperced amongst it, as he told us there were, in
his Answer to Hydr. Chym. p. 67. He affirms in the place forecited, that they
do Calcine whitish; now says he, you may see they have a manifest appearance of
a Red Color, qui color albus erat nunc est, etc. This Redish Color he judges
to come from Iron, and for that purpose he presented it; whereas it is a better
Argument, that the Redness comes from the Sand and Clay that is in it, which by
stress of fire, turns to be of that Color, as is observed in the Potters
furnace, and Brickkilns he presented; also half an Ounce of the Spirit, besides
an Ounce of Phlegm which he distilled out of six Ounces of the body of
Minerals, signed by G. H. Alas, that a man should be at all this pains and
charge, only to confute himself, and that before the Royal Society, to whom he
makes this offering, and of whom he boasts, these noble Worthies were pleased
to receive with some satisfaction. I desire no better Judges, and therefore
appeal to them, if it be not impossible to distill a Spirit of half an Ounce,
out of six Ounces of this Body of Minerals, unless it be granted that there is
a large proportion of Sand and Clay in it, as I have affirmed.

For what else could hinder the Salts from fluxing in the Retort, and if they
did flux, how could the Spirit arise in the Receiver?

Now let others judge (to use his own words) with a little alteration, if these
few Notes may not serve for Academical Demonstrations of Doctor Witty 's
Mechanical Fooleries.

The Marginal Note ( p. 23.) is, he confesses his Levity. I confessed my
credulity, that I durst drink the Waters, and commend them to others, upon the
credit of Doctor Witty's Book. Forgive me but this once; when after search I
found Stone-powder in it, I then rationally desisted, and dissuaded others,
inclined either to Stone, Gout, or Jaundice, from further meddling with those
Waters. He says, I brought my Wife thither, what then? it was not for Cure of
any of these three Diseases mentioned; ergo, his talk is, nihil ad rombum; but
of this more anon.

But that this charge of Levity might the better take place in the minds of
men, he strengthens it with another, plainly insinuating, p. 24. that the
change of my opinion was but for a base design, of interest and advantage; and
thus he does above nine times (if I misreckon not) in his Book. What shall I
answer to this? will Doctor Witty arrogate to himself the knowledge of my Heart
and Principles? he knows whose sole prerogative it is to be (...), may not I
with equal probability affirm, that it is a base design of gain in him, to plead
for Scarbrough, against the evidences produced of its danger, to such as drink
it. But I would have him know (if he has the Ingenuity of believing a serious
Profession) that the Conviction I have of the hazard, that attends the drinking
those Waters, was the true cause that moved me to a public discovery of it; if
these Accusations be friendly or manly (they are his own words) I know not what
is friendly or humane.

What he further urges ( page 26. 27.) that Scarbrough Spaw cannot have a
petrifying property from Nitre, is so altogether nothing against me, that one
would think he had not read my Book, which he pretends to answer; neither is
his catch about a Nitrous stone, (p. 28.) worthy of any consideration; Saxum
Nitrosum, is Kirchers expression, and Saltpeter, is in Latin called
Sal-petrae.

But now he falls on at last against my first Argument (to prove the petrifying
property of Scarbrough) drawn from the Authority of Kircher, which he thus
answers, Kircher is such an uncertain, and wavering Writer, that my Argument,
from his Authority, is of no validity at all. This is a great unthankfulness in
Dr. Witty, thus to abuse this Learned Author, that stood him in so much stead
before; so long as Kircher seemed to be on his side, against Dr. S. then who
but Kircher, Paracelsus was not worthy to carry his Books, who was certainly a
hundred times more profoundly Learned than he. Answer to Hydr. chym p. 228. Now
that he is turned to be on my side against Dr. Witty, he is a wavering and
uncertain Author; well, what then? is his Authority, therefore, of no validity
at all? If Dr. Witty could produce the Authority of Galen against me, I would
answer, Valeat quantum valere potest. The Authority of this Learned man is of
some weight, until he bring as great a Scholar to put in the other Scale to
balance it; let it be observed, that authority of Authors, is the best weapon
Dr. Witty has to contend with; and if any dare encounter the Doctor, none does
more industriously handle this weapon than he. But I shall further concern my
self to vindicate Kircher, from another charge of Dr. Witty: Kircher is
extremely roving and unresolved, wherein this petrifying property shall reside,
says he, ( p. 28.) Oh strange! Self-interest is of such a smoaky nature and
force, that it puts out his Eyes; and therefore he cannot see, how in the very
same Book and Chapter quoted by him, he places the petrifying property of
waters in their dissolving of Stone; and that to effect this Dissolution, it is
necessary some Salt (of what sort soever) be joined to the water, lib. 8. p.
46. there are these words, Succus Lapidificus est saxum nitrosum, aqua
eliquatum, quod experientia docet, si enim aqua nitro vel tartaro miscetur and
polliui saxi per filtrum colaveris illa frondes similiaque nitida, cortice
saxeo vestiet, quod sine sale non eveniet, unde patet, vel salis nitri, vel
aluminis copiam jungi debere aquis rupes per currentibus, ad petrificationem.
He speaks so plain, that he that runs may read, that any Salt in water will
serve to dissolve Stone, and thereby make the water to petrifie; and that no
Salt of what sort soever, that is in water, and has not dissolved Stone, is
petrifying. Reader, you see how disingeniously Dr. Witty has dealt with
Kircher, and that he is so far from weakening his Authority, that he discovers
only, that either he would not, or did not understand him.

My second Argument is, Experiment, whereby I prove that Scarbrough is parallel
to all petrifying waters, in that property which is essential to them; namely,
in that they have dissolved Stone, which is common to no other water, which is
not petrifying. I instance in Knaisbroughs Dropping Well; what says Dr. Witty
to this? To both these Arguments (of Authority, and of Experiment) I Will answer,
says he, in one word, why in one word? I shall dare him, or any man else, to
confute me, as the Scholar confuted Bellarmine, with saying, Bellarmine thou
lie. Upon this Point, I Will venture as high as Dr. Witty has done, to give up
the cause. If I be false in either of my Experiments, which I have made of
Scarbrough, and of this Dropping Well; but let him speak out, Knaisbrough will
cover with a stony Crust, Moss put into it; and let any man show me that
Scarbrough will do so, and I Will give up the Cause. What a sorry unScholar-like
vaunt is this, when I told him before, that Scarbrough was not accused by me,
for doing so, if they agreed in this Point; how could he and I dispute such a
matter, which any two Girls that come to the Waters, may decide with their
eyes? It could not then be a fit subject for Disputation; but though it
petrifies not a stick put in it, what if it petrifies when put in our Bodies,
and leaves a crust of Stone, when it is passing through, in our Vital Bowels? It
will not follow, that because it does not the one, therefore it cannot do the
other; there is a difference in the subjects, Sticks and Living flesh are not
one; there is a difference in the object, the water in the Fountain is
Homogenical; every drop of that water, is water, and will so pass through the
filter, but after it is received into our Bodies, the Ferments of Concoction
makes a separation of the Principles, and what was before Water, is now in
part, Sand and Clay. But this is all nothing in Dr. Witty's account; I hope the
Learned will judge otherwise of it; with this empty brag, he would pass on to
my Third Argument: I shall not part with him so, but shall fetch him hither,
from p. 57. (Dr. Witty has dissected me after such a Butcherly manner, that I
am forced to make Head and Pluck go together.)

There he concludes thus, The parallel betwixt Dropping Well and Scarbrough, is
naught and frivolous. You would think a strong Team of Arguments went before,
that made this conclusion follow; it is this, The salt of Dropping Well is not
Nitre, for it does not shoot into Stirias: suppose it were so, that the Water
of Scarbrough, and Dropping Well have different Salts, what is this to the
purpose, so long as they agree in this, that they both have dissolved Stone?
It Is proved already, let the Salt be what it will, whereby the water has power
to dissolve stone, that water is petrifying. Seeing in this therefore, they do
agree, wherein the petrifying property of all Waters does recide; I have all
granted to me I dispute for, but I declare and vow, per fidem meam datam
universitati Oxon, that the Salt of Droping Well is Nitrous, and shoots into
Stirias, having it to show to any that questions this my solemn protestation,
enough, I hope, to satisfy any Brother of the Profession, but the Dissector.
He proceeds, (because I declare there is Nitre in Scarbrough) I have proved it
already, to be inconsistent with the nature and property of Nitre to make a
stone; who goes about to disprove him in this? he is beating the Air again.

Reader, then see that Scarbrough and Dropping Well are parallel; for any thing
the Dissector has to object against it, hear him now confess it; says he, (
page 56.) of the Dropping Well, if it be evapourated away, it leaves in the
bottom of the vessel a gretty stone powder; so does Scarbrough (confessed of
all hands that have tried it) ergo, they are parallel. Dr. Witties Friend
confessed to me, he boiled Scarbrough Water this year, and found it did so. But
this is not all, as he has confessed that Scarbrough and Droping Well are
parallel, here now he gives up the whole Cause; his next words are, For the
fire fixes the Lapidescent juice; hence this Syllogism does naturally result.

The Water, that after evaporation leaves a gretty stone powder at the bottom
of the Vessel, has in it a Lapidescent juice.

But Scarbrough Spaw, after evaporation, leaves a gretty stone powder at the
bottom of the Vessel; ergo,

Scarbrough Spaw has in it a Lapidescent juice.

The Major is his own confession in the place force-cited, ( p. 56.) The minor
is proved by the Experiment mentioned, and confessed by all Experimentators of
Scarbrough Spaw; nemine contradicente. It is superfluous to say more, yet for
satisfaction of the vulgar, I shall say again,

The Spaw that has in it a Lapidescent juice, is a petrifying water.

But Scarbrough Spaw has in it a Lapidescent juice; ergo,

Scarbrough Spaw is a petrifying Water.

Reader, now that mine Adversary, the Dissector, is under my Feet, as I am a
Gentleman, I scorn to trample upon him, and therefore shall with all
submission, patiently give him leave to pull the hood over mine Ears, in the
most disgraceful manner to degrade me, if the minor Proposition of the first
Syllogism prove not true upon his own trial and experiment.

My third Argument, a priori, ( p. 30.) from the apporhoea spiritus Lapidifici,
is now, ex supra abundanti; so that if there were no effects of this to be seen
on the Cliff, Dr. Witty's boasting is vain, though he be got up as high as
Tenderdens Steeple. I advise him to make use of the Bell-rope, and the Muscle
shells we find petrified on the bank, he says, was cast up by the Sea. So may
be, was the three Cart load of Earth, that lies petrified, at the bottom of the
Hill; but hear his proof, Assuredly the Sea does petrifie any thing that has in
it a Lapidescent juice, ( p. 31.) This is a Golden Aphorism, so does all the
four Elements, Fire, Air, Earth, and Water, without Salt; for Fire, that is his
own saying, ( p. 56.) the words that cost him so dear before cited. For Air,
see Tachen. p. 15. where he says, that it is observed, that a Flint stone, laid
on the ground, of a hundred pound weight, will receive from the Ambient Air
such nourishment, that yearly, it will acquire about ten pound more weight; for
Water look into fresh rivers, how full they are of pebble stones at the bottom;
for Earth dig any where among the Quarries. Is not this then spoken like a
Philosopher think you? hear him now, how like a Physician he utters his mind;
Hence it comes to pass, that he that has any Lapidescent juice, which we call a
Tartarous humor, shall sooner contract the stone, if he eat much salt with his
meat. This is point blank against the unquestionable reasons, and experience of
Helmont, cap. de Lithiasi, 3. parog. 30. Sexagenarium immunem arenum calculo
servavi annos sedecim (cui alioqui obnoxious erat) largo salis marim usu, quod
deinceps in multis confirmavi. But Dr. Witty matters not what Helmont say; for
he told me (I hope, not for a secret) when I was at Scarbrough, and he newly
come from Cambridge in Triumph, for his victory over Dr. S. That Helmont was a
Quack, and if he could have met with the man, that Married his Daughter, whom
he sought after in London, he assured me, That Son-in-Law of his, would say no
less of him. I shall therefore tell him the practice of another Learned
Physician and Chemist, famous for his Cures done in the North, Doctor Webb: he
for preventing of Tartarous humors, coagulating in the Body, did use himself,
and advised all his Friends to breakfast every morning, with Bread and Salt;
which was observed in his time, by most Gentlemen of his acquaintance: I dare
be positive, that this breakfast, is a better receipt for the Stone, than the
eating of Radish Roots with Meat, which Dr. Witty magnifies for a secret, ( p.
61.)

But if any object, that Salt meats are found to be ill for the Stone, I Will
grant it; yet does it not therefore follow, that to eat much Sea Salt, with
fresh meat, is so, as Dr. Witty says, for this reason. If meat be laid in
Salt, before it be eaten, the longer it lies, the more of the fleshes Alkali is
melted into the Salt, (which we find again by distilling of the pickle) The
flesh being so much deprived of this, must therefore be bad for the Stone, in
as much as Acidity in all Concoctions, but the first is the principle of
Coagulation, and Alkali is the sole sweetner of it: If this be not a Note above
Ela in Doctor Witty's Gamut, I would have him to dance, after this my pipe, for
the future.

That this Dissector is a perfect Trifler, we have a proof of it, as all along;
so here, because I did but allude to Lot's Wife, what a bussle he makes about
her, writing in Folio to Doctor Bazere for information, whether it was
Sea Salt, or other Mineral that she was turned into; yea, so Foolhardy is
Doctor Witty, that he will prescribe to the Almighty a reason of his miraculous
doings. Says he, She was not turned into Marine Salt, for then she would have
melted away with every shower, and so it could not have suited with the design
of God. Vain man, the same Omnipotent hand, that withheld the Bush that burned
with fire, that it was not consumed, would have kept the Salt from melting with
rain, and made it suit his design, as long as he pleased. But to go on, Doctor
Bazere sends this Letter of Doctor Witty's to the Bishops Chaplain; He told me
that a Traveller, lately showed him a white lump of stone, like Alabaster,
bidding him to taste it; he did so; says the Traveller to him, that is a piece
of Lot's Wife; upon this report, the Chaplain fell a spitting and a spawling,
seeming to be angry, that he was not told so before he put his tongue to it;
for says he, for ought you know, it was taken out of her Buttock. Had this
Traveller gone to Doctor Witty with it, he would (to give the world
satisfaction) have lick't his lips at it, notwithstanding it had been so.

To let this Woman alone, I say, old Parr, who lived an hundred and forty
years, and eat Sea Salt with his meat daily, when he could get it, if Doctor
Witty speak truth, that this Salt is petrifying, then 'twas a miracle, like
that of Lots Wife, that he was not turned into a petrifying Pillar of Salt
before he dyed.

Whilst Doctor Witty is of this opinion, it were advice, secundum artem, for
him to persuade people to eat their meat without Salt.

He comes next to my fourth Argument, from the effects of Scarbrough Spaw,
instancing first in my self, how hurtful these Waters were to me; he brings in
with it, what I said of Knaisbrough before, how it brought mucous matter out of
my Bladder, which I illustrated with a saying of Helmont in his Custos errans,
(p. 212.) Vbi custodes male se habent continuo plorant partem proprii alimenti,
quod sibi assimilare debebant: The Marginal note is, Dr. T. Cites Helmont
impertinently, (p. 34.) yea, says he, The matter for which I cite him, and the
words, agree like a Harp and an Harrow. Now, if I produce a another place in
Helmont, where the words, and the matter, are both expressly together, Doctor
Witty had better said nothing. See Delithiasi, (p. 664.) Oblaeditur nempe
vesica in sua digestione acrudeli and molesto hospite calculo, qua-propter
impatiens, partem sui alimenti indigestam, continuo plorat, quia preficere,
atque promovere eam nequit novamque ideo accersit successive. It appears then,
that though in the judgment of Dr. Witty, Helmont is impertinent to write thus,
yet have not I cited him impertinently; Nor does it appear, says he, that I
understand Helmonts meaning. I deserve a Fools Coat, if I do not; To say no
more (says he) than what appears true to Learned men, this is one of those
sentences, wherein Helmont affects obscurity, and is scarce intelligible. Thus
Dr. Witty would put the Fools Cap upon the Head of all Learned men, measuring
their knowledge by his own: Custodes is the one hard word that is in the
sentence; he knew the whole body is distinguished into three, Continentia,
Contenta, and impetum fatientia; what ailed him, that he could not appropriate
the word Custodes, to the last of these? does not the Spirits Animal, Vital,
and Natural (as they say) deserve to be called Custodes, seeing they are the
Fountain of all the Functions, which every part of the body does perform. Dr.
Witty, in that he can smell Vitriol in an Allom Water distinctly, has approved
himself to be Homo Emuniti naris; yet suppose he catch a cold in his head this
Winter, and thereupon water distills out of his Alimbick, and wets his
Handkerchief daily; if this experience does not teach him to understand
Helmonts words I cited, then for certain there is something else (his brains)
has dropped out of his Nose. What weeds Doctor Witty can gather out of Helmont, I
know not; sure I am, this sentence of his is a Flower, that is fragrant in the
Nostrils of all Artists, whilst they have to do with most Diseases,
particularly the Diabetes, Stone in the Bladder, all Ulcers, inward and outward.

He says, I had the same reason to charge Knaisbrough Water for breeding the
mucous matter that it brought away, as to charge Scarbrough for breeding the
Stone. Let Dr. Witty give me as good a reason for the former, how is it
possible that a Vitrioline water should breed Mucous water in the Bladder, as I
have done in the latter, how Scarbrough water is apt to breed the Stone, and
then I Will believe he writes sense.

I said before, that Nitre in Scarbrough, is as the Rose; stone filings are the
prickles that grow with it. This is good, the other is bad, yea, the worst
thing in the world for the Stone.

He tells me, ( p. 37.) out of Kircher, that I had reason to look for fits of
Stone, after cutting. It Is granted, and therefore I came to Scarbrough to
prevent them, where I met with those fits, and upon examination of the Water, I
found just cause to say it bred them. Mine experience confirms what I said; for
since I was cut for the Stone, I never, to this day, felt the least symptom of
Gravel, save only, when I drunk of Scarbrough Water, and immediately after the
drinking of it.

But says he, Scarbrough by reason of the Nitre in it, makes a plentiful
Current run through the passages of Urine, and therefore cannot breed the
stone. At first it does so, till it take a Jadish Fit, sooner or later, it will
neither go backward by Stool, nor forward by Urine. But again, the more
currently a petrifying Water is supposed to pass through the Urinal passages,
the more danger there is of breeding the Stone. I have bound him with his own
chain, to this conclusion, that Scarbrough has in it a Lapidescent juice. They
are fetters of brass, he can never break them asunder.

He added (page 38.) a particular man's experience of such an one, specially as
my self may be Fallacious. He mistakes, the Experiment I made of the Water, was
the foundationstone of my Position, my particular experience did but confirm
it; therefore, I say, an Experiment agreeing with the Experience, not of one,
but of many, cannot be Fallacious: he heard me ( p. 35.) protesting to the
world, both as to my self, Patients, and Relations it was so.

I shall now be more particular to convince him and others, that it was not my
experience only, that Scarbrough Spaw is bad for the Stone.

Mr. William Beckwith never had any symptom of Gravel, until he used Scarbrough
Water, which he observed, did give him Fits of Stone, and therefore he gave it
over, and since betook himself for Knaisbrough. Mr. John Aton came to
Scarbrough by mine advice, he did commend the Water for its purging property,
but it gave him a touch of his old distemper the Stone, of which he was cured
perfectly at London fifteen years before; and never from that time, till he
drunk Scarbrough, had he the least remembrance of it; this did so affright him,
that he durst not drink any more of these Waters.

Mrs. Johnson of Kiblesworth, came to Scarbrough, by mine advice, for
prevention of the Fits of Gravel, she used sometime to be afflicted with; after
her return from thence, she had her Fits more frequently, and more violently;
besides, as the Water dealt with me, so did it with this Gentlewoman. No sooner
did the Stone pass out of one Kidney into the Bladder, but immediately she felt
from the other Kidney, a darting pain strike into her great Toe, which made her
halt for a fortnight after. She never in all her life time, had any fit of the
Gout before, or since she left off drinking of Scarbrough.

I shall but add one other instance expressed in a Letter to me, which I judge
is as a remarkable one against Scarbrough Spaw, as that of Mr. Waugh, to Dr.
Witty, cited, ( p. 60.) is for it.

Mr. Wilmer of Bow, near London, being afflicted with the Stone, comes to
Scarbrough in (70.) to drink the Water; his Wife (being with him) was pleased
to drink of it also for company, though she was never subject to the Disease in
the least; after she had drunk it two or three weeks, they both return to York,
and within two days, she fell into such a violent fit of the Colic and Stone
(with almost a total suppression of Urine) that many hours she almost dispaired
of life; but by the use of good remedies, she voided a good quantity of Sand of
Gravel; some bits as big as great pins heads, and wondered at such a surprisal;
for she said, she never had a fit of Stone before, in all her life, and thought
the Spaw water had bred it; well, after some weeks recovery, she went up to
London, and then she had another dangerous fit of the Stone again, which had
like to have cost her life, but by the help of two Physicians there, she got
quit of two or three Stones; one of which was as big as an ordinary Almond,
which still confirmed her belief, that the Spaw had made them; well, the next
year (71.) she came again with her Husband to Scarbrough, and brought those
stones to show Doctor Witty, resolving not to drink any more, unless the Doctor
gave assurance the Spaw had not occasioned them. Being over-perswaded by the
Doctor to drink again, in a few days trial, she fell the third time into such a
desperate fit of it, for several days, that her Husband and Children, bemoaning
her, thought verily she would have ended her days there; this I was an
eyewitness of, as to the first part; the rest was a relation to me from her
own Mouth this last Summer. Henry Wilkinson.

He is proving ( page 39.) that Scarbrough, cannot breed the stone, because it
expells them. That it expells them, it was confessed, but the inference denied
in the place before cited.

He argues, Scarbrough cannot be either the material, or efficient cause of
breeding stone; not the material cause of stone, because that must be Crass
matter, but the Spaw is a pure water; ergo.

As pure as it looks, if all the Sand and Clay in it, were put in his eyes, he
would then see it is otherwise.

But for him to affirm that Crass matter, is the material cause of stone, is no
less than a gross mistake. Spirit of Urine, mixed with pure Spirit of Wine, they
both do coagulate together into a firm Salt: Fermented Urine distilled, before
half be cummed over, there is found all about the sides of the receiver, a
Sabulous matter: Sat namque constat, says Helmont, delithiasi, (p. 683.) quod
in lotio humano (etiam sanorum) semper sit proxima materia invisibilis, and
semen ad duelech. But if Doctor Witty be willing to learn, and can understand
Helmont well, he may be informed by that Author, how stones are bred in our
Bodies.

Vbi Spiritus Vrinae invenit volatile non coagulatum coagulabile tamen (quia
terreae indolis) suum exserens coagulum, constringit eandem aporrhaeam in
terram; consercisque viribus utrimque, fit nova creatura, quae est nativitas
duelech, Helmont. (p. 687.)

The efficient cause of stone it cannot be, because it is cooling, for says he,
Thus the stones are bred, the fiery heat of the Reins, and circumjacent parts,
condueeth some Crass matter into Gravel and Stone; even as Potters Clay is by
heat, hardened into a stone. Who will blot Paper to tell him how Helmont has
confuted this irrational opinion, which is contrary to the judgment of
Hippocrates, Sennertus, and with him all Modern Authors, that has not put their
Thumbs under Galens Girdle; yea, contrary to the experience of all afflicted
with that distemper; who can feel that Stone and Gravel causes the heat in the
Reins, and circumjacent parts, and not the heat of them causes the Stone; in
as much as they find, if ever the petrifying Spirit be extinct and gone, they
are never more troubled with any preternatural heat in those parts, than others
that know not what fits of Stone meant.

If heat were the cause, sine qua non, of Gravel and Stone in the Kidneys; how
easily were it, by the Galenical method, to prevent it for ever; a little Vng.
Populeon, or refrigerous Galeni, would do the feat. I would know of him, how it
comes to pass, that there are great stones bred in the Bladder so frequently;
suppose heat were there, as much as in a Potters Furnace, it could not harden
Crass matter into stone there; because the water continually coming thither,
would keep it moist. Again, how could stones be bred by heat in the hollow of
the Lungs, as in Mr. Procters case, which continually sucks in cooling Air. How
comes it to pass that old men, quatenus, such are more subject to stone, than
others of middle age. Thou see that Dr. W. in his description of the stone,
is of the question both as to matter and form.

But says he, Our Author accuses it as a material cause. I accuse Scarbrough
to breed the stone, both as a material and efficient cause.

He goes on, perhaps, I might be beguiled in taking up Sand with the Water,
which made me look upon it as an inseparable adjunct of the Water. What a
wearisomness is it, to answer such trifling words? why did did not the
Dissector, before he fell on his work, try the water by boiling it? and then if
he did not find a great deal of gretty stone powder at the bottom of the
Vessel, he might have put his Whittle to my throat, and said to me, Tonstall
thou lie; perhaps, indeed, he did try it, but we hear not a word of that.

But he further urges, (p. 42.) All Mineral Waters will let fall something to
the bottom, called Ochre; yet Learned Writers, on the subject, never thought
the worse of them. I know Allom waters will let fall its Glebe, as Vitrioline
do their Colcothar, neither do I think the worse of them for it. The Spaw at
Malton does so, which is an Allom water. If Scarbrough were as innocent as
this, Doctor Witty, and I, should soon agree together. I declare and publish,
that I have Experimented this Water, as I did that at Scarbrough; and it lets
fall no gretty stone powder to the bottom: Hereby Doctor Witty is plainly
confuted in two things.

First, That I picked a quarrel with Scarbrough, only for by-ends, and out of a
mean design, to draw Patients from thence to Knaisbrough. If I had been so
basely Spirited, I would not have told him thus much of Malton, which he
confesses ( p. 201. first Edition) To be of like virtue, and in operation, as
quick and strong, as that at Scarbrough. Here let him set up, and if he can
bring the Patients from Knaisbrough, to him thither, I shall not complain.

Secondly, He is confuted by this also, that it is a peculiar fault in
Scarbrough, as it is a petrifying water, not as an Allom water, that it casts a
gretty stone powder to the bottom in the boiling.

Yet another evasion. Doctor Witty relates, a notable Experiment shown before
several persons of quality, I wonder, I met not with it in his Letter at large
to the R. S. Two quarts of Spaw water, passes through the filter, whilst it is
cold, cleaverly, leaving not a grain of Sand behind; and thence he infers, that
if they drink the water unwarm'd, it will, he doubts not, pass through the Body
as easily, leaving no dregs behind, as it did in the filter. I Will set another
Experiment against this, dissolve Pearl (prepared with Sp. of Venus) in
springing water, filter it, and it shall go all through, not leaving a grain
behind. Were it true, therefore, that this Pearl-water, would so pass through
the Body, as it did the filter, then save but the Ladies water that drank it,
and we may find the Pearl again, and that an hundred times over. If Swelfer
were alive, he should thank Doctor Witty, who by this Experiment would prove,
that his Spir. veneris, is tantum non, the liquor Alkahest.

He endeavors, again, to put by the force of this Argument, by affirming, (
page 43.) Though the fire make a separation of the gross parts of the water,
from the pure, yet the natural heat in the Bowels does not so when we drink it;
but the water passes through the body, as pure as we put it into our mouths:
His first proof is, a most impertinent instance, of the blood which is flued in
our veins, yet exhaled on the fire, it will be thick like Starch.

Let Doctor Witty, who is a Master of Secrets (yet will tell me none) take the
liquor Alkahest, and first digest the blood with it, then set it on the fire,
and he will see that all the blood will be exhaled, and no thick matter left
behind.

He considers not, that the different parts of our body, are endued with diverse
Functions; it is the faculty of the veins and arteries (quam diu custodes been
se habent) to circulate the blood, which also evaporates through the pores,
without separation of any Sediment, or caput mortuum, because of the natural
Alkahest that recides there; it is the faculty of the bowels, by the Ferments
there, to make separation betwixt pure and impure, and to leave a Sediment, and
Natures caput mortuum, to be cast forth as an Excrement.

His second instance, like the former is, That Sack put on a hot fire-shovel,
will leave a white Sediment, but passes well through our bodies. In Sack there
is a Volatile Sulphur and Salt, duly contemperated, which makes it so great a
Cordial: Being cast on the Fire, these two Principles suddenly apprehends each
other, and unites in, aliquid tertium, like Starch. Yet let him take the Tartar
of Wine, which is the grossest part of it, and Volatilize it, as he is told in
Quarcetan de medecin. prisc. Philos. cap. 6. And then put it upon a hot
fireshovel, and it shall all evaporate into smoke, and leave nothing behind; so
that his two instances serve nothing to his purpose, to show the different
effects betwixt the heat of the Fire, and of our Bodies; but rather the
difference of Functions, betwixt that in the Veins, and that in the Bowels; and
the difference of Concretes, how some are volatile, and some are not. But if
Doctor Witty would make Scarbrough Spaw as parallel to Sack, as I have made it
to the Dropping Well at Knaisbrough, we will all come and drink with him.

But what needs all this trouble of Experiments? Doctor Witty hits the nail on
the head, and drives it home at one blow; says he ( p. 44.) A petrifying water
is an excellent remedy against the Stone. Alas, poor Galen, Doctor Witty, has
broken thine head at this one stroke; a word and a blow with him, will confute
us both: remember what he said before of Galen; and is not this in him, crimen
laesae majestis?

Contraria Contrariis curantur,

Says rational Galen.

Similia Similibus curantur,

Says Doctor Witty.

Welcome good Sir, I am glad to see you shake hands with Paracelsus.

Sic saevis inter se convenit ursis. But he has Doctor Fuller, an Historians
word for it, that a spring at Newenham Regis, a petrifying water, is sound to
be very soverain against the Stone; If so, then it is the best expedient in the
world, to recover the credit of Scarbrough, for him to go thither this Summer,
and when he has performed his Cures there, then to bring his observations under
the hands of his Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, Reverend, and
Well-beloveds. If he will not follow mine advice, I shall be on Galens side,
against Doctor Witty, for all that Fuller reports of Newenham Spring, because I
descry Scarbrough Spaw, by reason of the stone powder in it; therefore he
infers, I may as well cry down Pearl, Coral, Crab-eyes, Gasc-powder, all sorts
of Precious Stones, as dangerous against the Stone; and we should use nothing,
but the fiery hot Spirits of the Pseudo-Chymists, if Wise men, and Great Ladies
would believe this doctrine. N. L. doubtless the Dissector has drunk too much
of the hot, fiery Spirits of the Pseudo-Chymists, which has inflamed his brain,
and made him rove at this rate. What says Wise Men, and great Ladies, to this
Doctrine of his? seeing they take Pearl and Precious Stone-powder, they may as
well take the Powder scraped off their stone-walls; as if there were no
difference betwixt stones in the street, and Rubies; whereas they differ, toto
coelo, as we say, distant in virtue from each other, as far as Heaven is from
Earth. Hear that incomparable Philosopher, describing these Precious stones,
and the common ones, Canon 172. Saxa vero and lapides, quia non tam ex vera
elementorum mixtione generantur, quam ex Terra and Aquae concursu per
exteriorem caloris and frigoris vim, quasi opus terreum and fictile,
decoquuntur; propterea omnino stupescunt, a tenebrosa frigentique terrae and
aquae natura formam invalidam mutuati; de pretiosis lapillis and gemmis aliter
sentiendum est, formas enim suas, a limpidissimus Coeli and solis fontibus
hauriunt, ipsorumque corpora sunt purissime roris exuberati guttulae,
coelestibus influentiis impregnatae ac veluti concrete Coeli lacrymae, unde
plurimas sublimesque in se virtutes possident.

As for Crab eyes and Claws, which are the Basis of Gascin powder, they are
noble Alkalis, sweeting all Acidities, and therefore good for the Stone, as I
said before. As for Spar, it is a mark hasite of Lead, abounding with Volatile
Sulphur and Salt, whereby it is very Diuretical, and therefore not only good
for the Stone, as he mentions, but for the Dropsy also, which he might have
found in Kirkerus, if he had read him for any other end, than to serve his turn
in disputations. If Scarbrough Water has dissolved any one of these he
mentions, I had been as just to commend it, as now in honesty, I dispraise it
for the Stone.

Once again he assaults the Battery, ( p. 47.)

It Is impossible (says he) for such a gross substance as Sand (which suppose we
grant to be in the Water) to pass through the capillar veins of the Mesentery
and Emulgents, which it must do, before it come into the Kidneys to breed the
Stone.

He must needs be quarrelsom with others, who cannot be reconciled to himself;
he said before, ( p. 43.) He did not doubt but the water, nothwithstandiug the
gross Sediment, which the fire, as a proper instrument, has discovered to be in
it, would pass through, and penetrate our Bodies, and leave no dregs behind;
now it is impossible it should be so.

Again, observe what he said last, Mineral and Precious Stones, are good to
expel Gravel and Stone out of the Kidneys: now he says, it is impossible they
should get thither, through the Capillar Veins of the Mesentery; will he also
be against Aristotle, and deny, that omnis actio est per contactum, or will his
Medicines kill Diseases in the same manner (as the Gentleman told him, bragging
how he had mall'd me) he had killed his Adversary, namely, before he came at
him.

A factum esse ad posse valet argumentum affirmative; he might have read in
Sennertus, that powder of Anniseed given to a Child, for wind of the Stomach,
was found in the Child's Urine next day after. I shall tell him of baggs of
water, the skins whereof were as thick as the brim of an Hat, and before the
water was drawn out of them, as big as his Head; these hanging upon the outward
coat of the Bowels, came through into them, and was voided by siege. To give a
reason how this could be (that it was so, I shall manifest in mine
observations) take the Answer of Severine, in another case, Quod manifestas
vias corporum in his and similibus Atomistis demonstare non possumus, excusamur
Hippocratis authoritate. Qui consensum and conspirationem naturae ubique
celebrat, affirmans nullam viam naturae difficilem, omnia patere etiam per ossa
abscessus fieri. To confirm what Hippocrates says, I shall mention, how another
vomited up, every morning, gross purulent matter, and sowas cleared of an
Empyema, that lay above the Diaphragm, in the hollow of the Chest; whether by
the translation of the matter into the Veins and Arteries, and so bringing it
to the Stomach, or by what other secret ways, Nature did perform this, let the
Learned discuses; but that it was so, I shall evidence hereafter.

A Servant of the Lord Sinklers in Scotland, tormented with a Stone in his
Kidneys, after he had lain about half a year, the Stone came through his Back,
into the bed, leaving no wound by its passage, the man recovered.

He proceeds, Nor ever was any such thing (as Sand and Clay) found or suspected
to be in the Spaw, till this, our Author, fancied it.

More shame for the Dissector to boast of his practice at Scarbrough, near
thirty years, and all the while not to learn the skill, to separate the Sand
and Clay from the Salts in the Water. And is it not a pretty fancy of him, to
say of that which my hands have handled, mine eyes have seen, I fancyed it.

Another evasion follows, But (the Sand and Clay, must of necessity be thrown
by the purging property of the water into the Bowels, where no harm, nor manner
of detriment can ensue, and so go out by siege.

If the Water be drunk, it must of necessity be thrown into the Bowels, whether
the Water purge, or not purge; and being there obstruct by the Sand and Clay in
it, both the Ductus Pancreaticus, and Cholidochus, if not, petrifie their
juices; for the Faeces of the water going out by siege, it is but his fancy in
this place; for hereafter he declares they stay behind, notwithstanding that
the water purges well all the while.

Yet again, Nor did ever any thing happen upon the drinking of these waters,
that could afford any the least ground of jealousy, that there was any such
cause, notwithstanding his pretenses.

This is a loud untruth (with this aggravation upon it) contrary to his own
knowledge, as will be made appear, in ( p. 96.)

The Dissector tired a little with his work, to divert himself, and the Reader,
makes a Digression, ( p. 48.) To tell first of the Nature of Stone, and then of
the Generation of Stones, says he, It is a point of no small difficulty, that I
am now fallen upon; Fallopius his definition, he likes not, but leaves it to
others to give better. But this is observable, that the more pure and fine, the
matter of any stone is, the harder it is; by this rule, flint is of purer
matter than Pearl. So much for that Point.

But the Generation of Stone is still more difficult, they are not all
Originally water, because they are not all pellucid, nor all of earth, for then
none should be pellucid; besides, they are heavier than Earth, and yet dryer,
which may not be granted. The best account we can give is, that every sort of
stone has its stony juice, before it be Concrete, and that Concretion is
furthered sometimes by cold, and sometimes by heat. This is the sum of his
Digression. I shall say nothing to him, only a word to the Learned, and
Industrious Naturalist.

Kircher forbear thy sighs, and wipe thine eyes,
Weep not to see him thus Epitomize
Thy Subterranean Treasures, since we see,
It Is all the difference 'twixt him and thee.
There are also stones generated in men's Bodies, by the immoderate heat of the
parts condensing Crass matter, (even as Clay is hardened to a stone, in the
Potters Furnace, so he said before, p. 41.) For instance, he tells of a Stone,
as hard as a Flint, which would strike fire on a steel, cut out of a man's
Buttock, at Doncaster; you will say, how came the immoderate heat so to that
part, as to condense Crass matter to that extreme hardness? I Will tell you,
either he was one of the Dissectors ill Boys, when he taught School at Hull,
and therefore got his Breech overheated, when he was young; or else the man
being too much delighted with pastime, did play too long in the Winter nights,
at the sport we call hot-hand.

He proceeds to a rare Spring in France, that in 24 hours time, by placing
Timber, and then pumping water upon it, they may have a complete Stone Bridge,
made by petrifaction. Faber endeavoring to give a reason for it, he tells him,
he had as good have said nothing. Now hear something to the purpose, it is thus,
The true cause, says he, must be this, that this whole Matter that runs out of
the Spring, is a Lapidescent juice, and not water. Thus he contradicts the
definition, which Kircher gives of Succus Lapidificus. I demand therefore what
he means by it, if it be not Saxum nitrosum aqua eliquatum; I do suppose, like
as he learnt from the Potter, how stones are bred in our bodies, so here he is
taught by the Grape-gatherers, how these stonebridges come to pass, viz. as the
juice of Grapes runs out of the Wine-presses in France, so here the juice of
Stones runs out of the Spring, which as soon as it ceases to move, immediately
it hardens.

Thus also the Dissector has turned the Royal Society topsie turvy; their Art
is to imitate Nature; he will have Nature to imitate Art, both in the Potters
Furnace, and the Wine Press.

Page 54.55.56. He is describing Knaisbroughs Dropping Well, for which he
received satisfaction before.

The Marginal Note, ( page 57.) A rare case of help in the Stone. He mentions
me, that was helped into a Fit of the Stone by drinking of it; and he is so
fond of his Brat, a pretty similitude (to which I gave answer, ( p. 34. of my
Book) that he repeats it here again. The dispute was, where the Thief lurked; I
said in Scarbrough Spaw. The stone-filings I discovered, and by Anatomy
ferreted him out. Doctor Witty was studying above twelve months, how to requite
me for so doing; his answer came out at last, the design whereof is to hide
this Thief, if it were possible, from the eyes of others. A Receiver, we say,
is worse than a Thief; justly therefore was he set in the Pinfold; but seeing
he threatens either to creep through, or overtop it, I have now bound him in a
Chain, and clapped him up in close Prison. As for the Thief it self, I have
delivered it to the Judges (the Royal Society) if they will not condemn it, yet
I have discharged the part of an honest man.

In case Doctor Witty be troubled, with the overflowing of his Gall at this,
let me dissuade him from drinking any more Scarbrough water, for it is very bad
for the Jaundice.

He proceeds ( p. 59.) against my fourth Argument, endeavoring to overthrow it
by contrary instances; he produces one I know not, the other I do, Mr. George
Waugh, who continues still with bad Fits of the Stone; but we have not a word
of this.

He thinks fit, (p. 61.) to insert a story, as old as Paul's, however I thank
him for his good will; sorry he is, that I should come under the knife again,
and be cut for the Stone; therefore he will teach me a cure from the casualty
of the knife halft, lying upon the Radish root, which being made of a Stone
taken out of the Bladder, melted away considerably. His inference upon this
that happened by the Radish, Helmont has pulled up by the roots, showing how the
power of such vegetable dissolvents is enervated, before they come where the
Stone is, by the ferments of concoction.

( Page 63.64.) He mentions Mr. Proctors case I spoke of, and Catechiseth
Doctor Neale, that did advise him to Knaisbrough, to whom I refer the Dissector.

He gave out before, that I placed the petrifying property of Scarbrough, in
Nitre, and manfully beat the Air about it; now he understands me better, it is
in the stone perticles, says he ( p. 64.) But how come these to be found in
Scarbrough? Thus, the fire in the boiling of the water, does condense some
fixed parts of the Minerals, and Metalline substances (even so said the Parson,
that Tenderden Steeple was the cause of Goodwin Sands) however, yet exceeding
short of that proportion that he mentions. I wonder he should say so, what need
of extenuating the matter thus? if it be not plain Sand, but only the Mineral
and Metalline Substances, what worse is Scarbrough's water for them? though
they were exceeding above the proportion, that I mentioned; nor indeed, is it
worth the enquiring; what is his Book worth then, which he entitles an Answer?
Surely not the Reading. For if he have not enquired into mine Experiment, of
Scarbrough Spaw, and upon trial found, that it is false, either as to the thing,
or to the proportion of it, his whole discourse is impertinent, as indeed it
is, save only, that it serves to illustrate what I have said of Scarbrough.

Observe now his pitiful shufflings, to make the Sand, found in Scarbrough, an
innocent thing, and but that which is common to all waters.

His first Argument.

Mr. Boil, in his Ninth Experiment ( p. 390.) says, that distilled Rainwater,
left at the bottom a fine white Earth; the Dissector, according to his wonted
manner of dealing, with all Chemical Authors, abuses this noble person,
reporting of him, That he sound there a quantity of Sand, as a bottom Sediment.
His second Argument, would throw Sand and Clay that is in Scarbrough, into all
the Spaws in Europe; such, says he, there is in Burbon Spaw; his proof for it
is, the Lord Faulconbridge showed him the Minerals of it; his Lordship told me,
they were pure Mineral Salts, extracted out of the Spaw; he goes on, Epsam,
Tanbridge, Barnett, has the like Sandy Sediment. If this charge of his be not
true, then let the Physicians, who attend at those Waters, return the Dissector
the thanks he deserves for reproaching them. If it be true, let them give me
better reasons than he has done, why they are not petrifying, notwithstanding
they have dissolved stones. Knaisbrough water, upon my own knowledge, says he,
after evaporation, yields a great proportion of Sand and Clay. I distilled a
quart of it last year, and there was not one grain of Sand at the bottom, only
ten grains of a Colcothar, which I have to show; yea, Doctor French, says he,
( p. 66.) in his Book of Knaisbrough, confesses it; his words are these, The
water being evaporated, leaves behind it an insipid powder, of a darkish
color, like unto which powder, will that bluish cream, or skin, which swims
upon the said water after long standing be, when it is dried French, p. 69.
what pretty Hocus Pocus tricks are here? every Spaw after evaporation, has its
proper Sediment, suitable to the Minerals it has dissolved. Scarbrough Sediment
is Sandy, because it has dissolved Stone: The Dissector by the Art of
Legerdimain, would make all the Sediments of Spaws, whatsoever, to appear the
very same with Scarbrough, when no waters in the world has the like, except
those only that are petrifying.

He cites Faber, who speaks in words to the same purpose, as Dr. French said
before, which is true of all Vitrioline waters; but it seems any inspid Earth
or Ochre, is Sand with Doctor Witty, he makes no difference.

I found by Experiment, that Scarbrough has a Sandy Sediment, and therefore to
return upon the Dissector his own words, ( p. 67.) Either he did not know this,
when he writ his Book of Scarbrough, or he did; If he had not known it, then it
betokens ignorance in that part of Philosophy, wherein he ought, especially, to
have been better instructed; if he did know it, and yet goes about to buzze it
into the heads of the vulgar, That Scarbrough water has no other Faeces, than
insipid Earth, common to all waters, it savours still worse, as coming from the
Crackfart of Scarbrough Spaw.

Page 68. to 72. He frisks it away, as if he were making a third Edition of
Scarbrough, declaring, that it sharpens the Apetite, making them eat like
Farmers; it has been better expressed, like Seamen, for doubtless, the Sea air is
a good whetstone to it, as any that walks near it on the Sands, will find,
though they drink no Water; but why does he apply this as an answer to me? show
where I quarrel with Scarbrough upon this account. To what I said, ( page 27.)
of the Sand and Clay in Scarbrough, cleaving to the Bowels, Dr. Simpson is put
upon these remedies and cautions, to prevent the mischief thereof. First, He
prescribes a Vitrioline Vomit, which does strengthen the stone of the Bowels;
the Relaxation whereof renders them susceptible of a stony Incrustation, from
the Sabulum of the water, whereby they become the cause of all those Diseases
that happen by drinking the Water.

Secondly, He prohibits immoderate exercise, and too soon eating after the
Water, lest the lattex, wherein the Sabulous matter is dissolved, be thereby in
danger to be carried by the Thoracical Vessels, into the fourth digestion of
the Heart, and thence into the habit of the body, whereby it may lay a
foundation for the Gout, Stone, Scurvy, Fever, etc.

Thirdly, After the two or three days drinking Water, he advises Purging
Pills, and to rest a day or two after, from taking the Spaw Water; and that to
prevent a sudden precipitation of the strong matter, upon the Panicles of the
Intestines, after their abstertion or cleansing by the former Solutine. When
all this is said and done, he is is said and done, he is not peremptory in his
dictates, but concludes, if any, who are inclined to the Stone and Gout, be
jealous of drinking the Water, in case his prescribed method do not satisfy,
then he commends the Essence of Scarbrough Spaw, which is a Salt depurated from
all the Stony Concretions that are in the water. These he supposes will become
powerful against all those Diseases, whose Seminaries consist in a Sabulous
petrifying property, as the Stone, Gout, Jaundice, etc. The Dissector likes not
such plain and honest dealing, and therefore, he says, Dr. Simpsons Answer, in
the Judgment of Learned men (such as himself) deserves nothing, but to be
employed in the most homely uses. You may gather what he means by it, saving
your presence; well, If any answer be but like that, I have lost my labor;
Parturiunt montes, I shall bring forth his reply, it is this (p. 73.) Hard words
indeed, enough to fright Children; but they that are wise, will not be startled
with Bugbears; the cause, and the effect, are much alike; the truth is, it is n
othing more than a frivolous conceit, and not worthy to be replied to. To be
homely with him, I judge an Oyster woman at Billingsgate, will give as
satisfactory an answer as this.

The Resty Jadish Fit that Scarbrough Spaw takes after sometimes drinking, I
demanded, ( p. 25.) If it were the manner of other waters to do so? he Answers,
Yes, I can tell him, that Knaisbrough water, will not go through, at any time,
in ordinary bodies, unless it be drawn, or driven.

Suppose this calumny were true, what is it to the purpose? Knaisbrough purges
by Urine, as all Vitrioline Waters do; and this it does effect so long, as any
please to drink on it. How can the Dissector then charge it, with a Resty Jadish
Fit? when was it observed, that after it had wrought well this way with any, it
afterward stopped, and would not pass by Urine, but swell the Belly, and bring
upon the Patient such Evils, which the Dissector himself acknowledges
Scarbrough will do. See then this impertinent Tattle, yet thus he boasts, I
am certain no water in the world, that I read of, is less guilty of this Resty
Fit, than Scarbrough; for proof he cites Dr. Here, of the Germane Spaw,
confessing that those that drink it, have scarce one stool in six days, even
such as were wont to retriograde once every day at home. Does not these words,
and the matter for which he cites them, agree as an Harp, and an Harrow? Here
gives the reason whereof, Humoribus aquarum vi ad renes and vesicam delatis
sicci ora fieri intestina, atque alvum inde pigrescere necessarium est, ( p.
138.) This is the Dissectors reasoning Knaisbrough, and the German Spaw purges
by Urine, and not by stool; therefore they are more to be blamed, for taking a
Resty Jadish Fit, than Scarbrough is. The account why Scarbrough alone is
guilty of this, amongst all the Spaws in the world in use, (that I read of) is,
it is both a purging and a petrifying Water; the purging property, takes effect
presently, and proceeds on regularly, until the petrifying property prevail,
and then all the water stops, which of necessity it must do, being damned up
with Sand and Clay; which the water left behind in the Bowels, after so long a
time drinking. Of like insignificancy is his parallel of Diet-drinks, which as
soon as they have purged away that, for which they were given, are of no
further use. The instance I gave for this Resty Jadish Fit of Scarbrough, the
Dissector gives this Answer ( p. 750.) As for the Lord he mentions, I know whom
he means, that Lord told me, he could never get quit of him, till at length he
yielded to take something of him. That the Reader may be assured once for all,
that the Dissectors whole discourse is fraught, as full of untruths, as it is of
impertinencies, and witless stories; let this instance bear witness, the Lord
Pawlet, Brother to the Marquess of Winchester, made his complaint to me, as I
mentioned, ( p. 25. of my Book) I knew the cause was from the dirty Faeces of
the Spaw that laid in his Bowels, and therefore the Essence I judged most
proper for him, because it is a Salt that was separated from the Sand and Clay,
and would upon that account, easily join with those in his Bowels, to cleanse
them off, with which they were once united in the water. The ground of this
apprehension is both agreeable to Atomical Philosophy, in respect of the
sutableness of their Textures, and to all Experiments of Chemistry.

His Lordship being satisfied with the reason I gave, desired to take it, and
therefore I went with him under the Penthouse, and in the presence of the
Dissector, put it to his Spaw-water, which made the Dissector to grumble,
saying, There was nothing in that essence, but Allom and Nitre. I smill'd to
hear him commend it in those words, which he uttered, to make his Lordship
undervalue it. There is nothing more in the Spaw, but Allom and Nitre, except
Sand and Clay, and that is the excellency of the essence that it is well quit of
them.

That afternoon his Lordship sent his Servant to desire my company, when I
came, he gave me thanks, and told me, he believed, he had purged that day, all
the water he had drunk in three or four days before; which lay so heavy upon
him, that he was sick, and ill at ease with it. I neither asked, nor received a
Farthing of his Lordship; I have therefore mentioned his name, that if he be
alive, he may do me right; his Honor is concerned to acquit me of the
Dissectors opprobrious aspersion; I hate to be an Interloper. Such is the
manner of some Physicians, that one cannot come near them, but they will cleave
like a Bur, which you cannot get quite off, without pulling some wool off the
back; such are Mendicants, more than Mendicants, they will Lackquay it up and
down, proffering their service, where it is neither needed nor desired.

Such low designs I leave to the Dissector, whom I observed to be too nimble
for the Drummer of Scarbrough; though he, poor man, made all the haste he
could, to bid their Worships welcome to the Spaw.

Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum. He complains (p. 76.) That of all
the Authors, who have given rules for drinking Spaw-waters, none ever met with
such contradiction, and wresting of their sense, as he has from me; this
reason, for his severe charge is; I make another use of his rule, than he
intended it; for it is granted, he showed more honesty then wit, therefore, to
mention it; his rule is, ( p. 211. second Edition) When such, and such Evils
come upon the Drinkers of the Water, then it is high time wholly for them to
desist. I enquired into the ground of this rule, and it could be no other, than
his own observation. Experience had taught him, that though for some time, his
Patients found benefit by the Waters, yet by longer continuance of drinking,
they found such harms, which put him upon giving his Rule: This evil (it may be
supposed) he did not so much as suspect to be in the Water; I told him it was,
and that from the Stone and Clay Faeces that was in it; wherein now, am I blame
worthy for this? nay, I Will say more, he mentions Dr. Here, Dr. Dean, Dr.
French, Dr. Roosly, giving their Rules for drinking water; let him show me,
amongst these Authors, any such Rule, as this of his, which I have taken notice
of, and I will cry peccavi.

He wonders (p. 77.) that I should call the Salts, extracted out of the Spaw,
an offense, thereby excluding the grosser parts (Sand and Clay) which are in
the Water from being Essential to it, any more than the body, which is of a
grosser substance than the Soul, should be excluded from being the essential
part of man. I wonder, also, why the Dissector should thus plead, to have these
dirty Faeces essential to the Spaw; but I Will remove this Mountain, that he may
no longer marvel at it. Impurities of any mixed body, are not essential to it;
they supervened upon the earth, when it was cursed for sin, and are by Art, as
a natural effect, in some good measure separable from it; therefore we call
that the Essence of a thing, which contains the whole Crasis of the subject
matter, nothing wanting there from, but its impurities, properly termed a caput
mortuum. If the body be nothing else, but a caput mortuum, to a man, it might
then be accounted no essential part of him, most likely the Dissectors upper
parts, give only a --

He argues again, If the Salt be the only Essence, then it will follow, that
Knaisbrough water has little or no Essence, because it has little or no Salt in
it.

Even so do blind men judge of Colors, as if what is the Essence of the one
Spaw, suppose Scarbrough, must be the Essence of the other at Knaisbrough, or
else it has none. Salts extracted, are the Essence only of Saline Waters; such
are Scarbrough, Sulph. well, and Burbon, the Essence whereof, the Lord
Faulconbridge showed to the Dissector.

But says he ( p. 78.) The Volatile Spirits are Essential to all sorts of
Spaw-waters, and if it were not for these, Knaisbrough Spaw were not worth a
rush. He has more confidence, than skill of Spaw-waters, to say so: He
confesses in his Letter to Doctor Foot, Printed in the Translations of the
Royal Society, that he could not meet with Tachenius; it seems he is at the
same loss still, which makes him so peremptory. The Generality of Spaws are
Acid Waters. Acid Spirits, we know by experience, are not so Volatile, as to
lose the least of their virtues, by standing open in the Air, though for a long
time; but the Spaws, that are Acid Waters, do lose their virtue, in a few days,
out of the Fountain, though never so close stopped up in Bottles; we may
therefore necessarily infer from hence, that it is not from the Volatility of
their Spirits, that their virtue is so soon vanished and gone, but from another
most rational account; for which I refer him to the Author he has not seen. The
worth and excellency of Scarbrough Spaw is, that an Embrionate Sulphur, has
corroded Iron in it, which makes it Stomachical, Deopilative, Diuretical, and
strengthening all the noble parts. A fig for the Dissectors Volatile Spirits
here, they are not worth a rush.

He does still persist ( p. 79.) in persuading us to put forth our eyes, and
blindly to believe him, that the Sediment which we see to be Sand and Clay, is
nothing else than the fixed parts of Minerals or Metals, which the fire
condenceth, and that these are of a singular use to the fortifying of the
Natural parts.

The fire condenceth the Minerals, by exhaling the water, so far from them,
that they settle into Chrystals, which, nevertheless, will dissolve again in
Water, and pass all through the filter, not leaving the least atom behind; if
these Faeces then be, what he says they are, why will not they pass the filter?
which he confesses will not. Minerals then they are not; for Metals, he tells
us of none in Scarbrough, but Iron. If that were it, why did he not, when he
presented his seven or eight Extracts to the R. S. tell them this is Iron, and
if they approved on it, I should have yielded to him, that there is Vitriol in
Scarbrough Spaw; however, whatsoever they be, he says of them, that they
fortify the Natural parts. I gather from hence, that the Dissector is of the
Cartesian Sect, taking the body of man for a fine Engine, and therefore he, as
a cunning Engineer, will fortify the parts with Sand and Clay, by the help of
the Potters Furnace, making a Bullwork about them, impregnable against all the
storms and batteries of preternatural Diseases. The Lord Er. case which I
mention, ( p. 57.) He confesses (p. 80.) frets him more, than all my Book
beside. I wish him more patience for the future; He refers to ( p. 149. Edit.
2.) here he is mounted into Helmonts Aenigmatical Chariot, glances, dark
language, being of the same mind with him, not to have his meaning publicly
known. I protest, in verbo Medici, it is an untruth, like the rest of his
stories, to say, that I asked him again, and again, with very much importunity,
whose case it was. My light burns dim; oh for a pair of Galenical Snuffers! the
old man Hippocrates, his Spectacles, cannot help me to read; (...), etc. What?
pump me, and then tell abroad my Secret? I declare, he does me wrong, for I was
never guilty of so much folly yet, as to pump for Wine out of a dry Hoggshead.
But that I may give the Reader satisfaction, I shall give a true account of
this matter. Whilst I was at Knaisbrough, the report came, that the Lord Er.
went to Scarbrough to drink the Waters, and came home in the Jaundice, of which
he shortly dyed. I said then to Dr. Neale (who was with me when this news was
told) that certainly, Scarbrough water had some mischievous thing in it, for it
was never heard of before, that any should take the Jaundice, which is founded
on Obstructions, by drinking Spaw-waters that are deobstructive. This scruple
against Scarbrough, I carried with me thither, and therefore the first time of
my coming, I asked the Dissector how it came to pass, that the Lord Er. got the
Jaundice, by drinking of the Water? he gave me the answer I mentioned in my
Book. This is the truth, and the whole truth; I appeal then to the Reader, how
I have deserved such language from him, as I did unworthily, the very
Schoolboys will blame me for this. This is not done like a Physician, but you
may understand like Knave and Rascal, by that long scratch.

It seems, Secundae cogitationes sunt meliores, he is now provided of a better
answer, than he gave me at the first; Nor had the Lord Er. any Jaundice, but a
Cachexy which he brought with him.

He comes now ( p. 83.) to the Aldermans case I mentioned, ( p. 40.) His
position is, That no man can call a Disease the Jaundice, if it appear not in
the skin. This he would prove from the definition Galen makes of the Jaundice,
to whom, he says, agrees all the Princes of Physic; yea, that Hippocrates and
Helmont, they will let me see, the Jaundice is not to be judged, without it do
appear in the skin. I said in the entrance of this Book, that the Dissector
wanted one eye; by reason of the thick darkness that is continually in his
Library (if he have any) he could not see the light of Chemistry, how
Transplendently it does brighten the Art of Physic; he now gives evidence
against himself, that he is a Monoculous upon a worse account; he wants the eye
of reason, and will therefore judge diseases only by the eye of sense. And
because he reigned a Monarch, at Scarbrough, thirty years, persuades himself,
Regali more, that all other Physicians will wink of one eye at him, for fashion
sake. If this that he has said of the Jaundice, be granted, thence it will
follow, that the Small Pox, which is a Disease that diffuseth through the whole
body, into the skin, cannot be called, or judged to be what it is, till it make
its appearance to the view of all the beholders. In this case, good Ladies, you
must not send for the Dissector, when your Children are very sick, to ask him
what they ail. Now, because he will not allow me to say I suspected, but brands
it with a new way of discovery, and will make it alone, as if I had said, I
sancied it. I shall here relate a sad story, how Eminent Physicians miscarried
only, because they did not suspect My much Honored Friend, a Baronet in
Yorkshire, sent his Eldest Son to the Inns of Court; being there, he falls
sick, the Learned Doctors treated him as in a Fever, with cooling Juleps,
Glisters, and letting blood, which was no sooner done, but that appeared, which
they did not suspect, and the Patient shortly dyed. Several years after, the
said Knight sent up his next Son, who was now his Eldest; he also fell sick
there, and the Doctors treated him also in like manner; and immediately there
was the same appearance of Pox, as in the former, which they also did not
suspect, and he also shortly dyed.

As to the Jaundice, by this position of his, grounded upon Galens definition,
Icterus est effusio bilis in Cutem; he has confuted himself, for he affirms,
that the Lord Er. had not the Jaundice, nor the Merchants Wife (whose case next
follows) notwithstanding the cholor did diffuse into the skin abundantly,
where it did appear, witness to all that see them; this is not the first time
that the Dissector has contradicted Galen and himself both; but to return to
the Alderman, faintness at Stomach, Lassitude over the whole body and stools
(in those that use not a Milk-diet) white, not tinctured with Gall, are
symptoms, sufficiently warranting us to suspect a Jaundice, though it did not
appear in the skin; yea, the danger and greatest pain and torment in this
disease, befalls the Patient generally, before the effusion of choler into the
skin. Mrs. R. of Newcastle, (whom I mention in my observations) was rackt and
torn, nigh to death, for many days, whilst there was no appearance, either in
the Urine or Skin; in the same manner was the Merchants Wife handled, but as
soon as the Choler got liberty to expiate into the habit of the body, both of
them had ease. Miserable Comforters are all Physicians therefore, that cannot
judge of this disease, before it appear in the skin; as to the Alderman, those
three Symptoms, Faintness at stomach, Lassitude white stools appeared in him.
Now hear his own words to Doctor Witty, the Copy of which Letter, I have by me;
I consulted Doctor Tonstal, and another Physician, as formerly, and they agreed
it was the Symptom of the Jaundice; thereupon I took a Jaundice drink, by the
direction of another person, and the Essence of steel by order of Doctor
Tonstal, which I suppose is his Chalybeate, and Icterical drinks he mentions,
which by Gods Blessing, brought me to my former health and condition.

What can be said more to satisfy any, but the Dissector, that I was not
mistaken, in calling his disease a Jaundice, when besides the concurrent
judgment of another Physician, that it was so,

He was cured of it by a Jaundice drink, it is a Maxim that the best indication,
both as to the Diagnosticks, and Therapeuticks, is taken from what does good or
harm. A juvantibus and nocentibus optimam sumi indicationem, says Here de
Spavans, (p. 115.) Let it be observed, that the Dissector, in Printing the
Answer the Alderman sent him, he has not only clipped, but counterfeited his
Coin. I appeal to the Learned, in the Law of Disputations, what he deserves for
so doing; now take notice, what Spirit the Dissector is of, by these words, I
wonder our Author did not consult better for his own reputation, in describing
this Disease, like an Artist, especially in engaging in such a design as this,
wherein he could not think to escape so unsifted, either by my self, or some
other, (p. 84.) Again, the Jaundice he fancied, and that is all the sign we
have of it; but since it appeared not, it gave him a ground of suspicion: I
will leave it to any man of reason to judge, and especially to those of our
faculty, (p. 85.) Again, it is well he cured, though he did not know what (p.
87.) In the case of the Merchants Wife, he promises to evince, that I labored
under a grievous mistake, in reference both to my Diagnosticks, about the
Disease, and also the Cure.

To answer this unparalled boast, first, I must seriously acknowledge the
eminent hand of God, going along with me in this undertaking, when both the
Mother, and Infant in her womb, were delivered from the stroke of death, ready
to fall upon them several times; and let the Christian Reader consider, if the
Dissector has done like a Brother of the Profession, or rather like a scoffing
Ishmaelite, to sit in his Chair at York, and blaspheme this mercy, laughing at
my Medicines he understands not, vilifying the success of them, he believes
not, describing the disease he saw not, and Nick-naming me a Mountebanck (but
for that) I care not. I shall here present a Testimonial, signed with the hands
of Husband and wife, and another Physician, who was also concerned in her.

As we do acknowledge the goodness of God, derived to us, and our Family, upon
several occasions, by the advice of Doctor Tonstall, which he was pleased to
crown with success, so particularly, and most signally, in that case of the
Jaundice, which befell my Wife, after her coming from Scarbrough, big with
Child; she first complained of a weariness in her Legs, going up stairs; soon
after, of a most grievous pain in her right side, Ointments, and Fomentations
were applied, but did not allay it; yet as soon as she was blooded, she was at
ease, and continued so three or four days; but then the same pain returned upon
her again, which the second blooding did remove, as at first, for other three
or four days; as soon as the trouble began the third time to threaten her, the
Doctor advised her to a Vomit, being assured (as he said) that Choler only was
the cause of all her grief; it wrought to satisfaction, procuring some
mitigation of pain, yet did it afterward increase upon her so, that the Doctor
did propound, if she would admit of a third blooding, seeing she had
experienced two times before, that it was a present relief to her; she
consented willingly, and bore it without the least appearance of fainting; he
then gave her his Elixir in Rhenish Wine, which in one, or two days time using,
struck forth the Jaundice so visibly, that from the crown of her head, and all
her body over, she appeared as Yellow, as ever eyes beheld any, and then her
water (but never before) was of the same color, and as thick as puddle; she
never had the pain of her side, after the Jaundice appeared in her skin;
neither had she, from first to last, the least degree of Fever, nor any Cough,
or Spitting of Blood, that any could misjudge it for a Pleurisy, nor any
Hickough, or Singultus, that might occasion any to fancy it the inflammation of
the Liver; at this time, to her drink with Elixir, he added Millepedes and
Jaundice Powder, which after fourteen days, reduced her to her former
Complexion. She supposing her self well, desisted to use the drink any longer;
the yellowness appeared again, he advised her to the Country air, and resuming
the same Medicine, and chewing Rhabarb by his order, she did perfectly recover,
and continued so, till she brought forth a Son, who also is in Health, and well
liking, as any Child, of many, God has blessed her withal.

William Hutchinson. Richard Hutchinson. Luke Hodgson. (...).



The Mountebanks Medicine (as the Dissector is pleased to call it) that did the
Feat is thus: R. Spirit of Nitre dulcifi'd, with Spirit of Wine, Mercury
calcined without a Corrosive, dissolved in Spirit of Venus, with these, after
several Cohobations, make a Menstruum.

With this Menstruum, make an Elixir Proprietatis; now let the Learned judge,
if the Dissector deserve any other name, then that which he has put upon this
Medicine. I know all he understands of it, is, that there is Spirit of Wine in
it, and this (says he) is exceeding hot; now I dare tell him, that here the
Spirit of Wine is mixed only, and on purpose to refrigerate; which office of
cooling it does perform, by sweetning the fiery Acid Spirit of Nitre, which is
hereby meekned, the Acute edge dinted, and reduced to such a Texture of parts,
as is agreeable to our constitution; insomuch, that of this dulcifi'd Spirit,
one may take a spoonful, in a convenient Vehicle, at once; which who shall
attempt to do with Spirit of well rectifyed Nitre undulcify'd, shall find the
Archeus incensed, a burning and corrosion in his Stomach and Bowels.

I hope this much will suffice to satisfy the Reader, that the Dissector is
not a competent judge of my Medicines; but that I may for ever throw this
opprobrious term upon his face.

I shall take leave to digress, thereby to show how another Mountebank Medicine
did the Feat (taken in a glass of Sack twice a day) when neither he, nor others
more Learned than himself, could do any thing toward the recovery of their
Patient, though all of them proceeded with her, Secundum Artem, as they please
to speak, even till they were so weary, that they gave her over for one past
help; this was the case of Madam Ardington, of Ardington. I shall tell him
again of a third Mountebank Medicine, taken also in a glass of Sack every
morning, did cure an Empyem, causing the Child to vomit it up, every time she
took the Medicine (though it was only cordial and strengthening the Archeus)
till all the purulent corrupt matter, that laid in her Chest, above the
Diaphragm, was clear gone, and she perfectly well; it was the case of (...)
Winchip of Chester.

If the Dissector have such Mountebanks Medicines, he may do well to publish
them.

Let it be here noted, that there are many Diseases, called incurable, not
because they are so, Ex natura rei, but that we Physicians are ignorant of
Medicines, proportionable to them; and that if nature have meet assistance, it
will act wonderfully, beyond our hopes and expectations.

The Parent of this Child, would not consent to have the Intercostal Muscles
pierced, thereby to let forth the purulent matter that lay in the Chest, which
had distended the ribs, on that side, to a great height; though I told him, it
was the only way in practice to cure it; yet he desired me to try what inward
Medicines would do, and the Lord made them successful.

I shall mention another instance for proof hereof. A Gentlewoman had a Tumor
under the Muscles of the Abdomen, the rise of it, supposed to be from hard
labor in Childbearing; it increased in bigness yearly, that at last she had
no rest from pain of it; she then made a long journey to London, where she
consulted two Learned Doctors, famous to the world for their Books in Print.
After fourteen days proceeding in their rational method with her; finding no
effect, they dismissed her, she making ready to return home, as she came, was
by one, advised to consult an Ingenious Chemist, Doctor Poleman, who by his
Mountebank Medicines (for so the Dissector will have called, all the Medicines
that are not found in Londons Dispensatory) caused the humor that swelled to a
lump, to pass by Urine; She observing his directions, was reduced to good
health, and continues well; the Tumor is decreased, so that she has not trouble
by it. This I mention as for the honor of that worthy person Dr. Poleman, so
to let the Learned consider, that rational methods, and Chemical Medicines, do
well together, and that the Dissector is like a Dog in the Manger.

But to return to the Merchants Wife, p. 89. He wonders how I could make the
return of her pain, in the right side, three or four times over, a sign of the
Jaundice. I answer, just as Dr. Preston told King James, the Hound makes a
Syllogism, following the Hair to a place, where three ways met, the Dog smells,
she is not this way, nor is she that way, therefore he casts up his nose, and
concludes from the two Premises, that she is gone the third way without
dispute, and there he finds her sitting. So in this case, there is a pain in
the right side, that blooding removes for a time, but it returns still again.
Where shall I find the Hair sitting, that has made so many doubles (as the
Hunters speak) going forward and backward again? there are but three ways for
it; the first a Plencise, I beat the Bush there, I found her not, for the Woman
had no Cough. The second, An inflammation of the Liver, not there neither, for
she had not a Fever, nor Singultus. Therefore the third way I took, and found
her sitting in Vesica Bilaria, the Gall being there pent up by Obstruction, a
Nitro Sulphurious humor; it acted like Gunpowder fired in a Squib, or Cracker,
flying upward; a terrible do it makes, till it gets liberty to vent it self
into the habit of the Body, as the Squib does in the open Air, and then is
quiet. Thus willing am I, to teach the Dissector, how to hunt out Diseases; but
what do I say? all the Hounds in Hide-Park, has not the faculty of that sense,
so quick as he, for he can smell, not only Vitriol in Scarbrough Spaw, where no
body else can find it, but as if his Nose were as long as his Ears, he can
smell Diseases from Newcastle to York, and judge of them there, better than I
can do here, that am daily conversant about them. For proof hereof, see how
Magisterially he sits on the Seat of the Scornful; What have we to prove the
Jaundice, why, nothing but his suspicion and jealousy, which I wonder he would
offer now the second time to public view, (p. 60.) But I must confess, I
cannot but laugh at his Medicine; the Disease was a violent Fever, with an
acute pain in a part; and here is a violent Medicine, which must needs inflame
the part more, and increase both the Fever and the Symptoms. And as if I had
laid the petrifying property of Scarbrough water upon Nitre, which is nonsense
to say, he proceeds, Besides, that Nitre in the Spaw is suspected to have
petrifyed the Gall, and congealed the Choler; and here Nitre is fancyed to be
the dissolvent. I am sorry, I am forced to point to these things, but I cannot
avoid it, since they lie in my way; but really, it is such an Hodg-potch of
Art, as I never met with before. I am afraid, my Friend will suffer more from
his Brethren, in the faculty, about this Disease, and its Sign, Symptoms, and
Cure expressed, than he did by the Woman, about so often bleeding, and vomiting
this Gentlewoman.

( Page 90.) Now he will have it an inflammation, and therefore, I should have
consulted Hippocrates, for cooling, and opening Medicines; but it may be he
will say, he does not approve of the old method that uses hot things in Fevers;
it appears so indeed, in the mean time, that Patient is to be pityed, that must
be so treated. I have had occasion to speak to this Point, in my answer to Dr.
Simpson, and therefore I Will say no more now, since there is little danger of
any young Students to become Proselytes to the Author that shall observe,
either his description of Diseases, or the success of his Medicines. But as if
he would recant his last Clause. (the success of my Medicines) Dr. Tonstall is
to blame, for chalenging to himself the Honor of this Cure, which was due to
God alone; who beyond all hopes in defect of due means, does oftentimes grant a
signal recovery, (p. 92.) It seems when the Dissector applies due means for
cure, and the party recovers, the Honor is not then due to God alone, but he
must go half with him in it; as for me, I disclaim all right and title there,
and gives it to him, that works in us, both to will and to do of his own good
pleasure. But yet, as if the Gentlewoman or the Child was dead, supposing I
mistake the Disease, he is positive in this; If the Physician mistake the
Disease, he must undoubtedly fail of the Cure: Though I grant this to be true,
he contradicts himself, for in the Aldermans case, before he declares, I cured,
though I did not know what. Again, (p. 95.) As he mistook in his Diagnosticks,
or judging of the Disease, so I must in kindness to him, and his business for
the future (if he will not accept it so) let him know that he was out of his
Theraputicks, that Ternary Spirit of Wine, Nitre, etc. being as improper, as
any thing he could have pitched upon. Thus, says he, I have sifted these three
cases of the Jaundice, that is, by Lies and Tales, he has shifted them off as
well as he could. But where will the Dissector find refuge, to excuse all this
mallepert bitterness vented against me, only for doing my duty so well to this
Gentlewoman, that she, and all her Relations, blesses God that did direct me in
the performance of it; why, it is here I was told so, the very same answer,
which in my hearing he gave to the Apothecary of York, charging him that he had
Printed a Lie, to the reproach of Doctor Simpson in his practice; and that the
Widow, whose Husband dyed, would take her Oath before any Magistrate, to
witness as much.

He now ( p. 96.) to balance his charge against Scarbrough, that it occasions
the Jaundice, as I have instanced in these three cases; he tells of two, that
the Water cured of the same Disease: I shall here record another instance to
like purpose, and then it will appear, that there is two to one on my side
against the Dissector. Sir Watkinson Paler, troubled with Hypochondiack wind,
consulted Doctor Witty, who advised him to drink Scarbrough for his Cure; he
observed all his directions, as to Preparatives, order of drinking and Physic;
such as he pleased to prescribe; notwithstanding all his strict observance of
these rules, instead of a Cure by the Water, he contracted the Jaundice, and in
such an height and manner, that it staid with him all the Winter following,
though he used means, all he could procure to resist it. Thus much I had from
his own mouth, who came on purpose to Knaisbrough, to advise with me two years
ago; ever since he makes use of the Sulpher Well there, to his advantage; and
though the Dissector was so impudent, as to persuade him against his own
experience, to return to Scarbrough last year, yet he is so wise, as to use it
no longer, but continues in his resolution for Knaisbrough.

Now ( p. 97.) he takes in hand to Plow with my Heffer, telling a story of my
Wife, wherein there is not one tittle of truth, more than that, she came to me
at Scarbrough, as I had appointed her, before I came from Newcastle; and when
she was come, one morning being on the Hill with the Ladies, I called her down,
and when she came, I told the Dissector that she was my Wife, I bid her
discourse with my Brother, so they walked together; to this day, I never asked
her what he said or advised; having done it solely in point of Honor to him,
as a piece of Civility, which one Brother owes to another, as to acquaint him
with my Wife; She neither took Preparatives before, nor Physic with, nor after
her Water, but staid above a week, and returned with her Father, who came there
for the Gravel and Stone, but will do so no more. As to the Marginal Note, That
he is unthankful. I declare the contrary, for I thank God, she got not the harm
by Scarbrough, which I did, yet he has the face to make the world believe,
that I sent for her thither, on purpose to take his advice.

I grant what he says, ( page 98.) That it is common for Scarbrough, to take
down those that are Corpulent, by reason of the sharpness of the Salts in it;
it is either good for that, or for nothing; but I deny his Inference, which
says, it could not possibly be done, if it were obstructive; if it were only
obstructive, his Inference were good; but who says so, Scarbrough it is purging
also.

He proceeds, ( p. 99.) Nor is there a better thing in Nature, for taking away
the relics of all inveterate Agues. How can I believe this brag, when Mr.
Tailor of York, his own Apothecary, was ordered by the Dissector, after his
Ague Fits had left him, to come to Scarbrough, and drink water, who did so, and
after the first days drinking, instead of taking away the relics of the Ague,
it brought his Fits upon him again, and he was glad to return, whether more
Wise man, he, or the Dissector that advised him thither, I leave the Reader to
judge: This was told me, whilst I was at Scarbrough, by Mr. Tailor himself.

He goes on, ( p. 100.) But I may not pass it over, that our Author was
censured, and fell under the obloquy of the Women, concerning the Merchants
Wife; yet I thank him, he says, I do indeed, take him to be an honest Man, and
faithful Physician. It seems, if I had not been so then, I had escaped both his
and their obloquy; yet what I said in my just defense, he says, It savours too
much like that of a Pharisee. p. 102.

I shall here show you the Dissectors fair outside profession, that by the
sequel it may appear, whether he or I be more like an Hypocrite, the true note
of a Pharisee, says he, ( p. 125.) As I desire in all all things to be found
faithful, as becomes me, either as a Physician or a Christian, so in this
dispute, I aim not so much at Victory as Truth. Here then is truth
unquestionable.

First Truth, Scarbrough Water has Stone-powder in it, leaving it in Sand at
the bottom of the Vessel when it is boiled.

Second Truth, Scarbrough Spaw is parallel to the Dropping Well at Knaisbrough,
which leaves also Sand, at the bottom of the Vessel in boiling.

Third, The Water that leaves Sand at the bottom of the Vessel, when boiled,
has a Lapidescent juice, and is petrifying; it is his own saying.

Fourth, The Water that has a Lapidescent juice, and is petrifying, is bad for
the Stone, Gout, and Jaundice, by natural consequence.

Fifth, It Is the peculiar Character of Scarbrough Spaw, whereby it is
distinguished from all other Spaws that are in use, to take a Resty Jadish Fit
sooner or later.

Sixth, Allom-stone dissolved in water, gives a Purple Tincture (with Gall)
this Allom-stone, he confesses, is in Scarbrough, and therefore the Tincture
by Gall, is no Argument for Vitriol in Scarbrough Spaw.

Seventh, That all waters that have dissolved Iron, has Vitriol also, as the
product of that dissolution.

Eighth, All the Salts that sproots out of the Cliff, is Nitroaluminous, and
not Vitriol.

Ninth, The three Carts load of Earth, fallen from the Cliff, is not
Iron-stone, but Earth petrifyed, mixed with pebble stones.

Tenth, The precipitated powder found in the bottom of the Vessel, after
Scarbrough Water has stood in it two or three days, is Glebe of Allom.

Eleventh, If Vitriol be joined with Nitre in Scarbrough Water (as the
Dissector will have it) he makes it a corrosive water, which is worse than all
I have said against it.

Twelfth, The Dissector must yield the Victory to the Anatomizer, for Truth
sake, or else -- in Print.

As to the Tenth Proposition (all the rest being proved already) if it be
demanded how I can make it out, I answer first, to the (...), the Dissector in
his Letter to R. S. says, that when the Spaw Water is first set on the fire,
this Powder settles to the bottom; I grant it, but after the water by boiling,
has let fall the stone-power in it, then does the Saline water resume this
powder into its Pores, and after all the Salts are settled into Chrystals, you
shall find it in the remaining water, and may see that it differs nothing from
the Glebe of Allom, if one may trust his senses, as I have mentioned, which I
have to show, as to the (...), take this account, The Nitrous water meeting
with the Allom stone, corrodes and dissolves it wholly. During this action, the
water appears clear, but as soon as the Intestine motion cease, that the
Nitre and Allom embrace mutually each other in quiet, then is the Glebe of
Allom as an Heterogenious, Caput mortuum, cast forth of the embracements of
these two Salts, and so settles to the bottom, which happens in two or three
days time.

If it be demanded further, how it comes to pass, that the Glebe of Allom
should settle to the bottom, and yet the stone-powder which is also in it, and
a heavier body, does not settle at all, whilst the water is kept in cold, from
boiling on the fire. I answer, here is the difference betwixt petrifying
waters, and Mineral waters; these always, sooner or later, do settle something
to the bottom, the other do not, as is known by experience; the reason of the
difference may be gathered from that I said last; for the Stone, whilst the
Saline water dissolves it, is merely passive in that action of dissolution; and
therefore the longer a Nitrous water has stone in its Bowels, the firmlier it
holds it, there being neither Sulphur, nor other Salt in it, to re-act upon the
Nitre. It is not so when Metallic, or Mineral Stones are dissolved in water;
there are then contrary principles at work; the strife being ended, they show
what Metal or Mineral those waters come from by their settlements.

He now remembers what he had forgotten, ( p. 103.) But there is one thing I
may not overlook; the stones, that were by Physic, brought out of the Gall,
which the Professor at London did show us. He is afraid I was mistaken, ( p.
104.) So is the saying still of the things I see with mine eyes; but why? What
passage is there from the Gall to the Guts to convey stones? the stones he
showed us, were larger in breadth, than Gray-Pease, being flatter, but about
their bigness; if he denies these passable through the Ductus Bilarius, he has
little or no experience of the works of Nature, as I have instanced before,
when it is assisted by Art; next he accuses me for asserting upon the former
Principles of the petrifying Nature of Scarbrough, that is ill for the Gout,
which I experienced in my self, and he opposes it only by his experience of
himself, who has had some gentle Fits of it, and so leaves it, making himself
both Plaintiff and Witness, and Judge of this matter; but this is spoken to
hereafter.

Next he declares ( p. 105.) against me, for commending Scarbrough, that it is
so quick in its purging quality, that it needs no Preparative, and rather than
lose his advantage of dosing out his Physic, he does discommend the water, as
much as I can think it deserves; it is an old saying, better may one steal a
Goose, than another stick down a Feather; his words are these, The water is,
(p. 106.) indeed nimble, and sometimes has wrought ten days together, while yet
it has but made a furrow through the Guts, and has left all the Excrementicious
humors behind it, the party finding therein no benefit at all. It Is honestly
said of the Dissector, now this second time; I see truth will come out at last,
Therefore he says, there is a necessity both to prepare by purging before, and
also in the drinking of the Water; otherwise, notwithstanding the daily working
of the water, they may return as they came; it is well, if it so fall out, that
they return not worse. Having thus discommended the ineffectual property of the
Waters purging, in that it makes but a furrow through the Bowels, and leaves
all the Excrementicious humors behind, he faceth about ( p. 107.) and does
commend it as singular incomparison of other Spaw waters, that are not purging.
First, in regard of the Stone, in this case waters that are only Diuretical,
may cause an Ischuria, by carrying slimy humors into the smallar Vessels; It Is
granted, if no Physicians be there, that has so much wit, as to prevent this
danger, by giving the Patient a Purge. Secondly, ( p. 108.) By the purging
property of the Water, not only the gross Excrementicious humors, but also the
stone filings that are in the water, must be carried the broad way down the
Bowels. Alas for him, surely, the man is unadvised, thus in one Page, to write
pro and con; if the water purging ten days together, could not carry away the
light Cherry-stones that were in the Bowels, as he instances, ( p. 106.) How
can it be supposed, that it should Purge away the Stone-fileings, which beside
their gravity, has affixedness upon the inner coats of the Bowels? like as we
see the Sand cleaving to the sides of the Chamber Pot, which will not be washed
off with water, unless rubing be used. Thirdly, This purging property of the
water, does quite overthrow what before I said, asserting the waters
obstructive property, for it is impossible that the same thing should be
purgative, and also obstructive. In this contest with Hydrol. Chym. he used the
term Sir Simpson, as a reproach; for my part, I wonder how the Dissector got
his Bachelor of Arts degree, if he disputed after this manner; had he said the
water quatenus purging, could not be obstructive, it had been something;
purging and binding, are terms more opposite, than purging and obstructing; yet
Rhabard the same thing does perform both, because of its different parts.
Scarbrough purges, as it is enriched with Allom and Nitre; it obstructs also,
by the plenty of Sand Sand and Clay that is in it; may not different things in
the same water, have different effects? Fourthly, ( p. 109.) That property
which I charge on it, as that it causes the Gout, cannot possibly consist with
the purging quality of the water, for purging is owned by all, and prescribed
as a special remedy against the Gout, either to prevent or to cure it.

First, I said the rise of this Disease, was from a petrifying property of an
Acid Spirit; I know none but the Dissector (who refers the cause of all things
to the first qualities of heat and cold) that does oppose me in this; the
instance which Mr. Clarke, one of his Majesty's Justices for the Peace, in
Northumberland, told me, which he see with his eyes, is famous to confirm it;
Mr. Potter, Steward to the Earl of Northumberland, extremely troubled with the
Gout, had frequently, Sand and small Stones, that came forth through the Pores,
and stood on all the joints of his fingers on the outside of the skin; this
being so, Sylvins and with him, all experienced Authors, give as a Maxim, that
Acidities are so far from being corrected, or removed by purging (with any
Physic that is vulgarly known) that it does but exasperate them, and make them
worse.

Yet I Will grant his Proposition; what will it avail? to bring it down
particularly to the purging with Scarbrough in this Disease; nothing at all;
for by his own confession, it makes but a furrow through the Bowels, and leaves
all the Excrementicious humors behind. But he will say, I Will mend that matter
by giving other Physic, mean while, it is the purging with his Physic, and not
the waters purging, that cures the Gout. But then I ask, will his purge mend
the petrifying property that is in the water, and that Acidity, because of the
Dulphicate Salt in it, both which are Enemies to the Gout? I trow not; as
Scarbrough therefore does upon these two accounts, exalt and augment the
specific cause of this Disease, as it cannot cure it, much less can it prevent
it. John Lord Bellasses, complained this year, that by drinking Scarbrough but
3 or 4 days, it gave him a Fit of the Gout; if the Dissector will persist, that
he can cure the Gout, and prevent it by purging, then, I suppose, he is master
of Helmonts Arcanum corallinum. I advise him to present it to the R. S. which
may make amends for the last trouble he gave them; he concludes, And therefore
seeing he had projected to fix so severe a charge upon the Spaw, I wonder he
did not take care so to draw it up, as that one piece might not interfer with,
and consute another.

I judge, that the Reader has more cause to wonder at him, why he should say so.

He now summons up all his forces together, and says, that Chemical Writers
lead the Van; Acidity, Inky smell, and black Tincture from Gall, are certain
and undeniable Arguments to prove Vitriol. Thus he builds Castles in the Air, I
shall blow them all down with this one breath; where? not in Scarbrough, nor
any other water that has Nitre and Allom; there these three Properties prove
nothing for Vitriol, for Nitre will give the Acidity, Allom the Tincture
without it; as for the Inky smell, as he alone does find it, I gave him an
Experiment to make it more perceptable to the sense of smelling, from whence it
proceeds, namely, Allom. The savor of any thing, is from the Sulphurious
parts, whilst they are freed from their Vincula Salina, and sends forth the
Effluvium, which effects the Organ of smelling; thus Brimstone, till the Body
be opened, smells little or nothing, but dissolved and precipitated, how strong
is the sense of it? from the same account, the Allom in the Spaw is not
distinguishable by smell, but let all the Saline parts settle into Chrystals,
after the stone-powder is separated, and take the Sulphurious part that
remains, dry it, and dissolve it in hot water, as I said ( p. 59.) of my Book,
and then you will find it gives the same smell that the Allom Pans at Whitby
do, and stronger.

Thus you see his threefold Cord is easily broken at one snap; observe now his
Pedantick, and Unscholar-like dealing with me: I wonder to find him so zealous
in this Point, to fix a stinking smell upon that water, when there are so many
thousands to confute him; though hence it may appear he has lost his smell, yet
I should be sorry, that for so small a mistake, my Friend should forfeit his
Nose.

I have lost my understanding, if the Dissector forfeit my Crest and Coat of
Arms, whilst he writes of Scarbrough Spaw against me.

He says ( p. 111.) the instance I gave of Hunwick Well, makes nothing to my
purpose; for this, I refer the Reader to my Book ( p. 53. and 54.) But why may
not that water have the Vitriol of Iron in it; it is granted that it has, for
how can it partake of Iron, and be without the Vitriol; and how can it give the
Tincture by Gall, but from Iron. What then, is this his may-be to his purpose,
that goes about to prove that the Tincture from Gall, is not from Iron, but
from the Vitriol? to this I shall speak anon, all the matter the Dissector has
to brag on against me, is occasioned by my civility to him, for this see ( p.
97.) Concerning my Wife; so here, because at my first coming, I gave him leave
to say what he pleased, and did not contradict him in a word, therefore it is
put in the Margent, I have changed my mind. He is now for a work of
Supererogation ( p. 112.) Because I would do something more (which is as much
as nothing at all) For this my friends Conviction, I shall ex abundanti, cast
him in one Author more, and he is a Chemist too, Faber. Hidrell. Chym. ( page
38.) where treating of Springs that has imbibed Sulphur and Vitriol; the water,
says he, of these Fountains, turn black with Gall, and that is as true and
undoubted Testimony that there is Vitriol in it. The Dissector will still be
dabling with Chemical Authors, and does but bemire himself with them; for
instance, he cites Swelfer against Dr. S. that Vitriol of Iron will Calcine
white in a Crusible, contrary to the knowledge of every Barber Chyrurgion; he
cited Faber before ( p. 66.) directly against himself.

Now, ex abundanti, to signify that he understands not the scope of their
Writings, he cites him here again, whilst he is treating only of these Spaws,
that has imbibed Sulphur and Vitriol; and will transfer his inference he makes
of the Gall tincturing those waters, to be an Argument for Scarbrough, that has
imbibed Allom. If Faber were alive, he would not bear this abuse of Dr. Witty,
who would make him speak, that the Spaw that has Allom in it, if it tincture
black by putting Gall to it, then it is an undoubted Argument that it has
dissolved Vitriol. Chemists, are more searching by their Experiments into the
truth of things, then to give a general Proposition from what is true, but in
some, not all waters.

He would fain know, p. 115. How it comes to pass that white Vitriol will make
Ink? For satisfaction, I again refer him to the Author he has not seen, Tachen.
Hippoc. (p. 130.) Vitriolum album illud de Goslaria, and ut illud de Carinithia
participant quidem de Mart, and venere, non tamen sunt divites acidi naturalis
ob id admodum pigre ingrescunt cum Gallis. Dr. W. accuses Dr. S. in his
Epistle to the Reader, That he fell among many ill Books, and read unwholsom
Authors. If this had not been Dr. Witty's own Lot, he had not fallen into the
Pinfold, nor rendered himself so trifling a writer of Mineral waters. Because I
still persist to owe him the kindness of a Friend, that he may understand
Vitriol the better, I commend to his reading Caneparius de Atramentis; Dr. W.
thinks I am of his complexion, ready to quarrel with any one that differ in
opinion from me; Will he fall out with the Author of Hydrel Chym. says he. I
Answer no. Truly I leave that to the Dissector.

That which I saw with mine eyes, he is ever telling I may be mistaken in, says
he, ( p. 115.) I am afraid the Apothecary was too nimble for the Doctor; It is
true, he is too nimble in his discourse against Dr. Witty, He took the Stone
out of the Vitrioline bed, with which the water was tinctured by Gall. Dr.
Witty did then approve of it to be an Allomstone, and was confident it would
not give Tincture by Gall, till he see the contrary, S. W. Davis, and his
Brother being present. Now he has bethought himself of this evasion, 'twas
taken out of the Vitriol Bed, ( p. 116.)

It Is a shame that the Dissector should be suffered to shift off plain Truths,
with false Surmises, giving the Reader to believe, that there is a Vitrioline
Bed near the Water; if it were so, why did he not, first, extract the Vitriol,
and have it to show? it is easily done; by all the search we can make in all the
Beds thereabouts, we Extract nothing but plain Allom.

He contents himself with proving Knaisbrough Spaw to be Vitrioline, by the
Yellow color it precipitates. I am proving no such matter, for I know that
Cole-water, yea, a Spring that runs through the rotten roots of Trees, will do
the like; it is true that, I say, Vitrioline water precipitates by Sanding, a
Yellow color; but it does not therefore follow that the yellow precipitation
is a proof for Vitriol, as he would have me to infer. Dr. S. also mistakes me,
in what I mean by easily precipitating; I understand by it, in so short a time,
as two or three days, I there say, ( p. 56. and 57.) that Scarbrough settling of
it self in so short a time, a black Sediment cannot be Terra Vitrioli; first,
because I judge that it was never observed, that any Vitrioline water, did by
standing, cast down its other so quickly.

Secondly, That this differs in color from the other; whoever please to try
it, shall see, that as soon as Scarbrough casts down this Sediment, it is black.

The Dissector has now got to the Pinfold, ( p. 117.) as his deserved Haven;
it is his singular Art to be strict in tything Annis, Mint, and Cummin; but the
great things, the pillars on which the dispute lies, he neglects, and lightly
passes them over with a, The truth is, it is nothing more than a frivolous
conceit, and not worthy to be replied to; So he speaks, ( p. 73.) He tells us,
That the Pinder of Wakefield could not hold him, he was very well delivered
with his bones whole. I have cause to say something, sure I am, the Air that
got into his Peritonaeum, of the imaginary victory over Dr. S. has made him
swell with rage, contempt, and revenge against me. Let the Reader now view the
Pinfold.

Thus the Dissector argues, the Tincture by Gall is not from Allom, nor from
Iron; Ergo, it is from Vitriol.

I Reply, if not from Iron, then not from Vitriol; Ergo, It is from Allom.

If the Cuckoo of York, be for ever able, in the judgment of all the Chemists
in Europe, either to creep out, or overtop this Pinfold, I shall submit to be
called the Pindar of Newcastle, whilst I live. As for Gotham College, I did
imagine 'twas only to be found in Eutopia; but now I do retract, taking it for
granted, the Dissector has had his Education there. Vitriol of what sort
soever, is a Metal dissolved; this is an undoubted truth, made good by
Experiment upon all Vitriols; both Natural, such as are got out of the Bowels
of the Earth, and Artificial, such as are made by dissolving any Metals, and
exhaling of the dissolvents. Each one of these Vitriols will dissolve in water,
and by an Alkali put to it, will precipitate the Body of the Metal contained in
it. Let us now descend from this General Proposition, to the particular Vitriol
of Iron, which the Dissector affirms is in Scarbrough water, and I will suppose
it to be there; the question now is, what is it, that the Gall put into the
water, does precipitate? is it not the body of the Iron which was contained in
it, according to the general rule of all Vitriols, which by precipitation is
made to appear, and settles as an heavy Body to the bottom? Thus is the
Tincture by Gall, from Iron, made plain and evident; and therefore as he
excludes Iron from giving Tincture by Gall in Scarbrough, he must exclude
Vitriol also; for this Vitriol is nothing more, than Iron dissolved with Spirit
of Sulphur; and so it follows, that it must be from Allom by his own
confession. Thus has he brought himself into the Pinfold, there let him be. But
the Reader may ask how is it, that the Allom in the water, gives the Tincture
by Gall? I answer, in a parallel manner to Vitriol, as was said at first; as it
is proved in Vitrioline Waters, that it is from the body of the Metal, not from
the Spirit, Sulphur, that dissolved it, that the Gall precipitates; so here
it is not from the juice of the Allom, but from the body of the Glebe, a
Terrestrial and Sulphurous matter, which gives the Tincture. I prove it by this
Experiment, take the Allom water out of any Trough at Whithy, which is the
infusion of Burnt Allom-stone, and put Gall to it, and it will Tincture; but
take the very same water without the Addition of any thing, and Boil it until
it cast to the bottom the Earthy Sulphurous parts, which the Workmen call Slam,
and then that Water will not tinck with Gall.

He repeats ( p. 118.) what he said before, that the Earth falling from the
Cliff, near the Spaw, is converted into Iron stone. I suppose, by this, he
would have us to believe, Ovid Metamorphosis is no Poetical Fiction, but real
Truth, that this Earth was converted into Iron stone, as Lot's Wife was into a
Pillar of Salt, by a Miracle, on purpose, that the Spaw might be made to
strengthen the Natural parts, by the property of Iron. The answer I gave to it,
he can no more make sense of it, than of the plain position of Helmont, which I
expounded to him, and shall do this, I said at first it did appear to me (now
that I have tried it) I affirm it to be nothing else, than what I said before,
Earth (wherein are abundance of pebble stones of several sorts) impregnated
with store of Nitro Aluminous Salt, as all the Cliff is, sliding down by some
dash of rain upon the Sands; as soon as the superfluous moisture is exhaled
from it by Sun and Air, it then Petrifies, and is as a Rock lying there. I
declare there is as much Gold as Iron in it, I wonder he did not say so, for
the same Argument which he uses for Iron, namely, that it fluxeth in the fire,
would have served to make it Gold; this had been as good an Artifice for
bringing Moulter to his Mill, as all the Hyperboles of Scarbrough water; his
Patients then might satisfy both their thirst and hunger, Auri sacra fames.

I said that Allom stone dissolved in water, would Tincture with Gall; I
mentioned Spirit of Nitre, mixed with Water, for a dissolvent, as freest from
exception; he answers, Alas Dr. S. said so, nor does he weild the Club much
better, or has any new guard, ( p. 119.)

The man is in a dream certainly, the Logomachia, betwixt him and Dr. S. was,
indeed, playing with Foyls or Cudgels; what tells he me of a Club? his
dissecting, and my Anatomizing is, fighting with sharps; is it so long since I
met with him on the Hills (near Knaisbrough Town) they are to him the Mountains
of Gilboa, where he did manfully fall upon his own Sword point, ( p. 56.) Where
was his New Guard then, not in his Breeches, for his Bum has been well paid,
more than once or twice, ( p. 20.31.51.)

He cites my Argument, ( p. 120.) against Vitriol in Scarbrough, but says
nothing to disprove it, only he calls it my Battering-kam, and leaves it to my
Wife to confute; I am persuaded she is as able as the Dissector to do so. He
compares me to Joab, he considers not, that the comparison lies fully upon
himself; for who so great a Friend to Scarbrough, as the Dissector? and he out
of his simple Friendship to it, will plead to have Vitriol there, where also is
Nitre; and in this he does not less against Scarbrough, than Joab did to Abner,
in smiting him into the fifth rib, making the water thereby corrosive. I retort
his own words, Is this a token of his Friendship, to make it poisonous? But
says he ( p. 121.) What have we to do with the Spirits of Vitriol and Nitre?
why? if their bodies be in the water, they cannot be without their Spirits.
Such as the Spirits are, such are the Bodies from whence they are drawn;
corrosive both, only the Bodies are not so active as the Spirits. But, says
he, Rye-bread distilled, will afford an extreme corrosive Spirit, that will
dissolve Metal, if he will trust Mr. Boil. This is the second time, he has
abused this worthy Author, making him speak point blank contrary to his very
design, the second part of his Experiment Philos. p. 88. his words are these;
Since I have observed it to be the main thing that keeps Judicious Men from
seeking, or so much as hoping for Noble Dissolvents, that they are scarce to be
persuaded there can be considerably piercing Menstrums, that are not
proportionably corrosive. I will here acquaint you with a Liquor, that may, I
presume, assist you, to undeceive some of them. Thus you see the Author brings
in this distilled water, of Rye-bread, as an Argument to persuade others, that
there may be Liquors Dissolvent, which are not corrosive; the Dissector says
this same is extremely corrosive, citing Mr. Boil for it: Spirit of Volatile
Salt of Tartar, is a great Dissolvent, it is not therefore corrosive; so much
may be said of Circulatum minus and majus Paracelsi Ens veneris pole manui,
which Helmont declares to be as sweet as Honey (to say nothing of the Liquor
Alkehest.) Sallet-Oyl will dissolve Brimstone (which Aquafortis cannot do) is
it therefore corrosive? let it be noted also, that the Dissector says, we must
believe Mr. Boil, that the water of Rye bread distilled, will dissolve Metal;
another untruth charged upon him, which is contrary to the common Maxim of
Chemistry, Similia similibus Dissolvuntur.

He goes to my last Charge, and says, ( p. 123.) I have often known Inveterated
Dissenteries, and other Fluxes, cured by it; he has told the R. S. that
Hecticks and Consumptions are cured by it; and now Dissenteries, when the Third
Edition comes forth, he will tell us of broken Bones, and Limbs out of joint,
are cured by it; there is as much reason for this, as the other. A Merchant in
this Town, was brought into a desperate Flux, and hardly escaped with life, by
drinking of it but two or three days.

Another instance of one at Scarbrough, a lusty young man, Son to one of the
Officers of the Custom, whilst I was there, by drinking but two or three days,
had such a Flux, that he was pined near to a Consumption, before it could be
remedied.

I urged the Dissector with his promise to Dr. S. that he would deal
accordingly with me, in the last words of my Book; to which he gives this
answer, ( p. 124.) But as for this Piece, I see not the least point of Art in
it, from the beginning to the end; I refer it to the Learned and Impartial
Reader, to judge betwixt us; In this we are agreed.

Having done with the Dissector, I shall relate only the story of Columbus.
After he had first discovered the way to the Indies, taking the Spaniards along
with him, he expected performance of promise from them; they requited him with
this Answer, 'Twas no Art at all to Sail thither; he then took up an Egg, and
bid them make it stand upright upon the Table, they made an essay, but could
not; he then did it before them. Here is no Art, it is true (said he) in making
the Egg to stand upright, yet could not you do it, till I showed you how.

Let Dr. Witty apply this story to himself, and what follows, ( p. 123.) I am
of opinion, that an angry fit is very wholesome for some constitutions, though
it may make a man uneasy in his company for the present, and those that are
within his reach, yet when the Ebullition of Choler is over, it leaves a man in
a far more sedate temper of mind, for a good while after, than before he was
wont to be, and more Gay and Complacent in his humor to others: If my Friend
having given his Spleen this vent, be the better for it in his Cranium, I
should be very glad.

To the Brethren of the Faculty, particularly to Dr. Carr of Cambridg, Dr.
Tailor of York, Dr. Neale of Leedes, Dr. Constable, Dr. Armitadge, Dr. Simpson.
SIRS,
WHat Tragic part soever the Comaedian acts upon the Stage against his Fellow,
it is not upon any design of malice, to the party, but merriment to the
Spectators. The time I took for penning this Reply, was Christmas, a season
allowed me for Revelling; let none of you mis-judge it Reviling, because, as a
Chemist, I have but Cohobated all the Spirit of Vinegar and Gall I found in Dr.
Witty's Answer. Memorable is the saying of a Learned Man, In such alterations
few men understand the sharpness of their own words, their edge is toward
them, whom they oppose; but when a return of the like expressions are made unto
themselves, they are sensible how they pierce. Had he levelled his Arrow to the
mark, he might have hit the Butt; he shot it directly up into the Air (as may
be seen through his whole Book) and therefore by the un-erring law of Nature,
it has fallen upon his own head. If he has received any mortal wound in this
Combat, 'twas made by his own weapon; I appeal to you my Brethren of the Jury,
if you do not find (p. 56.) that the Dissector, by the Coroners Inquest, is
Felo de Se.

He is injudicious in nothing, so much as in the case of Scarbrough Spaw; I
cannot wonder at it, for a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, Deuteronomy. 16.19.
If it be possible to buy Gold too dear, in my serious apprehensions, he has
made but an ill purchase there. When these Irresistible words, (give account of
thy Stewardship) are spoken to his heart, he will consider what I say. I honor
him for his gists of Learning, but it is Grace only that can make him,
Palanodiam Cavere, and I shall not be out of hopes, to see the fruits of it in
him. Saint Austin gained as Honorable esteem amongst wise men, for writing his
Retractions, as he got for all his other Learned Volumes. Though Saturn be
ascendant in my Horoscope, let no man think it carries any evil aspect, to his
practice in Physic. This is a fault I find in him, against Chemical
Physicians; 'twere unpardonable, to be guilty of the same my self; the
experience he has gained in Therapeuticks, yea, amongst a number of the Right
Honourables at Scarbrough, will serve abundantly to reverberate every undue
expression against this Art, upon the head of him that dares unworthily reflect
it.

I know what the Books of Galen, and all his Followers, can instruct him in, he
is not to learn; yet must he be persuaded also, that we have traveled over
these shallow Fords, as well as he; and if we have, after all this essayed, to
launch further into the depths, for Hermetick Physic, he is no Friend to
Learning, who will therefore call us Mountebanks; of the same Import is his
Super-hyperbole, which he gives of Galen, taking it pro confesso; That Helmont
has deluded the generality of enquiring Men, into a Labyrinth of Mysterious
nothings. I appeal to the Experience, and Judgment of you all, if these things
be so.

Thus much premised, I shall now present you with Homers Iliades in a Nutshel.
Dr. Witty (page 37.) says, at my first coming to Scarbrough, I had a Covetous
design to carry on, which if it had succeeded, doubtless, we had heard none of
this, but that failing me, as the Fox said in the Fable, the Grapes are sour;
so said I, Scarbrough water breeds the Stone.

This being believed, well may it serve for an answer to all that I have writ,
or shall hereafter write against Scarbrough Spaw.

Therefore have I mentioned your names, my Brethren, whose Faces I did see at
Knaisbrough, upon my return from Scarbrough; that the world may judge by this
surmise of his, at what rate he magnifies himself; one Dr. Witty is able to
spoil my design of getting, more than all these Worthies, Men of renown in
their Profession. If the Dissector will go upon Stilts of his own making, on
purpose, that he may appear like Saul, higher by head and Shoulders, than his
Brethren; who of you can pity him, for that he has catched a fall? for all his
brags, (p. 119.) That I have not wielded the Club much better, than his former
Antagonist, or has any new guard; I do not find one tooth in the three Combs
broken by him. If he like to come again into the Pit, he shall know I am no
Crawdon, but a Cock of the right kind; mean while, it is but a dirty alledgment
of him, that wants an Argument, to insinuate, that I came to Scarbrough, to
scrape on the Dunghills there. My Brethren, what is sharper than a Woman's
Tongue, when it is set on fire; I have bidden the brunt thereof, yet Dr. Witty
is afraid, (page 90.)) I shall suffer more from you; what remedy, but Patience,
I suppose the Dissector has as much need of it, as

Your Loving Brother George Tonstall.

FINIS.

