LICENSED,

Roger L'Estrange.
Feb. 21. 1669.
SCARBROVGH SPAW SPAGYRICALLY ANATOMIZED.

BY Geo. Tonstall, Doctor of Physic.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for the Author. MDCLXX.

PREFACE.
Nulla rosa nascitur sine spinis.
DOctor Witty in his Epistle to the Reader complains, that Mr. Simpson by
giving him the trouble of answering his Book, has interrupted his design of a
Latin Copy upon the subject of this Spaw, which he thought should have seen
the light this year. I would not willingly hinder any good work; let this
little therefore that I have writ, but serve only as an Appendix to his third
Volume, and I shall clothe it in like fashion: far be it from me to espouse the
quarrel of either of them; I profess my self a friend to both; for if I should
not walk uniformly betwixt Dr. Witty's Library, and Mr. Simpson's Laboratory, I
might suspect my self a lame Physician: Hippocrates and Helmont I declare are
the two great lights that rule in my Hemisphere. Galen's method of Physic may
justly be named rational so far as he writes after the old man his Masters
Copy, I dare not speak further for him.

I hope in this Tract my writing is so candid, that it may be observed what I
have said is not ad personam, but ad rem. And that I have not concerned my self
in any word which Dr. Witty has been pleased to say in his two Books, but only
what was necessary to take notice of me defendendo.

It is but one Position that I have affirmed upon the whole subject; if it be
daubed up with untemper'd Mortar, let who will pull it down; but if its
foundation be built upon mechanical demonstration, it must stand firmer than
Hercules Pillar: by the Process that I have taken, the material principles
which I assert to be in this Spaw are presented to our senses, these are
infallible judges (positis omnibus requisitis) of their objects.

Dr. Witty's failure was, in that he left off where he should have begun: after
he had observed what is most conspicuous about the Spaw, and tried that the
Gall tinctured the water of a dark purple color, contents himself with fair
probabilities for affirming his five principles, and then, page 15. leaves it
to others to try Experiments, and make what new discoveries they can.

What unexpected things has Anatomy discovered in the body of man these late
years? to derogate a tittle from the honor of these happy improvements of
knowledge, were to speak against the light, and to bark against the Moon: yet
why must the usefulness of this noble Art be confined to the Animal Kingdom
only? The grounds of Anatomy in the vegetable and mineral Kingdom, laid down by
Tachenius, does nearly conduce to the discovery of the Nature, Cause, and Cure
of diseases, if I know any thing. The little desection that I have made of
Scarbrough's Diana, gives the cause why one cries, great is D. of S. and another
at the same time decrys it as much: the general account for this confused noise
is, because as the liquor is commendable, so the dregs are insufferable: the
Essence of it fit for the Cup of a Prince, the caput mortuum, which is Sand and
Clay, fit for nothing but the Brick-layers Trowel. Hence it does follow, that
those who are weak in their digestive faculties, and strong in their
distributive, these may find good by drinking this Water, and no harm by the
sordid feces, due care being taken: but those who are weak in both, will
experience the contrary. To all those that have a petrifying character
seminated in them, I say of Scarbrough water, Procul Ite, cito abite, nunquam
redite.

SCARBROVGH SPAW SPAGYRICALLY ANATOMIZED.
BEfore I enter into this Discourse, I am necessitated to remove an Objection,
lest I stumble on the Threshold: Says my honored Patient, Last Year you
persuaded me, that Scarbrough Water was to be preferred before Knaisbrough;
this Year you are of a contrary opinion, and therefore I know not how to trust
you. I answer, first excusively, you may note hereby, that I am not
pertinacious; conviction of an error will work in me conversion to the truth:
Again, I did commend to you no worse thing than that which I took my self;
'twere to be wished that all Physicians were bound with this Girdle. Secondly,
directly, for your particular trouble, Gravel, and Stone in the Kidneys, I did
prefer the Nitre at Scarbrough before the Vitriol of Knaisbrough: Appello
Coronam, if that be not a more noble principle than this; yet must it be
understood only caeteris paribus. Here my mistake was incurable, until I got
opportunity to sift Scarbrough Water in the Fire, the best Microscope could not
have shown me what lay in the bowels of it, only Spagyrick Anatomy made the
Dirt appear to open view. For satisfaction to others, who may censure my
wandering from Knaisbrough to rise from wavering in opinion, take this plain
Narrative.

Anno Domini 1666. the famous fortunate Chyrurgeon Mr. Thomas Holiard of London
(may this man be blessed in his deed) cut me for the Stone, which weighed four
Ounces and a half; Six weeks after, I was able to take Journey; the Doctor
there (my friend) told me his doubt, that Vitrioline Waters were too sharp for
me to drink, because of my green wound so lately healed: notwithstanding I
resolved for Knaisbrough, remembering Mr. Stones case which his Father related
to me long since, which was this; after his Son was cut, a large Stone taken
out of his Bladder, the wound did not perfectly heal, (notwithstanding he had
all the help that London could afford) for about three Months time, at last Sir
Theod. Mayrne did advise him to Knaisbrough Water, he had not drunk it fifteen
days till he was perfectly healed; for which great Cure done by it, he did
frequent that Spaw for many years after: this Water I mixed with white Wine,
which brought away by Urine abundance of mucous matter. Helmont the Prince of
Reason sets down the cause hereof in these words; ubi custodes male se habent,
continuo plorant partem proprii alimenti quod sibi assimilare debebat: I was
glad to see that this Spaw cleansed the Bladder from that glutenous stuff,
which (if let alone) would undoubtedly have laid a foundation for another
Stone. Sandy Gravel (which few or none are exempted from) falling amongst it,
and mixing with it, must in continuance gather to a hard substance, too great
to pass away. I wish all those that shall receive like mercy with me, would use
the like means to prevent a relapse of that formidable Disease the Stone.

Anno Dom. 1667. I returned thither again, the season proved wet, during which
time, the Spaw proved very weak of the mineral, this discouraged me from
drinking much of it: I then blamed the great Ditch about the Fountain, as the
cause of impoverishing the Spaw of its principle, for I judge it was as
rational to pare an Apple, and to peel the Bark off a Tree, and hereby not
indemnifie them, as to cut away the surface of the earth about a mineral
Fountain; standing water abiding all Winter in these deep Trenches, by sinking
down through the softened earth, makes passage into the current of the Spaw;
then every shower of Rain in the Summer will find the same crevices and clifts
to descend into it: If this may suffice to get this fault mended, I shall be
glad.

Anno 1668. being mostly concerned to look well to my self against the
threatenings of my former distemper, I visited Scarbrough during mine abode
there.

First, I took notice what Doctor Witty says, page 151. that after he had
exhaled the water from the body of the minerals, it would not unite with other
waters, but lie all at the bottom undissolved. By this trial of his, I was
certain that in that body of Minerals there must be other things containd than
his 4 or 5 principles; for Allom, Nitre, Salt, and Vitriol of Iron, are
amicable to water, and without any force dissolvable in it, neither may it be
supposed that the fire in exhaling the Water can alter the texture of Salts, so
as to hinder their dissolution; for the more Salts are calcined, the more
speedily do they imbibe the Water, as thirsting for it, as Ice does, therefore
easily melt in Water, because it proceeded from it, for the same reason Salts
must do so likewise. If any one doubt of this, let him try the Lord Blay's
Experiment, that learned Frenchman, viz. calcine Sea Salt, deliquiate it, then
distill all that will come over, repeat this process, and you will find that
all the Salt is turned into Water, as devoid of all saltness, as is distilled
Rain Water.

Next thing I observed was these words of his, page 13. Nor can the principles
be separated further than I have already expressed, namely, by putting Gall to
the Water, notwithstanding many ingenious Gentlemen have endeavored it: I wish
those he means had applied their wits about the usefulness of Experimental
Philosophy, as the Honorable Boil has done, and then their endeavors would
have succeeded here, and to higher purposes than the separating the principles
of Scarbrough Spaw; where the difficulty lay that obstructed the separation, I
cannot apprehend, for fire alone is an instrument sufficient to effect it. This
substance (if I may so call it) being as subtle as the light, must penetrate
through the center of every pore of the mixed Water, and because of its
property to ascend upward, it does incessantly disquiet the lodge of
heterogeneals: during this restless Motion, like things do occur with like, and
their Nature is to unite: after this manner (as I conceive) it comes to pass
that ignis segregat heterogenea, congregat homogenea: by no other artifice did
I extract out of the Spaw Water a pure nitroaluminous Salt, and a large
quantity of feces apart, both which I then showed to the Honorable Lord
Faulconbridge, who can remember what I said then to his Lordship of it. At this
time I could not be certain but that much of the Sand which settled to the
bottom in the Preparation, came through the carelessness of the Porter that
brought me the Water, and therefore I could not come to a positive
determination by this Experiment; only I wrote to Mr. Simpson, wishing him to
forbear publishing any thing concerning Scarbrough Spaw, till he had spoke with
me, because I had made a trial what was contained in it; his answer was, my
advice came too late, for his Book was in the Press, so far was I from having a
hand in the framing his Book, as Dr. Witty was made to believe by the report of
others.

This Year 1669. I returned thither, and though I dropped Oleum Salis tinctured
with Gold in every other Glass, hoping thereby to cleanse off the sordes of the
Spaw, yet after a fortnights drinking, it gave me a fit of the Stone, which
from the time Mr. Holiard cured me, I had not felt before. I brought the Water
home with me, that I might be sure that nothing extraneous to the Spaw might
interrupt a critical Analysis thereof; the product confirmed my first
Experiment, which I made at Scarbrough; all the materials that can be found in
it, are three, first Raments of Stone, secondly a Nitroaluminous Salt, and
thirdly, a gleeb of Allom: their proportions are thus, of the Stone-powder, one
Ounce and three Drams; of the Nitroaluminous Salt, one Ounce and six Drams; of
the Blew-Clay, which is the gleeb of Allom, three Drams; the active principles,
and the caput mortuum are equal; so that if Dr. Witty's trial be true, that
five Quarts of Water give one Ounce of the body of Mineral (as he calls it) you
take half an Ounce of Stone and Clay into your Bowels, every such quantity you
drink.

Here you see a cause (as I observed before) why this Body of Minerals would
not dissolve in Water, namely, the Stone and Clay by the heat of the Fire
(while he exhaled the Water dry from them) become more compacted together with
the Salts, than when they were in the Fountain; whereas when these Salts are
separated from their dross, they melt as easily as Snow in Water.

You will say, how comes it about, that there is so much Filth in Scarbrough
Water, as you speak of? For answer, take notice, Dr. Witty tells you, that the
Spaw, which is a quick Spring, comes out at the foot of an exceeding high
Clift, all the Stone and Earth that makes up this Mountain is big bellied with
Nitre, Allom-Stone here and there mingled in it; after the Spring has run
through this high Hill, the Spaw is brought forth, which is fair and clear to
look to; I cannot but compare it to an Harlot, of whom it is said, She eats
and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness. This hungry esurine
Water, after she has devoured Stone in a large quantity, as if that were not
sufficient for to grate her Teeth upon, she has swallowed both Cup and Liquor
of the Allom. Because I have dealt with her, as Aesop dealt with the Boy that
had eaten the Figs, made her vomit them up again; whosoever is angry with me
for doing so, I must bear it. If any of her friends think I do belly her, let
them for their satisfaction first answer this Query.

From what cause is it, after you have drunk a Month of it, then, if not
before, it takes a Resty, Jadish fit, will neither go backward nor forward? A
Noble Lord complained to me that the Water dealt thus with him: his Lordship
having drunk it with success about a Month, it then swelled him at stomach two
or three last days, and would neither work by Urine nor Stool, though he took
his usual Physic with it, as formerly, the Scotch Pill, which is an Extract of
Aloes: I advised him to take one Dram and half of the pure Essence with the
Spaw Water; by the help of this, and the said Pill, he had plentiful
Evacuations in that Afternoon: thus being quitted of his oppression, he meddled
no farther with the Water. This Dr. Witty has carefully observed, and
therefore advises thus, page 211.

If any man finds, that after benefit once had by the Waters, he begins to
decline again in his health, as that his appetite or concoction decay, or the
Waters pass not so well as formerly, but cause distention, either in the Belly
or the Veins, and so bring on a difficulty of breathing, or pain in the head,
or the like, it is then time wholly to desist, and to proceed no farther.

This is honestly spoken, but is this the manner of other Waters, when they are
fitly suited to a Chronical Distemper, and the Patient find once benefit by
them, do they produce in him afterward such evils as these? or rather, the
longer they are drunk till the Cure be wrought, the nearer the Patient is
carried to his desired end. Is there not therefore a sting in the tail of
Scarbrough-Water? are not the Stone-feces plaistered upon the inner Coat of the
Bowels, disturbing their peristaltick Motion, and obstructing the attraction of
the lacteal Veins, the cause of all those evils?

This Query thus answered, for further satisfaction proceed after this manner.

First, Take a large quantity of the clear Spaw Water, in case you fear any
Sand may be taken up with it, put all through a Woolen Cloth, boil it till half
be consumed, clear off that Liquor, then see how much Sand you find at the
bottom; which is nothing else but part of the nitrous Rock, which the Water has
dissolved, exhale that Liquor lower to the thickness of Oil, then pour it forth
into a wooden Vessel; set it by in the cold, and the Nitre and Allom settles
into crystals: when that Liquor will cast forth no more of these, then exhale
the liquor dry, put Water to it, and filter it, and you will find more
Stone-Powder in the Paper; exhale this Water perfectly dry, then burn it in a
Crucible, dissolve it with Water, and filter it, there will you have the blew
Clay; which is nothing else but the gleeb of the Allom: If you please to
proceed further, dissolve the first Crystals, exhale, and filter, so often till
the Crystals be pure and white, so will be separated more sandy Clay. By all
this that I have said and proved to those that will trust their own eyes, I
affirm this as my Position (viz.)

The Nature of Scarbrough Spaw is petrifying.

First, I shall prove it by the Authority (which to Dr. Witty is instar omnium)
of Kircher, lib. 8. p. 46. Quaeritur quid proprie sit succus lapidificus; dico
esse Saxum nitrosum, aqua eliquat^; his whole Chapter, de Origin Succi
petrifici, does make manifest this truth, as if it were written with the
Sunbeams.

Secondly, by Experiment, I made it visible that the Spaw is mostly nothing
else, but the nitrous Stone melted in Water, besides the Allom-stone that is
imbibed in it; There is a famous petrifying Water at the Bridge-end of
Knaisbrough Westward, known by the name of Dropping-well, a Stillicidium of a
nitrous Rock. I sent for a Quart of this Water (which was very clear) and
distilled it in a Glass Retort, which gave a Dram, wanting ten Grains) of pure
white Nitre and Stone: by this it is observable, that Scarbrough Spaw, because
of the Allom juice joined with the Nitre, has corroded and imbibed more Stone
than this notorious petrifying Water at Knaisbrough.

I would not be here mis-understood, as if I did from hence infer, that
Scarbrough Spaw is more petrifying than this Water, which will set a stony
Crust upon a Loaf, or piece of Wood, after it has lain in it a few hours: this
manifest token of petrifaction Scarbrough Water is not charged with. The reason
of the difference I apprehend to be thus, viz. the alkali of the Allom in
Scarbrough Water has in part imbibed the acidity of the Nitre, and therefore
it cannot so penetrate the Wood put in it, as to leave a crust of Stone upon
its superficies, which the other Water having Nitre alone in it will do. That
Allom is an Alkali Salt, is plain from its saponary property, this the Dyers
have experienced: Again, when Allom is put in a Crucible over the fire, it
burns to a light porous Cinder, Vacua esse alcalium corpora demonstravit
Tachenius. Nitre on the contrary does flux in the Fire into a hard compact
body, whereby it is evident, that in Nitre the acid has the predominium, in
Allom the Alcali; and therefore Scarbrough Water cannot manifest its petrifying
property by putting Wood into it, and crusting it over as the other Water does:
yet he that will affirm, that Scarbrough Water has no such occult quality in
it, must first prove that it carries no Stone Powder in the Bowels of it; which
is manifestly false.

Thirdly, By the Aporrhoea Spiritus lapidifici, there are found on the Clift
near the Spaw, Muscleshells, and such like things petrified to a stony
substance; one of these was shown to Dr. Witty, this year, but he accused the
Sea for petrifying it; if so, what befell Lot's Wife judicially, is not so great
a miracle, as that it is not our lot naturally to be turned into Pillars of
Salt, that eat so much of Sea Salt daily; again, when the Earth of the Cliff
falls down by dashes of Rain upon the Sands, as soon as the watery moisture
is exhaled from it, it does petrifie. Dr. Witty tells you of a lump of Earth
thus petrified that will load two Carts, which because it was of a redish
Color, and hard, he mistook it for Iron.

Fourthly, by the effects the Spaw produces, primarily in those that are
inclinable to the Stone: I wish Scarbrough Spaw had given me no just occasion
to complain of it in this particular; besides what happened to me there, (as I
said) I was no sooner come home from thence, but another sharp fit tormented me
for two days; that I am not alone in this accusation, may be gathered from Dr.
Witty's Book; if such complainings as these had not been vulgarly spoken, I
suppose, so wise a man as he would not have started this Objection against the
Spaw, page 150. Another (says he) never had a sit of the Stone till drinking of
these Waters, though few of his Family have escaped that Disease: is not this a
shrewd sign of its petrifying nature? his Parenthesis does not invalidate it,
for, multae sunt in potentia, quae nunquam reducuntur in actum; but take his
answer to this Objection; Even just so a Light is brought into a dark Room, by
which a Thief is discovered, therefore Light is ill for a Thief; by the same
consequence that Scarbrough Spaw is ill for the Stone. An Objection of this
weight must not be answered so lightly, we that have been afflicted with this
Distemper cannot be affected with ginglings when they tend to our mischief: But
to answer, The Thief is in the Spaw, the Water was not such a dark Room where
the Thief has lain hid so long, but if a Light had been brought in by a
Chemist, this Thief might have been discovered before this time, and then
Nephritick men would have been aware of it. I grant, by reason of abundance of
Nitre in the Water, it will force out stony Gravel in the Kidneys, when any is
there; but I am certain also because, of the plenty of Stone filings that are
in it, the Water will occasion the breeding of Stones in the Kidneys, where,
pro tempore; there are none; ask those that have quitted themselves of the
Stones they voided by drinking the Water, if after they returned home, fits
have not come on them more frequently and sharply than before they drank of
Scarbrough-Spaw. I protest to the world, both as to my self, Relations, and
Patients, I have found it so: to show the disserence betwixt Scarbrough and
Knaisbrough Water (as to this petrifying property) I shall mention a remarkable
Observation of Mr. Henry Proctor of Farnly, I had the relation of it from his
own mouth when we were together; this Gentleman was brought very low in an
Hectic Fever, and sadly troubled with shortness of breath, he consulted with
Dr. Henry Poor for Cure, but found no Remedy; he then applied himself to Dr.
Neal, who prepared his body, and advised him to drink Knaisbrough Water, which
caused him cough up several Stones daily till he was perfectly cured. He does
enjoy his health very well ever since, using those Waters once a year;
afterward he married, and now is Father of two Children; if this Patient had
been sent to Scarbrough-Spaw, what had become of him let others judge; as the
Disease of the Stone does immediately proceed from a petrisick spirit, the
cause sine qua non, so Jaundise and the Gout have their (...) from it, hence it
does follow, that, secondarily these two Distempers are dangerously exalted (in
bodies that are inclinable to them) by drinking this Spaw: for evidence of this
truth, I shall give instances: First, the Lord Erwin went from his House at
Temple-Newsam to Scarbrough (upon what other account than to divert himself
there with the company of his friends, I know not) after he had drunk the
Water, and was returned home, presently the Jaundise seizes on him, of which
Disease he shortly died, though Dr. Tailor used all means for his remedy; now
this I say, all sweet Spaws in the World have a property common to them, that
they are of a deopilating nature, and though they may not suit to every
Disease, yet for the removing of grand Obstructions (the cause of most
Diseases) they are generally the best, and mostly the last advice of all
Physicians; what reason then can be given why this Honorable Lord by drinking
Scarbrough Spaw Water had not the Obstructions of his Gall opened, but
contrarily brought into this irrecoverable Disease that killed him? I say what
reason else, if not this, Scarbrough Water did petrifie that Sulphurous Saline
humor in the Vesica bilaria into Stones, too great to pass through the porus?
Dr. Witty blamed his too liberal drinking of wine with it (as he said to my
self this year) but what harm could that do more than to increase Choler, which
humor unpetrified is most easily purged away of all others? That Stones do as
usually concrete in the Gall, as in the Kidneys, in men as well as in beasts,
who does question? I was present many years since at a Physic Lecture in
London, when the Professor in the Discourse of the Jaundise brought forth three
or four little Stones of Gall wrapped up in his Handkerchif, to show them to the
other Doctors there, relating that a Gentlewoman of the City afflicted with
that Disease, after many fruitless attempts made by him for her Cure, at last
was put to it to give her a Dose of sharp working Physic, which quitted her of
those Stones, whereby she forthwith recovered: if any object, that suppose the
Gall be petrified, yet it cannot cause death in so short a time as this Lord
took his Disease, and died in it.

For answer, let him consult Helmont with Syloius, and there is enough to
satisfy him, that the second fermentation made by the succus pancreaticus, and
the Gall, are as necessary for the preservation of life, as the first
fermentation is, that is in the Stomach; though in an Ox Gall there is often
found a great Stone, notwithstanding the beast keeps health and liking till the
Butcher slaughter him, yet then there is abundance of liquid choler besides in
his Vesica bilaria, sufficient to perform fermentation; I shall mention but two
other instances of this year in our Town. An Alderman whose Father some years
since died of the Jaundice, but himself was never troubled with it, till after
his coming from Scarbrough Water, then did the Symptoms of this Disease appear,
only it did not manifest it self either by Urine, or by Color of his body,
which gave me a great cause of suspicion that the water had petrified the Gall;
with Chalibeat, and other Icterical drinks, by slow degrees he recovered.

A Merchant's Wife with Child, for company of her Husband, came to Scarbrough:
Dr. Witty in his Book approving the Water safe for such, she desired to drink
of it, upon her return home, a tormenting pain seized on her right side, for
mitigation of this extreme dolor, and prevention of a Fever, Phlebotomy was
thrice ordered, then an Antimonial Vomit, yet so obdurated was the Gall, by the
petrifying property of Scarbrough Water, as I suspected, that none other sign
appeared of the Jaundice, but a return of her pain three or four times over, at
length a ternary spirit of Wine, Nitre, and Mercury elixerated dissolved the
congealed Choler, and then did the Disease shine forth in its saffron color;
after three recidivations she was plucked out of the Jaws of death, beyond the
hopes of all her friends, and is now well delivered of a lusty Boy: Let it be
here observed that I practice according to conscience, and let those
She-Tatlers, who when they have done mumbling over their Beads, come to a
Feast, and there mutter hard speeches against me for dealing so severely with
this Patient, take notice that it is my principle, when I see my duty, to
pursue it to the hazard of my credit with such as them: and though I be
singular in this point from the most of my Brethren, whose wisdom it is to
secure themselves from an evil report, by doing nothing in a doubtful case; yet
I have not so learned Christ. The Maxim is true, quod unicum est, non
deliberandum est, and the resolution is Christian, Let us quit our selves like
men of Art and Integrity, and let the Lord do what seems him good. Pardon
this digression, Reader.

Dr. Witty gives an instance, page 180. of a Knight and his Lady in
Lincolnshire, by drinking the Water at home for the Scurvy, both of them took
the Jaundice, which they recovered not from, till Christmas following; he
blames the distance of place from the Fountain for this fault of the Water; but
all that can be charged upon drinking at a distance, is, that it may diminish
the good, and increase the bad qualities of the Water which are innate.

The Gouts inveterate malice is known to arise from a petrifying property of
its acid Spirit, hence it is said, Tollere nodosam, nescit medicina podagram. If
losers may have leave to speak, I shall mention how Scarbrough water dealt with
me as to this Distemper, which all my life long I never felt the least touch on
before: no sooner was an usual Stone slipped into the Bladder, from the left
Kidney (of which I have spoke) but immediately ictu oculi, a Thunderbolt from
the right Kidney darted into the joint of the great Toe, which caused me to go
limping a fortnight after: Thus have my Reins tried what is that water of
Scarbrough Spaw. That I am not alone neither in this accusation, hear Dr.
Witty, page 149. Others drinking without due preparation as was necessary
(peradventure to save some petty charge) have fallen into the Gout, the water
contracting heat for want of speedy passage, being thrown by nature upon the
weak Joints, have hence inferred that these Waters cause the Gout. Answer,
These Gentlemen without peradventure may be supposed to have neglected that
which is judged necessary for them to do before they drink Water, yet I do
aver, no Spaw in the world has less need of preparatives, and more need of
Purgers than this of Scarbrough: it was never observed by me, that any at the
first morning draught of this Water, wanted a speedy passage by the back door.
Though I cannot approve of his Notion touching the (...), how and wherefore the
water causes the Gout, yet in the (...), that it does so in Bodies inclinable
to that Disease, we are both agreed. Thus having proved by all manner of
Arguments both a priori and a posteriori, that Scarbrough water is petrifying,
and have manifested that Knaisbrough Spaw (which partakes of the Vitriol of
Iron) by a famous Instance is quite otherwise; it now remains, only that I make
out Scarbrough water has no Vitrioline Spirit in it. In this undertaking, I
shall approve my self a greater friend to Scarbrough than Dr. Witty, who
maintains the contrary, for if in this water the esurine Spirit of Vitriol be
joined with the Volatile Spirit of Nitre, of which this Spaw does chiefly
partake; how then does it differ from Aqua Fortis, that deadly corrosive water,
which is nothing else, but these two acid spirits inseparably united together?
if he say these two are not all, there is Allom and Salt also, this makes the
Water worse, for a Spirit from all these will make an Aqua Regia, which does
corrode Gold it self, the hardest of all Metals to dissolve. If it be said
these corrosive Spirits are extorted by stress of fire from their bodies, which
extraordinary heat will not be granted to be in the bowels of the Earth. I
answer, this possibly may excuse a tanto, but not a toto: for first, the
prolifick Seminals of all things generated in the Earth, does come to their
proper matrixes in a vapor. If any question this, let him try Platt's
Experiment, put bituminous and combustible substances into two Glass Retorts,
filling their necks, the one with lean Earth, the other with peet-earth, set
them in an open fire, and by gradual heat the Vapors that ascend will
petrifie, the one Earth into Stone, and the other Earth into a plain coal.
Secondly, this Vapor, if it be of ill quality, has the same pernicious
effects upon our bodies, as those that are sublimed by Art in the fire. This
truth the Miners do sadly experience, the Sulphurous Vapors that are in every
Coal-pit, will soon stifle any that goes into it before it be purged by air
conveyed to it. Thirdly, this Vapor Nature can no more cause to ascend upward
(which it does perpetually) without heat, than Art can sublime without fire.
Suppono (says Kircher) omnes vapores nihil aliud quam tenuissima, subtilissima
ac insensibilia corpuscula esse, quae calore exaltata ingentis in terreno mundo
mutationis causa sunt.

Wherefore, I say, though we know that Nitre and Vitriol distilled divisim, are
both of them severally good, and of daily practice; yet we experience also,
that distilled conjunctim, they send forth the most deadly corrosive Vapor,
which by the coldness of the Receiver is condensed to a Spirit; there can be no
doubt, but if both these (as Dr. Witty would have it) be joined in Scarbrough
water, it must be highly corrosive, though not to such a degree as Aqua Fortis
is, twenty drops whereof will kill a Cat; notwithstanding I shall examine his
proofs for this Vitriol of Iron, as I find them in his Book, page 9. he says, a
small quantity of Gall being put into the Spaw Water, does turn it into a dark
Claret Color, ergo, there is Vitriol in it; this is a non sequitur, for thus
will the Gall turn a Coal-water, if it has gotten any touch of the Spirit of
Sulphur to sharpen it, for dissolution of the black Mine that it passes
through: but we will suppose there is no Coal-Mine about Scarbrough, therefore,
I say, it is only the Allom-Stone in the Spaw that gives the tincture by the
Gall; let experience prove it, take any Allom-stone unhurnt, powder it, add
Spring Water sharpened with the Spirit of Nitre that it may dissolve it, and
silter it, so will you have (to appearance) a water as clear as the Spaw, put
Powder of Gall thereto, and it gives you the same tincture. I am witness that
the Chemical Apothecary of York did pick out of the Hill near the Spaw, an
Allom-stone that was not hardened in the air, but made soft in the Nitre which
abounds there, and after he mixed only Spring water with it, and added the Gall
to it, it gave as high a Claret color, as the Spaw it self does.

The Reason of these Experiments is plainly thus; the acid water dissolves the
black Coal, or the blew Stone, and hides the color of them in its pores,
because every Atome of the continens must be outward to the contentum. The Gall
being put in and stirred amongst it, by its Alcaly imbibing the acidity of the
water, what is included therein is extruded toward the bottom, where, what is
precipitated appears in its own color, the Spirit of Salts adding luster
thereto.

I will not mention here, how Dr. Witty commends this black sediment for
Physical use, page 10. Against this Experiment of Allom Stone giving its
tincture by the Gall, let be observed how Dr. Witty mistakes in his trials;
says he in his answer to Mr. Simpson, page 91. I have tried the Allom Mine,
having broken it to powder, and infused it in Spring water some hours, and it
received no tincture from the Gall. Good reason, for he did but infuse it, not
dissolve it; can it be expected that the Gall should precipitate the Allom
Stone from the water, whilst it came not into it, but only lay at the bottom
undissolv'd? what can simple water extract out of a hard Slate? no more than a
Feather can strike fire out of a Flint Stone: Nay more (says he) I calcined
that very Stone, and then dissolved it in Spring water, and yet it received no
tincture from the Gall. Answer. No marvel neither, because the calcined Stone
of Allom is white; its blewness, which gives the tincture, disappears by the
sire; even as red Coral calcined in a Crucible turns white of Color. Further,
to let the Reader know that he will spare for no pains to give satisfaction,
page 92. he sends to two ingenious Gentlemen at Whitby, where is a water that
breaks out of the middle of a Mine, to try if that would receive tincture from
Gall, and they did both assure him it did not; besides they sent a Glass-bottle
of the same water to York, where he tried it himself, and it did not change at
all. Why? what is the matter? he is answered out of his own mouth, Nay, says
he, I do aver with them that it is like ordinary Spring Water, (in truth it is
none other, the Laborers drink of it, to quench their thirst) having taken no
vapor, odor, or Sapour from the Mine; yet he does confidently conclude from
this trial that it is not from Allom that this Water at Scarbrough takes its
incture. Such another Errand as this to Whitby, he makes to Barnsley upon the
edge of Darby-shire, to try if a Spring of fresh Water that runs out of
Iron-stone, would change color with Gall: and it did not, neither there, nor
at York. What can be inferred from hence, but that this Water which ran from
the Iron-stone was no more concerned with the Iron, than that at Whitby was
with the Allom; nay, a potiori, if a Mineral Salt of Allom whiles crude, and
imbodied in its Gleeb, does not always impart to the Spring that runs through
it, either Odor, Sapour, or Vapor, as he has said before, much less will the
Metal of Iron-stone do it. If his friend that for a further trial made a hole
in the bottom Stone, to see if the Water that stood in it would tinge by Gall,
had sent him a Bottle of any Water that came from the Iron-stone, whilst it was
in solutis principiis, I do affirm that Water would receive tincture from Gall;
such a Water we have at Hunwick, where great quantity of Iron-stone is dug
up, and it receives tincture from Gall as highly as Scarbrough does. Dr. Witty,
page 94. is framing an Argument ab inductione thus. The tincture by Gall is not
from Allom, nor from Iron, ergo, it is from Vitriol: Answer, I am loath to see my
Brother in the pinfold, yet must I say, if it be from the Vitriol, it is
because of the Iron that is in it, for no other Vitriol but ferrugineum will do
it: hence it will follow, if not from Iron, then it is not from Vitriol, ergo,
it is from Allom that Scarbrough Water tinges by Gall.

His second proof, page 11.

Sir John Anderton observed that the Water carried in an Oaken Vessel, in the
bottom whereof was found a yellowish sediment, which he sent to the Doctor, he
saw it like crocus Martis, and tasted it of a stiptick quality, and therefore
it is supposed by him to be the Chalybeate part of the Minerals. Answer,
Quaecunque volumus, facile credimus. The sharp Water agitated against the Oaken
Vessel, in carrying corrodes the inner parts of it, which powder settling to the
bottom, with some seces of the Spaw Water produces a settlement of the color
of Oak, which if he had dried, and then burnt in a Crucible, the flame thereof
would have shown him, that it was Wood and not Iron. If different things were
not sometimes like one another, none could be deceived. Page 12. The water at
40 Miles distance will not cruddle Milk as it does at Scarbrough, and that it
does not receive such a deep tincture from the Gall, nor is it found to have
such a pleasant acidity as at the Fountain: which certainly must proceed from a
loss of the Vitrioline Spirits, of which it does eminently participate. Answer,
Who questions that Allom will not cruddle Milk as well as Vitriol? the more
subtle any acid Liquor put to Milk is, the more perfectly does it separate the
thick parts from the thin; 'twill follow therefore that the water has lost
some of its subtle Spirits, by carrying, but none of the Vitriol which it
never had. The tincture from the Gall I have manifested to proceed from the
Unburnt Allom Stone, whereof this is a plain proof; put the Spaw Water into
Glass Bottles at the Fountain, let them be carried abroad and left a few days,
and the Allom Stone will settle of it self without any mixture of Gall, to the
bottom, in a blackish Powder, which cannot be any thing of Chalybs, for two
Reasons; First, because the Vitrioline Spirit, and Iron are too great friends
(being once met together) to be so easily separated. Any that have prepared
Vitriolum Martis, he has learned this Note by it. Secondly, when the
Vitrioline Water does settle its Colcothar without adding Gall to it, it is
always of a yellow Color. This may be seen in the Stone Basin and Spout of
Knaisbrough Spaw, where the Water passing continually in the open air over it,
has precipitated Crocus Martis, as I may call it thereupon. The like may be
observed in every runner near the Fountain head of any Vitrioline or Chalybeate
water whatsoever. His Argument for Iron, page 14. The Earth that falls from the
Bank turns to Iron-stone, as hard as Iron it self, and fusible being put into a
Smiths Forge, as I have sometimes found upon trial: There is a piece of the
Cliff within one hundred paces of the Spaw, thus converted in a very sew years
to an Iron Stone, as much as would load three or four Carts: Answer, I here
require the Smith to make Horse-shoe Nails of it, and then I shall yield to Dr.
Witty, thus much, that within a hundred Paces of the Spaw Westward there is
Iron-stone. To me it does appear to be a reddish Earth dissolved with the
Nitroaluminous Salt, and petrified in the Sun and Air to a hard lump, which
will flux in the Fire, answerable to the Nature of that Salt that is in it.
Another Argument for Iron (which for manners sake I leave last) is that the
Water colors the Excrements black: he should have said blew, for when he looks
back again, they will appear of the same color that Allom Stone is of. In his
Answer to Mr. Simpson, page 42. I knew (says he) Vitriol to be in the water
from its eminent acidity. Answer. This is a non sequitur, for acidity is
appropriated to the Spirit of Nitre, as well as to the Spirit of Vitriol. Page
43. Another token of Vitriol is, that Vitrioline vapor which any one of an
indifferent smell may observe, which is something likely of Ink, though more
pure. Answer. Take this Experiment to know what smell Scarbrough Spaw is of,
(viz.) Take oily Water (after all the Christals are settled from it mentioned
before) exhaled perfectly dry; add hot water to it, then stir it, and if it do
not stink as bad, or worse than the Allom-pans at Whitby, I will forfeit my
Nose: why then says Dr. Witty it is a more pure smell than that of Ink. Dulcis
odor lucri ex re qualibet. Page 44. Six score paces from the Spring a
Vitrioline Salt, of a dark yellow color, sweats out of the Cliff. Answer. The
Nitre spires out of the Cliff all along Westward from the Spaw, of a white
Color, this he confesses to be none other than Nitre; at a further distance
it changes Color to a dark yellow, as the Earth does out of which it sweats:
Let him hear Kircher confirming this truth, Capite de nitro; Quod si subinde
nitrum variis coloribus imbutum reperiatur, id nil tamen diversum a nitro,
arguit cum omnem colorem a color terrae ex qua extractum fuit, trahat, si ex
rubro, rubrum; si ab albo, album, and sic de caeteris, page 304. l. 6. Page 67.
The black sediment precipitated by the Gall, I Calcined (says Dr. Witty) and it
became of a dark brown color, and is none other than Scoria of Iron (he
calcined likewise the whole Body of Minerals) and there are in it here and
there flakes of Iron, broad and thin, like those that fly off from the Smiths
hammer. Answer. This calcined Sediment, and calcined Body are all one
Experiment; for the Gall precipitates the gross parts whatsoever they be: no
marvel then if it became as hard as a Cinder, which had so much Stone in it as
I have proved; for those flakes of Iron that are discovered in the Body of
Minerals, I confess I am not so ingenious, I never yet undertook his method in
searching what different parts were in this compound Water, to calcine the
whole Body of Minerals together, as that only expedient way; yet I calcined the
Stone Powder, where most likely it should be intermixed, and there they are
not. I calcined also the Clay, neither are any Iron flakes there, wherefore it
must be supposed, like as he smelt the Vitriol, so he saw the Iron flakes,
idest, something like them.

The right improvement of this Water consists in three indications.

First to resist (if it were possible) the petrifying property; but this being
to the Water proprium quarto nodo, small help can be had against it.

Secondly, To hinder that the Stone Powder, and feces of the Allom fix not in
the Bowels.

Thirdly, To prevent in tender constitutions that the duplicated Salt corrode
not the Entrails, causing thereby a Dysentery, which (says Dr. Witty, page
150.) rarely happens.

All the harm that Scarbrough water is guilty of, proceeds from one of these
causes.

In his Answer to Mr. Simpson, I read thus, page 238. And though Mr. Simpson
has designed causlesly to rob me of the honor and reputation (if there be any
in it) of my discovery of Scarbrough Spaw, with its usefulness to my Country,
yet if he have any thing to make out in point of Art, I shall never go about to
eclipse it, but thank him to boot.

As he is a man of his word, I expect thus much from him.

FINIS.

