THE Preaching of Christ, AND THE Prison of God, As the Certain Portion of them
that reject Christ's Word.

Opened in Several SERMONS On 1 Peter III. 19.

By SAMUEL TOMLYNS, M.A. And Minister of the Gospel of Christ in Marleborough.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chappel. 1694.

TO My Honored Friends, Robert Grove, of Dunnet, in the County of Wilts, Esquire
And to his Worthy Consort, Madam Tryphena Grove, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be
multiplied from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
THE True God is styled, The Excellency of Jacob, Amos 8.7. The Glory and
Praise of his People, Isa. 60.19. Deuteronomy. 10.21. Though Pharaoh King of Egypt
boasted thus, I am the Son of the Wise, the Son of Ancient Kings, Isaiah 19.11.
Yet David Glories in this, Lord, I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant, the Son of
thy Handmaid, Psalm. 116.16. This is your Honor, That you are descended of
Parents that owned Christ's Gospel, espoused his Interest, and countenanced
God's pure Worship in Dark, Difficult, and Dangerous Times: I Rejoice that you
tread in their steps, and endeavor to promote God's Kingdom in your Family,
and among your Neighbors. As this has been the Glory of your Predecessors, so
I desire it may descend to, and be inherited by your Children, that the Entail
of God's Covenant may never be cut off from your Posterity. The World counts it
Honorable when Estates continue, and Lands descend from one Generation to
another. But this is most valuable, when Piety, and God's pure Worship descends
from Father to Son. It is said, Deuteronomy. 33.4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the
Inheritance of the Congregation of Jacob. As God has commanded, and Commended
his Law as an Inheritance to the whole Church, so every Particular Member of it
should by his Choice accept the Word of God as his Inheritance, as the Psalmist
says he did, Psalm. 119.111. Thy Testimonies have I taken as my Heritage for
ever, for they are the rejoicing of my Heart. Children will be sure to claim
their Father's Lands, but it is much more desirable to claim their Father's
God, as Moses did; Exodus 15.2. He is my Father's God, and I will exalt him. How
Excellent is it, when they Inherit their Parents Graces? Unfeigned Faith dwelt
in his Grandmother Lois, then in his Mother Eunice, and then in Timothy
himself. This is to be an Ancient Family, and truly Noble. As in the Temple of
Old there were Treasurers over the Dedicated Things, 1 Chronicles. 20.26. So in the
Spiritual Temple, the Church of Christ, God has constituted Christian Parents
as the Treasurers over the Dedicated Things. Children of Believers are
Dedicated to God in Baptism, and Parents should Carefully, and Faithfully watch
over these Holy Dedicated Things, that they may not be alienated from God by
cold Neutrality, or open Profaneness and Degeneracy.

The ensuing Discourse Treats on two Noble Subjects, The Preaching of the Son
of God, and The Prison of God, which will be the certain Portion and Punishment
of those that reject the Word of the Son of God. I am sensible of manifold
Weaknesses, Defects, and Imperfections in my self, that might deter me from
exposing my self to the Censures of a Cavilling Contentious Age; but because my
Life declines apace, my Days do post away, my Sun will quickly set, I am
willing to publish something that may contribute to the Informing the Ignorant,
and awaken the Secure. Christ's Preaching may be a Lodestone to draw perishing
Sinners to him; and the Prison of God may Alarm, and Rouse up drousie Souls,
and be a Spur to Quicken them to fly for Refuge, to lay hold of the Hope set
before them. I bow my Knee to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Father of Lights, and the God of all Grace, that he would Grant unto you the
Spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, and thereby Seal Instruction to your Souls;
that being built upon your most Holy Faith, you may grow up into Christ in all
things, and at last obtain an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified by
Faith in Christ. These are the unfeigned Desires of

Your Affectionate and Humble Servant, Samuel Tomlyns.
Milcot, May 11. 1694.
1 Pet. III. 19. By which also he went, and Preached to the Spirits in Prison.


IN these words we may observe, 1. A Subject, He. The Person spoken of is
called Christ in the 18th. Verse, Though he was put to death in the Flesh, yet
he was quickened by the Spirit. He tasted Death for a little time, but soon
abolished and swallowed it up for ever. His Humane Nature rendered him obnoxious
to Death, but his Divine Nature made him Victorious over it. 2. We have
something affirmed and asserted of this Subject, viz. That he went by it, that
is, by his Divine Nature, and preached. Though the Son of God had not yet
assumed a Humane Nature, yet he did exist in his Divine Nature; though he came
to Men in time, yet he was with the Father from Eternity, and so was in a
capacity to Preach before he was manifested in the Flesh. As a Candle can shine
and give Light before it is put into a Lanthorn; and the Light created the
first day did Illuminate the World before the Sun was created the fourth day.
So the Divine Nature of Christ did enlighten the World before he rose, and
appeared as a Sun of Righteousness shining in and through a Body of Flesh,
while the fourth Thousand of Years was yet current. And this Expression is
observable, that by his Divine Nature he went and preached. Where the Son of
God preaches, thither he comes, and there he is Spiritually present; where the
Gospel is dispensed, there is a special Presence of the Son of God. In Ephesians.
2.17. it is said, He came and preached Peace to those that were far off, and to
them that are nigh. So the Householder is said to go forth to the elder Brother,
and entreat him to come in to the Feast, Luke 15.28. Where the Word is
preached, the Father and the Son do come forth, and draw near to Men, and treat
with them about their Spiritual and Eternal Good.

3. We may observe to whom the Son of God preached; Peter tells us, it was to
the Spirits in Prison; but yet he preached to them before they were cast into
Prison, while they were yet seated in Bodies clothed with Flesh, and were
dwelling in the World; it is such that are meet to be preached to, that are yet
in the way in a state of Trial, and Candidates for Eternity. When once the
Final Sentence is passed, and the eternal state of Sinners fixed, it is too
late to set on foot a Treaty of Peace with them, or to make offers of Mercy to
them. Those that were Prisoners in the days of Peter, were living, and at
Liberty in the days of Noah. The Vid. Rhemish Test. and the Notes on it.
Papists would impose and obtrude this sense on Peter's words, as if the Soul
of Jesus Christ being separated from the Body, did go and Preach to some of the
Fathers of the Old Testament, that were not (as they say) yet admitted into
Heaven, but were reserved in some out-rooms of Hell, where they felt no pain,
but did not yet see the Glorious Face of God, nor enjoy his Blessed Presence.
But this cannot be the true genuine sense of the words. For, 1. If Spirit
signifies here the Soul of Christ, and quickened imports his Resurrection, then
Jesus Christ must Preach to these Spirits not while his Body was dead, but
after his Resurrection, which the Papists themselves will not own or admit. 2.
Spirit in the 18th. Verse signifies Christ's Divine Nature, and it was not in
this, or by this that he preached to the Spirits of the Old Testament after
their Souls were separated from their Bodies. 3. Those that Christ preached to
lived, and were disobedient in the days of Noah; it is not said, they did
Repent of, or break off from their sins, but were hardened in their Unbelief,
and dyed in their Iniquities; they went down uncircumcised in Heart into the
Pit, and so Eternal Death was their Wages, and Hell was their own Place. Now
even Papists dare not say, that Christ preached to the Damned, their state is
remediless, the Sentence irrevocable, their Loss irrecoverable; there is no
Year of Jubilee, no Jail-delivery for imprisoned Spirits confined to, and shut
up in Hell. Jesus Christ would not Preach to those that God had cast off for
ever, and doomed to Eternal Misery, for their continued and obstinate
Disobedience, they whose Nature was not changed on Earth, their Condition could
not be altered in Hell. 4. If the Soul of Christ had preached to Souls in the
Prison of Hell, what Reason can be assigned why he should Preach rather to
those that were disobedient in the days of Noah, than to those that were
disobedient in the days of Abraham, Moses, or in the aftertimes of the
Prophets? This one Argument may shame this Notion, and confute this ungrounded
Exposition of the words, that the Soul of Christ went down to Hell to Preach to
Spirits there.

Before I come to the main Doctrines that the words afford, I shall observe
several other great Truths that the words do offer to us. 1. That the Scripture
is a most Excellent and Divine Book, in that it gives us such a true Account,
and such sure Notions about a future and eternal state after Death. As it tells
us what is the Condition of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the Holy
Prophets, that they are in the Palaces and Kingdom of God, Luke 13.28. so it
informs us what is become of the Sinners of the Old World; that these are cast
into the Prison of God. He that appoints Portion in the Paradise above, and
assigns places in the Prison below, and adjudges to each of these by an
irrevocable Sentence, can best tell what is become of Saints and Sinners now
they are departed out of the World.

2. This Evidences the Immortality of the Soul, that the Spirits of wicked Men
are said to subsist after Death, and to abide in God's Prison, though their
Garments of Flesh were plucked off, their Houses of Clay thrown down to the
Dust, yet their Souls did not expire, or sleep; as a Man can live, though his
Garments are put off, or his House be demolished, or drop down: So the Soul
has no such necessary dependence on the Body, but can exist though this
Garment be put off, this House be pulled down. This Candle will burn, though
taken out of the Lanthorn of the Flesh, Death does not blow out, only it
removes this Light into another World.

3. We may observe the Mercy and Goodness of God, that though he had threatened
a Flood, and adjudged all the World (besides eight Persons) to be drowned by
it, yet the Son of God Preaches to this degenerate and wicked World before he
destroys them; though God designed Severity against their Bodies, yet he offers
Mercy to their Souls; that though they could not avoid the first, yet that they
might decline the second Death; and though their baser part were cast away, yet
that their Souls might swim to, and Land safely on the Shoars of a blessed
Eternity, and God's means do not use to be totally ineffectual, and in vain.
The Word is seldom if ever preached, but that some are to be drawn out of the
dead Sea, and called out of their Graves by it. Peter seems to tell us, that
the Word was not wholly lost on the Old World, but that some received saving
Benefit by it, 1 Pet. 4.6. For this cause was the Gospel preached also to them
that were dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but
live according to God in the spirit. This may be, Vid. Piscal in locum.
and is expounded to relate to, and point at the state of the Old World; the
Gospel was preached to them, that though they were judged, were drowned, and
perished in the Eye of Men as to their Flesh, yet they might live to, and with
God in their Spirits. Though God proclaimed War against their Bodies, yet he
tendered Peace to their Souls.

4. We may further Observe, that even those that the Son of God Preaches to,
may stop their Ears, close their Eyes, harden their Hearts, and for their
Unbelief and Impenitency, may be cast into God's Prison, and perish
everlastingly. The Gospel is to some the savor of death unto death, 2 Cor.
2.16. They did shut Christ out of their Souls, and for this are shut up under
the wrath of God, and are the Subjects of Eternal Vengeance.

5. We may Observe what a heinous Evil Sin is, and what a terrible Adversary
God is: He did not only sweep away the sinners of the World, and drown their
Bodies in a Flood of Waters, but he imprisoned and punished their Souls. God
drowned their Spirits in Destruction and Perdition, 1 Timothy 6.9. Sin is
committed against an Infinite Majesty, and cannot be sufficiently punished or
satisfied for in a Finite Time, by a Finite Creature. It is an Axiom in the
Civil Law, Accusatio rei morte finitat: An Accusation is finished by the death
of the guilty Person; all Process and Proceedings then cease against the
Delinquent. But it is otherwise here; God's Accusation is not let fall, his
Actions are not withdrawn, his Controversy does not cease when sinners dye; he
pursues and overtakes them in another World, there he meets them as one
bereaved of his Authority, Honor, and Glory; by them, he resents the wrongs
done to him, he pours out the full Vials of his Wrath on them, and fights
against them for ever. They are, that they may be Miserables, a bare Stock of
Being is continued, that God may graft Misery and Eternal Torments on it.

The words afford us two Doctrines: First, That the Son of God did Preach
before he was Incarnate, and does as truly Preach by Instruments, as he does
immediately in his own Person when he appeared here in the World. The Second
Doctrine that rises from the latter words is this, That the Souls of wicked
Men, after they are departed out of the Body, are confined to, and shut up in
God's Prison.

1. Doctrine. The Son of God preached before he was Incarnate, and does as
truly Preach by Instruments as he does immediately in his own Person. We may
here distinguish three Preachings of Jesus Christ. 1. He preached before his
Incarnation. So in the Text the Son of God is said to Preach to those that were
disobedient in the days of Noah. The Gospel was preached to them that formerly
lived, but were dead in the days of Peter, 1 Pet. 4.6. And who did then Preach
it? It was the Son of God. He was in the world, and the world was made by him,
and the world knew him not, John 1.10. He was in the World, and that to Teach
and Instruct the Souls of Men. His being in the World relates to the time
before his Incarnation; then he treated with, and revealed a way of Salvation
to the perishing Souls of Men. He was in the World to give light to straying
Sinners, to awaken sleepy, to apprehend flying, to rescue and save sinning
Souls. He was in the World before Abraham was chosen, and his Seed was taken as
a Peculiar People, or the Son came to them as his own.

2. The Son of God preached when he was manifested in the Flesh. At Nazareth
(where he was brought up, Luke 4.26.) he seems to Preach his first Sermon, and
then he chose that Text, Isa. 61.1. This Scripture evidences his Mission, and
contains his Commission: As Ambassadors first show their Credentials, before
they enter into a Treaty with those to whom they are sent. So Christ, as the
Father's Ambassador, produces his Credentials, he says, The Spirit of the Lord
was upon him, for he anointed him to Preach glad tidings unto the meek. And
Christ, in pursuance of his Commission and Instructions, went about preaching
the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God, Luke 8.1. Jesus went about all Galilee,
teaching in their Synagogues, and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, Matthew.
4.23. Jesus was not idle, did not loyter, or trifle away his time, but was
daily casting his Net to take Souls, and calling Men from Darkness to Light,
and from the Power of Satan to God. When the Son of God was Incarnate, then
Wisdom cried without, Prove. 1.20. And the firstborn of Gods new Family
declared his Name to his Brethren, Ps. 22.22. Then the Church found him
without, Cant. 8.1. That is, come forth into our Nature.
And where he did not Convert Men, yet he did convince, and somewhat awaken and
terrify sinners with the fear of Hell. In this sense he is said To smite the
Earth with the Rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips to slay the
wicked, Isa. 11.4.

3. Now Christ is in Heaven he still continues to Preach. Take heed, says the
Apostle, Heb. 12.25. See that ye refuse not him that speaks -- we shall not
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. It was foretold
that our Lord Jesus should speak Peace to the Heathen, Zech. 9.10. So it was
fulfilled by our Lord Jesus. Paul says, That Christ came to Ephesus, Preaching
Peace to them that were afar off, Ephesians. 2.17. Jesus Christ was then ascended
to Heaven, yet even then he came to Ephesus, and preached Peace. As he went to
the Old World and preached before his Incarnation, so he came to Ephesus after
his Ascension, and proclaimed Peace; though he came into the World to wage War
with Satan, and to destroy his works, yet he daily comes and preaches Peace to
Sinners, and wooes, and beseeches them to be reconciled to God 2 Cor. 5.20.
. Thus you see that the Son of God preached by Instruments, and by his
Ambassadors before and since his Incarnation as he preached immediately when he
was here in the World.

For the prosecuting of the Doctrine, I shall insist upon these three things.

1. How fit the Son of God was to Preach. 2. What it was he did Preach. 3. To
whom he did Preach.

1. I shall show you how fit the Son of God is to Preach; and that in respect,
1. To the Divine Nature he possesses. 2. As to the Office he is clothed with.

1. As to the Divine Nature he has. 1. As he is God, he knows all things; as
he was in the bosom of the Father from Eternity, John 1.18. He is conscious to
all his Secrets, he is privy to all his Thoughts of Grace, and Counsels of
Peace, that did spring up in his Heart from Eternity concerning the Sons of
Men. None knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom he will reveal him, Mat.
11.27. The Son knows the Father immediately, perfectly, and infallibly. As the
Wisdom of God, he has a full Acquaintance with the Father; nothing is hid or
concealed from him, what he has seen with, and heard from the Father, that he
testifies, John 3.32. A Witness that reports what he has heard and seen, is
surely to be credited, and such a Witness is Jesus Christ, Isa. 55.4. Rev.
3.14. He was to bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles, Isa. 42.1. The Doctrine
of the Gospel is God's Judgment concerning a way of Relief, Reconciliation, and
Salvation for Sinners. This Doctrine Christ was to bring forth, and that out of
the bosom of the Father Vid. Piscal. in loc.
These great Secrets he was to reveal to the World.

2. None but the Son of God can give sufficient Authority and Efficacy to the
Word. 1. The Son gives Authority to the Gospel, he that Preaches out of the
bosom of the Father, John 1.18. He that speaks from the Throne of Majesty and
Glory Heb. 12.25.
, is to be regarded. The Word ought, and is to be received as the Word of God,
1 Thessalonians. 2.13. It is to be entertained as a Law from his Mouth, Job 22.22. What
the Son Preaches is stamped with a Divine Authority. All should tremble at, and
stand in awe of his Word.

2. The Son of God only can give Efficacy to the Word. He that brought forth
the Gospel out of his Father's Bosom, can bring it into our Hearts: He can sow,
cause the Seed to take Root, and change the Soil; he can write in the Tables of
our Hearts, 2 Cor. 3.3. Jesus Christ did not write the Gospel with his own Hand
in any Paper or Book, he intended and reserved a more Noble Writing to himself,
which is most becoming of him, and peculiar to him. He writes in the Minds,
Consciences, and Wills of Men; and he writes not Letters, Syllables, bare Words
or Sentences, but he writes Divine Truths, Supernatural Mysteries, Spiritual
Principles, Dispositions, and Inclinations in the Souls of Men. The Son can
come at, and write in that Table, that no other can reach, or make impressions
on. And the Son of God can write so effectually as to change a Heart of Stone
to a fleshy Table; he can soften and melt the Heart, and make it pliable and
flexible. Isa. 51.4. Hearken unto me, my People, and give ear unto me, O my
Nation; for a Law shall proceed from me, and I will make my Judgment to rest
for a light of the People. When may the Son of God be said to make his Judgment
to rest? I Answer, when he engrafts his Word, and causes it to join, unite, and
close with the Stock of the Heart, James 1.21. When the Seed is turned into a
new and Divine Nature, when in this Noble Effect of it, it dwells and abides
in the Soul for ever, 1 Pet. 1.23. When it is mixed with Faith, Heb. 4.3.
when it molds and fashions the Soul into a Conformity to God, and a compliance
with his Will; then it may be said truly to rest and abide. A Graft that is not
implanted into the Stock, a Stone that is not joined to the Foundation, may be
spurned to and fro; but when the Graft is united with the Stock, and the Stone
is laid into the Building, then it has rest. None can give a Rest in this
sense to to the Doctrine of the Gospel but the Son of God, and how weak soever
Instruments are, yet he can produce mighty Effects, when he speaks in them, and
by them 2 Cor. 13.3.
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklicks he ordains strength, Psalm. 8.2. The
Disciples of Christ were but as Babes and Sucklings, they were not trained up
in the Schools of Philosophers, or Rhetoricians, but were (...), Acts 4.13. Men
unlearned, and ignorant in the Eyes of their Adversaries; the word translated
Ignorant, is (...) Idiots, and those by the Graecians are called (...), Idiots,
that have a very low Talent of Reason, a scanty measure of Understanding at
utmost, fitting them to manage their own Private Affairs, and small Concerns,
but disabling them from being employed in any Great, High, and Public Affairs.
How Observable is it then, that the Son of God should choose, and employ Men of
such mean Parts in the most high, weighty, and important Matters of his
Kingdom, and accomplish such great and Noble things by them? The Son of God did
speak in them, 2 Cor. 13.3. and work with them, Mark 16.20. so that they
proselyted a world of Enemies, and discipled Barbarous Nations to the Faith of
Christ. They famished the Heathen Gods of the Earth, Zeph. 2.11. They drew away
their Worshippers, and deprived them of their Sacrifices. The Hands of these
Husbandmen cultivated and manured a barren and horrid Wilderness, and reduced
it to be a Spiritual Paradise, and Garden of God. The word of the Cross,
signified by the Living Water that came out from the side of the Altar, Ezekiel.
47.1, 2. flowing out into the salt and dead Sea of the World, did heal these
brackish, unpleasant, and unwholsom Waters. O, how wonderful was the Son of God
in this, that a little stream of Doctrine concerning Christ crucified, should
heal, and make fresh the Waters of the great Sea of this corrupt and degenerate
World! How strange and surprising is this! that such few and weak Hands should
pull down Satan's Kingdom? should build the Ruins of many Generations, and
wrest the Captives from the Srong, and the Prey from the Mighty: The Arrows
that the Son of God did shoot by his Ministers, did hit right, pierce deep, and
cause sinners to fall under them

2. If we consider the Office the Son of God does sustain, and is invested
with, this fits him to Preach to a sinful and lost World. He is styled a
Mediator, 1 Timothy 2.5. If he had not undertaken to satisfy Justice, and make
Peace, God would have kept silence as to any gracious or comfortable speaking
to the World. Had not he interposed between guilty Creatures and an angry God,
we could have heard nothing else from Heaven but denunciations of Vengeance,
threatenings of Punishment, and messages of Death. But now lively Oracles come
from the Mercy-seat, sprinkled with the Blood of the Mediator. He that has
made a Testament, and sealed it with his own Blood, is fittest to open,
publish, and declare it. He that was intimate with God, and acquainted with all
his deep Designs, and Bosom-Secrets, was fittest to bring them forth, and make
them known to the World. He that was to execute God's Purposes, was meetest to
reveal them. God had Designs of Grace, Counsels of Peace, Purposes of
Redemption and Salvation, that were conceived in his Mind, and formed in his
Heart from Eternity. But these could not step forth into execution but by the
Interposition and Sufferings of Jesus Christ. The pleasure of the Lord was to
prosper in his hand, Isa. 53.10. And what his Hand was to accomplish, his Mouth
was to reveal. He that satisfied Justice, was fittest to discover Grace and
Mercy. The Lord Jesus is styled the High Priest, and Apostle of our Profession,
Heb. 3.1. What he merited as an High Priest, that he is meetest to reveal and
declare as an Apostle. We may see infinite Wisdom in this: He that makes Peace
by the Blood of his Cross, Col. 1.20. He speaks Peace, Zech. 9.10. He preaches
Peace, Ephesians. 2.17. He that paid the Ransom, Matthew. 20.28. He preaches
Deliverance to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are
bound, Isa. 61.1. He that was taken from Prison and Judgment himself, Isa.
53.8. He calls Prisoners to come forth, Isa. 49.9. He bids those that are in
Darkness to show themselves in the Heavenly Sanctuary, and the Glorious
Presence of God. He that was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, he is
the Consolation of Israel, and comforts those that mourn, Isa. 53.3. with Isa.
61.2. He that became the Father's Servant himself, Isa. 42.1. Proclaims the
Acceptable Year of the Lord, publishes a Spiritual Jubilee to us, for the
release of our Souls, from the Servitude of Sin, from the Bondage of Satan. Man
being fallen under the Wrath of God, the Curse of the Law, the Sentence of
Death, none but a Mediator that was made Sin and a Curse for us, could bring us
any good News, could publish any glad Tidings, that might be a Foundation for
our Faith and Hope, relieve and revive our fainting and sinking Souls. He that
is the Wisdom of God, and knows all, was fittest to be the Word of the Father
to reveal all.

2dly, I shall now consider, what it is that the Son of God Preaches.

1. Jesus Christ Preaches the Doctrine of Faith, and calls Men to believe it.
He Preaches good Tidings, and that to the Poor, Luke 4.18. The Law promises
Life, and publishes good Tidings only to those that are Rich in Habitual
Righteousness, and perfect Active Obedience: But Jesus Christ Preaches good
Tidings to those that are exceeding Poor; to such as have no good dwelling in
them, Romans 7.18. or good done by them, Romans 3.12. Compare those two
Expressions; Paul says, In me, even in this flesh of mine, dwells nothing at
all that is good: There is none that does good, no, not one. O, how sweet a
Sentence is this, that Jesus Christ preaches glad Tidings to the Poor! Jesus
Christ Preaches Righteousness. Psalm. 40.9, 10. I have preached Righteousness in
the great Congre^ation, I have not hid thy Righteousness in my heart. These
words are spoken by the Son of God concerning himself; the Righteousness he
preached was a great Secret, a deep Mystery. We should have been for ever
ignorant of it if he had hid it in his Heart: But this Righteousness of God is
revealed in the Gospel, Romans 1.17. And it is that which Faith must Act, and
live upon from first to last; therefore it is said, to be revealed from Faith
to Faith, from a lesser to a higher degree of Faith. This is a wonderful and
comfortable Righteousness, it consists in Jesus Christ his perfect obeying the
Commands of the Law, and his bearing the Penalty and Curse of it; and both
these are the Objects of Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. Precious Faith, (...). I would
render the words, In the Righteousness of God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ,
and so to note the Object of Faith. And this Expression may expound to us, why
this Righteousness is called the Righteousness of God; because the Person that
wrought it out was God and our Savior Jesus Christ. This is not an exacting,
an obliging, a menacing, or threatening Righteousness, that is sufficiently
declared in the Commands and Threatenings of the Law; but this is a
Righteousness wrought for us, not by us; a Righteousness dwelling in Christ,
but imputed to us; a Righteousness prepared and brought by Christ, and freely
given to us, Romans 5.17. The Law can tell us of a Debt of Righteousness that we
owe, but the Gospel acquaints us with a Gift of Righteousness that we may
receive. And it is the empty hand of Faith that receives this Gift, the hand of
a Leper, the hand of a Beggar, the weak, trembling, Palsy hand may receive a
Rich Gift, a Jewel of inestimable Price. And Christ's Blood is also set forth
as an Object of Faith. Romans 3.25. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation
through Faith in his Blood. The Blood of Jesus Christ is Reconciling,
Redeeming, Purchasing, Purging, and Purifying Blood, and therefore is a Noble
Object of Faith. And add to this the Arm of the Son of God to rescue us, subdue
us, and destroy Satan's Works out of us, Isa. 51.5. And we have a complete
Object of Faith: This Arm of his the Son of God reveals, and reaches out to us,
for our weak, fainting, heavy laden, and sinking Souls to lean on, Cant. 3.5.
This is an Arm that can Root up Satan's Tares, pull down all his strong Holds,
and break all his Bonds and Snares. And Jesus Christ is also the Messenger of
the Covenant, Malachy 3.1. He reveals to us a Covenant of Grace and Peace, a
Covenant that secures us from the Evils that we deserve, and dread; and so it
is all our Salvation, and promises all the Good we need; and so it is all that
we desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. It is ordered so as to meet with all our Objections,
and silence them; to quash our Fears, and to supply our Wants. The Son of God
commands us to believe his Gospel, Mark 1.15. To look to him for Salvation, to
fly to him as a City of Refuge, to get under his shadow, that he may protect
and secure us from the scorching Wrath of the Almighty.

2. The Son of God Preaches Repentance. Matthew. 4.17. Repent, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. God was then about to erect that Kingdom that was foretold,
Dan. 2.44. Daniel did Prophecy, That the God of Heaven would set up a Kingdom,
and so it might be said to be the Kingdom of Heaven. It is Heavenly in its
Original, Heaven is the Subjectmatter promised in the Gospel, it issues in the
Heavenly Life, and Happiness of those that believe. They shall be placed in
Christ's Throne, and feasted at his Table in Heaven, Rev. 3.21. Luke 22.29, 30.
Christ requires Men to Repent of their low, base, hard, reproachful thoughts of
God; to Repent of their Enmity, Whoredoms, and Rebellions against God. Does God
show himself as Love, 1 John 4.8. I, and shall not Men Repent of their Hatred
of God? Is he willing to lay aside his Just and Righteous Enmity against us?
And shall we not lay aside our wicked Enmity against him? Jesus Christ may very
reasonably require us to Repent, seeing God does change his Dispensations
toward us; and this may be called God's Repenting; he might have hardened his
Heart against us, but now his Bowels yearn toward us: he might have ascended a
Tribunal of Justice, and given Sentence on us; but he sits on a Throne of
Grace, and offers Mercy to us. He might have drawn his Flaming Sword to
destroy, but he stretches out his Golden Scepter to save. God curses sinners in
the Law, but blesses them as Believers in the Gospel: He Condemns in the Law,
but Justifies in the Gospel; he rejects and disinherits in the Law, but he
receives and Adopts in the Gospel: Does God Repent of the evil of Punishment,
and may he not well call Men to Repent of the evil of Sin? Is God's Punishing
Hand bound, and shall our Rebellious Hand be loose and at liberty to fight
against God? Jesus Christ calls us to deny our selves, Mat. 16.24. -- Man fell
from God into himself; intruded into his Throne, usurped his Rights, alienated
the Creatures from God, and turned them against him. Sinful Man is the
Voluntier, the Creatures the pressed Soldiers to fight against God; and shall
Man, so mean a Creature, make himself the Sovereign Lord, and the last end of
all the other Creatures? Shall Man, now become so filthy and deformed a
Creature, dote on himself? Shall he that is so hateful, inordinately love
himself? Shall he that is so poor, so empty, so vain a Creature, lift up, exalt
himself, and be proud of an imaginary, and merely conceited Excellency? And
has not the Lord Jesus to amazement denied himself? He that was Rich, for our
sakes became poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. He that was in the form of God, and thought it
no robbery to be equal with God, yet did empty himself of his Fullness, and cast
a Veil over all his own Glory; took on him the form of a Servant, Phil. 2.6, 7.
The Ocean became as it were a drop; he whose goings forth from the Father were
from Everlasting, yet but as yesterday came forth from Bethlehem, Micah 5.2.
The Ancient of Days became an Infant of Days; he that bears up all things, was
carried in Arms; he that knew no sin, was made sin, and God blessed for ever,
Romans 9.5. Was made a curse, Gal. 3.13. And has our Lord thus denied himself,
and shall Servants seek and please themselves? And Jesus Christ calls us to
take his Yoke, Matthew. 11.29. And did he not take a harder and heavier Yoke on
himself for us? He puts his Name into our Bond, and became a Surety for us; the
Debt was great he was to discharge, it was not to be paid off with Gold and
Silver, but with Blood; the Debt was not only possible, or probable, or likely
only to fall on him, but certainly to take hold of him, and to be required of
him: He was to be wounded with the Sword of his own Father, to bear the
heaviest Burden, to drink the most bitter Cup; this Lamb of God was to be
roasted by the hottest Fire, he was to sweat Blood, and to pour out his Soul to
the Death; and is it not reasonable now that the Son of God should require us
to renounce our depraved Wills, base Lusts, and vile Affections, and put our
Necks under his easy Yoke, bound on us by Cords of Love? Did our Lord submit
and obey, and shall we be proud, disobedient, and rebellious?

3. The Son of God preached Peace, Ephesians. 2.17. His Gospel is a Gospel of
Peace, Ephesians. 6.15. His Covenant a Covenant of Peace, Isa. 54.10. In the days
of his Flesh he preached Peace, Acts 10.36. And now he still publishes Peace
to humbled Sinners. This Peace the Son of God Preaches is a costly and
righteous Peace: His own Father did wage War with him, that he might make Peace
with us, Zech. 13.7. He called the Sword of his Justice to awake, smite, and
wound his own Son: The Sufferings, the Wounds of Christ were great and deep;
they came from, they were made by the awakened Sword of Justice. Our Sins had
made a wide Breach between God and us, and this Breach was filled by the dead
Body of Jesus Christ. Our Iniquities had kindled the Fire of God's Wrath, and
this Fire was quenched by the Blood of the Son of God. He made Peace for our
Souls, because he made Atonement for our Sins.

4. Jesus Christ preached Salvation, That we should be saved from the hands of
our Enemies, and from all that hated us, Luke 1.71. Sin and Death are our
Enemies, wicked Men and Satan hate us; here is a Salvation from Enemies, and
all that hate us. And this is a full and perfect Salvation; Christ saves from
sin, Matthew. 1.21. And he saves from wrath, Romans 5.9. And by his own Sufferings
he was delivered up to Death, Romans 8.32. that he might deliver us from the
Wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. last. He fell into the hands of God as an angry
Judge, that we might not fall into the Bottomless-pit. He went out into the
most dreadful Storm, that he might allay it, and free us from it. The Cup of
Wrath came to him, that the Cup of Salvation might come to us. Jesus Christ
could not have been a Shield to us, if he had not been pierced by the Arrows of
Divine Vengeance himself. He could not have been a shadow to us from the
burning, scorching Wrath of God, if he had not been himself exposed to it. That
Cloud that skreened Israel from the hottest Beams of the Sun, was exposed to
them; that Cloud did not feel the burning Beams of the Sun, but Jesus Christ
had a tender sense and feeling of the Wrath of God, that for our sakes he was
liable to.

5. Jesus Christ preached the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 4.23. He went about
Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and declaring the glad Tidings of the
Kingdom of God, Luke 8.1. Jesus Christ does not only Preach to us Salvation
from the greatest Evil, but also the Enjoyment of the highest Good. The
Apostle, 2 Timothy 2.10. says, The Elect shall obtain the Salvation that is in
Christ, together with everlasting Glory. As Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego
were not only called out of, and saved from the Fiery Furnace, but also
promoted and exalted to Honor and Rule in the Province of Babylon, Dan. 3.
last. So Believers are not only preserved from a Furnace of Fire, but also
called into a Glorious Kingdom; they do not only escape Ruin, but are advanced
to Reign. And this Kingdom is bequeathed by Jesus Christ, (...); the word, as
Budaeus In Comment. Graecae Linguae.
observes, is Verbum Testamentale, a word used by the Graecians in making their
Wills. Though in the account of wicked Men Jesus Christ died as a Malefactor,
yet in the Eye of God he died as a Testator; when he was robbed of his Liberty,
Garments, and Life, then he bequeathed a Kingdom to enrich us for ever. The
Eternal Inheritance is a Legacy of Christ's Testament, Heb. 9.15. Christ that
is Heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. takes us to be Coheirs with himself, Romans
8.17. Those that serve God shall Reign, Rev. 22.3.5. And those that are
Subjects to Christ shall wear a Glorious and Everlasting Crown, Rev. 2.10. As
the Blood of Christ keeps destroying Justice out, so it gives us boldness to
enter into the Heavenly Sanctuary, Heb. 10.19.

6. The Cross of Christ is preached, 1 Cor. 1.19.23. as the Meritorious cause
of all Good. Christ's Poverty enriches us, his Abasement Exalts us, his Infamy
is our Glory: He is a Priest of good things, Heb. 9.11. he merits and procures
them by his Sacrifice. The Death and Testament of Jesus Christ is the very
Foundation of our hopes of, and of our call to the Everlasting Inheritance,
Heb. 9.15. In the Civil Law Institut. lib. 2. Tit. 19. Sect. 6.
, he that is an Heir is said to be Vocatus ad haereditatem, and that by the
Testament of the Deceased. This much illustrates Spiritual things; Christ makes
a Testament, designs Heirs, and calls them in due time to what he has designed
for them. The Cross of Christ should be preached, and the Death of the Son of
God should be most valuable in our Eye, because this is the Foundation and
Confirmation of Christ's Testament. If he had not made a Will, and died to
confirm it, there had been no Heirs appointed, there had been no Inheritance
bequeathed, and there had been no ground to call any to the Kingdom and Glory
of God.

3. To whom did the Son of God Preach? I Answer, sometimes to more, sometimes
to fewer; before Abraham was called, and his Seed chosen and separated to be
God's Peculiar and only People, he preached more or less to all Mankind, if
they did not cut off, and cast themselves out by their Negligence and
Profaneness, as Cain's Posterity seemed to do. Afterward God made an Enclosure
of a Common, when he took Abraham, redeemed him from his Idolatry, and called
him from his Ignorance and Blindness. Since that, God has made a Common
instead of an Enclosure. We read of the Common Faith, Titus 1.4. And of the
Common Salvation, Jude's Epistle, Verse 3. After Christ's death the Hedges were
pulled Luke 14 23.
up, the Enclosure thrown open. Christ was to be a Light to the Gentiles, and
to be Gods Salvation to the ends of the Earth, Isa. 49.6. The Son of God is the
true Universal Bishop, 1 Pet. 2. last. The whole World is his Diocese. This
Husbandman goes forth to sow, Matthew. 13.3. and the large Field that he sows in
is the World. Matthew. 13.38. The Field is the World. This Noble Fisherman does
not Fish in the Rill of a Village, in the Rivulet of a City, in the River of
one Country, but in the Sea of the wide World. Mat. 13.47. The Kingdom of
Heaven is like unto a Net cast into the Sea. It is observable what the Son of
God says, Psalm. 40.9. I have preached Righteousness in the great Congregation.
What is this great Congregation? It is the Church made up of Jew and Gentile;
it is Men of all Nations: He did not come only to call the Jews, to raise up
Jacob, and to restore Israel, Isa. 49.4, 5. but he was to gather the Kingdoms
of the Earth, Psalm. 102.22. To gather all Nations, Jer. 3.17. To call and bring
home Sheep, that were not of the Fold of the Jewish Church, John 10.16. The Son
of God preached to the Heathen, Zech. 9.10. caused Barbarous People, and the
Inhabitants of Wildernesses to bow to his Scepter, and to submit to his
Authority. Psalm. 72.9. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him,
and his Enemies shall lick the dust; yea, the Kings and Great Ones of the World
shall fall down before him as Subjects and Worshippers. And the Son of God
preached with such Authority, Efficacy, and Success, that those that knew him
not before, did at his call run to him, Isa. 55.5. And fly as the Clouds, and
Doves to their windows, Isa. 60.8. As the Jews did formerly attend on the
Ministry of God's Prophets, Zech. 11.11. The poor of the Flock that waited on
me: So now the Gentiles should wait on the Son of God, listen to his Doctrine,
and receive his Law: Isa. 51.5. The Isles shall wait upon me. And Isa. 42.4.
The Isles shall wait for his Law. By the Isles we are to understand the Gentile
Nations that were beyond the Seas, and lived remote from the Land of Canaan;
even these should wait for the Rain of Christ's Doctrine, for the Dew of his
Word; they should submit to be Scholars when the Son of God did Teach, and
become his Disciples when he did call: As Isa. 2.2, 3. The Gentiles should
exhort one another, and say, Come, let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord's
House, for he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in them. This is
observable, that the Lord is not said to Teach alike every where, but in the
Mount of his House, that is, in his Church he Teaches; here it is Day when it
is Night with other Parts of the World. Darkness does cover the Earth, gross
darkness the People, but the Glory of the Lord arises on, and shines in the
Church, Isa. 60.1, 2, 3. Therefore the Gentiles are said to repair to the
Churches Light with a full Resolution to yield, submit, and obey what the Son
of God should teach as Truth, and dictate as Duty. I shall come now to the Use
of the Doctrine.

Use 1. The Son of God preached by Instruments, and has also preached
immediately in his own Person; this may inform us of the wonderful Grace and
Kindness of Jesus Christ: As a Priest he purchases Good Things for us, and as a
Prophet he Preaches them to us. He bought precious things dearly at God's
hands, and he proposes, and proffers them freely to our hands; he procured an
Inheritance, provided a Feast, and prepared Salvation, and he promulgates and
declares them to us. O, what a condescension is this! that the Son of God
should be a Herald to Proclaim Peace, and the King of Glory should deign to be
the Father's Ambassador, to treat with Rebels, and beseech Enemies to be
reconciled to him?

Use 2. Here is great matter of Consolation, that the Son of God Preaches as
truly by Instruments, as in his own Person: He can give Efficacy and Success to
his own Word. Our case were deplorable, yea, desperate, if Men only did Preach.
Could they open blind Eyes, unstop deaf Ears, quicken dead Souls? As Eglon's
Servants did wait till they were ashamed, for his rising and opening the
Parlour-door to them, Judges 3.23.25. But their waiting and expectation was in
vain, Ehud had killed Eglon the King of Moab, Judge. 3.21, 22, and a dead Man
could not open the Door to his waiting Servants without. So Sinners are dead in
Trespasses, and in the uncircumcision of their Flesh, Col. 2.13. And can such
arise and open the doors of their Hearts to the Son of God? Free Will ruined
Mankind when the Image of God was drawn on their Souls, and the Law of God was
written in their Hearts; and will Free Will now raise and recover Man again out
of his Ruins with the aids of Common Grace, when the poor Sinner is a Captive
under the Law of Sin and Death? This was the great Encouragement that Christ
gave his Apostles to go forth into the World and Teach all Nations, That he
was, and would be with them to the end of the World, Matthew. 28 19, 20. He that
had all Power both in Heaven and Earth, could make way for his own Word, and
cause it to be received and entertained. Ministers need the special Presence,
and the powerful Working of the Son of God with them. Weak and degenerate Man
does not only need an Auxilium sine quo non, such an aid, without which they
cannot believe or come to Christ, but an Auxilium cum quo, as Jansenius In his.
August.
excellently and truly distinguishes. We need such an aid as will certainly
produce the Effect: Such an aid as Free Will is Lord of, and is to Husband and
Improve, will not suffice for our Recovery; but such an aid of Grace we need as
will Lord it in our Will, and effectually incline it to yield and submit to
Christ. Ezekiel. 20.37. I will cause them to pass under the Rod, I will bring them
into the bond of the Covenant. Blessed is he whom thou choosest, and causest to
draw nigh, Psalm. 65.4. Christ can so influence the Will, as to undertake it
shall, and cause it to comply. Ars Coelestis Medici est Demonstrativae, as
Alvarez De Auxiliis gratiae.
truly asserts; it is in the Hand and Power of the Heavenly Physician to Cure
the Will of its Malignity, Enmity, and Rebellion. Surely he can Cure whom he
will, and when he will, else he were not infinitely Wise and Omnipotent. He
could undertake that the Gentiles, though deaf, Isa. 29.18. yea, though dead,
John 5.25. should hear his Voice, and be joined with his Flock, and gathered
into his Fold. God bids Moses to smite the Rock, and it should give forth Water
for the Thirsty Israelites to drink, Exodus 17 6. But would the Rock yield Water
if Moses alone had been there, and smitten it with his Arm? No, a struck Rock
would yield rather sparks of Fire, than floods of Water, had not the Lord stood
on the Rock, and caused it to cleave; and turned the Flint into a Fountain of
Waters, Psalm. 114. last. So in vain would Christ's Ministers smite on the Rocky
Hearts of Men to draw Penitential Tears from thence, if the Son of God does not
stand on this Rock, and so melt and dissolve it into Floods of Godly Sorrow. In
vain would our hands knock at the Door of Men's Hearts, if Jesus Christ had not
a Hand to open them. Acts 16.14. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia, and then
she attended to what Paul spoke. The Prophet Isaiah says, The Lord spoke to
him with a strong hand, and that he should not walk in the way of that People,
Isa. 8.11. The Lord speaks with a strong Hand when he levels Mountains of
Opposition, conquers Enmity, and effectually Plants the Word in the Heart. The
Bridegroom did not only give sweet Names to, and use strong Arguments with the
Church, why she should rise and open to him, but he put in his Hand by the hole
of the Door, he touched her Heart, he stirred her Affections, he moved her
Bowels toward him, and then she rose to open to him, Cant. 5.2.4, 5, 6. This
is a great Encouragement, that Ministers do not speak alone, but Christ speaks
in them, 2 Cor. 13.3. And they do not act alone, but the Lord Christ works with
them, Mark 16.20.

Use 3. Does the Son of God Preach as well by Instruments, as when he Preaches
immediately in his own Person? Then, 1. Be convinced, that whoever Preaches,
that you have to do with the Son of God; it is he that speaks to, and deals
with your Souls. Noah he treated with, and preached to the Old World; he is
styled, A Preacher of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.5. But in the Text Peter does
overlook him, and keep silence concerning him, and says, The Son of God went
by his Divine Nature, and preached to the old World that were disobedient in
the days of Noah: As the light of the Sun does obscure, darken, and hide the
Stars, so this Sun of Righteousness by his Glorious Light does darken all the
dim and little Candles he does make use of. O! how should this awe our Hearts,
and make us to tremble at the Word, that it is the Son of God that Preaches,
and dispenses it to us?

2. This should make us forward, willing, and ready to hear, because it is the
Son of God that Preaches: If Christ were now on Earth, and was to Preach at
such a place to day, and at another place to morrow, would not Men and Women
run, and flock to hear him? Should we not charge folly on, and impute sin to
those that would not lay aside Excuses, neglect their little petty Affairs and
Concerns in the World, to hear the Son of God Incarnate? And yet when the Son
of God Preaches by Instruments, how ingenious are Persons to invent Pretenses
to neglect and hinder themselves from hearing Christ speaking by his
Ambassadors? They will not, with the Eunuch Acts 8.38.
, cause the Chariot of their Trade and Worldly Business to stand still, to
attend on an Ordinance of God, and listen to the Word of Jesus Christ. The
Queen of the South came from the ends of the Earth to hear the Wisdom of
Solomon, Mat. 12.42. But how few now will step without their Doors to hear the
Son of God Preaching by his Servants? It is said in Prove. 8.33, 34. That they
are blessed that do hear Wisdom, watch daily at her Gates, and wait at the
Posts of her doors. Men should be as willing and forward Scholars, that come to
School before the Gates, or Doors of the School are opened; that stay and wait
there when the Doors will be opened, and they be let in to be instructed, and
learn. Thus should we run to, and wait at the Doors of Wisdom's House, where
she teaches School, and gives saving Instructions to ignorant Souls.

3. Does the Son of God Preach by his Instruments as truly as in his own
Person? O then, how should we attend and listen to the Word! Hearken, O
Daughter, incline thy ear, Psalm. 45.10. As those that are somewhat deaf, are
thick and hard of Hearing, how do they bow down their Ears, and put them near
to the Mouth of the Speaker? So we should with the greatest care attend to
Christ's Word, Isa. 55.2. We should hearken diligently to Ch^^st, and eat that
which is good. The Word that we hear is the Bread of Life, and the Food of our
Souls, and shall we not therefore listen to it? We ought to give the more
earnest heed to the things we hear, lest at any time we should let them slip,
(...); there seems to be an Allusion to Water-Glasses that were anciently used
to measure Time by; and as the Water in the upper Glass did drop into the
lower, till all was run out: So we are apt to lose the Word of God by our
negligent and careless hearing of it; so it leaks and flows away from us, and
we get no saving Benefit by it* We must hear with that Attention, as those that
have to do with the Prince of Life, with the Lord of Glory; as those that hear
Matters of Infinite Consequence, and everlasting Concernment. You must attend
as those that hear for their Souls and Eternity. Take heed of a sleepy Ear, a
drousie Mind, a Heart wandering and roving. Will you bring Bodies only into
God's Presence? Will you leave Carcasses before him, and let your Thoughts
stray, and your Minds run to the ends of the Earth? Would a condemned
Malefactor hear his Pardon read, as you hear Jesus Christ offering Grace and
Remission of Sins to your perishing Souls?

4. We should readily receive the Word of the Son of God, as the good Ground is
said to drink in the Rain and Dew that comes often upon it, Heb. 6.17. O, how
should you drink in the Word of Jesus Christ! O, how should it soak and sink
into your Hearts! That Doctrine that came out of the Bosom of the Father,
should it not be lodged in your Breasts, and be received into your Hearts? Job
22.22. Receive the Law from his mouth, and lay it up in thy heart. We must
entertain the Word, as coming immediately from the Mouth of Christ; and you
must let it into your Hearts. Psalm. 119.20. My Soul breaks for the longings
it has to thy righteous Judgments at all times. As the dry Ground so thirsts
after Rain, that it chappeth, cleaves, breaks, and with open mouth Petitions
Heaven for Rain. So our Souls should even break for the Longings we have after
the Rain of Christ's Word. Matthew. 11.12. The Kingdom of Heaven suffered
violence, and the violent took it by force; the Doctrine of a Spiritual and
Heavenly Kingdom was earnestly catched at. (...), the violent do catch at, and
snatch it away. If Bread were thrown among the Hungry, if Pieces of Gold and
Silver were thrown among the Poor, O how would starving and perishing Poor
catch at this Bread, and these Pieces of Gold and Silver? And should not we
more greedily, and earnestly catch at the Doctrine of Reconciliation, and the
Promise of Eternal Life?

5. We should yield, submit to, and obey Christ's Word: The Scripture speaks of
receiving Christ's Testimony, John 3.33, 34. and of receiving Christ, John
1.12. If we receive the Doctrine of Christ, we shall receive Christ himself; on
the other hand, we reject Jesus Christ, if we receive not his Word, John 12.48.
The Natural Man receives not, entertaineth not the things of the Spirit, 1
Cor. 2.14. (...). Though Men do exercise Hospitality, and take in Natural and
Moral Truth, yet how is the door of the Heart shut against those supernatural
Doctrines and Mysteries that the Spirit reveals? There is no room, no Lodging
or Entertainment for these wonderful and Divine Truths. But we must comply
with, and yield Obedience to these things that the Spirit makes known. We must
believe them, that they may work effectually in us, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. The Word of
the Gospel must be a Mold to shape and fashion our Souls. Romans 6.17. You have
obeyed from the heart that mold of Doctrine, into which ye were delivered; for
so it is in the Greek, (...). The Gospel of Christ is elegantly compared to a
Mold, into which the Hearts of Men as melted running Metal are delivered, that
they may be fashioned aright, and conformed to the Word; that they may be Holy,
Spiritual, and Heavenly, as the Word is. The Gospel must leven all the Powers
and Faculties of your Souls, Mat. 13.33. and so give them a new taste and
relish; as a Graft does meliorate, improve the Sap of the Stock, and makes it
to bring forth better Fruit, than ever it could otherwise do; so the Gospel
heightens, ennobles, and advances all the Faculties of the Soul to better and
more excellent Operations than otherwise they would rise to, or bring forth. We
must steadily look into this Spiritual Glass, and behold the Glory of Christ in
it, 2 Cor. 3. last. So by beholding the Glory of the Lord, we shall be changed
and transformed into the same Image. Yield therefore to Christ, and his Word;
let Christ erect his Tribunal in your Souls, suffer him to Judge your State,
Condemn your Sins, to pass Sentence on your Lusts; that when he has wounded,
he may heal you; when he has cast you down, he may raise you up. Isa. 2.4. It
it said of Christ, That he shall Judge among the Nations, and Rebuke many
People. Christ executes a Judicature by his Word; to this you are to stand, by
this you are to be sentenced to Life or Death. O therefore when you come to
hear, do not carp, cavil, and judge the Word, because it thwarts your Foolish
Notions, or crosses your vise Affections; but yield and submit to Christ,
Judging and Commanding of you by his Word.

I shall now proceed to give and press some Motives to urge you to listen to,
comply with, and obey the Son of God that Preaches to you.

1. It is Wisdom that Preaches to you: Prove. 1.20, 21, 22. The Son of God is
the Wisdom of God, and Wisdom is now come forth into our Nature, and cries
without in our Streets. Does not Wisdom deserve to be styled, A wonderful
Counselor, Isa. 9.6. who is so fit to advise us how to fly from the Wrath to
come, to escape the Corruption that is in the World through Lust? Who is so
meet to Teach and Direct us how we may come out of Debt, and get out of Prison,
as Infinite Wisdom? Who can so well Instruct us how our Consciences may be
purged, the foreskin of our Hearts cut off, our Diseases healed, our Guilt and
Filth purged away, as the Wisdom of God? Shall we exalt our vain Minds, and our
foolish Understandings in Opposition to the Counsels and Dictates of Wisdom? We
are entangled in a Wilderness of Woe, we are in a Labyrinth of Iniquity and
Guilt, and Wisdom only can teach us the right way to get out, and lead us to
the Glorious City of God above. We knew not how God should be Just, and yet
justify the Ungodly; how his Righteousness should be glorified in Punishing,
and yet his Mercy magnified in Pardoning; how Sin should meet with a Hell of
Punishments, and yet Sinners enjoy a Heaven of Blessedness. Yet the Son of God,
that is, Wisdom, does reconcile these things, and make them to consist with
each other.

2. The Son that Preaches is Love it self. Cant. 3.5. The Church charge the
Daughters of Jerusalem not to stir up, nor awake (...) that Love. Christ is
called by way of Excellency that Love, that admirable, that transcendent Love.
O, will you not listen to him that is Love it self? If he had not been Love it
self, he could never have stooped so low, have drank so bitter a Cup, have
endured so heavy a Burden, have exposed himself to so dreadful a Storm. He that
was Rich, became Poor, 2 Cor. 8.9. He that was the Holy One of God, and without
spot and blemish, was made Sin; he that was God over all, blessed for ever,
Romans 9.5. Was made a Curse, John 3.14. And in order to all this, he that made
all things, was made Flesh, John 1.1, 2.14. He showed himself to be Love, that
as a Head he would choose and take a Body below; and as a Bridegroom be related
to a Spouse on Earth. O, how wonderful is this! that Nobility should woo
Vileness and Baseness? That Riches should court Poverty? And Beauty be
enamoured with Deformity? O! is it not wonderful Love, that the Heir of all
things should make Addresses to those that had nothing, yea, were indeed worse
than nothing? For nothing cannot go Astray, cannot run a Whoring, cannot Rebel,
and Provoke; yet sinful Men and Women are guilty of all these. If the Son of
God were not Love, would he have dyed to open a Fountain to wash us, Zech. 13.1.
to provide a Remedy to heal us, Isa. 53.5. By his stripes are we healed? If he
had nor been Love, would he have been a Sacrifice, 1 Cor. 5.7, 8. that we might
have a Feast on his Altar? Heb. 13.10. If Jesus Christ were not Love, would he
cast his Net to draw us out of a dead Sea? Ezekiel. 47.10.
Would he speak to raise us out of a Spiritual Grave? John 5.25.
Would he call us out of a dark and doleful Prison? Isa. 49.9. If he were not
Love, would he Preach to raise Sinners out of their Ruins, and to build them up
as a House and Temple for God? 1 Pet. 2, 4, 5. Would he enclose and take us
within the Walls of the Spiritual Jerusalem? Jer. 31.38, 39, 40. Jer^miah
Prophesies of a Jerusalem that should be built to the Lord, that is, for him to
dwell in; the Name of this City is Jebovah Shammah, Ezekiel. 48. last. It is an
Honorable and Glorious Name, that Jehovah is there, that his special Presence
is to be found and enjoyed in this City. It is farther said, that this City
shall be Holy to the Lord; that is, consecrated and devoted to God, and that it
should never be plucked up, nor thrown down; the Rage of Men, the Fury, Policy,
and Power of Satan should never prevail against it. And this commends this City
yet the more to us, that it is greater, larger, and wider than the Earthly
Jerusalem. The Building-Line for the raising of this City should go forth, and
be stretched over the Hill Gareb. The Hill Gareb signify the Hill of the
Scabby, or of the Lepers. Such diseased Persons were to be shut out of the
Earthly Jerusalem, and it seems at least probable that such Lepers pitched
their Tents on this Hill: Yet the Hill Gareb should now be taken into the
Spiritual Jerusalem, besides, the Valley of dead Bodies, and of the Ashes was
to be enclosed within the Walls of this Spiritual Jerusalem. We Gentiles were
as Spiritual Lepers, Ulcers and Scabs were upon us, we had even Plague-sores on
our Hearts; we were dead in Sins and Trespasses, vile Dust, unclean Ashes. And
is not this most surprising Love, that Jesus Christ will Preach to gather all
Nations into this Holy and Spiritual Jerusalem? Jer. 3.17. Jerusalem shall be
called the Throne of the Lord, and all Nations shall be gathered unto it, to
the Name of the Lord, to Jerusalem, neither shall they walk any more after the
imagination of their evil hearts. Here is an excellent Exposition, what is
meant by building a Jerusalem with larger Walls, that the Gentiles should be
brought into, and joined with the Church, John 10.16. be in the same Fold, of
the same Flock, under the same great Shepherd: And that though the Gentiles
were in themselves unclean Creatures, as wild Beasts, and polluted creeping
things, Acts 10.11, 12, 13, 14. yet they should be transformed into Sheep, and
be wrapped up in the same Sheet of the Church with the Jews. And why does the Son
of God Preach but to build up Spiritual Jerusalem, to enlarge its Walls, and
increase the number of its Citizens? And what Love has the Son of God
expressed, that he Preaches to call the Gentiles, to make them Fellow-Citizens
with the Saints, Members of God's Family, and partakers of his Promise in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.19. and 3.6.

3. The Son of God is Lord of all, Acts 10.36. He sits on a Throne above, and
speaks from his Heavenly Glory, Heb. 12.25. 1. Will you not listen to him
speaking to you from Heaven, whose Blood must speak for you in Heaven, or else
you must perish everlastingly? Heb. 12.24. 2. Will you not regard his Voice,
that can call you out of the World when he pleases? If he says, Return, ye
Sons of men, Psalm. 90.3. we can continue in the Body, we can stay on Earth no
longer. If he speak the word, we must return to the Earth, and be crumbled to
Dust; his Command cannot be gainsaid, or contradicted. 3. Will you not listen
to him, that can, and will call you out of your Graves at the last day? John
5.28, 29. All that are in their Graves, shall hear his voice, and come forth.
Job says to God, Thou will call, and I will answer, thou will have a desire to
the work of thy hands, Job 14.13.15. O, what Authority and Power has the Son
of God, that can make the dead to hear and obey? 4. Will you not listen to him
that will give the last and perfecting call to Saints? Mat. 25.34. Come, ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World. How much is it our Interest to regard, believe, and obey him, who
can at the last day call us into his Eternal Kingdom and Glory?

4. Will you not listen to the Son of God, when his Word is the Rule of
Judgment, and the very Ground of the Eternal Sentence of Men and Women? Christ
says, The Word that I have spoken shall Judge you at the last day, John 12.49.
Men shall be sentenced to Life or Death, be adjudged to Heaven or Hell, as they
receive or reject Christ's Word.

5. Those that Receive not Christ's Word, and Reject his Person, have one that
will Judge them, John 12.48. The Father will call such to a strict Account,
will enter into Judgment with them, and execute Vengeance on them. Moses did
Prophecy of Christ, Deuteronomy. 15.18, 19. That God would raise up a Prophet like to
him. And God says, That he would put his words into his mouth, and he shall
speak all that I command him; and it shall come to pass, that whosoever will
not hearken unto my words, which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it
of him. God will require an Account of his Unbelief and Disobedience, and will
requite him for it. Christ seems to have a respect to these very words, when he
says, He that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that will
Judge him. Will you not dread the Impartial and Righteous Judgment of God, and
fear Punishment from his Hand?

6. Consider the Matter that Christ Preaches. He speaks excellent things,
Prove. 8.6. Wonderful things. Psalm. 119.18. Open thou my Eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy Law. The Apostles filled with Christ's Spirit, did
Preach the Mighty Works of God, Acts 2.11.

Jesus did Preach the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 13.11. He
revealed the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 11. And did declare the Wisdom of
God hid in a Mystery, 1 Cor. 2.7. and manifest the Name of the Father, John
17.6.26. There is a Name of the Father, that the World would never, could never
have known, had not the Son declared it. The Law declares, That God loves
Righteousness, and has a delight in Righteous Men; and that he will do good to
those that be good. But if Men break his Laws, cast off his Yoke, reject his
Authority, the Law denounces Wrath and Vengeance, threatens Sinners with
Perdition and Destruction. Those that rob God of his Honor and Glory, must
make Restitution to him by their Eternal Sufferings and Misery. The Light of
Nature, or the Law of God gives us no. Account that God has Grace to exercise
toward the underserving, yea, ill deserving; that he has any Pity to extend
to those that have provoked his Anger, and affronted his Infinite Majesty. This
is a great Secret, that God will stretch out his Hand from Heaven to raise up
fallen Man; that he will provide a Laver to wash foul and filthy Sinners in,
that he will out off his own Plea against Offenders, sheath his Sword, and
provide a Satisfaction for his own Justice, and pay himself out of the Blood of
his own Son. And how deep a Mystery is this, that the God that might have
required us to be Sacrifices to his Revenging Justice, should call his own Son
to make his Soul an Offering, and lay down his Life for Sinners? Isa. 53.10.
John 10.18. That he should be just in bruising and punishing Christ, that he
might be just in justifying us, in healing our Wounds, and purging our
Consciences. It is this gracious, sweet, precious Name of God that is the
Subject Matter of Christ's Preaching; he declares it, that the Love wherewith
God loves Christ, may be in us, and he in us, John 17. last. O, how welcome
should this Discovery of the Father be to us? O, how greatly should it affect
and rejoice our Souls? This Declaration of the Name of God is, 1. As a
retreshing Rain, and reviving Dew to the dry and parched World. Psalm. 72.6. He
shall come down as Rain on the mown Grass, as showers that water the Earth; the
Church, with respect to the Doctrine of the Gospel dispensed by her; As a Dew
from the Lord, as the showers upon the Grass, M^cah 5 7. 2. This Declaration of
the Name of God is as comfortable, chearing, directing Light to the dark World.
Isa. 60.1, 2, 3. Though darkness does cover the Earth, gross ignorance does
overspread the People, yet the Lord does arise on the Church, and his Glory is
seen on her. The Grace of God to perishing Sinners is his Glory; and when his
Name is declared as Gracious and Merciful, then his Glory is declared to the
World, Isa. 66.18, 19. In knowing God's Name, Men do see his Glory; this makes
it Day with the Church, when it is Night with the World.

3. It is this Name of God that is as a sweet Persume to refresh and revive
fainting Sinners. 2 Cor. 2.14. Thanks be to God, which always causes us to
triumph in Christ, and makes manifest the savor of his knowledge by us in
every place. The Apostle compares the Gospel, the Knowledge of God in Christ to
a sweet Smell, to a strong Perfume. He further tells us, that he did overcome
Sinners, and Triumph in the World by burning this Incense, by spreading the
smell of this Persume. O, how strange and wonderful a Victory is this, that is
got by pouring out the Name of Christ as an Ointment? Cant. 1.3. By declaring
the Glorious Grace of God to lost Man. Yet this was the way that the World was
conquered, and the Heathen Gentiles subdued to the Church. Psalm. 48.3. He shall
subdue the People under us; (...) the word properly signifies to speak from
(...), and so to subdue by speaking. Thus the Apostle did Conquer, and Triumph
by speaking forth the Glorious Grace of God, by shedding abroad the sweet
Savor of his Knowledge, by discovering how willing God is to be reconciled to
Enemies, and receive Prodigals.

4. This Discovery of God is the very Bread and Food of our Souls; Isa. 55.2.
Hearken diligently unto me, and eat you that which is good, and let your Soul
delight in fatness. The best things of this World without the Favor of God,
and an Interest in Christ, will be rather hurtful than good to us. But if we
hearken unto Christ, we shall eat that which is good indeed. The Benefits of
Christ are a Spiritual Good, a Satisfying Good, an Eternal Good, and our Souls
may here delight themselves in Fatness: Here are not only Fat things, Isa.
25.6. but Fatness it self; not only Good things, but Goodness it self. Psalm.
65.4. We shall be satisfied with the Goodness of thy House, even of thy Holy
Temple. Your Souls will have nothing to live upon, and to sustain themselves
with, if you listen not to Jesus Christ; there is no Bread of Life, no Water of
Life, but in Jesus Christ. Famine Reigns abroad in the World, and those that
are strangers to Jesus Christ will perish with Thirst.

2. Jesus Christ Preaches these Great and Excellent Things very plainly. 2
Cor. 3.12, 13. We use great plainness of speech, and not as Moses, that put a
Veil over his face. There is great Luster and Light in the
Gospel-dispensations, So that with open face we may behold the Glory of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. If the Gospel be hid from us, the Veil is not on Christ's
Face, but on our Hearts, 2 Cor. 3.15. The Veil before the most Holy Place is
rent, Life and Immortality is brought to light. We are plainly taught in what
Name we must be justified 1 Cor. 6.11. John 16.23.26.
, and call upon God We must be justified and Pray in Christ's Name.
; on what Arm we must trust, Isa. 51.4. In what Beloved we must be accepted,
Ephesians. 1.6. In whose Blood we must wash our Robes white, Rev. 7.14. In what
Seed we must be blessed, Gal. 3.8. If Men are now Ignorant, it is because they
shut their Eyes, love Darkness, and hate the John 3.19, 20.
Light.

3. Jesus Christ Preaches these Great and Excellent Things as in a great
measure come, and now actually exhibited to us. The Patriarchs saw the Promises
afar off, but the Watchmen of the Gospel are said to see Eye to Eye, Isa. 52.8.
They behold the things that were future, now to be accomplished, come, and
performed. The Law and the Prophets Prophesied until John, Matthew. 11.13. They
spoke of Christ, and his Kingdom as future things; but now since that time the
Kingdom of God is preached, and every Man presses into it, Luke 16.16. Now the
Kingdom of God is come, is set up; the Messiah has passed through, and laid
aside the form of a Servant, and has put on the Majesty and Form of a Lord;
the low state of the Messiah, his Humiliation is past, he is entered into his
Glory; these Glad Tidings are now published to us, that our God who served
below, now Reigns above, Isa. 52.7.

4. The Son of God Preaches the most Excellent Things as sure Mercies, and to
be obtained in a Righteous way; Isa. 55.3. I will give you the sure Mercies of
David; that is, of the Messiah, that was not only the Son of David, but also
Typified and shadowed out by him. And these Mercies are said to be sure,
because Jesus Christ is dead, and risen again, and can dye no more, Acts 13.34,
35. Lives to Intercede for his Purchase, and to execute his Testament. The Son
of God has taken a Sure, a Just, and Righteous way to impart and communicate
Spiritual Benefits to us: They come not as Gifts from a Living Person, but as
Legacies from a Dying, yea, Dead Person. The Son of God dyed in our Nature to
Ratify and Confirm his own Testament, and to make it irrevocable. If a Man's
Testament be established by his Death, there is no disannulling of it, or
adding to it, Gal. 3.15. Christ's Testament cannot be frustrated, it must be
executed: This makes the greatest Spiritual Benefits, yea, the Eternal
Inheritance sure to us, that they come to us in a Righteous way. Jesus Christ
bequeaths nothing but what he purchased by his own Blood. The Lord Jesus is the
Mediator of the New Testament, Heb. 9.15. not only as he dyed to Ratify it,
but as he lives, and continually Intercedes with the Father in Heaven for the
fulfilling and executing of his Testament. And will you not listen to the Son
of God, as opening, promulgating, and declaring his own Testament, and the
Riches and Fullness of it? Other Men's Testaments do make Heirs, but they cannot
make Children: But in the Testament of Christ a new Heart, a new Spirit, and
the Holy Ghost to sanctify and quicken, are bequeathed, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Those
that are savingly renewed, are regenerated by virtue of this Promise, and so
are styled, The Children of Promise, Gal. 4.28. We Brethren, as Isaac was, are
Children of Promise, as Isaac was born by virtue of God's Promise; Romans 9.9. At
this time will I come, and Sarah shall have a Son. So Saints now are Children
of Promise, they are born again by virtue of this Promise; A new Heart will I
give to them, a new Spirit will I put into them, Ezekiel. 36.26. And as all the
Grace we have is from the Womb of the Promise, so all the Glory we hope for is
by the Promise; and therefore Believers are also styled, The Heirs of Promise,
Heb. 6.17, 18. O, how is Christ's Testament ordered! first, to make us
Children, and then to make us Heirs. First, to make us Holy, and then to make
us Happy. And will you not believe on, and submit to the Son of God, that
Preaches his own Testament? First, to impart to us a Divine Nature, and then
to communicate to us an Eternal Kingdom, an Everlasting Glory.

I shall proceed to Propose a few Directions, and so conclude my Discourse on
the first Doctrine.

1. If the Son of God Preaches as well, and as truly by Instruments, as in his
own Person immediately, then believe it is the Voice of the Son of God that
sounds in your Ears; and believe soundly and deeply what he Preaches. 1.
Believe it is the Voice of the Son of God that you hear; Heb. 3.7. To day if
you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. There is not only the Voice of
Ministers, and Ambassadors, but also the Voice of the King of Glory. Christ
draws near, and comes with them; Ephesians. 2.17. He came and preached Peace to you
that were afar off. And Jesus Christ speaks in them, 2 Cor. 13.3.

2. Believe soundly and sincerely what Christ Preaches; Romans 10.10. With the
heart Man believes unto Righteousness. Acts 8.37. If thou believe with all
thy heart. You should believe so as to be sure, and fully persuaded in your own
Minds; John 6.69. We believe, and are sure that thou art Christ, the Son of the
Living God. Let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith,
Heb. 10.22. We may confidently rely on the Word, and we may boldly lean on the
Arm of the Son of God. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy
1.15. It is a Faithful Saying, the Understanding may acquiesce in it; and it is
worthy of all Acceptance, therefore the Will may embrace it.

2. Make Particular Application of Christ's Word and Doctrine to your own
Souls. Account that Christ as truly Addresseth himself to you, as if he did
from Heaven call you by Name, and apply himself to you; John 10.3. He calls
his own Sheep by Name. Jesus Christ with an effectual Call makes Persons to
know that he speaks as expressly to them, as if he did from Heaven mention their
very Names. Do not divert or turn off the Word to others. Do not think that a
Portion is divided to them, but not to thee; that their Conditions are pointed
at, their Sins reproved, but not thine. As Pictures in a Room do seem to look
on every Person, whose Eye is fixed on them. So we should Account, that the
Word of the Son of God has a particular Aspect on us, that it directs our
Hearts into the Love of God, that it guides our Feet into the ways of Peace; it
speaks to all that hear it. We should account that what is written, is written
for our Learning; and what is spoken, is spoken for our Practice.

3. Obey the Son of God, hear his voice presently, Heb. 3.7. To day if you will
hear his voice harden not your Hearts; excuses, delays will harden the Heart;
Audience and Obedience should be presently yielded and rendered Jesus Christ; we
must not put off, adjourn our Obedience to a longer day, or to years hereafter
to come; David says, He considered his ways, and turned his Feet to God's
Testimonies, he made have, and delayed not to keep his Commandments, Psalm.
119.59, 60. The Gentiles when they were Enlightened, Convinced, Converted, they
Exhort, they Encourage one another, Zech. 8.21. the Inhabitants of one City
shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to Pray before the Lord, and to
seek the Lord of Hosts: I will go also; those that are sensible of their Duty
and Danger, cannot defer, or put off the great concernment of their Souls any
longer Isa. 49.17. it is said to Zion, Thy Children shall make have, that is,
to join themselves to Christ and his Church: This have is set down by many
Similitudes in Scripture; it is said, The Gentiles should as waters Flow to the
Mountain of the Lords House, Isa. 2.23. Tho Waters they do run downwards
naturally, yet the Nature and motion of the Heathen Nations should be so
changed, that they should run upwards, ascend the holy Hill of God, the Nations
should flow unto it.

2. It is said, The Gentiles should run to Jesus Christ, Isa. 5.55. Behold thou
shall call a Nation that thou know not, and Nations that knew not thee shall
run unto thee because of the Lord thy God, and for the Holy one of Israel, for
he has Glorified thee.

3. It is said, that the Converted Gentiles should fly to the Church, Isa 60.8.
Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves to their Windows: How
swiftly do the Clouds move, when driven by the Wind? How swiftly do the Doves
fly when pursued by the Hawk, or any other Bird of prey; so convinced, and
awakened Spirits will fly from the wrath that is to come, and will fly for
refuge to take hold of the hope set before them, Matt. 3.7. Heb. 6.18. Are your
Souls sick? Are your wounds bleeding? Are your Consciences burdened? Are your
Hearts broken? And can you delay turning to Jesus Christ presently? O! consider
how great that Person is that speaks to you, it is the Prince of Life, the King
of Glory, and is he to be shut out, or put off till a longer time. O! think how
great matters Jesus Christ speaks, and treats about; is Reconciliation to God,
espousals to Christ, cutting off the Entail of the Curse, reversing the
Sentence of Death, and settling upon you an eternal Inheritance, small matters;
Are they unnecessary, or inconsiderable things, that you should delay to mind
them till hereafter? Is it not great mercy that the Son of God will open his
Mouth? He might have kept silence toward us, as he does to many Nations of the
World at this day. Why should we be Visited, when others are passed by, and
neglected? Why should the Son of God come to, and knock at our Doors, when he
is far off from others, and makes no Address to them? And will you slight, and
abuse Christ's Kindness? Will you break off the Treaty of Peace, and reject the
offers of Mercy? If you delay, Jesus Christ may withdraw, he may utterly depart
from you, the Bridegroom may no more woo you; the Physician may no more offer
his Help to you, but suffer you to die of your Diseases; the great Shepherd may
break his Staff of Beauty, take no more care of you, but leave you to be a prey
to Satan that roaring Lion. O! consider if you delay, and put Christ off,
Sickness may suddenly seize you, Death may in a moment snatch you away, your
Flower may soon Fade, your Lamp of Life be quickly blown out, an Apoplexy may
surprise you, your Reason may be Clouded, your Understanding darkened, your
Speech may fail you, some sudden accident (that you never thought of) may cut
off your Life in an instant; will not your delays then be pernicious and fatal
to you? What then will become of all your Promises, and all your purposes to
Believe, Repent, and turn to God? Will not Satan then catch away the Soul to
Hell? Will you not then fall into the Hands of the Living God? Will you not be
the objects of his Eternal Frowns and Fury? Will you not then too late
understand your Folly and Madness in putting off Jesus Christ? O! will not
Conscience then twit, upbraid, reproach you? what did you think it was too soon
to be Cured of your Diseases? Was it too soon to have your Bonds, and Satan's
snares broken? Was it too soon to be made wise? Too soon to be set at liberty?
Too soon to be Pardoned? Too soon to return from your wanderings, and get into
the way of Salvation and Eternal Life? How did Satan blind your Eyes? How did
Sin charm and bewitch your Souls? You that once thought it too soon, do now
understand and feel that it is too late: It is a very observable Sentence in
Cyprian, Sero credunt in aeternam paenam, Contra Demetr.
qui noluerunt credere ad aeternam vitam. Those too late will believe the truth
of Gods word to their Eternal Punishment, who would not timely believe to their
Eternal Life; they that would not see their Danger, shall see their
Destruction: They that would not fear the Threatenings of Gods Mouth, shall feel
the Blows of his Hand, Is it not better to hear now the sweet noise of the
Bridegroom, than hereafter to hear the terrible Voice of an Angry and
Condemning Judge. Take heed that you be not Cheated and Beguiled by Satan; he
tells thee thou may listen to Christ, and Repent hereafter; but his design is
to harden thy Heart, and that thou shall never listen, or turn to Christ. As
the Levite rose early to go his Journey, Judges 19.5. but his Father in Law
encouraged him to stay, and comfort his Heart with a morsel of Bread, and
afterward he should go his way; so Satan, and sin are first modest in their
Temptations, and Suggestions; They tell sinners they need not rise early, and
soon set out in the way to Heaven? That it is best first to Comfort their
Hearts with the Pleasures and Enjoyments of the World: after they have Eaten a
Morsel, and Drunk a Draught of Stolen Waters, they may go on in their way to
another World, and as the Levites Father in Law that first asked but for the
Morning, afterward desires the whole day, and would have the Levite tarry all
Night, and so he did; even thus Sin and Satan deal with wicked men after they
have prevailed with them to mis-spend, and vainly Consume the Morning of their
Lives, they afterward insinnate, desire and demand the whole Day of Life to be
spent in Estrangement from God, in the service of vile Affections and base
Lusts; so that the Night of Death comes on them, and they drop down into the
bottomless Pit; The Levite, tho he did not depart and journey one day, yet he
might Travel away the next; but when our one day of Life is past, and spent in
sin, there is no day of Life or Grace that will succeed to amend our Folly, or
repair our loss; Psalm. 49.19.
careless and negligent sinners go to the Generation of their ungodly Fathers,
they that never see the Light; there will be a morning for Judgment and
Condemnation, but none for Repentance; Delays are exceeding dangerous; the
Heart it more hardened, Heb. 3.13.
the old Man is more corrupted, Ephesians. 4.22. As a Dead Body does every day grow
worse, more corrupt, and putrified; even so the old Man in us does more corrupt
in its desires, and affections; it is great Policy in a Captain to hold an
Enemy in a Treaty about a Surrender, while he does Portify his Garrison; so it
is a deep Policy of Satan to put thee on Fair Promises, and faint purposes of
yiedling to Jesus Christ, while thy Heart is more Fortified with prejudice and
enmity against God, and Christ; O! therefore soon stretch out thy Hands to
Christ, Psalm. 68.31. Ethiopia shall soon stretch out her hands to God; in the
Hebrew it is, shall make her Hands run to God: O! that thy Hands may run to
Christ, to receive precious Gifts from him, and to offer up a Living Sacrifice
to him.

The Second Part of a Discourse on 1 Pet. 3.19.
The Second Doctrine that the last words of the Text afford us is this.

2. Doct. The spirits of Wicked Men when they go out of the Body, are confined
to, and shut up in Gods Prison.

THree things here are to be spoken to, and insisted on. 1. That God has 2
Prison 2. That the Souls of wicked Men when they go out of the Body, shall be
cast into this Prison. 3. I shall show how Dreadful and Terrible this Prison is.

1. That God has a Prison. Earthly Princes have places of Durance and
Restraint for such as offend them, and Transgress their Laws, Genesis 1.2, 3. two
of the Officers of Pharaoh offended the King of Egypt; their Lord was wroth
with them, and expresses his Displeasure by putting them in Prison; And is it
not highly reasonable and just that the King of Heaven and Earth should have
his Prison to confine Transgressors to, and to punish delinquents in? Should
Sinners that do their own wills, fulfill the Devils Lusts, Rebel against Gods
Laws, still be at liberty to Contract more Guilt, and provoke more wrath? if
Iniquity were for ever joined with Impu^ity, would not the Majesty of God be
still affronted, his Laws trod under foot, his threatenings derided and scorned?
Tho sinners own God in word, and cannot utterly race and extirpate the Notion
of a Divine Being out of their Souls, yet they hold it in unrighteousness, Romans
1.18. They are as Dark Lanterns, to shut in, and hide the Light of this great
Truth; they unjustly Imprison, Hold and Detain it; they will not suffer it to
have Authority in their Consciences; they will not permit it to reign in their
Souls, to control their Lusts, to restrain their Vices, to check their sins;
and may not God righteously shut up those Spirits of Men, that have so
unrighteously imprisoned, bound, held under that great and primary Truth, that
there is a God, and have lived as if there were none, as if there were no
Omnisciency to observe their Sins, no Holy, Just Being to Loath and hate them,
no Omnipotent Arm to Punish them: God has several Attributes to Display his
Glory; as he has a Palace to Magnify his Mercy in, so he has a Prison to
Glorify his Justice in; the Righteous Judge of the whole World has several
sorts of Persons to deal with, he has Friends that he will shine on, and
Enemies that his wrath will burn against to all Eternity; he has Children that
he will Portion, and Enemies that he will Punish; as he will entertain and
Feast his Sons and Daughters at the Table of Mercy in his Palace, so he will
Treat Satan's Seed at the Table of Justice in his Prison; all the World shall be
Gods Guests, he will set out their Food, he will proportion and appoint their
Cup; they that have not their Inheritance in God, shall yet have their portion
from him; The Lord is the Portion of my Inheritance, and of my Cup; this is the
sweet Language of a Saint, Psalm: 16.5. but this is the terrible Language of the
Scripture concerning Sinners, Job 31.2. What Portion of God is there from
above? And what inheritance of the Almighty from on high? Is not Destruction to
the Wicked? And a strong punishment to the Workers of Iniquity? God will
magnify his Righteousness in feeding Sinners with the Fruits of their own ways,
and doings, and in adjudging them to their proper place, Acts 1.25. Judas is
said to go to his own place; the place his Sins had bespoken, provided and
prepared for him; This place may well be called a Prison to sinners. For, 1.
Sinners are made to be what they would not be; For them to gratify sinful
Self-Love, was here their great sin, and for God highly to cross Self-Love
there, will be their Eternal Punshment. Sinners shall be the Foot stool of an
Angry God, Psalm. 110.1. They shall be the mark of Revenging Justice, they shall
be Vessels of wrath, and Vessels for Dishonor, Romans 9.21, 22. How dreadful is
this for God to Illustrate his Justice, and Magnify his Wrath in their Eternal
Misery? How Terrible is it for God to get him Honor, by Wounding Eternally the
Heads and Hearts of Sinners, to Exalt himself by throwing them down into the
bottomless Pit, in striking and suppressing them, in consuming and preserving
them at once, to continue a bare stock of being, that he may Graft Eternal
Torments on? Will not this be exceedingly dishonorable, and infamous to
Creatures, that they did not pay God any Rent, Service or Obedience, but
necessitated their great Landlord to Distrain on them, and make distress, and
take up their Souls and Bodies both in Execution? Will not this be an
Everlasting reproach, that they Robbed God of his Honor and Glory, and obliged
him to make Reprizals on them? That they would give him no Glory as they ought,
Jer. 13.16. but left God to get Honor on them as he could. So God says, He
would get him Honor on 'Pharoah, and on his Host, Exodus 14.17.

2. Sinners shall be where they would not be, even in a bottomless Pit, in a
Lake of Fire and Brimstone, and under outer Darkness, Rev. 20.1, 3, 10. The
state of the Damned may well be called a Bottomless Pit, they cannot in their
Thoughts reach to, or by their longest Line of Reason Fathom the bottom of this
Pit; they cannot say, they are arrived at the utmost that God can do against
them, or they can suffer from him? As in Heaven there will still be fresh
Visions of Glory, so in Hell there will still be new Scenes of Misery; and how
Terrible is this Expression, a Lake of Fire? A Lake that will never Ebb, never
sink, never dry away; this Lake will be as broad, as deep, as hot and scorching
to Eternity, as it was the first moment sinners were cast into it.

3. Sinners shall be deprived of what they would possess and enjoy, what God
threatens Babylon with shall be fulfilled to them, and executed on them, Rev.
19.14. All the things that their Souls Lusted after, shall depart from them;
all that is delicate and dainty shall depart from them, and they shall find
them no more for ever; all the Lamps whereby they did drive away the Darkness
and Terror of their Night, shall be put out, their Cisterns shall be broken,
their Paradise of Earthly Pleasures and Delights shall be utterly and eternally
blasted, the Breasts of Creatures shall be withdrawn from their Mouths, and all
their Idols for ever snatched out of their Arms, a great part of their Hell
shall be drawn out of, and from that which once was their Heaven; this shall
lash and scourge their Souls, to think of the Mercies they enjoyed, and abused;
to remember the good things that they received from God, perverted, and turned
against God; that they fed their Lusts with what should have fuelled their
Love; those Gifts enticed their Hearts from God, which should have drawn them
to him. Dives in Hell complained of the pain of Sense, but has no relief;
Abraham minds him of the pain of Loss, and so augments his misery, Luke 16.24,
25. Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy Life time receivedst thy good
things; as if Abraham should say, Thou had all those good things which thou
did esteem and value, that thou did desire and delight in, that thou did
love and dote on; thou had thy choice, thou did possess the Prize thou
did run for; but now thy Days of Pleasure are at an end, thy Sun of
Prosperity is set; Thou have no wrong, yea, God is highly Righteous in his
Dispensations toward thee; he withholds spiritual and eternal Mercies, that
thou did never desire, but always despise, and snarches away Temporal
Enjoyment, which thou did ever Idolize.

4. Sinners shall feel, suffer, endure what they Loath, and Abhor; Job
complains that the things that his Soul refused to touch, were his sorrowful
meat, Job 6.7. So the wicked in Hell may renew, and take up this doleful
complaint, that they must feed on that Wormwood and Gall, that they abhor, and
drink the Wine of the wrath of God, that they loath, that Food is provided for
them, that they have the greatest aversation from; that Cup is reached out to
them, that they have the greatest detestation of; they shall be filled with
their own ways, Prove. 14.14. Eat the Fruit of their own doings, and Drink the
Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty, Job 21.20. Rev. 14.10. All deadly Poisons,
all fatal Ingredients shall be tempered together, and meet in their Cup,
containing Red Wine, and full of Mixture, Psalm. 75.8. All the Evils that may
Enebriate, intoxicate and overcome the Spirits of Sinners, are to be found in
this Cup; yet in another Sense, it is Wine without Mixture, Rev. 14.10. Not any
Tincture, not any drop of Mercy, but it is pure Wrath; these Evils will be so
bitter, so grievous, so terrible, that persons will be a burden to themselves,
Job 7.20. When God made Job his mark, and shot the Arrows of Temporal Evils
against him, he complains he was a burden to himself; How then will sinners be
a burden to themselves, when the Arrows of the Almighty shall Pierce them, when
the Poison of them shall drink up their Spirits; when the Terrors of God shall
set themselves in Battle array against them, Job 6.4. If Job did loath Life
because it was so much imbittered with Temporal Afflictions, Job 7.16. How much
more shall sinners in Hell loath their own being, when embittered with Eternal
Evils?

5. Hell may well be called a Prison, because that men shall be confined at
home, and shall be imprisoned in the presence of an Angry Revenging God.

1. Sinners shall be shut up in themselves. It is the great sin of the Children
of Men, that they stray, wander from themselves, dwell continually abroad; the
Prodigal, when he went into a far Country, he did not only depart from his
Father, but also wander from himself: The first step toward his Recovery was
to come to himself, Luke 15.13, 14, 17. So it will be the Sinners Punishment to
dwell at home, to be confined to himself, to have his Thoughts Eternally fixed
on his own Folly and Iniquity, to consider of the wrong steps he took, the
corrupt fruit he brought forth, the debts he contracted, the seeds of misery he
sowed, the Eternal Wrath he provoked, that tho he was admonished of his sin,
and warned of his danger; yet he would not be diverted, he could not be
reclaimed; that he would not give Audience to his Maker, yet listened to his
Enemy; that the Door of his Heart was shut against Christ, yet open to Satan
and the World. Sometimes Magistrates do Command Offenders to keep their own
homes, and Imprison them in their own Houses, that they are not to step out, or
stir abroad: Even so the Great and Just God will shut up sinners in themselves;
will turn their Eyes inward, and will fix their Thoughts on their shameful
Nakedness, their Monstrous Ugliness, their loathsome Deformity; God threatens
the House of Israel, that they should take their Inheritance in themselves,
Ezekiel. 22.26. this will be Eminently and Signally fulfilled in another World;
then Sinners shall take their Inheritance in themselves, their own ways and
doings shall procure the greatest evils to them; their own backslidings shall
reprove them; their own wickedness shall lash them to Eternity; their
Accusations, their Upbraidings, their Reproaches shall be from within; their
own Consciences shall fly in their Faces, charge their Sins, bind their
Iniquities on them; Condemn them for their Ingratitude, and Enmity against God.
The Lord tells sinners, He will reprove them, and set their Iniquities in order
before them, Psalm. 50.21. This is a dreadful word, I will set in order before
you, (...), the word has two Senses in the Old Testament, that are pertinent
in this place, to set in order a Cause that is to be Argued, or Pleaded, Job
13.18. Behold now I have ordered my Cause; So God will order his Cause when he
is to Accuse, and Plead against Sinners; He will detect their Enmities, rip up
their Abomination, exactly order all matters that Evidence their Guilt, that
may shut their Mouths, and shame their Faces. 2. The word Signifies to order a
Battle, 2 Samuel 10.9, 10. Joab did put his Army in Array, every Troop and Company
has their ground appointed, every Soldier his place fixed in which he is to
Fight; It is dreadful when God draws together Troops of Childish Sins, Legions
of Youthful Lusts, Brigades or Battalians of Transgressions committed in Riper
Years, when God will set all these in Battle Array against the Soul, and will
Command them all to give a fierce onset, a Furious Charge on it: O! How
terrible will it be when God shall at several times present them to View, and
bring them to the remembrance of a Guilty Creature, when they shall be so set
in order, that the sinner cannot but behold them, cannot but think on them,
cannot turn away his Eye from this Formidable, and dreadful Host of his
Iniquities; the Eye of the Soul shall be opened, and never close again; The
Sinner shall awake, and never doze, never be stupefied, never sleep again, but
shall Eternally dwell upon the Sight, and sense of what he has done against,
and deserved from God.

2. Sinners shall be imprisoned in the presence of an angry God. This may seem
strange, that God's Presence should be Hell to the Damned, that is Heaven to
the Blessed; yet thus it shall be: It is threatened as a dreadful Evil to
Zedekiah, that his Eyes should behold the Eyes of the King of Babylon, Isa
32.4. Zedekiah had dealt perfidiously and treacherously with the King of
Babylon; he had broken his Oath with him and rebelled against him: But have not
sinners done worse? have they not broken repeated Promises, and falsified their
Covenant with God? have they not back-sliden from him with a perpetual
backsliding? have they not held fast their deceitfulness, and refused to
return to him, Jer. 8.5. have they not been hardened in their Enmity, and
persisted to run astray, and to go a whoring from God, Psalm. 73.27. and O how
terrible will God's Face, how dreadful will God's Presence be to them? I have
been credibly informed of a Woman that had prostituted, and defiled her self in
her Husband's Absence beyond Sea, and was with Child by her Adultery, that
hearing that her Husband was arrived, and ready to land, did hang her self,
that she might not see his Face, whom she had so highly offended, so bitterly
provoked by her Adultery? How then will Spiritual Harlots, and Adulterous Souls
Endure to see the Face of God, and to behold his angry Countenance to Eternity:
O! how bitter will it be to them to be confined to the Thoughts of their
Rebellion, and Gods Enmity against them for it? The thoughts of God now are
very unpleasant, and very unwelcome to Sinners, Romans 1.28. They like not to
retain God in their Knowledge. It was burdensome to them to acknowledge there was
a God; and it was bitter to them to think of this God, Psalm. 10.9. God is not
in all their thoughts, they banish God as much as is possible, out of their
minds, they forget him as much as they can, they cannot think of God but as a
Law Giver, that forbids their Lusts, and Actions; and as a Judge that holds them
guilty, and threatens them with Eternal Punishments; therefore they say to God
himself, and to the Thoughts of God, Depart from us, Job 12.14, 15. they would
not suffer such Thoughts to break in upon them, to lodge or stay with them,
because they begin their Hell, and anticipate their Torments before the time;
yet tho it be so grievous to sinners to remember God, to have their Thoughts
fixed, to have their Minds dwell on God; yet they must behold, they must
Converse with this Angry God for ever. O! what a doleful, dreadful Prison will
it be when a guilty Creature, and an angry God shall be alone together. Sinners
now have their divertisements, they drink deep draughts of the Pleasures of
Sin, of the Wine of Sensual Delights, that they may forget their Misery, and
shake off the thoughts of a Final Account, of a Righteous Condemnation, and of
an Everlasting Destruction; but in this Prison they can no more steep their
Souls in Pleasures, nor soak them in Sensual Delights; all the Comforts of the
World are gone, but sin remains, guilt abides, Conscience can never be Charmed,
Silenced, or suppressed: When sinners lie down among Thorns of Terrors, and in
Sheets of Flames; when they make their Bed in Hell, Behold God is there! Psalm.
139.3. This is an awakening, a dreadful Behold. O think on it, behold God is in
Hell! There he meets Sinners with a frowning Face, with a punishing Hand;
behold God is there to remember Iniquity against men, to bind the yoke of their
Transgressions on them: This will most surprise and astonish; this will most
dismay, sink, overwhelm the Damned to meet with a God they have so wearied, so
grieved, so vexed, so burdened with their Iniquities; Behold God is there, but
it is still to fill their Cup of wrath, to deal out blows, and give wounds to
them by his Almighty Power! Behold God is there, and does unveil his rowning
Face to scorch them, and make bare his glorious Arm to destroy them.

The second thing that I proposed to speak to is, That the Spirits of Sinners,
when they go out of the Body, shall be cast into, and shut up in Gods Prison.

The Scripture confirms this truth in several places, The rich man is said to
die, and in Hell he lifted up his Eyes, being in Torments, Luke 16.22, 23. No
sooner was his Soul out of the Tabernacle of the Body, but it was in the Prison
of Hell. So Judas is said to go to his own place, when he passed into the
Regions of Darkness, and of Misery, Acts 25. The filthy Sodomites, after their
Bodies were burnt with a Temporal Fire, their Souls were Tormented in Eternal
Fames, Judes Epistle 7. He that wandereth out of the way of understanding,
shall remain in the Congregation of the Dead; in the Hebrew it is (...); the
word signifies Giants; some have thought that Hell is called the Congregation
of the Giants; there were Giants before the Flood, Gen 6.4. as they were of
High Stature in Body, so they were no Dwarss in Sin and Wickedness; their
Iniquities grew to so great a Height, that God was provoked to send a
destroying Flood; these Giants were not only drowned in the Waters, but also
swallowed up of Eternal Death. These were such heinous Sinners, that they seem
to be presented as chief Proprietors, and Principal Possessors, and Inhabitants
of Hell.

I shall endeavor to Demonstrate to you, that it must needs be so, That the
Souls of wicked Men when they go out of the Body, do pass into a Prison: For,

1. Here in this World they do cast off all restraints, they are all for Carnal
Liberty, they exempt themselves from Gods Jurisdiction; they count their Hearts
their own, they will Love and Lust as they please, Heb. 9.10. Their
Abominations were according as they Loved. Sinners reckon their Tongues to be
their own, Psalm. 12.4. Our Lips are our own, Who is Lord over us? Therefore
they will Talk, and speak as they please. The ten Tribes are called Aholah,
Ezekiel. 23.4. as much as to say, her Tent, because that Israel, like an
Adulterous Wife, left the House of God, her Lawful Husband, forsook him, and
repaired to her own Tent Idolatrous Israel built high places, set up Temples in
Dan and Bethel; these were the Israelites own Tents; they did break off from
Gods Temple, they thought it Bondage and Slavery to be tied to Worship in Gods
House, they would Offer their Sacrifice in their own Tent. The Prodigal thought
himself not a Freeman while he was under his Fathers Eye and Government; he
would not depend on him for Maintenance, or be controuled by his Authority, or
Subject to his Commands; he would have his Portion in his own Hands, and Live
of himself; so he gathered together all that his Father gave him, and departed
into a far Country, Luke 15.12, 13, 14. There he lived according to his own
Lusts, and liking; he wastes his Fathers Goods, keeps bad Company, and
indulgeth his vile affectiones to the height. So Sinners carry it as if they
were not under Gods Eye, or Subject to his Authority, Jer. 5.5. It is said of
the great Men, That they altogether broke the Yoke, and burst the Bonds. So
Psalm. 2.23. The Kings of the Earth did set themselves, and take Counsel
together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, saying, let us break their
Bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from us. Tho Jesus Christ came as a
Redeemer to ransom, and as a Deliverer to rescue Souls from Slavery; yet they
took up such wrong Notions, such hard Thoughts of him, as if he came to chain
and fetter them, to yoke and enslave them, to spoil them of the Pleasure, and
deprive them of the liberty of their lives. Hose tells us, that the Princes of
Judah were like those that remove the bound, Hos. 5.10. Sinners will not be
restrained and limited by Gods Bounds, or be held by his Bonds, or bare his
yoke. Our first Parents affected inordinate Liberty, to cast off all
restraints, to remove all bounds, to be lawless and independent, tho this
indeed be Monstrous to have the limited Nature of a Creature, and yet the
boundless unlimited will of God. Our first Parents thought to change their
Tenure, and of Tenants to become absolute Lords; They denied God that little
Quit Rent that he reserved to himself, and invaded the Fruit of that Tree, that
he restrained them from; that Carnal Liberty that Sinners so much hunt after,
and aspire to, is a stream from this Poisoned Fountain, and pernicious Fruit
from this corrupt root; their degenerate Children have all like sheep, gone
astray, and have turned aside into their own way, Isa 53.6. yea, they love to
wander, Jer. 14.18. They choose their own ways, and their Soul delights in
their Abominations, Isa. 66.3. They think God a poor Master that can do little
for them, Job 22.14, 15. Job 22.17. What can the Almighty do for them? They
account him a hard Master, that requires too much of them, Matt. 25.24. I knew
thou wast a hard Man, Reaping where thou have not sown, and gathering where
thou have not strowed, Men affect a broad way, a wide Gate, tho it tend to
Destruction, Matt. 7.13. They cannot Endure the Girdle of Gods Covenant, or the
Bond of his Laws; and therefore how just a Punishment is it that those should
be cast into Gods Prison, that have cast off his Yoke? How Righteous is God in
punishing sinful Carnal Liberty, with Eternal Bondage and Confinement.

2. Sinners are Criminals, and Debtors, and in both respects do deserve a
Prison.

1. Wicked Men are Criminals; they rob God, they withold his due, they usurp
his Rights. It is said of Jesus Christ, that he restored what he took not away;
This was prophesied and spoken of our Surety, Psalm. 66.4. If he did not take
away from God, who did it? Surely sinful Man did take away from God; he robbed
God of his Trust, of his Love, of his Religious Worship; He alienated himself
from God, he withdrew and estranged all the Creatures from God. Men should have
been first Fruits devoted to God, and as living Sacrifices offered to him; In
this respect God may charge the whole World, as of Old he did charge the whole
Nation of the Jews, Mal. 3.1. Ye have robbed me in Tyths and Offerings. O how
many Thieves are there in the World, that rob God both of the Seventh of their
Time, in profaning of his Sabbath, and of the Tenth of their Goods? They care
not how little they expend to maintain God's Service, and to uphold his Worship
in the World; do they not daily rob God of their precious thoughts, and of
their choicest affections? They set up their own ends, and exalt their own
Wills, and do not make God's Will their Sovereign Law, his Glory their Supreme
End; How many Families rob God of his Worship every day? There is no praying to
him, no calling upon him, Psalm. 14.4. Jer. 10. last. All their Life is the
sowing of Mammon, the pleasing themselves, the gratifying their own Lusts and
Vile Affections; Is it scandalous to steal from Men, and is it not more heinous
to rob God?

2. Men are Enemies to, and rebel against God, Col. 21. You that were Strangers
and Enemies in your minds through wicked works. Sinners are Strangers to God,
they do nothing to oblige him: they are Enemies to God, they do much to provoke
him; they are Enemies against God in their minds; it is an hearty, a deep
rooted Enmity; their Minds are still intent on Evil Works. The Apostle seems to
me to glance at, and have respect to those words of God recorded by Moses, Genesis
16.5. the Lord saw that the Imaginations of the Thoughts of Man's Heart were
only evil continually. And Men express their Enmity to God by their Rebellion
against God. Hear how God accuses Israel, and complains against them, Isa.
1.2. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, I have nourished, and brought up
Children, and they have rebelled against me. God calls in the whole Creation,
summons all the Creatures to give in Evidence, and to be Witnesses against
them; the Sun, Moon and Stars did run their Race, and afford Light and
Influences continually to them; the Earth did bear them, and bring forth Fruit
to supply their Wants, and continue their Lives. God made so many Servants
above, and below to minister to Man, yet this proud ungrateful Creature
withdraws his Service from God, denies Obedience to his Maker: Oh hear, and be
astonished, both Heaven and Earth, that Israel that I have adopted, the Jews
that I have nourished, taught, educated as my Children, yet have made void my
Laws, and rebelled against me: Princes have Prisons for Thieves and Rebels
against them, and shall not the King of the whole World have a Prison for those
that rob him, and rebel against him. Rebellion against God is far worse than a
Rebellion against any Earthly King; for God is an Infinite, and an Eternal
Being; he gave us Life, Breath, and all things; his Laws are all righteous, his
Commands are holy; they ask but for the Rights of a God: They are just, they
demand but what we owe our Neighbor; they are good for our selves, in the
keeping of them is great reward, Psalm. 19.11. The Apostle commends the Law, and
says, the Command is Holy, Just and Good. These are Three weighty,
comprehensive Epithites. When we yield God his Right, we reap Benefit to our
selves, just as the Trees that serve us in bringing forth Fruit, do also serve
themselves in bringing forth a Stone or Kernel, to continue their own Kind.
Obedience to God is grounded on our very Nature, and founded in our very Being.
Those that have received a Being from God's Hand, surely ought to receive a Law
from his Mouth. Rebellion against God therefore must needs be an heinous Crime,
and deserve an Eternal Prison. Those that serve their own Lusts, and do Satan's
Will in time, are worthy to suffer God's Will to Eternity.

3. Sinners are guilty of Spiritual Whoredom and Adultery, Psalm. 73.27. Thou
have destroyed such as go a whoring from thee. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses,
know you not that the Friendship of this World is Enmity with God? James 4.14.
As a Rebellious Son was by God's Law to be stoned to Death, Deuteronomy. 21.20, 21. so
a Woman guilty of Adultery, and the Adulterer, were both to be put to death, by
God's Command, Levit. 20.10. Judah gave Sentence against Tamar for her
Whoredom; Let her be brought forth, and burnt, Genesis 38.24. If the Rebellion of
a Son against an Earthly Father, was Capital; if bodily Adultery was punished
with Death, what then does Soul-Adultery deserve? God is our Lawful Husband,
Isa. 54.5. Thy Maker is thy Husband. Yet have not sinful Souls affected the Bed
of a Stranger? have they not turned from God after Creatures? As Christ
admonishes, and accuses the Woman of Samaria for living in Adultery, or at
least in Fornication, John 4.18. He that thou now have, is not thy Husband; so
God may charge unconverted Men and Women, that they live in Spiritual Adultery,
that the object they most love and dote on, is not their Lawful Embraces; the
Creatures were not made to be Idols to Entice us from God, but are bestowed as
Love tokens to allure our Hearts to God; yet the Hearts of Covetous Sinners do
go after their Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. And the Hearts of Idolaters do walk
after the Heart of their detestable things, Ezekiel. 11.21. tho this was a great
cheat, to think that Dead Idols, or false Gods had a heart to retaliate their
Love, or to Requite them for their Worship; on this Account God is the only
Lawful Husband, and mere object of our Love, because he has a Heart to Love us
again, Prove. 8.17. I love those that love me; Idols or Creatures cannot say so;
Dead Idols, and Dead Creatures have no Heart to love us. O! consider then what
a horrid Crime Spiritual Adultery is; hereby we defile the Creatures, do offer
Violence to them, and put a Rape on them; they call and invite us to the Love
of God, they entice us not to the sinful, and inordinate love of themselves. It
is men's Lust that is active in this Adultery, the Creature is only Passive, it
groans under this Force put on it, but cannot decline and avoid it; the
Creature is innocent, but it is a Man's Unchaste and Filthy Heart that is guilty.
For this Spiritual Whoredom men deserve to be cast into Gods Prison; if God be
broken by their whorish Heart, Ezekiel 6.9. then surely they are worthy to be
wounded, and broken for it.

2. Men are debtors to God, every sin is a Debt, Matt. 6.12. Forgive us our
Debts, as we forgive our Debtors; we primarily owe to God a Debt of Love, and
Obedience; but for default in the Payment of this Debt, there arises another
Debut, we owe God Glory to be raised out of our Sufferings, Eternal Misery and
Torments; all Creatures must bow to God, and some way or other serve him, Isa.
45.32. Either as Vessels of Honor, or as Vessels for Dishonor; God must have
glory either by his Mercy, or our Misery; it is but just that God should enter
his Action against his Debtors, that he should Sue, Arrest and Imprison them.
If those that owe Money to Men, and do not pay it, are cast into Prison; much
more those that owe Service, and Obedience to God, and not render it, are to be
thrown into an Eternal Prison.

3. Sinners are now already in Prison, they are called Prisoners, Isa. 24.6.
Isa. 49.9. they are Styled Captives, Isa. 61.1. they are said to be taken
Captive by the Devil at his will, and to be held in his Snare; they are in the
Bond of Iniquity, Acts 8.23. The Sins of Men do take them, and their iniquities
do hold them, Prove. 5.22. we read that Paul and Silas were cast into the inner
Prison, Acts 16.24. This Expression of the Inner Prison, implies the Prison was
divided into two parts; there was an outer, and an inner Prison; so I may
distinguish, God has an outer and inner Prison; his outer Prison is in this
World, his inner Prison is in Hell; here sinners are in the outer Prison, they
are bound, Isa 61.1. they are held, Romans 7.6. They are taken captive, 2 Timothy 2
last. They are shut up under sin, Gal. 3.22. Laden with Dead Works, Heb. 9.14.
Guilty before God, Romans 3.19. And Condemned, John 3.18. He that believes not is
Condemned already; and if men stay, and continue in the outer-Prison, and Death
finds them here, how just is it that God should cast them into his inner
Prison, and shut them up, and hold them there for ever.

4. Jesus Christ himself, when he was a surety for Sinners, and stood in their
room, and stead, was made a Prisoner, was under a restraint and confinement,
Isa. 53.8 It is said, He was taken from Prison and Judgment. Jesus Christ could
not have been taken out of Prison, if he had not first been in Prison. But how
was Jesus Christ in Prison? I answer, 1. The great sorrow that was in, the
amazing fear that was on Christ's Spirit, was as a Prison about his Soul, Matt.
36.37, 38. he was sorrowful, and very heavy, he said, My Soul is sorrowful to
the Death. He was sore amazed, Mark 14.33. taking a prospect of the dreadful
storm that did hang over him, the deep and bitter Cup reached out to him. the
vast Ocean of Sorrows and Sufferings that were before him, yet he was heard in
that he feared, Heb. 5.7. This implies that he was under fear, yet he was
delivered from it, that it did not sink him, or overwhelm him. 2. Jesus fell
into the hands of his Enemies, they seized on him, led him him away to Annas
and Caiaphas, they held him under their power for several hours, till they
Condemned and Executed him, John 18.12, 13. the Captain and band of Soldiers
took Christ, bound him, and led him away as a Prisoner. 3. Jesus was buried, he
was laid in the dust, and shut up as a captive of Death in the prison of the
grave; but such was the dignity of his person, the value of his Blood, the
satisfactory, nature of his Suffering, that his Captivity was short, his
Imprisonment lasted but a little while; yet this confinement and prison of
Christ does teach us what sinners deserve; does instruct us what they must
expect, if they are not washed from their Sins in Christ's Blood, and reconciled
to God by his Death; his Person being infinite, and his Sufferings
satisfactory, his Prison could only be temporary and short; but the nature of
Sinners being Finite, and their sufferings not able to expiate their sins,
their Prison must needs be Everlasting.

5. God threatens sinners with this Prison, and he must needs be just to
himself, and true to his word; the Lightening of Gods Threatening, is not
without a Thunderbolt of Execution and Vengeance, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall
be turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God; God has not only
said it, but also sworn it, That he will never forget any of the deeds of
impenitent Sinners, Amos 8.7. the Lord has Sworn by the Excellency of Jacob,
that is, by himself, that is Jacobs Excellency, surely I will never forget any
of their Works. Tho men forget God, and his Laws, yet he will not forget their
Crimes and Iniquities. Gods Threatening must stand, therefore sinners must fall
into the Bottomless Pit: Gods word must take hold of them, Zack. 1.5, 6.
therefore they will be cast into the Eternal Prison; If we confirm not Gods
Command by doing it, Deuteronomy. 27. last. God will confirm his threatening by
executing it, Dan. 9.12.

6. The Spirits of Sinners departed out of the Body must be shut up in Gods
Prison; for God has mighty Officers of Justice, he has powerful Bailiffs and
Sergeants to Arrest, to Seize on, to carry away departing Souls, Luke 12.20.
(...), they shall require, and demand thy Soul of thee, they that shall require
it, will not be denied, will not be rejected and sent empty away, they will
take hold of guilty Creatures, drag them to the highest Tribunal, and present
them to the Sovereign Judge of Heaven and Earth; good or bad Angels seize on
dislodging and removing Souls.

I have been credible informed concerning a wicked man that I knew my self,
That when he was on the brink of the Pit, and on the Borders of Eternity;
Something in the likeness of a Crow appeared in his Chamber, and sat on the
Testar of his Bed, and could not be driven away till the sick man gave up the
Ghost, and then it suddenly Vanished away. The Ancient Rabbis have talked of
the Angel of Death, that did appear to Sick and Dying Men, and was very
Terrible to them; by this Angel of Death they seem to mean some good or bad
Angel sent to fetch the Soul to God's Tribunal to give its Account, and to
receive its final Sentence. God does not want Means, or Messengers to attach
and apprehend guilty Souls, and to Conduct them into his Terrible and glorious
presence.

The 3d. thing I proposed to speak to, was to show you how dreadful this Prison
is; and that I shall open to you in these following particulars.

1. This Prison is a very dark Prison, the Scripture calls the darkness of it,
outer darkness, Matt. 8.12. The Children of the Kingdom shall be cast into
outer darkness, so the unprofitable servant is sentenced to, and sent into
outer darkness, Matt. 25.30. Sinners now are in darkness, yea, they are said to
be darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. but this expression points at the inward darkness of
the minds of Sinners; there is a Cataract on the Eye of the Soul, a Veil on the
Understanding; but there is besides this inward darkness, an outer darkness,
when sinners shall be removed at the greatest distance from God the Father of
Lights, James 1.17. They shall be eternally separated, and cut off from the
Communion with God; In his light Saints shall see light, Psalm. 36.9. In the
light of his Countenance, they shall see the light of Life; but wicked men
shall go to the generation of their ungodly Fathers, they shall never see the
Light, Psalm. 49.9. The mist of darkness is their portion, 2 Pet. 2.17. yea, the
blackness of Darkness is reserved for them as an eternal inheritance, Judes
Epist. the 13th v. what Terror is there in this expression, The blackness of
darkness. Neither Creatures that Shine as a Candle to them, nor God as a Sun
shall arise on them Luke paints out the sadness of Paul's State, and of those
that were in the Ship with him, Acts. 17.20. That no small Tempest laid on
them, and that neither the Sun nor the Stars for many days appeared to them.
Thus it shall be with the Damned in Hell, a dreadful Tempest of the wrath of
God will lie upon them, and he will never appear as a Sun to cheer them, nor
suffer Creatures as Stars to shine for their Comfort; they will be shut out
from Gods gracious presence, and also shut up from the Creatures, they shall
neither have Beams from Heaven, nor Lamps from Earth, they shall leave all
their Idols behind them in the world; they shall loose all their sensual
pleasures and delights; God will give them no joy, and Creatures will lend them
no comfort, therefore blackness of darkness must needs follow. Thick darkness
that might be felt was one of the plagues of Egypt, Exodus 21.22, 23. but this
lasted but three days, but here is Eternal Darkness.

2. This prison is a strong prison, there is no breaking out of it, no Filing
off the Chains of the Damned or Forcing open the doors, the Judge himself by the
arm of his own Omnisciency is the Keeper of this Prison; the Eye of his
Omnisciency still watches over the Prisoners, that there is no flying or
escaping. God challenges all creatures, who shall deliver out of my hand,
Deuteronomy. 32.39. if he do tare in pieces, and deliver up the body to the first, and
the Soul to the Second Death; there will be none to rescue or deliver, Ps.
50.22. when God shuts up, there is no opening, Job 12.14. Tho there may be
millions of Prisoners in Hell, yet this Evidences their weakness, and evinces
Gods strength, that this huge and vast multitude cannot wrest themselves ou^ of
the Hand of the Judge, or break his Prison; God that cast them thither, will
hold and secure them there.

3. Gods Prison is a close Prison; there will be no Addressing to, Visiting or
Releiving of his Prisoners, Luke 16.26. consider what Abraham there speaks to
Dives, And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, so
that they that would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they pass to
us, that would come from thence. There is a great gulf that cannot be filled
up, or passed over, and this gulf is Fixed, it shall remain and continue for
ever: Gods Decree is Stable, it cannot be changed, revoked, or repealed; there
is an unalterable, an eternal separation between the blessed and the damned; it
is not to be thought that any of the Saints will pity the Damned, will relent
toward them, or melt over them; Saints that be perfected, and even swallowed
up in the Love of God, they shall fully acquiess in his will, and rejoice that
his Justice is Magnified, and his Power Glorified in the Eternal Destruction of
the Wicked; but Abraham makes only a supposition; if any such thing were
possible, if Saints could sympathise with the Damned, if their Bowels did yearn
toward them, if they were willing to relieve them, or to carry over any
supplies to them, if they did endeavor to case their Pains, or mitigate their
Torments; all such desires would be in vain, all such endeavors would be
frustrated and inefiectual; they could not get to the Damned, their Kindness
could not reach them or affect them, all Communicatition with them is
obstructed, all passages are shut up, these tormented Creatures are
inaccessible, Saints can carry no water to cool their Tongues, can bring them
no Cordials to revive their Souls; the Damned cannot come forth, nor others
come in to them to succor or ease them.

4. It is an Eternal Prison, there will be no Jail-delivery, no dismission or
releasing of these Prisoners. We read in Isa. 24, 21.22. of some that should be
gathered together and shut up in Prisons, but after many days they should be
Visited. Piscator understands this of Kings and Princes that should be
Conquered by the King of Babylon, and held in Bondage for many years, but these
oppressed men should at last be Visited, and releived by the gracious Kingdom
of Je^^s Christ, that should give liberty to their Souls, freedom to their
Consciences. But those that God apprehends, and shuts up in his Prison shall
never be visited, and recover their Liberty. Jeremiah was by the Fury of his
Adversaries cast into a deep and miery Dungeon, but God raised him up Friends;
Ebed-melech and others did let down Cords into his Dungeon, drew him up, and
saved his life, Jer. 38.10, 11, 12, 13. But no Beam of Hope shall shine, no
Cord of a Promise shall be let down to the Damned to draw them up out of their
Dungeon. It was an Act of Oppression, Cruelty and Tyranny in the King of
Babylon, that he opened not the House of his Prisoners, Isaiah 14.17. but this
is an Act of Pure and High Justice in God, that he will never open the House of
his Prisoners; they that sinned without Dread of his Justice, shall suffer
without Relief from his Mercy: There is now a Wall of Partition between God and
sinners in this Life, but this may possibly be broken down, but there is a Gulf
fixed in Hell, that can never be passed over. This is dreadful to consider,
that God executes sinners, and yet they continue his Prisoners to feel more
Wrath, and suffer more Vengeance; the guilt of sin still cleaves to them, and
the wrath of God will still abide on them, John 9. last, John 3. last, sin is
said to remain, and so wrath does abide. Repentance in Hell will be without any
Fruit; their Grief without Relief; their Groans, Cries, Petitions will not
prevail, can obtain nothing at the Hand of God; sinners were deaf to God in
time, and he will be deaf to them in eternity: Their Hearts were hardened, and
his Bowels will be shut: The Fuel of Gods Anger will be everlasting, therefore
the Fire will be eternal, an Immortal Death, an ever dying Misery, and endless
Torments will be the Portion of the Damned. The suffering Jews complain, and
say, that God had hedged them about, and they could not get out, Lam. 3.7. so
the damned in Hell are so hedged in by their own guilt, and the just wrath of
God, that they can never get out: Their Destruction will be everlasting, their
Ruin irrecoverable; God will not Release them, and they cannot Rescue
themselves.

5. This heightens the Misery of departed Souls, that their Prison is a place
of Torments, as well as of Restraint: Dives complains he was tormented in that
Flame, Luke 16.24. and would have his Brethren warned, that they might not come
into that place of Torments, Luke 16.25. God will exact his debts of, and
execute his threatenings on sinners: He will tread them in the Wine Press, and
press out all that is sweet, grateful and pleasant, and leave only a dry Husk
of Being: the Damned seem to be called Carcases, Isaiah 66. last. Ye shall go
forth, and see the carcases of the men that transgressed against me. The
Expression is Elegant, Significant and Emphatical: Christ will command his
Enemies that would not have him to reign over them, to be brought before him;
he will sentence them to be slain in his presence; when they are slain, when
all the Peace, Joy, Comfort of their Souls is destroyed, what will remain but a
mere Carcass of Being. When men shall be only to be miserable, to endure
vengeance, to suffer Torments, this may well be styled a Carcass of Being.
Bullinger de Triumph. tells us, that the day that an Emperor Triumphed, the
Prisoners were led in Chains, and exposed as an open spectacle to the Eyes of
the Spectators; and that when the Chariot of him that Triumphed, turned to go
up to the Capitol, then the Prisoners were led away to the Prison, and the
Triumpher staid in the Capitol, till news was brought him, that the Prisoners,
or some one of them was put to death in the Prison; the Prison this day was a
place of Execution among the Romans. Gods Prison will be a place of Eternal
Execution and Torments. Dives begged that Lazarus might but dip the Tip of his
Finger in Water, and let fall a few drope to cool his Tongue, Luke 16.24. his
Request seems very modest, he did not desire that Lazarus should dip his whole
Hand, no not his whole Finger, but only the Tip of his Finger; this was a very
small Petition, yet it is not granted, but rejected and decried. Sinners in
Hell shall not obtain the least ease, refreshment or mitigation of their
Torments. God will deal with sinners, as they did with Jesus Christ; he cried
out, I Thirst, John 19.28. but did he receive any thing to refresh or ease him?
no, his Enemies only filled a Sponge with Vinegar, and put it to his Mouth,
John 19.30. this was to Torment, rather than Relieve him. As Christ obtained
nothing from men to refresh him, so sinners shall get nothing from God to ease
them; when once they are shut up in his Prison, as the wicked Jews, Priests and
Scribes upbraided Christ with his words and works, Mat. 27.40, 41, 42, 43. that
he said he would build the Temple, that he asserted himself to be the Son of
God, that he saved others; so a Righteous God, and an Awakened Conscience will
upbraid Sinners with their evil words, and their sinful actions to eternity;
the iniquity of their Heels will compass them about, the reward of their Hand
will be given to them: Isaiah 3.10. they shall feed on the fruit of their own
way, and be filled with their own inventions; Prove. 1.31. They that glory in
their wisdoms, and applauded themselves in their inventions, as of they had
found out the true and chief Good, as if they had discovered the true
Pleasures, the true Liberty, the true Happiness, shall smart for their
Inventions, and feel the woeful effects of them for ever.

6. This renders the Condition of those that are in Gods Prison, terrible, that
they are under the fear and dread of future evils, and of a more severe
punishment: As the thoughts of the Affizes are bitter and terrible to
Malefactors; they know that then their Crimes will be remembered, accusations
will be formed, Witnesses will appear against them, they will be Condemned and
Executed: So sinners in Hell may dread the appearing of Jesus Christ, and the
Judgment of the Great Day: Sinners are not yet at the bottom of their Pit, they
are not yet fallen under the heaviest, hottest, fullest expressions of the
Wrath of God; they do not yet see the worst of their Condition: It is said that
Death and Hell shall be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone; this is the
second death, Revel 20.14. What is intended and meant by Death and Hell? I
suppose by Death here, is meant the Body that died, and so fell under the power
of Death; and Hell here signifies the Souls of the Damned that were cast into
Hell: The Continent is put for the thing Contained; the Bodies of the wicked
were held under death, and their Souls were shut up in Hell, but the Bodies of
the Wicked shall not still sleep in the Grave; they shall awake and rise, be
joined to, and united with their Bodies; but this resurrection will not be a
benefit, but a hurt to them; it will not be a privilege but a punishment;
their Bodies shall rise that they may fall into the Lake of Fire, that they may
feel Torments, that they be obnoxious to punishment from the Revenging Hand of
God; those that are now in Hell do know that this will be, that their Souls and
Bodies must meet again, that as they joined in sin, so they may be Companions
in misery; this conjunction they dread, they would rather their Bodies should
dwell in the Grave for ever, than that Soul and Body both should be united to
be drowned in a Lake of Fire, to be swallowed up of the second Death.

7. Sinners shall have the misery of their Prison heightened by these two
aggravations. 1. They that remember what Mercy was once offered to them, and
was rejected by them. 2. They that behold what happiness others enjoy, and they
are eternally deprived of. 1. Sinners shall call to mind what means of Grace
they once enjoyed, what tenders of Salvation were made to them; the Son of God
preached to the old World; he called them to Repentance, he warned them to fly
from the Wrath to come; yet their Understandings were darkened, their
Consciences stupefied, their Hearts hardened, their Ears stopped; even so it has
been since, those that have been in the Church, and under the sound of the
Word, have heard tidings that should have affected their Spirits, gladded their
Hearts yea, even ravished their Souls; a year of Jubilee has been proclaimed,
a day of Salvation has been afforded; sinners have been told, that dead Souls
may hear the Voice of the Son of God and live; that Prisoners in this World may
be set free, Captives released, Wounds may be healed, Diseases cured, Sinners
may be justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, filthy Souls may be cleansed,
Conscience may be purged from dead works; yet men mind not, regard not, seek
not any of these things: They make light of all the Travel of Christ's Soul, of
the Purchase of his Blood, of the Legacies of his Testament, Matt. 22.5. they
consider not that their Diseases threaten them with Eternal Death; that the
weight of their Guilt will sink them down into the Bottomless Pit; that the
shame of their Nakedness will expose them to everlasting Contempt and
Abhorrency; all this Stupidity, Folly and hardness of Heart shall be renewed,
and reflected on as a just Cause of Eternal Punishment: They shall remember,
how Jesus Christ called, and they did not answer; he knocked, and they did not
open; he stretched out his Hands filled with precious and inestimable Gifts,
but they did not stretch out the hand of Faith to receive Christ, and his
Benefits: They would not look to Christ that they might be saved, Isaiah 45.22.
They turned from the Captain of Salvation to a Murderer, from a merciful
Shepherd to a cruel and devouring Lion; they would not come to Christ that they
might have life, John 5.40. they would not lean on Christ^ Arm, that they might
not fall under the wrath of God, and the vengeance of eternal Fire. This will
one day sting them, that sin was sweeter to them than salvation; that rather
than quench the fire of Lust, they would run into the flames of Hell; that
rather than the Old Man should suffer, and its Members be mortified or cut off,
they themselves would perish everlastingly: This will to eternity wound them,
that their vanity of Mind, their carelessness of Spirit, their unbelief, and
hardness of Heart has undone them; that they dallied, trifled away the time;
turned away the Physician, refused the Redeemer, rejected the Bridegroom, and
must suffer the deserved punishment for all this to eternity; they will see
their opportunity is lost, and never to be regained; that the Door of Gods
House is shut, never to be opened again; that the Treaty of Peace is broken
off, never to be revived any more; that the Ladder that joined Earth and Heaven
together is taken away, is drawn up, and will never be let down to sinners any
more.

2. This will aggravate the Misery of those that are in this Infernal Prison,
that they shall see what others enjoy, but they are bereaved of, and shut out
from, Luke 13.28. There shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth, when ye shall
see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust
out. The Time was when Sinners were earnestly called upon, were pressed with
importunity to enter into the Kingdom of God, but they neglected, they
contemned it, but now this is their Punishment to be thrust out into Eternal
Darkness and Torment; and their loss will be embittered, when they behold what
others are arrived at, and in Possession of: O how will it pierce the Hearts of
the degenerate Seed of Godly Men, to see their Fathers possess a rich
Inheritance, and they themselves to be Poor for ever! How will this vex,
incense and inrage them; to see others at a plentiful Royal Feast, and
themselves to lie under an Eternal Famine! That Saints Triumph in Glorious
Triumph, and they are held in Eternal Bondage: That others wear Robes, and
Crowns of Glory, but they themselves are clothed with sordid Garments, and Rags
of Infamy; it might be a trouble to Lazarus to see Dives his Plenty, and his
own Penury: To behold his Delicates, and costly Fare, and then reflect on his
own hunger and wants; but in the other World things are quite turned. Now Dives
is troubled to see Lazarus at Rest, and he himself in Torments, to behold
Lazarus Feasted, and himself Famished, Luke 16.19, 20, 21, 22, 24. O how will
this Disquiet and Torment Sinners to see Saints bathing themselves in the
Fountain of Life, and that they cannot get a drop of Water to cool their
Tongues, and allay their Torments!

1. Use, Of the Doctrine: Is it so that the Spirits of Wicked men gone out of
the Body, are in Gods Prison, then this Truth should awaken secure, and strike
a Terror into hard Hearted Sinners. O do not imagine, that if you are
afflicted, that you receive all your evil things here; Gods anger is not turned
away, his Sword is not sheathed, his Controversy is not at an end with you;
there is a vast Arrear of Debt, a dreadful remainder of Wrath yet behind: You
drink but the Top of the Cup of Gods Fury, the dregs of it yet remain to be
sucked into your Souls in another World, Psalm. 75.8. God lets fall but some
drops of his Displeasure here, the most dreadful storm is yet behind, Psalm.
11.6. God now does but Skirmish with Sinners in this World, he will join
Battle, and come to a close fight with them in another World. O Sinners! will
you choose the way to Gods Prison, will you take the Road that leads to the
Lake of Fire and Brimstone? you foolishly run into the Devils snares, and rush
upon Hell and Destruction; will you bring forth Fruit to Death? Romans 7.5. Will
you bear such Fruit as will make you more worthy of Death, and more fit for
Destruction? Will you provide evidences, and prepare witnesses for your
Condemnation? Jer. 14.7. Men's Iniquities testify against them. The more Sins
they commit, the more Witnesses they raise up against themselves. Will you heap
up fuel for your Eternal burning? Will you daily purchase for your selves a
place in this Eternal Prison? Will you yield your depraved Wills, your vile
Affections as so many Chains given into the Devils hand to lead you by unto
this dreadful Prison? Will you Barter, and Trade away your Souls for so
contemptible a price, as the Wages of Unrighteousness, and the Pleasures of Sin
that are but for a season?

Will you be ignorant of Satan Devices? Will you not discern his designs? he
seeks for, he hunts after your Souls. His aim is to gain and seize them, that
he may carry them away into this dark Prison: O Sinners will you not consider,
will you not rouse up your selves, and start out of your deep Sleep? there may
be but a step between you and this Eternal Prison. Will you delay at the brink
of the Pit? will you sleep at the Door of the Prison? Will you not stop your
selves before it be too late? Will you stay in the Devils snare, till he takes
up his snare? Amos 3.5. seizes on the prey he has caught, and carries it away
to Hell? As the Lord lives, there is a place of Misery, there is a dreadful
Prison, and place of Torments. Do not banish it out of your Thoughts; do not
ridicule it as a mere Invention of Men, or as vain ungrounded Fancy,
entertained in weak and timorous Minds. Do not go on to despise or question it,
till God confutes your unbelief, and punishes your Atheism, by the woeful,
painful feeling of that, which you would not believe or fear.

2. Use. Do not envy Sinners, do not grudge them their full Cup of sensual
Delights, their calm and smoath Streams of Prosperity. God has a reckoning
with them; Judgments are traveling toward them, Hos. 5.1. Vengeance is ready
to take hold of them, those that now will bear no Yoke, will be restrained by
no bounds, must shortly be laid fast in the Eternal Prison: They that now swim
in Rivers of Pleasures, must soon be drowned in Perdition and Destruction: They
that suck in large draughts of sensual Delights, must within a little time
drink the Wine of the Wrath of the Almighty. Would you envy a Malefactor a
large Meal, or a full Glass of Wine, that next day is to be executed? Would you
grudge a Man Fine Clothes, or delicate Fare, that next hour is to be cast into
devouring Fire? their Comforts are measured by Time, but their Misery and
Torment is to be measured by Eternity?

3. Use, O examine your selves, what grounded Hope you have that you shall be
secured from Eternal Bondage, and delivered from the wrath to come; are you in
the Road to the Prison, or in the way to the Palace? there are but these two
Receptacles and places of Entertainment for departed Souls. Consider well of
it, are you in a perishing way? Psalm. 1. last. or in the way Everlasting, Psalm.
139. last? Put these following Questions to your Souls.

1. Are your Eyes opened? Isa. 42.7. This is the means to bring us out of our
spiritual Prison, and the first step toward our Liberty. Why are Men so quiet,
so contented, so satisfied to stay in Gods outer Prison? Surely it is, because
their Eyes are shut, they discern not where they are, and how great their
danger is. Jesus Christ first opens the blind eyes, and then he brings the
Prisoners out of the Prisonhouse: Inquire therefore, did you ever come to your
selves, take up true Notions, or form a right Judgment concerning your lost,
deplorable and miserable Estate? Luke 15.17. The Prodigal came to himself, he
conversed with, reflected on himself, dwelt on the sad Thoughts of what his
Folly, and Lusts had reduced him to; and then he took up this fixed Resolution,
I will arise and go to my Father, Luke 15.18, 19, 20, 21. If Men did come to
themselves, they would leave Sin as a bad and hard Master, and would return to
God their Heavenly Father. The Apostle Paul speaks of Sinners recovering
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. last. The Word in the Greek
is (...). It signifies to recover out of Drunknness, and to become sober; and
those that thus become sober do escape out of the snare of the Devil. Sinners
are drunken with false Notions, with wrong Conceptions, and ungrounded
Imaginations concerning themselves, the goodness of their own Estate, the
sweetness of the Pleasures of Sin, the worth of the Riches of the World. Men
must return to sobriety of Mind, to a right Judgment of their State and Ways,
that they may recover out of the snare of the Devil. Are the Scales of
Ignorance fallen off from your Eyes, is the Veil drawn off from your Hearts?
Act. 12.7, 9. A Light shined into Peter's Prison, and then he was raised, and
called out of it; so here.

2. Are you come to Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament, and to the Blood
of sprinkling, that speaks better things than the Blood of Abel? Heb. 12.24.
Are you come into his Righteousness? Psalm. 69.27. That is an observable Phrase,
to come into the Righteousness of the Messiah; Believers come into it as their
Garment that must cloth and cover them, their Fortress and City of Refuge,
that must secure them from the Curse of the Law, and Revenging Justice. Those
that lay hold of, and come into the Righteousness of Christ, are passed from
Death to Life, and shall never come into Condemnation, John 5.20. These things
are linked with, and depend on each other, coming into Christ's Righteousness
secures us from coming into Condemnation; have you fled by Faith to the
Mediator and his Blood, so that you have received the Atonement that he made,
Romans 5.11? Do you apply the Reconciliation that Christ has made to your
selves? 2 Cor. 5.18. All things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself
by Jesus Christ.

3. Are you made Free from the Law of Sin and Death? Romans 8.2. The Law of the
Spirit of Life which is in Christ Jesus, has made me free from the Law of Sin
and Death. The Law of the Spirit is the mighty, powerful, effectual working of
the Spirit of Life. Though the Law of Sin be strong, yet the Law of the Spirit
of Life is stronger. This Law of the Spirit can prevail and carry it against
the Law of Sin; have we ever experienced this mighty Law of the Spirit? has it
broke our Fetters and Chains, mortified our Lusts, enlarged our Hearts? Psalm.
119.32. Then will I run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my
Heart. It is the work of the Spirit to enlarge the understanding by beaming in
new Light, and to enlarge the Will by kindling new spiritual Love; when Christ
by his Spirit does cirtumcise the Heart, then the Chains of Lust do fall off:
Is the Law of God written in you? Jer. 31.33. Is this a prevailing, reigning
Principle in your Hearts, and as a powerful Bias on your Wills? Do you choose
the way of Truth, and choose Gods Precepts? Psalm. 119.30, 173.

4. Have you New, Honorable, and Ornamental Chains cast about your Souls? Isa.
45.14. It is promised the Church, that the Egyptians, and the Ethiopians, and
other Gentile Nations, should come over to her, and be hers; they should come
over to her, and after her in Chains. We are not to understand the Words as if
Christ should force Proselites into his Church, or Subjects into his Kingdom.
Jesus Christ never did violence to the Bodies of Men, or by an outward force
hale Men to him; but the Phrase signifies the powerful work of Christ by his
Spirit on the Minds and Consciences of Men; he casts Chains of Light and Love
about the Souls of Men: He mightily convinces and persuades them of the Truth
of his Doctrine, of the Excellency of his Promises: He plants strong
Inclinations in them, he makes powerful Impressions on them, that they cannot
but subject themselves to him, and yield and submit to his Church. Those that
are bound with Chains of Light and Love, shall not be Prisoners in Hell, or
bound there with Chains of Everlasting Darkness.

5. Is your Prison Raiment put off and changed? when Joseph was brought out of
the Dungeon, and was called to come in to Pharaoh, it is said he changed his
Raiment, Genesis 41.14. Prison Garments were not fit to be worn by a Man called
unto Liberty, and in the presence of a King. While we are in the spiritual
Prison we wear filthy Garments, Zech. 3.3. The old Man is a sordid Garment,
that does defile and deform our Souls; this Prison Raiment does fit Men for the
Prison of Hell. O therefore consider, whether you have put off the old Man, and
his Deeds, Col. 3.9. and have crucified the Flesh with its Affections and
Lusts, Gal. 5.24. Have you put on the Lord Jesus? Romans 13. last. Have you put
his Mind on your Mind, and his Will on your Will, and his Affections on your
Affections? Have you put on the new Nature of Jesus Christ, and so put him on
for Sanctification? it is said of the Church that she is all Glorious within,
and that her clothing is of wrought Gold: That she shall be brought unto the
King in Raiment of Needle work, Psalm. 45.13, 14. and it is said, verse 15. That
she and the Virgins her Companions with Joy shall enter into the Kings Palace.
This Scripture teaches us, how they must be clothed that are to be Married to
Jesus Christ, and to be taken into his Royal Palace, and into a blessed
Communion with him. The clothing, the Ornaments of our Souls will inform and
instruct us, whether we are secured from Gods Eternal Prison, and fitted to
dwell in his glorious Palace.

3. Use, O seek to prevent your going into, and abiding in this dreadful
Prison; when the Psalmist was under but Temporal Afflictions, and outward
Restraints, how does he cry to God! Psalm. 142. last. Bring my Soul out of
Prison; that I may Praise thy Name: And should you not be more earnest, and
importunate with God, to bring your Souls out of a spiritual Prison, and to
prevent their being cast into an Eternal Prison. Dives would have his Brethren
warned that they might not come into that place of Torment, Luke 16.28. and
shall not we much more desire this for our selves, and regard Gods warnings
that we may not come into this Prison? Two things here I shall endavour: (1.)
To give you some Motives, to stir you up to avoid this Prison. (2.) I shall
give you some Directions how you may be preserved from this Prison. Strive to
escape this Prison, that your Lot and Portion may not be in it for ever: For,

(1.) This is a most uncomfortable Prison: The Company is very bad, Devils and
damned Souls will inhabit these Regions of darkness. O what horrid Scrieches
and doleful Grans, what fearful Execrations and Blasphemies will be heard there
to Eternity! Prison-Fare here in the World uses to be course and unpleasant; 1
King. 22.27. Ahab says of the Prophet Micaiah, Put this fellow in Prison, and
feed him which Bread of affliction, and water of affliction: But how much worse
will the Treatment of Sinners be in Hell! they must feed on Wormwood and gall,
and be filled with the fruit of their own ways, and drink the Wine of the Wrath
of God. God will call off all Comforters frm them, and call all his Terrors
against them, Lam. 2. last. As Jesus when he stood in the place of Sinners, and
aswered Gods Justice for their iniquities, he was deserted by all his three
Disciples that he took to be with him in his Agony, who fell asleep; when he
was apprehended all his disciples forsook him, and fled from him, Mat. 26.40.
Mark. 14.50. Jesus Christ complains in that Prophetical Psalm, Psalm. 69. v. 20.
Reproach has broken my Heart, and I am full of heaviness; and I looked for
some to take pity, but there was none; and for Comforters but I found none. He
complains God his Father forsook him, Psalm. 22. He hid his pleasing Countenance
from him, and turned his angry Face against him; the sight of this caused
Christ to sweat drops of Blood in the Garden. You see Jesus Christ stood alone
to bear the wrath of God; all forsook and rejected him. As Jesus Christ was
dealt withal, so thou must expect to be used; all Creatures will withdraw, and
God also will hide his Face. Sinners shall behold nothing but the huge Host of
their iniquities compassing them about, and the Lord of Hosts fighting against
them; Conscience shall reproach them, God will loath them, all Flesh will
abhor them, Isa. 66. last.

2. Gods Prison is a reproachful, ignominious and infamous Place: Here Gods
Debtors are detained, here his Enemies are confined; this will be an Eternal
Disgrace to the Prisoners, that a patient Creditor was put to arrest them, that
a long-suffering God was necessitated to apprehend and shut them up: He has
sworn that to Him every Knee shall bow, Isa. 45.23. And those obstinate,
stiff-necked Sinners would not willingly stoop to God, would not yield him any
sincere Obedience, therefore God was obliged to bow, to break, to stoop them,
whether they would or no. To be a Tree for Fruit, is honorable; but for
Barrenness to be made a Tree for Fuel, is disgrace full; to serve God only by
their Sufferings and Torments, to illustrate the Story of Gods Justice by his
Hating of them, and the Glory of his Power by Punishing them, this is infamous
to Creatures. Dan. 12.2. it is said, some shall rise to shame and everlasting
contempt.

3. The Prison is our own Place, Acts 25. Judas is said to go to his own Place.
We have deserved to be cast thither, to be confined there for ever: Confusion
of Face belongs to us, Dan. 9.8, 9. Death is the Wages due to our Iniquities,
Romans 6. last. We have showed the Power of our Enmity against God, and he may
show the Power of his Wrath against us, Psalm 90.11. We are Children of Wrath by
Nature, Ephesians. 2.3. so Hell is our Inheritance and Patrimony: We are Children of
Disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. and so Hell is our Purchase. God has been exiled out
of our Minds, Psalm. 10.4 and we deserve to be banished out of his glorious
Presence. It is said that Cain went out from the presence of the Lord, Genesis
4.16. and the Prodigal went into a far Country, Luke 15.13, 14. Thus Sinners
do sinfully banish themselves from God, and a sinful Banishment does deserve
and may procure a poenal Banishment: If every Worker of Iniquity has bid God
Depart. Job 21.14, 15, They say to the Almighty, Depart from us; then surely it
is but a just Recompense for Christ to say at last, Go ye Cursed into
everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Matthew. 25 41.

(2.) I shall now proceed to some Directions, how you may escape this Prison.

1. You must Believe soundly that there is such a Prison: This Truth must be
fixed on, and rooted in your Minds; it must not be a doubtful Opinion, but a
rooted Persuasion: God is wronged by wicked Men, and he must right himself;
they have pressed him with their Iniquities as a Cart is pressld under the
sheaves, and he must ease himself, Isa. 1.24. Ah, I will ease me of my Enemies,
and avenge me of my Adversaries. Sinners rise up proudly against God, Psalm.
138.21. Am I not grieved with those that rise up against thee? and God must
humble and abase them: Psalm. 73.29. Thou set them in slippery places, thou
castest them down into destruction. Ungodly men break God's Yoke, Jer. 5.5. and
therefore must be broken with that Rod of Iron that is in Christ's hand, Psalm.
2.9. God will draw near to them in Justice, Mal. 3.5. I will come near to you
to Judgment, that are gone far from God as to Obedience: Psalm. 73.27. Lo those
that are far from thee shall perish.

2. Acknowledge that you have deserved to be thrown into this Prison: Have you
not lived without God in the World, Ephesians. 2.12. and and so have you not begun
your Hell on Earth? have you not executed a great and grievous part of the
Eternal Punishment on your selves, by neglecting Converse with God, and cutting
your selves off from Communion with him? Have you not contentedly been without
God in Time, and is it not righteous that you should be without him to Eternity?

3. Submit to the Spirit of God when it becomes a Spirit of Bondage to your
Souls, Romans 5.15. It is then a Spirit of Bondage, when it arrests the
Conscience with a deep heavy sense of Sin; when it sets home the Threatenings
and Curse of the Law, when it seals to a Sinner a Sentence of Condemnation, and
fills the Soul with the Terrors of God: Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded
all under Sin; the word (...) might as well be rendered shut up: The Scripture
has shut up all men, and all the Acts of the Natural man under sin; it is
(...), all things that appertain and belong to the Natural man, and flow from
him: For they that are in the flesh, cannot please God, Romans 8.8. The Sacrifice
of the Wicked, that is, his best Religious Service, is an Abomination to the
Lord: And the Prayer of the Wicked, that is, all his common Actions, are also
an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 15.8, 9. If the Sacrifice and the Way of the
Wicked be an Abomination, then the Scripture may well conclude his All under
Sin. Ungodly men seem to walk at Liberty, to be secure, merry, and unconcerned
at Sin, the Wrath of God, and an Eternal State; but the Spirit of God comes and
arrests secure Sinners, and shuts them up under the bitterness of Sin, and the
dreadful sense of the Wrath of God; in this Case it is dangerous for Persons to
shake off the Terrors of God, to despsse his Threatnnings, and to break God's
Prison: Those that quench Convictions, and return to a loose and licentious
Life, are in great danger of undoing themselves to Eternity. Be therefore
persuaded, that the Spirit and the Scripture do mercifully shut up Unregenerate
Men, and all their Actions under sin; it is not that they may sink under their
Guilt, languish under their Disease, and perish everlastingly; but all this is
to humble their proud Minds, and break their hard Hearts, that they may sue to
Free Grace to remit their Debt, break their Chains, heal their Disease, and
save their Souls. The Scripture shuts up all under sin, that the Promise by
Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe: The Spirit of
Bondage prepares Persons for the Spirit of Adoption, that Men may act Faith on
Jesus Christ, lay hold of the free Promise, and so have Justification and
Salvation as an Alms of Mercy.

4. Listen to Christ's Voice, that calls you out of the spiritual Prison, Isa.
49.9. That thou may say to the Prisoners, Go forth; and to them that are in
darkness, Show your selves. O desire and cry to Jesus Christ to speak this
effectually to your Soul: You need he should speak with a strong hand, Isa.
8.11. Look to Jesus Christ to open the door of Gods Prison, Isa. 61.1. and also
to open the door of your hard heart. Acts 16.14. God opened the Heart of Lydia.
O desire Jesus Christ to speak so, that your Chains may fall off, your Doors
fly open, and you be brought out of darkness and the Prisonhouse, Isa. 42.7.
You need to be sprinkled with the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, to keep
destroying Justice out: The Blood of the Paschal Lamb sprinkled on the
Doorposts of the Israelites, was a Sign to the destroying Angel that he was not
to break into that House, or kill any there, Exodus 12.22.23. It is the Blood of
Jesus Christ the True Paschal Lamb, 1 Cor. 5.7.8. that must be our Guard,
Security, Protection; and where this is sprinkled, God sets a Sign on those
Souls, that they shall not perish, but escape; that they are not appointed to
Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by Jesus Christ. God says in Isa. 66.19. that
he would set a Sign among the Jews: Calvin on the Place, thinks that there is
an allusion to the Blood of the Paschal Lamb sprinkled on the Israelities
Doors, that was a Sign they should be safe: So Christ's Blood applied to us, and
sprinkled on us, is a sure Sign and Token of our Salvation, that we shall not
come into Condemnation, but find Mercy with the Lord: O therefore apply your
selves by Faith to Jesus Christ as a Redeemer, Isa. 59.20. that you may be
Ransomed by the Blood he has shed, by the Price he has paid; address your
selves to Jesus Christ as a Deliverer, Romans 11.26. that you may be Rescued by
that Power he can put forth. Jesus Christ is a Redeemer by Price, and a
Deliverer by Power; these two conjoined do render him a Complete and perfect
Savior. If Jesus Christ be a refining Fire to you in this World, Mal. 3.2, 3,
4. God will not be a Consuming Fire to you in the world to come, Heb. 12. last.

5. Repent unfeignedly of, and truly break off from your Sins: Mark 1.15.
Repent and believe the Gospel. O wash your Hearts from Wickedness, put away the
evil of your doings, escape that Corruption that is in the World through Lust,
Jer. 4.14. Isa. 1.16, 17. 2 Pet. 1.4. Break and shake off the bond of Iniquity,
Acts 8.23. Get out of the Snare of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2. last. and you need not
dread the Eternal Prison. God will not condemn those that bear his Image, live
his Life, wage War with his Enemies. As you seek to Jesus Christ to quench the
Fire of God's Wrath by putting his Blood on it, so do you pluck away the Fuel
of this Fire by Repentance and continual Mortification; suffer in your Flesh,
in your corrupt Nature here, 1 Pet. 4.1. that you may not suffer in your Soul
for ever hereafter; dye to sin, that you may not dye for sin: If your Lusts do
still find Favor with you, how can you hope to find Mercy with God? Curb your
Flesh, restrain your selves from Carnal Liberty, and you shall be safe, and
secured from eternal Bondage. Make a Covenant with your Eyes, Job 31.1 restrain
them from wandering, and gazing on tempting and enticing Objects. Cry to God,
Lord turn away mine Eyes from beholding Vanity, Psalm. 119.37. Keep your Hearts
with all diligence, Prove. 4.23. suppress vain thoughts that spring up; quash
sensual desires that are ready to sprout forth: The old man is a stock still
budding; In-dwelling sin is still tempting; this Womb would still conceive, and
bring forth Fruit to death; there is a Law in us, Romans 7.21. that Satan has
enacted, Members that he has made; Col. 3.5. Lusts that he has kindled, 1 John 2.15, 16. Our daily Work therefore must be to contend with our corrupt
Wills and vile Affections; to fight against sin, to conflict with and overcome
our selves: He that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second Death, Rev.
2.11. You must restrain your Tongues, and set a Watch before the door of your
Lips; the Psalmist said, he would take heed to his ways, that he did not sin
with his Tongue; he would keep his Mouth with a Bridle, Psalm. 39.1. Much sin
would be prevented if we did watch over our Words. Christ's great silence when
he was falsely accused, points at Sinners great sin in abusing their Tongues in
rash and evil speaking. We must also refrain our Feet from the ways of Sin and
Death, Psalm. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I
might keep thy Word. By the Word of thy Lips I have kept my self from the Path
of the destroyer, Psalm. 17.4. Wicked men take Liberty to themselves to say or
do what they please: Jer. 14.10. They love to wander, they have not refrained
their Feet: It is dangerous for you to affect a Liberty for your corrupt
Hearts, roving Senses, and wandering Feet. If you give Liberty to your Lusts,
God will proclaim Liberty to the Sword, Jer. 34.17. Would you have Gods
punishing hand at Liberty to destroy you? would you have his Glistering Sword
at Liberty to cut you off? shall all banks be cut, and the Flood of the Wrath
of God be at Liberty to overwhelm and swallow you up for ever? Abridge your
selves, deny carnal Liberty to your Flesh and it is Lusts: If you walk in the
Narrow Way of the Lawgiver, you shall not fall into the strait Prison of the
Judge.

FINIS.

