A VINDICATION OF Mr. H's Brief Enquiry Into the true Nature OF SCHISM, FROM
The Exceptions of T. W. THE Citizen of CHESTER, AND Sincere Lover of Truth.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the lower
end of Cheapside near Mercers Chapel. 1691.

A Vindication of M. H's brief Enquiry into the True Nature of Schism, etc.
THAT man must be a great stranger in England, that knows not what unhappy
flames have been kindled amongst us about matters of Church Government and
Worship; and he must be as great an Enemy that would not contribute his utmost
to the extinguishing of them: A great deal has been writ on both sides, to
convince the World where the fault of our Division lies. The word Schism has
been tossed like a Tennis-ball, from one side to another, till by such motion
those violent heats have been caused, that have much endangered both our Church
and State. Great endeavors have been used to fasten the guilt upon such as
impose unnecessary, suspected Terms of Communion, and it has been fiercely
retorted upon those that refuse to comply with such Terms, and after all, the
Difference remains, and for ought we see, is like to do so still. Some have
fancied the severe Execution of Penal Laws, by Fines, Imprisonment, Exile, etc.
would have put an End to that Separation, which they thought proceeded from a
Factious humor, not to be tamed any other way; but Experience has convinced
them of a quite contrary Effect: Others have persuaded themselves, whenever
such Enforcements were laid aside, the Controverted Ceremonies would of course
fall into contempt, for being (by acknowledgment) things purely indifferent
(that is to say) mere trifles, without any native worth or strength, they
cannot be rationally supposed to stand any longer than they had those external
props to bear them up; and herein they have not been altogether disappointed,
for they hear of five or six of the Clergy, and those not of the meanest sort,
that have chosen to quit their Preferments, for the ease of their Consciences,
now they may Preach the Gospel without bearing that burden; and were our
present Liberty improved to a Comprehension, more such Instances might be
expected, and the World would then see whether all this troublesome Zeal for the
things in Controversy, has proceeded from the real value of the things
themselves, or the valuation of those external Advantages affixed to them.

But since neither Disputings, nor Penal Laws have hitherto brought English
Protestants to an exact Uniformity, it is worth every honest man's Enquiry how
under these different Modes of Worship, all men may be induced to live quiet
and peaceable lives, as becomes those whose Interests are so inseparably
united, both by a Sacred and Civil Tie.

Mr. M. H. has made a very modest and ingenious attempt that way; from which we
expect the greater success, because he has certainly hit upon the true cause of
our Animosities, which, as all other Wars and Fightings, proceed from our
Lusts, which war in our minds; were these as entirely subject to Reason and
Virtue as the Gospel would have them to be, it would not be in the power of
greater Controversies than ours, to make us run so fiercely one upon another,
breaking all the Bonds which our Religion, natural Relation, and Civil
Concernments have laid upon us: And because a great deal of harm is many times
done by a mistaken Scripture word, and it is necessary to take the Weapon out
of the Gladiators hand: He has given us so clear an Account of the true import
of the word Schism, as it is used in Sacred Writings, as does acquit all the
sober, moderate, peaceable men, and only falls upon the fiery, proud,
censorious Bigots of both Persuasions.

In so healing an Enterprise as this, he could fear no opposition except from
two sorts of persons; The furious Zealot, who will find himself too deeply
concerned to be quiet and easy; And the Debauchee, who makes use of the
Controversy only as a blind to cover his own leudness, and a pretense to act
his malice against the more serious Professors of Practical Religion. Whether
that T.W. who has encountered this peaceable Design, belongs to the former or
latter sort of men, I shall leave to his own Conscience, and those that are
better acquainted with him to determine, but by the complexion of his Book he
seems to have a mixture of both.

Before I proceed to the Examination of his Pamphlet, I think my self obliged
to do Mr. H. that Justice, as to assure the Reader he has acted no part at all
in this Reply, nor ever saw one word of it before it came out of the Press, and
therefore is not chargeable with any Errors whereof it may be guilty.

The Gentleman begins his Preface imperiously enough, and is very liberal in
bestowing his Titles of Honor and Disgrace. The Episcopal Clergy he vouchsafes
to salute Learned and Pious, the Dissenters Fools and Schismatics, as if
'twere his Province to make an oracular decision of the Controversy, and to
give Laurels or Halters at his pleasure: But as it is to be hoped, the Clergy
he speaks of will not value themselves, their Piety or Learning overmuch, upon
the bare sentence of a person, that is so little a Judge of either; so it
cannot be expected, the Dissenters should immediately confess themselves Fools
and Schismatics, because the Citizen has pronounced them such. It is no new
thing to them to be called Names, to be represented as Rebels and Traitors,
unfit for Humane Society; and it has been formerly an unsufferable crime to
endeavor their own vindication, and these men have been so long accustomed to
a hectoring abusive kind of Language, that they have forgotten how to speak
with common civility to persons that are almost as good men as themselves.
[Little shifts, restless spirits buoying up a Faction] have been decantate
terms to do the work of a common Foe, in ruining those that were more early
aware of the advances of Popish Designs than some of their Neighbors: But it is
some what strange such words should be heard at this time a day, when our
Governors, and almost the whole Nation are convinced how much this kind of
Language, and the Severities that were kindled thereby have contributed to
those great evils from which the Nation is but lately escaped.

He musters against us the great names of Hooker, Bramhall, Hammond, Sanderson,
and diverse more; but why should he leave out his Modern men? Why should Parker,
Dryden, L'Estrange, with their [learned elaborate and Orthodox Writings] come
in for their share of Honor? I know none so weak as [to set Mr. H's Book in
comparison with these] it is evident his subject and design is variant from
theirs; but if we thought fit to imitate his Pedantry, we could tell him of
Reynolds, Cartwright, Blondell, Ames, Daille, Owen, Baxter, etc. whether these
men have not done as much to prove the Imposers Schismatics as the former to
prove Dissenters such, is referred not to the Judgment of T. W. or of an
Interessed Party, but of all the unbiased part of Mankind upon a fair hearing,
which yet we could never obtain. Mr. H's design was to create a good agreement
betwixt Parties that had been so long and learnedly contending; and in this I
know of no professed Adversary he has but T. W. and whether his design be not
more honest than this man's, and his management more rational, will be speedily
tried.

Our sincere Lover, before he finishes his Preface, makes his honors to three
sorts of Readers, the Churchman, the Dissenter, and the Sceptick, and he does
it with as good a grace as can be expected from a man in his circumstances.

As for the true Member of his Church, he is assured of him [that he has been
taught the Candor to cover the faults] of a weak Brother -- be the performance
never so vicious, Zeal for the Church will consecrate and make it pass with
applause amongst such as himself; [and if they be but pleased, he is satisfied]
for to humor them, was all he designed.

Now to the Dissenter, [if he be one that has not sacrificed his name to the
factious, so as to divest himself of all Christian temper, humility and
consideration:] But what a strange supposition is this? Is there ever a
Dissenter in the World that is not devoted to Faction, and stripped of Humility?
They have formerly condemned us in the lump; it is well our Friends have learned
to distinguish: Well, if there should chance to be such a creature [he is
desired to consider his desperate condition] how? humble, considerate, of a
Christian temper, and yet in a desperate condition? this is as great a Riddle
as the former. In good earnest, if a man may be in a desperate condition with
all these Virtues, I would desire T. W. to consider what the condition of that
man is that appears to have none of all these. The Dissenter however bids me
thank him for [his weak endeavors to snatch him as a firebrand out of the
fire] but I am also to tell him his weak service comes too late, for it has
pleased God to move the King and Parliament to do it, who have already by their
gracious Indulgence plucked a great many Brands out of the fire of these men's
rage and fury, in which they and their Interest were almost consumed, a
blessing, which we doubt not [all the Angels congratulate to us] excepting
those whose business it is to accuse the Brethren, and to raise storms and
tempests in the World.

His last Address is to the Sceptick, and [if the Sceptick be obstinate and
perverse] an obstinate Sceptick is almost as great a Riddle as a humble
Dissenter. It has been the way of some men to represent all men as Skeptical
and Atheists, that have had larger Souls themselves, and would not join with
them in unchurching the greatest part of the World for the sake of a Mitre, and
a few Ceremonies; and yet many of these Scepticks have as true a veneration for
the Clergy and Church, as T. W. himself; for it can hardly be imagined, that
man can have any real value For an Office, whose life does openly confront the
great Ends thereof.

And now he takes leave of his Reader, and turns him to Mr. H. himself, and
upon the first salutation blames him [for not choosing the true Standard whereby
to discover Schism] Mr. H. chose no other but the Sacred Scriptures, which
being the great Law for the Government of Men, must certainly be the truest
Touchstone of Sin and Duty; and if the Schism this man would charge us with be
not so, according to the Standard of Scripture, we shall not much dread the
guilt or danger of it. This is a hopeful beginning of Controversy, to decline
the sufficiency and propriety of Scripture as the Standard of good or evil. --
But will this man assign a better? yes [the ninth Article of the Apostle's
Creed, I believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints] But by
what Standard must we discover [the true notion] of these words? Who must tell
us what the Unity of the Church is, and what the Communion of Saints? Must not
Scripture be our Rule? And must you not then come to Mr. H's. Standard at last?
a happy Omen! when the first Paragraph contains a plain affront both to
Scripture and common sense. But let us see how he goes on.

He offers to our consideration the Origination and first Existence of the
Catholic Church [which was before the day of Pentecost,] but how long before
that day he does not tell us. If a man pretends to acquaint me with the
Origination of the World, and tells me it was before the Babylonish Captivity,
I shall count him a ridiculous trifler; but I suppose he means it was
immediately before, or a little while before the day of Pentecost; and here
indeed is a discovery worthy of its Author. But had God no Church then amongst
the Jews? must they be excommunicated too? for what cause pray? Not for want of
Ceremonies, or a Pontiff, I hope. The man told us in his Preface, the Angels in
Heaven were the most glorious Members of the Church. -- How must we lay these
things together? Were the Angels originated at the day of Pentecost? had they
their first Existence then? -- or did the Members of the Body exist before the
Body? let the Citizen, or any of his Cabbala solve these Riddles, and I Will
promise him he shall be my great Apollo.

That [the Apostles and Disciples were the Church] we do not question, nor the
power Christ gave his Apostles to Preach the Gospel to all the World; and he
well observes, that Christ's commission and charge, That in every Nation they
that believe might be baptized, and so made Members of the Church: How well
they have observed their Commission, who refuse to admit of Church Members upon
their profession of Faith, unless they will also comply with some significant
Rites of their own that are alien to the Scripture Rules, some men may do well
to consider, and whether to deny Gospel-priviledges to those that in the
Judgment of Charity are Believers, be not to assume a greater power than that
which this man calls [the Universal Power given to the Apostles] whereby they
become guilty of the worst sort of Tyranny, because the Liberties hereby
invaded are of all others the most sacred and invaluable.

It is plain from this man's confession, that to be a Disciple or Believer would
make a man a Member of the Church in Apostolical times; and we cannot but
assent to that excellent saying of the now Bishop of Worcester, It is pity that
which would make a man a Disciple of Christ then, should not be sufficient to
make him a Member of the Church now; but we have no reason to doubt the
contrary; and if such a person should be (clave errante) shut out of the
Communion of a particular Church, God would still look upon him as his own; for
the pride and perverseness of men shall not make the Faith of Christ of none
effect.

That prevalency of the Gospel (which he speaks of) in Primitive times, we
believe, and adore that divine Energy that appeared therein, making its way
through so formidable an opposition as it every where met with; and next to the
Power of God, which is to be accounted the principal cause, we cannot but
ascribe this wonderful success to the sanctity of the Preachers, and the
spirituality and simplicity of their Doctrine and Worship; for we find it has
made but a slow progress in the World, since men, upon pretense of adoring it,
have encumbred it with needless Ceremonies, and committed the management
thereof to men, who (many of them) had little to recommend them to the service
besides a vehement Zeal for these Religious Impertinencies.

But, though the Apostles did propagate the Gospel far and wide, yet that they
did actually [Preach it to all Nations] is a thing we never heard of before T.
W. told us so; and we must have better evidence before we believe it. Whether
[the seven Churches in Asia had seven Bishops presiding over them] neither more
nor less, is a thing that no way affects the present Controversy, nor can any
thing be concluded from thence in favor of our English Prelacy, till the Power
of those Bishops, the extent of their Diocesses, the quality of their
Underofficers, the Modes of their Worship, and Terms of Communion be proved
the same with ours, or liable to the same exceptions. We have no prejudice
against Episcopacy, name or thing, provided it be reduced to the Primitive
Standard. He must not think to run us down with a bare word. We find mention
made of Presbyters in Scripture; he would think it irrational from hence to
assert Scotch Presbytery to be Jure Divino; the name will signify little in
the debate, till the true bounds and limits of the Office so named be stated
and adjusted.

I will not take upon me to contradict those Learned men that think the Angels
there mentioned were Bishops, but to say [it is plain by the word Angel they
were so] is a wonderful Argument indeed; as if Bishop and Angel were
convertible terms. And so the two young men that came to rescue Lot out from
the Sodomites, were Bishops, and the glorious Messengers that brought to Mary
and Elizabeth the joyful tidings of our Savior's approaching Birth, were
Bishops; it is plain they were so by the name Angel the Scriptures give them,
and if this hold good, there will be a great many more Bishops in Heaven than
Chrysostom expected to find there.

He tells us, though there was a multiplication or plurality of Churches in
those times, by the increase of Believers, yet no variation. I am glad to hear
that the increase of Believers will make it necessary to multiply Churches; and
why does it so -- but because the increase of Church Members may be so great as
makes them incapable of ordinarily meeting together to worship God, therefore a
Church in the primitive sense must consist of no more than could ordinarily so
meet; and that every Church had its Bishop is evident, for without the
governing part it cannot be a distinct Political Society, but if the model of
our Episcopal Churches be right, which are made up of some hundreds of
Congregations, and Millions of Persons that cannot be known to the Bishop, or
one to another; if this I say be allowable, I see not how the increase of
Believers can be a sufficient cause for the multiplying of Churches.

But what does he mean in saying, in these multiplied Churches there was no
variation; was there no variety at all in any circumstance of worship? That Is
gratis dictum, and the contrary may be proved even in the Apostles times.
Whence was that scuffle betwixt the believing Jews and Gentiles about Jewish
Ceremonies? Acts 15.
What need was there of that Apostolical Synod, and of all those precepts
against imposing upon, or condemning one another upon the account of different
Sentiments? If he means there was no variation from the Scripture Rules (tho we
are afraid that will scarce hold, yet) we wish it had been so still.

We have a Notion of Church Unity laid down p. 2. in which we freely concur
with him, i. e. [That all Churches are one, as united into one Body, whereof
Christ is Head, having the same Baptism, the same Faith, and the same
Eucharist] that is the same for substance for it that they all agreed in the
Primitive times in the same Circumstances, such a Unity we hold, and doubt not
but in our Congregations this Unity may be found. They are made up of visible
Christians, such as in the Judgment of Charity are united to Christ by Faith;
we have the same Baptism with the Apostolical Churches for Substance, and come
as near in circumstances as we can to the Rule, leaving out the innovations of
latter and more corrupt times, we hold the same Doctrines of Faith, and the
same Eucharist, and after the Apostolical Mode, as far as by their Writings
appears, and thus far we are the same with them in the External Worship and
Service of God, and the same with all other true Churches, as far as they are
the same with the Apostolical, and differ from them no farther than upon a
serious Enquiry, we find they differ from these.

We expect T. W. should stand to this Description of Church Unity he has here
given us, and if he does, we can easily make it appear he has ruined his whole
Book and Cause; for if this be the true proper Unity of Churches, then there
may be true Church Unity without the uniting of many particular Churches,
Ministers and People into one Diocesan Church under the Jurisdiction of a
Prelate and his Officers; then there may be true Church Unity without a
necessary observation of the same Parochial Precincts: I do not speak against
the convenience of such a thing, but only observe that it is not de Essentia
Unitatis, according to this Man's definition; and there may be true Church Unity
without an absolute Uniformity in the same Modes and Circumstances of Worship;
and consequently a Man may plead to the Jurisdiction of a Diocesan Prelate, may
step over Parish Bounds, and may worship God without the Ceremonies used in
England, and yet be free from the guilt of Schism, for if none of these things
be Essential to the Churches Unity, they may be omitted, and that preserved
entire notwithstanding.

Touching the continuance of the Church of God upon Earth we have no
Controversy with him, we believe it will be till Christ's second coming, but
whereas he affirms, that the power wherewith our Savior vested the Apostles,
was not to cease or expire with them, we think a Man of Sense would have
distinguished betwixt the extraordinary power which was properly Apostolical,
and that ordinary Pastoral power which was eminently comprehended in the other;
as to the former we do not find that it was designed to outlive their Persons,
and therefore in this we know of no Successors that they have, their call to
this Apostolical power was extraordinary, their Authority was Universal, their
Commission extended to the whole World, and was the same in all Churches. Now
to say that the Bishops which are stated Pastors in an Organical Church are the
Apostles Successors in this Apostolical power, is destructive to their own
Notion of Church Government, and would give the Bishop of Rome as great power
in England as the Archbishop of Canterbury (when there is one.) Indeed as the
Apostolical power did contain [eminenter] the Pastoral power, so far the
Bishops or Pastors of Churches do succeed them; but this cannot be properly
called an Apostolical Succession.

I shall not dispute with him the Episcopal Jurisdiction of Timothy and Titus,
it signifies nothing till the Nature and Extent of that Office be first
determined out of Scripture: Dr. Hammond tells us, all the Elders we read of in
Scripture were Bishops, and that every particular Church had at least one of
these, and no doubt but Ephesus and Creet had such Bishops as well as other
Churches, but whether Timothy and Titus were such is not certain or material;
though their frequent removes from place to place at the command of the
Apostles, makes it very probable that their Office was itinerant and unfixed.
But it is pretty to hear him say these two were ordained the Bishops of Ephesus
and Creet by the Apostles, Was there any Apostle then besides Paul concerned in
it? But here lies the Trick, they must needs be two Bishops, and the
Apostolical Succession must begin in them, and therefore it was necessary to
mention their Ordination by Apostles in the plural, because it does not agree
with the nature of a proper Succession that two Bishops should succeed one
Apostle in his Apostolical power, for then Timothy would have been as much
Bishop of Creet as of Ephesus, and Titus as much Bishop of Ephesus as Timothy,
for the Apostolical power vested by Succession in them extended as much to the
one as the other, and as much to all the World as to either.

And how (pray) could Timothy and Titus succeed the Apostles in the Sees of
Ephesus and Creet, whilst the Apostles were yet living? Were they translated to
a higher Seat, or suspended or degraded, for not owning the Authority of the
Civil Magistrate? To be the Apostles Successors in Apostolical power, the
Apostles yet alive, and in plenitude of power, is a very great Mystery, and
something akin to the honest Vicar of Newport's quondam Prayer that King
Charles the Second might outlive all his Successors.

Whereas he says no Presbyters had power to ordain, I desire him to try how he
will reconcile this with Dr. Hammond, that says these Presbyters were all
Bishops, or indeed with Scripture it self, that says even Timothy received the
gift by the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. 1 Timothy 4.14.


But as to this delicate Notion of Apostolical Succession, he is pleased
further to inform us, that for the propagation thereof, Linus by Apostolical
Consecration Succeeded the Apostles in the Sea of Rome, here is a double blunder
again -- Linus Succeeded whilst the Apostles were alive, for how else could he
have Apostolical Consecration, and Linus a single person Succeeds the Apostles
in the plural: As before the Apostolical power of one Apostle was divided
betwixt two Bishops, Timothy and Titus, so here the power of two or more
Apostles is exhausted by one Bishop who is their Lineal Successor -- and they
still living in full enjoyment of their power; ask him not how can these things
be? they must be so, for Dissenters must be Schismatics, and this is the way
to prove them so, and therefore must be rational and solid, whatever
absurdities our Skeptical Heads discover in it. I need not here take notice how
positively he asserts the immediate Succession of Linus, when all the Learned
Men in the World acknowledge great Difficulties, and uncertainty -- whether
Linus or Cletus were first Bishop, or whether both at once, one as Bishop of
the Circumcision, the other of the Gentiles; As Grotius thinks.
but Ignorance is the rarest thing in the World to make a man bold, and venture
at any thing. Nothing but this Faculty of Ignorance would have emboldened him
to say, as p. 3. That this Line of Apostolic Succession of Bishops, has
continued in all Ages to this present time; an Assertion without the least
shadow of proof; yea, contrary to the Acknowledgments of all Church-Historians.
The very Papists themselves, whose Interest it is to make men believe it was
so, confess there are insuperable difficulties about the Succession of Popes in
the Roman See; and if the Succession be so perplexed there, it must be much
more so in other Churches, whose obscurity in former Ages makes it less
feasible to trace this Line of Succession. -- And though Irenaeus might be able
to [name all the Successors of the Apostolic Churches in his day] yet that
will hardly prove that there has been no interruption since. Irenaeus is said
to have been the Scholar of Polycarp, who was the Disciple of Sr. John, and he
is said to have died in the year of Christ 182. It is therefore very probable
he might remember the names of all that had been Bishops of Rome, Jerusalem and
Alexandria, since he had not much above the space of an hundred years to
burden his memory with; a less man than he can tell who have been Bishops of
Chester for a hundred years -- but does it follow that an uninterrupted
Succession for above 1600 years is equally certain?

I might here enquire how it came to pass that this Apostolical Succession was
propagated in so few Churches as the Patriarchal were; methinks there should
have been as many as the Apostles were. For this man to be so very positive in
these difficult and perplexed points, shows a very great Effrontery; and what
may we not expect from the man that will talk at this rate? And to say, whoever
exercises any Ministerial Office out of this Line of Apostolic Succession, can
be no other than a Lay-Impostor, is to expose Christianity it self, and to
leave the Consciences of all men in the World at an utter uncertainty whether
they have a true Ministry and Ordinances or no. Wretched men! that to support
the beloved Cause of Persecution, will advance a notion destructive to our
common Christianity, and the Peace and Comfort of the Christian World; and
rather than the Dissenters in England should not be Schismatics, will shake
the foundation not only of all the Reformed, but of all the Christian Churches
in the World. Certainly T. W. ought to have been well advised, before he had
given it under his hand, That if there be not an uninterrupted Succession
betwixt all the Bishops in England, and Apostles, they are Lay-Impostors and
Schismatics; and that he and the rest of his Friends have no better evidence
that the Church of England is a true Church, than they have of such a continued
Succession; that they can as soon demonstrate such an unbroken Line, as that
their Ministry and Sacraments are true; and that they have no better proof that
Dissenters are Schismatics than they have of this, nor any better defense of
all the Severities they have used against them than this, and if it should
happen that in almost 1700 years there has been the least breach made upon this
Line, all that they have said and done against Dissenters becomes due to
themselves. Would any man in the World (that was not hired to betray the
Churches Cause) have put it to such an Issue? I am sure no wise man would
venture his Estate upon it: And yet this man has chosen to fix his Church, and
Faith and Salvation upon no better a Foot than this.

For in how many cases may this Line be broken, and all that Apostolic Power
conveyed there be spilt and lost, if there should happen a vacancy in any of
those things he calls Apostolical Churches and Sees for some years, and the
succeeding As the Northumbrian Bishops by the Abbot of Hy.
Incumbent be a person ordained by an Abbot who was no Bishop, as is allowed in
the Roman Church, through which this Authority must be conveyed to us; does not
this make an Intercision in the Line of Episcopal Ordination be so
indispensable? it must do so. I desire to know of this man, or (any other that
encourage him to write little Books) whether this Line of Succession may be
continued in a Schismatical Church, and the Apostolical Power conveyed thereby;
if by Schism Men and Societies are cut off from the Universal Church, as this
Man frequently affirms in his Book, then such Schismatical Churches are no
Churches, nor parts of the Universal Church, and so cannot be the Subjects of
this Apostolical power, and if this power cannot be derived through a
Schismatical Church, then he must grant either that the Church of England has
not this power, or that the Papal Churches through which this Line and Power
runs are not Schismatical, and if they be not, his own Church must be so, for
separating from them; for he allows Separation utterly unlawful, unless from a
Schismatical Church.

But after all, though by this continued Line of Apostolical Episcopal
Succession, he would Exclude all the Reformed Churches beyond Sea that have not
those Governors he will allow to be Scripture Bishops -- Supposing this same
Line (he makes such a splutter about) were certain or necessary, which it is
not, yet till this Man has proved the English Prelacy to be nearer akin to the
Scripture Episcopacy than the Pastoral Office, which is the Episcopacy we
contend for; we stand as fair for any advantage this Notion may afford as his
Party does; for we reverence and maintain Ministerial Ordination, and so are in
the Line still, if such a Line there be, which yet we are no way concerned to
prove, because we look upon Ordination to be no more but a public Approbation
of Ministerial Abilities by competent Judges, and we doubt not but the
Ministers that have such Qualifications themselves are the most competent
Judges thereof in others; but if there should happen a case wherein such
Persons could not be had; As if a company of Christians should be cast upon a
remote Island, or if all the Pastors in a Country should be put to Death, or
all turn Heretics, we doubt not but it would be lawful for a Man of the best
Qualifications, being chosen by the rest, and approved, and set apart by the
most competent Judges amongst them, to Administer in Holy Ordinances to them,
and that he would be a true Minister of Jesus Christ, sufficiently Authorized
to the Work, and a Lay-person no longer; but if we assent to the Whimsey of a
constant Succession (as if power were conveyed like Water in a Conduit after a
Physical manner, by contact passing through the Finger ends of the Prelate into
the Noddle of the Person Ordained) then can no necessity make the practice
aforesaid warrantable, and so the Substance must fail and perish for want of
the Ceremony -- which is contrary to Reason, and the Notions Men have of the
Goodness of God.

This conceit of an entire Apostolical Line, was forged upon the same Anvil
with that of an uninterrupted Succession of English Monarchs, from the Eldest
Son of Noah, whereby a Patriarchal Right descends inseparable from the Person,
Sacred and Irresistible, which has tortured the Ears of all Men of Sense and
Sobriety in these late Times.

The Lewd and Extravagant Caresses that have happened between Ambitious Princes
and Aspiring Churchmen have produced such Twins as these, that lately
threatened the Kingdom with a dismal Fate. No less pretenses than those of
Patriarchal and Apostolical Powers were sufficient for the Usurping an Absolute
Empire over the Civil and Religious Rights of Men; but as we have seen the One
deserted, exposed to just contempt, and renounced by the very Authors thereof,
not in words only, but in actions famous and public throughout the World, so
we doubt not they will to deal with the other, it being of the same extract,
and calculated to serve the very same interest and design.

His fourth page is taken up with proving that to love as Christians in
Scripture Sense is to love as Members of Christ, and obliges us to preserve the
Body from Rents and Schisms, which we never deny; but wonder at some Men, who
notwithstanding all their talk for Peace and Unity, have so little real Love
for it, as to Excommunicate and Damn all those that cannot comply with those
Ceremonies which themselves acknowledge have no Moral goodness in them, and
therefore can be but idle encumbrances upon the Worship of God, which (as one
says of Friendship and Heraldry) is noblest when plainest, bravest when alone:
Certainly such unreasonable Stiffness cannot have much in it of that love,
[which is the Characteristick of Christ's Disciples;] but these Gentlemen think
to excuse their aversation to us, by saying we are not Christians, we are out
of the Catholic Church, this is to make one gross act of Uncharitableness to
excuse for another; but we thank God they are not to be our final Judges.

For our further Conviction we are told [The Communion of Saints is one
External visible Communion of the Christian Church] which is so far from
explaining the thing, that it makes it much darker. We hold Communion in
Essentials with every Church of Christ upon Earth, and in Integrals with all
sound Churches, and we know few Churches, that hold Communion in all
accidentals, nor was such a Communion ever pretended to be necessary. This word
Communion, not rightly understood, nor the sense of it carefully distinguished,
has strangely misled some Men, and is at the bottom of all those clamours that
have filled the Ears of our Rulers, and the whole Nation against us; and this
Man seems as little to understand it as any one that ever pretended to write
upon the Subject. In the fifth page we have an aggregate description of the
Communion of Saints, which we shall particularly examine, and apply to the
present case; the Communion of Saints consists of these things.

1. [A firm Belief of all the Articles of Faith, contained in the Apostolical,
Nicene and Athanasian Creed;] and why not in Scripture? these Creeds are but of
Humane Composition, and some things in them want Explanation, however so far we
are within Communion, though hereby the Greek and other Eastern Churches are
shut out, which the Citizen of Chester has no Commission to do.

2. [To partake all of the same Table] he cannot mean the same individual
Table, but the same Eucharist in specie; so far we are with him still: But
whether this will not exclude the Papists, who by denying the Cup to the Laity,
have taken away in part the matter of the Eucharist, I shall leave to his
second thoughts, who I believe will not be over-forward in Unchurching them,
for fear of breaking the Line by which his own Church hangs.

3. [To join all in the same holy Prayers and Supplications, and in giving
Thanks] he cannot mean that in these Duties we must necessarily use the very
same words, without the least adding, substracting or changing, for then he
Excommunicates all the World, but those of his own persuasion, and a great many
of them too.

4. [To be subject and obedient to our Spiritual Rulers and Governors (who
have derived their Authority from the Apostles by a due Succession) in all
things pertaining to a Godly Life, Decency and Order.] We are very desirous to
give due Honor and Obedience to our Spiritual Governors, who derive their
Authority from Christ, which is more proper than to speak of deriving it from
the Apostles, for Christ is the only Fountain of Authority, and the Streams are
derived rather from the Fountain, than the Cistern; It is observable the Man's
Expression is sunk from an uninterrupted Succession to a due Succession -- to
observe the Apostolical precepts in Government and Worship may make it up a due
Succession, but there is more required to an uninterrupted one than so. Now
before he can say we want this Qualification for Communion, he must prove that
Diocesan Prelates are made our Rulers by a Divine Command. A single Person
taking upon him to govern some thousands of Congregations, by such Rules and
Officers as our English Prelacy uses, and this by the Nomination of the Civil
Magistrate without the Consent of the People, or of the Ministers within the
Diocese, is a Creature we neither find in Scripture, nor in Primitive Times,
and therefore can be no Spiritual Governor of ours by Divine Right, let him
prove this, and he does something; but till this be done, his whole Book is as
insignificant as waste Paper.

When this Man or any one for him, has made it to appear that the Authority of
a Diocesan Prelate, Dean, Lay-Chancellor, etc. over all in the Diocese, is as
certain and Sacred as that of Moses and Aaron; we will not dare to dispute it
for fear of Corah's doom, but till this be evinced, I hope he will not take it
amiss if we be not frightened out of our Wits by such misapplyed Passages,
which we have often heard urged to back the Doctrines of Non-resistance, and
all those Principles of Slavery some Men have been endeavoring to instill into
our Minds, but as we see they have no great regard for such alligations
themselves, when adhering to them would be chargeable and dangerous, so we
believe they cannot heartily blame us if we despise them too.

In the last Paragraph of the fifth page we have the Communion of Saints
described over again, being willing, I suppose, to make up in the Number what
is wanting in Weight, and here we are told all those particular Churches who
agree with the Primitive Catholic Church in all the Articles of Faith, and in
the External Visible Worship and Service of God are true Members of the
Universal Church, and in the Communion of Saints: In what Bounds he will fix
the Primitive Church we know not, certain it is, a Century or two made a very
considerable change in the features of their Government and Worship; but if we
must take our measures by those Courches that are truly Primitive, we fear not
to put our selves to the Trial, That our Congregations have this agreement in
Faith none will deny; and he has not proved that we differ from them in the
Essential or Integral parts of Gods Worship, or in any considerable
circumstance; and that this Divine Worship and Service is Visible and External
this Gentleman is but too sensible, and it is a very great Eyesore to such as
he that it is so much more Visible than formerly it has been.

If we will take his confident and repeated assertions for demonstration, we
may believe that the Church of England has from the first planting of the
Gospel here, retained the Apostolical power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by
an uninterrupted Succession of Archbishops and Bishops in a right Line from
the Apostles days to this present time; but how uncertain this is, and how
inconsistent with other parts of his Book I suppose has been sufficiently
manifested, I shall therefore take no farther notice of it, especially because
that, till the true Bounds of Episcopal Power be fixed by Scripture Rules, it is
as impertinent as uncertain.

After he has thus delivered himself of his crude and confused apprehensions,
he tells Mr. H. he has done it as cleanly as he could, and that may be true
enough for ought I know, but it is no fault of Mr. H's, he could do it no
better; his Capacity and Employment indeed may be some excuse for his blunders,
but will by no means lessen the fault of his officious and confident
impertinency in meddling with things he so little understands.

We are no way concerned in the Citation of the Fathers brought in against us,
till he has proved that Episcopacy then was the same thing it is now, and that
the terms of Communion we scruple were ever imposed by them.

Ignatius charges the Bishop in his time to take a personal cognizance of every
Member of his Church, not excepting the very Servants: It was the Custom then
in every Congregation to receive the Sacrament every Lords day, and they never
received it [nisi ex Antistitis manu] but from the Hand of the Bishop, What
could such Bishops be more than Pastors of single Congregations; but I shall
forbear dipping into this Argument which has been so copiously managed by
Blondel, Baxter, Owen, Clarkson, and others.

It is observable in the passage cited out of Irenaeus, the Presbyters are said
to have their Succession from the Apostles; it seems they were the Apostles
Successors as well as Bishops, surely then they must have the same power; if
the Bishops claim the power they have as the Apostles Successors, then must all
the Successors of the Apostles have the same power; the Rule is known a
quatenus ad omne. It is plain by this that Apostolical Succession in the sense
of those times, was not any such fine Aerial Thread as this Man speaks of, but,
Conformity to the Apostles model in Government and Worship, and those that best
observe that, are in the truest sense the Apostles Successors, whether the Line
has been broke by intervening Heretics and Schismatics or no.

We all grant that for Persons wilfully to withdraw themselves from such
particular Churches as are framed according to Scripture Rules, and impose no
new or needless terms, is to act Schismatically, because such wilful Separation
when no cause is given cannot be without breach of Charity with our Fellow
Christians, which is the Scripture Notion of Schism, and this Mr. Henry himself
grants, and calls it Separation for Separation's sake, which T.W. might have
taken notice of had he designed fair dealing.

But this is not at all proved to be our case. We earnestly desire Episcopacy
may be reduced to its proper Sphere, that every particular Church may have its
Bishop and Presbyters, and so power within it self to admonish, suspend and
reject scandalous Persons; we desire the Rules of the Gospel may be carefully
looked into, and a Model of Government and Worship taken from thence, such as
may be likely to answer the great Ends of Church Societies, that nothing may be
imposed but what is either expressly commanded, or has a natural and proper
tendency to promote that which is so; then would the Worship of God appear like
it self, rational, grave, and majestical, becoming reasonable Creatures to
offer, and a Being of perfect Simplicity and Spirituality to receive; nor would
we (as we are accused) under pretense of Spirituality, reject the natural
decorum of an Action in Divine Worship, but only lay aside those Formalities
that are over and above natural decency, which in civil converse are counted
foppish, and daily grow out of repute betwixt Man and Man, and are no where so
improper as in the Service of God.

It is certainly a very odd Custom these Men have taken up against us, if they
find in any of the Fathers the word Bishop, they presently transfer it a
Diocesan Prelate; if they read of Breaking off from the Communion of the
Bishop, it must be immediately applied to the practice of Dissenters in
England. When alas till the Extent of Power, way of coming into Office and
Charge, terms of Admission, etc. be proved to be tantamount to what they now
are; bare words will conclude nothing at all.

And yet without so much as offering to prove any thing of this, T.W. will
needs persuade Mr. H. to confess himself a Schismatic, and so out of the
Catholic Church, and possibility of Salvation.

Though we need not concern our selves to soften or extenuate the fault of
Schism, no such thing being proved against us -- yet it may not be amiss to
take notice how this eager Man over-shoots himself in these matters; he first
makes all those Churches Schismatical that do not agree with the Primitive
Catholic Church in Faith, Worship, and Government, without adjusting the
measures of such Agreement, as if every little difference made a Schism, which
would bear hard upon all the Churches at this day in the World -- And when he
has done this, he cuts off all these Schismatical Societies from being parts of
the Catholic Church, or under a possibility of Salvation -- It must needs
follow from hence, that Popish Churches (to say nothing of others) must be
Schismatical, for they vary notoriously from the Primitive in Faith,
Government, and Worship, as I suppose this Man will grant -- all those Churches
therefore since this Variation, were no parts of the Catholic Church; that is,
no Churches at all, and by consequence (according to him) their Bishops must be
but Lay-Impostors, their Ordinations null and void, the Line of Communication
broken, the Apostolical Power lost, and all England in a state of Damnation;
and all this is the Effect of overgreat earnestness to prove the Dissenters
Schismatics.

We have with a great deal of Patience examined T.W's Notions of the Church, of
Communion and Unity; and whether there be any thing observable in them besides
Ignorance, Confusion and Contradiction, is left to the Judgment of the Reader.
That which remains is to view the Remarks he has made upon Mr. H's Book.

The Instance of Eldad and Medad, was never designed to run of all four; but
thus far it is to the purpose, as it proves that God has not limited his People
in Religious Actions so nicely to the public places, as some would pretend;
and that even good Men are apt too severely to censure such actions when
managed out of the usual Method, before they fully understand the reason of the
thing; and that meek and humble Men like Moses, who are more concerned for the
Substance, than Circumstances of Religion, would not deny the Church the
advantage of those Gifts which God has bestowed upon Men, even though the
exercise of them might seem to derogate from their own Grandeur; those general
Inferences naturally follow from the place, and the application of them is not
improper as this Man fancies; whatever the Office of this Man was to be, yet
doubtless this Act of prophesying was of a Sacred rather than [a Civil nature]
and though under that Economy, the Priests were principally engaged in the
Ceremonial part of Worship; yet in the Moral part the Prophets often bore a
share; which was discovering the mind of God to the People, and pressing them
to Obedience, and it is to this rather than the Priestly Office that a Gospel
Minister succeeds.

If these Men demand [we should give as signal proof of our Authority to the
Bishops -- as Eldad and Medad could to Moses] I hope we may expect that the
Bishops should give as signal proof of their Authority as Moses could do; but
if extraordinary Commission need not be pretended in the one case, we suppose
there is as little need of it in the other; and we are ready to give
satisfaction to all the World, of the ordinary Warrant, which consists in
suitable Qualifications enquired into, and approved by such as the Scripture
calls Bishops.

Upon Mr. H's bare mentioning of the Worshippers of the Diana of their own
opinion. T. W. charges him with saucy Language, but Mr. H. needs not come to
this Man to learn how to speak; the reflection Mr. H. made was general, that
there are such cannot be denied -- and let it fall where it is due -- but why
must this of Necessity be spoke of the Bishops; such an invidious innuendo in
the last Reign might have cost a Man dear, of which Mr. Baxter is a memorable
Instance. But T.W. will answer for the Bishops (and they are certainly very
happy in such an Advocate) that if the Punctilio's of Opinion do not cause a
separate Communion, they will not censure that for Schism; But what if they
make these Punctilio's of Opinion the terms of Communion, do they not then
become the true causes of that Schism which they censure -- for in this case
what must we do -- must we immediately lay aside our Opinions, and jump all of
a sudden into the same Sentiments with them? That cannot be done till the
evidence and force of Reason does it; must we then subscribe and profess our
assent to what we do not believe? That T. W. himself has already condemned as
downright Hypocrisy and Knavery page 10. parag. 4.
-- Must we then quite desert the public Worship of God and turn Pagans? I
hope they will not say so; Then there is no other course left but to meet
together our selves, and Worship God in places distinct from the Imposers, and
whatever there is culpable in this breach falls upon those that made such
little Opinions terms of Communion, which might have been preserved entire
without them.

That which next falls in our way is a pleasant Instance, as this Man calls it,
of an innocent difference in Opinion -- but it had been much more for his
Reputation to have denied himself the pleasure of it; he tells us it was Mr.
H's Fathers Opinion that it was best to put him to be a Lawyer's or Attorney's
Clerk; this is one of the many Falsehoods, a Debauched Club have contrived
against a Person who upon all accounts deserved better treatment; Mr. H. needs
not be ashamed to own that he spent some considerable time in the Inns of
Court, but with no design of making that his business; and the honorable
Acquaintance and Respect he has gained thereby have set his Name far above all
the little malicious calumnies of this Man or his Myrmidons: He has so little
to do as to tell the World that he was put to a Mercer; this is a discovery of
very public Concernment without doubt, for which the World is greatly obliged
to him; as for his Neighbors they needed not much the Information, some of
them have but too much reason to remember it; but the envious Man must needs
expose himself, to introduce an idle flam which he thought might lessen Mr. H's
Reputation.

He says he has proved Diversity or Separation of Communion to be the formalis
ratio of Schism: The greatest Charity that any Man can have for him, is to
believe that he does not here understand what he says -- for it is a downright
giving the Lie to the Apostle Paul, who charges the Corinthians with the guilt
of Schism when there was no such Separation -- and can there be Schism without
the ratio formalis, the proper nature of Schism; does he not know that Forma
dat esse rei -- could none of his Club teach him that scrap of Reason, or at
least advise him to adjourn writing of Books till he has learned common sense?

Upon the Apostle Paul's Exhortation to the Corinthians to be of one mind, Mr.
H. made this Remark, that it must be understood of Fundamentals, for to be so
in every little thing is morally impossible -- and that where they are advised
to speak the same things, it is as if he should say in your Preaching and
Converse speak of those things only wherein you are agreed, which fair and
rational Comment T. W. most maliciously perverts, as if Mr. H. allowed Men to
speak one thing and think another; and so he runs a long and dull ramble, how
well it would do; would he go to Rome and Constantinople, and set up with this
Notion, of speaking only of things wherein all are agreed -- But is there no
difference betwixt concealing our thoughts, and speaking contrary to them?
Could Mr. H. have dispensed with such doings he might have subscribed to the
Articles and Homilies -- as Articles of Peace, not of Truth, as some others
have distinguished, though most Men thought they did it as to Articles of
Preferment. Is there no difference betwixt forbearing to Preach upon those
lesser Controversies that might be amongst the Corinthians, and waving those
Fundamental Doctrines by which we are distinguished from Papists and
Mahometans: Is it not a shame so notoriously to wrest plain words, and make
them speak things never intended: Does not this Man know that in the Reign of
King Charles the First (his Prince of incomparable Piety) there was a strict
prohibition against Preaching upon the Quinquarticular Points; and do not many
of our Clergy tell us, the Articles of the Church of England are expressed in
words of that Latitude, as may be subscribed by either Arminians or Calvinists;
and do they not applaud the thing wonderfully, as if done out of a prudent and
peaceable design; and yet the very same Sentiments in Mr. H. must be
represented as downright Hypocrisy and Knavery, and thought to deserve no
better a reply, than a piece of the meanest sort of Rallery, which he calls his
Harrangue forfooth; a man may hear twenty such Harrangues [as full of Wit and
Sence] at Billings-gate almost every day in the year.

To say it is morally impossible to be of the same mind in every thing, is no
bar either to Argumentation or Preaching, as he pretends, few Persons that are
fit either to argue or preach, will make every little difference the matter of
their Discourse; but the practice which T. M. has undertaken to vindicate, that
is, forcing to declare their assent where they have had no convincing evidence,
would indeed render Argumentation ridiculous. To reason Men into an Opinion
does not very well consist with hectoring, fining and forcing them into it; I
am sure such Practice precludes all reasoning, or any other Methods proper to
work upon a rational Crearure.

He gives us Dr. Hammonds Paraphrase upon the Text, viz. That ye all teach the
same Doctrines, and nourish Charity and Unity, that there be no Divisions in
Churches, but that ye be Compacted and United as Members of the same Body in
the same Belief and Affection: and then he triumphantly demands, Is not this
quite different from your Exposition? If this Man's Judgment were but half the
size of his Spleen and Confidence, he might easily see a very good Agreement
betwixt these two Expositions. Dr. Hammond understands the place, as obliging
to preach the same Doctrine; so does Mr. H. and to nourish Charity and prevent
Division, and to be of one Faith and Affection; so does Mr. H. too: But does
the Doctor any where affirm that this obliges men to be of the same Opinion in
every Punctilio? (which is all Mr. H. denies) No, he has not one word to that
purpose -- Where then lies this mighty difference? truly in nothing but this.
Mr. H. makes the thing more plain, and urges it more home than the Doctor --
for since Unity and Charity ought to be nourished, and yet different Opinions
will be held; This Apostolical Rule obliges men not to make their differing
Sentiments in these smaller things the matter of their Preaching, much less
Terms of Communion; for then it will be impossible to preserve the Unity and
Charity pleaded for; and now let all Mankind judge whether Mr. H's Comment does
any way abate the force of the Apostles Exhortation to Unity, or rather,
whether it does not greatly promote the same by censuring and exposing those
Practices that are destructive thereof.

Nay, this very man in the next Paragraph, page 12. confesses that [the Apostle
aimed not at all different Opinions in mere Notions and Speculations] which is
the very same assertion he has treated so scurrilously in Mr. H. he says the
Apostle meant only those different Opinions that break Communion; but how come
different Opinions to have that effect, but by being made Conditions of
Communion? and must not the fault then lie upon those that make them so? For
had that been forborne, the Communion might have been preserved entire still, as
has been before showed.

He derides Mr. H. for not knowing that a perfect Conjunction in the Catholic
Church and Communion of Saints, is required of all those that are to come to a
World of Everlasting Perfection. And all the sober part of Mankind will deride
him for so confused and gross an Assertion; for if that be true, then must none
be saved, who are imperfect [in Faith] or in their [partaking of the Lords
Supper] or imperfect in Prayers, and in obedience to Ecclesiastical Rulers in
all things pertaining to a godly Life] page 5. parag. 3.
for these things make up the Communion of Saints, as he himself tells us, and
then it is time for T. W. to look about him, for I fear the last would exclude
him, though he could pretend Perfection in all the rest.

He acknowledges the Corinthians were accused [of that which Mr. H. calls
Schism] for admiring one Minister above another. But why of that which Mr. H.
calls Schism? does not the Apostle himself call it so, as positively as Mr. H.
but it was not convenient to own that, because he had told us, that diversity
of Communion was the formalis Ratio of Schism; and if so, the Corinthians could
not be charged with it; either therefore the Apostle falsely accused the
Corinthians, or this man's Notion of Schism is false; and here we hold the
point, and have brought it to a fair Issue; if this man has a mind to quarrel
with St. Paul, he may take his course, but he may do well to consider he
engages himself against the Spirit of God; and who ever contended with his
Maker and prospered?

He accuses Mr. H. of scandalizing St. Paul in saying he preferred Soul
Salvation before his own Credit; but I am assured St. Paul would not take this
for a Scandal -- for he was ever willing to sacrifice his Name and Reputation
to the blessed Interest of Christ and the Gospel; I wish this man were
chargeable with no grosser Scandals than these.

It is very unfairly insinuated, That Mr. H. thinks it as great a Crime to
silence him, as it would have been to have silenced the Apostles; He is far
from making any such Comparison, but it will be found criminal enough to
silence the least of Christ's faithful Ministers, for what is done to them he
takes as done to himself; and for him to say Mr. H. is no Minister, is purely
precarious, and shall be granted the first hour that he has proved it, and he
cannot reasonably expect we should acknowledge it before.

Mr. H. in his little Book has this Expression; It appears, That
narrow-spiritedness which confines Religion and the Church to one way and
party, whatever it is, to the condemning of others that differ from us in
little things, is the bane of the Christian-Church; a Sentence to which all
those will subscribe, who either understand, or wish well to the common
Interest of Christianity; what fault then will T. W, find with it? He tells us
Religion is the Bond of Unity; that is to say, where there is no true practical
Religion, there can be no real Church Unity; Is not this the meaning? If it be,
it will turn abundance of our fierce Contenders for the Ceremonies out of
doors; He asks, Did you ever know a Religion without Bounds and Rules, for all
of that Religion to be confined to, even to a Punctilio? Sir, we know no
Religion but what is contained in the Word of God, nor any necessary Bounds and
Rules but what are there laid down; and we find none there obliging to exact
Uniformity in your Ceremonies; nay, on the contrary, we find Rules laid down
for mutual forbearance in such things; and for denying our selves in what we
might lawfully do, when the doing of it would offend tender Consciences; and if
we must suspend our own Act and Freedom for fear of such Offense, it can never
be lawful for us to force our Practice upon others; and whoever do so, observe
not the Rules, nor confine themselves within the Bounds Religion has fixed, but
are convicted by the Word of God of schismaticating Practices, how eager soever
they may be to fasten the brand upon others: If this man's way of living had not
made him more conversant with L'Estrange's Observators, than with the Sacred
Scriptures, he would never talk at such an odd rate concerning the Rules and
Bounds of Religion, as he does.

He enquires, whether They of our Conventicling Communion have not Rules of
their own making, by which they are distinguished and confined -- To give him a
plain Answer, We utterly disclaim making any Terms of Communion but what Christ
has made; we desire no more but a credible Profession of Faith and Holiness, in
order to admission to the most solemn Ordinances; we require no Oaths,
Subscriptions, Declarations of assent and consent to Canons and Homilies and
Liturgies of humane Composure; and if there be any thing that distinguishes
from other Parties, it is the Gospel Simplicity of our Worship, and the absence
of those little Toys, others value themselves so much upon; and as protesting
for Scripture Sufficiency in Matters of Doctrine distinguishes Protestants from
Papists, so in Matters of Government and Worship it distinguishes us from you;
and thus by leaving the Bounds of Church Communion, as wide and large as Christ
has left them, we escape the reproach and guilt of that Narrow-spiritedness
which would retrench the same, and yet after all, are far from thinking all
true Religion and Christianity, and Salvation confined to those of our
Persuasion.

Now comes our Citizen to cast in our Teeth all the Irregularities and
Distractions of the Civil Wars; the old threadbare Cant, which has been a rare
pretense for all those Brutal Excesses that have been acted upon us for these
many years; wherein has been the most horrid Misrepresentation of matters of
Fact that were ever advanced in the same Age wherein the things were done.

The true causes of that War are so well known to all the World, and have of
late met with so public and Authentic a vindication, that they need not my
Apology. All our Historians, even those that are most devoted to the Court
Interest, acknowledge there were the greatest Encroachments imaginable made
upon the Liberties of the Subject from the very first appearance of that
unhappy Prince in the Government, the Foundation whereof was laid in his
Fathers Reign. For when King James the first Ascended Englands Throne, the
Prelatick Party dreading lest the Puritans would have too great a share of his
Favors, upon the account of his Education, and the Influence the Scottish
Nobility and Ministry might have upon him, bent all their Studies to create in
him a prejudice against them, and finding no Bait was so like to take with him,
as the extending of his Authority, and enlarging the Prerogative, which had
perhaps been too much limited by his Ancient Subjects, they flattered the
Ambition and Vices of that Prince, and thereby made him entirely their own; and
this was indeed the true Origin of all the misfortunes of Succeeding times --
for when once the Fence is broke, and the Landmark removed, it is hard to fix
it again, but the loosned Hind will wander endlesly. Buoyed up with
expectations of an Absolute Power his Son begins a Fatal Reign, during which
there was not one Parliament from his very first year to his Exit, that did not
seriously remonstrate the Grievances of the Nation, and humbly Petition they
might be redressed: The Levying of Tunnage and Poundage without Act of
Parliament, the Illegal Imprisonment of Peers, Extravagant Dispositions of
Crown Lands were the Early Complaints of his Reign -- Granting Commissions to
require Money under the Title of a Loan, Imprisoning Persons of Quality that
refused to pay that which they had no pretense of Law to demand, and denying
them the Privilege of Habeas Corpus when they moved for it, Menacing of
Parliament, telling them if they would not grant him sufficient Sums of Money
for his Occasion, he would take some other course -- openly in Parliament
threatening those Gentlemen that opposed these Violences -- calling them Vipers
-- and sending at one clap seven worthy Gentlemen to the Tower -- whereof
Denzen Holles and the Great Seldom were two -- and this for no other Crime, but
in a Parliamentary way opposing the Kings Arbitrary proceedings. The suspicious
actions of the Marquess of Hamilton in raising Forces, discovered to my Lord
Rhees Maccay to be designed for England in the Seventh year of this Reign, the
whole Story (which had a very ill Aspect) all those can tell who have any
Acquaintance with the History of those Times. The breaking to pieces that brave
and pious design of buying up Impropriations for the maintenance of a preaching
Ministry, and consiscating to the Kings use vast Sums of Money given by
well-disposed Persons for that purpose; the greatest piece of Sacrilege that
was ever heard of. The Declaration for Sports on the Lords day, and Suspending
and Depriving of Ministers for not reading it; the Hectoring such Judges and
Justices of the Peace, as made Orders of Court against Rioting and Revelling on
that Sacred Day. The Exacting of a new invented Tax called Ship Money in the
Twelfth year of his Reign, and proceeded to give Judgment against the
Defaulters.

The Extravagant and Tyrannical proceeding of the Star Chamber, the Suspending
of Bishop Williams ab Officio and Beneficio -- by the mischievous malice of
Archbishop Laud of Blessed Memory. And to fill up the measure, the imposing the
English Liturgy upon Scotland added to the many Violations of the Constitution
of that Kingdom -- these are the known occasions of that unhappy Breach betwixt
that King and his Parliament, which I have taken a more particular notice of,
not to vindicate our selves -- for the challenge has been often made to Name
four Persons in that whole Parliament that were not in full and complete
Communion with the Church of England as by Law Established when the War begun
-- but to vindicate the Nation, for it was a general and common case; and those
Men have been very disingenuous and unjust to their Country who have put such
false and dismal Colors upon a War to which the Nation was forced in defense
of those Privileges which they had derived from their Ancestors by a Title as
Sacred and Inviolable, as the greatest Monarch has unto his Crown; it is true
indeed the Bishops were many of them great Sufferers, their Honor and Interest
obliged them to stand by the King and his Courtiers, and to vindicate those
Extravagancies where of they were the principal Causes and Instruments, and
that was the reason of the Parliaments readiness to lay that Order wholly aside
that had for the support of their own Grandeur abetted and consecrated the
violation of the Laws and Liberties of England: I am no way obliged to defend
all the Irregularities and Distractions that happened upon that War -- when
once the Sword is drawn, and Men are flushed with Blood and Victory it is
impossible they should be kept within due Bounds, and not be too severe upon
those who had acted the first part upon that Tragical Scene; every Body knows
the Complexion of that War was at length greatly changed, and it was pursued
far beyond the first design, but the blame of all belongs to those that were
the first Aggressors, and made it necessary by force to withstand that Torrent
of Arbitrariness that bore down all Legal Fences before it. And yet it is
notoriously false that all the Episcopal Clergy were then Silenced and
Sequestered, there were many of them connived at, and preached all along those
Times; indeed there were many of them (as they are now) notoriously Debauched,
and lamentably ignorant, and it will be hard to persuade us that the removing
of such is any great Curse to the Nation; there was an allowance given for the
maintaining of those that lost their Places, for refusing to submit to the
Powers that then were; during that time, it cannot be proved, that the
Presbyterians ever varied from the true Interest of the Nation -- but always
endeavored to maintain the Balance betwixt an unlimited Monarchy on the one
hand, and Popular fury and confusion on the other, and thousands of them lost
their lives upon that Score; and at length by their Address and Interest,
(under God) the Nation was prepared to receive the Banished Prince; the solemn
Promises, fair Words, and great Assurances that were made them by the Church
and Court Party, upon the Treaty of Restoration, are very well known; and the
speedy and barefaced violation of all, is not to be paralleled in Story, in
little more than two years time, two thousand of these Ministers were turned
out of their Office and Livings, when Scandal or Insufficiency were never so
much as pretended, only because they would not declare their Assent and Consent
to three Books of Humane Composure, and all and every thing therein contained
-- and made incapable of teaching Schools, and a while after Banished five
Miles from the places of their former Ministry, and from Corporations, that
there might be no possibility of escaping to Starve -- and ever since treated
with the greatest Scorn and Hatred imaginable, and made the Song of the
Drunkard -- some thousands of Families (as can be made to appear) crushed and
almost ruined, Houses rifled, Prisons filled, and many forced to leave their
Native Country; and all this acted against them by the very Men they had let
into the Nation, contrary to the minds of a more wary and politic Party, who
have not failed frequently to upbraid them with it; over these things we are
willing to draw a Curtain, did not this Man, and such as he, force us to speak
the naked truth in our own defense? It is necessary indeed that these Men
should render us odious, as can be imagined, for all the World must own either
we are the worst of Men, or they that have treated us so barbarously, must be
so themselves. But blessed be God we have a King upon the Throne that
understands and loves the true Interest of England too well, to regard such
calumnies as these, which indeed our former Princes knew to be false, though to
serve a wretched Interest they would sometimes seem to believe them.

I now return with T.W. to Mr. H's Book -- he would fain have Mr. H. to make
this Conclusion -- if having one Minister in admiration above another be
Schism, how much more am I a Schismatic who am no Minister but keep up a
Communion separate from the Church of God -- That is to say, if Mr. H. in
compliment to this Man will own his Ordination to be invalid, and his
Congregation no part of the Church of God, then T. W. will prove him a
Schismatic -- but what if Mr. H. will not grant this, why then the Man must
prove it, and that is more than he can do; I am sure he has not yet done any
thing like it.

Mr. H. and the Citizen are both agreed in this, That is Schism which breaks or
slackens the Bond by which the Members are knit together -- but they are not
agreed what this Bond is, Mr. Henry says it is true Love and Charity -- the
Unity of the Spirit, and Bond of Peace; not an Act of Uniformity obliging to
Communion in the same Modes and Ceremonies.

T. W. does not think fit to say, that an Act of Uniformity is the Bond -- but
says the breach of Communion breaks the Bond by which the Members are knit
together -- which according to his own sense is but to say the breach of
Communion breaks Communion, for he makes Communion, and the Bond the same; this
is to be attributed to his Ignorance in the meaning of this term Communion,
which I have before taken notice of; if he mean for us to meet and Worship God
in places different from theirs, and without the Ceremonies they use, does
necessarily destroy Love and Charity -- we must tell him, it is only with such
Men as himself that are captivated to a Party -- for all Men of Sense and
Sobriety, can retain Christian Love and Charity for all that agree with them in
Essentials and Integrals of Religion, notwithstanding lesser differences -- Mr.
H. says if the Bond of Unity betwixt the Members of Christ be Love and Charity,
then it is not an Act of Uniformity in point of Communion in the same Modes and
Ceremonies; this T.W. says is a manifest contradiction -- but I am persuaded no
Man alive besides himself can find it out; I hope Communion in the same Modes
and Ceremonies is not the only or the Essential Communion of Saints; by this
every Church would Damn all the rest for their different Modes of Worship --
the Bond by which the Members are united, must be something common to all
Christians, which the Ceremonies cannot be -- therefore our not joining with
them in these cannot necessarily break that Bond so long as we retain that
which is Common and Essential to Christianity -- that is, Faith and Charity;
the breach of the former is Heresy, and of the latter Schism.

Mr. H's Definition of Schism is this [Schism is an uncharitable Distance,
Division or Alienation of Affiction, amongst those who are called Christians,
and agree in the Fundamentals of Religion occasioned by their different
apprehensions about little things.] T.W. says he has condemned him out of his
own Mouth -- In good time -- How does that appear? why, breach of Christian
Communion is certainly the breach of Christian Charity; the old blunder -- Sir,
we hold Communion with you in all that is necessary either to the being or
welfare of a Church; and by your unnecessary Trifles you break with us, and not
we with you, if any breach there be.

From the Definition of Schism, Mr. H. infers, There may be Separation of
Communion where there is no Schism; for thus we all agree, there may be
difference of apprehension and yet no Schism, provided it do not eat out
Christian Love, but be managed amicably as betwixt the Arminians and the
Calvinists in the Church of England; and adds, if this difference in Opinion be
about Modes of Worship, there must be distinct Communion. Here T. W. exclaims
against him, for illogical reasoning, in bringing an instance to justify
Separate Communion from Schism, where there was no Separate Communion at all.

But a little consideration would have spoiled this Triumph; Mr. H's arguing is
this -- If there may be different apprehensions about Doctrinal matters without
breach of Charity, why may there not be different apprehensions about matters
of Worship and terms of Conformity -- without breach of Charity, and
consequently without Schism? If I may love and honor a Man, that is not of my
mind, nor expresses himself after my manner about the Divine Decrees, the
Operations of Grace, and the Consistency thereof with the freedom of Man's Will,
etc. why may I not likewise love and honor that Man that differs from me,
about a stinted Form, the Cross in Baptism -- Bowing at the Altar and Name of
Jesus? are these things of greater importance than the former -- Oh but says
he, you break Communion about these things -- for you will not join with us in
them -- What, must I join with things I judge unlawful? Is there that fatal
necessity laid upon me that I must either be a Hypocrite or a Schismatic? And
has God made it necessary to Salvation, to know that all these things are
lawful -- if you will not suffer me to Communicate with you, except I join with
you in those things we must Worship God in another place with those that will
not so impose upon us, and yet we will love as Christians still -- here is no
breach of Charity on our side, and if so no Schism; for if the formal nature of
Schism be breach of Charity, as Mr. H. has proved, (and this Man cannot deny
without giving the Lie to Scripture, as he has done) then Separate Communion
may be without Schism, and the reason of the Consequence is, because Separate
Communion may be without breach of Charity -- T. W. says it cannot, for it is
naturally and infallibly the cause of the hottest and fiercest Contentions, and
highest breach of Charity. That is to say T. W. finds he must necessarily hate
and revile us, and after the fiercest manner contend with us, because we pray
without a stinted Form, and he prays with one -- because we take no more notice
of the Altar than of the Pulpit, whilst he bows toward it -- because our
Ministers preach in Cloaks, and his in a Surplice -- And if it be so natural
and necessary for him, to run out into the highest breaches of Charity against
us upon this account we cannot help it, but heartily pity him; but if he will
search to the bottom, he may find that his unruly passions, and rampant pride
are the natural and infallible causes of such Contentions -- and these distinct
Modes of Worship are but the occasions, or perhaps but the pretenses thereof.
We know very well there are a great many of the Conformists, that we love and
honor, and can live very peaceably and quietly with them, and have very
intimate converse together, and they have the like respect for us,
notwithstanding those different practices which he calls Separate Communion,
they earnestly desire the Ceremonies in Debate might be laid aside, because the
Papists have not only spit upon them, as the Bishop of Salisbury speaks, but
have made them Tools of Discord and Mischief -- and if all the Members of the
late Convocation had been like some few -- we should have hoped the Bone of
Contention would have been removed, and I know not what such Men as T. W. would
then have done for a Cloak to cover their Malice -- but though that Assembly
failed the expectation of the King and Country -- yet we are not without hopes
it will come to that at last; however in the mean time we are very desirous to
be peaceable, and glad we can be so -- and if these men are resolved they will
have no Charity, for any but their own Party, let them wipe off the guilt of
Schism as well as they can.

We now come to his citations out of Calvin, that we ought not to separate from
a Church upon the account of many blemishes, and we say so too; but if those
blemishes and corruptions be made Terms of Communion, and we must testify our
approbation of them, it will greatly alter the case; we know there are
blemishes in the purest Societies -- but when we must be obliged to admire and
praise these Deformities we shall desire to be excused, and that is our Case.

The Three Letters of Le Moyne, L' Angle and Claude have been already reflected
upon by some of the Answerers of Dr. Stillingfleet -- it appears by many
passages therein, that they have been very much misinformed concerning our
Practice, and the Grounds thereof; as if we thought none in Communion with the
Church of England could be saved; that we are the only Men in the Nation that
are predestined to Salvation -- and such like things for which we are greatly
obliged to those that have thus represented us -- but those that would be
further satisfied in the disingenuity of some Men toward us, and what Arts
they have used to procure the Suffrage of Foreign Divines against us, may read
the three last pages of Mr. Rules Rational Account, to which I could add
something my self were it not an invidious piece of work.

When Mr. H. used these words, Whether they be Episcopal, Presbyterian,
Independent, or by what Name or Title soever they be self-dignified or
distinguished: T. W. charges him with Malice against the Clergy, as if he meant
them only -- whence so gross a mistake should happen, I know not, unless it be
from the same cause that makes every thing look yellow to some that have been
afflicted with predominancy of Choler, it is plain Mr. H's design was to
censure the vanity of assuming to our selves the Title of a Party, or valuing
our selves upon it, which certainly has done much mischief: But this must needs
reflect upon the Archbishops and Bishops, which he says are Orders Instituted
by the Apostles in the Church of God, and from them continued to this present
Age without Interruption -- and for this he refers us to 1 Cor. 12.28. And God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly
Teachers helps Out of some little cunning design no doubt.
-- Governments (...), though he puts it helps in Government -- but where is the
Archbishop and Diocesan Bishop -- he says God has set them up, but we cannot
tell where; all that he says concerning Mr. H's despising and speaking evil of
Dignities proceeds from nothing but the Spleen -- We reverence the Bishops as
they are vested by our Laws with a Civil Power circa Sacra, and as many of them
are Men of great Learning and Worth, but cannot allow them to be our Governors
by a Divine appointment till we see it better proved.

Sir, That Act of Parliament by which we enjoy our present Liberty, and which
is your intolerable grievance -- does not carry the Title of Indulgence, as you
affirm -- it has in it the very words permitted and allowed, which you ought
not to have been ignorant of, and had you taken as much delight in conversing
with this Act, as those by which we have been so unkindly oppressed, you would
not have needed to have been told this: It Is true this Act does not Authorize
our Churches, nor Annex the Benefices to them -- but as we need not the former,
for we derive our Authority higher -- so we are not at all discontented for
want of the latter -- you tell us it is given us for the hardness of our
Hearts, we might here very well retort and say it was rather given for the
hardness of your Hearts -- who turned the Edge of Laws made chiefly against
Papists, to destroy your Fellow Protestants, which was declared by one of the
best of English Parliaments to be greatly serviceable to the Popish Interest,
and the ready way to bring ruin upon Protestants, and a Bill brought in for the
Uniting of us -- how that Parliament was represented by such Men as these, and
what thanks they had for running those great hazards for their Countries
preservation is sufficiently known.

The Story he brings of Barrow, Penry, and Burchet, signifies nothing, but the
Malice of the Relator; the two former who were Brownists flew so high, as with
this Man, to unchurch and condemn all besides their own Party, which is indeed
a very ill Principle, and none ever more guilty of it than T. W. Burchet was
Hanged for Killing his Keeper; would it not be thought a very ill thing for us,
to charge upon the whole Episcopal Party, the Odium and Guilt of all the Rogues
and Felons that have died at Tyburn in their Communion? We challenge this Man,
or any of his Abettors, to show any one Principle of ours, that has the least
Aspect toward Treason, or any practices of that kind we have been guilty of,
though under the greatest provocations -- We vindicate not the Extravagancies
of the Brownists, nor will the sober Men of his own Party vindicate the severe
handling of Udal -- Barrow, etc. as Dr. Fuller himself testifies; That Great
Princess had something of the ^^re in her, and there wanted not Prela^^ck
Breath to blow the Spark into a flame.

Mr. Baxter's Censure of a Universal Toleration, which he would twit us with;
agrees with the sense of every wise and good Man in England; but surely there is
a great deal of difference betwixt tolerating all, how Erroneous soever their
Tenets may be, and giving ease, to such, as only differ from you in Ceremonies,
which your selves confess might well be spared; if this Man knows no Medium
betwixt tolerating the grossest Heresies, and Blasphemous Opinions, and tying
all Men up to the very same Punctilio with our selves, he shall never be a
Privy Councillor.

He falls very foul on Mr. H. for saying the Unthinking Mobile are so well
taught as to know no other Churches but the public places of Worship, are
easily induced to believe we leave the Church: This he says is highly
reproachful, as if the Pastors of the Church seduced the people to believe that
which is false -- Mr. H. does not charge them with having seduced them to
believe what is false, but they are indeed very many of them justly chargeable
with not having sufficiently taught them what is true -- for our most common
Experience assures us, that there is amongst you a Debauched Ignorant Rabble,
that Rant and Swear against our Hearers upon this very account, and never offer
at any other reason, but that they leave the Church -- for you to deny that
there are such a Crew, is to trample upon our Senses, and persuade us we can
neither hear nor see. How many of the Privy Council, Judges and Magistrates
believe us to be Schismatics we know not, but we do not think any of them
grounds the charge merely upon our leaving the Churches, which was all Mr. H.
spoke of here -- when you have proved that the presence of God is as much
confined to your Churches as it was to Jerusalem, your instance may be worth
something -- but when our Savior tells us, that Distinction was to be
immediately laid aside, 'twas very impertinent to urge it now --

I do not know whether Mr. Dodwel may have hired you to cry his Books; but he
knows very well where to find his Answer, though you do not. Mr. Baxter has
saved us that Labor, in more Treatises than one.

He complains we rob their Parish Churches; I suppose these men look upon all
within the parochial Precincts to be their own Goods and Chattels; but this
cannot be pretended to be by Divine right, and therefore the Transgression
thereof cannot be the true Nature of Schism; whilst men have Preachers thrust
upon them without their Election or Consent, (which is perfectly contrary to
Primitive Custom) no wonder if they leave them and go to others they are better
satisfied in.

Mr. H. very heartily endeavors to extenuate the difference betwixt
Protestants -- who all believe the same Christian Faith, and join in the same
abhorrence of Papal Delusions; to which the man replies, by this a man may be
an Arrian, a Socinian, or Atheist, and yet free from Schism -- what! do these
believe the same Christian Faith with us -- I could almost blush for this man's
gross disingenuity.

He Is now become such a perfect Humourist he cannot forbear Quarreling with us
for not reading the Prayers made for the Wednesday Fast, and asks us what
account we can give to God and the Government for such Omission.

Sir, You may know if you please, that the Kings command to read those Prayers
does not extend to us, we are not mentioned nor designed therein; and where
there is no Law, there is no Transgression; We have reason to think the
Government does not in the least question but that we are as hearty in our
Prayers on this occasion, as T. W. who was somewhat with the latest in
testifying his Allegiance thereunto.

It Is a gross Calumny that we impute our Prayers to the immediate Dictates of
the Spirit of God -- much less the Levities and Impertinencies of them -- we do
believe there is a gift of Prayer that is to be attained by the use of ordinary
means, and nevertheless is from God, who is the Fountain of every good and
perfect Gift -- and this is fully and excellently vindicated by that truly
Pious and Worthy Bishop Dr. Wilkins -- The words you put in the Margin as
charged upon Mr. H. are very false, as many Persons of as untainted Reputation
as your self can testify. You might have spared your Commendation of the
Liturgy, we grant there are many good Petitions therein, but we know no reason
to limit our selves unto it, as if a man without the Gift of Miracles could not
speak Sense in a Prayer, but by a prescribed form of words; but it were
Presumption to attempt it when Miracles are ceased, as our great Adversaries to
conceited Prayers pretend; which (by the way) is little less than Lampoon upon
the common sense of English men.

I have now waited upon the Citizen through all those Passages of his Book,
which even he himself can think material; and upon the whole I make little
question, but every sober unprejudiced Reader will join with me in these
Reflections.

I. That Mr. M. H. has given us the true Scriptural Notion of Schism; that is
[An uncharitable Alienation of Affection amongst professed Christians,
occasioned by their different Apprehensions about little things.] This was the
very thing which St. Paul reproves as Schism in the Corinthians, and no doubt
he knew very well what he said, and was acted by too good a Spirit, to become a
false Accuser of the Brethren. To this T. W. has given no manner of Answer --
but instead of that, peremptorily asserts that the formal Nature of Schism is
diversity of Communion, which both contradicts Scripture, and leaves the matter
still in Confusion and Darkness; for since wherever there is a diversity --
there must be two parties diverse, this definition may make both or either of
them Schismatical -- but does not determine, which, till all the Circumstances
of the case be considered -- which makes it evident that the form of Schism
lies not in the distinction of Communion it self, but in the true Causes of it:
which upon due search will be found to be one of these two, either
Uncharitableness or Unwilling mistake; to lay so dreadful a charge as this of
Schism is accounted upon an involuntary mistake seems very hard, and not
agreeable with the Nature of the Gospel that makes so large allowances for this
kind of weakness; and has commanded us all to do so: It must therefore
necessarily fall upon the former, which having more of the perverseness of the
Will in it, and being much more contrary to the Nature of Christianity, and to
the Unity of the Spirit, appears by all marks to be the real Criminal after
which the Hue and Cry was sent.

II. That the design of Mr. H's Books appears to be honest and peaceable; it is
no way calculated to serve a Party or Interest, but to promote Catholic Love
and Concord amongst Christians, this is the professed end, and natural tendency
of his Hypothesis, which has so favorable an Aspect upon all sorts of
Christians, that every honest Man must necessarily wish it were true, and be
glad to see it well made out; for he is no Christian that can take pleasure in
thinking all Parties besides his own are out of the Catholic Church, and Road
to Salvation; or that can be sorry to find that the Catholic Church
comprehends a great many more than he formerly thought it did.

It has been an unhappy Error, and which too many on both sides have
entertained, That either the whole party of Dissenters must be Schismatics, or
the whole Body of Conformists must be so. This mistake has animated even sober
Men to charge each other with Schism in their own defense, thinking they had no
way to clear themselves but by accusing the other; and I am persuaded this is
one way by which some Men keep up prejudices in the minds of many worthy
moderate Gentlemen against our Congregations, as if coming to hear amongst us,
must necessarily argue the Parochial Congregations Schismatical -- and on the
other hand some strait-laced Dissenters, think if they should at any time
occasionally hear in a public Congregation; they presently thereby condemn
their own, which are great mistakes, as plainly appears by Mr. H's Arguing --
for Schism is a personal fault, and cannot be charged upon a whole Party,
unless every Person therein discover that Uncharitable Alienation of Affection
from others which the Scripture calls Schism.

Indeed it will be very difficult to acquit those Persons from the guilt of
Schism, that were the promoters of those Impositions, from whence our Divisions
proceed; for since they themselves acknowledge the questioned terms of
Communion to be unnecessary -- the insisting so obstinately upon them, cannot
in reason be thought to proceed from any other Spring but that of
Uncharitableness, and the more pernicious, they Judge our Dissenting to be, the
more Uncharitable they, that would rather we should turn Schismatics and be
Damned, than a few Ceremonies should be laid aside, which they will own might
be omitted, without hazarding the loss of one Soul. But as for the Passive
Conformists, whose part has been only to comply with these Impositions, and
have not justified or abetted either the making of them, or the violent
prosecution of Penal Laws upon them; (and several such we know there are) these
are no way chargeable with Schismatical Practices; on the other hand those
fierce Dissenters cannot be cleared from Schism, that uncharitably condemn all
Conformists in the lump, and look upon none of their Congregations as true
Churches -- if any to excuse them say this censure of theirs may proceed from a
mistake, we answer it is such a mistake as is occasioned by their animosity and
prejudice, which will not give them leave to Weigh the thing impartially, and
therefore is Schismatical; for want of Charity is at the bottom, and distorts
their Judgments to pass so severe a sentence.

By this it appears that Mr. H's Book was writ with a Catholic Spirit and
Desgn, because it favors neither side -- but censures -- or justifies Persons
of both sides, according to their Charitable or Uncharitable Tempers and
Actions.

III. That T. W's Hypothesis and Notions of Schism are very Erroneous and
confused -- I confess it is pretty difficult to gather his meaning in this case,
and I have reason to think he does not himself understand it; he looks upon
Schism to be the reverse to Unity, which rightly understood is very true; but
then he gives us so many and variant descriptions of this Unity, some too
large, and others too narrow, that no Man knows where to have him -- He never
distinguishes of Unity in Essentials, Integrals, and Accidentals -- betwixt
Internal and External Unity, betwixt the Unity of the Universal Church -- of a
National Church, of a Diocesan Church, and of a Particular Church; but having
got hold of a Word like a Man in a delirium, runs away with it, till he has
lost himself and his Readers too; I have with all possible seriousness often
considered, upon what Foot these Men will fix their charge of Schism they so
confidently advance against us, and by what I can gather from their Writings it
must be upon some of these.

1. Our withdrawing our selves from the Government of the Bishops -- without
paying Suit and Service to their Ecclesiastical Courts -- but till it be proved
from Scripture, that they have the pretended Jurisdiction over us, this cannot
be Schism. In Commissioned Offices, Extent of Power changes the Species, and if
it do not so -- we may have one Bishop in a Nation, nay one over all the World.

2. Our want of true Ministers with Episcopal Ordination -- but this likewise
depends upon the proof of the former; if Pastors of single Congregations be
Bishops in Scripture sense, then is our Ordination valid and regular too. I
mention not the pretended Line of an uninterrupted Succession, because that has
been sufficiently discussed before; and indeed the sober part of Conformists
look upon it as an idle Whimsey, and will by no means so far destroy the
certainty of their own Ordination and Ministry as to put it upon that Issue.

3. Our Omission of the appointed Rites and Ceremonies; but till it be proved
that these are requisite to Church-Unity -- or that the Convocation that
appointed them had any power over us Jure Divino to require our Submission, we
cannot be guilty of Schism by the Omission of them -- the Canons of our English
Convocations pretend to no power, till Confirmed by Act of Parliament, and it is
not the breach of a Civil Law that makes us formally Schismatics, for then
could there have been no such thing as Schism in the Primitive Churches, where
the Civil Authority was wanting; not to mention that the Civil Power has left
us now to our Liberty.

4. Our Transgression of Parish-Bounds; but this cannot be formally Schism, for
such Districts, are but prudential things and are Dispensed with by themselves
in many cases, as by going to hear in other Parishes, which is frequently done
in all parts of England without any such censure -- also by setting up Chapels
within Parochial Precincts, whereby Congregations are gathered out of many
Parishes, and this if not allowed, is very generally practiced and connived at;
for my part I think in ordinary cases it is most regular and convenient that
there should be such Bounds fixed and observed; but this being but prudential,
will not bind in extraordinary cases; as for instance, where the Parishes are
so vastly great, that not a Tenth part of the Parishioners can have room in the
Parish Church. Where the Minister is notoriously and intolerably scandalous or
ignorant; for though in doubtful cases, it is fit this should be left to the
decision of the Ministry -- yet there may happen some cases so plain and
evident as to decide themselves. Likewise where approved Pastors are violently
and injuriously thrust out, and others imposed contrary to our consent, by
those that had no power so to do -- Also where we cannot partake of all
Ordinances without complying, with sinful Terms, this will not only warrant but
necessitate our joining elsewhere -- In all these cases we are not bound by the
prudential order of Parish Bounds, and before they can prove us culpable, they
must demonstrate that none of these cases are ours; and yet after all, if they
should do so, since this is but a matter of Order, and not of Essential Unity
-- they could but convict us of an Irregularity, not that Damning Schism these
Men speak of.

But we cannot but admire to hear some Learned Men descend so much below
themselves as they do, when they say our Meetings are Schismatical, for we have
no true Ministers; and why so: Why, Because we have only Presbyterian
Ordination; And when we urge that this Unchurches the Reformed Churches beyond
Sea, they answer, No, though Presbyterian Ordination may be valid amongst them
-- yet it is not so with us, because our Ministers are Ordained in a Schism --
thus the Invalidity of our Ordination must prove the Schism, and in requital of
its Kindness, the Schism must prove our Ordination invalid, and so we are got
into the Circle, and by treading such rounds, contract that giddiness which
makes us fall foul upon one another.

My last Reflection is, That as T.W's Hypothesis is false and confused, so the
Temper, Management, and Design of his Book appears to be equally vicious --
this is too evident in not reciting whole passages, but leaving out what was
necessary to complete the ARgument -- his notorious perverting the plain sense
of Mr. H's words -- invidious insinuations, scurrilous reflections, and
downright falsehoods, which you find taken notice of in this Reply. And as I am
assured a great many sober Churchmen have observed, and resented such unfair
dealing in his Book; so I believe none of them will blame me if I have treated
him a little more roughly than a Man of his consistency can well bear; If our
Brethren of that Persuasion will either suffer us to live easily amongst them;
or take such Methods for our Conviction as are proper to work upon Rational
Creatures we will thank them, and shall endeavor not to be behind hand with
them in Civilities -- but if they be resolved to turn loose upon us Men of
Brutal Lusts and Lives, that will venture to fly at any thing; and if we must
be Hated, Anathematized, and (when the time comes) Persecuted, because we are
not Converted by such Men and Books as these, there is no remedy; we leave our
Cause with a Righteous God, and all the sober part of Mankind.

We come now to the Conclusion, wherein T. W. with all Meekness and Christian
Charity [ i. e. with all he has] would persuade Mr. H. he is in a desperate
Condition, has no Title to the Promises, nor any place in the Catholic Church;
It is lamentable to think what depraved Apprehensions, these Men have of God
and Religion, and Heaven, that would exclude all from thence that differ from
them in a Thread, or a Shoe-latchet: The great Design of our Redeemer was to
rescue Men from the Slavery of Sensual and Sinful Affections, and bring them
into a state of Obedience, and Conformity to God; to teach them to deny
Ungodliness and Fleshly Lusts, and to Live Soberly, and Righteously, and Godly
in this evil World; Tit. 2.12, 13.
and those that do so may comfortably look for the Blessed Hope and Glorious
Appearance of our Lord and Savior: They have a Right to all Church Privileges
here, and to Heaven after all -- but we have a sort of Men amongst us that
threaten all with Damnation that are not of their length in every thing -- as
if when they can torment us no longer upon Earth, the Eternal God would quit
his own fixed Rules of Rewarding and Punishing Men according to their real
Holiness or Iniquity, and become the Executioner of those unjust and furious
Sentences they have here denounced against us; but we thank God, Christ has the
Keys of Hell and of Death, and will not open and shut at their command: And
though an immoderate Zeal for a few Ceremonies, serves some Men at present for
a Sanctuary, whither they retreat when pursued by an accusing Conscience, yet a
little time will convince us all, that without Holiness no Man shall see God --
and since that time is at hand, it is fit in these lesser things we should let
our Moderation be known unto all Men.

FINIS.

