GOD'S REVENGE AGAINST MURDER, Demonstrated in the Apprehension, Prosecution
and Execution OF HENRY SYMBAL AND WILLIAM JONES, For the Inhumane MURDER of
Sir Richard Sandford Baronet, Murdered by them the 8th of September. 1675.

LONDON. Printed for William Cademan, at the Pope's Head in the New Exchange in
the Strand. 1680.

To the Honorable and truly Virtuous Lady, Dame Mary Sandford, Relict of Sir
RICHARD SANDFORD of Howgil-Castle in the County of Westmorland Bar.
The Author most humbly Dedicates the following LINES.
MADAM,
I Cannot think the ensuing Relation will be acceptable to your Ladyship; for
it is an Account of the Barbarous Murder of your late dear Husband. Your sense
of the loss you have not only demonstrated in your large and bountiful
acknowledgments of your thankfullness to such as you found were isntrumental
in bringing his Murderes to condign Punishment, but much more by your thus long
sequestring your self from the Pleasures and Enjoyments of the World,
continuing in the disconsolate condition of a Widow, like the chaste Turtle,
still mourning for the loss of him whom it is impossible to recall; whilst your
virtue, Humility, sweet Aspect, and resplendent Beauty, render your Ladyship,
not only desired, but admired by all that know you.

Thus throwing my self at your Ladyships Feet, humbly begging pardon for this
my presumption, I beseech God to bless you, and to give you Comfort in your two
sweet Babes, the choice pledges of that Conjugal Affection that was betwixt
your dear Husband and your self; and that you may after all the Enjoyments and
satisfactions of this World, have the eternal Bliss of that to come; which
shall be the constant desire of,

MADAM, Your Ladyships most humble and most obedient Servant, JOHN TONGUE.

To the Reader.
GENTLE READER,
IT is probable thou will Admire why this Narrative, after it had lain so long
quiet, should throng to the Press, at this time so full, and crowd it self into
the World. I can assure thee that it is not the Authors ambition to be seen in
Print that caused this publication, but some late discourses whereby the ashes
of the Murdered Sir Richard Sandford, seemed Irreverently to be raked and drawn
out of his Tomb, and therewith the Reputation of the Prosecutor trampled upon;
as if he had with too much severity prosecuted the Offenders, and by an
overcuning management of the Evidence brought against them, drawn them rather
to speak his sense, than their own words, whereby the Court was brought to
Judge worse of the Prisoners than the fact did truly and in its self merit; for
which persuasion there was no other inducement then Symball's false pretense at
his Trial, that he killed Sir Richard fairly, and at the Gibbet, that he
fonght him in his own defense.

In these Particulars, that Friends may be satisfied who desire it, the
Ignorant undeceived, the Prosecutor justified, and the Court vindicated, to
whom it was fully demonstrated that both those suggestions were utterly false,
and that they did basely and secretly fall upon Sir Richard in the dark, and
without speaking any word of warning till he had received his death. Though man
may be deceived, God will not be mocked, who says, Vengance is mine, and I
will repay it; I am sure nothing is more plain then that Gods Justice has
showed it self eminently in this Case, by prompting and directing the
Prosecutor, as it were by Divine impulse or inspiration more then once in this
affair: when false tricks and cheats were strongly endeavored to be imposed
upon his belief, to let him in the prosecution, he was made see them to he such
beyond any natural sagacity; so also in defeating them, and over taking them in
their craft, notwithstanding their often crossing the Roads, and making false
pretenses of going one way, when indeed they went another, inquiring for places
which when out of sight, they purposely shunned, and went the quite contrary
way, hopeing thereby to amuse the Persuer.

As for the Trial, the matter of fact appeared so clear, that both the Judges
and all the Jury were fully satisfied that it was a Barbarous Murder; and I
doubt not but that all unintersted persons, who shall peruse the following
discourse, will plainly see the vanity of the contrary pretenses.

To those who are pleased to say, though all were true, they would not have had
their hands in their blood:

The Prosecuter for answer to such nice scrupulosity says, that he is very
well satisfied in his Conscience that he is innocent of their blood, who were
so notoriously guilty of Sir Richard's; and he doubts not at the great Assize
to be cleared of theirs by the Judge of all, who for his warrant has enacted,
that he that sheds man's blood, by man his blood shall be shed; and taught us,
that innocent blood cries to Heaven for vengeance.

God's Revenge against Murder:
ON Wednesday the 8th of September. 1675. Sir Rich: Sandford and Captain George
Hilton went into Southwarke about Business, and Returning to take water at the
Bear at the Bridgefoot, being at the water side, they went into a Little Room,
and called for a bottle of Wine, and before it was out, there came two or three
boats full of Gentlemen, who landed at the Bear stares, several of whom were
of Capt. Hiltons acquaintance, who (seeing him,) called him, and asked him how
he did, upon which Sir Richard (...) to one of them, the Gentlemen all going
into a room close by that, which Sir Richard and Capt. Hilton were in etc.
Making a Boul of Punch, several of them came to Sir Richard and Capt. Hilton,
and desired them to come into their Room, and to taste their Liquor; but it
being a Drink, that neither Sir Richard, nor Capt. Hilton did like, Sir Richard
called for a Bottle of Wine, and staying a Little while with them, one of the
Company hearing Sir Richard's name, took acquaintance with him upon the account
of Sir Edward Stradling, but Sir Richard's occasions calling him away, (having
appointed Business in Fleet Street) he desired to know where he might meet with
that Gentleman and one friend more in the Evening, that then they might in a
Glass of Wine Remember Sir Edward Stradling, and they agreed to meet at the
sign of the George in White-Fryars. Then Sir Richard, and Capt. Hilton took
leave of the Company and went a bout their concerns, and at the time appointed
they came to the George, and presently after them, came one Henry Symbal (who
had been of the former Company) but a man altogether unknown either to Sir
Richard, or Capt. Hilton, nor ever seen by either of them before that day) and
with him one William Jones, another of the former Company, altogether a
stranger to Sir Richard, but had some accquaintance with Capt. Hilton, these
two enquired for the Gentlemen, which Sir Richard had appointed to meet him
there, and were showed up into the Room where Sir Richard, and Capt. Hilton
were; Immeadiately after whom came the Gentleman, and his friend whom Sir
Richard had appointed to meet, and stayed two hours, then Sir Richard called
for a reckoning (which being paid) the Gentleman and his friend went away. The
rest stayed to drink a bottle of Wine, then upon the table, and paid for in the
reckning, they being gone, Jones asked Hilton for Box and Dice, who answered
that he never played, and so had no occasion to carry any, whereupon Jones
replied, your Brother John owes me Forty eight Shillings, Do you pay it me?
and upon Hiltons refusal Jones threatened him, and came from Threats to Blows,
and struck him with a Caine, and so they fell a scufling, Sir Richard going to
part them, Symbal laid hold on him, and would not suffer him to do it; then Sir
Richard went to the stairs head to call some of the House to part them; but
Symbal Drew his Sword and stood in the door of the Chamber and would suffer
none to go in, the Candles being out, Sir Richard called for more, a
servant-maid coming up with them saw Hilton down upon the flower, and Jones
upon him Beating him, and Sir Richard and Symbal standing with their Swords
drawn, and Sir Richa^d fast hold of Symbals Sword hand, and Symbal fast hold of
his, Sir Richard striving to go to part Hilton and Jones, and the other
endeavoring to keep him from doing it, but a Constable being called, Jones let
Hilton rise, and so when they were parted, Sir Richard and Hilton went down
stairs, and Sir Richard went quite out of the doors, but Jones laid hold of
Hilton, as he was going out, and said he would make him pay for Glasses that
were Broke in the scuffel, and so stopping of him, Sir Richard came back to see
why he stayed, and taking Hilton by the hand, they went a way together, leaving
Symbal and Jones in the Tavern, and when Sir Richard and Hilton were gone,
Jones swore Dam him, he would do both their Business that night. And having got
two more of their Comrades to them, they immediately persued Sir Richard and
Hilton, that were going down toward the water side, to take Boat, who hearing
some follow them very fast, apprehending that it might be Symbal and Jones,
with their Comrades whom Hilton saw in the Tavern before he came forth of it;
they stepped into a little alley to avoid them, but Symbal persuing them closer
then the rest, Discovering them, called to Jones, and said, They are here: so
sending their Comrades a little before them down the Street, they came to the
Alley-end; which Sir Richard and Hilton seeing, least they should be set upon
in the streight-Alley, made have to come forth into the street, Symbal standing
at the Corner in the dark, as Sir Richard came forth, ran his Sword into his
Left side, under the short Ribs, up into the stomach and thorough the midriffe
into the Backbone, from which he could scarce pull it back again, saying will it
pay the Eight and forty shillings or not? at the same time Jones, with his
Sword drawn, made at Hilton, and said this is my man, giving him several Cuts
over the head, Sir Richard's Sword being in his scabbard, he stepping back to
draw, staggered, and said, I am slain, at which Jones looking about, gave
Hilton time to draw his Sword, Sir Richard at the same time drawing,
endeavored to defend himself, but having Received one wound more in his right
side, and another in his right shoulder, and his Caul comeing forth at his
wound he had Received on his left side, he not being able to stand any longer,
staggered bewixt Symbal and Jones; and then Symbal Joined with Jones against
Hilton, and their two Comrades (that were going from them) hearing the noise,
one of them came, and laid hold of Hiltons Sword-hand, at which time Symbal run
Hilton through his Left side, into his Lungs, then both Symbal and Jones with
their Comrades fled; this was done betwixt nine and ten of the Clock in the
evening. And Sir Richard Lived in Great Torment, until almost ten of the Clock
the next morning. And finding it Impossible for him to survive, he declared to
the Prosecutor, and to several others, that he Received that wound in his left
side, (which was his mortal wound) from Symbal, and that he gave him it
unawars, when his Sword was in his scabbard at his side, and without any manner
of Provocation. Sir Richard being dead, and the Coroner being sent for, Bound a
Gentleman a friend of Sir Richards, who was with him when he Died, to make
Prosecution, and summoning a Jury, the inquest found it Murder in Symbal, and
Jones Aiding, Assisting, Abetting, Concurring and Comforting in the said
Murder. Whilst the Coroners Inquest was sitting, the Prosecutor came into one
of the rooms of the House, where they were to speak with some of the witnesses,
he met there with one that he never had seen before, and fancied that it might
be one of Sir Richards Murderers, and going to take a strict view of him, the
party seemd to be shie of him, it Confirmed him in his opinion that it must be
one of the four that persued Sir Richard and Hilton, after their going out of
the Tavern, and the Prosecutor going to speak with a Gentleman in the room,
could not forbear observing the stranger, who took the opportunity of the
slipping down stairs, when he saw the Prosecutor busy, which he seeing,
followed, and comeing to him, desired to know his name, but he denying to tell
it the Prosecutor, seized him, and secured him, and knowing that some in the
house did know if he were one of the four Persuers, had two Examined upon oath,
who both confessed they did know him, and that he was one of them, after which
he confessed it himself, and that he was the man that held Hilton by the
Sword-hand, when Symbal gave him the wound in his left side. Then the
Prosecutor made it his Business to find out the rest of the Murderers, and
being in St. James's Park, considering with himself, what course was best to
be taken for the Apprehending them, immediately he espied comeing into the
Park, several persons which he knew to be Jone's Companions, upon sight of
whom, it came into his mind, that several of these being necessitous, it was
probable that for a sum of money some of them would discover to him where the
Murderers were, or at least tell them his Proposals, and hoped it might chance
to fright them out of the Town, and then he did believe, that he should have
them taken. Being much moved with this Persuasion, he stepd in amongst them,
and openly declared that he was the Prosecutor of Symbal and Jones, and that he
would give Ten pounds Reward to any that would secure Symbal or Jones, and
Twenty pounds for the securing of them both, or to any that would inform him
where they were, and assist him in the securing of them, that he did intend to
publish this reward in the next Gazette. The next day several came, and
promised the Prosecutor, that if he would get the Lord Chief Justice his
Warrant, he should have the Murderers secured, for the Reward promised; upon
which, the Chief Justie not being in Town, he procured a Warrant from one of
the Judges of the King's Bench; and so meeting the persons at the place
appointed, upon Discourse with them found that their Pretentions were nothing
but Air, and he leaning upon his Arm to consider of the matter, immediately
thought with himself the Murderers were certainly fled, and that these people
were set on work with design to Amuze him, and cause him to spend his time and
money whilst the Murderers might the more easily make their escape, he
leaving a Friend or two with them to keep them Company, fancying that if the
Murderers were gone, a Gentleman of his acquaintance must know of their going,
and be instrumental in assisting them to make their escape; both which
Suggestions proved true, though it was done without any other ground but his
own Imagination. So going to enquire after that Gentleman, he chanced into a
House where the Murderers Lodged that very night they had committed the Fact,
where he was told, That Symbal had received a wound in his Breast. (by knowledge
of which, they were at Wallingford discovered to the Persuer) He meeting with
the Gentleman whom he went to look after, charged him positively with his
assisting the Murderers in making their Escape, which though the Gentleman
denied at first, yet after some time he said they were gone, and that he had
helped them away: The Prosecutor asked him which way they were gone, saying he
resolved to follow them; the other Answered him that he had hired them an
Oyster Vessel at Billingsgate (for ten Guineas) to carry them to Callis, and
that they set Sail on Monday Morning betwixt four and five a Clock, and that he
see them down the River, and said he hoped they were in France by that time,
which he said to deceive the Prosecutor, that he might look no more after them.
But the Prosecutor, as it were by Inspiration, suspecting the Truth of this
plausible Story, which most men would have been satisfied withal, told him
peremptorily that he knew they were not gone that way, but over Land, and that
if he would not Discover the Truth to him, he would take him before a
Magistrate and Charge him with the Fact: and when he saw there was nothing but
a Prison for him, if he did not confess the Truth, rather than go to Newgate,
he did acknowledge what he had said was false, and that he did it on purpose to
cause the Prosecutor to forbear further Search, and that he did believe they
were fled into the Country, but whither he knew not, for he left them at a
Tavern on Sunday night in a great fear lest they should be discovered to the
Prosecutor, who had promised such a Reward for the Apprehending of them. And so
the Prosecutor, satisfied with this, took the Gentleman along with him, and
went to the Tavern where they were on Sunday night, and that he might the
better inform himself, he pretended to be Symbals Uncle, a Brewer, which he
did, least they knowing him to be the Prosecutor, should not discover the Truth
to him, and enquiring for the Master of the House, he not being within, asked
for his Wife, and told her that his name was Symbal, and that he was Uncle to
that unfortunate young man, who it was said had killed the Person of Quality in
White Friars on Wednesday last at night, and that he had an account that Mr.
Francis, the Master of that house, had been very civil to his Nephew and his
Comrade, and had assisted them to make their Escape, the particulars whereof he
was come to be satisfied in from his own mouth, that he might better be able to
acknowledge and gratify the kindness done; for said he if they be taken they
are dead men. Upon which the Gentlewoman Replied, We hear indeed that the
Prosecutor is a very severe man, and will follow them very close, but I hope
they are now out of his way, for my Husband hired them a Coach and went with
them to Barnet, and there sold them a Mare, and hired them two Horses and a
Guide: But the Prosecutor asking which way they went from Barnet, she Answered
she did not know, but her Husband would be within presently, who would give a
better account: The Prosecutor sitting down, expecting the Master of the Houses
return; and staying there till ten of the Clock at Night, and the other not
coming home, he was directed to go to the Sign of the Ship in the Old Bailey,
and there the Prosecutor being known, was necessitated to take his own name
again, for finding Francis there, and being informed that he had been that day
with Symbal the Brewer receiving money for the Mare that he had sold the
Murderers, the Prosecutor going in, told Francis who he was, and charged him
with assisting the Murderers to make their escape from him, and desired
Francis to let him know which way they were gone, that if possible he might
find some means to Retrive them; but Francis denying that he knew any thing of
them, and giving the Prosecutor scurrillous Language, he having neither Warrant
nor Constable ready, he procured a Coach to be brought to the door, and forcing
Francis into it, took him before a Justice of the Peace, who making his
Mittimus to send him to Newgate, he confessed his conveying them to Barnet, as is
before described, and that they went away from London about four a Clock on
Monday Morning the tenth day of September, and that at Barnet, besides that
they bought of him, they hired two Horses more, and a Guide, for two days
Journey outward, without naming any place they would go to, but gave Security
for the return of the Guide and Horses, upon the Thursday night following, and
upon the Wednesday Morning the Prosecutor went to Barnet, and there he was
informed that upon Monday in the Morning the Murderers called at Gibbon, near
Bel-bar, and enquired for one Cook, who was lately come out of Ireland, and
was upon the returning thither again, but not meeting with him there, after
some stay at the Sign of the Bell at Bel-bar, they proceeded on their Journey,
and went to Hatfield, and so to Welling, and then crossed the Country to
Dunstable, and kept that Road until they came to the Gibbit, two miles beyond
Fenny-Stratford, and then left that Road, crossing the Country went through
Whadden-chace to a little Town called Horrod, and from thence to Them, and so
to Wallingford, where they were Apprehended, and at first denied their names;
but the Persuer telling Symbal, that if he was not wounded in such a place,
viz. in the Breast, then he was not the man he did look after, and going to
search for the Wound, Symbal did acknowledge he was the man, and confessed the
Fact; from thence they were sent to Reading-Goal, and by Habeas Corpus removed
to Newgate, London.

It is worth Observation how they did cross the Roads, one while as if they
designed for the North, going that Road two Miles North of Welling, having
pretended, as the Prosecutor was informed before he came out of London, to go
to Stamford, and so to Boston, and there take Shipping for Holland; but they
crossing the Country from Welling to Dunstable, as if they designed for
Westchester (which seemed to the Prosecutor very likely, they having told the
Vintner that they would stay some time for Cook at Bell-bar, and their not
only calling at Gibbon to enquire for Cook, who having married a Wife who had
been formerly Servant there, she being then in Ireland, her Husband had been
with her Mistress and told her that about that time he intended to go into
Jreland, to his wife, but they not finding him there, as they expected, they
went to the sign of the Bell at Bell-bar, and from thence, sent several times
to Gibben, to Enquire for Cook,) followed that Road two miles West of
Fenneystratford, then crossing the Country again into the Oxford-road, passed
from thence to Wallingford, into the great Western-road, and at several places
they made motions of leaving the roads they took long before they left them;
yet for all this Gods Vengeance did not let them slip, but still Discovered
their windings, and turnings, to the prosecutor, for providence though by a
misinformation lead him a far nearer way to them, then they went themselves,
and so they were Apprehended upon thursday the 16 of September, before noon,
and had their Trial, upon Thursday the fourteenth of October following at
Justice-Hal in the Old Bailey London. And there it was proved in Court, that
they did begin the Quarrel without any manner of Provocation, and when the
Judge asked them, what they could pretend was the cause of their Quarrel, they
were not able to make any appear. And it was further sworn in Court that after
Sir Richard and Capt. Hilton had left the Tavern, Symbal and Jones staying
behind, having got some more of their Comrades to them, did threaten, (by
swearing Dam em) they would do both their business that night, and then persued
them, and overtook them, and in the dark set upon them unawars, Jones falling
upon Hilton, and it was likewise proved by a Gentleman of the Temple, and by
the Prosecutor from Sir Richards own mouth, a little before he died, that
Symbal came upon him at unawars, when his Sword was in it is scabbard at his
side, and gave him his great wound in his left side; the same was sworn by
Hilton, who was an Eye witness to it; Jones being asked by a Friend if he did
see Sir Richards Sword drawn before Symbal did pass at him, answered that Symbal
had said some things very ill at the Bar, but excused himself from making any
positive Answer, saying that he fought Hilton with his back toward Sir
Richard; yet Symbal had the impudence (both upon his Trial and Execution) to
say that he fought Sir Richard fairly. I leave it to the Judgment of any man of
sense, whether it is not more reasonable to believe Sir Richard Sandford dying
(who was a Person of Honor of known worth and integrity) or his Murderer, who
hoped to mitigate his Fact in some peoples opinions, by endeavoring to impose
a lie on the belief of those that saw him a dying man?

And that it may not seem strange that I do thus endeavor to Justify Sir
Richard from his lying Tongue, I shall only take leave to give you an account
what a fair fighter he was, and shall go no further then the Evidence sworn in
Court upon the Trial. First, Hilton swore that Sir Richard had his Sword in his
Scabbard when Symbal gave him his mortal Wound, and that when Sir Richard was
gone that Symbal joined with Jones, who was then fighting with Hilton (which
neither of them did deny) and that when a third man came in (who was one of
their Comrades) and laid hold on Hilton's Sword-hand, and held him fast by it,
that he could make no manner of defense, That then Symbal came and run him into
the left side: the person that held Hilton's Sword-hand confessed it to the
Prosecutor and several others, and that he called out to Symbal to forbear
pushing at Hilton, being he had secured his Sword. And it was further sworn by
another, That upon Friday the third day of September 1675 (which was five days
before this Murder was committed) Symbal and Jones going up the Street in
White-Fryers, they met a Gentleman, upon whom Jones drew, and the Gentleman
drawing in his defense, Symbal drew too, and joining with Jones, they both set
upon him together; an Housekeeper standing at his door, and seeing them, did
at first believe they were in jest; but finding that they had villanously set
upon the Gentleman, he took a Half-pike, and joined with the Gentleman, and so
rescued him from them; and upon his Oath in Court, said, That he did believe,
that they would have slain the Gentleman, if he had not come to his assistance.
Several other of the like nature I could instance in; but having resolved to go
no further than the Evidence at Bar, I shall forbear, and only tell you how
penitent Symbal was for the Murder, when he was apprehended at Wallingford
After some demur, and falsifying his name, he did confess the Fact (as he
pretended) with regret, saying, That he was heartily sorry for having slain
that brave, worthy, and valiant Gentleman, Sir Richard Sandford; but wished it
had been Hilton; For then, said he, I had not cared: as if it had not been as
well Murder to have stabbed Captain Hilton basely, as Sir Richard Sandford. Now
that Symbal was a man who persisted in his Murtherous designs, is evident,
partly by what has been said before, and likewise by a Letter of his, writ
(when in Reading Goal) to a Friend in London; which Letter was produced in
Court, and there proved to be his hand, wherein he laments his own and his
Friend Jones's Misfortunes in being imprisoned; and imputes the cause of it to
a Gentleman of his acquaintance, whom he charge (though falsely) to have
betrayed them to the Prosecutors; and says, that he hopes that he has some
friend that will pistol him pissing against the Wall. For, says he, he
deserves no better. All these things being proved, and the Murderers having
nothing to allege for themselves, they being indicted both upon the Statute of
Stabbing, and at Common Law for Murder. The Jury withdrawing (in half a quarter
of an hour) returned their Verdict, which was, that they found them both Guilty
of both the Indictments, and accordingly they received Sentence of
Condemnation; and upon Friday the 22 of October they were hanged upon two
Gibbets in Fleet Street, Symbal at the little Gate of VVhite-Fryers, and Jones
at the great Gate, where they hung, by the Kings special Command, three hours,
and were then taken down, and by the Kings Warrant, hung in Chains. Symbal at
Stampford-Hill in the road near Totnam-Highcross. Jones upon Finchly-Common,
betwixt Highgate and Barnet. And here I shall leave them to be an example to
all Spectators of Gods just Judgment and Revenge against Murder; and give you
an account of what is not unworthy your observation, how miraculously the
Prosecutor, even by a false Information, happened to find them. They having left
Bel-bar, as is said before, called at a little house in Hatfield Road, at a
Lane end, where a way lead to St. Albans, and asked the way thither, and took
that way, as if they did intend to go to St. Albans, when out of the sight of
those people, whom they inquired of, being well acquainted with the ways, they
took a little By-lane that leads to Hatfield, and the Prosecutor believing that
they were gone to St. Albans (that being the ready way to VVestchester,
apprehending they were flying for Ireland) took that way, and often asking at
the houses in the Lane-side, if the people did see such men (describing the
persons) ride that way; every one that he met with (by what dilusion I know
not) affirmed that they see them pass that way upon Monday in the afternoon;
and so all along until he came to St. Albans Townend, where he lost all manner
of account of them, as well he might; for they never came that way at all; so
he (spending some time to inquire in St. Albans, whether they had been there or
no; and getting no account of them) having lost all manner of hopes to meet
with them, unless at VVestchester, he took Post, designing for that place, but
had scarce got out of the Towns-end, till hearing a Posthorn wind, as he
apprehended one riding fast after him, he staid and found that it was one that
followed him, on purpose to give him an account, that the Murderers Guide was
secured at St. Albans, who was returning with the Horses that they had hired at
Barnet; and this was occasioned through the Prosecutors strict enquiry and
search, which he made in that Town upon this lucky accident; the Prosecutor
turning back to St. Albons, took their Guide away with him, who brought him to
the place where they lay on Tuesday night; And here you may see how Gods
providence did direct him in the quest of these Murderers; for had he not been
deceived by their pretentions of going to St. Albans (when they had called at
the little house at the Lanes end in Hatfield Road, where the people did inform
that they were the same men that called there, and went that way, that had
stayed at the Sign of the Bell at Bel-bar, two or three hours upon Monday
morning; and from thence sent to Gibbon, by which he knew them to be the same
that he followed) he had never gone to St. Albans, and so had missed their
Guide, and in all probability the Murderers had escaped.

I shall close the whole with a short Character of Symbal, that was given the
Prosecutor by a near Relation of his, (when he was in Newgate) who was
extremely concerned for him, and would have been glad to have found the Fact
such as might have given hopes of saving his Kinsmans life, and to have had him
transported; for the doing of which he would neither have spared pains, nor any
thing else, (if the thing had been feazeable) but when he saw the ugliness of
the Murder made appear, he could not forbear admiring Gods Justice and
Providence in following home so wicked a wretch as this his Kinsman was,
lifting up his eyes and hands toward Heaven, he broke out into this grave and
serious Meditation. Good God (says he) thou art wonderful in thy Providence,
and in the Dispensations of thy Justice, toward this wicked young man; for I
fear he ruined his Master; I Am sure he broke the heart of his Mother, and sold
the Blood of his Father; and in thirteen years (since his Fathers death) I am a
Thousand pounds the worse for him, and he is now cut off in the four and
twentieth year of his age. I once more recommend it to the serious
consideration of all sober and unbiassed persons, whether it is more reasonable
to believe the dying words of Sir Richard Sandford, a Gentleman of Worth, and
unstained Reputation, or the words of his Murderer (being a person of this
Character) though upon the Gibbet.

FINIS.

