MAN'S Extremity, GODS OPPORTUNITY. OR, A Display of GODS Sovereign Grace, in
Saving a PEOPLE whose Recovery, as to Men and Means is next to desperate: As it
was delivered in A SERMON Preached before the Honorable Lieutenant Governor,
and Counselors, and the Assembly of Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England. On MAY 29. 1695. Which was the Day for
ELECTION of Counselors for that Province. By the Reverend Mr. SAMVEL TORREY,
Pastor of the Church in Weymouth.

Isa. 57.18. I have seen his ways, and will heal him. BOSTON, Printed by
Bartholomew Green, for Michael Perry, under the West end of the. Townhouse.
1695.

Published by Order of Authority.

To the READER.
Christian Reader.
HOW Seasonable the following Discourse was and how well accommodated to the
Occasion for which it was Levelled, and Audience before whom it was Delivered,
may possibly be questioned by such as either are possessed with an overweening
O pinion of a Negative Commendation given us, that we are not so bad, or so far
gone as many other People who make a Profession; or are little concerned in
observing, either Men or Providence, and comparing them with Scripture Rules:
But he that shall seriously ponder how far we are declined from what we
sometimes were; how many things are Dead among us, and how those that Remain
are ready to die; how much God has done for us more than for many others, and
how we have Requited him; how long he has been dealing with us in a way of
Judgments, and what means have been used to Reclaim us; all which
notwithstanding, neither are we returned to God, nor is his Anger turned away
from us; cannot but Subscribe to it, and say, it was a Word upon it is Wheels.
And truly, when we are cast in Common Law, what have we to hope in but
Prerogative Mercy? When Good Men in all Orders find all attempts to recover a
Backslidden People awfully to be frustrated, needs must they sink in
dispondency, and lose their Faith and Hope, did they not encourage them by this
consideration, that as God can, so he frequently does, take such an Opportunity
to make himself known; and so have the whole Glory of such a Peoples Salvation
ascribed to him. The Author of this Sermon, is one whose Works Praise him in
the Gates, and cannot be added to by any commendation of mine. He has lived to
see many changes in this Land; and being awfully sensible of the decays of
Practical Holiness, and the solemn Tokens of Divine displeasure at a People who
were sometimes highly favored by their God; has on all Occasions been ready
to thrust into the Gap, and endeavor the preventing of Ruin, by promoting a
through Reformation: but finding how little Success such Essays have had, has
thereupon, with Eli, Sat trembling for the Ark of the God of Israel: and had
fainted, but that he believed to see the Salvation of God. He has here told
us, where he found relief against his sinking and overwhelming thoughts, even
in him who works for his Great Name, when it has been Profaned by a People of
his Covenant: and has recommended it for an excellent help to encourage the
Faith, and animate the Prayers of the truly Godly unto perseverance in waiting
to See Gods Salvations; assuring us that neither our Sins, nor our present
Impenitence, can obstruct Gods Grace, or prevent his appearing for our help, in
Subduing our Iniquities, and restoring us to his favor: that when times are
never so black, second causes afford little or no relief, and there is none
shut up or left, yet Caelo restat iter, and there is THEOS APO MECHANES. That
the Publication of this Sermon, may answer the desires of these who earnestly
sought for it, and be made profitable, as to show us more of our own State, so
to put us upon greater industry in all present necessary duties; and (because
there is yet hope in Israel,) to set upon the work so often solemnly pressed
upon us, and hitherto so little pursued, shall be the Prayer of,

One that waits for the Consolation of Israel, S. WILLARD.

MAN'S EXTREMITY, GODS OPPORTVNITY.
Hosea I. 7. But I will have mercy upon the House of Judah; and will Save them
by the Lord their God.


WE find in the Context, that the House of Israel; (that is) the ten Tribes
having by their Spiritual Whoredoms, given not only Conception, but, Birth both
unto Loruham^h and Loammi: God in his Holy Jealousy and Righteous Judgment,
had resolved to cast them off for their Apostasy, unto Idolatry, as a Reprobate
People? Wherefore, he raised up and sent this Prophet, to give them the sad and
certain intelligence, of that his most dreadful Resolve against them; the
Prophet having received his doleful Message, in a grievous Vision; he delivers
it in a most direful Threatening, at once denouncing the utmost Extremity, of
all kind of Calamity and Misery, in their being given up totally, both unto Sin
and Judgment; this we have in the latter part of the sixth verse. I will no
more have mercy upon the House of Israel; but I will utterly take them away!
And further, to Accumulate, and Exaggerate, this heavy Threathing in the
burden of it, upon the House of Israel: God does at the same time, and in the
very next words, propose and proclaim, a very gracious and glorious Promise, of
Mercy and Salvation, to the House of Judah, verse 7. But I will have mercy upon
the House of Judah, and will save them by the Lord their God. Judah (was at
this time) a very Sinful, Backsliding People; sinking into a depth of gross
Apostasy to Idolatry also; which God upbraids them with, judging and condemning
them, as more vile and inexcusable, than Israel, Jer. 3.11. Yet God, in his
Sovereign Grace, makes a sure Promise of Mercy and Salvation, to Judah! Buts I
will have mercy upon the House of Judah; and ingageth himself to perform it, by
Saving of them, in a more immediate and extraordinary way of working by
himself; and will save them by the Lord their God; intimating thereby, that
Judah also was past hope of Salvation in any ordinary way: Whence we have this

DOCTRINE. That at some times, and in some cases, God does in Sovereign Mercy,
Save his Churches and People, both from Sin and Judgment, in a more immediate
and extraordinary way of working by himself.
I will have mercy upon the House of Judah, and will save them by the Lord
their God: This great comprehensive Promise contains the Sum of all Promises
of Temporal Salvation to the Church, both from Sin and Judgment, which God has
made, or does accomplish, in this world; and therefore it has been, and does
remain the foundation of Faith, Hope, Confidence and Comfort, to the Church in
all Ages, in their greatest depths, when they have been most ready to perish in
their Apostasy, Calamity and Misery. The Promises of God, the Prayers of the
Church, and all the most Notable Instances of such glorious Salvations, which
we find recorded in the Word of God, do all concur, to prove; That God at some
times, and in some cases, does in Sovereign Grace, save his Churches, both from
Sin and Judgment in a more Immediate and Extraordinary Way of working by
himself:

This Doctrine opens it self unto us, with a fullness of Scripture Evidence in
the several parts of it;

1. That all Salvations to the Children of men are from God; He who is God
alone, must needs be the only Savior; therefore he is emphatically styled, the
Savior; Isa. 45.15. O God of Israel the Savior; and verse 21. There is no God
else besides me, a just God and a Savior; Isa. 43.11. I even I am the Lord,
and besides me there is no Savior; therefore he is styled the God of
Salvation, Psalm. 68.20. He that is our God is the God of Salvation; hence
Salvation belongs only to the Lord, Psalm. 3.8. all who know and believe him to
be God, must needs acknowledge him to be the only Author of all, both Temporal,
Spiritual and Eternal Salvations, to all the Children of men, who partake of
any Salvations, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me and be ye Saved, all the Ends of the
Earth, for I am God, and there is none else.

2 That God works diverse kinds and degrees of Salvation: there are diverse ways
of Salvation, wherein God works as a Savior; there are external, common,
general Salvations, which God works in his common Providence; these God works
in diverse waves and degrees for all the Children of men. By these Salvations it
is that he moderates all the Evils of the Curse, so far as to give man a Being
and Subsistence in this world, more or less comfortable, as seems good to
him; Psalm. 107. per tot. We have an Induction of such kind of Salvations, with
a reiterated Exhortation, To Praise the Lord for his Goodness and for his
wonderful Works to the Children of men: Again, God works such Salvation in
common Providence also, but in special Mercy to his Churches and People, Deuteronomy.
33.29. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like to thee, a People Saved by the
Lord. There are also Special Salvations which God works for his Churches and
People, in the way of his Spiritual Providence, in Saving Mercy; which are the
only Saving Salvations, and which hold a necessary Connection with Eternal
Salvation; this is the most glorious Salvation which God works for his People
in this World, when he Saves his People from their Sins, and from all Spiritual
Evils and Enemies, and to this all Promises of Salvation to the Church in this
World, do ultimately referr. This is, and will be the Consummation of all
Temporal Salvations to the Church in this World, as it will appear gloriously
in the last and full Accomplishment complishment of this Promise in our Text,
when that Acclamation shall be heard, Rev. 12.10. Now is come Salvation and
Strength, the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ.

3. That God works all, both Temporal and Spiritual Salvations for his Churches
and People, either more Mediately or more Immediately: he works common
Salvation in a way of mediate, ordinary Providence; and so all Gods Propitious,
Prosperous Providence may be said to be Salvations? God works special,
extraordinary Salvations for his People in a more Immediate, Extraordinary way
of Providence; although it may not be altogether Immediately, yet more
immediately; there may be a more Immediate Influence of Divine Wisdom and
Power, which may make the Salvation wrought, Wonderful, if not Miraculous; such
as God wrought for his Church of Old, in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in the times
of the Judges, and of some of the Kings, and afterward. In this way of working
it is that God is said to Save his People by his own Right Hand, and by his own
Arm, Psalm. 44.3. Psalm. 77.15, and to Save them with an High Hand, and Out
stretched Arm, Exodus 6.6. and 14.8. When the Lord does make bare his Arm, then
all the Ends of the Earth may see his Salvation: Isa. 52.10. Most immediately
God works, in working of Spiritual Salvations: Now God may be said to work more
immediately.

1. When he works as a Creator; when it is Creating Work, (and in some
respects) the most Glorious Creating Work, or Work of Greation, for God to
Create to himself a People, a Church, Psalm. 102.18. The People that shall be
Created, shall Praise the Lord, so Isa. 41.20. Isa. 43.1. Thus says the Lord
that Created thee, O Jacob, etc. ver. 7. For I have Created him for my Glory;
and ver. 15. I am the Lord, the Creator of Israel, your King. Surely God will
work more gloriously by himself, in Creating the New Heavens and the New Earth,
Isa. 65.17, 18. For behold I Create New Heavens and a new Earth, be you glad
and rejoice for ever in that which I Create; for behold, I Create Jerusalem, a
rejoicing, and her People a joy: Isa. 45.8. Drop down ye Heavens from above,
and let the Skies pour down Righteousness; let the Earth open, and let them
bring forth Salvation: I the Lord have Created it. Observe, God Creates this
most Glorious Spiritual Salvation for his Church.

2. God works more immediately by himself in Saving of his People, when he
works by a more full and glorious exercise of the Power of Christ Mediator. God
works all Salvations by his Son; he is therefore eminently styled, the Savior;
he has wrought Spiritual and Eternal Redemption and Salvation; and he applies
it to all his Elect: He is Exalted by Gods own Right Hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, Acts 5.31. There is Salvation in none other, nor any other Name given
under Heaven amongst men, whereby we can be Saved: Acts 4.12. he is therefore
called Jesus, Because he came to Save his People from their Sins, Mat. 1.21.
All Temporal Salvations wrought for the Church of Old, are attributed unto him;
Isa. 63.10. In all their Afflictions he was Afflicted, and the Angel of his
Presence saved them; God appeared and wrought by him, in Saving his People out
of Egypt, Exodus 3.2. in the Wilderness, Exodus 23.20. and in bringing of them
into Canaan, Josh. 5.13, 14. and in bringing the Church out of Babylon, Zech.
1.12. thus God always Saved his People by the Angel of his Presence; and
therefore all Salvations which God works for his People in all Ages of the
World, until the Church Militant become Triumphant, are ascribed to him, Rev.
7.10. Salvation to our God, and the Lamb; that is to God working more
immediately by Christ Mediator.

3 God works more immediately to Save his People by himself; that is by his
Spirit, Zech. 4.6. not by might nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the Lord
of Hosts; that is more immediately by myself. This is none other than the same
Promise with this in our Text, renewed just then, at the first period of the
Signal Accomplishment of it; though it may have a more full and notable
Accomplishment, not only unto them, but to the whole Church of God in the
World, at the time appointed; and truly, this great Promise of the Spirit, (so
often renewed in the Scripture,) it has been and ever will be in successive
Accomplishment to the Church; it is that whereby the Church has lived, and
been upheld in all Ages, as the soundation of their Faith, Confidence and
Perseverance.

4. God works more immediately by his Word when he make it mighty and powerful,
to all the saving Effects and Ends of it; especially in the Conversion and
Reformation of his People; he works all saving work, all Spiritual Salvation
for his Church by the means of the Ministry of his word; (that is) he works
more immediately by this means, it being the highest means of the working of
Divine Wisdom and Power, especially upon the Souls of men: the Church in their
return out of Babylon, could not recover themselves, nor be recovered by any
through Reformation unto Salvation until God wrought more immediately by the
Ministry of his Word, in the Prophesying of Haggai and Zechary, Ezra. 6.14. as
we read more at large Hag. 1.12, 13, 14. Then Zerubbabel the Son of Shealtiel
and Joshua the High Priest, with all the remnant of the people, did obey the
voice of the Lord, and the words of Haggai the Prophet: and they did fear the
Lord: then spoke Haggai the Lords Messenger in the Lords Message to the People,
saying, I am with you says the Lord; Observe, when the Word works, then God is
with a people to Save them; therefore it follows, and the Lord stirred up the
Spirit of Zernbbabel; Nothing could be done until God himself, wrought by
himself in the Ministry of his Word, and then all Saving Work went on
powerfully and prosperously. Thus we may understand how God Saves his People by
the Lord their God, which was the main thing to be opened and proved; But,

4. There are certain times, and extraordinary cases, wherein God thus Saves
his People by himself, (that is) in general, when their Condition in it self,
and as to them, is altogether hopeless and helpless; either respecting their
Sins, growing more and more general, powerful, incorrigible, poenal, judicial,
past any ordinary hope of Reformation; their Defection and Apostasy in the Life
and Power of Religion so deep, that there is no ordinary hope of recovery. All
both Spiritual and Political Wounds and Sicknesses; so immedicable and
incurable that they are past ordinary hope of healing; so when a people are in
extreme, inevitable danger of perishing in their own sins, under Gods
Judgments, both Temporal and Spiritual Judgments; unless God, in Sovereign
Mercy, appear and work Salvation for them by himself: When all things are past
man, past means; when the Wisdom, the Power, the Heart, the Spirit, the
Prayers, Enleavours and Labors of man fail, then it is time for the Church to
cry out, as Psalm. 119.126. It is time for thee, Lord, to work: More
particularly;

1. When a People are fallen into such a depth of Spiritual Heart Apostasy, as
that they are thereby become, not only secure, but utterly senseless, sottish,
stupid, supine, and so altogether ignorant, careless, regardless of the
greatest Concernments of their own Good and Welfare, and of their own
Salvation, either from Sin or Judgment, as being senseless of both, not
minding. nor caring which way things go, nor what does become of themselves, or
of the main interest of God, of Christ, or of the Churches; ready to speak as
they, Ezekiel. 33.10. If our Transgressions and Iniquities be upon us, and we pine
away in them, how then can we Live, as if they should have said, there is no
hope, we shall perish in our sins, and thus they conclude, carelessly and
desperately; and as they, Isa. 3.6. In that day shall he swear, saying, I will
not be a Healer, make me not a Ruler of the People; It follows, verse 8. For
Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: Thus they gave up themselves as
desperate.

2. When those who are sincerely concerned for the Welfare and Salvation of the
People and Churches, are altogether dispirited, and succumb under sinking
discouragements; Hearts fainting, Spirits failing, have no heart left in them,
to make any further essay, or to do any thing, but to sit down, Mourn, Weep and
Lament, as the Prophet, Jer. 8.18. When I would comfort my self against sorrow,
my heart is faint in me; the Har west is past, the Summer is ended, and we are
not healed; for the hurt of the Daughte of my People, I am hurt, I am black,
Astonishment has taken hold upon me: Is there no Balm in Gilead? Is there no
Physician there? so Jer. 9.1. O that mine head were waters, and mine eyes a
fountain of Tears, that I might weep day and night, etc. so Mic. 7.1. Woe is me!
When it is thus, it is time to cry, Help Lord! Psalm. 12.15.

3. When God seems to have wrought, and done for a people, all that can
ordinarily be done, by the improvement of means, to Save them from all
destroying Evils, especially from their Sins; and to reclaim and reduce them to
himself; and to secure and advance both their Temporal and Spiritual Welfare.
When God speaks after the manner of men, as it were Complaining, Isa. 5.4. What
could have been done more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it; so Jer.
9.7. I will melt them and try them, for what shall I do for the daughter of my
People: Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim what shall I do unto thee? O Judah what shall I do
unto thee? God speaks here as men do when they know not what to do more.

4. When hereupon God does cease to work in an ordinary way by ordinary means,
and leaves a people to themselves; withdraws his Spirit, his Presence, his
Power, his Counsel, his Conduct, his Protection and Benediction, and gives them
up to their own wills and ways, Counsels and Courses, to do what they will
with themselves: When God deserts his own work among a people, suffers his own
Worship and Ordinances to be ineffectual, if not judicial: When God says of a
People, as of them, Deuteronomy. 32.20. I will hide my face from them, I will see what
their end will be; what lamentable evil end they will bring themselves unto;
and as Hos. 4.16. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone: When God appears
only as a Stranger in the Land; as a man astonished, a mighty man that cannot
Save; Jer. 14.8. Surely then there is no hope, unless God magnify his
Sovereign Grace in Saving such a People by himself.

5. When the Interest of the World is Espoused and Exalted; and the Interest of
Religion is thereby enposed, deposed and depressed. When the Spirit of
Worldliness grows exceeding high and strong, and the Spirit of Religion grows
low and weak, weaker and weaker, languishing even unto death; when the World
prevails against, and over Religion, to strike it past ordinary hope of a
Resurrection: When the Spirit of the World, is the reigning, governing spirit,
and carrys all before it; nothing can be done but in subserviency to it, when
it is become the Spirit of the Times; truly then all kind of Impediments and
Obstructions to the Work of God, will become insuperable. All Spiritual Evils,
which are most dangerous and destructive, will become irresistible and
invincible, and the Work of Reformation, more and more impracticable and
impossible, unless God undertake it by himself; for when the foundations are
thus out of course, or destroyed, what can the Righteous do, Psa. 11.3. at such
times, and in such cases as these, nothing but Sovereign Grace can Save us.

Which is the last thing in the Doctrine: therefore,

5. It remains to be proved, That when God thus Saves his People by himself,
it is in Sovereign Mercy; this is most evident by the instance in our Teaet;
for when this Promise of Salvation was made to Judah, and much more before it
was most signally Accomplished to them, Judah was as bad, yea worse, more wicked
than Israel, as was hinted before from Jer. 3.11. and is more at large set
forth, in Ezekiel. 16.46. etc. where comparing Judah with Samaria, God concludes
that Judah had committed more sins, and more abominable, than Samaria; that
Samaria had not committed half the sins that Judah had; yea, that Judah was
worse than Sodom: yet God says in our Text and Context, I will no more have
mercy upon the House of Israel, but will utterly take them away. But I will
have mercy upon the House of Judah, and will Save them by the Lord their God:
this must needs be Sovereign Grace in the glory of it. Thus it appears, That at
some times, and in some cases, God does in Sovereign Mercy Save his people,
both from Sin and Judgment, in a more immediate and extraordinary way of
working by himself.

I shall pretermit what might and ought to have been spoken in the Application,
by way of Inference, for Instruction, or Admonition; and to proceed to the

EXHORTATION:
Which speaks in general to all the People and Churches of NEW ENGLAND; So
far (at least) as they may be spoken unto, and addressed, in this General
Assembly: and it is to Move, Excite and Encourage us, So to approve and apply
our selves unto God, as he may be graciously moved to have mercy upon us, and
to Save us by the Lord our God; (that is) to Save us in Sovereign Mercy, in a
more immediate and extraordinary way of working by himself.

Let not such an Exhortation be thought improper, or impertinent, to N.E. as to
think or say within our selves, we hope, We are not yet come to that lamentable
pass, nor reduced to such an extremity, as to be under an extreme necessity to
implore Sovereign Mercy for our Salvation; we hope our Condition is not yet so
hopeless, but that we may hope to be Saved, in the ordinary way of the working
of Gods Power and Mercy, by ordinary means; and therefore that it may be too
much a scandal and reproach, to be represented otherwise as a people, utterly
lost and gone without Sovereign Mercy. O would to God, it were not so much so,
as, upon serious consideration, we may conclude it is; but we must understand,
that an Apostatizing People, are most secure, when they are most in danger,
Isa. 57.10. Yet saidest thou not there is no hope, thou have found the life of
thine hand, therefore thou wast not grieved: Observe, an hard-hearted People
will never be brought to say, there is no hope, till it be too late; therefore
although I believe, that we are yet a people, as hopeful, as to Salvation, in
the issue, as any other visible people of God in the World, if not more: (I say
in the issue) yet those who have any right understanding of our present State,
Frame and Way, must needs acknowledge, That we have need of present Help and
Salvation from God himself, working by himself in Sovereign Mercy; and
therefore that it is our instant Duty and Concernment, so to approve and apply
our selves unto him, as that we may obtain it.

I shall therefore amplify this Exhortation, by showing:

1. How it does appear, that we stand in such present need of Sovereign Mercy.

2. How we ought so to approve our selves to God, as that we may be prepared to
be made the Subjects of it, and to recive it.

3. How we ought so to apply our selves to God for it, as that we may obtain it.

That we may be sensible, that we have present need of such Salvation from God.
We may consider:

1. Whether we can expect that God should do any more for us in the ordinary
way of the working of his Ordinate Power and Mercy, by ordinary means, than he
has already done, to Save us; God does put the Quaery to his People for
Conviction: What could have been done more, that I have not done? What shall I
do for the Danghter of my People? O Ephraim, What shall I do unto thee? It may
not, it cannot be denied, but that God did as much in our first Constitution;
(when he Planted these Heavens, and Laid the Foundation of this Earth, and said
to New England, thou art my People) for Establishment before him, in Faith,
Obedience and Perseverance under his Covenant, and in his Kingdom, and to
secure us from Defection, and Apostasy from him; as we can say, that ever he
has done for any People these many Ages: Can we say, what God could have done
more for us, to Settle us in a steadfast Standing before him, with close,
constant adherence to him, then he has done. He chose us, and set us apart to
be a peculiar people to himself; he gave us a Constitution, completed with all
kind of Privileges, Liberties, and Immunities, both Civil and Religious, which
any people could desire, enjoy or improve, unto the promotion of both Holiness
and Righteousness, Godliness and Honesty; he gave us a full and complete
standing under his Covenant in his Kingdom, or in Church State: He gave us his
House, with all the Spiritual Furniture and Provision of it, pure Doctrine and
Worship, the whole Gospel Ministry, and Ministration; the whole Faith and Order
of the Gospel, and has hitherunto kept us in the full Possession, Enjoyment
and Improvements of all, with full Freedom, Liberty, Seasons, Opportunities,
Advantages, Encouragements, to do anything, everything, that was necessary for
the advancement of Religion, and the interest and work of our Lord Christ, and
our own Establishment with fafety from Apostasy; he has granted and continued
a special day of Grace, with all possible means of Grace, for the carrying on
of the work of Conversion and Edification, and for the progress of all Saving
Work, both in Churches and in Families, both in Public, and in Private: He
also Created a Defense upon all the Glory, and appointed his Salvation for
Walls and Bulwarks. What could we expect, that God could do more for us in the
ordinary way of the Improvement of Means? Well, notwithstandall this, we have
made a woeful defection from God; insomuch, that he may justly upbraid us, as he
did them, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus Requite the Lord your God, O foolish people
and unwise! Is not he thy Father, has not he made thee, and established thee;
Remember the days of Old; ask thy father, and he will show thee, thy Elders,
and they will tell thee. Now then, let us further consider, What God could have
done more for us, to recover and restore us, and bring us back again to
himself, and this either by his Word, or by his Works. Let us Consider,

1. How much, how long, how powerfully God has labored with us by his Word,
and by his Spirit therein. It has been his great Work, by the Ministry of his
Word, to awaken, convince and humble us for our Sins, by charging, judging,
condemning, threatening, denouncing very dreadfully against us for them, by such
of his Servants whom he commanded to cry aloud, and not to spare, to lift up
their voices like Trumpets, in testifying and crying against those Sins, and
ways of sinning; especially those Heaven affrighting, astonishing Sins, whereby
we have so far exchanged our Glory, for that which profits not; (that is) Our
God for the World, as Jer. 2 11, 12, 13. Also God has by his Word, plainly
proposed and pressed all the general Duties of the Times; wherein the work of
Reformation does consist; and wherein he has called us with utmost
importunity, to turn unto him; moving of us by all his most graicous Promises,
of all kinds of Salvations; and all this, with infinite Patience and Long
Suffering, from One Generation to another; as Neh. 9.30. Yet many years did
thou forbear them, and testifiedst against them by thy Spirit in the Prophets,
yet would they not give ear; and Zech. 7.17. But they refused to hearken, and
pulled away the Shoulder, and stopped their Ears, that they should not hear;
yea, they made their hearts like an Adamant Stone, lest they should hear; and
from thenceforth, God gave them up to Sin and Judgment, Psalm. 81.11. But my
people would not hearken to my voice, Israel would have none of me: By
rejecting of his Word, they rejected God himself; therefore it follows, So I
gave them up to their own hearts Lusts, to walk after their own counsels: O
that my People had hearkened unto me, I should soon have subdued their Enemies,
etc. From thenceforth the Word of God became Judicial to them, Isa. 6.10. Go
make the heart of this people fat; make their ears heavy, shut their eyes; Lest
they should Convert and be healed: God set them under an Hardening,
Soul-killing Dispensation of his Word, Hos. 6.5. Therefore I have hewed them by
the Prophets, I have slain them by the words of my mouth. Truly, we may with
fear and trembling, consider how generally ineffectual, the Ministry of the
Word has been with us, as to any general work of Conversion and Reformation,
and is yet like to be; seeing that we cannot say what God could have done more
for us thereby, in an ordinary way of working, to recover us, and reduce us to
himself; So that our Lord may complain of us, as sometime he did of them in the
person of the Prophet, Isa. 49.4. I have Labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught and in vain. But,

2. Can we say, what God should further do further for us by his Works, to
reform and save us; and that either by his Mercies or by his Judgments; and all
hitherunto in vain.

1. Consider how much, and how long God has Labored with us in a way of
mercy; he has multiplied all kinds, both of Temporal and Spiritual Mercies
upon us; the richest, rarest, choicest, peculiar mercies, the most alluring,
obliging mercies, even loving kindnesses and tender mercies; and if we had
rightly improved them, they would have been Saving Mercies; he has wonderfully
magnified all his Mercies to us; in that they have been granted upon our Cries
to him, in the times and cases of our greatest extremity; and continued unto us
notwithstanding our great unworthiness, and manifold abuses of them; they have
been in all respects very signal Mercies, whereby God has been drawing of us
with the Cords of a man, the Bands of Love; Hos. 11.4. But, Oh how have we
abused all these Mercies, to Pride, Carnal Confidence, Hardness of Heart,
Presumption, Security, Sensuallity; so that we may fear, they have been
hardening, and so Judicial Mercies, granted not in Saving Mercy, but in
Judgment.

2. Consider we further, how much, and how long God has been Laboring with us
in a way of Judgment, to reform and save us; he began his Process with us by
lighter afflictions, in a way of Chastisement and Correction; he began with the
Rod, but that not availing, he Entered into Judgment, drew the Sword; and
proceeded therein gradually, according as our sins have arisen to higher and
higher degrees of Transgression and Provocation; so God has hightned the
Severity of his Executions, and that unto a great consumption of our small
people, both by the Sword, and by the Sickness, and otherwise, wasting,
weakening and consuming of us; carrying on his whole Process, in such a way, as
that we have been convinced and forced to confess, that his whole gracious
design, thereby has been to reform; as it is always with his People, Lev.
26.23. If ye will not be reformed by these things, etc. and the main issue of
the whole Process, is to humble and reform them, verse 41. If then thine
uncircumcised heart be humbled, and thou accept of the punishment of thine
Iniquity, then will I remember my Covenant. But may not God yet complain of us,
as he did of them, Jei. 44.10. They are not humbled unto this day. May we ^o
fear, that we are rather hardened than humbled, as they, Zeph. 3.7. I said
surely they will fear me, they will receive Instruction; but they rose up
early, and corrupted all their doings: We are under many fearful Symptoms of
being hardened, and not humbled, by all past Judgments, that we are rather the
worse than the better for them, as they, Isa. 1.5, 6. Why should ye be stricken
any more, ye will revolt more and more; the whole head is sick, the whole heart
faint, etc. and truly if so, we may dread that fearful Sentence, Jer. 6.29, 30.
the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire, the Founder melts in
vain, for the wicked are not taken away, reprobate Silver shall men call them,
because the Lord has rejected them: Again,

3. Consider, How much and how long God has been proving and trying of us,
both by his Word, and by his Works, both by his Mercies and his Judgments; and
indeed by all kind of merciful Probations; to see whether we would repent and
reform, as he did his people of old, Deuteronomy. 8.2. to humble thee, and to prove
thee, and to know what was in thy heart, whether thou would keep his
Commandments or no; verse 16. That he might humble thee, and prove thee, to do
thee good in the latter end; truly so it is, God has been many ways, every
way proving and trying of us, and that with much patience and long-suffering,
waiting upon us to see how we would approve our selves unto him; it may be said
of this or that time, and of this or that State and Condition; then and therein
God tried and proved them; as Exodus 15.25 there he proved them, he proved them
at Massah, Deuteronomy. 33.6. and he proved them at Meribah, Psalm. 81.7. truly so has
God been trying and proving New England. It is very easy to Instance, when and
how: But alas, we have not understood it, we do not, we will not understand it;
and therefore it is that we have so woefully miscarried and misapproved our
selves under all Divine Probations; so that all those merciful Probations,
slighted, neglected and abused, have only made further discoveries of our
Stubbornness, and utter averseness to turn to God; and so our Probations have
issued in nothing, but the further Aggravation of our Sin and Provocation of
Gods Wrath, by tempting of him. All the while God was proving of them in the
Wilderness, they were trying and proving of him to provoke him; as Psalm. 95.8.
Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, and as in the day of temptation
in the Wilderness, when your fathers tempted me, and proved me, and saw my
works. All these things considered, what can we expect that God should do more
in an ordinary way of working for our Salvation; and what hope of Salvation,
but by the Lord our God himself in Sovereign Grace?

2. To make us yet more sensible of our need of such Salvation: We may consider
Whether we our selves shall be able to do any more for our selves, to Reform
and Save our selves, than we have done. We are convinced there is no hope of
Salvation without Reformation, and accordingly we have been stirred to labor
it in that way, by the visible improvement of all means which we have had; all
External helps, advantages and encouragements, unto it, both from Civil
Authority (at lest) by making all kind of Reforming Laws; as also, and (more
especially) by the Power and Authority of Christ, and that in the highest way
of Ministerial Exercise thereof, by the Churches in Synods; declaring and
testifying in the Name of Christ against all those evils, which are the
radical, and are likely to prove the fatal causes of our defection: and laying
open the whole way and work of Reformation, and proposing Expedients, together
with Solemn Admonitions to the People and Churches to Repent and Reform, and
that upon Peril of destruction, if we do not. In pursuance of which we have
with Extraordinary visible Solemnity, transacted with God, and one with
another, and therein laid our selves under most Sacred and very awful
Obligations, by renewed Covenant ingagments to God in Solemn manner, with
Fasting, Prayer and Humiliation; wherein we have promised, vowed, professed and
protested unto him our most sincere purposes and resolutions, by his Grace, to
forsake our sins, and to turn unto him with all our hearts and with all our
Souls unfeignedly; and this we have been doing, until (we may fear) that we
have wearyed our God, as well as our selves by our gross Formalities: for so
God speaks of their highest formal performances, Isa. 1.13, 14 -- Incense is an
Abomination to me -- Your New Men's, and appointed feasts my Soul hates, they
de a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. It remains then a fearful
question; Whether we have not by all this Aggravated our sins, and further
accumulated Divine wrath upon our selves? for when a People Flatter him with
their lips, and ly unto him with their tongues, heir hearts being not right
with him; It provokes him to Jealousy and to Abhorrency, Psalm. 78.3659. God
seems to Express himself as more grieved and provoked with the Formality,
Hypocisy and Treachery of Judah, in their highest Reformations, even that in
Josiahs time, than with the Idolatry of Israel, and it hastened destruction upon
them; Jer. 3.10, 11. And yet for all his her treacherous Sister Judah has not
turns to me with her whole heart but feignedly (or in falsehood) says the
Lord; and the Lord said unto me, backsliding Israel, has justified her self
more than treacherous Judah. What real hope is there then left, that we shall
be able to do any thing nore for our selves, to accomplish our own Reformation
and Salvation: Have we not caise then to bemoan our selves before and uno God,
as the Church, Jer. 3.23.25. Truly in vain is Salvation hoped for from the
Hills etc. Truly in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel; Shame has
devoured the Labors of our Fathers, -- We ly down in our Shame, that our
Confusion may cover us: and as Jer. 31.19. I have surely heard Ephaim bemoaning
himself thus -- Turn thou me and I shall be turned, for thou art the Lord my
God. Thus we have heard how it does appear that we stand in present extreme
need of such Salvation by God himself in Sovereign Mecy.

I Proceed,

2 To show, how we ought so to approve our selves to God as that we may be
prepared to be the Subjects of such Salvation as this:

And to this end,

1. We must Labor unto a right and full understanding, and an humbling, heart
breaking sense of our own State and Condition, that we may lay it deeply to
heart. It was the ruin of Gods People, that would never be made to understand,
nor lay to heart, of which God complains, Isa. 1.3. Israel does not know, my
People does not consider; and yet it was at such a time, wherein the whole head
was sick, and the whole heart faint; from the sole of the foot to the head,
there was nothing but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, which had not
been closed, nor bound up, nor mollified with Ointment: Yet even then they did
not Know nor Consider what their Condition was; so Isa. 42.25. It set him on
fire round about, yet he knew not; it consumed him, yet he laid it not to
heart; therefore they could not be Saved, because they would not lay it to
heart, Jer. 12.11. The whole Land is Desolate, because no man lays to heart:
Surely, there is very little sign of any laying to heart in New England, but
the quite contrary; as it was with them, Isa. 22.12, 13. In that day did the
Lord God of Hosts call to weeping and mourning, and baldness, and girding with
Sackcloth; and behold joy and gladness, slaying of Oxen, and killing of Sheep,
eating flesh, and drinking Wine. It was revealed in mine ear by the Lord of
Host ^urely this Iniquity shall not be purged yrom you, till ye die. God grant
that New England may never incur this dreadful Sentence. We are much in the
Laodicean State and Frame; conceited that we are rich, and increased with
Goods, and know not that we are poor and blind, and wretched and miserable, and
naked, Rev. 3.17. It is the great thing that God is laboring to bring us to,
that we may understand and lay to heart, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise,
that they understood these things, that they would consider their Latter End.

2. We must utterly renounce all carnal confidence in our selves, or in any arm
of Flesh; especially those carnal confidences, which we are most apt unto, and
which are most dangerous; those carnal confidences in our visible
Covenant Relation to God, in our visible Church State, the visible Privileges,
Interests and Enjoyments of the House of God; to cry as they, Jer. 7.4. The
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord. Carnal Confidence in our own Faith,
and Prayer, is yet more dangerous to think as they spoke, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore
have we fasted say they, and thou see not, and afflicted our Souls, and thou
take no knowledge? It is diverse ways too evident, that we have abused our
Faith and Prayer too much, to carnal confidence; but that which is most
dangerous and destructive, is, carnal confidence in God h^elf, Mic. 3.11. Yet
will they lean upon the Lord, and say, is not the Lord among us, none evil can
come upon us; therefore shall Zion for your sakes be plowed like a field: If
ever we hope to be Saved in Sovereign Mercy by the Lord our God himself, we
must away with all our carnal confidences, and Pray as the Church, Hos. 14.3.
Take away Iniquity, and receive us graciously -- Ashur shall not Save us; --
for in thee the fatherless find mercy. We must become as fatherless; then God
promises, as ver. 4. I will heal their Backslidings, I will love them freely;
we must become a poor and an afflicted people, Zeph. 3.11, 12. For then I will
take away out of the midst of thee, them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou
shall no more be haughty, because of my Holy Mountain: I will leave in the
midst of thee, an afflicted and poor people; and then it follows ver. 15. The
Lord has taken away thy Judgments, he has cast out the Enemy; ver. 17. The
Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is mighty, he will Save; When God sees that
all power is gone, and that there is none shut up nor left; then then they are
prepared for Salvation in Sovereign Mercy, Deuteronomy. 32.36. When a people speak
trembling, and out of the dust, that is, out of a depth of Humiliation, then
they are prepared for this Sovereign Mercy, Hos. 13.1.

3. We must Labor to understand what it is to be Saved by the Lord our God;
what it is that God must work both in us, and for us, to Save us: what
Salvation is, what our own Saving Good and Welfare is; ignorance of this does
make a people incapable of Salvation, Hosea 11.3. They knew not that I healed
them; this Ignorance was that which our Lord lamented with tears, weeping over
Jerusalem, Luke 19.41. If thou had known, even thou at least in this thy day,
the things of thy peace, but now they are hid from thine eyes. God grant that
this may not be verified on New England, of which there are very sad signs; we
must therefore set our hearts upon that which is and will be our Salvation; and
without which there can be no Salvation; (viz.) the powerful progress of the
Word, Worship and Work of God; the Conversion of our People, the Reformation of
our Churches, the Resurrection of Religion: O if our heart were set upon these
things, we should be heartily willing to be Saved, earnestly desirous to be
Saved; and if we were so, God would soon Save us; Isa. 1.19. If ye be willing:
But so it is, an Apostatizing People depractically refuse to be Saved, Isa.
30.15. For thus says the Lord, in returning and in rest shall ye be Saved, in
quietness and confidence shall be your Strength; and ye would not, but ye said
no etc. Jer. 2.25. but thou said, there is no hope we have loved Strangers,
and after them we will go; This also our Lord laments, Mat. 23.37 O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem; how often would I have gathered thy Children, and ye would not;
behold your house is left unto you desolate. God never destroys his people,
but they wilfully refuse to be Saved; truly our wilfulness in those ways of
sinning, which are the direct and broad way to destruction; is fearfully signa^
to us: God has been healing of us, and we will not be healed, we will not be
Saved from our sins, but seem to be the more resolute in them, Hos. 7.1. When I
would have healed Israel, then the Iniquity of Ephraim, and the wickedness of
Samaria, was discovered; truly that the sins of the times with us, not only
continue but prevail more and more; notwithstanding all, that God has been
doing to Save us from them; is matter of fearful consideration to us, and deep
Humiliation, to all who have any sense of the State and Condition of our People
and Churches: O that we knew what it is to be Saved.

4. We must submit and commit our selves unto God, with a practical
acknowledgment of, and subjection unto his absolute Sovereignty, as also to the
Supremacy of his Wisdom and Will; that whatsoever he does, it is good, yea, it
is best in it self, and as he does it; and withal giving of him the glory of
all that he does to us or for us, or with us, whether in mercy or in Judgment,
with an absolute submission to his Sovereign Will and Pleasure, and an humble
resolution to bear and endure whatsoever he shall please to inflict; be willing
he should take any course with us to Save us; withal acknowledging our
unworthiness of such Salvation; thus the people, Judge. 10.15. We have sinned,
do with us what seems good to thee, deliver us only we pray thee this day:
Observe here how they Implore Sovereign Mercy for their Salvation; and cast
themselves into the arms of it; and it follows, ver. 16. his Soul was grieved
for the misery of Israel; and so instantly Saved them by himself.

5. We must arise and set to work for God; with utmost labor, diligence, zeal,
courage, faithfulness, with all our hearts and Souls, with all our might and
strength, with a most sincere and fervent love to the work of God, and an
heart, care, and concernment for it; as long as we sit still, and slight and
neglect and desert the Work of God; running every man to his own house, as
they, Hag. 1.9. that is, giving up our selves to the World, and Worldliness; so
long as all seek their own things and not the things which are Jesus Christ's,
Phil. 2.21. I say, so long as it is thus, there is no hope that God will work
for us in such an extraordinary way of Salvation: But if we will arise and work
for, and with God, God will arise, and work for, and with us; Hag. 2.4, 5. Now
be strong O Zerubbabel, and be strong, O Joshua, and be strong all ye people of
the Land, and work, for I am with you, -- and my Spirit remains among you,
fear not. Observe, if we will work, God will be with us, and carry on all
Saving Work for us by his Spirit. Falseness, Unfaithfulness, Unstedfastness in
the Work of God, does render us not only unworthy and unfit, but utterly
incapable of such Salvation.

6. We must hearken most intensely and effectually, subjecting our very Souls
to the Word of God; which is the highest means of the working of Divine Wisdom,
Power, Grace and Mercy in all Saving Work for the Children of men: Yea, and in
working all kind of Salvations for the Church and People of God. The whole
glorious work of Salvation out of Egypt, was wrought by the Word, Hos. 12.13.
By a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet he
preserved them; by the Ministry of his Word he Saved them out of their
Apostasy, and the Calamity of the Babylonish Captivity; as appears by the whole
History of Ezra and Nehemiah, and the Prophesies of Zechariah and Haggai; and
by the Ministry of the Word, the great and last Salvation for the Church shall
be wrought; Isa. 52.6, 7. How beautiful upon the Mountains are the feet of him,
that brings good tidings, that publishes peace, that brings good tidings
of good, that publishes Salvation, that says to Zion thy God reigns. Our
Lord also prophesies the same, Mat. 23.39. For I say unto you, ye shall not
see me henceforth, till ye shall say, blessed is he that comes in the Name of
the Lord: Surely, it was by the Ministry of the Word, that God wrought
gloriously for New England, in giving of us our Being, as his People. It is by
the Ministry of his Word that he upholds and carries on the work of Conversion,
and thereby upholds his Churches in their Spiritual Being and Constitution, and
Religion in them; and therefore it must be by the Ministry of his Word, that
that Work, and these Churches and Religion which are now sinking and dying,
must be recovered and revived, by a thorough Saving Reformation. It is by the
power of the Word, that God makes Mercies and Judgments, and all other
Providential Dispensations, even all his ways and works unto his people
saving; nothing will do us good, till God work by his Word, to make all
effectual. It is by his Word, that he does lead and guide his people into, and
in the way of Salvation: It is by his Word that he removes all obstructions,
subdues all opposition; that the great Mountains before Zerubbabel, become a
Plain, Zech. 4.7. It is by his Word that he does stir up, and strengthen all
Instruments, quicken, sanctify and spirit all his Servants to his work. O when
God comes to Save New England by himself, we shall see and feel wonderful
effects and changes wrought by the Ministry of the Word; and when once our
hearts are fully and generally subjected to the power of the Word, then we may
be assured, that God is arisen, and at work for us in a glorious way of
Salvation by himself; then we shall be prepared to be the Subjects of such
Salvation: When our hearts tremble under the power of the Word, as it was with
them, when God was at work with them, to reform them, Ezra 9.4. Then were
assembled to me, every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel; and
again, Ezra 10.3. According to the counsel of my Lord, and of those that
tremble at the Commandment of our God: God would do nothing for them till they
did thus subject themselves to his Word, Zech. 7.7. Should ye not hear the
words which the Lord has cried by the voice of the former Prophets, whilst
Jerusalem was inhabited. Surely God expects that New England should hear and
obey those many solemn words which he has cried to them by the voice of the
former Prophets, as well as those which he is still crying unto us by the
present Ministry, and this we must do before we can upon any grounds of Faith
and Hope, expect that God should Save us by himself: Thus we ought to approve
our selves unto God.

I Proceed,

3. To show how we ought to apply our selves to God for such Salvation; and
this I need not tell you, we all know it must be by Faith and Prayer.

1. By Faith, and it must be Pure Faith, without the least mixture or tincture
of carnal Confidence, Prefidence or Diffidence; and our Faith must work under a
most humbling sense of our sins and of our unworthiness, and of our own utter
insufficiency to help our selves, and our present Extreme necessity of help
from God, and from God alone, and that with a full reliance and recumbence upon
him, and an high and strong Confidence in him for such Salvation; with an
humble and yet firm dependence upon his Infinite Sufficiency, and his Sovereign
Grace and Mercy; and with an hopeful, patient, earnest, instant Expectation,
looking, longing, waiting and watching for him in this way of Salvation. Thus
we must believe by Faith, Asserting our Covenant interest in him and relation
unto him as our God, the God of our Salvation; as the Church Isa. 25.9. Lo this
is our God, we have waited for him, he will save us; this is the Lord we have
waited for him, we will rejoice and he glad in his Salvation.

2. With such an exercise of Faith we are to apply unto God by Prayer: for such
Faith works most powerfully and effectually, by Prayer; and is ever prevalent
with God, never fails, but ever obtains help from God; but then we must pray
indeed, Pray in good earnest, with utmost Sincerity, Fervency, Instancy,
Importunity, laboring therein even unto an Agony: not only cry, but cry
mightily, with an outcry of Prayer, as a People ready to perish: as the
Children of Israel at the Red Sea; Exodus 14.10. The People of Israel Cried out
to the Lord. Truly we are now concerned to Pray as for our Lives; yea much more
than for our own Lives, by the utmost improvement of all Arguments of Faith and
Hope in pleading with God: Striving as it were once for all; resolving with
Wrestling Jacob, that through his Grace, and by his own strength, we will Hold
him, and not let him go till we obtain; as Remembering that we are Praying and
Crying for Sovereign Mercy; and being sensible, that not only the eternal
concernments of our own Souls, but that all the Saving concernments of our
Churchces and People, and of all Posterity: that our very being and standing
before God under his Covenant, in his Kingdom as his People: Yea that all the
concernments of Gods own Cause, Interest, Name and Glory, with us, have great
dependence upon the success of our Prayers at this time: God has been
laboring long to make New England cry. God does Expect and Wait to hear us cry
to him, as Jer. 3.14. Will thou not at this time cry to me, my Father, thou art
the guide of my youth: and he has promised that he will be very gracious to
the Voice of our cry, that when he does hear it, he will answer, Isa. 30.19.
Truly it is much to be feared, that New England does not yet know what it is to
cry; that is with Lamenting, Bemoaning, Bewailing, Deploring, Mournful,
Penitential Cries of Prayer; although there are a Praying People yet left with
us, those who are Gods Remembrancers, who stand before him in the Gap. But
alas, how much of the Spirit, Life and Power of Prayer, is decayed and wanting,
among People and Professors, in Public, Private and Secret; and how much we
have failed and falsified with God in our Prayers: We have sad cause to
Consider, O that there might be such a General, Powerful cry of Prayer as
sometimes there has been with us; and as God now expects and looks for, and
which is absolutely necessary, as the way and means wherein we are to seek and
labor to obtain this Salvation from God: God has therefore promised, that his
People shall pray, Jer. 29.11, 12. Then shall ye call upon me, and ye shall go
and Pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you, and ye shall seek me and find
me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart: This is a promise that
then they should Pray when the time of Salvation was come. God always Saves
his People in the way of Prayer, Jer. 31.9. They shall come with Weeping and
with Supplication will I lead them. Oh that God would pour out the Spirit of
Grace and Supplication upon us!

But it may be inquired, What we are more especially and particularly to
Believe and Pray for, in order to the Obtainment of such Salvation?

I Reply, It must be for the returns and continuance of the Divine Presence,
and the accomplishment of the Promise of the Spirit.

1. That God would no further or longer withdraw himself; His Spiritual,
Gracious and Saving Presence, but return to us in those ways and by those
degrees wherein and whereby he has been departing from us: We have yet all the
visible signs and means of his presence, that ever we had, or any People can
have: But alas, how much have we lost of the Spiritual Beauty, Glory, Power,
Saving Effects, and Blessedness of his presence, and of the comfortable
Beatifical Apprehensions of his presence in Spiritual Communion with him and
communications from him. God is much withdrawn from our hearts, and from his
own House; much of the Protecting, Directing, Prospering, Propitious presence
of God, in the ways of his Providence gone. And truly the Divine presence
seems still to be upon its remove from us; and we and our People seem to be
very little sensible of it, and growing more insensible and unconcerned about
it: surely then it is high time for us to stir up our selves to take hold of
God: we may complain with the Church, Isa. 64.7. There is none that call upon
thy Name, that stirs up himself, to take hold of thee, for thou have hid thy
face from us and consumed us: Hos. 10.12. It is time to seek the Lord till he
come; that is till he return. Truly, Woe will be to us, if we suffer God to
depart quite away from us! Hos. 9.12. It was therefore the burden of the
Churches Prayer, Psa. 80.3.7.19 -- Cause thy face to shine upon us and we shall
be Saved: More plainly Expressed, Verse 14. Return O Lord we beseech thee. When
ever God Saves his People, he returns; and when ever he returns, he brings
Salvation with him, Zech. 1.16. I am returned to Jerusalem with great Mercies.

2. We must believe and pray for the accomplishment of the great Promise of the
Spirit. It was intimated before, that God works more immediately to Save his
People by his Spirit; they therefore can expect no such Salvation, otherwise
then by the accomplishment of that Promise of the Spirit; which indeed seems to
be a Fundamental Article of the Covenant of Grace; because it is by the
performance of that he brings his People into Covenant with himself, and
applies all the Saving Grace of the Covenant unto them, and so thereby he
becomes their God, and makes them his People; therefore it is so often in
express terms given and renewed in the Scripture, both of the Old and New
Testament, as Isa. 44.1, 6. Isa. 59.20, 21. Ezekiel. 36.27. Ezekiel. 37.14. Ezekiel.
39.29. Joel 2.28. and elsewhere abundantly; which signifies, that God has laid
this Promise of his Spirit in the foundation of the Faith, Hope and Confidence
of his People; and that the accomplishment of it, is the great thing which they
are to believe and pray for, in order to their Salvation; and therefore he has
directed his Church to wait upon him for Salvation, until he pour out his
Spirit, Isa. 32.15. Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the
Wilderness become a fruitful field. There were gracious Promises of Salvation
made to the Church in that Context; but they were to wait for it, until the
Spirit was poured upon them from on high: It all depended upon the
accomplishment of the Promise of the Spirit. We have (it may be) sometimes
thought and hoped, that we had seen God working in the way of his Providence,
at this time, and at that, for our Salvation; and we have been apt to be much
raised in our Spirits with what we have so thought God has been doing for us,
and that with very high hopes of being suddenly and perfectly restored to as
good and happy condition as ever. But alas! do we see, do we feel God working
by the power of his Spirit? Truly, if not, whatever other Signs or Prognostics
of good we may think we see, we may assure our selves, that all such hopes and
confidences will fail us, and we shall be left to complain with the Church,
Jer. 14.19. We looked for peace, but no good has come, for a time of healing,
and behold trouble; and as Isa. 59.9, 11. We wait for light, and behold
obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness: -- We looked for Judgment,
but there is none, for Salvation, but it is far from us. Thus it will be, so
long as God does with hold and suspend the Dispensation of the Spirit, which is
of all other, the most humbling consideration of our present state and
condition; and therefore, if we hope that God should ever have mercy upon
New England, and Save us by himself; we must labor our very Souls must labor,
by Faith in Prayer, for the accomplishment of the Promise of the Spirit. It is
by the accomplishment of this Promise, that God does accomplish all other
Promises and Prophesies also to his Church, referring to their Salvation: Yea,
it is by the accomplishment of this Promise of the Spirit, that he does
accomplish all his most great and Glorious Works in the World, referring more
directly to his own Kingdom, Name and Glory. O may we obtain this Dispensation
of the Spirit, then his will be filled with his Spirit; whereby the Ministry
and Ministration of it will be made mighty and powerful, as the Rod of Christ's
Strength sent out of Zion, and we shall be made a willing people in such a day
of his Power, Psalm. 110.2, 3. Then all Ordinances shall be filled with the
Spirit, and so become, powerful and effectual, unto the most full and abundant
communication of all saving grace and blessing; represented in the Vision of
the Candlestick, by the two living, growing, Olive Trees or Branches;
distilling the Golden Oil into the Pipes; signifying, the Spirit powerfully
working for the communication of Grace and Blessing, by the Administration of
Ordinances; therefore the Vision was expounded by the Promise of the Spirit,
Zech. 4.6. Also God by filling his Word and Ordinances with his Spirit, will
fill his Churches with his Spirit; and then we shall see the Churches spirited
unto Church Reformation; and so flourishing again with all Spiritual
Prosperity: the Promise, it is primarily made unto the Churches; by the
accomplishment of which, God will also fill all his Servants, (betrusted with
the management of the affairs of his People and Churches) with his Spirit. Yea,
all his people will be graciously influenced by his Spirit, unto extraordinary
Ability and Activity in his Service. O that we may thus believe and pray
effectually, that God would, Pour out his Spirit upon all Flesh, according to
his Promise, Joel 2.28, 29. Especially respecting the saving gifts and graces
of it, in a general work of Conversion wherein more especially it is that God
works more immediately, to Save his People by himself, and which is, the only
true and real Salvation. And when God thus pours out his Spirit upon his People
and Churches, he works also in an extraordinary way, and manner, by his Spirit,
in the ways and works of his Providence, especially with reference to his
Church; which is held forth to us, in that Visional Scheme of Divine
Providence, Ezekiel. 1. By the Spirit of the Living Creatures, and the Wheels,
and the Throne, and the appearance of a man upon it; signifying, our Lord
Christ, in the Administration of his Providential Kingdom, by the working of
his Spirit in the Dispensations of Providence; a more glorious appearance of
which, will be seen in approaching accomplishments. Hence we proceed to the

2 Exhortation: Which is to Excite us to believe, apply and improve this great
Promise, that God will have mercy upon New England, and Save us by himself. Not
by might, nor by power, but by his Spirit, and that in a way of Sovereign
Grace; this seems to be the only hopeful way that we have left, wherein God
calls us to wait upon him for Salvation. O therefore that we may obtain grace
so to believe, apply and improve this Promise, and thereby enter into this most
sure and happy way of Salvation. Therefore

1. I take leave humbly to propose this Exhortation, unto those who are, or may
be our Rulers, together with the Representatives of the Perple in this General
Assembly. Right Honorable, much Honored and Respected, Suffer your selves to
be entreated, in the Name of the Lord, and by this Word of the Lord; to
undertake, and carry on your whole work, in the Administration of Government,
both by Legislation and Execution, and in the management of all the great
Affairs of the Public Weal of this People of God, which you are by him
betrusted withal, by a very powerful exercise of Faith, in this great Promise,
that God will have mercy upon this his People, and Save them, by the Lord their
God: This is the Word of the Lord to you, as it was to Zerubbabel, the
Governor of Judah; Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit says the Lord
of Hosts. It remains as sure a foundation of Faith to you, as it was to him:
Those whom God made Rulers and Deliverers of his People; especially in times
and cases of Difficulty and Danger; they are Chronicled in Holy Writ, for
mighty men of Faith, according to the Apostles Induction, Heb. 11. Moses,
Gideon, Barak, Sampson, Jeptha, David, Samuel; to whom we may add, Joshua,
Ezra, Nehemiah, Zerubbabel: These all carried on their mighty works, for the
Salvation of Gods People, by Faith; and therefore were styled Saviors, Neh.
9.7. According to thy manifold mercies, thou gave them Saviors, who Saved
them. If God shall so spirit You unto believing, we shall be comfortably
persuaded, if not assured, that he will make you such Saviors, and Save us by
your means: The present State of our People, in this difficult, distressing
conjuncture of time and affairs, does require the extraordinary exercise and
improvement of your Faith in God, according to this promise; nothing can be
done effectually by you for our Salvation without it; every thing will be
savingly performed by it. May you, by the Exercise of Faith in Prayer, obtain
the accomplishment of this Promise to your selves; you shall by an
inexpressible Experiment, feel the Spirit of God coming upon you, moving and
actuating of you, by the more immediate influences of his Divine Wisdom, Power
and Grace, in all Service unto God, and his People, in your several places, and
that with a sincere and single respect, to his Glory, and our good, which is
the highest good and end of all Government. And then you shall be stirred up
and strengthened, to set your selves, with an high and holy zeal and courage,
in the Strength and Power of the Spirit of God, against all the most powerful,
dangerous and destructive Sins and Evils of the Times. The Spirit of God shall
by you, Lift up a Standard against them; now they are breaking in upon us like
a Flood. It appears by Scripture Instances, that it is Gods way to Save his
People from their Sins, by the power and working of his Spirit, in and by
Religious Rulers, as well as in and by his Word, and seldom otherwise. In the
power of the Spirit also, you shall labor effectually to recover, uphold and
advance Religion, by promoting Holiness and Righteousness, in all the ways of
it; that so we may live quiet and peaceable lives in all Godliness and Honesty.
Much Honored, I do with all humble Importunity, Pray and Beseech you, to
suffer this word of Exhortation. It will be your highest honor, as well as
happiness in your Station, to Subserve so immediately by the Spirit unto God
himself, when he comes to Saves his People by himself. The first New England
Magistracy, under whose Conduct, God led his People into this Land; by Faith
obtained this Promise of the Spirit; and being extraordinarily (even divinely)
Spirited, both in the undertaking and progress of that glorious work, unto an
happy consummation, in Setting up Churches, Worship, Ordinances, and the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ here. May it therefore be your highest, and very
holy ambition, to be (through the power and assistance of the Spirit) Repairers
and Restorers of that work, and of these Churches thereby unto their primitive
beauty and holiness; and that more especially at such a time, wherein God seems
to be arisen unto an extraordinary way of working, in preparation unto great
Accomplishments for his Churches and People in the World. Herein you shall not
only be graciously accepted, but gloriously Rewarded; for if God thus improve
you, and you thus approve your selves unto God, he will Signalize his special
favor unto you, by making and setting of you as a Signet upon his right hand,
Hag. 2. ult. Then shall we with much joy and thankfulness, acknowledge to his
Praise, That he has given us Rulers divinely Spirited Just men, fearing God;
and that he has restored unto us our Judges as at the first, and our
Counselors as at the Beginning.

2. I propose the same word of Exhortation unto my Brethren in the Ministry,
and herein I desire first to apply to my self, who am among all the rest most
unworthy; and therefore most unmeet in that respect to apply unto you; yet
having (through divine patience and mercy) lived to outlive the most of those
of the more worthy Servants of Christ, who have been Coaetaneous with me, and
being one of those Ancient Men yet Surviving, who have seen the First Temple,
the First House, in much of its First Glory: I mean these Churches, shining
with the fullness and splendour of the divine presence, in the beauty of
holiness; and who have also unhappily seen, the beginning and progress of that
defection, which has occasioned the gradual removes of the Glory, and which
does endanger, the dissolution of their Constitution; therefore I ought to be
the more sensible, and deeply affected, and to propose and press the
Exhortation the more sensibly and affectionately. Whereby, O that we might be
all moved, to wait earnestly upon God by Faith in Prayer, for the Promise of
the Spirit in the more full accomplishment of it to our selves: We (tho
unworthy) are Servants of our Lord Christ, under peculiar relation unto him, as
the great Prophet, Apostle, Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, the head Minister of
this most glorious Gospel Ministry and Ministration; who has engaged himself
to his Servants, by many special Promises, of his Presence, Spirit, Power, and
Grace, to carry on his own work in their hands, more immediately by himself, in
respect of which it is said; They are Laborers together with God, and to work
the work of the Lord, that which is more peculiarly his; unto which, no
Creature in Heaven or Earth, has any Selfsufficiency, and wherein Paul and
Apollos themselves were nothing; and in which the Excellency of Power, does
always appear to be of God: And because it is all Spiritual, Supernatural and
Creating Work; Wherein the Apostle himself, said he, labored, with fear and
much trembling: doubtless under awful apprehensions of the more immediate
Accesses and Concourses of the Divine Presence and Power: nothing therefore is
to be done in it Savingly, but by Divine Sufficiency, engaged by the Spirit, by
whom his Servants may be endued with power from on high, and made able
Ministers of the Spirit, the Holy Ghost being sent down from Heaven, together
with the Word Preached, by their Ministry. The means whereby this work is to be
carried on, are not Carnal, but Spiritual and Mighty, only through God: and so
are to be improved only through Faith, that his Servants being full of Faith,
may also be full of the Holy Ghost, and of Power. God gave a very powerful,
prosperous progress to this glorious work by the First Old England Ministry in
the first New England Churches, which flourished exceedingly thereby. And God
has graciously upheld it by the succeeding Ministry, though not with like
fullness of saving success. Nor without a very fadening, humbling diminition of
Saving Grace and Blessing, and a gradual failure of the work of Conversion. The
work being therefore attended, with more and more difficulty and
discouragement. O how much the more are the poor Servants of Christ concerned
to reinforce and strengthen their dependence upon him, by Faith in his Promise,
(in all the Promises) of his Spirit for more immediate and extraordinary
Assistance, considering they are called to labor for him in the decaying State
of Religion, the declining State of Churches and Christians, with a Backsliding
people, with an hard-hearted, unbelieving, disobedient generation of Sinners,
heightning and strengthening themselves in their ways of sinning, multiplying
and aggravating all the Sins of the Times, unto an higher and higher degree,
both of Transgression and Provocation; and much in danger of falling under that
most dreadful Execution of Divine Vindictive Justice upon the Souls of men, by
Spiritual Plagues and Judgments. And in all this to stand before, and minister
unto, an angry and departing God, proceeding in a way of Judgment; and before
our Lord Christ, who is so far provoked, as to threaten, to come quickly, to
remove the Candlestick out of its place, except we speedily repent, and do the
first works: O then with how much Soul concern, ought all those who have
received this Ministry, to implore divine mercy that they may not faint; but
may obtain Faith to persevere, with courage and confidence, under the working
of his Power, which may work in them more immediately, and mightily by the
Spirit, to furnish them more abundantly with the Spirit and Grace of the Gospel
Ministry. That they may speak as the Oracles of God; all that which God would
have spoken unto his people, at such a time, and in such a case, which may be
most suitatable, seasonable, powerful and effectual to awaken, convince,
admonish, warn, instruct, exhort, humble; to deliver all the Messages, which
God does send, even the whole burden of the Word of the Lord, to hear and
receive the Word from his mouth, and so to warn the people from him, that they
may deliver their own Souls. O never, never, has there been so great an
incumbency upon any New England Ministry; as upon this Ministry which God has
now raised up: (and through his grace hopefully qualified) to labor with the
present rising and standing Generations in these Churches; forasmuch as our
Weal or Woe, in the issue of Gods Controversy with us, either in Mercy or in
Judgment, either in Salvation or Destruction, will have great dependence upon
the successfulness, or unsuccessfulness of this Ministry. If God make this
Ministry savingly successful in a general Conversion, we are Saved: If God
suffer it to be Judicial, we may tremble with fear, at the thoughts of the
issue; inasmuch as this Ministry seems to be set for the last Trial or
Probation (at least) of that Generation, with whom God has been, and is in a
way of Judgment O then, Let us be moved to believe and pray powerfully for such
of the Servants of Christ, who are just now Entered or Entering upon the Work of
the Ministry; and who are to labor therein, under every dark and doubtful
Dispensations, not knowing what God will do with his People and Churches here.
Oh, who may Survive or live to see the issues and events, either in Salvation,
or otherwise? I say, Let us Believe and Pray for them, that they may lay out
themselves, their very Hearts and Souls in every part of their work: and that
their Ministry may be savingly successful; and themselves eminently
Subservient, to a Glorious Salvation by the Lord our God Himself, in a way of
Sovereign Grace.

To Conclude,

3 I propose this Exhortation, To all the believing Praying People of God with
us. O believe and pray; Improve this great promise by Faith in Praver, That God
may have mercy upon New England, and Save us by himself in a way of Sovereign
Grace. It is high time thus to believe and pray: and to this end,

1. We must take heed, that we do not presume upon Sovereign Grace, which we
are apt and (I fear we begin) to do: We must therefore remember that God has
not by his Covenant absolutely engaged the absolute sufficiency of his
Sovereign Grace for the Salvation of his people; but he has engaged himself
only according to the Ordinate and Ordinary working of his Grace and Mercy, to
a repenting, believing, obedient, reforming People. God is not wont to Save an
hard hearted, Impenitent, unbelieving, disobedient People continuning in their
sins, slighting, neglecting, abusing and rejecting, ordinary mercy offered to
them: I say, God is not wont to Save such a People by Sovereign Grace; he does
seldom (if ever) supersede this course and process of his with such a People
by Sovereign Mercy; he does rarely Save such a Generation who have first
provoked him to enter into Judgment, by Sovereign Mercy. It is therefore
dangerous to presume upon Sovereign Grace.

2. We must remember also, that the promise of Sovereign Mercy is made only to
Mourners, to a People brought down to such a depth and degree of mourning and
humiliation, that their Spirits, their Hearts, their Souls, are ready to faint
and fail within them; so expressly in the text of that promise, Isa. 57.16.18 --
With him also who is of an humble and contrite Spirit, to revive etc. For I
will not contend for ever -- for the Spirit should fail before, and the Soul
which I have made. I have seen his ways and I will heal him, I will restore
comfort to him and to his mourners, etc. Truly we must Expect that God will
make New England Mourn, until our Spirits, our Hearts be ready to faint within
us; before he will Save us by Sovereign Grace: with these cautions all the
sincere People of God, in the Land, may and ought to set themselves to believe
and pray with confidence and comfort for the accomplishment of this glorious
promise of Salvation: and have not good but great encouragement so to do, for
as much as,

1. Though our condition respecting our sins and Gods wrath and Judgment, for
them, be very dangerous, yet it is not desperate; there is always hope for the
People of God: When there is not any, no not the least or most remote
appearance of hope, from man or means, either Ordinary or Extraordinary; Yea
though there may be all the most prodigious signs and formidable appearances,
and inevitable approaches of destruction both by Sin and Judgment: Yet still
there is hope in God, and he would have his People to understand it, Isa. 4.27.
Why say thou O Jacob and speak O Israel, my way is hid from the Lord, and
my Judgment passed over from my God, have thou not known, have thou not heard,
that God, the everlasting God the Lord, faints not nor his weary etc. Yea God
incourageth his People to hope in their most desperate cases, Jer 31.16, 17.
Thus says the Lord refrain thy voice from Weeping and thine eyes from tears,
for there is hope in thine end: Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that I think
toward thee, thoughts of peace and not of evil to give you an expected end.
God sometimes gives his People, The Valley of Achor for a door of hope, Hos.
2.15 Opens to them a door of hope in the greatest depth of distress: There is
always Hope in Israel, in the most desperate case, Ezra 10.2. Yet NOW there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing.

2. That we have not only hope, but a sure Foundation of Faith and Confidence
in God for Salvation (viz.) His Covenant and all his promises, whereby we are
assured, that he is not only able, but graciously Willing to Save us: reserving
to himself the absolute liberty of his Sovereignty, either to Save or Destroy,
Jer. 18.16. O house of Israel cannot I do with you as the Potter. But God has
not yet taken away his Covenant from us, he has not yet said of us (as of this
People in our text) either Loruhamah, I will no more have mercy, or Loammi, ye
are not my People, I will not be your God; nor broken the staff of Beauty or of
Bands. He does yet own us and call us his People, and give us leave to call him
our God, yea our Father and our Fathers God also. We may yet Pray in Faith as
the Church, Isa. 63.15. Look down from Heaven and behold, from the habitation
of thy Holiness, and thy glory, where is thy strength, thy zeal, the sounding
of thy bowels, and thy mercy, are thy restrained? -- Doubtless thou art our
Father: and as Isa. 64.8, 9. O Lord thou art our Father -- behold see we
beseech thee, we are all thy People: and as Jer. 14.9. Yet thou O Lord art in
the midst of us we are called by thy Name, leave us not.

3. God delights to Save his People by Himself, thereby most gloriously to
magnify his own Wisdom and Power above man and means; as in our Text: I will
Save them by the Lord their God, and will not Save them by Bow, nor by Sword,
nor by Battle, nor by Horses, nor by Horsemen: Observe, God would not Save them
by Ordinary means, but by Himself, that he might exalt himself in his own
Strength, Psalm. 21.13. Be thou exalted in thine own Strength, so we will sing
and praise thy Power. Sometimes God Saves his People by terrible things in
Providence, Psalm. 65.5. By terrible things in Righteousness will thou answer
us, O God of our Salvation. By wonderful visicissitudes of Providential
dispensations, the Wheels of Divine Providence, are sometimes so high, that
they are dreadful, Ezekiel. 1.18. This made the Apostle to break forth, into
highest expressions of Admiration and Adoration with doxology, Romans 11.33. O
the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God; how
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past findout; who has known the
mind of the Lord? Or, who has been his Counselor: For of him, and through
him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen. There will be
a time, when the Church shall sing the Song of Moses, and the Lamb, Rev. 15.3.
Gaeat and mavelous are thy works, O Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, O thou King of Saints. O that New England may live to have her part in
this Song.

4. If God shall thus Save us by himself: It will be the most full, perfect,
saving and glorious Salvation that over God works for his People in this
World. He will magnify New England again before the World; he will make us
again a Praise in the earth, by causing our righteousness to go forth as
brightness, and our Salvation as a Lamp which burns, Isa. 62.1, 7. God will
glorify himself before all people in us, when he shall thus Save us from our
sins and apostasy, by the power of his Spirit, in a general work of Conversion
and Reformation; and by a glorious resurrection of Religion, in the life and
power of it; and by the return of his spiritual and gracious Presence unto us
in the fullness of it; and so by causing his face to shine upon us. O this will
be glorious Salvation! and that is the Salvation which I have intended and
spoken of all along; and when this Salvation comes, then shall that great
Promise unto the Church be fulfilled to us, Jer. 33.9. And I will cleanse them
from all their Iniquity, whereby they have sinned against me; and I will pardon
their iniquities, -- and it shall be unto me for a Name of joy, a praise and an
honor before all Nations of the earth, which shall hear of the good that I
will do to them, and they shall fear and tremble, for all the goodness, and for
all the Prosperity that I shall procure unto it. In that day will God
accomplish that great Promise unto us, Zeph. 3.17. In that day it shall be said
unto Jerusalem, fear not, -- the Lord thy God is in the midst of thee, mighty,
he will save, he will rejoice over thee with joy, rest in his love to thee, joy
over thee with singing. O blessed, will such of the Servants of God be, who
shall survive, or hereafter live to see the accomplishment. Yea, blessed shall
we be, may we die in the Faith, hope, confidence and comfort of the
accomplishment of this Promise, in Gods time to his people and Churches here: I
will have mercy upon New England, and I will Save them, by the Lord their God.
What remains then but that we believe, pray and wait for as much as the Lord
waits that he may be gracious to us, and he will be exalted that be may have
mercy upon us, for the Lord is a God of Judgment, and blessed are all those
that wait for Him.

FINIS.

