PHARISAISM DISPLAYED, OR Hypocrisy Detected. IN A SERMON Preached in St.
Mary's Church in Stamford, August the 21st, 1690.

Being the Triennial Visitation of the Right Reverend Father in God, Thomas
Lord Bishop of LINCOLN.

By GEORGE TOPHAM, Prebendary of Lincoln.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Fox, at the Angel in Westminster Hall; and are to
be sold by Mr. Caldecot, Bookseller, in Stamford, Lincolnshire, 1690.

PHARISAISM DISPLAYED, OR Hypocrisy Detected, etc.
St LUKE xii. v. i. Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy.


REligion and a Holy Life is so necessary for the making all Humane Societies
Happy, that thereupon it has constantly been recommended by the wisest Men, and
greatest Philosophers: The very Poet could observe this to his Countrymen the
Romans, Dis te minorem quod geris,
Imperas;
that they owed their Success to their Piety, and were made Commanders of the
World for their Obedience to their Gods.

It Is of such concern for the establishing Government, that all Lawgivers have
thought it necessary to prohibit the Violation thereof; and it carries so much
of the Image of God in it, that all his Revelations to the Patriarchs and
Prophets, especially that by the Blessed Jesus to the Christian Church, do
mainly insist upon it.

When the Heathen World went greatly astray, by their abominable Idolatries,
even in their pretended Religious Rites, the Doctrine of the Gospel appeared to
turn them from the power of Satan unto God: And when the Jews (but chiefly the
Pharisees) had so strangely degenerated in their Principles and Practices, from
the great Design of the Law, our Lord protests against them, and gives his
Disciples this caution, Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy.

From which words I shall observe, First, Who these Pharisees were. Secondly,
What this Leaven of theirs was, which our Savior cautions his Disciples
against. And then, thirdly, Consider how much of this sour Leaven is spread
abroad amongst us, and give some Cautions against it.


First, Who these Pharisees were:

They were a particular Sect, proudly affecting singular Opinions and Practices
different from the other Jews, and such as were not enjoined in the Law of
Moses: The Name Pharisee is to separate and divide; and themselves were
distinguished into several sorts, as the Jewish Writers tell us.

Some were called the Sechemitical Pharisees; these made a Trade of Religion,
and all their pretended Sanctity, was only to vail their inward Villainies,
that so they might the more demurely Cheat. Others were styled the Stumbling
Pharisees, who for an appearance of Humility, would scarce lift up their feet
in the Streets. Others they called the Winking Pharisees, because they shut
their eyes as they past along, least they should (as they gave out) behold a
Temptation. And others they styled the Boasting Pharisees, because they
pretended not only to do whatsoever the Law required, but even to Works of
Supererrogation, to perform a great deal more; and upon this account, boasted
that God himself rejoiced in them, and that they were infinitely dear to him.

Yet if we may credit Josephus, they did not withdraw themselves from the
Synagogue, or Temple public Worship. Though concerning the Synagogue-Worship,
there is probable Evidence, that the chief Sects among the Jews, and therefore
the Pharisees, as one of them, had their distinct Assemblies: And it is certain,
the Pharisees did reject the best of Men from their Synagogue-Communion, merely
for confessing that Jesus was the Christ, and becoming his Disciples. And in
the Temple-Worship they were guilty of a kind of Separation, under an
appearance of Communion; for whereas the Daily Sacrifice in the Temple was a
Burnt Offering, and therefore appointed for Expiation and Atonement, the
Devotions of those who attended at the Hours of Prayer and Sacrifice, ought to
be conformable thereunto; but the Pharisees Prayer there, as our Savior
describes it, had nothing in it of Humble Supplication for Mercy and Favor,
but he thanks GOD that he was not as other men. And this Spirit of Division was
so much worse in them, because 'twas founded in a high conceit, and great
confidence in their own Piety, when all the while there was nothing in it but
Hypocrisy.

Which brings me to the second Considerable, what this Leaven of the Pharisees
was, which our Lord and Master cautionizes his Disciples against: And this
Leaven (as he Expounds himself) was of two sorts; the Leaven of Corrupt and
Superstitious Doctrine, Mat. 12. ver. 16. and here the Leaven of Hypocrisy:
Now it is the nature of Leaven not only to spread and diffuse itself, but also
to swell the Lump it is mixed with: so this Leaven of the Pharisees did sour and
imbitter their Minds, puff and fill them with Hypocrisy, Cruelty, and Pride.
Hypocrisy is an affectation of seeming to be what a Man is not, in point of
Piety toward God, or Love and Charity toward Men; and at this Art, the
Pharisees were subtle Masters: Whenever they designed to devour Orphans or
Widows Houses, long Prayers, and Fasting twice a Week, must usher in the
Inhumane Villainy. If any Covetousness, or Cruelty of more than ordinary Size
was to be committed, they presently covered it with Corban, and were Deceivers
of Men in the Name of God. Their Study was to be circumspect and wary in their
Wickedness, Noctem peccatis and fraudibus addere nubem; They sinned out of
sight as much as might be, and made it their business only to appear unto Men
to be Righteous: And therefore well might our Savior give it in charge to his
Disciples, to beware of their Leaven or Hypocrisy. And because he did so, I
shall give some Instances wherein this their Pharisaical Hypocrisy did consist:

First, They placed much Righteousness in their being a peculiar Party, and
maintaining a kind of Separation, and pretended to a greater Holiness and
Devotion, an exacter Knowledge of the Law, and a more perfect Obedience to it,
than any of the rest of the People; and by these Pretenses gained strangely in
the Opinion of the unthinking Rabble. Our Lord himself brings in the Pharisees
openly boasting a greater Piety, a stricter Life, a higher Righteousness than
any other sort of Men. In the 18th of St. Luke, verse 8. Two Men (says he) went
up into the Temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, the other a Publican: The
Pharisee stood, and prayed thus with himself; God, I thank thee, that I am not
as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican.
Where we find him making a Distinction, between himself and other Men, in the
very first words he speaks to God. Yet for all this, if we observe the
Character our Savior gives of them, we shall find them so far from being
better, that they were worse than other Men; that tho they professed they were no
Extortioners, yet they devoured Widows Houses, and that for all their pretended
outward Sanctity, they were within full of Extortion and Excess.

Secondly, Their Righteousness did much consist in such a Zeal as was
disorderly, fierce, and censorious. They declared a great Respect to the Memory
of the Prophets, but this was only to gain Credit to their own Dictates. Their
Zeal was a violent espousing the Interest of their own Errors, and was not so
much for God and his Law, as for themselves and their own Party. They were far
more nice, far more scrupulous in lesser things, than they were in those of
greatest Moment, far more punctual in the Observance of their own Precepts and
Institutions, than those that were of God's appointment. They were strict in
washing those hands which remained polluted by Evil Works; and were careful to
tithe Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but omitted the weightier Matters of the Law.
For what Law more Sacred and Indispensable, what more Natural and Agreeable to
Humanity, than that which requires us to Honor our Parents, to Relieve and
Assist them in their Necessities and Wants? Yet such was the Blindness of the
Pharisees, that with respect to their unlawful Vow of Corban, they could
without Regret dispense with the Law of God, in not honoring their Parents.

Another Instance of their Hypocrisy was, That they prescribed to others what
themselves would not practice. They were forward in binding heavy Burdens on
other Men's shoulders, but were not willing themselves to stoop to the Duties of
Subjection and Obedience. They were so little Friends to Caesar, that by them
the Question was propounded, Whether it was lawful to give Tribute to him, or
no? And were (as Josephus relates) constantly disaffected to their Governors,
and frequently Turbulent and Seditious; for they were of a haughty and proud
Spirit, and scorned to pay Respect to any Rule or Order, without it carried the
Impress of their own Invention, looking upon themselves as the only Pious, and
Favorites of Heaven, and therefore fit to manage all Affairs, both in Church
and State. And when they had the Power in their Hands (notwithstanding their
pretended Humility and Mortification) none were more violent and bloody than
they, as appears from their barbarous Cruelties under the Government of
Alexandria, and especially in their being concerned in prosecuting our Lord to
death, and his Apostles after him with various methods of Cruelty, and
particularly murdering James the Just, the first Bishop of Jerusalem.

The last instance I shall give of their Hypocrisy, lay in their flaming Zeal
to proselyte to their Party, to make Disciples to their Sect, whilst they made
them worse and not better, greatly more worse than they were before: This our
Savior objected to them in the 23 of St. Matthew. v. 13. Woe unto you Scribes and
Pharisees, hypocrites; for ye compass sea and land to make one Proselyte, and
when he is made, ye make him twofold more the child of hell then your selves.
And so indeed they did, for the Proselites made by these Pharisees, became much
worse than themselves, the Scholars far out-did their Masters in their wicked
lives. This was observed by Justin Martyr, (...). The Proselites (says he) that
are made by you, do not only not believe, but do blaspeme the Name of Christ
twice as much as you your selves; the Gentile exceeds the Jew in his Unbelief.

Thus having given some instances of the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, I shall
now proceed to consider how much of this sower Leaven is spread abroad amongst
us, and give some Cautions against it: yet I shall not strain Resemblances to
make the Cases parallel, but only take notice of things as they really are, to
observe how far there is a likeness to, or compliance with the Spirit of
Pharisaism. And by the way give me leave to declare, that I cordially wish well
to all Men of what Party or Persuasion soever; and therefore whatever I shall
say, that speaks the Error or Danger of any of them, is not out of design to
blacken or cast reproach, but out of this true charitable end, to warn others
to beware thereof: And for my part, I look upon it as my Duty, to speak out;
for whilst the Sons of the Church of England were in pursuit of the Jesuit, an
unexpected Party came behind, and I am afraid, still lies lurking to reward
them with Joab's Complement under the fifth Rib. Do we not daily hear them
bespatter the purest Church in the Christian World, revile her whole
Government, Discipline, and Service, traduce her Clergy of every Rank and
Order, and endeavor by all Arts and Slanders, to poison the World again with
their old Pharisaical Leaven of Sedition and Faction. Now shall we, whilst the
Papists on one hand call us Heretics, and charge us with Schism? and the
Seperatists on the other hand (notwithstanding our late opposing the Romish
Designs, when we know who they were that readily joined) charge us with Popery,
and give our Worship the title of Antichristian; be silent, bear the Charge,
and not plead for ourselves? God forbid; I shall therefore in as few words as I
can, lay open the Leaven of both these Parties, and give some Cautions against
it.

And first for the Papists:

Our Case with respect to that of the Church of Rome, is much like that of the
Apostles, with regard to the Scribes and Pharisees, for when they professed the
Christian Religion, and Worshipped God after the way which they unjustly called
Heresy, the Pharisees sentenced them to be put out of the Synagogue: And Jesus
himself (as the Talmud of the Venice Edition, has been observed to affirm,) was
excommunicated with the Shammatha, or Great Excommunication: And because we (as
we ought) reject the Evil and Corrupt Romish Doctrines and Practices, which are
all laid ( Pharisee like) in Hypocrisy, to maintain their own Grandeur, and
make good their Regalia Papae, they let fly their Anathema's in the various
Canons of the Conventicle of Trent, and Annually (with all the Solemnities of a
proud and malicious Zeal) Curse us in the Bull in Caena Domini. And though they
at Rome keep to their public Worship, as the Pharisees did, yet are they
grossly guilty of Schism, by unjustly rejecting all other Christian Churches.
And herein they pass Sentance, as the Pharisee did against the Publican, upon
those who are much better than themselves.

And as 'twas one quality of the Leaven of the Pharisees to be fierce and
cruel, for where they could not prevail by their Hypocrisy, when they had any
Credit or Authority in the State, they made use of that (though after the most
barbarous and inhumane manner) to proselite to their Party. And do not the
Romanists take the same Methods? Are not their chiefest Arguments drawn (where
they have power) out of Bonner's Logic, Fire and Faggot? Is it not by Bloody
Inquisitions, Massacres, and Rebellions; by horrid Treasons and cruel
Conspiracies, that they propagate that their Romish Religion?

In short, as the Pharisees of old, so the Romanists of late, put themselves
into all Garbs, and suit themselves to all Dispositions, the better to
proselite to their Party; if to day they are full of Processions, Fastings, and
Whippings, to morrow shall gratify them with Masqueradings, Plays, and
Jollity; if upon one Door there be an Excommunication, casting down to Hell all
Transgressors, upon another you'll-see a Jubilee, or Pardon for all
Transgressions; if on one side of the Street a House of Veiled Nuns, on the
other, a House of open Curtesans: Their promising of Pardon of Sin, upon
condition of Performances unnecessary and insufficient, such as undertaking
Pilgrimages to the Shrines of Saints, Visiting Churches, making War upon
Infidels and Heretics, contributing Money, repeating so many Ave Marie's and
Pater Nosters, what are they but Religious Cheats? And tho they spare no pains,
but compass Sea and Land to make one Proselite; yet when he is made, (as our
Savior told the Pharisees) they make him twofold more the child of hell.

The next that falls under my consideration, are our Dissenting Parties at
home; and it is strange we should have any such at this time of day amongst us;
I know that the sour Leaven of Division was once deeply molded into our
Peoples breasts, and they were envenomed with an Opinion, That the Bishops and
Clergy, nay, all the Members of the Church of England, were Popishly affected;
and this Calumny how weak soever, was yet so unhappily strong, as to carry off
many well-meaning, but weaker Brethren from our Communion. But now that the
Fathers and Sons of this Church, have given (especially under the late Trial)
such good assurance to the contrary, we hoped, (as justly we might) that these
Mis-representations would easily have been seen through, and abhorred by all
our Dissenting Brethren; and that they would readily have come in, and joined
with us in one Public Worship, and lent a helping hand to preserve that Church
which the common Enemy thrust at with so much Malice and Envy: For if there
were any such Tincture of Popery, or Papistical Inclination in the Sons of the
Church of England, as the Romanists have taught our Pretenders to a further
Reformation to say and publish, why should the Emissaries of Rome be more
industriously intent upon our Destruction, than upon the Extirpation of all
other Protestants in the World?

Indeed the reason is, That the Church of England has for her Faith resisted to
Blood; that this Church has sent into Heaven whole Colonies of Confessors and
Martyrs for the Truth; that this Church has constantly (and of late as much as
ever) maintained her own Cause, and the common Cause of all the Reformed
Churches; that this Church is still (thanks be to God, and their Sacred
Majesty's) the Ornament and the Apology, the Support and the Protection of all
the Protestant Churches throughout the World: Our Brethren beyond the Seas
cannot be rooted out with ease, or but persecuted with safety, whilst there is
a Church of England to stand as a Rampire in the way between them and Ruin:
but destroy or extinguish this Church, and all the Reformed Churches abroad,
will soon be shattered and made a Prey: O that our Separatists were wise! that
they understood this! that they would but consider who they are actuated by:
They little think that they are but Journy-men to their and our worst Enemies
the Jesuits, who drive a Trade of Divisions in Church and State, in hopes one
day to sacrifice them both to their Revenge and Avarice.

Now there is nothing more dishonorable to the nature of Man, or more to the
shame of his understanding, than to be made another Man's Property, or Tool;
yet such is the sottishness of too many amongst us, that notwithstanding all
the Arguments that have been used, they are still resolved to be overreacht and
abused by Men ingenuously wicked, are still as industrious Agents to spread
abroad their Leaven of Separation, as ever. And therefore my Reverend Brethren,
(with submission I speak it) I think it is the Duty of every one of us, in our
several Places and Cures, to Cautionize our People to be ware of them: And good
reason we have for it, if we cast but an eye about us, and see how zealous they
are to proselite to their several Parties, and how maliciously they Mis-figure
us to the more weak and unwary, to draw them from our Communion. They cannot
but acknowledge, (and some of the Ringleaders of them have done it in print)
that we have all the Fundamentals of the true Religion, both in respect of
Faith and Practice: We agree in all Essentials with all the Protestant Churches
of Christendom, as the Harmony of Confessions will satisfy every Man, who will
be but at the pains to read them.

We add no Articles of our own making to the Apostles Creed, (as we know who
do) nor do we snip one of the Ten Commandments, and then slit another to make
up the number: We do not equal the Apocrypha with the Canonical Scriptures,
neither do we prohibit the Laity the consulting those Sadred Records, but as
much as in us lies, endeavor to persuade them to read and meditate on them: We
have but two Sacraments, according to our Savior's Institution; and our
Public Service is performed in our own Language: We do not buy or sell
Pardons, nor do we trust in any Merits save those of our most Blessed Redeemer
Jesus Christ: We pray for noue who are departed this Life, much less do we
Invocate any of the Saints: We renounce the strange Doctrine of
Transubstamiation, as we do all pretentions to Infallibility upon Earth. What
pretense can they then have, not to join Communion with us? If some things
indifferent and uncommanded in Holy Writ, do make them divide from us of the
Church of England, they must (for the very same reason) not only separate from
all the Reformed Churches of Europe, but from themselves too, wherein some
things must be indifferent.

Yet notwithstanding all this, how pievishly are they bent against us? And
outrun the Pharisees in the way of Separation; for those, though they were for
Prayers of their own, yet joined in the Public Prayers of the Jewish Church;
but these are so far from joining with us in Prayer, that they cry out against
our Public Service, and condemn the Form, only because it is Uniform: Yet were
they not as Ignorant as they are Envious, and as stubbornly resolved not to be
Informed, as they are both, they might soon be satisfied, that set Forms of
Prayer have been the constant Practice of the Church of GOD in her Public
Worship, in all Ages, both Jew and Christian. For as no Form of Prayer is the
Mother of Confusion, so several Forms by Persons of the same Church, are the
Means and Inlets of Division: and therefore to prevent all Divisions in the
Church, and to avoid all ignorant, insignificant, and extravagant ways of
expressing our Minds unto God in Prayer; as also that we might Communicate in
each others Prayers, and reap the benefit of each others Fervency and Devotion,
these were the great and weighty Reasons wherefore a set and standing Form of
public Prayer, has ever been prescribed and used in the Church.

Again, as the Pharisees of old were constantly backbiting and speaking Evil of
the High Priest, so our Modern Phnrisees make it a piece of their Religion, to
bespatter and slander, despise and contemn the Persons and Commands of our
Reverend Bishops, whom they ought to serve and obey in the Lord; Episcopacy
being an Apostolical Institution, as appears from the Bishops which they
Ordained in several Churches: And St. Jerome assures us, that 'twas the Judgment
of the whole Christian World in his time, (that for avoiding of Schism and
Heresies) it was necessary there should be one Bishop in every Diocese.

But to come nearer home, the Learned Doctor Du Moulin wrote a Book to
Vindicate the French Reformed Churches from being a Pattern to any Scottish or
English Presbyterians to reject their Bishops, where he gives us also the
severe Censures of Zanchy and Calvin against those who deny Obedience to their
Lawful Bishops a Tester me Deo, says Zanchy, I protest before GOD and in my
Conscience, that I hold them no better than Schismatics, who account it a part
of Reformation, to have no Bishops in the Church. And says Calvin, They are
worthy of any Execration, who will not submit themselves to that Hierarehy,
which submits itself unto the LORD. And Calvin for his own part, though he
had not the Title, had as much Authority as ever Bishop of Geneva had; and
Presbytery itself is little else than a Multiplied Episcopacy, setting up a
Diocesan in every Parish, only with the Addition of an Unparallelld Pride, and
Insolency into the Bargain. Beza the great Patron of Presbyterian Eldership,
yet onfesses it to be necessary, Vt Presbyterio (...) essit, and permaneret;
That one be Prelate over the Presbytery; and this not pre tempore, but to
continue; and allows St. Jerome's Reason why it should be so, In Remedium
Schismatis; For the avoiding of Schism. And I hope this Age will not yet
forget, that when the Reverend Bishops were laid aside, when the influences of
those Lights were restrained, what a Night of Darkness overspread the Face of
the English Church; not unlike unto that which now threatens our Northern
Brethren: for the same Arguments which the Presbyterians had fiercely used
against the Bishops, were by the Independants unanswerably managed against
themselves: and then there succeeded more Sub-divisions, the Anabaptist got up
and bore Sway; the Fifth Monarchy Men made bussle for the Rule; and at last, up
starts the Quaker, and he will hold forth to them all.

Thus (though they could all but too well agree to Ruin the poor Church of
England) yet no sooner had they done that, which was, and still is their
Design, but you see how they fell out among themselves about their particular
Ends; and when they had pulled down that which they maliciously called Babylon,
the English Jerusalem, their Language was so divided, that they could none of
them build a Babel of their own.

Thus Religion, whose main business and design is to persuade Men to Unity, was
generally made the occasion of Quarrel; for no sooner had they gone off from
the peaceable and pious Ways of the Church, but into how many Bypath of Error
did they run? and fled as fast from one another, as they did at first from us.
And God knows this Leaven of Separation begins now to spread again as much as
ever, and there are not wanting those, who as boldly as impiously give out,
that the Unity of the Spirit cannot be better kept than by Dis-uniting; that
is, (though they differ amongst themselves) by uniting against the Established
Religion, and make that blessed Spirit whose Fruit is Peace, and Love, and
Gentleness, the Author and Fomenter of Discord and Strife, as if the fiery
Tongues, he appeared in, had been designed for Incendiaries, and the Zeal,
signified by those sacred Flames, could not be better expressed, than in unkind
Heats, and uncharitable Animosities; and the rushing of the Wind, which filled
the Room where the Disciples were met, portended only Storms and Tempests to
the Christian Church, and those to be bred within her own Bowels.

But to proceed; another piece of the Hypocrisy of the Pharisees was; in that
their making long Prayers, and pretending to greater Mortification,
Self-denial, and Contempt of the World, was only that they might the more
easily and readily Defraud the Widows and Orphans; and at the same time that
they pretended to scorn all Secular Interests, they were the most covetous
Persons living. And our homebred Pharisees do not only imitate, but have
outdone the Copy: for though they cry themselves up to be the great Lovers of
the Life Eternal, yet if you mark them in their several Employs, and observe
how they will Equivocate and Lie to gain their Ends, and advance their Interests,
you will see that they prefer the Temporal, and that Gain is their Godliness; and
that though they give out, they are all upon the spur to the New Jerusalem, are
yet for all their have, (if they had the power in their hands) as ready to make
a Halt again in Church Lands as ever.

Again, as the Pharisees of old boasted a greater Tenderness of Conscience than
other Men, when all the while 'twas but Hypocrisy; for though they strein'd at
a Gnat, they had a Conscience so wide as to swallow a Camel: So our Modern
Zealots, though they are so tender as to scruple at a Ceremony, yet they have a
Conscience so tough as to bear a Schisin. They are no Sabbath Breakers or
Swearers, (for those are Sins of no Profit) nor are they ordinarily drunk with
Wine, without it be at another Man's charge, for that is both a disgraceful and
a costly Sin; but they are serious demure in all their Projects, and seek the
Ruin of a Church in as great Sobriety, as Julius Caesar did that of a
Commonwealth.

Another part of the Religion of the Pharisees lay in deriding the Persons, and
cenfuring the Faults of other Men: And does it not pass (with several of our
Separatists) for a very confiderable piece of Religion, to speak contemptuously
of others, to scorn a Priest, deride a Bishop, and mock a whole Profession.
This is the Piety of too many of them, this is their Religion, and this is the
thing for which they so highly prize themselves; and if they should be denied
this, if they should be stripped (as it is fit they should) of their Zeal in
scorning those they ought to value, if all that Heat which appears in them
against the Persons of other Men were quenched, all that sour Leaven of theirs
cast out, they would have very little to say for their being of any Religion:
For if their Faith be observed by their Works, such as Patience, Humility, and
Righteousness, those Graces wherein the Kingdom of GOD consists, you will find
them (without breach of Charity) far from being what they imagine themselves to
be, namely, truly Pious. Nay, it is now become (such is the Age we live in) a
main part of the Religion of some, first to invent and forge Lies concerning
the Persons and Lives of those who will not join with them in their Separation,
and then with the greatest Pharisaical Demureness, spread and report them for
Truths. And they are so far from accusing themselves for this, that they
applaud themselves in it, and instead of looking upon themselves to be worse,
(which I am sure every good Christian ought to do) they believe themselves to
be better Men for so doing.

Again, as the Pharisees when ever they had the Power in their hands, were
constantly cruel and bloody, so we have not forgot, how when our Saints in Buff
had the Sword in hand, and their Blasphemous Teachers such Texts as this in
their mouths, To bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles with links of
iron, how many Loyal Heads they brought to the Block; and to fill up their
Inhumane Cruelty (true Pharisee like) they murdered the best of Princes; and
the Thirtieth of January will for ever blush in our English Calendar, as well
as the Fifth of November.

Lastly, The Pharisees were a proud and self-conceited Sect: And for our
homebred Separatists, notwithstanding their outward show of Humility, they are
inwardly full of Pride; and of this take one Instance for all: Can there be a
greater piece of Pride, than for a Person of very low Parts, and little
Learning, of contemptable Education, and small Improvements, to separate from a
Great and Admired Church, the Church of England, and from the Devotions of the
same in her Public Liturgies, all contrived by the Wisdom, directed by the
Learning, embraced by the Piety, Established by the Authority of such a Nation,
Confirmed by many Acts of Parliament, and by as many Convocations, or
Representatives of the Clergy, Signed and Sealed by the Sufferings of many
Confessors and Martyrs, I say, for an Audacious Schismatic full of nothing but
Ignorance, to scorn or pity all his Teachers, as Fools and Blind, is such an
Arrogance, Self-conceitedness, and Pride, as no Rhetoric can express, no
Charity excuse, no Humility not censure.

Thus do our Modern Separatists run parallel with the old Pharisees; And give
me leave to tell you, (my Reverend Brethren) that it is the Duty of every one of
us, to Caution the People committed to our Care and Charge, to beware of their
Leaven: I know Prudence is to be consulted how to reprove Dissenting Brethren,
but Courage and Resolution is never to be laid aside, and the more prevalent
and resolute any Party is, the more need of Courage to oppose it. Let them but
once show some true signs of their Repentance for what is past, by joining
Communion with us, and no Men living shall rejoice more than we. But if instead
of this, they study to raise their old Devil of Sedition again in the likeness
of a Prophet, are still as active to spread abroad their sour Leaven, and are
still as industrious to proselite easy natured Men to their Faction as ever:
shall we be so cowardly and treacherous to that Church of which we have the
honor and happiness, not only to be Members but Ministers too, as not to tell
our People (for all their coming in Nomine Domini) that Religion is but
Hypocrisy, and endeavor (as much as in us lies) to lay open their Delusions,
that they may not be twice poisoned (by these Mountebanks in Divinity) in less
than one Age.

And for you my worthy Brethren of the other Cloth, I hope a few Motives will
persuade you to beware, especially if you please to remember, into what a sad
Condition this Leaven of Hypocrisy once molded this flourishing Church and
Nation: For what things are there in Holy Writ (how Essential soever to
Christianity) which have not been questioned and disputed, if not denied and
rejected, since this sour Leaven has been spread abroad amongst us? It Is to
this alone we owe the raging of the Sea, and the roaring of the Waves, whereby
the Madness of the People is often expressed: 'Twas this Leaven of Schism, made
Sacrilege and a Sale of the Crown Lands, and Murdered GOD's Anointed in order
to it; but for this we had never heard either of Plunder or Sequestration, the
sound of those Names had not reached our English Ears: In short, to this alone
we owe the Legion not only of Creeds of Dogmatizings here amongst us, (since
the Year 41. in especial manner) but even of Skepticism, Apostasy, and Atheism.

And now to conclude, (for I fear I have been too tedious) with a word or two
to our Separating Brethren, and I heartily wish that I were but as able, as
from the bottom of my Soul I am willing, to persuade them to join with us in
the Public Worship of God: One would think our common Enemies ought to make
them our Friends, and 'twould certainly do it, if they would but permit
themselves either in Piety or Prudence to be provoked by them to Emulation: For
if all sorts of Papists, even the Sorbonists, and the Jesuits, the Dominicans,
and the Franciscans, however differing in Opinions, and burning in Heats one
against another, do yet agree against the Protestants, what should hinder all
sorts of Protestants, the English especially (however divided in Opinions) from
meeting together, and agreeing in the same Church of England, whose Reformation
is made Authentic by the highest Authority under Heaven? But if they will not
come in, if they will not cast out this Leaven of theirs, but are still
resolved (let what Arguments as will be used) to be peevishly bent against us;
yet we'll Treat them with Candor and Charity, and not cease to Pray to GOD for
them, and humbly beseech him (for the sake of his Dearest Son, and our and
their Blessed Savior) in his due time, to heal all our Divisions, and make up
all our Breaches, that so we may Serve him with one Mind and one Mouth, to the
Glory of his Holy Name, the Good of his Church, the Honor of Their Sacred
Majesty's, and the Peace and Prosperity of the Nation, which He of his Infinite
Goodness grant.

Now to God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed,
as is most due, all Glory, Honor, and Praise, both now and for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

