At a General Court held at Boston, May 27. 1674.

THis Court Orders, That the Reverend Mr. Samuel Torrey be Thanked from this
Court, for the great and acceptable pains which he took in his late Election
Sermon; And that he be desired to Print his said Sermon, with as much speed as
may be. And that William Stoughton and Thomas Clark Esqs Capt. Hugh Mason, Mr.
William Parkes, and Mr. Peter Bulkley, be Appointed in the Name of this Court
to give him Thanks accordingly.

By the Court,

Edward Rawson Secret.

AN EXHORTATION UNTO Reformation, AMPLIFIED, By a Discourse concerning the
Parts and Progress of that Work, according to the Word of God. Delivered in a
SERMON Preached in the Audience of the General Assembly of the Massachusetts
Colony, at Boston in New England, May 27. 1674. BEING THE DAY of ELECTION
THERE. By SAMVEL TORREY, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Waymouth.

Isa. 30.15. For thus says the Lord God, the holy One of Israel, In returning
and rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and in confidence shall be your
strength, and ye would not.

Ver. 18. And therefore will the Lord wait, that he may be gracious unto you,
and therefore will be be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you; for the Lord
is a God of judgment: and blessed are all they that wait for him.

Jer. 3.22. Return ye backsliding Children, and I will beal your backslidings:
Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God.

Rev. 2.7. He that has an ear -- let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

Cambridge: Printed by Marmaduke Johnson. 1674.

To the Reader.
THe God of our Fathers has done great things for this his people, in the
sight of the Nations. We have heard with our ears, our fathers have told us,
what work God did in their days, how he did drive out the Heathen with his
hand, and Planted them, how he did afflict the people and cast them out: for
they got not the Land in possession by their own Sword, neither did their own
Arm save them, but his right Hand and his Arm, and the light of his
Countenance, because he had a favor to them. Yea, the Lord has given us his
good Spirit to instruct us, and has not withheld Manna from us, but has
turned this Wilderness into a Canaan, and here has he given us Rest (the Land
of Israel seldom rested longer) forty years and more: and all this while has
he been feeding and leading of us, by the hands of Moses and of Aaron. It would
fill a Volume, to declare in how many respects the Lord has dealt with us, as
he did with his people in the days of old. He that has said, I will make the
Wilderness a Pool of water, and the dry lands Springs of water, I will plant in
the Wilderness a Cedar, has in an eminent degree fulfilled that word before
our eyes. And we may conclude, that the Lord intended some great thing, when he
planted these Heavens, and laid the foundation of this Earth, and said unto
New England (as sometimes to Sion) Thou art my People: And what should that be,
if not that so a Scripture-Pattern of Reformation, as to Civil, but especially
in Ecclesiastical respects, might be here erected, as a First fruits of that
which shall in due time be accomplished the whole world throughout, in that day
when there shall be one Lord, and his Name one over all the earth?

Upon all which accounts, our not answering Divine Expectations concerning us,
has the more of evil, and of dangerous consequence in it. Apostasy in any
people is a great provocation to the eyes of Gods glory, but much more in a
people whom he has brought under such manifold Engagements to the contrary, as
is to be affirmed of us, in these goings down of the Sun. It must be confessed
to the praise of his glory, that the Lord is not yet wholly gone from us, and
there are grounds of hope, that he will not leave us nor forsake us, at
leastwise that as yet it shall not be: For there are some (though alas! now
but few) of the first Generation still surviving, who went after the Lord into
this Wilderness, when it was a Land not sown, whose kindness God does remember;
and it may be hoped, that there shall be Peace and Truth in their days. It
must likewise be acknowledged, that as for our Israel, the Leaders thereof,
both in our Civil and Ecclesiastical state, are in some measure faithful.
Scandalous evils when they break forth, are born witness against, and therefore
the Lord will not impute them to the Land where they are committed. When did
the Lord ever give up any people to utter destruction, but that first their
Magistrates and Ministers were become corrupt? Therefore as yet our Jerusalem
shall not become heaps, and the Mountain of the Lords house as the high places
of the forest. Also the Lord who was still wont, as there were any beginnings
of Apostasy in his people of old, to testify against them by his Spirit in his
Prophets, has raised up those in this Land, unto whom he has given grace, and
a Spirit of faithfulness to do the like, (witness the ensuing Sermon) which is
a token for good.

Nevertheless, there are on the other hand awful Considerations, which may
cause us to fear what the end will be; O that we were wise, that we
understood these things! We have been, and (through grace) to this day are, a
people near unto the Lord; but in that respect, we have the greater cause not
to be secure. It is a very solemn Observation, which I remember Commenius
has, speaking of those once-famous and glorious Churches in Bohemia, viZ. That
they were nearer to the Sanctuary then other Churches, by reason of a more pure
Discipline by them owned and professed; and therefore when Contentions and
Apostacies prevailed amongst them, the Lord poured down his righteous
Displeasures on them, and has set them forth as sad Examples before other
Churches. Let us lay it to heart. And it greatly concerns us so to do, for that
there are sad evidences of our departures from the Lord in a woeful degree, and
awful symptoms of the Lords departure from us. Churches are not wont to cast
off the good ways of God at once, but gradually, it may be more generations
then one may pass away first; so neither does the God of all patience and grace
cast off them, but in a gradual way of procedure. How many stands did the glory
of the Lord make, e're it was quite removed, never more to return in the former
luster? Is it not so with this people? In what place can we behold the glory
of the first Temple? Do not the ancient men that have seen the first House,
weep over this? If we be not at all sensible of these things, our case is no
less desperate then Ephraims, when gray hairs were upon him, but he knew it
nor. That people who were newly come out of the hands of those that sometime
said to their Souls, Bow down, that we may go over; and whose present great
Interest was to carry on Temple work, when arrived at the full enjoyment of
Peace and Liberty (and in many other respects circumstanced as we are this
day) soon forgot their main and true Interest, being under the powerful and
prevailing influence of a Worldly degenerating Spirit; and yet they said,
Wherein shall we return? How many with us, are with the same Spirit making the
same enquiry? The Reverend Author of this Sermon, law it less needful to insist
on the Answer to that, or to speak much by way of Conviction, because that
would have been Actum agere, since God did help that Worthy Servant of his,
who Preached the Election-Sermon, but the year immediately preceding,
faithfully, fully, and convincingly to enlarge on that Argument. Moreover
(though some deny it) it is a general Concession amongst us, that we are in a
declining Apostatizing state, and therefore that Reformation is necessary. Our
sins testify against us, and as for our iniquities we know them: And yet
when it comes to particulars, we shall find those calling that Apostasy and
Defection, which the Lord Jesus (I doubt not) will own for Truth and laudable
Constancy another day, and consequently would have that put in practice for
Reformation, which Christ will never own. Brownism, Libertinism, or undue
straitning and confining the grace of that Covenant, which God has made with
our Fathers, is far from being the Interest of N.E and most of all from being
the Interest of Massachusetts Colony. Were our now glorified Fathers (
Winthrope, Dudley, Cotton, Hooker, with the rest of those blessed Worthies,
who were the Instruments, under God, of laying the Foundation both of our
Civil and Ecclesiastical State) here amongst us, they would say so. Let their
Manuscripts and printed Books, which they have left behind them to succeeding
generations, come in for Witnesses; and witness the Platform of Discipline,
agreed on by the Elders and Messengers of all the Churches in this Colony, yea
of all these United Colonies. Well did our blessed Mitchell also give in his
Testimony, when speaking in the Name of the Lord, upon the like solemn Occasion
as this Sermon was Preached on; Do not (said he) wrong and mar an excellent
work and Profession, by mixing and weaving in spurious Principles and
Practices, as those of Separation, Anabaptism, Morellian (Anarchical)
Confusion, and licentious Toleration. If any would secretly twist in, and
espouse such things as these, and make these part of our Interest, we must
needs renounce it as none of our Cause, no part of the End and Design of the
Lords faithful Servants, when they followed him into this land which was not
sown. Separation and Anabaptism are monted Intruders and seeming Friends, but
secret fatal Enemies to Reformation, as Paul in a case not much unlike, 1 Cor.
3.10 -- 15. In this work here on foot, there was a good Foundation laid, viz.
Christ as the only Lawgiver in his Church, and Reformation designed according
to his Will, and Apostolical Pattern. If you should build the Hay and Stubble
of such things as those, then verily (though sincere persons will be saved, and
the main of the work may be saved and revived at last) yet sooner or later,
there will come a fire that will burn up this Stubble, and then your poor
Leaders, that would have led you the right way, may be remembered when it is too
late. Do not under pretense of avoiding Corruption, run into sinful Separation
from any of the true Churches of God, (and what is good therein) or from the
Children of the Covenant. Prize and hold fast the Covenant to you and yours.
Thus that blessed man. It does then concern us to take heed, that we do not
mistake as to that Apostasy which is, and the Anastacy which ought to be
amongst us. And surely it is a safe and undoubted Principle, which runs through
that practical and profitable Discourse, to the which these lines are prefixed,
viz. That the great Apostasy of New England is in respect of the Spirits of
men, and general decay as to the power of godliness. Were there a thorough
Reformation in this matter, we need not fear any evil, but without this, no
other Reformation will continue the Lords Presence with us. The first Design of
New England was purely Religious, but now we begin to espouse, and are eagerly
pursuing another, even a Worldly Interest. Is not this the grand Procuring
Cause of former and present Blastings on the fruits of the earth? And is it not
for this sin, that the Lord is at this day seeming to speak as if the Trade of
this poor Country should be ruined? These are folemn humbling Providence,
which God would have us take notice of. Verily the Lord smites us, in that
which has been our Idol, i.e. the World, that so he may put us in mind of our
first and true Interest; yea, that we may remember whence we are fallen, and
repent, and do the first works.

Reader, The ensuing Sermon needs no Letters Commendatory, especially not from
so mean a pen as writes this. The Vote passed in that Honored Assembly to
whom it was preached, desiring the Author to print what he had preached, is
Recommendation sufficient. The acceptance also which this Sermon when delivered
found with all good men, though of different persuasions, is an evidence, that
the Preacher was under a special guidance and influence from the Spirit of
Christ the wisdom of God. It was the Advice of one of the Ancients, that in
Reading Books, we should regard non scientiam sed saporem: if we respect either
of these, the following Discourse commends it self to the Reader; for that a
judicious and savoury Spirit does breathe in it and through it, no
understanding Christian can deny.

Now the good Lord, who was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of David his father, grant that we may be kept faithful to the first
Principles of New England, and that not only as to our Church state, in
respect whereof, we are engaged to profess and practice the Congregational-way
of Church Government, as instituted by Christ, and held forth in the Scriptures
of Truth, but also as to our Civil-state, which has been built upon principles
of Righteousness and Sanctity, the Laws and people of Christ being especially
regarded therein, that so Holiness unto the Lord, may be upon us in all
respects. Then may we expect the continuance both of our Civil and Sacred
liberties. That it may be so, is the earnest prayer of him, who has great
reason to esteem himself,

Boston, N. E. 26. 5. 1674. Less then the least of all Saints, Increase Mather.

AN Exhortation unto Reformation.
REV. 2.5. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do
the first works --


GOD who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past to the
fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son.
This Book, wherein we find our Text, it has this peculiar unto it, that it
bears the Style and Inscription of this great Prophet, the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, Chap. 1.1. The Revelation of Jesus Christ. And indeed it bears a very
lively impression of his Image (as it were) in the Frontispiece of it, drawn
out to the Life by a twofold description of him, in his Person, Office and
Work, Chap. 1. ver. 5, 6, 7, 8. and ver. 13, 14, 15, 16 -- as also throughout
the whole Book, respecting both the Matter of it, and the Manner of delivery,
in the Mystery and Majesty of it. It has also this peculiar Eminency and
Excellency, that it contains a Systeme, or the Sum of all Gospel Prophecy. It
is a Prophetical Revelation of all Mysteries of Divine Dispensation, in the
whole Series and Succession of it, in every Age and Generation, and in every
state and condition of the Church; respecting both the Propagation of his
Kingdom, and the destruction of his Enemies, until all the whole Mystery of
God be finished, and Time shall be no longer, (at least) until the last and
utmost Prophetical Period. It is the last great and general Prophecy, which
does complete the Canon of Holy Writ, intimated Chap. 22.18. Therefore blessed
is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, etc. Chap.
1.3. John, the beloved and bosom Disciple, and last Apostle, is the Minister
of this Revelation, Chap. 1. ver. 1. therefore the Dedication of it is from
John, unto the Seven Churches in Asia, Chap. 1. v. 4. John to the Seven
Churches in Asia. This general or indefinite Dedication, makes way for the
particular Inscription of an Epistle unto the several Angels of those Churches,
in the 2d and 3d Chapters. Our Text lies in the first of these Epistles,
inscribed, Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Chap. 2.1. I shall not
detain you with any discourse concerning the Situation of the City, or Typical
Relation of the Church of Ephesus; nor stay upon an Artificial Resolution of
the Context, by an Analytical Exposition of the Epistle; which are vulgar with
Expositors. The way to our Text is easy and open: it lies in that part of the
Epistle which is Narrative. The words (as to Mode of expression) they are
Monitory, and withal highly Imperative or Commanding. The duty commanded, it
is to labor (according to direction given) unto a full and through Restitution
from that Declension and Defection in Religion, which that Church was fallen
into. In order hereunto, three things are proposed in the words, as parts of
the work and duty commanded to be done.

1. An awakening sight and sense of their declension and defection; (in these
words) Remember from whence thou art fallen. The word Remember here, it imports
an awakening, convincing Remembrance: it is often used in Scripture to express
a conscience and conviction of sin, Ezekiel. 16.61, 63. -- from whence thou art
fallen, or elapsed, slidden, backslidden; plainly signifying, Backsliding and
Apostasy.

2. A penitential Confession of, and humiliation under the sin of their
declension and defection; in this word, Repent. It signifies Repentance in the
proper act of it, which is a sad and solemn recognition of, and reflection upon
our past evil actions, with Confession and Humiliation.

3. Reformation; in these words, Do the first werks: which signify Reformation
in the proper act of it, positive practical Reformation; -- Remember from
whence thou art fallen, repent, and do the first works. It is as if our Lord
Jesus Christ should have said unto this Angel and Church of Ephesus, Although
thou have been commendable (and I have commended thee) for thy strong and
steadfast perseverance, by the great labor of thy Faith and Patience, in the
sincere, pure, and powerful Profession of the Gospel, respecting both Doctrine
and Worship, with extraordinary Zeal against Heresy and Apostasy, Heretics
and Apostates, and that also with extraordinary Courage and Constancy, under
many great Temptations, and much and great Tribulation: and although thou have
been extraordinarily beautified and blessed with my Presence, in the exercise
of my Kingly and Prophetical Office; though thou have been Eminent, yea
Excellent among the Churches; and although thou do yet hold up thy Profession
in the external Form of it, and do therefore still deserve some Commendation:
Yet know, O Ephesus, that thou art fallen; thou have lest thy first love, thou
have lost thy first life, thou have deserted thy first works; thou art not what
thou have been, thou art fallen into a state, frame, and way of backsliding and
Apostasy. Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and labor to recover
thy self speedily from thy declension and defection, and to retrive thy
pristine and primitive Profession and practice of Religion, unto its former
internal and spiritual Life and Power, from which it is chiefly that thou art
fallen, or else I will withdraw my gracious Presence from thee, and come unto
thee quickly in my wrath, and divest thee of all thy Privileges, Church Order,
Ordinances and Administrations, of the Dignity and Beauty, yea of the very
Being of a Church, by the Amoture of the Candlestick: Remember from whence thou
art fallen, etc. The words thus plainly opening themselves unto us, afford us
this Doctrine.

Doct. That it is the present, and most important Duty and Concernment of any
Collapsing or Backsliding Church or Churches, to labor (under an Awakening,
Convincing sight and sense (or under an Awakening Conviction) of their
Declension and Defection) unto a full and through Restitution from it, by
Repentance and Reformation.

The Text it self is so good a Doctrine, it does seem needless to invert the
terms of it. It is enough to say, That it is the work and duty of any Church or
Churches, which are in the like declining and decaying estate, which this
Church of Ephesus was in, to Remember from whence they are fallen, to repent,
and to do their first works. It is the present, instant, and most important
duty, it is indeed all the work and duty which our Lord Jesus Christ does
commend and propound unto, and press upon this Church in this whole Epistle,
and so unto and upon all other Churches in the like state: and he does propose
it plainly and fully in all the parts of it, that they might have a full and
distinct understanding of it, and direction unto it; that they might be through
and effectual in the pursuance and performance of it. He proposes it also as a
most important duty and concernment, as that upon which depended their very
Being and Standing as a Candlestick amongst the Candlesticks, as a Church among
the Churches. He proposes it as a work and duty which they had yet great
advantage and encouragement to labor in, under the powerful exercise of his
Kingly and Prophetical Office; and therefore he represents himself unto this
declining Church (for their encouragement) as walking amidst the golden
Candlesticks, and bolding the Stars in his right hand; that is, in his full and
whole Sufficiency to uphold his Church, in its Constitution, and in the pure
and powerful Administration both of Doctrine and Worship; and by a powerful and
effectual dispensation of his Spirit and Grace, to restore and recover them
from their present declension and defection. He also proposes it as a work and
duty requiring present, instant dispatch, which must be quickly done: and he
presses it, upon penalty of Unchurching Judgments, and so upon peril of
gross, open, total, and final Apostasy, implied in the removal of the
Candlestick; and finally moving of them hereunto, by a great and most gracious
Promise of perseverance in case of obedience, ver. 7. To him that overcomes, I
will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the midst of the Paradise of
God. Thus you see how full both the Text and the Context are of this Doctrine.
And this is also the great work and duty, which God did propound and press by
all his Prophets, upon the Church of old, in their declining and decaying
state, which for many Ages together they were in. It was Gods great work by the
Ministry of those great Prophets, whose Prophesies are recorded in Scripture,
to convince them of their Backslidings and Apostasy, and to persuade them to
return by Repentance and Reformation. The general word of the Lord by those
Prophets, it was Turn, O backsliding children; Return, O backsliding Israil --
Repent, and turn ye; Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die? etc. Jer. 3.12, 14,
22. and 4.1. and 18.11. Ezekiel 14.6. and 33.11. Hos. 12.6. and 14.1. It was the
great work of those Prophets, to bring back this people unto God: 2 Chronicles.
24.19. Yet he sent Prophets to them, to bring them again to the Lord. It was
the general cry of all the Prophets, Zech. 1.3, 4. Turn ye now unto me, says
the Lord, etc. Be not as your fathers, unto whom the former Prophets cried,
Turn ye now -- Observe, Repentance and Reformation it was the general cry of
the Prophets to that backsliding people: whence it does appear, that it was
their great and main work and duty, to Repent and Reform. I might further
demonstrate, argue, and prove this Doctrine from the suitableness of this work
and duty, unto a back sliding people, (it is the proper work of such a people;)
as also from the necessity of it, and from the good and benefit of it, and from
all Topics of Reasons and Arguments: but it being of undeniable, and therefore
of unquestionable verity, I shall take leave (for brevity's sake) to pretermit
what might or ought to be spoken for the more full Proof and Explication
thereof, and proceed unto Application.

Wherein, I shall apply my self unto the Churches, and unto the People of
New England, so far (at least) as they may be spoken unto in one General
Assembly; and I shall address my self unto You, as in the Name, so in the words
of our Lord Jesus Christ, by this threefold Exhortation. (1.) Remember from
whence thou art fallen. (2.) Repent. (3.) Do the first works. These Epistles,
and so these Exhortations, were directed to the Churches: Christ requires and
calls for the Attention of the Churches, ver. 7. He that has an ear to hear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. I am emboldened therefore
to propose and press this general Exhortation, unto and upon the Churches,
because the Text, the Doctrine, the Occasion and the Opportunity do lead me
unto it; and because I have also thought, that God does call me unto it, in the
Improvement of such a Text, upon such an Occasion, in such an Assembly.

Exhort. I. Remember from whence thou art fallen. Let this be an Awakening
Watchword from our Lord Jesus Christ, unto these slumbering Churches in this
Midnight of deep Security, wherein the generality both of Christians and
Churches, are disposing, yea composing of themselves to sleep, by indulging
themselves unto carnal rest and ease, shutting their eyes against all awakening
discoveries, and stopping their ears against all awakening voices; yea,
although it be the voice of their Beloved: as the Spouse, Cant. 5.2, 3. I
sleep, but my heart waketh, it is the voice of my Beloved that knocks -- I
have put off my coat, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I
defile them? Surely an Awakening Watchword is then most necessary and
seasonable; and never more, then in sleepy and sleeping Times, when Judicial
Security seems to be both one of the greatest Sins and Plagues of the Times;
when God in just Judgment is pouring out of a spirit of deep sleep, and
closing the eyes of men, as Isa. 29.10. and giving a spirit of slumber, Romans
11.8. No doubt but this Church of Ephesus was deeply secure, under her deep
declension: Spiritual declension does incline both Christians and Churches unto
Security; whilst the wise Virgins lamps wanted trimming, and the foolish
Virgins lamps were gone out, they all slumbered and slept, Mat. 25.5. as
Christians or Churches decline, so they grow secure, and fall asleep. The
Church of old, both Israel and Judah, were most prodigiously secure in the
depth of their Apostasy: the Prophets did prophecy Peace, and the people did
promise themselves peace, until they had consummated both their Apostasy and
Misery, Jer. 4.10. and 6.14. and 8.11. Ezekiel. 13.10, 16. Truly thus it is (too
much) with us, the more sinful we grow, the more secure; the generality of the
Generation growing more and more senseless, supine, stupid, sottish in their
security. Hence, although we hear all kind of Awakening Voices, and see many
Awakening Sights; though the voice of God does Cry by his Word, as Zech. 1.4.
yea though it does Roar by his Works, Amos 3.8. yet we are not awakened: Though
there be a grievous and general Complaint and Cry of the great and Crying sins
of the Times, yea although our sins do testify against us, unto our very
faces, Jer. 14.7. Hos. 5.5. though our own wickedness does correct us, and our
backslidings reprove us, that we are forced to see and acknowledge, that it is
an evil thing and bitter, that we have forsaken the Lord our God, and that his
fear is not in us, Jer. 2.19. though we begin to labor and to languish under
the sad and lamentable effects and consequences of our sins; and are sensible,
that our transgressions and iniquities are upon us, and that we pine away, and
are likely to perish in them, Ezekiel 33.10. yea, although we our selves, in our
most solemn Addresses unto Heaven, do complain and cry out unto God of our
sins, iniquities, Backslidings and Apostacies, and verbally and formally
express deep Conviction, yet we are not awakened nor convinced, but senseless
and secure still: our public Solemnities performed (by many) but as Solemn
Formalities, do lull them to sleep in the deeper Security, Isa. 58.3. Truly,
the more means of Conviction, the more a secure people are sometimes hardened
against Conviction. Security, it is a great hinderance, both unto Repentance
and Reformation, therefore Christ does propose this as the first part of the
work, Remember from whence thou art fallen. So to the Church of Laodicea, Rev.
3.18. Anoint thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see -- (that is) See
and be sensible of thy defection. God has made it the work of diverse of his
faithful Servants, whom he has of late sent and set to speak upon this
Occasion in this general Assembly, to Awaken, and to Couvince, to Plead with us
in a way of Conviction, to Cry aloud, not to spare, to lift their voices like a
Trumpet, to show New England their transgressions, and this people their sins,
Isa. 58.2. and surely until we are thus awakened and convinced, there will be
no hope of Reformation.

Exhort. II. Repent. So remember from whence thou art fallen, as to Repent. It
must be a Penitential Remembrance, such a remembrance as does both move, and
lead to Repentance. Ezekiel. 16.61. Then shall thou remember thy ways, and be
ashamed: ver. 63. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open
thy mouth any more, because of thy shame: so Ezekiel. 6.9. and 20 43. When and
where there is such an awakening, convincing Remembrance, there will be
Repentance. Surely God expects, and calls for a deep, thorough, general
Repentance: Repentance in all the parts of it, the full exercise of it, the
whole work of it, unto all the fruits, effects, and ends of it, expressed in
Confession, Contrition, Humiliation, Supplication, from a right Spirit of
Repentance. God calls for heartbreaking, heart-rending Repentance, Jol 2.12.
Rend your hearts, and not your garments. God expects to hear New England (as
Ephraim) bemoaning himself, Jer. 31.19. Surely, after I was turned, I repented,
after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh, I was ashamed, yea even
confounded. It is impossible that we should Reform, except we thus Repent; for
the foundation of the whole work of Reformation is laid in Repentance, the work
of Reformation is wrought in Repentance: and therefore our Lord Jesus Christ
lays the burden of all the work upon Repentance, in the Text, Except thou
repent.

Exhort. III. Do the first works. So remember from whence thou art fallen, and
repent, as to do the first works; that is, Reform. And here chiefly lies my
present business, viz. in pressing this part of the Exhortation: And the rather
I shall take leave to insist a while upon it, as a suitable and seasonable
word, because we have been Originally a Reforming, and a Reformed people a
people separated and set apart by God, to be the Subject of a very great and
glorious Work of Reformation. Reformation has been the design of New England,
and therefore Reformation it is the Profession of New England. This work of
Reformation, it has been (especially by this Generation) (not only) much
neglected, but even (almost) utterly deserted, by a general defection and
declension, which we are fallen into; so that we are now become a declining,
and declined people. There has been, and there is a general Complaint and Cry
for want of Reformation, it is generally confessed and acknowledged, that there
is an absolute necessity of a speedy, thorough Reformation, and that without it
we are an undone people. We have in our public Solemnities made many solemn
Vows and Promises of Reformation unto God, wherein, we have too much, flattered
him with our lips, and lied unto him with our tongues, whilst our hearts have
not been steadfast with him: there is yet therefore an utter, total neglect and
defect of Reformation; no kind, no degree of Reformation, as little, and (in
some respects) less hope and probability thereof, then ever before: and truly,
without speedy Reformation, our defection is likely to prove irreparable, and
irrecoverable, sin and sinners growing every day more and more incorrigible,
and incurable, and the heart of the Generation more and more corrupted with a
Spirit of Profaneness and Apostasy, and so bent to back sliding, Hos. 11.7.
insomuch that it is too likely to be a perpetual backsliding. And that which is
yet more then all, and most of all pressing, it is the danger that we are in of
being given up justly and judicially by God, unto a spirit, frame, and way of
Backsliding and Apostasy, if we do not speedly reform. Has. 4.16. Ephraine
back slideth, like a back-sliding-heifer -- Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him
alone. Psalm. 81.11. So be gave them up to their own hearts lusts. Deuteronomy. 32.20. I
will hide my face from them; I will see what their end will be: (q.d.) I will
have no more to do with them in a way of grace and mercy, I will leave them to
themselves, to finish their Apostasy, to fill up the measure of their iniquity,
I will see what miserable, lamentable end they will bring themselves unto: and
truly, if so, then woe unto us, we shall soon destroy our selves. But yet, God
is in mercy waiting that he may be gracious, Isa. 30.13. and therefore, that
which God is yet calling for, looking for, (yea to speak after the manner of
men) that which God is longing for, it is out Reformation, as Jer. 13.27. O
Jerusalem, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? These
Considerations may move our Attention unto this Exhortation. And here I shall
take leave to speak unto Reformation in general, and so not only unto a
restitution from our defection, but the progress of the Work of Reformation.
God expects not only that we should do our first works, but that our last
works should be more then our first, which was the Commendation of the Church
of Thyatira, Rev. 2.19. I shall therefore propose some general duties to be
labored in, in order unto Reformation; and endeavor (as God shall help) to
suit my Discourse herein unto the present condition of this people, and these
Churches.

First, It should be our labor to get a new Heart and new Spirit. This is the
life and spirit of the work of Reformation, Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. Repent, and turn
your selves from your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin --
and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye die, O horse of
Israel? When God does work reforming grace, and renew his Covenant with his
people, upon terms of Reformation, he does first take away the corrupt, hard,
impenitent, unbelieving, backsliding, apostatizing heart, and gives them a new
heart, and a new spirit, Jer. 31.33. and 32.39. Ezekiel. 11.19. and 36.26. The
foundation of the work of Reformation, it must be laid in a new heart, because
the original of our defection and Apostasy, it is in the heart: and therefore
God everywhere complains of that backsliding people, that they had an
uncircumcised heart, Jer. 9.26. a whorish heart, Ezekiel. 6.9. that their heart
was set upon their iniquity, Hos. 4.8. Truly, so it is, the very heart of
New England is changed, and exceedingly corrupted with the sins of the Times:
there is a Spirit of Profaneness, a Spirit of Pride, a Spirit of Worldliness, a
Spirit of Sensuality, a Spirit of Gainsaying and Rebellion, a Spirit of
Libertinism, a Spirit of Carnality, Formality, Hypocrisy, and Spiritual
Idolatry in the Worship of God. Sinners are sp^^^ed unto, and with the sins of
the Times, those sins are even rooted and grounded in the Spirit of the
Generation, as Jer. 17.1. The sin of Judah -- it is graven upon the table of
their heart, so that there is no hope of Reformation, except we make us a new
heart, and a new spirit. And truly this is the reason that we do not reform,
that we cannot reform, though we do promise and vow Reformation unto God. Deuteronomy.
5.29. This people have well said, O that there were such an heart in them*
(q.d.) the great thing which this people want is an heart: Truly, so the great
thing which New England does want, it is a new Heart, and a new Spirit. Here
then we must begin; and in order hereunto,

1. All sincere Christians must begin this work of Heart-reformation, by
laboring to recover your Souls out of your Spiritual Declensions, in grace,
and in the life and power of godliness. This Spiritual Declension, it is in the
first, and most strict and proper sense, that having of our first love,
reproved in the Context, and therefore restitution from this Spiritual
Declension, it is in the first most strict and proper sense, Doing of our first
works, commended in the Text: and therefore sincere Christians are first, and
most properly concerned in this duty of doing of their first works. How,
generally and deeply Christians are thus declined, both their hearts and lives
do sadly testify. It is the great and general complaint of all sensible
Christians, O their decays, and declensions! hence little of the life and
activity of grace, hardly enough to evidence the sincerity of it, clearly and
comfortably, either to themselves or others; little of the life of Obedience,
either in duties of Religion or Righteousness; much Carnality, Formality,
Hypocrisy in the Worship of God, both in public, private, and in seeret, in
all their Converse and Communion both with God and Saints, their Souls
languishing under a Spiritual Consumption, and those things which remain, even
ready to die, Rev 3.2. It is true first of Christians, then of Churches (in
this sense) That there is a universal deadness upon the hearts of Churches,
hence great unprofitableness and unfruitfulness under all Ordinances, sin more
unmortified then ever, their hearts and lives deeply corrupted with the sins of
the Times, and many Christians fallen into a very dangerous way of Communion
with, and Conformity unto the wicked World: and all this appearing upon some of
those, whose first life, love, sincerity, purity and eminency in grace and
godliness, was sometimes a Beauty unto these Churches. O how is our gold become
dim? and our fine gold changed? Lam. 4.1. How is our silver become dross, and
our wine mined with water? Isa. 1.22. How are Zions Nazarites changed in their
visage? Lam. 4.7. How are the faces the Countenance, the Conversation of many
Christians changed? O Christians, what shall we say? what shall we do? what
will become of us? yea, what will become of Religion in this next succeeding
generation? If you live and die under your declensions, as truly many
Christians are likely to do, being fallen into such deep security under their
declensions, that they are not like to be awakened, until the Cry be made at
Midnight, The Bridegroom comes, and must bestir themselves very hard to trim
their Lamps, in time, to enter in with him. O Christians, It is your Spiritual
Declension that is the main root of the degeneracy of this Noble Vine, Jer.
2.21. It is your leaving of your first love, which does make way for the
removal of the Candlestick; your Spiritual declension will lead the way unto,
and lay the foundation for, the general and total defection of these Churches
in succeeding generations: therefore, as the defection has been in part begun
by your declension; so the work of Reformation it must be begun by your
restitution. It is impossible that ever these Churches should be restored unto
their first Spiritual prosperity, and flourishing state, unless Christians do
first recover their first love, life, sincerity, fervency, purity, activity,
eminency in the exercise of grace, and in the performance of duty, and in all
practical piety, both in heart and life. O how can you hope to lie down in your
Graves with peace and comfort, before you have done what in you lies in the
Work of Reformation? How can you die in peace, under your Spiritual
declensions, and thereby leave Religion decaying and dying, and these Churches,
and this Generation, your poor Posterity, sinking under a general and total
defection? Sure, in vain, and frustrate will be all your prayers, desires,
hopes of a Reformation, except that you Christians do thus begin, and lay the
foundation of the work in your own hearts before you die.

2. The work of Heart-reformation, or making of a new heart, consists in
Conversion, and Regeneration. This is the most full and proper sense of those
words, Ezekiel. 18.31. Make ye a new heart, and new spirit, for why will ye die?
so Ezekiel. 33.11. Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die? It is a Call to the
unconverted: when God does restore his people from any deep and general
defection, and renew his Covenant with them, he does promise, and actually pour
out abundance of converting grace, and so revive and renew the work of
Conversion. So Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart will I give you, and a new spirit will
I put within you; I will take the flony heart out of your flesh, and I will
give you an heart of flesh: I will put my Spirit within you. -- Let me be hold
to say, If ever these Churches be thoroughly recovered, it will be, it must be
by such a dispensation of converting grace, unto an unconverted generation. It
is Unregeneracy, that is the radical and total degeneracy of any generation,
whereby it is wholly turned into the degenerate plant of a strange Vine, unto
the Lord. Here will be our deepest, and most dangerous defection, and that
which will prove inevitably ruining unto these Churches, unless the Lord have
mercy upon us. O our unbelief, and disobedience unto the Gospel, our rejection
of Christ and his Kingdom! It is a most sad and lamentable sign, that these
Churches, and Religion, are falling into an irreparable, irrecoverable decay,
That there are so many of the generation growing up under the Ministry of the
Word, and the improvement of all means of grace, in their Unregeneracy, under
the prevailing power of Spiritual Apostasy and (as we have cause to fear) under
a dreadful dispensation of divine Justice, by Spiritual Plagues and Judgments,
being justly given up by God, unto a spirit, frame, and way of unprofitableness
under a Judicial Ministry, sent to make their heart fat, lest they should be
converted, as Isa. 6.10 -- O it is a fearful word, Lest they should see with
their eyes, etc. -- and convert, and be healed. Observe, there is no help, no
healing for any people, if the work of Conversion cease amongst them. Truly, it
is a matter of very sad Consideration unto us, that the work of Conversion does
fail, and is failing more and more, in many (if not) in most Congregations:
although we have cause, with thankfulness, to acknowledge the Presence and
Power of the Spirit of God (so far) with his Ministry, that there is yet some
fruit of their labor appearing in the work of Conversion; but alas! not with
proportion unto the great increase of the generation. O how rarely do we hear
of a sound work of Conversion, held forth with full and clear demonstration of
the sincerity of it! O how few such Converts are there, as do evidence their
Conversion by a powerful, practical Profession of Religion? Multitudes there
are growing up in their Ignorance, Atheism, Unbelief, and Profaneness, who
receive no impression at all by the Word of God; and many others who do receive
some degrees of common grace, who yet fall away by Spiritual Apostasy, who
prove either vain, profane Professors, or close Hypocrites, or gross Apostates.
Truly, unless God is infinite Mercy revive and uphold the work of Conversion,
there will be no hope, we shall perish under this our Spiritual Apostasy, which
is begun: for if the work of Conversion fail, all the sins of the Times will be
multiplied and aggravated; and unconverted sinners will be in just Judgment
given up to God, unto the power of those sins, so that our sins will become our
plagues, and those incurable. O that all unconverted sinners might be moved, to
wait earnestly upon God in the improvement of all means for converting grace,
and bemoan themselves before God under their Unregeneracy, Impanitency,
Unbelief, then there would be hope in our end, Jer. 31.17, 18. There is hope in
thine end, says the Lord -- It follows, I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus -- Turn thou me, and I shall be turned: the only hope which was,
and which yet remains in the End of this people, it arises from the reviving
of the work of Conversion amongst them; this shall be their resurrection. And
this seems to be a promise of that glorious dispensation of converting grace,
which shall be effectual unto their last Conversion: This hope there is yet in
our end, that the work of Conversion shall yet have a powerful progress in
these Churches; and then we shall return, and revive as the Corn, and grow as
the Vine. Hos. 14.7.

Secondly, In order unto the promotion and progress of the Work of Reformation,
we must renew our Covenant with God. By Covenant, here understand the Covenant
of Grace, as it is constituted and confirmed, and savingly dispensed in, by,
and through the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only Mediator thereof, together with
all the Means both of the visible and Spiritual dispensation thereof, in a way
of holy Communion with God and Saints. That Covenant whereby God is our God,
and we his People. Now this Covenant, it is always in some degree or other
violated and broken, by defection and apostasy; and therefore God calls it,
Forsaking of his Covenant, Jer. 22.9. Breaking of his Covenant, Jer. 31.32.
Trangressing of his Covenant, Hos. 6.7. Hence, when God does reject any people
for their Apostasy, he is said to break his Covenant with them, Zech. 11.10.
Hence also we read, that the people of God have always perfected the work of
Reformation, by renewing their Covenant with God, 2 Kings 11.17. and 23.3. And
when God gives reforming grace, he always renews his Covenant with his people,
Jer. 31.33 -- God singled out our Fathers, and separated them unto himself, in
a more peculiar manner, as a people with whom he did particularly, and as it
were personally renew his Covenant, and more amply and explicitly confirm it,
that in renewing of it, he might more fully reveal it, and restore it unto the
more pure and primitive way of Administration, according to his own
Institution. We cannot say when, where, or with whom, God has in more special
grace and favor renewed his Covenant, that they might be a special people unto
himself, above all people, as Deuteronomy. 7.6 -- Therefore if we hope for the
confirmation of Gods Covenant with us, it is our duty, after our defection, to
renew it.

1. It is the work of sincere Christians, who are actually and personally in
Covenant with God, (who yet have (by the omission of Covenant-duties, and by
the commission of Covenant Breaking sins) walked loosely, remissly,
unconstantly, unsteadfastly, and in all respects very unworthily, under Gods
holy Covenant) to renew your Covenant with God, by the renewed stipulation of
your Souls unto God, under the Soul-binding Obligations of the Covenant. To
renew your Covenant-Engagements unto God, under the renewed sense, experience,
power and efficacy of New Covenant grace, by which you have had the
experimental knowledge of Gods Covenant, in the saving Mystery and Sufficiency
of it, as a Covenant of Life, as in Psalm. 25.14. The secret of the Lord is with
those that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant, and whereby God does
put his Covenant, write his Covenant in your hearts, Jer, 31.33 -- Thus renew
your Covenant by Faith, with an holy resolution, to cleave unto God fully and
firmly, to walk with God closely and constantly, in his holy Covenant, with
fear and reverence, holily, humbly, cheerfully, joyfully, thankfully,
faithfully, and fruitfully, in a way of Communion, with full and abundant
satisfaction in your Interest in, and enjoyment of God as a God in Covenant; as
David, 2 Samuel 23.5. For this is all my salvation, and all my desire. O
Christians, it is your work to uphold Gods Covenant in the life, spirit and
power of it, and unto all the spiritual and saving ends of it, as a Covenant of
life, in these Churches.

2. It is the duty of all those who are not yet savingly in Covenant with God,
actually, personally, and professedly to take hold upon the Covenant. Gods
Covenant, it must be thus renewed with his Church, in every Age of it, in order
unto the continuation and succession of it, from generation to generation. And
thus to renew the Covenant, is the proper work of this Generation, of those who
are the Children of the Covenant, that is, to lay hold upon the Covenant, by
believing in the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only Mediates of the Covenant; and
in God through Jesus Christ, as a God in Covenant with you: and so by giving up
your selves into God, under the Bond of his Covenant, to walk with him, and to
live unto him, in a way of Faith, and Gospel-obedience, as his Covenant people.
Thus to lay hold on Gods Covenant, and actually, personally, and professedly to
Enter into Covenant with God, is the Foundation of your being and standing
before God as his people, and indeed of your whole Religion. O how many be
there of this Generation, growing, and grown up in these Churches, under the
visible dispensation of the Covenant, who do rest, and trust, and boast in
their visible Covenant relation, and all the while live without saving
Covenant Relation unto God? Yea, how do they profane, poliute, neglect, reject,
contemn Gods holy Covenant, as profane Esau did, Genesis 25.32. What profit shall
this Birthright do me? -- Thus Esau despised his Birthright. Know then, all you
who are the Children of the Govenant, that it is by your taking hold upon the
Covenant, that the Covenant is established and confirmed unto you as your
Covenant, and your Interest, in the Covenant asserted. For, whatever your
visible right and interest unto, and in the Covenant may be, and whatever your
Confidences may be, yet if you do pollute, profane, neglect, reject, despise,
contemn Gods Covenant, and not lay hold upon it, God will certainly take away
his Covenant from you: Gods Covenant will certainly fail unto such a
Generation, and then these Churches will fall to the ground. If you should so
reject Gods Covenant, and cast off Gods Covenant, God would reject and cast off
you, as altogether unworthy of his Covenant, and of the blessings of it, and
say of you, as in Psalm. 50.16. What have thou to do to declare my Statutes, or
that thou should take my Covenant into thy mouth? You ought highly to prize
and esteem your visible right and interest unto, and in the Covenant, hold it,
assert it as an inestimable Privilege: but O take heed of abusing of it unto
carnal Confidence, and of resting in it; and take heed of slighting and
neglecting of it. You are the Children of the Covenant; but yet think not to
say within your selves, We have Abraham to our father, for God is able of the
very stones to raise up Children unto Abraham. And the Ax will be laid to the
root of the tree, and every tree, etc. Mat. 3.9, 10. You are the Children of
the Kingdom; but remember, that the Children of the Kingdom may be cast out,
and that will cause weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 8.12. It is
by laying hold upon Gods Covenant, that we do lay hold upon God himself. We may
fear, (and that justly) that God will depart from us: and the great enquiry is.
How we may keep God with us? Surely it lies much, yea most, and almost only in
you, to retain the gracious Presence of God in these Churches, by taking hold
upon him by his Covenant. If you reject the Covenant, you reject God, and put
him away from you: God will be gone, and testify against you, as in Psalm.
81.11. but my people would have none of me. And truly if God depart from, and
reject you, there will be no place found for Repentance, though you may seek it
carefully with tears, as Esau did, when it was too late, Heb. 12.17. If you
should go on generally and totally to neglect and reject Gods Covenant, God
will at last break the staves of Beauty and Bands, that is, break his Covenant,
and remove it utterly from us, as Zech. 11.10.11. God has not yet done it, he
has not yet disowned us: but yet let me say, God has not yet visibly and
signally owned us, by renewing and confirming his Covenant with us, in such a
way of special grace and favor, as he did with our Fathers, because we have
not so owned him, we are not yet so established in our standing under the
Covenant, as they were. It is yet doubtful what God will do with this poor
Generation, only God is yet waiting upon us, and proving and trying of us, to
see whether we will take hold upon his Covenant, and upon himself by his
Covenant, yea or no; and upon this Point will turn the weal or woe of this
present, and of succeeding Generations. O that we understood how much we are
concerned, thus to renew our Covenant with God!

Thirdly, Do the first works in all things pertaining to the Worship of God.
After we have made us a new Heart, and renewed our Covenant, our next great
work in a way of Reformation, it is to recover the Worship of God from those
decays which it is fallen into. The great work of Reformation in the Church of
old, it was much, and most about the Worship of God, which is most properly
Church-Reformation: and here our main work is, to recover our selves from that
decay which we are fallen into, respecting the internal, spiritual power and
purity of Worship.

1. We must labor to recover our first love to the Worship of God, both Moral
and Instituted Worship: all duties of Worship, and all Ways. Means, Ordinances
of Worship. It was a very high esteem of, and dear love unto, and delight in
the Worship and Ordinances of God, whereby our Fathers were first allured, and
moved to follow God into this Wilderness, O the first love of New-Englands
first Espousals, the kindness of her youth, when she first followed God into
this Land, merely, and only out of love unto, and delight in his Worship and
Ordinances! God remembers it, as Jer. 2.2. And truly, we ought to remember it
also, with shame and confusion of face, under a sense of our loss of that love,
and our (too much) slighting, neglecting and despising the Worship and
Ordinances of God. O this is the original of all our decays in the Worship of
God: the heart of the Generation, the heart of New England is much gone from
the Worship and Ordinances of God; though we pretend and profess much zeal and
love, yet our heart begins to be far removed from them. Isa. 29 13. Forasmuch
as this people draw near to me with their mouth, and do honor me with their
lips, but have removed their heart far from me. Ezekiel. 33.31. For with their
mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their covetousness. O
the heart of New England is gone much from the Worship of God, after the World;
yea truly, Christians themselves are much fallen in their love, esteem, and
delight of, and in the Worship of God. O then let us labor to recover our
first love, and to set our hearts to the Worship and Ordinances of God, Deuteronomy.
32.46. Set your hearts unto all these things which I command you, for it is not
a vain thing for you, for it is your life. Our very hearts and Souls must be
set upon, and engaged unto the Worship of God, as a very dear and precious
Interest, so as to prefer it above our chief joy, Psalm. 137.6. O the
luke-warmness of the love of the generality of Worshippers, to the Worship of
God, is an evident sign of our declension therein.

2. We must labor to recover our first Zeal for the House of God, in keeping,
upholding, and maintaining the Worship and Ordinances of God. Cleave to them,
and keep them up, by a lively, constant, steadfast, sincere and holy Profession;
by an humble, professed, practical subjection of your very Souls unto them; by
a constant, diligent, religious, and profitable Attention upon them, and
improvement of them with entire love, peace and union, in a way of pure and
holy Communion. Labor also to uphold the Worship and Ordinances of God, by
teaching of them diligently to your Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Train up your Children
in the House of God, unto the Worship of God, that they may be prepared to
uphold the Worship and Ordinances of God in their places; in their generation.
It has been heretofore the work of New England, to build the House of God, to
set up the Worship and Ordinances of God: but now (alas!) it is (too much) our
work, to pull down the House, Worship, and Ordinances of God. Most of the sins
of the Times, and of the generation, have a strong and direct tendenty
thereunto. We are sinning down, and sinning away the Worship and Ordinances of
God; especially by our Pride, Wantonness, cannot Confidence in our visible
Liberties and Privileges carnal ease and rest, Carnality, Formality,
Hypocrisy, Spiritual Idolatry in the Worship of God, our manifold both gross
and more spiritual Profanations and Pollutions of the House, Worship and
Ordinances of God. O these evils growing, and prevailing amongst us, and many
of the most notorious and scandalous sins of the Times getting into Churches,
and corrupting of Churches, do sadly signify, at least great danger of the
downfall of the House, Worship, and Ordinances of God, Jer. 7.10, 12. But that
which is yet most sadly signal, it is, that there is not likely to be a people
fit to uphold such pure Churches. Worship and Ordinances, (at least) not in the
internal, spiritual power and purity of them. If we do consider how much both
Civil and Religious Education is neglected; and if we look upon the sad face of
the Rising generation, and see how much of Ignorance, Atheism, Profaneness,
Disobedience, Rebellion and Irreligion does already appear in the Conntenance
of it; what an ungracious, irreligious generation there is likely to arise
among us, unless God in infinite mercy work a great and wonderful change, our
hearts may well tremble to think what will become of the Worship and Ordinances
of God in the next Age. Many there are hopeful; but alas! how few, in
comparison with the Numbers of this numerous generation. Here is a second
generation arisen, and a third and fourth generation arising apace, and truly
we have cause to fear, that every generation will be less hopeful then other,
until at last, that woeful Saying be verified of us, which is spoken Judge.
2.10. And there arose another generation after them, which knew not the Lord. O
unless God work graciously to save these degenerating generations, there will
be small hope of the long continuance of the pure Worship and Ordinances of God
here: the Worship of God and Religion, will either revive and live, or else
utterly decay and die, with the Rising Generations. Unto this we may further
add, the graduall removes of the Glory, the disappearances of the Divine
Presence, the departures of God from his own House; a sad sign that our House
will be e're long left unto us desolate. O how much then are we concerned to
labor (as much as in us lies) by all means to uphold and maintain the Worship
and Ordinances of God in their spiritual power and purity, least the Glory
should depart from this Israel, and the Light of the Gospel be again utterly
extinguished in this Western World.

3. We must uphold and maintain our first love unto, and zeal for the external
purity (which through the grace of God is yet continued unto us) in the Worship
of God. The voice of Christ unto these New England Churches, is as unto the
Church of Thyatira, Rev. 2.25. That which thou have already, hold fast until I
come. Keep and preserve pure Worship, purity in the Worship of God: preserve
the primitive purity of these Churches, according to their Reformed
Constitution by Divine Institution; that is, pure instituted Churches: purity
in the Constitution of Churches, is the groundwork of pure Worship. Preserve a
pure Ministry, constituted exactly according to Gospel Order, respecting all
the Offices of it, the Power, the Investiture, the Exercise, the whole Work and
Service of it; such a Ministry as our Lord Jesus has instituted and appointed,
Christ's Ministry. Preserve these pure Gospelordinances, the Ordinances of
Christ: Admit of nothing as an Ordinance of Worship, but that which Christ has
instituted and ordained; and keep the pure Ordinances of Christ, in the purity
of them, in the Gospel simplicity of them, without any corrupt Mixtures in, or
with any Ordinance of Christ, which is ordinarily the first inlet of corrupt
Worship into most Reformed Churches. O let us keep and cleave unto naked
Ordinances, simple Ordinances; the Crystalline purity of the waters of the
Sanctuary, which are, as they arise and flow from the Fountain of Divine
Institution, clear as Crystal, Rev. 22.1. Preserve purity of Administration,
respecting both the Power, Subject, and Order of Administration. Preserve pure
and holy Order in the Administration of every Ordinance, 1 Cor. 14.40. This
holy Order is the Beauty of Churches, Col. 2.5. Disorder, it is a general
Corruption in Worship; it corrupts both Churches, Ordinances, and
Administrations, and so it makes the House of God like a Den of Thieves, Mat.
20.13 -- O Christians, this purity of Worship, it has been the Eminency and
Excellency of these Churches, not yet lost as to the external Form of it. It
was Gods design and work, not only to set up his Worship in New England, but to
set it up in the purity of it, by a purging, refining Reformation. God did
therefore qualify his Reformers with extraordinary Humility, Sincerity, and
holy Zeal for purity of Worship; and made extraordinary discoveries of his
Mind and Will, concerning his Worship unto them: He did show them the Pattern,
the Platform (as I may say) of his House, that they might show it unto us,
Ezekiel. 43.11. O how much then are we engaged to preserve purity of Worship?
Purity, it is the Excellency of Worship, it is the Beauty and glory of
Churches, it is that which makes Churches shine, as golden Candlesticks; it
makes Churches the Beauty of Holiness, Psalm. 29.2. and 110.3. It makes the
Church to appear in her Spiritual Beauty, in her ornaments, as a Spiritual
Bride adorned and trimmed for her heavenly Bridegroom. That purity of Worship,
which shall be after the destruction of Antichrist, will be the chief
perfection, if not the consummation of the Gospel Dispensation, Rev. 21.2.3,
and 22.11. Then let us be moved to prize and preserve purity of Worship. And to
this end, we must subject our selves, our very Souls, freely, fully, and most
sincerely, unto the Power, Authority, Rule and Government of Christ, as it is
Regularly, Ministerially exercised and administered in his Church, in the
Administration of all his O dinances. Exalt Christ in the Exercise of his
Kingly office in his Church: whilst Christ is walking amidst the Churches,
holding the Stars in his right hand, they will remain golden Candlesticks. If
we do debase Christ, and set up our own wisdoms and wills, in and about the
Worship of God, then farewell to purity of Worship. Again, if we will preserve
purity of Worship, we must keep up internal, spiritual purity and holiness of
heart, in the Worship of God: we must be holy, pure, spiritual Worshippers; we
must keep up the Worship of God in the internal, spiritual power and purity of
it in our hearts; these pure Churches, Worship, and Ordinances, will not,
cannot stand, without internal, spiritual power and purity. If we do corrupt
the Worship and Ordinances of God by our Carnality, Formality, Hypocrisy, and
Spiritual Idolatry, and such like spiritual corruptions, and
heart-abominations, in the exercise of it, God will take it from us. It is our
Spiritual and Heart-Apostacy, from internal, spiritual power and purity of
Worship, that is the deep and most dangerous defection of these Churches in
Worship. And although we do yet retain purity of Worship in the external Form
of it, yet if we do not speedily recover that which we have lost, of the
internal, spiritual power and purity of Worship, but persist in our spiritual
Apostasy from it, whatever our pretended, professed zeal for visible and
external purity of Worship may be, we shall let go, and lose all, pull down
all, and bury our selves in our own ruins: New England will be no more unto
God, then any other people, Jer. 9.26. Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the
children of Ammon, and Moab -- for all these Nations are uncircumcised, and all
the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.

4. We must labor to recover our first holy Care and Watchfulness against all
Will Worship, corrupt Worship, and Corruptions in Worship. Surely, it has been
heretofore, and almost hereunto, the Commendation of these Churches, that they
have been sincerely, fervently, steadfastly zealous against all kinds and
degrees of Will Worship. It was the Commendation of this Church of Ephesus, in
her declining state, Rev. 2.2, 6 -- how thou can not bear them that are evil
-- Yet this thou have -- God grant that these Churches may never lose this part
of their Commendation; that our Lord Jesus may never have occasion against us,
to reprove us, and threaten us for our carelessness, negligence, sinful
Connivance and Indulgence in this point, as he did the Church of Pergamus, Rev.
2.14. and of Thyatira, ver. 20. -- because thou suffer -- It may be we are
too secure, and not aware of any danger of corrupt Worship: let me say, The
more need we have of this warning; for Willworship does ordinarily creep into
Reformed Churches whilst they are asleep, gradually, secretly, and insensibly,
and grow up unto a considerable and formidable height and strength, before it
appears, and before Churches are aware: thus the Church of Laod cea deeply
corrupted with corrup. Worship, and knew it not, Rev. 3.7. O these Churches in
this declining, scure, lukewarm frame, are in great danger of it; let us
therefore remember and receive the Apostles Exhortation, Gal. 5.1. Stand fast
therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, and be not again
entangled with the yoke of bondage.

1. Let us take heed and beware of all dispositions and inclinations unto
Will Worship. Watch against the spirit of it: Corrupt Worship gets in first by
the spirit and principles of it, and by the spiritual working of it in the
heart of a people. It gets first into the heart; a people may uphold the pure
Worship of God in the visible and external Form of it, with much seeming love
and zeal, and yet their heart deeply corrupted with a spirit of Will Worship.
When the heart of a people is gone from God and his Worship, it argues their
heart is corrupted with a spirit of Will Worship, as in Isa. 29.13 -- there is
a whorish heart, Ezekiel. 69. They have broken me with their whorish heart; there
is a spirit of Whoredom, Hos. 4.12. How far the heart of New England is
corrupted with this spirit of Will Worship, with prae-dispositions and
inclinations thereunto, would (we may fear) too soon and sadly appear, under a
temptation thereunto.

2. Let us watch against all the ways and workings of it, even the secret,
subtle, insensible infinuations and intrusions of it; against all the depths
and devices of Satan, working by the darkest and deepest Counsels of Hell, to
introduce Will Worship into Reformed Churches. We may think our selves secure
from it, unless overborn by the overpowering violence of some external
Temptation: but believe it, Satan has diverse and various Forms of
Will Worship, suited and accommodated to the diverse constitutions and
conditions of Churches, and the diverse spirit and disposition of people that
he has to deal withal; he has many Antichrists, 1 John 2.17. there is a
diverse working of the spirit of Antichrist, 1 John 4.3. This spirit works by
the power of Satan, in a Mystery of Iniquity, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7. And truly, we have
had many Antichrists. It has been always Satan's design, to introduce corrupt
Worship into these Churches, under the most specious and spiritual Forms of it,
by a direct contrary Extreme unto gross Ceremony and Superstition; the more
cause we have to be very watchful, against all such ways and workings of it.

3. Let us watch against all Temptations unto corrupt Worship, whether more
secret, or more open. There are many Temptations thereunto: there is the
Temptation of false Teachers, corrupting the Doctrine of Worship, and teaching
of Will Worship, Mat. 15.9. Teaching for doctrines the Commandments of men:
Rev. 2.20. -- to teach, and to seduce -- There is the Temptation of corrupt
Communion, tempting Communion, Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you, etc. There is
the Temptation of Division and Dissension, tending to drive dividing Parties
into Extremes, in those matters of Worship which they contend about, 1 Cor.
3.4, 17. The Interest of a Party, it is a very great and strong Temptation: a
spirit of Division, (especially) when acting and working with a blind,
inordinate, preposterous, superstitious Zeal in matters of Worship, and when it
is become judicial and incurable, never fails to bring in corrupt Worship at
one door or another. It is the design of Satan, to bring in Will Worship in the
smoke and smother of the fire of Contentions; Divisions do always corrupt
Churches. There is also the Temptation of an undue Toleration, which does open
a way to all the former, and lead into corrupt Compliances in ways of corrupt
Worship, Rev. 2.20. There is also the Temptation of Persecution, and
Tribulation -- O there are many Temptations unto corrupt Worship, and these
Churches have not been without some of these Temptations thereunto; such
Temptations are likely to multiply upon us. O what cause have we then to be
zealously and wakefully watchful, more especially against such Temptations
which are instant, and most urgent and prevalent, and of which we do already
begin to see and feel the sad and lamentable effects: and that confidering
there is such a prae-disposition in the very Spirit and Constitution of the
Generation, to enter into this Temptation, and such a powerful working of a
Spirit of Libertinism, to make way for, and lead into this Temptation; and also
that men of corrupt Spirits, Principles and Practices, scandalous, corrupters,
and broachers of corrupt Worship, open and professed Enemies unto pure
Churches, Worship and Ordinances, are arisen unto so high a degree of bold
Presumption among us; and that notwithstanding, they know that Public
Authority is by good and wholesome Laws, and so by Oath, and so by Conscience,
and by diverse obligations, both Civil and Sacred, engaged against them. I am no
Casuist, in the great Case of Toleration, neither shall I undertake either to
state, dispute, or decide that Question; what is in it self, or in diverse
respects or cases, at diverse times and places, either Tolerable or Intolerable,
in matters disputable: But this I take to be undeniable, That gross, bold,
scandalous, presumptuous transgression of any one, or more, or all the
Commandments of the First Table, perpetrated and persisted in with an high
hand, notwithstanding all due means of Conviction used, and against clear light
held forth, and manifestly under the Prevailing Power of a Spirit of Error,
with malignity, in open opposition to the Truth, the true Churches, worship and
ordinances of Christ; I say, I take it to be unquestionable, That such
transgression it is Intolerable. Such I take to be the transgression of those
who do grossly and scandalously profane any of the holy Ordinances of Christ, in
the Administration of them, presuming to offer strange fire: but much more of
those who do both professedly and practically deny most, if not all
Fundamentals, both of Faith and Order, and are known and acknowledged so to do
by all the Reformed Churches in the world; who are in their ways of corrupt
worship no less the Synagogue of Satan, then those in Rev. 2.9. Now I say, if
such Transgressors and Transgressions should (after the long labor and
patience of these Churches, in a strong and steadfast encounter and conflict
with this Temptation) at last prevail to break open a door unto corrupt
worship, by Teaching, Seducing, Tempting and Enticing others unto corrupt
Communion with them, according to the Doctrine of Balaam, to cast a stumbling
block before the people of the Lord, as Rev. 2.14. I say, if this should come
to pass, our case would be exceeding dangerous; especially this coming upon us
in our declining and languishing state, when we have lost so much of our first
life and love, that we have soarcely strength enough left, to reinforce our
former Zeal and Courage in the Encounter, yea, and at such a time when the
Generation is lamentably exposed, by the sins of the Times, (which are all
tempting unto a Compliance with such a Temptation) and are (too much) without
grace to resist it; and in a very unsettled state, as to their standing before
God under his Covenant, even standing upon the dangerous Precipice of a gross
Apostasy, the very opportunity for Satan to over throw us by such a Temptation.
Surely, if it be thus, or likely to be thus, then there is very great need of
watchsulness against this Temptation. Neither let it be slighted, or accounted
a light thing: for, such Profanations and Abominations, if Indulged, will
become the sins of the Land, and the guilt and Punishment of them will lie, and
fall exceeding heavy upon the Land in a day of wrath: O they will pull down
wrath upon this Land, and upon this People; and the filth of them will pollute
and defile the Land: it will be such Pollution as will not be purged away
without fire, the guilt and filth of corrupt worship, is not purged away
without the fire and the furnace. And that which is most Perilous, it is the
universal diffusion of the Corruption and Contagion of corrupt worship, by the
subtle and insensible infusion and influence of a Spirit of Libertinism: a
Spirit and Principle (it is) of all other, most dangerous and destructive unto
Pure Churches, and will soon open a wide door unto all kind of Abominations:
for all false worships, (although they seem, in themselves, to be contrary
Extremes) yet they all agree in this Principle of Libertinism, and will break
in at that door. It will be in vain for us to hope for, or Promise our selves
Security from gross Superstition and Ceremony, if we will leave open this door,
or admit of a contrary Extreme in corrupt worship. And truly, if we should give
way unto any kind, it will be just with God, to give us up Judicially unto all
kinds of corrupt worship. And let me add, That a Spirit of Libertinism, if it
prevail, will in the end bring in all kind of Licentiousness and Profaneness;
for it is a Womb, big with all kind of Abominations; for, corruption in
Worship, and conruption in Manners, do always grow and go together. See at
large Ezck. 22. beginning. Although Libertinism does promise much Liberty, yet
it brings into bondage to Corruption, 2 Pet. 2.19. It does gender altogether
unto bondage. O that these Churches may recover their first Zeal against
Libertinism, both the Spirit, Principle, and Practice of it! and so against all
corrupt worship, which has been the common destruction of Reformed Churches,
and will most certainly be of these Churches, if it should break in upon us. O
let us consider, we have been hither unto a People extraordinarily Privileged,
with Immunity from corrupt worship; we are yet free from any foraign or
forcible Temptation thereunto; we have yet all Advantages and Encouragements to
withstand it, and to keep it out. If we admit of will worship, we shall lose
all the glorious work of Reformation which our Fathers labored in, (which
consisted chiefly in Separation from corrupt Worship) we shall at once reze the
Foundation, and ruin the Superstructure of these Churches, which in the very
Constitution were set up, and stand in a way of opposition unto corrupt
worship: such Churches will not, cannot bear any degree of corrupt worship.
VVill-worship, it would even destroy our very Religion, and reduce this
VVilderness-People unto a kind of Heathenism. O woe unto us, if we admit of
will worship, we shall soon fill up the measure of our sin, and prepare our
selves for Judgment, even wrath to the utmost. O woe unto New England, if ever
God be provoked to revenge this quarrel of his Covenant upon us, according to
that Threatening, Lev. 26.25. If we admit of will worship, New England will
become the shame and scandal of Religion, and of all Reformed Churches, the
Reproach of the Christian world, the Scorn and Triumph of Antichrist, and in
all respects a most sinful and miserable People. Thus we are to do our first
works, in all things pertaining to the worship of God.

4. Labor unto the promotion and progress of the work of Reformation, by the
full and faithful discharge of duty to the Children of the Covenant,
multiplying and growing up under the Covenant in those Churches; under how
great and general omission of duty toward them, we have cause seriously and
sadly to consider, and to lament. Truly, it is much to be feared, that we shall
so long doubt and dispute the Interest and Right of fuch Children, and
controvert, and neglect our duty toward them, until the holy Seed will be
wholly corrupted, and the Purity, if not the Constitution of these Churches be
greatly endangered, if not lost. It is sad to consider, how much many Churches
are already corrupted, by the Licentiousness and Profaneness of many, if not
most of the Children of the Covenant. Many, if not most, of the sins of Youth
(which are many of them some of the most flagitious sins of the Times) are
become the sins of Churches, and the guilt of them does lie heavily upon
Churches, with this heavy aggravation, that they are committed through the
neglect of duty toward them, by the due exercise of Discipline. If yet there
be any hope in Israel concerning this thing, (as it is spoken of a very
difficult Point of Reformation) Ezra 10.2. I say, if there be any hope of
Reformation in this matter, it must be by a holy, religious, saving Education
of the Children of the Covenant, and that both in Private and in Public,
Doubtless there is an extraordinary obligation upon Covenant-Parents, to train
up their Children for God; and a great motive it is unto all care, labor and
diligence, unto such Religious Family-Education, for such Parents to consider,
that their Children are Children of the Covenant, and in this fense Gods
Children, as Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. and the Children of the Promise, Acts 2.39, and
so under a special Promise of saving grace and blessing: on the one hand, it is
a very sad and lamentable consideration, unto any Religiou^ ^^ent, to consider,
that his Children should (through his neglect (...) ^^ucation) be instrumental,
by their Profaneness and wickedness, (...) corrput, pollute and defile the
Church of God. O if ever you would do any thing for the recovery, and
Propagation of these Churches, labor herein. The corruption of Churches does
begin in Families, and it there be no hope of Family Reformation, there is no
hope of Church Reformation. It is indeed sad to consider, how many Families are
already grown incorrigible and incurable. Labor to imitate faithful Abraham,
Genesis 18.19. But that which I chiefly intend, in this Particular, is Public
Eaucation, (if I may so call it) Surely Churches do owe much duty unto the
Children of the Covenant, commonly styled, The Children of the Church: they are
doubtless the Subject of the especial care and industry of the Presbytery, to
be watched over, warned, instructed, admonished, both Privately and Publicly.
Churches also are to own them, and acknowledge them, visibly, as they do
gradually grow up unto maturity and capacity unto Church-watch and Privileges.
If they be in any wise under the Covenant, and so of the visible Kingdom of
Christ; they must needs be under his Rule and Government, which is no way
rightly administered, but by the regular exercise of Discipline in Instituted
Churches. O they have been very unhappy Controversies to these Churches,
whereby the vigorous exercise of Discipline unto these, has been so long
demurred and delayed, that very many of them are grown up unto such an height
and strength in Profaneness, that they have even broken, and cast off the Yoke
of Christ's Government in his Church, and are grown incorrigible, and incurable
by Discipline. And truly, this neglect is grown so great and general (at least)
in some Churches, that there is very little hope of the recovery of the
vigorous, effectual exercise of Discipline toward them. So that the current of
the corruption of the Generation, is likely to break in like a flood upon the
Churches at this breach, and in short time to carry all before it. It is one of
the most fatal signs which is upon these Churches, that this one evil is likely
to prove both ruining and remediless; and is the more sadly signal, because we
are no more sensible of it, and no more concerned by our Prayers and Endeavors
to Reform it. Let me say, The Progress of the Covenant, the Propagation of
Churches, the Preservation of Churches under their deepest defection, in their
lowest condition, it must be by the succession of an holy Seed, Isa. 6.13. So
the holy Seed shall be the substance thereof. If we Unchurch them, either
Doctrinally or Practically, by the general and total neglect of them, and our
duty toward them, we do thereby lay the foundation of the Apostasy both of
these Churches, and of the whole Generation.

5. Labor unto the promotion and progress of the work of Reformation, by a
full, faithful, and religious improvement of your Christian Liberty. There is a
Spirit and Principle of Liberty in the hearts of all sincere Christians, whom
Christ has made free indeed, Joh. 8.36. Where the Spirit of God is, there is
liberty, 2 Cor. 3.17. There is a very large and necessary use and exercise of
this Spirit and Principle of Liberty, in our whole Christian Conversation,
especially in all our religious converse with God and men, Gal. 5.13. For
Brethren, ye have been called unto liberty. Our Christian Liberty is regulated
most exactly and strictly, by Rules and Precepts in the Word of God: there is a
complete directory for the exercise of our Christian Liberty in the Word of
God, which is the perfect law of liberty, Jam. 1.25. Our habitual conformity to
this Law of Liberty, is the chief Principle of Liberty; and our Practical
Subjection to the Law of Liberty, is the chief Practice or Exercise of our
Liberty. This Liberty is always acted under the Power and Authority of Divine
Truth, Joh. 8.22. Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.
Jam. 2.12. So speak, and so do -- judged by the law of liberty. This Christian
Liberty does not give men leave to believe, Profess and Practice what they
will, (as Libertines do vainly suppose) and from thence plead for a Licentious
Liberty of Conscience, and a boundless Latitude both of Profession and Practice
in matters of Religion. True Christian Liberty holds Conscience fast bound to
the Rule: there are Privileges and Immunities, commonly called Christian
Liberties, in and about which our Christian Liberty is to be exercised, as the
proper Subject of this Liberty. Those we must hold, keep, and stand fust in,
Gal. 5.1. Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free. And we
must be careful to exercise our Christian Liberty in a way of Gospel Order;
Liberty and Order are inseparable, in the conversation of a Christian: it is
the Liberty of Order, our Liberty is laid out, and limited by Order; those
therefore that do plead for Liberty, unto the subversion of Order, are
Libertines, and dangerous Enemies unto Liberty. We must also exercise and
improve our Christian Liberty in a way of full subjection unto the Power, Rule
and Government of Christ Ministerially exercised in his Church, in the
Administration of all his ordinances, as the free Subjects of his Spiritual
Kingdom. Those who rise up in a way of opposition unto, or rebellion against
the Power of Christ, regularly exercised in his Church, under pretense of the
defense of their Liberty, are no true friends to true Liberty. We must also
improve and exercise our Liberty in way of Love, Peace, Union, and Communion,
unto mutual edification and comfort: By love serving one another, Gal. 5.3. O
this is the only sweet and comfortable life of Christian Liberty. It is a very
sinful, shameful abuse of Christian Liberty, to make it an occasion to the
flesh, to make it subservient to Libertinism, to Licentiousness, to carnal
Reason and Policy, to worldly Designs and Ends, to the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of men, in fomenting Divisions and Contentions, and of making it a cloak
of maliciousness, 1 Pet. 2.16 -- Surely it is a great part of our work of
Reformation, to Reform these Abuses of our Christian Liberty. We are People
highly Privileged with Christian Liberty, and advantaged to the exercise of
it, O that we better understood it, and improved it! Let us always remember to
keep our Liberty wholly subservient unto our Religion, and not set up Liberty
above Religion; if so, we shall lose both our Religion and our Liberty together.

6 Labor unto the promotion and progress of the work of Reformation, by
recovery of your first Love, Peace and Union. O the loss of our first Love,
Peace and Union, has hitherto been an irreparable loss, an incurable wound,
concerning which we may take up our Lamentation, and say, Jer. 8.20, 21, 22.
The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not healed: for the hurt
of my people, I am hurt, I am black: astonishment has taken hold upon me. Is
there no Balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? why then is not the hurt
of the daughter of my people recovered? O are our Divisions become judicial,
and so incurable? If so, our state is truly lamentable, as Jer. 16.5. Thus
says the Lord, Enter not into the house of mourning, neither go to lament, nor
bemoan them; for I have taken away my peace from this people, says the Lord,
even loving kindness and mercies. If it should be so, well might the hearts and
hopes of all our faithful Leaders fail, whose labors have hither unto much
failed. Surely then the recovery of our first Love, Peace and Union, is a chief
part of the work of Reformation, and will be found a very hard and difficult
part of the work. In order hereunto,

1. We must remember from whence we are fallen. O let the remembrance of the
sweetness and blessedness of our first Love, Peace and Union, convince and
humble us under the sin of our Envyings, Strifes, Debates, Divisions,
Contentions and Emulations, etc. It was the sad state of the Church of Corinth,
that although they were lamentably distressed and distracted with Divisions,
yet they were not sensible of the sin of them, but were puffed up, and did
glory one against another. O that it were nothing so with us! truly, so long as
it is so, there will be no hope of healing. O that we were convinced of the sin
of our Division, and the multitude of sins that are begotten by it, that we
might mourn penitentially, and bemoan our selves before God with brokenness of
heart, and earnestly beseech him to pardon, and to purge away all that sin, and
to grant us reforming grace. Truly, until we are thus convinced and humbled,
there will be no Reformation.

2. We must labor to recover our first Spirit of Love, Peace and Union; pray
earnestly unto God, to pour his Spirit upon us, a Spirit of Love, to pour out
abundance of the grace of Love; to create Love, Peace and Union for us; and to
take away the Spirit of Division, which we are so deeply corrupted withal.

3. We must labor to recover our first New England Interest; that is, that
Interest upon which this People, and these Churches were first founded, as to
their Religious Constitution, which is God and Religion: this is the only
uniting Interest, our very hearts and Souls will cleave and unite most
entirely, in Love, with Peace and Union, in our God and our Religion; this
Interest will make a people of one heart, and of one Soul, Jer. 32.39. -- They
shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will give them one heart and
one way, to fear me. Observe, when a people do cleave close to God and his
Covenant, and so unto Religion, they have one heart and one way, that is, sweet
and perfect Unity and Amity. O this is our great mischief and misery, and the
very original of our defection, that we have much forsaken our proper
New England Interest; we have committed these two great evils, Jer. 2.13.
Forsaken our God, and hewn out Cisterns: We have been changing of our main
Fundamental Interest; we have been deserting our own Religious Interest, and
espousing another, (viz.) a Worldly Interest; we are turning from God, after
the World; the World is becoming the main Interest of N. E. and we are becoming
a worldly people, a people of a worldly Spirit, Principles and Practices. I do
not mean only, nor so much, in seeking and prosecuting the things of the
World, (although that be enough to denominate us notoriously Worldly) but our
turning our very Religion it self into a Worldly Interest, by making of it the
subject of Carnal Confidences, resting, trusting, and boasting in it, and also
by making of it the subject of Carnal Contentions, and so setting Religion
against it self, and the Professors of it one against another, and so making of
it subservient unto worldly designs, yea unto worldly lusts, and thereby making
it, in our Profession and Practice of it, a mere Worldly Religion; yea, too
many do too much make their professed Confidence in God himself, a worldly
Interest and subservient to their worldly lusts, as they Mic. 3.11. -- Yet will
they lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord in the midst of us? none evil
can come unto us. When a worldly Spirit, worldly Principles, worldly Wisdom
and Counsels, do sway and preponderate in all matters, both Civil and
Religious, then a people are fully and thoroughly settled upon a Worldly
Interest, and are truly become a Worldly people. And then comes all kind of
Dissentions, Contentions, Emulations, Strifes, Debate, etc. for the World is
always a dividing Interest, and all our Divisions are carnal and worldly, 1
Cor. 3.3. Jam. 4.3 -- Whatever pretenses of a Religious Zeal, the Fomentors of
Division may make, it is a Worldly Spirit that foments all Divisions; and it is
utterly impossible, that ever a worldly spirited people should unite upon sure
grounds of Union, or that any people should ever unite at all in a worldly
Interest. And therefore if we can relinquish our worldly Interest, and retrive
our own only true and proper Interest, which is our God and Religion, set and
settle our hearts again upon God and Religion, this would heal all our
Divisions, and reform all. As a change of Interest has been the great Cause of
our general defection; so a change of Interest again, would consummate our
Reformation. It is the Prescription which God gives unto that Backsliding
people for their recovery, Hos. 14.2.3. Take with you words, and turn to the
Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, etc.
Asshur shall not save us, we will not ride upon horses, neither will we say any
more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods: for in thee the fatherless
finds mercy.

I shall take leave (now in the Conelusion) to propose this general Exhortation
unto Reformation, more particularly, unto those who are especially concerned as
Reformers.

I. I crave leave to Apply my self (yet with humility and sincerity (as it
becomes me, speaking in the Name and fear of God) unto Those, who are, or who
shall be Established, or Re-established (this day) in Place of Rule and
Government among us, as our Magistracy. Much Honored, that which I have humbly
to offer unto You in the Name of the Lord, and on the behalf of this People, it
is this plain (yet great word) of Exhortation: Whereby I do most humbly beseech
you, to labor in your Place, by the utmost and most faithful improvement of
your Power, Interest, Wisdom, Grace, and Spirit of Government which you have
received from the Lord, to promote this great Work of Reformation, in all the
Parts, and in all the Degrees of it. This Government, and so this Magistracy,
it was through the most wife and merciful Providence of God, constituted unto a
more direct subserviency unto the Work of Reformation, as the great and main
design of it, in the intentions both of God, and of all his faithful People.
Therefore God Spirited our first Magistracy unto this Work of Reformation, and
prospered that glorious Work unto a very happy progress, under their Civil
Conduct of this Religious and Reforming people. And now the Place, the Power,
the whole Betrustment of this Reforming Magistracy, it is by our Annual
Election, and so by a Providential Succession, devolving upon You, and
remains vested in You. Therefore our eyes, our hearts, our hopes, are (under
God, and as to men) much upon You as our Reformers. It is our great hope, and
will be our great rejoicing, to see the Plummet stin in the hand of Zerubbabel,
with those Seven; to see a powerful and prosperous progress of the Work of
Reformation, under your hand, laboring therein with a full concurrence of
Divine Assistance. True it is, there are great Mountains standing before you;
but this is the Word of the Lord unto you, Not by might, nor by power, but by
my Spirit: if the Lord Spirit you unto the Work, they shall become a Plain; and
although the work be much declined, it shall be again revived, and the Topstone
thereof shall be brought forth with Shoutings and Acclamations of Grace, unto
the glory of God. It has been a great (if not the greatest) Honor, which God
has pu upon Civil Magistracy, and that which adds true Glory unto its
Greatness, That he has made Civil Magistrates, Reformers. Seldom has there
been any great Work of Reformation wrought, either in the Church of old, or in
the succeeding Ages of it, but God has made Kings, Princes, and Civil
Magistrates, his Ministers in it. And always, in the most flourishing state of
the Kingdom of Christ, he has caused the Mountains to bring peace, and the
little hills righteousness. The Church on earth will be in the height and top
of its prosperity, when the Mountain of the Lords House shall be exalted in the
tops of the Mountains; when Kings shall be her Nursing-fathers, and Queens her
Nursing-mothers. You have the most encouraging Examples of the most Illustrious
Refor mers before you: You know this people, their present spirit, state and
way; You have been with us at Massah, at Meribah, and at Kibrothhattaavah,
where we have both tempted God, and tried you. You may well say of us, as Moses
did of them, I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck; and so you may by a
solemn Contestation, call Heaven and Earth to record against us, as he did
sometime against them. You are to labor with a very immorigerous, rebellious,
backsliding generation, under an extraordinary juncture of Provocations and
Temptations, Difficulties and Dangers. O so much the more I am imboldened in
the Name of the Lord, with an humble importunity, to beseech your Care,
Constancy, Courage and Faithfulness in this your great Duty, lest the Ruin of
this Self-destroying people, should be found under your hand. It will be your
Glory, not only to be Reformers, but Repairers and Restorers, to Repair the
Breach, and to raise up Foundations for many Generations. Such as You, are in
Scripture called not only Gods, but Saviors; and Saviors, raised up upon
Mount Sion: we style you so with Modesty and Sobriety, in Scripture phrase and
sense, as still remembering that you must die like men. But hereby we understand
that you are concerned in and betrusted with somewhat that is Sacred; you
cannot approve your selves to be Gods more, then by the Patronage of Religion;
you cannot approve your selves to be Saviors more, then by being Reformers,
Reformation will be our Salvation. We are to choose you this day for God; and so
doing, we may hope that God will in mercy choose you for us* You being so
Chosen, both by God, and his people, are under a double, and so indispensible
Obligation, even by your Election, to be for God, and for his people; that is,
for the promotion and preservation of that which is the main Interest of God
and his people here, which is Religion. You are to Rule not only over Men, but
Christians, not only over People, but the People of God: therefore you are to
Rule, as in the fear of God, so in a more peculiar manner from God, and for
God, that God may Rule by you, that you may be the Ministers of God for our
good. God has set you as our Hedge, and as our Wall, whereby he has enclosed
this his Vineyard, and all his precious and pleasant things with us; he has
set you as a part of the Defense upon the Glory, God does therefore expect,
that you should fully Assert and Exert all that Power which he has committed
to you, to be improved for the public Weal of his people, especially in and
about matters of Religion, which is the greatest concernment of our public
Weal. Courage and Faithfulness therein, is the peculiar Excellency of a
Christian Magistracy, the regular exercise thereof, will be the Strength and
Glory of your Government, and the Stability and Prosperity of this people under
it. It is your Concernment to uphold this Government, in the full and whole
interest and influence of it, unto all the Ends of it; especially this great
and main End of it, the Preservation and Propogation of Religion. It will be
your Commendation, which was holy David's, as he was eminently a Type of Christ
in the Work of Reformation, that the Zeal of Gods house had consumed him. The
hearts of the sober, faithful, peaceable, and religious people of the Land, are
toward the Governors of Israel, who offer themselves willingly to the help of
the Lord in the Work of Reformation, in this time of general defection. And
surely, this is the greatest Trust that we repose in you, and therefore the
highest hope, expectation, confidence and dependence that we place upon you, as
our Rulers, Governors, Leaders, Public Benefactors and Fathers, That you will
by the utmost improvement of your Power and Interest, advance and establish the
true, pure and holy Worship of God, (and so far as it concerns you) not
suffer these Churches, no not this People, to be corrupted, no not this Land,
to be polluted and defiled with Will Worship. A Religious Reforming Magistracy,
has hither unto been our Crowning Mercy: if God set You over us in mercy, he
will make you such a Magistracy. And therefore our Prayers for you shall ever
be, That he that is the Light of Israel, will be a Light unto you, that you may
be as the Light of Israel unto us. And that you may be abundantly influenced
with a Spirit of Government, from Him whose all Government is; that you may
receive a large portion of that Spirit, which rests upon Him, even a Spirit
of Wisdom and Understanding, a Spirit of Counsel and of Might, a Spirit of
Knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; that you may be of a quick
understanding in his fear: And that in your measure also, Righteousness may be
the girdle of your loins, and Faithfulness the girdle of your reins, that so
you may feed and lead this people, both in the skilfulness of your hand, and
the integrity of your hearts. We also shall pray, That you may be kept, and
carried above all the Temptations and Provocations of our Murmurings,
Dissentions, and Rebellions; that God may never be angry with you for our
sakes, and that it may never go ill with you for our sakes: as also above all
your own frailties and infirmities; that God may never be provoked by our sins,
to suffer you to fall, as once he did holy David, that he might punish Israel.
We wish you all the blessings which those who are just, ruling in the fear of
God, may expect; that we might behold you as the Light of the Morning, When the
Sun rises, a Morning without Clouds; that the Anniversary Revolution of this
Government by our Annual Election, may be unto us as the rising Sun, by which
we may receive Influences of Divine Blessing, which may cause us to grow up as
the tender grass, by the clear shining after rain; that in your days the
righteous may flourish, and abundance of peace; that we may enjoy Prosperity
and Tranquillity under this Magistracy, and that there may be a peaceful and
prosperous Succession of it from Generation to Generation; that God continuing
unto us our Judges as at the first, and our Counselors as at the beginning, we
may remain to be a City of Righteousness, and a faithful City.

II. I shall take leave to propose this Exhortation unto the Ministry of these
Churches, nextly concerned, as Public Reformers, in the Work of Reformation.
It is proposed in the Text, directly, To the Angel of the Church of Ephesus.
The Angels of the Churches are particularly directed unto, and charged with
this Work, in the several Churches. The first Ministry of these Churches, it
was eminently a Reforming Ministry, extraordinarily qualified unto, and
improved in, the Work of Reformation: God made them great Reformers, and
wrought a great Work of Reformation by them; and they lived faithfully
laboring in that Work unto the death, though not without some discouragement,
and some diminution of their joy and comfort, from a prae-apprehension, yea
from some present appearance of the sad signs of the defection of these
Churches, before their departure. That Ministry, those Ministers, they are
generally departed; (some few (here and there one, only) of that Ancient Old
England-Ministry, remaining with us, as the Crown and Ornament of our
New-England-Presbytery.) And truly, the remembrance of the departure of that
Ministry, with the signal Circumstances, and said Consequences thereof, may
justly move lamentation; they being diverse of them carried away (as it were) in
Chariots of sire: I mean, by an Anticipation of their translation, in the
ordinary course of Nature, and when in the strength and travail of their
Ministerial Labors, for these Churches, and with this Generation; bearing a
full clear Testimony unto the great duties, and against the great sins of the
Times, and standing in the Gap before God, to turn away impending Judgments.
Their Praise is yet fresh and flourishing in these Churches, being legible in
living Epistles of Commendation, written not with Ink, but by the Spirit of the
living God. They have a living Memory, and a lasting Monument in every godly
heart, who has experienced the converting, quickening, comforting presence and
power of the Spirit in their Ministration. They are departed, and we have wept
over their faces with that Lamentation, My father, my father, the Chariots of
Israel, and the Horsemen thereof. The Burden of the Work of the Ministry, and
so of this great Work of Reformation in these Churches, it now rests upon
you, who are the present standing Ministry, this New England Ministry, which is
Coaevall and Coaetaneous with this New England Generation; Amongst whom, I am
not worthy to be mentioned as one (though with the utmost expression of
diminution, as less then the least of those whom God has called forth to take
a part of this Ministry) and therefore most unmeet and unworthy thus to speak
unto you: yet I am bold to beseech you to bear this Exhortation from the Lord
Jesus Christ, in whose Name I speak, and say, O Labor to be a Reforming
Ministry. Although there has been a change of Ministers in most of the
Churches, yet we hope there is not a change of the Ministry, but that the same
Ministry is still remaining; that is, a Ministry of the same Constitution,
Spirit, Principles, Mind, Judgment and Practice, in all things pertaining to
the Work of the Ministry in these Churches; a Ministry, which has received not
only the Mantle, but a portion of the Spirit of Elijah. And therefore, you are
engaged to undertake, to uphold, and to carry on the same Work of Reformation,
in all the parts of it, and to labor unto the progress of it, in the Spirit
and Power of it, so far as you are concerned, respecting either Doctrine,
Profession or Practice. More especially, God expects that you should promote
the Work of Reformation, in your several Churches and Congregations, by the
regular and thorough exercise of the Power of Christ (committed unto you) in
the Administration of Doctrine and Worship, which is the great Trust and Charge
committed unto you to keep, 1 Timothy 6.20. This is the Rod of his strength out of
Zion, whereby his people are made a willing people in the day of his power,
Psalm. 110.2, 3. Exalt Christ, by the due exercise of his Power in his Name;
that Christ may reign Ministerially in these Churches. The Rule and Government
of Christ powerfully Administered, would soon Reform all. O that Discipline
might be restored, unto the full and effectual exercise of it, in the Spirit
and Power of it, unto all the saving Ends of it, in these Churches! it would
work a great Reformation. And O that this poor Generation, which is committed
Chiefly to the Charge of this Ministry, may be generally cared for in all the
Churches. They are the Generation, which you are called to labor with and for,
amongst whom you hope to have the fruit of your Labors in the Work of the
Ministry, and whom you are to stand in Judgment with, and to give an account
of, in the day of Account. O what Account will be given of them, if many, or
the generality of them, should perish, under the neglect of the due exercise of
the Ministerial Power of Christ toward them, in any of the Churches? Most of
all the Work of Reformation, depends upon the faithful and successful Labors
of this Ministry, in the work of Conversion; the travail of your Souls in that
work, your travailing with Souls in that work of Conversion. Here lies the
stress, and the life and spirit of the Work of Reformation; without which, all
Essays, Endeavors, and Labor therein, and thereunto, will be utterly vain
and void. If God make this Ministry a Converting Ministry; the Work of
Reformation will be again revived; but if God suffer it to be a Judicial
Ministry, a Ministry sent in Judgment, to make the heart of this people fat --
then there will be no hope, the Generation will grow sick at heart, under
Spiritual Plagues and Judgments, under a savor of death, by this Ministry,
and so die in their sins. A Judicial Ministry has always been the fatal
Cause of the final Ruin of such a people, as Isa. 6.10. Mat. 13.13, 14. Joh.
12.40. Romans 9.32. And therefore, how are all such, who have the Charge of Souls
in such a dangerous time, amongst a declining people, concerned to Labor, to
Pray, to Preach, to be instant in season, out of season, in private, in
public, to spend their Souls, to bend the strength of their Ministerial
Labors, unto the Conversion of Souls? How did the Prophets of old labor, in
like ease, with a declining people, and dolefully lament the loss of their
labor; so Isaiah, Isa 49.4. Jeremiah, Jer. 6.10. yea, our Lord Jesus Christ
himself, Mat. 23.37. O Jerusalem, -- how often would I have gathered thy
Children -- Truly, it is a most doleful discouragement to the present Ministry,
in many Congregations, to see so many Souls fatting, hearts hardening, immortal
Souls dying and perishing under their hand, Care and Charge; but yet they must
labor, and Agonize in Prayer unto God, for a dispensation of Converting grace
by their Ministry, that the Work of Conversion, and so the Work of Reformation,
may be revived: for if not, it is much to be feared, that the Sun will quickly
go down over the Prophets: I allude unto Mic. 3.6. -- I mean, that our day of
grace will expire, and the Sun set upon these Churches, by the departure of the
Ministrv, and so our house be left unto us desolate, as Mat. 23.38, 39. The
Prosperity of these Churches, depends much upon the success of the Labors of
this present Ministry: and therefore, the hopes, desires, and prayers of all
the faithful people of God in these Churches are, That you may always remain
as Stars in the right hand of Jesus Christ, fixed in your Orb, full of Light,
Regular in all your Motions, Powerful in all your Influences, shining in all
your Appearances, with the Splendour and Luster of his Spirit and Grace, in
whose hand you are: And that there may be no such Wandering Stars, spoken of
Jude v. 13. whose Erratick Motions should disturb the Celestial Order and
Harmony of our Ecclesiastical Heaven.

III. I propose this Exhortation also unto All the People of the Land, who are
present; and O that whole New England might be moved with this word of
Exhortation, -- Repent, and do the first works. O that the heart of this people
might be moved, as the heart of one man, unto the Work of Reformation^ It is a
general work, our defection it is general, and therefore our Reformation it
must be also general. Of old, the Work of Reformation it was always wrought by
all the people, as you may read 2 Kings 23.3. 2 Chronicles. 29.36. and 34.30. the
Text says there, All, small and great: So Ezra 109. Neh. 8.1. -- All the the
people as one man; every one that is able to do any thing; must bear his part
in the Work of Reformation. Every one has a particular work of Reformation, in
and for himself, to Reform himself, his own heart, and his own life; if every
one could Reform one, it would be a great and general Reformation. Every one,
that has a Soul to save, or has any care of his Salvation, is concerned in
this Work of Reformation, of what degree, rank or order whatsoever; every one
must labor, in his own person, in his proper place, by the utmost improvement
of his power, interest and influence, to help forward the work; every one must
set his hand and heart unto the Work of Reformation, in Families, Towns,
Churches, throughout the Country. The Work of Reformation, it must run through
all our hearts and ways, in every Station and Relation, in every Calling and
Employment, through all matters both Civil and Religious, in all our converse
with God and man. There is not one here present in the Congregation, but is
concerned in this Work of Reformation.

1. Let every one be admonished and warned to take heed of hindering the Work
of Reformation. They are the most dangerous and desperate Enemies unto
New England, and unto these Churches, who do hinder Reformation; so do all
Profane persons, by their sins of Profaneness, whose work it is more and more
to corrupt the Generation, and to fill, and pollute the Land with their
Abominations. So also do all Worldly and Self-seeking persons, by sinking the
Interest of Religion, and raising a Worldly Interest, and so building up their
own Self-interests upon the ruins of the Public. So also do all Factious,
Seditious, and Contentious persons, who make it their design and work to foment
Divisions, and to uphold dividing Parties and Interests, unto the shaking of
very Foundations. So also do all corrupt Worshippers, and corrupters of the
Worship of God. In a word, so do all Carnal, Formal, Hypocritical Professors.
And so do all the Capital leading sinners of the Times, and of the Generation.
These are all public Enemies unto these Churches -- more dangerous and
destructive Enemies unto this great Work of the Lord, then Sanballat and
Tobiah, and the rest of old, were unto the Building of the City or the Temple.
Woe to those by whom Offenses come, who are Leaders in our great and general
Defection, and hinderers of the Work of Reformation. As for such who turn aside
unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of
iniquity: but peace shall be upon Israel, Psalm. 125.5.

2. Let all the Friends, Lovers, Well-wishers, Well-willers unto the Public
Good and Prosperity of these Churches, up and be doing in the Work of
Reformation. You who are of the passing generation, of the first undertakers of
this Work of Reformation, surviving, and who have seen with your eyes, and told
us, what works God did in your days, as Psalm. 44.1. who have therefore yet a
living remembrance of the gracious Ways, and glorious Works of God to his
people, in the first beginnings, and prosperous progress of the Work of
Reformation; and so of the House of God, of the Churches here in their first
glory, Hag. 2.3. You have also seen and observed, the gradual declension and
defection of these Churches; and therefore you cannot choose but be most sadly
and sorrowfully sensible of our present necessity of Reformation. O then be
moved to do what in you lies, by your Faith, Prayer, Life and Example, to
revive the Work of Reformation again before you die. You also who are the
present standing Generation, the next and immediate Successors unto those first
Reformers, who have been actually betrusted with Church Order, Ordinances, and
Administrations, with the whole Cause of God, Kingdom of Christ, and Interest
of Religion, and so with this great and glorious Work of Reformation, and who
are likely to be found most guilty of this general defection, and have too much
already endangered the loss of all; O be you moved to stand up strongly unto
the work under that Charge, and all those solemn Obligations and Engagements
which God has laid upon you, the weight and burden of the Work lies upon
you: we have been raised up in the stead of our Fathers, as Josh. 5.7. to carry
on this Work. And truly, if we should desert, or be slight and negligent
therein, it will soon fall to the ground, and sink past recovery, and we shall
thereby, at once, cut off the hope of our Fathers, and lay the Foundation of
the Ruin of Succeeding Generations, utterly undo all Posterity. O let us
therefore make it our Prayer, which is in 1 Kings 8.57, 58. The Lord our God be
with us, as he was with our Fathers; let him not leave us, nor forsake us, that
he may incline our hearts unto him, to walk in his ways, etc. And you who are
of the Rising Generation, Adult Youth, and Young men, You are many of you, if
not most of you a Third Generation, from those whom God first brought out into
this Wilderness; You are they who are likely to outlive Joshua, and all the
Elders of Israel that outlived Joshua -- and all that Generation, as it is
said of them, Judge. 2.7, 8, 9. You cannot (many of you) remember the works
which God wrought for your forefathers -- You have never seen these Churches in
their first Beauty and Glory, nor the Worship and Ordinances of God in their
first Spiritual Power and Purity: It has been, so far, your unhappiness, that
you have been brought forth, and lived under the decaying state of these
Churches, and of Religion, and therefore are like to grow up under the
prevailing power of a Spirit of Apostasy. And alas! upon you is likely to fall
all the Calamity and Misery of this Apostasy which is begun, you will see and
feel the sad and lamentable Effects of it. O therefore that Youth and Young
persons, could lay this Consideration unto their hearts; and be moved also, to
engage in this Work of Reformation, before it be too late, by laboring unto a
sound Conversion, and a religious Conversation, in the days of their Youth. O
that All thus concerned would Up and be doing! -- True it is, there are many
great discouragements, so that the hearts of those who are most, and best
disposed unto the Work, are ready to fail; especially considering, that all
means of Reformation have hither unto failed, nothing has hither unto done us
any good: So that God himself may justly complain of us, as he did of that
people, Hos. 6.4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? etc. Jer. 6.29. -- the
bellows are burnt -- Truly Reformation, it is likely to prove a very hard and
heavy Work, yet we must never despair of Reformation, as that people seemed to
do, Ezekiel. 33.10. If our transgressions and our iniquities be upon us, and we
pine away in them, how then should we live? (q.d.) You call us to Repentance,
and Reformation, and denounce Wrath and Judgment against us, if we do not do
it; but alas, to what purpose? for God is resolved to suffer us to pine and die
away in our sins: And therefore God does instantly give them an encouraging
call to Repentance and Reformation, Ver. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says
the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked
turn -- and live: Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
Surely, God is yet calling of us unto Reformation, and waiting upon us for
Reformation. It is yet a Probation-time with us, wherein we are standing before
God upon our Trial; God has repented once more of the evil, as Amos 7.3. the
unprofitable Tree has one year more to stand in the Vineyard, Luke 13.8. Yet
truly, now God seems to be limitting of us to a certain day, Psalm. 95.7 -- To
day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. O let us take heed then
unto this day, this limited day, which will put a period unto Gods patience and
long-suffering, lest God swear suddenly, and irrevecably, in his wrath, against
us: if once our day be past, it will be indeed too late; witness our Saviors
mournful, doleful Lamentation, which he wept out over Jerusalem, Luke 19.42. If
thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things of thy peace;
but now they are hidden from thine eyes. And why? see ver. 44. Because thou
knew not the time of thy visitation; therefore I say now, now, it is high
time to reform. It is pressed as a present, as an instant duty, Zeph. 2.2, 3.
Before -- before -- before -- before; that is, in all haste, speedily. Hos.
10.12. It is time to seek the Lord; (that is) it is high time, more then time,
the only time; now if ever, now or never. I do now reinforce the Exhortation,
at least by way of allusion to that in Hag. 2.4. Yet now be strong, O
Zerubbabel, and be strong, O Joshua, the son of Josedech the high Priest, and
be strong all ye people of the Land, says the Lord, and work, for I am with
you, says the Lord of Hosts, according to the word that I Covenanted with you,
when you came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you, fear ye not. So
let Magistracy, Ministry and People be strengthened, and encouraged to this
Work, believing and hoping that Gods Spirit remains among us, according to
the Covenant which he made with his people, when he brought them forth first
into this Wilderness. Now we must set to the Work.

1. With one heart. No hope of Reformation without Union. Division has been
one great cause of our-defection, and will be a total obstruction unto
Reformation, if it continue; we must unite our hearts, our hands, our strength.
O if ever we would unite, let it be in, and unto the Work of Reformation.

2. Set unto it with all your hearts, and with all your souls. Our very hearts
and souls must be engaged unto it, and in it, we must set to it in good
earnest, as unto a work that must be done; we are now brought unto this
Dilemma, either a timely, speedy, thorough Reformation, or else there will be a
general and total defection; either, Repent, and do the first works, or
otherwise I will come unto thee quickly, and remove thy Candlestick out of its
place, except thou repent, is the voice of Christ unto these Churches. O that
we understood, and seriously and solemnly considered, that we are a lost and
undone people without Reformation; that we are a helpless, hopeless people
without Reformation; that nothing will recover us from our defection, and
prevent our destruction by the execution of impending Judgments, but only
Reformation. O then, we should stand trembling before God, under the
apprehension of the instant, urgent necessity of Reformation, as Ezra 10.9. And
all the people sat in the street of the house of God, trembling because of
this matter -- ver. 12. Then all the Congregation answered, and said, with a
loud voice, As thou have said, so must we do. Observe, they cried out,
passionately, affectionately, So must we do; (q.d.) we are a lost, undone
people, there is no hope, no help for us without Reformation: and then they set
to the Work in good earnest. O that we could make Reformation our main work and
business, without delay.

3. We must set to it with a right and full understanding of the whole work of
Reformation, in the parts and progress of it. We have been ready to return (by
way of retortion) unto this great Exhortation, as that people, Mal. 3.7. Even
from the days of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine Ordinances, and have
not kept them: Return unto me, and I will return unto you, says the Lord: but
ye said, Wherein shall we return? So 8, 13. Though they were guilty of a very
great and general defection, yet they understood not the Work of Reformation.
Truly so it is our great unhappiness, that we do no better know wherein the
Work of Reformation consists; yea, that some of the great things of our peace
do seem to be even Judicially, or in Judgment, hidden from our eyes, Luke
19.42. Deuteronomy. 29.4. Yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day; and that was the reason that
their defection was continued. Psalm. 95.10. Forty years long was I grieved
with this Generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and
they have not known my ways: Unto whom I swear, etc. They were incurable in
their defection, because they understood not the Work of Reformation. It is
observable, in all these seven Epistles unto the Churches, Christ calls for an
understanding attention, Let him that has an ear to hear, hear, etc. There is
much wisdom and prudence requisite unto the Work of Reformation: Hos. 14.9.
Who is wise, he shall understand these things; prudent, he shall know them? for
the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them -- O! a want
of this wisdom and prudence, is one great hinderance: we do not, we will not
understand the way and work of Reformation.

4. We must set unto the Work in a way of full and sincere subjection unto
Order, and carry on the Work according to Rules of Order. Breach of Order,
neglect of Order, Non subjection unto Order, Disorder, and Confusion, it has
been one great Cause, yea it is a great part of our defection; and if ever we
do hope, or intend to make thorough work in Reformation, we must recover Order,
the Beauty, the Harmony, the Peace and Tranquillity, the Regularity, the Purity
and Simplicity, the Power and Efficacy, Life and Spirit of Order, Gospel Order,
the Order which Christ has set and appointed in his Church. Although we may
have never so good dispositions, intentions, resolutions, and desires unto the
Work of Reformation, yet if we pursue it not in due Order, it will all come to
nothing, 1 Chronicles. 15.13 -- because we sought him not in the due Order --
Surely, there is no case so difficult among us, but there is a regular and
easy way to an issue, if we will acknowledge, and apply, and follow up Rules
of Order, in the due improvement of them; if we would be set down by Order, be
ruled and governed by Order: but if we will slight, neglect, reject, contemn,
and despise Order, we can expect nothing but Disorder and Confusion, and shall
be in great danger thereby to run and rush desperately into our own ruin. It
was the great Expedient which the Apostle proposes, for the Reformation of
that distracted Church of Corinth, Let all things be done decently, and in
order, 1 Cor. 14.33, 40. So 1 Cor. 11.34.

5. We must set our selves to the work with a fervent love unto, and zeal for
the work it self. The Cause of God, the Kingdom of Christ, the Prosperity of
these Churches, so much concerned in it; this is the only true Principle and
Spirit of Reformation. O that our first New England Zeal and Love might be
revived and raised, under a full, clear discovery of the Spiritual Beauty and
Glory of that Work, and of that Cause, that we may labor in it, in the heart,
height, and strength of that Zeal and Love. This will indeed Spirit the Work,
and Spirit us unto it. It is a sign, that there is a glorious work of
Reformation near, when Gods people do love the stones, and favor the dust of
Zion, Psalm. 102.14.

6. We must labor in it, under a sense of our own utter insufficiency to
Reform, renouncing all our own carnal Confidences, and disclaiming our own
wisdoms and wills, wherein we have too long labored in vain; trust our own
hearts no further, no longer, which have so much, and so often deceived us, but
bemoan our selves before God, as a hopeless and helpless people, as Ephraim
did, Jer. 31.18. and the Church, Jer. 3.22, 23 -- Behold we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God. Truly, in vain is salvation hoped for, from the
hills, or from the multitude of mountains, -- for shame has devoured the
labors of our hands from our youth -- We lie dwon in our shame, and confusion
covers us -- then God will work for us, Deuteronomy. 32.36. For the Lord shall judge
his people, and repent himself for his servants, when he sees that their power
is gone, and there is none shut up or lest. So Jer. 30.15, 17. Why criest thou
for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable -- for I will restore health unto
thee, I will heal thee of thy wounds -- We must therefore make our Prayer to
God, Turn thou us, and we shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. Heal thou us, and we
shall be healed, Jer. 17.14.

7. We must labor in this Work by Faith. Those who will be (at least) Public
Reformers, must have a mighty power of Faith, 2 Chronicles. 15.8. He took courage,
and put away the abominable Idols. There must be the confidence of Faith, Isa.
30.15. In returning and in rest shall ye be saved, in quietness and confidence
shall be your strength. There must be the dependence of Faith, Hos. 6.1, 2, 3.
Come, let us return to the Lord -- he will heal us -- he will bind us up -- he
will revive us -- he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight. There
must be the hope and expectation of Faith, Isa. 26.8. -- in the way of thy
judgments have we waited for thee -- ver. 12. Lord, thou will ordain peace for
us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us. There must be the strong
and powerful intercessions of Faith, Isa. 62.6.7. He has set watchmen upon thy
walls, O Jerusalem -- Ye that make mention of the Name of the Lord, give him no
rest until he establish, and make Jerusalem the praise of the whole earth.
There must be the wrestlings of Faith, whereby we may take hold upon God, and
not let him go, but hold him by Faith, as a God in Covenant with us, as a God
All sufficient unto us, as a God who has engaged himself unto us by his
Covenant, and by all his Promises, to pardon us, to purge us, to convert us, to
heal us. Thus Moses, Exodus 32.11, 13, 32. Thus also the Church, Isa. 63.16.
Doubtless thou art our Father, etc. Isa. 64.8, 9. O now, if ever, is the time
for all those who have Faith, to improve their Faith unto the utmost, for the
public good of this poor people, and the prosperity of these Churches. Faith
will do much in this great work, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. -- hear me, O Judah, and all
ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, believe in the Lord your God, so shall ye be
established; believe his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.

And now, O that we understood, that it is God himself, our Fathers God, yea
God even our own God, our good, gracious, merciful, faithful, and
All-sufficient God, that God who has nourished us, and brought us up as
Children; O it is he that is now testifying unto us, and pleading with us, to
return unto him by Repentance and Reformation, (to speak with reverence of God,
after the manner of men.) Gods compassions are moving, his bowels are sounding,
his repentings are kindling, his heart is turning within him, toward
New England, toward this poor Generation; though he has many times, and many
ways spoken against us, yet he does earnestly remember us still; he remembers
the kindness of our youth -- when New England was Holiness to the Lord, Jer.
2.2, 3. Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, (or as in the Margin.) For thy
sake I remember; though we have forgotten that first love and kindness unto
God, yet for our sakes God does remember the love and kindness which our
Fathers bare unto him; the very remembrance of it does move him to express some
love and kindness unto us their Posterity; and the remembrance of it, has
hither unto stayed the hand of his divine Justice: So that he is even ready to
fay of us, as of them, Hos. 11.8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? -- Surely
God shows himself even loath to give us up. And therefore after all our
backslidings, unworthy, sinful, shameful carriages, evil requitals, high
provocations of him, whereby we have so much grieved and wearied him; yea,
notwithstanding he has been entering into Judgment with us, and departing from
us, yet he is after all, now at last, still calling and crying after us,
Return, ye backsliding children, for I am married unto you: Return; O back
sliding children, I will heal your backslidings, Jer. 3.12, 22. Yea let me say
further, It is our Lord Jesus Christ himself that calls, it is he that stands
at the doors of these Churches, and knocks, as Rev. 3.20. that he may return,
come in, and replenish these Churches with a fullness of his Presence, by his
Spirit and Grace. It is the voice of our Beloved that knocked, saying, Open
unto me, my Love, etc. as Cant. 5.4. O it is Christ, who is soliciting for the
renewing of our first love unto him as our Beloved; yea, our Beloved is yet
putting in of his hand by the hole of the door, (i.e.) letting in such
Influences, and leaving such Impressions of his love upon the Souls of his
sincere ones, as may move your bowels for him, that you may be thoroughly
awakened to arise, and open unto him; and that after he has waited without, so
long, until his head was filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the
night. We are now solemnly put to the question, Whether we will yet return to
the Lord our God, and whether we will yet open unto our Beloved? Surely then,
we have cause most seriously and solemnly to deliberate upon this question,
Will we repent, and do our first works, yea or no? Will New England return and
Reform, yea or no? What return shall we make? what answer shall we give him?
what shall we say unto God? thus expostulating in a way of grace and mercy with
us. O shall we be so desperate, as to reply with them, Jer. 2.25. -- but thou
said, There is no hope; no, I have loved strangers, and after them I will go.
Jer. 18.12. And they said, There is no hope; but we will walk after our own
devices; we will every one do the imagination of his evil heart. Is there no
hope? are we past hope of Reformation? Surely then, well may God make his
Appeal from us, unto the Heaven and Earth, and enter into a Controversy with
us, as Isa. 1.2. Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth -- Micah 6.3. -- Hear,
O Mountains, the Lords Controversy: for the Lord has a Controversy with his
people, he will plead with Israel, O my people, what have I done unto thee!
wherein have I wearied thee? testify against me: I brought thee up out of the
Land of Egypt, and Redeemed thee out of the house of Bondage: I sent before
thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. Truly, so may God plead with New England, O my
people, what have I done unto thee? Have I been unfaithful, insufficient,
unkind, unrighteous, ungracious, unmerciful unto you? Have I ever failed, or
frustrated your faith, hope, or expectations? Have I ever left you, or forsaken
you, in any time of necessity, extremity, or danger? Have I ever been in
jurious unto you? (q.d.) Charging me, charge me if you can, What iniquity have
you found in me? Have not I separated, and set apart your Fathers, as a
peculiar people to my self? Have not I nourished You, and brought you up as
Children, brought you under my Covenant, settled you in the possession of my
House, Worship and Ordinances, protected you in the enjoyment and improvement
of all my precious and pleasant things, carried you as upon Eagles wings,
pitied you, pardoned you, spared you, and saved you, and superadded Peace,
Plenty, and all temporal mercies? O foolish people and unwise, will you thus
then requite the Lord your God? Be astonished, O Heavens at this, and be
horribly afraid, and be ye very disolate, says the Lord! O how will
New England be able to stand before the Lord, when he shall thus contend with
us, and that in order unto the vindication of his Justice, proceeding unto the
execution of his destroying and desolating Judgments, as Psalm. 81.12. But my
people would not hearken unto my voice, and Israel would have none of me: so I
gave them up. O we to New England, when God comes to the parting blow with us.
But must God and New England part thus? O God for bid! Why should we not then,
now standing in the presence of God, in our hearts, and with our Souls say,
Behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God -- and take with us
words, and say, Take away iniquity, and receive us graciously; for in thee the
fatherless find mercy. O with what open outstretched Arms of mercy, would God
receive and entertain his poor backfliding people, so returning to him? and
say, I will heal their backslidings, I will love them freely, for mine anger is
turned away from them. O how would God rejoice over poor returning New England,
and rest with Divine delight and Complacency in his love unto us? O what a
blessed, glorious Change, would such a work of Reformation work in New England?
How would these Churches revive and flourish, and recover their first Beauty
and Glory again? be replenished with the gracious Presence of God, and of
Christ again; the Worship and Ordinances of God be restored unto their
Spiritual Power and Purity, and be accompanied in all Administrations, with a
plentiful dispensation of Gods Spirit and Grace; Sinners be converted, Saints
edified and comforted, in Communion with God, and one with another; the great
and crying sins of the Times suppressed, Holiness both in heart and life
increased; our Controversies issued, Contentions ended, our Breaches and Losses
repaired, out Wounds and Sicknesses healed, Gods Covenant renewed and confirmed
with us, and we in all respects made a blessed and happy people, in the full
enjoyment and improvement of our most precious and pleasant things! O then
New England would be New England again. What a rejoicing would this be to the
Churches of Christ? and what an advantage and advance to the Cause and Kingdom
of Christ in the World? O if it please God to give us (in this our most
hopeless and helpless estate) the valley of Achor for a door of hope, then
shall N. E. sing as in the days of her youth, as in the day when God first
brought her forth into this Wilderness, as Hos. 2.15. Then shall all the lovers
of Zion rejoice with us, and for us, with acclamations of Blessing, as Jer.
31.23. The Lord bless thee, O habitation of Justice, and mountain of Holiness.
It was a great refreshing to this weary and weeping Prophet, to see Visions of
peace and prosperity unto the Church, and therefore he adds, v. 26. Upon this I
awaked, and beheld, and my sleep was sweet unto me. O it is a sweet and
pleasant thing, by faith and hope, to believe and hope for such prosperity unto
these Churches. Let it ever be our Prayer, which was the Prayer of the Church,
Psa. 90.16, 17. Let thy work appear unto thy Servants, and thy glory unto their
Children, and let the beauty of the Lord, our God be upon us: and establish
thou the work of our hands upon us, yea the work of our hands establish thou it.

FINIS.

