Innocence no Shield against Envy. A SERMON Preached on Friday, April 11. Being
The Fast Day Appointed by the KINGS Proclamation To seek Reconciliation with
God, etc. BY GEORGE TOPHAM, Rector of Boston in Lincolnshire.

Perused and approved of by the Right Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord
Bishop of Lincoln.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Fox, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Angel in
Westminster Hall. 1679.

A SERMON Preached upon PSALM lix. 3. For lo, they lie waiting for my Soul: The
mighty men are gathered against me without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.
WHat the Argument of this Psalm is; why, when, and by whom written, the Title
shows and tells us, that it was David's, made when Saul sent, and they watched
the house to kill him. I shall not trouble your attention with the mystical or
Prophetical sense of it, either as it relates to Christ or his Church; a
discourse more proper for some other season; but only with the Historical or
Literal, as it concerned King David, and by his example all that succeed him in
the like dangers and deliverances; and at this time fit for our more than
ordinary Consideration: For it is a Psalm in which Isreal's sweet Singer, makes
his Address to his God, by way of vindicating his own Innocence.

For lo, they lie waiting for my Soul: The mighty men are gathered against me
without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.

Wherein be pleased to observe these particulars:

First, David's Petition, ver. 2. Deliver me from mine Enemies, O my God.

Secondly, A description of them,

1. By their practices, they lie waiting for my Soul.

2. Of their persons, the mighty men are gathered against me.

Thirdly, His Justification, Without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.

Lastly, Upon his being delivered, his resolution to praise God, ver. 16, 17.
Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for thou, O God, art my refuge, and my
merciful God.

Of these in order.

First, David's Petition, Deliver me, O my God. And surely never did greater
reason and encouragement center in any one person, more than in this Princely
Prophet: Nor ever had any man better assurance of the Almighties favor than
himself; so that well may he style him, not only God, but his God. How had he
raised him from a low estate, to sit upon no less than the Throne of Israel;
changing his Shepherds Cap into a Crown, his Coat into a Robe, and his Staff
into a Scepter? How had he given him, not only Courage to encounter, but Power
to Conquer, that daring Philistim, whose very Bravadoes frighted the Israelites
out of their Valor, and at once made them forget both God and themselves? How
often had he turned his enemies Swords into their own breasts, and maugre all
their malice, chained Victory to his Conquering Chariot? Which made the
Damsels of Israel at his Triumphant return, playing sing, and singing play,
Saul has slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands. It were endless by
retail to reckon all the donatives that Heaven bestowed upon this Prince: To
the no less joy of himself, than the Envy and wonder of his Adversaries. Yet
the greatest wonder is, How David (a King and Saint, both which entitle him to
a more than ordinary interest in Gods protection, for Kings are his Viceroys,
and Saints his Friends, and David eminent in both relations) should have
enemies and rebels.

But if we rightly consider, it will appear none, since no state or condition
of men upon earth is so exposed to dangers as theirs: For it is one, and not
one of the least, unhappinesses of the Sons of Adam; to be by nature proud and
impatient of restraint, greedy of liberty, always dissatisfied with the
present, and thirsting after Novelties; scarce any content with their station.
Some are aspiring, and would be higher; others covetous, and would be richer;
some revengeful, and will be quarrelling; some malicious, some turbulent, and
many the like. Now all this crowd of inordinate passions discharges it self
upon those in power and place, hoping by some public disturbance, that in
troubled waters they may catch that which calmer times would have conferred
upon persons of better merit.

And the State, the Employ, the Condition of Kings, gives some advantage to
such intendments, for they stand high, all eyes are upon them, nothing they say
or do escapes observation and censure. If any thing be amiss (as in
multiplicity of affairs it is impossible but there should) they are sure to
hear of it, with all its hightning circumstances; the giddy multitude not
considering that there may be a great Sacrilege committed in Israel, and yet
Joshua not know of it: Some errors will escape the best vigilance; that sin is
not half cunning enough that has not learned secrecy, yet when such
miscarriages happen, Magistracy must be traduced for it. Nay, how often is their
very innocence charged with aberrations? Making good holy David's assertion, For
lo, they lie waiting for my Soul, The mighty men are gathered against me
without any offense or fault of me, O Lord. Where be pleased to take notice how
he describes his Enemies.

First, By their policy, lying in wait for his Soul: that is, for his life. And
how and when they did this, is set down, 2 Samuel xix. 11. when Saul's unbounded
malice mist of its design, by David's avoiding his darted Javelin; his hatred
pursues him home: Sending Messengers thither, under the pretense of a visit, to
slay him, and to bid him a good Morning with the loss of his life. And though
this Stratagem failed of its desired end as well as the other; Saul will not
fail of a further contrivance for his ruin, and that of a most unpardonable
nature: To cozen under the color of Amity, is the most execrable villainy. And
there is no defense for that Pistol that is charged with the Bullet of
friendship; yet such was this of Saul's; Be thou valiant and fight the Lords
Battles, and I will give thee my eldest Daughter Merab to Wife; for he said, my
hand shall not be upon him, 2 Samuel xviii. 17.

David was now grown so popular that the King durst not offer him personal
violence; therefore he hires him into the jaws of death, by no less a price
than his eldest Daughter. What a Saint, what a Friend was Saul? Yet he never
intended more mischief to David, nor more unfaithfulness to his God than in
this offer, for, for all these fair flourishes, he hoped David would have
fallen by the Sword of the Philistines, as appeared by the not performing of his
promise, for Merab was not given to David, but to Adriel. And now the breaking
of his word must certainly be a sufficient oblation to his hatred. No, revenge
knows no limits: He has one plot more, by which he does not doubt, but to bring
David to his Grave, if he will but bring him an hundred Foreskins of the
Philistines, he has another Daughter which shall be his Wife: And though the
younger, yet the more affectionate, she was as sick of love as her Father was of
hatred toward him. Saul is glad of this, his Daughter could never do him better
service: If David's valor (overheated with the hopes of her Espousal) do but
make him perish in this attempt. But all those projects failing, and Saul's
death ensuing; sure nothing now can discompose his rest, or raise a storm upon
the face of his serene Government.

Yes, this rare and excellent Person, this gracious Prince, the very light of
Israel, as his Subjects styled him, 2 Samuel xxi. 17. was restless all his days;
I cannot reckon his troubles because he himself says they were innumerable,
Psalm. xl. 12. nor his enemies that hated him without a cause, and sought to
destroy him wrongfully, for they were mighty, Psalm. xxxviii. 19. The Grandees;
the gravest that sat in the Gate, (the place of Judicature,) Psalm. lxix. 12.
were those that conspired his destruction. Which is the next considerable, The
mighty men.

Had it only been the Drunkards, the scum of the People, that had made Songs of
him, he would either have reduced them to their obedience, by some punishment
suitable to their Crime; or with a noble scorn or pity have past by their
affronts: But for the mighty men to lie in wait for his life, must needs not
only awaken his diligence, but his devotion too, that Heaven would be pleased
to fortify his Guards against their treacheries, who were daily contriving his
ruin. And that after the most insinuating ways imaginable; traducing that
Government which God himself never found fault with, and at last took Arms
against him: And to make up his sorrows to the full, who should head these
Rebels but his dearly beloved Absalom; who drew into conspiracy with him,
besides the most of his Fathers Subjects, even his familiar Friend Achitophel,
whose Counsel, whilst good, was as an Oracle of God, but, when bad, might stand
in competition with the Devil; as appeared by that he gave Absalom, 2 Samuel xvi.
21. for he fearing that Absalom should relent, and David remit, and so that
breach be pieced, he advised him to second his unnatural Conspiracy with as
unnatural Incest; not only to violate his Fathers Throne, but his Fathers Bed:
And this Villainy not to be acted in secrecy, the argument of Fear or Modesty,
but so that all Israel might be Witnesses of the Sons sin, and the Fathers
shame. And that this treason may end in victory, he has another design ready;
Protraction may be an advantage to David: Therefore he resolves, 2 Samuel xvii.
2. I will pursue him to night, and come upon him while he is weary. How
pernicious, how destructive was this intendment? For besides the weariness and
unreadiness of David's Army, the spirits of that holy King were low and daunted:
And had not Hushai, 2 Samuel xvii. 14. put a stop to this piece of Aohitophels
policy, David's Army had been half vanquished ere one blow had been given.

Thus was this excellent King used, by an unworthy Master, an unnatural Son,
and an ungrateful Subject: Nay, that the Cup of his affliction may not want,
but run over, they will not suffer him to die in peace, for Adonijah, another
of his darling Sons, obtrudes himself a Successor upon him, endeavoring as it
were to bury him alive. But I shall proceed from their Cruelty to his
Innocence, the third thing proposed, David's Justification, Without any offense
or fault of me, O Lord.

Now that this was no Complement, but a real truth, is evident to any that
consults the History of his life. For he was a Pious man, a great Soldier, and
a gracious Prince; one in whom nothing was wanting to oblige a people to
obedience and respect; A man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel xiii. 14. proposed as
a Pattern to Solomon, with a promise to entail his Kingdom and blessings upon
him and his Posterity, if he would but walk in his steps, 2 Chronicles. vii. 17, 18.
His life was the Measure and Standard, by which succeeding Princes were to be
judged, his virtues outlived himself, and many Generations fared the better
for him.

Yet you see this incomparable Prince, this Favorite of Heaven, this glory of
after-Ages was continually disturbed in his own, by the Seditions and
Rebellions of his Enemies: Which made him say, They are minded to do me some
mischief, so maliciously are they bent against me.

But surely these Persons of Honor had some just cause to lie in wait for
David, perhaps he had degraded them, or taken away their Estates, or at least
his rising Sun had darkened and caused theirs to set in a cloud of disgrace. No,
he was not guilty of any of these: For as God was wonderful in placing him on
his Throne, so was he merciful even to the worst of his Enemies. How did he
pardon that railing Shimei, 2 Samuel xvi. 7. when he cursed him, saying, Come out
thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial. What Tongue, but that of this wicked
Rebel, durst thus have slandered the Majesty of a King? Every word was a lie:
He calls him an Usurper, a man of blood, and that of Saul's House; how false!
God sent for him out of the fields to be Anointed, How was he an Intruder? The
man after Gods own heart, is branded for a man of Belial, and he that regretted
for but the cutting off Saul's Garment, is reproached as a man of blood.

Indeed, for his Master, what respect did he pay him? Meeting his Envy with
Love; yea, at that very time that he sought his death: for Saul being weary
with pursuing of him, seeks a repose in David's Cave, 2 Samuel xxiv. 3. where
David takes him napping, and now his Soldiers advise him to carve his own
revenge; and to encourage him to it, they allege Gods promise and this
advantage concurring. But he, like himself, gives way, neither to his own
passion, nor their solicitation, but only makes this opportunity the trial of
his Loyalty, and the means of his Peace. It had been as easy to have cut Saul's
Throat as his Garment; but his Coat not his Person shall be the worse: Nor that
neither but for a monument of his Innocence. Did he not shed the blood of that
Amalekite, who did but say he had shed Saul's? How did he bewail the death of so
bad a Master; wishing no dew might fall where that Royal blood was poured out?

And as for Absalom and Achitophel, what humane power could have done more than
David did, to endear and secure the Duty of the one, and the Loyalty of the
other? With what love and affection had he treated Absalom? And for Achitophel,
he made him not only of his Privy Council, but the Grand Minister both of his
state and favor. And therefore when this ungrateful Politician turned Traitor,
how deeply did it wound the Royal breast that had advanced him? For it was not
(says he, Psalm. lv. 12.) an enemy that reproached me, then I could have born
it; neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify himself against me, then
I would have hid my self from him: But it was thou, a man, mine equal, my
guide, and mine acquaintance, etc. thou whom I had honored, thou whom I had
preferred, thou whose growing greatness knew no Rivality.

But David had his faults, and great ones too, for which he was punished! It is
true, he had so, but none to provoke his People to disobedience, they were
private and personal, not of public Concernment, his Government was just and
moderate, never taxed by God as his faults; and if this must be assigned a just
cause for disturbance, that they were governed by a Man, not by an Angel, by
one subject to humane infirmities like themselves, all the World would be in a
flame, and none left to rule in peace. What has the Subject to do with the
private failings of his Prince? He that was King of Israel was accountable to
none but the God of Israel, and therefore he says, Psalm. li. 4. Against thee,
thee only have I sinned; and well he might say so, for as to the people
entrusted to his charge, he was so upright and discreet in the managing his
honor and power that he gave them no offense: So equal in his Justice, so
obliging in his Favors, that he committed no fault against them. And so I pass
to the last particular proposed, David's resolution to praise God for delivering
of him, Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: For thou, O God, art my refuge,
and my merciful God. Where we may observe,

I. The Person resolving, and that is David, I will.

II. Of what he resolves; and that is to sing: Unto thee, O my strength, will I
sing.

III. The reason of this his Resolution, For thou, O God, art my refuge, and my
merciful God.

First, I will, (says this holy King) and it was but his duty; he in the first
place, he to lead the way, he to give the example. The deliverances were
public, and he a public person, and so more concerned in them than any other;
yet all obliged too as well as he, though not in so high a degree, even in
those dangers that aimed only at his Person: As the Members for the Head, if
that be wounded, all suffer with it. And that the Israelites were very sensible
of this; see what an esteem they set upon David's preservation, (2 Samuel xviii.
3.) when that unnatural Absalom had blown the Trumpet of Rebellion, and the
warlike King was once more resolved to give his Subjects a further proof of his
personal valor: Thou shall not go forth; for if we flee away, they will not
care for us, neither if half of us die will they care for us; but now thou art
worth ten thousands, therefore it is better that thou succor us out of the
City: If the King be safe, the Nation is secure; and when he has cause to sing,
if he say, I will; it is then a shame and folly too, as well as sin, for the
Subjects to be silent, so to mind our Private, as if we had no relation to the
Public; no obligation to mourn for to endeavor to remove National Calamities:
Or to sing and rejoice for public mercies and deliverances, since that is each
particulars interest, and therefore as every man is concerned in the benefit,
every man must betake himself to the duty; that is thankfulness, Unto thee, O
my strength, will I sing. The next particular.

If Gratitude be within, something will appear without; if there be that
apprehension, that estimation of the blessing as it deserves, it cannot be kept
shut in the heart, no more than fire in the bosom. Gods glory and his
delivering from dangers will make a good man speak, even when terror it self
has commanded silence. In Luke xi. 14. our Savior cast out a dumb devil, and
the dumb spoke, and the people wondered. Many are possessed (I am afraid in this
Age of ours) with this dumb devil: So that to hear one of them sing forth the
praises of the Almighty for his deliverances, would make all the people wonder.
The Tongue was principally given (you know) to set forth his praise and glory,
and it concerns us to use it accordingly; we offend, we pull down Judgments by
it, and it is but meet we give thanks with it for our deliverances, else we
have but dull resentments of his Favors. And therefore says this Princely
Prophet, Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: For thou, O God, art my refuge,
and my merciful God.

That David looked upon God to be his Asylum, his refuge, and his only
sanctuary of defense, his many Psalms (penned as the records of his gratitude)
sufficiently enform us. Deliver me, (says he, Psalm. xxxiv. 19.) O God, for vain
is the help of man; And in the height of distress he cries out, ( Psalm. xxv.
22.) Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles. It was Rabshakehs
blasphemy, Isa. xxxvi. 20. What God can deliver out of my hand? What God? He
found it to his cost. Till Lot be escaped, not a spark must kindle. The
impartial Sword must not touch Rahab, nor the destroying Angel offer a blow to
the sprinkled doors. Those Ministers of Justice ( Ezekiel. ix. 4.) have an Inkhorn
as well as a Sword: An Inkhorn, first to mark the chosen, and then to go and
smite. It were endless to multiply proofs out of Scriptures, which are but the
Registers of his Providence, and you cannot look besides them there. And it is
no less apparent unto reason, for that finds there is a God, and from thence
concludes a Providence. So that should I lead you out of the Church into the
Schools of the Heathens of all sorts, you will find them, by the very instinct
and light of Nature, asserting the same truth; ever ascribing all good
successes to their Demons, and accordingly giving thanks, courting them with
Sacrifices, and Holy days, dressing their Images with Garlands, and devoting
part of their spoils taken for the maintenance of their Worship, and making
magnificent their Temples.

But unto what times, O Lord, have thou reserved us? For to our great shame and
greater grief be it spoken, Have we not some in these days (I fear many) more
heathenish than the Heathens, who will not allow God to govern in his own
House, to have the managery of his own Family, that deny his taking care of
things below; and having the confidence to assert, that he is so far from
delivering us from dangers, that he takes no cognizance how we come in, or how
we get out. A persuasion that thwarts the common Notions of mankind, that
destroys, that confounds the advancement of all noble resolutions, that wholly
makes void and ridiculous the duty we are about, and indeed all other; for it
is totally destructive of all Virtue, Religion, and Government; none of which
can subsist, or be long lived, without a belief, a sense, a reverence of some
Divine Power, that does not only protect, guard, and defend us from dangers,
but that will be sure to call for an account of our acknowledgments.

Yet these must be cried up for the Vertuoso's, the Wits of the Age. It is
strange, it was not so thought of old, and let who will admire them, David sets
a Fools Cap upon their heads, Psalm. xiv. 1. The fool has said in his heart,
there is no God, that is, (as the word there signifies) no Judge, no
Providence, and I hope you will not think the term uncivil, it is not mine, but
his. And would they but have recourse to their own Consciences; consult those
indeleble Letters there engraven, and never to be rased out, they must (however
puffed up with pride, and aiming to be singular, and different in Paradoxism from
all the world) acknowledge that there is a good providence over them, that
orders all the Affairs of the world, from the least to the greatest, from
Crowns and Scepters to the falling of a Sparrow on the ground, and the very
numbering of their hairs, and join with holy David, and say, Unto thee, O my
strength, will I sing: For thou, O God, art my refuge, and my merciful God.

Having taken a view of David's Innocence, and the malice of his Enemies,
together with Gods delivering of him, and his thankfulness. Let me now beg your
patience and attention, to see how our gracious King runs parallel, not only
with him in his dangers, but in his deliverances too.

And first, as David having been often delivered not only from the private
designs of his Enemies, but when their Rebellion was grown to that height, and
power, as to force him from his Throne; was brought back again by the powerful
arm of Heaven, had good reason to style the Almighty not only God, but his God.
So surely no Prince since Adams Creation, ever had greater proofs of an
Omnipotent Protection, than our now mest gracious Sovereign. How diligent, how
vigilant was Heaven in the securing of him, (when our Nation was in a flame of
Rebellion) from his Enemies; who prized his destruction more than their own
preservation: And had not a more than ordinary Providence provided for his
escape, how had his Royal blood been sacrificed as an Allay to their unheard of
Cruelty?

But above all, that of his miraculous Restoration, when his Adversaries
thought themselves in secure possession, when Church and State, Religion and
Learning, Laws and Liberty, were not only in danger, but already devoured in
the hope and expectation of his Enemies; when Atheism and Ignorance were in a
full and fierce torrent breaking in upon his Dominions, and we his Subjects at
the very brink of a remediless Confusion, fit Objects either for the pity, or
the scorn of the World, as they stood affected to us; then, even then (when
nothing but faith, and that of the taller sort too, could see any appearance of
him) did Heaven (to the wonder and amazement of the world) place him on the
Throne of his Fathers. All which may justly entitle him when in danger, as well
as David, to say, Deliver me, O my God; for lo, they lie waiting for my Soul.

Now for Policy, the next Parallel, his Majesty's Enemies that lie waiting for
his Soul, clearly outvie, and outdo King David's: Alas they (in those more
early days of Impiety) were never acquainted with such contrivances and
stratagems; as the old Gentleman of Rome (by his Agents the Jesuits) teaches
his Creatures in these of ours: Who put on all the formalities of Religion and
merit when they intend to murder. Making good that Prediction of our ever
blessed Savior, They shall kill you, and think they do God good service. And
have they not turned their Pens into Pen-knives, multiplied the School into a
Camp, Arguments to Armies, teaching all their Proselytes dismal Conclusions.

Indeed, what mask do they not make use of to destroy, and promote faction?
Observing that Maxim of their old Roman Masters, Divide and impera; and to this
end have they not been, nay, are they not Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
Libertines, Pagans, any thing, so they be not Subjects. Most, if not all the
storms, that have been raised in Christendom, since Charlemains time, are owing
to the Pope and his Ministers. And I hope it will be no digression (for the
King of England never dies) to let you see, how industrious they have been in
all Ages, to bring this Nation under the Romish slavery, ten times worse than
that of Egypt. And though our Kings have been more kind and generous Vassals
than any of their Neighbors, though they were as obedient Sons as any that
ever owned St. Peter's Keys, as liberal in their erecting and endowing Churches
and Monasteries as any Princes in the world; as the many stately and
magnificent Structures (before the hammers of their own impieties rung their
passing-knels) in each corner of the Land did (and their ruins still do)
sufficiently witness, yet none have been so ungratefully requited as they: No
Crown suffered so much ignominy and bondage under the Tyranny of the Roman
Prelate, as this of England.

For no sooner had the munificent Monarchs of this Nation, built so many famous
Fabrics, but the Pope claimed the investing and Collating of them. Not that
the Church might be better provided for; but that by Bribery and Simony he
might enrich his Treasury; of which (though many instances might be given) let
that of Walter Gray (set down by a Monk of their own) speak for all the rest;
Matthew. Paris in Johan. p. 263.
who for his investiture at Rome obliged himself to pay to the Pope ten
thousand pounds sterling, in those days enough for a Kings Ransom.

This was the end for which the Pope had used so many Policies, taking the
advantage of the necessities of Kings, and their rebellious Subjects. This was
it for which so much blood had been shed, for which above an hundred set
Battles were fought since Gregory VII. This was it for which those that
suffered in the Popes claim for it, were styled Martyrs, put into the List of
Saints, and were sure to do Miracles after their death.

This was it which made Urban the Second espouse the Interest of Anselm, who
was fled from his own Prince, William Rufus, and liking the prudence of that
Fugitive, made use of his Counsel, and gave him the Archbishops Pall, thereby
voiding the Investiture he had received from the King his Master; and obliging
him (with the gift of that he had nothing to do with) to a dependency on him:
And what disturbances followed both to King and State, Matthew. Paris in Guliel.
Rufo.
the above cited Monk has largely set down.

Neither did this quarrel die with Urban and King William, for no sooner had
Henry the First of that name ascended the Throne, and Paschal the Second seated
himself in St. Peter's Chair, but he justified (as well as his Predecessor) the
Archbishop in his Rebellion against his Sovereign, and sends him a Mandate to
declare, that no Lay man should have power to confer any Investiture: Upon
which (this Bishop devoted to the Roman Interest) began to degrade his
Brethren, promoted by the Kings nomination, and refused to Consecrate others
named by him. At which the King (as he had good reason) being angry, banished
him out of his Kingdom. But how this was resented at Rome, and what troubles
ensued thereupon to this Realm, the Historians of that Age have sadly recorded.

After Henry the First came Stephen, and after him Henry the Second, A potent
and warlike Prince, who besides England, held Normandy, Anjou, Poitou, etc. Yet
this potent King was strangely disquieted by Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury. A man abundantly stored with an ambitious, turbulent, and
ungrateful Spirit, as appeared by his disowning the Investiture of the King, by
whose favor and bounty he was promoted, and receiving his Pall from the Pope.
At which the King, being enraged, exiled him out of him Dominions; but he fled
to Rome, (the Sanctuary in those days always open for such Traitors) where he
was not only entertained, (to the great grief of the King) but countenanced,
encouraged, and bid hearthy welcome by Pope Alexander the Third, who vindicated
the quarrel (for indeed it was his own) at so high a rate, that this great
Prince, partly through necessity, and fear of the power of the Keys, (which
made wonderful clinking in those times) and partly being persuaded by some
Prelates, Matthew. Paris In Hen. Secund. p. 117.
gave this Archbishop a meeting (in hopes of a reconciliation) at Froncevaux,
and did that which no man would have believed, for he held the Bridle of
Beckets horse, and that proud Prelate not contented to have received the honor
once, alighted on purpose that the King should pay him submission twice, as he
also did. Thus that Priest practiced Apostolic humility.

After this Triumph highly applauded at Rome, Becket returned into England full
of glory: Where instead of bringing Peace, he was the Bearer and Proclaimer of
an Excommunication, and Sentence of deposition of the Archbishop of York and
his Adherents, for Crowning the young King in his absence.

The King being in Normandy, and hearing of these procedures of the
Archbishops, sent four of his Attendants to require him to absolve those he had
so unjustly excommunicated, and take off his Suspensions from others. Which
command he refusing to obey, the King began to lament his condition. This moved
the same four whom he had sent before, to return into England, and finding the
Archbishop in the Church of Canterbury (some say at the High Altar) at three a
clockiin the Afternoon, calling him Traitor, slew him.

No sooner did the news of this arrive, King Henry still in Normandy, but he
showed a great deal of sorrow for it, and though he protested his innocence as
to the fact, yet he sent an Embassy to the Pope, to make satisfaction. But the
testy old man was so enraged, that he would not so much as vouchsafe his
Ambassadors to kiss his feet, but in great wrath spoke of Interdicting the
whole Kingdom, which (in those days) was looked upon as the sending all the
English into Hell. The dread of which forced this Magnanimous King to buy his
Absolution at a dear rate; acquitting not only his right of investing, but
likewise engaging to keep two hundred men of Arms in pay, for the service of
the Holy War, and the Popes Assigns to be the receivers. And to make the
satifaction complete, the Majesty of this great Monarch (to the wonder of the
world) must be so far debased, as to be stripped naked, and whipped by a company of
Monks. And that such Rebels as Becket might never want encouragement in
succeeding Ages, the Pope did not only defend him whilst he lived, but
Canonized him when he was dead.

King Henry being gathered to his Fathers, his Son Richard (surnamed Cor de
Lion) succeeded him, not only in his Throne, but in his troubles too. That
Prince for the better securing Normandy, was resolved to fortify the Castle of
Andeli: See Mat. Paris, p. 175.
At which Walter Archbishop of Rouen being displeased, immediately Interdicts
all Normandy; and flies to Rome, where he found as kind entertainment as ever
Becket did. And now, what must the King do? Alas submit; to contest was in
vain, for such was the fear of an Interdict in those times, that there was
nothing which the Pope could not obtain of Princes and Nations, if he did but
threaten them with it.

But above all, that in the Reign of King John was the most dismal, when
England remained under the Interdict six years, three months, and an half. Not
only the King and his Court, but all the People of the Nation were
Excommunicated, and that not for Heresy, not for any Crime of theirs; but for
a quarrel between the King and the Pope, about Investitures, Collations, and
Money matters. Matthew. Paris in Johan. p. 217.
Then (says Matthew Paris, who was an Eyewitness of all that disorder) all
the Sacraments of the Church ceased in England, saving only the Confession and
Communion of the Host in the last necessity, and Baptism of little Children.
Then were the Dead carried out of Towns, as if they had been Dogs, and buried
in Highways and Ditches; without Prayers, and without Service of Priests.

Yet this not producing the end it was designed for, the Balaam of Rome
proceeds to curse the King by name; and finally, to pronounce sentence of
Deposition against him; discharging all his Subjects of their Oaths of
Allegiance; and sends his Legate to Philip Angust, King of France, that for the
remission of his sins, he should invade the Realm of England with force of
Arms, and giving to all those that would attend him in that Conquest,
forgiveness of all theirs, and the same graces as to them that visit the Holy
Sepulcher: Whereupon Philip to obtain pardon of his sins (or rather to make
himself Master of this Land) raised a mighty Army, whilst Innocent (by his
Creatures) was laboring to engage the English against their own King. By this
means King John was strangely and suddenly weakened, and utterly disabled to
hold his Kingdom, and seeing strong invasions from without, and daily
revoltings within to open Insurrections, and every man now counted a Saint and
Martyr that would fight against him; and considering that the Popes Bulls, like
Magic Spells, had let loose many turbulent Spirits, not to be laid again, but
by him that raised them. After much debate, and with a heart full of anguish
and rage, at last resolves to prostitute his Crown and Dignity to Pandulph the
Legate, that he might receive it again from him, as from the Popes hands, and
be protected by him. Thus the Pope taking advantage of this poor Princes
misery, made him a Vassal to his own greatness, and his Kingdom a prop to
uphold St. Peter's Chair.

For these pretended Successors of that great Apostle, fish not for Souls, but
for Empire, even with the destruction of Millions (if their own Doctrine be
true) which says that all that die under the Interdict (without some special
grace or privilege, and that not to be had without ready money) are eternally
damned, as dying out of the Communion of the Church. So that if St. Peter
should now come to his Successor in his old tone, Silver and Gold have I none,
if he were a thousand Peter's, he must into Purgatory.

How many Millions then of Souls, did this Innocent the Pope wilfully send to
Hell in this great Kingdom of England in the Space of above six years? And this
for no offense, no fault of theirs: For what could they do, if the King would
not be ruled by the Pope? Are these the actions of the Vicar of Christ? Is this
the kind Father of the Church? Is this the way of managing the Keys? Yes, he
that consults the Reigns of our succeeding Kings, from the time of King John to
our own (which would make me too great a debtor to your patience particularly
to relate) shall find, that no stone has been left unturned, no policies
(though never so horrid) have not been put in execution, to reduce this Nation
to that miserable slavery they had once imposed upon it.

For it is not for the Points of true Doctrine, but for Wealth and Grandeur,
for the setting up of their visible Monarchy of the Church (whereof Christ and
his Apostles never spoke a word, and of which the Primitive Fathers never
dreamt) they so much contend. Henry the Eighth held all the Doctrinal Points of
the Romish Religion, yet for rejecting the Jurisdiction of Rome, was
Excommunicated by the Pope, his Subjects commanded to deny obedience, and all
men to take Arms against him. This is it, which if our Religion would allow,
Pius IV. Hist. Conc. Trid. lib. 8. p. 7.5.
they would allow of our Religion. The Politic rather than Pious Pope said
once: Since he could not regain the Protestants, it was necessary to keep those
in obedience which he had, to make the division strong, and the parties
irreconcilable. Conformable whereunto their now Doctrine is, that such as
submit not to the Popes Supremacy do renounce Christianity.

When the Fires of Queen Mary's bloody Reign could not do this work, how many
Plots were laid against the life of Queen Elizabeth, that Queen of blessed
memory, by whose gracious hand God wrought those wonders, that the most potent
Kings can hardly reach, Honor filled the Circle of her Crown, her brow with
Majesty, her heart with Piety, and her lap with Plenty. Yet how execrable were
the Treasons against that glorious Defender of the Faith, and of her Royal
Rights? When neither the Dagger nor the Poison could reach her Sacred Person,
an invincible Armado (as they themselves styled it) must be sent to invade
England, three Popes having made way for the Sword, by three roaring Bulls,
which dethroned the Queen, and commanded her Subjects to take Arms against her.
But when the invincible Army had lost that name, being defeated by the powerful
Arm of God, other Armies were poured from time to time into Ireland, ever prone
to Rebel. When all those effects were frustrated, God blessing England because
the Popes cursed it, and Elizabeth full of days and glory, was translated from
a Temporal, to an Eternal Diadem; her peaceful Successor, Defender of the same
holy Faith, must be welcomed to his Throne by a Mandate of Clement the VIII.
declaring him unworthy to sit there, as an Heretic, and forbidding his
Subjects to obey him.

When all that would not effect the desired end, to make short work, such a
device is excogitated as nothing but Rome and the Devil could have invented:
And now they are resolved on that desperate Cry, Incendium extinguatur ruina,
the King and his Royal Issue, Lords and Commons, all the flower and vigor of
the Kingdom must be blown up, sent to heaven before the Resurrection. Bloody
Priests, that would have offered a whole burnt Sacrifice, and made both Prince
and Peers pass through the fire, an oblation to their Moloch of Rome.

And as for our late King of blessed memory, that Prince in whose breast all
those Virtues Centred, which severally had commended the great Monarchs of
former Ages. Was he not beholden (as it is now apparent) to his Holiness, for
raising all those storms of Rebellion, upon the face of his calm Government,
hoping in those troubled waters to have caught that Fish, he had been Angling
for so many Ages.

Indeed, the large claim of St. Peter's Regalities, has been for these last six
hundred years, the cause of all the Corruptions of Faith and Religion, of all
the Confusions and Distractions, of all the Seditions and Rebellions in the
West of the world. And we of this Island (by sad experience) have been taught,
that this is the great Wheel, that sets those Mischiefs, Plots, and Treasons on
going, wherewith the State has been so many times shaken; torn, and brought to
the brink of ruin.

For when hotheaded Zealots are really persuaded, that the Pope has power to
depose Emperors and Kings that oppose him, and absolve Subjects from their
Allegiance to them (and this believed as absolutely necessary to Salvation)
what Royal blood will they spare? What attempt, be it never so cruel, never so
unjust, never so difficult, will they not assay, to bring their Country under
the Popes subjection, and to promote his Universal Monarchy? Or can it be
expected they will desist from endeavoring its reducement, (though after the
most inhumane and barbarous way, that any thing but Rome and Hell ever thought
of) so long as the Pope (whose slaves they are) is himself a slave to his own
cruel and illimited Ambition, which to satiate all the Kingdoms, and all the
blood in the world are too little.

And never was it more evident, more apparent to the world (than in this late
discovered Conspiracy against our most gracious Sovereign) what their
resolutions are, and what both King and People must expect from the Roman
Prelate; whose malice never sleeps, nor whose Agents never rest to work his
Ruin, so that he may say of them (and justly too) as King David did of his,
They are minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they bent against
me. But we will pass from their Malice and Policy, to a consideration of their
Might and Power, the next in order: The mighty men are gathered against me.

The mighty! alas he is such in the Superlative degree (that is enemy to his
Majesty) if you will believe him for this, he that asserts, that all Empires
and Scepters are at his dispose. As Pius the Fifth taught the People of this
Kingdom in express words, in the Bull of Deprivation which he thundered against
Queen Elizabeth. And to make this good to the world, and to show the height of
his Pride, Pope Celestine crowned Henry the Sixth Emperor of that name with
his feet, and kicked it off when he had done, making no less than an Emperors
Crown his Football. Gregory the Seventh made Henry the Fourth pay attendance
at his Gates in Winter four days barefooted. And Alexander the Third with an
insulting scorn trod on the Neck of Frederick Barbarosa.

This is he that can give and take Heaven away at his pleasure, Mat. 4.9.
a Privilege that great Usurper his Father never challenged. Nay, Cerem.
Sacra. l. 1.. 7. c. 6.
this is he that has encroach'd upon the highest Prerogatives and Titles of God
himself, Pope Sixtus the Fourth (out of his singular modesty) assumed that
authority, which not only we, but all the Primitive Christians thought to
belong to Christ alone; All power is given me both in heaven and Earth. Pope
Paul the Second was styled a Celestial Majesty, which all know is only proper
to God. Pope Sixtus Quintus called the Cornerstone in Sion, due to the Son of
God. And in the last Council of Lateran it was decreed, that the Pope must be
adored by all Nations, and that he is most like unto God. Yea, we are further
told in the same place, that he must be adored with the same Adoration
enjoined, Psalm. lxii. All the Kings of the earth shall worship him; in which
Text the Adoration proper to our ever-blessed Savior is understood, and so it
is taken by Tertullian. So that if David were permitted to speak from the dead,
he must needs acknowledge and say, that those of his (though mighty) were far
inferior to these enemies of his Majesty. Which brings me to the next
considerable, Without any offense or fault of me, O Lord.

And does not our gracious King run parallel with him in this? What Prince ever
writ his favors in such engaging Characters as he has done? That were his
Adversaries any thing but what they are (Vassals to the Roman greatness) he
must for ever have endeared and secured their obedience. A Prince whose
unspotted Innocence is such, that no fancies or fears disturb his breast; for
as he is guilty of nothing, so there is nothing he dreads. He is the very
Compound of Charity and Compassion: For he pities those that will not pity
themselves; and whilst they contrive his destruction, his Prayers ascend heaven
for their pardon? Nor can the utmost of their malice provoke him to a
retaliation, having learnt not only of God, but the King his Father to forgive
his very Enemies.

Now to study, to design and plot the ruin of such a Prince, must make a
strange aggravation of the Crime; and render the Conspirators much more black,
not only to this, but to all succeeding Ages; especially when they shall find
that some of them were indebted to his bounty for their bread. O, but he will
not admit of the power of our Father the Pope, and all Obligements, all Oaths,
all that is Sacred are too weak to engage and bind our Loyalty, when he claims
not only Rivality, but Supremacy. And therefore (Great Sir) pardon us, we will
serve you in any thing else; but when that Interest is on foot, when he enjoins
and commands us, we are bound (and that under no less penalty than eternal
damnation) to divest our selves of all to promote it.

Is this the cause, is this his offense, is this his fault? What if the Pope
command his Majesty to break the Sacred Mandates of the Almighty, and kneel
before an Idol, and offer his Invocation unto others than God? What if he
appoint him other Redeemers than Christ, and other merits for his Propitiation,
than those of his obedience in the Death of the Cross? What if contrary to the
Apostle he tell him, that the Blood of Jesus cleanses him not from all sin,
and will send him to be cleansed in an imaginary fire of Purgatory, and fright
his Conscience to drain his Purse? Must he, to please the unmatchable pride and
insatiable griping of that Tyrant, hood wink his Reason, befool his Conscience,
make shipwreck of his Faith, and blindly and wilfully inslave himself, and his
Subjects under the yoke of the Romish bondage? Or else be deposed and
murdered, and his Kingdoms disposed of at the Popes pleasure.

Good God! how contrary is this to the Religion of the ever blessed Jesus, to
the practice of his Apostles, and the Primitive times? Our Savior himself was
so far from pretending to a disposal of temporal Empires; that he refused to
divide Inheritances among Brethren, as a thing that belonged not to him, in
Luke xii. 14. And for the Apostles, how earnestly did they exhort and persuade
their Auditors to be obedient, not only for wrath, but for Conscience sake. Not
because the Emperors had their Swords in their hands, and might therefore
punish them; but because God did command and require it of them. That known
passage of St. Paul may serve for an abundant evidence, Romans xiii. 2. where he
not only affirms, That whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance
of God, but also that they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation.

And that the ancient Christians were of the same temper with their Master and
his Apostles submitting themselves to the penalties of those Laws, whose
Injunctions they thought it not lawful to observe, is clear from Tertullian and
others. And this they did too, not (as that great Cardinal would have the world
believe) because they wanted force and power to resist; Bell. lib. 5. de Romans
Pont. cap. 4. and 7.
but in a real practice of the Precepts of the ever blessed Jesus.

Tertullian and Cyprian, two Ancient Fathers, being under the Persecution of
the heathen Emperors, do make their Apologies in behalf of the Christian and
Catholic Church, Tertal. Apol. contra Gentes. cap. 37.
Tertullian thus: God forbid that our Christian Profession should be revenged
by Humane Power, or should grieve to suffer that whereby we are tried: Although
if we would become either secret or open revengers of our own wrongs, could we
want either number or power? What War is there that we are not fit for, yea,
and ready also to undertake, if that our Religion taught us not rather to be
killed, than to kill for the profession thereof? Cyprian ad Demetr.
And St. Cyprian, Our Professors (says he) do not take revenge against unjust
violence, though our people be more in number. And agreeing hereto when the
Theban Legion, which consisted of six thousand, six hundred sixty six Christian
Soldiers, were by the Emperor Maximian commanded to offer Sacrifice to the
heathen Gods, though they refused to obey his commands, yet when he upon that
refusal, commanded every tenth man to be slain, they suffered themselves so to
be without any the least resistance; looking upon themselves as obliged by
their Religion, to obey him either actively or passively.

Thus the Supremacy and Power in those days was in the Emperors, and Obedience
was held better than Sacrifice: And this owned and practiced by several of the
Popes of Rome themselves, as Binius and Baronius (two Witnesses against whom I
hope they will take no exception) have set down, yet I shall only produce three
of them, that number having always looked upon (especially of such men)
sufficient for any Test. And the first is Pope Leo the first who made his
addresses to the Empress, that the Emperor would be pleased to command a Synod
to be celebrated in Italy, and (though he did it by all the ways of humility)
could not obtain it. The next is Pope Pelagius the First, who asserted that by
holy Scripture (then adjusted as the rule of faith and manners) they were
commanded to be subject to Kings. The third is Pope Adrian the first, who
devoted himself to the Emperor by Letters, as one in supplication fallen down
prostrate at the soles of his feet. That base submission of Princes kissing the
Popes Toe being not then known to the world.

It was a thousand years after Christ, before St. Peter's temporal Sword was
found, unsheathed and flourished to fright Kings out of their Authority and
Power, and what horrid means have they used (it having laid rusting so long) to
make it bright, deluding and inebriating the people with false opinions,
persuading them to drink down Poison, instead of wholesome Doctrine, to break the
most manifest and positive Laws of God at the Popes command. How strongly do
the Precepts of the Almighty bind us to an obedience to all that are in
Authority and Power? How has he hedged in Regality, saying, Touch not mine
Anointed? That one would think nothing could be more safe. Yet alas, how has
this wild Boar out of the Fofrest broke down all those Fences? Telling his
Devotaries, that he has power to absolve them from all their Oaths of
Allegiance to their King the Lords Anointed, and declaring they ought rather to
obey him than God. That it is no matter, nay, though St. Peter himself gave it
in charge, and that for Conscience sake, as acceptable to heaven, (1 Pet. ii.
17.) not only to fear God, but to honor the King: Thereby plainly intimating,
that it is impossible to be true Servants to God, without being Loyal Subjects
to the King, so long as he says, Rebel against Princes who will not own my
Supremacy, and for Conscience sake (though contrary to Religion and common
honesty) work Treasons, Insurrections, Massacres, and what not, for that is
acceptable to God.

What new incredible abominable Doctrine is this? That firing Cities, Treasons,
Rebellions, dethroning of Princes, adjudging their Kingdoms to strangers,
filling the World with Perjuries, Wars, Invasions, bringing in a Chaos of
Confusion, and the face of Hell into the Christian world, should be
meritorious, a work of Piety and Religion!

Yet is not this preached up by the Jesuits, espoused and faithfully believed
and practiced by the Romanists? Could the Martyrs of his Holiness speak to us
from their Ashes under the Gallows, how would they tell us that what they did,
was in obedience to the Father of their Faith the Pope, whose Mandate did
instruct and encourage them to do it; upon him then, upon that your unwearied
enemy, lay the greatest burden of the infamy. Look to shield your heads from
the designs of the living, and leave the dead in the hands of Gods Justice. For
be assured that though we are cut off, he will not want some Sons as blindly
zealous as we were, who for the hopes of a Canonization, will refuse the
executing of no Treason, though never so horrid, never so bloody, nay, though
against Princes by whom they have been never so much obliged. And that this is
their Creed and Practice; was there ever a more clear demonstration to the
world. than in this damnable Piot against his Sacred Majesty, which Heaven (in
despite of all their seeret contrivances) has been pleased to lay open to their
shame, (if they be capable of any) and our comfort. Which brings me to the last
particular proposed by way of Parallel, David's resolution to praise God for
delivering of him.

Now in this as well as in the rest, our King is resolved not to be behind King
David, having commanded to blow the Trumpet in Zion, and sanctify a Fast, a
Trumpet worthy of Royal breath, having set this day apart to bless God for his
mercies already bestowed, and by an early and timely repentance (in and through
the blood of the ever blessed Jesus) to engage a further continuance of them:
Never was it, never can it be more seasonable than now. Now when our God has
done so great things for his Anointed, delivering from his enemies, whose
Malice is not to be defeated, and whose secret Combinations are not to be
discovered, but by his goodness, who never slumbers nor sleeps in our
prefervation. Ask from East to West, consult the days of old, and see if ever
God has appeared more visibly for any Nation than this of ours.

How did he scatter that daring Armado in Eighty Eight, (not only to the wonder
of our Allies, but to the Amazement of our Enemies, which made some of them
(though blasphemously) say, That God himself was turned Lutheran) whose
prodigious weight seemed to make the very Waves groan with its insupportable
burden?

How did he (in the days of King James) lay open those Penetralia mortis, those
inward Chambers, and recesses of death? Their secrecy made them confident,
engaging their Agents with all that is looked upon as Sacred, Religion, Oath,
and Sacrament not to reveal it, eating their God upon a bargain of blood.

How did he, when they (by raising those late uncivil Civil Wars and
dissensions among us) hoped to have made us fallen by our own Swords, make us
happy in his Majesty's return? And to endear our gratitude, how is he resolved
(as it is evident by the discovery of this late most detestable Conspiracy)
still to defend (maugre all their envy and malice) the Great Defender of the
Faith? So that if we have not absolutely taken leave of our Understandings, if
our spirits be not quite besotted, we must say with holy David, What shall we
return unto the Lord, for all his benefits done unto us?

What indeed, O God! for delivering us from a Religion, that (contrary to all
thy Precepts in the Old, and the Doctrine and Example of thy Son in the New
Testament) commands us to Worship Images, Adore Relics, Invoke Saints,
Sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead, hold a Purgatory (as if the
blood of the ever blessed Jesus was not able to do it) for the cleansing of
Souls; tread down thy Viceroys from their Thrones, and set up an usurping
Prelate, who by the consent of all Ages, has been acknowledged a Vassal to
Princes; in short, from a Religion that would take away the Scriptures, (those
Sacred Legacies of thine to the Sons of men) and wrap up our Consciences in the
livery of an unknown Language; that licenses Stews, condemns Marriage, sells
Pardons, and Canonizes Traitors. So that surely were there nothing but this, it
were enough for ever to oblige our thankfulness.

Yet besides, (for ever to engage us to thy service) how have thou chosen us
out of all the Earth, and divided us from the rest of the World, that we might
be a singular Pattern, and strange wonder of thy bounty? How have thou fenced
us about with the Hedge of good Discipline, of wholesome Laws, of gracious
Government, with the Brazen Wall of thy Almighty and miraculous protection!
never people had more exquisite rules of justice; thou have not left us to the
mercy of a rude Anarchy, or a Tyrannical violence, but have regulated us by
Laws of our own asking, and swayed us by the just Scepters of moderate Princes.

How have thou made us members of a Church, as pure for Doctrine and
Discipline, as any that either is, See Art. 6. of the Church of England.
or has been these fifteen hundred years; a Church which has no other rule of
Faith and Practice than the holy Scriptures. A Church that receives for
Canonical, neither more nor less, than those Books, of whose Authority there
was never any doubt. A Church that professes the same Faith and no more, than
what all Christians have made the Badge and Symbol of theirs; namely, Art. 8.
that which is briefly compiled in the Apostles Creed, explained in those
others, styled the Nicene and Athanasian. A Church wherein are used the same
Sacraments Christ left in his, Art. 25.
and no other. A Church, the Administration of whose Worship and Sacraments are
in a Language understood by all those that are concerned in them, as St. Paul
commanded, 1 Cor. 14. and those performed with such Rites, as are consonant to
the Word of God, and the direction of the same Apostle, (1 Cor. 14.40.) in
decency and order. Lastly, we are members of a Church, which above all other
Constitutions in the Christian World, enforces the great duty of obedience and
submission to Kings, and all that are in authority under them, and this not
only for wrath, but for Conscience sake.

Thus, O Lord! have thou courted us by thy favors, in the miraculous
restoring, and gracious preserving hitherto the breath of our nostrils, thine
Anointed Servant, and under his protection the solemnities of thy Sacred
Ordinances, the establishment of our Laws, and the enjoyment of our Interests.
Thus has the vigilant eye of thy Providence, out of the Window of Heaven
watched over this Nation for good: not an hellish Pioneer could mine under
ground, but thou have spied him out; nor a dark-Lanthorn offer to deceive
midnight, but thou have descried it; not a Plot, not a purpose of evil could
look out, but thou have discovered it, and glorified thy mercy in our
deliverance.

And now what service. what obedience, what thankfulness, must such a Defender,
such a Protector, such a deliverer expect, from a people so wonderfully
obliged? But O my soul! what deplorable retributions have we made? When God
gave us great and long prosperity, like Jeshurun we waxed fat, and kicked
against him. When he threw us into horrid confusions, from which we saw little
hope of arising, even in the time of that distress, did we trespass yet more
against him. When by miracles of mercy he turned our Captivities, we soon
returned to our wallowing in our former or greater filthiness. Even while he
has of late appeared for us, by discovering the Plots and Contrivances, of our
implacable enemies of the Romish Faction, we have been in the mean time (and
that most impudently) by our sins fighting against heaven, and against him.

Vice formerly, like an old Curtesanguilty of her own witheredhess, durst not
walk abroad without a borrowed Mask. They are frontless Zimries, that bring
Whores to their Tents in the face of all Israel: Yet such is the debauchedness
of the Age wherein we live, that he is looked upon as a cowardly sinner, that
is ashamed to show his face, though the spots of his guilt be written there; we
even dare noonday to witness our ungodliness, and do our villainies, as the
Pharisees gave their Alms, to be seen of men. O the Oaths and blasphemies that
are to be heard in each Corner of our Streets! It is not only a fashionable
sin, and the Mode of the vain Gallants; but it is spread among the Herd; the
brutish among the People are got to it; the very Vagabond, and he that has
scarce a rag to his back, will swagger with his Oaths; O that that Name which
is Reverend to Angels, and terrible to Devils; O that that Name we have been so
often delivered by from the hands of our Enemies, should be so profaned! A
complaint we have cause to sill up with tears, more than words. Have we so
learnt Christ, as only to swear by him? Will neither the mercies received, nor
those we expect, charm our lips from such a Rebellion?

What drinkings, what staggerings, what reelings are to be seen in all parts of
our Land? This deluge of excess has drowned the face of the earth, and risen
many Cubits above the highest Mountains of Religion and good Laws. What
extortings, what defraudings, what oppressings of the poor, what covetings,
(even the pretenders to a further Reformation, look asquint with a Sacrilegious
eye upon the small remnant of the Churches Patrimony) what repinings, what
traducings of Magistracy, what Atheistical discoursings of a Deity? It is
deplorable to see how these sinners are set down in the seat of the Scorner;
and since they cannot argue, resolve to laugh all Piety out of countenance.

Yet alas, were these the sins of ignorance, of infirmity, they might be worthy
of a pious pity. But O the high hand of our presumptuous offenses! we draw
iniquity with the strings of vanity, and shoot up those hateful shafts against
heaven: Did we sit in darkness and the shadow of death, as too many Pagan and
Popish Regions do, these works of darkness would be less intolerable: But now
that the glorious Sun of the Gospel has darted its Rays, has shined so long
bright in our faces, nay, even now when God has declared visibly for us; What
can we plead against our own confusion? O God! where shall we appear, when thy
very favors aggravate our Crimes, and thy Judgments.

What pious soul can consider all this, and much more, and not fear that all
these mercies are but forerunners of some greater miseries, that all our
preservations are but reservations to some more signal destruction? How justly
may heaven give us over into the hands of our enemies, depopulate our Cities,
destroy our whole Nation like Sodom, and make us the scorn and Proverb of all
succeeding Generations? Dan. 9.
But, O our God, let thine anger and fury be turned away from thy Jerusalem,
thy holy Mountain. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord harken, and do: Defer
not for thine own sake, O our God, for thy City, and thy people that are called
by thy Name.

But what speak I of not deferring to a God of mercy, who is more ready to give
than we to crave, more loath to strike than we to smart, and when he must
Complains, Why will you die O house of Israel? To a God who in despite of all
our sins, of all our impieties, of all our ingratitudes, does still continue
his favors, does still preserve us from our Adversaries that delight in blood.
Let me rather direct the discourse to our selves, the fault is our own if we
perish; Heaven has not, nor will not be wanting, if we do but our parts. And
therefore that Iniquity may never be our ruin, that God may never repent of
his protecting and delivering of us, let us resolve for the future to be in
good earnest Pious to our God, Loyal to our King, and Loving and Charitable one
toward another.

Let our Repentance be a real (...), a devesting of our selves of all those
sinful habits, with which we have provoked Heaven; let each man rend his heart,
with sorrow for his own sins, and the sins of his People; let every man ransack
his own soul, and life, and offer an holy violence to all those sinful
Corruptions, that may hinder heavens protecting of us, and let not these
resolutions end with the day; let us not think it enough to forbear a meal, or
to hang down our heads like a Bull-rush for a day, but let us break the bonds
of wickedness, and in a true contrition of soul vow and perform better
obedience.

Let our Loyalty be such as it ought, true and ingenuous; let no murmurings,
nor complainings find entertainment in our breasts. It is the trick of
Mutineers, of impenitent Covenanters, to say, the former days were better than
these: And if they once come to wear their teeth in their Tongues, as Shimei
did, they will do what they can to have the Trumpet at their mouths, as Sheba
had. Let not us that decry Romes Supremacy, make a Pope of an Anarchy. God
himself says, By me Kings Reign, not by the Pope, nor by the People. In a word,
let us not be less free in exposing our Lives and Estates, for the preservation
of our King and Country, than our Adversaries are to destroy both. It is a pity
but his Neck should hang in suspense with his Conscience in a halter, who
scruples to venture all for his King, the Church, and his Country.

Lastly, Let us learn to be unanimous, it is by our disunion our Enemies are so
strong. Were we but so wise, as to stand as a City that is compact together,
and not fall out about Circumstances, and Points of less moment, while we agree
in the main substance; the Skirts of the Scarlet Whore had been rent to pieces
ere this, and the Walls of Babylon with the Trumpet of the Gospel would have
long since fallen down, as Jericho at those of the Sanctuary. To conclude, Let
us keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; and though we may differ
in Opinions, let us not differ in our Affections, but unite against these
common Enemies of our Interest, and make our hearty Prayers to God, that he may
still continue his mercies, infatuate and defeat the Counsels of these our
bloody and unparalled Adversaries; continue the light of the Gospel to us and
our Posterity; bestow his abundant blessings upon his Sacred Majesty, and this
present Parliament; make us all happy here, and eternally happy hereafter. AMEN.

FINIS.
Books newly Printed for, and sold by Thomas Fox, at the Angel in Westminster
Hall.
A Sermon preached at the Funeral of the Right Honorable William Lord Paget,
Baron of Beaudesert, etc. by John Heynes M.A. and Preacher of the new Church
Westminster. quarto stitched. A seasonable advice to all true Protestants in
England in this present posture of affairs; discovering the present designs of
the Papists, etc. by a sincere lover of his King and Country. quarto stitched.
Holy Rules and Helps to Devotion both in Prayer and Practice, in two parts.
Written by the Right Reverend Father in God Bryan Duppa, late Lord Bishop of
Winton, in the time of his Sequestration. Twelves, bound. The Legacy of the
Right Reverend Father in God Herbert Lord Bishop of Hereford, or a short
determination of all Controversies we have with the Papists, by Gods holy Word.
The second Impression Corrected, with additions by the Author. Quarto stirch'd.
Grand Cyrus complete, a Romance. Folio. Clelia, a Romance. Folio. Dr. Peter
Heylins Geography. Folio. Farindons Sermons in three Volumes. Folio. Pharamond,
a Romance. Folio. Queen Elizabeth's last Speech and thanks to her last
Parliament, after her delivery from the Popish Plots, etc.

