(...) GREAT DUTY OF Christians, TO Go forth without the Camp. TO JESUS: Set
forth in several SERMONS On Hebr. XIII. 13.

By S. T. M. of A. of Trinity- College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst, at the Three Bibles and Crown in
Cheapside. MDCLXXXII.

To the Right Honorable WILLIAM Lord RVSSEL, Grace, Mercy, and Peace be
multiplied, from God our Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
My Lord,
IT is one of the wonderful Riddles, and deep Mysteries of Providence, That the
Church, that has the least of Sin, should yet endure the most of Sufferings;
That the Metal that is best refined, should be most often cast into the
Furnace; and, That they that are most white in their Souls with the Beauty of
Holiness, should be so black'd in their Outward Man and State by the scorching
Sun of Persecution. How hard is it for those that live by Sense, to believe,
That they shall wear glittering Crowns, and sit on glorious Thrones for ever,
that now are crushed as Worms under the Feet of Sinners, and are bruised as
Grapes in the Wine Press of the Worlds Rage and Fury? But as the Firstborn of
God's New Family veiled his Majesty, emptied himself, and hid his Glory, Phil.
2.6. His visage was marred more than any man, and his form than the sons of
men, Isa. 52.14. so his younger Brethren are arraied in dark Parables of Shame,
Reproach, and Sufferings. The blessed Life of Saints is now hidden, and a base
and course Covering is spread over all their intrinsic Glory; they are (as it
were) disguised and incognitol in the World, 1 John 3.1. Pignorius observes,
Quicquid Taetrum, Saevum, Horribile in Christianos olim excogitatum, and
exercitum est, illud omne (ut ego Censeo) a servis ad illos transivit, De
Servis, p. 9. That is, Whatsoever Grievous, Horrible, and Cruel Torments were
of old practiced against the Christians in the Primitive Times, were just the
same that cruel Masters used to inflict on their bought Slaves. O what a dark
Veil was cast over the Adopted Sons of God, when they were treated just as
imperious and tyrannical Masters used to handle their poor and vile Slaves!
Those that the World has not been worthy of, have been driven Into
Wildernesses, as if they were not worthy to converse with, and live among Men:
The precious Sons of Zion, comparable to fine Gold, have been reputed as the
vile potsheards of the earth, Lam. 4.2. and the heirs of Glory been accounted
but as Sheep for the Slaughter, Psalm. 44.22. Peter Martyr, in Romans 8.36. thus
glosses the Words; That they are not preserved as some Sheep, for their Wool
and Lambs; but are like other Sheep, fed and fatted, that their Bodies may be
for Meat. Scultetus thus understands the Words, in Psalm. 44.22. That the Wicked
of the World do make no more to kill the Saints of God, than a Butcher does to
kill Sheep. The Bodies of the Saints have been laid as the mire of the Streets,
and their Blood poured out as Water on the Ground, and Wicked Men have been
permitted to do to some of them even as they would. Read Isa. 51. last. Psalm.
79.3. Matthew. 17.12.

My Lord, This being the State of the Church of God (for the most part) in the
World, how necessary is it that every Christian should be armed with Faith and
Patience, that the Truths of God should be deeply rooted in our Souls, that
they may serve as an Helmet to guard our Heads in a great Fight of Afflictions,
and as an Anchor to establish our Hearts in a grievous Storm of Persecutions?
These following Considerations may somewhat conduce to this great End.

1. Christians should consider, That Jesus Christ was not of this World,
neither is his Kingdom of this World, John 18.36. and he represents and
commends his Disciples to his Father as conformed to him in this, John 17.14,
16. They are not of the World, even as I am not of the World. Christ did but
Tabernacle (John 1.14. (...)) in our frail Flesh, and passed through the World
as a Pilgrim and Stranger: And all the Gospel Worship of Christians is set out
by keeping the Feast of Tabernacles, Zech. 14.16. And what does this Expression
import? Surely this, among other things, may be hinted to us by this Text, That
as we are most gratefully to acknowledge this great Mercy of the Son of God's
Tabernacling in our Flesh; so, that it ought to have this Effect upon us, to
make us to sojourn in the World as Pilgrims and Strangers, in expectation of a
glorious Life, and Inheritance in Heaven. We should account, that this Natural
Life is not our Life, but that our Life is hid with God in Christ, Col. 3.3.
That this Earth is not our Country, and that Worldly Enjoyments are not our
Portion and Treasure. Christ has crucified our Old Man, and abolished the
Natural Life by his Death, Romans 6.6. Christ has put an end to the old State^
Week, and World; and by Rising again the First Day of the Week, he has begun a
new Week and World. The Eternal Day does dawn, Immortality is brought to light,
Everlasting Life is begun and exemplified in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ:
And he is ascended to Heaven, to choose the Inheritance of, and prepare a place
for all the Family and Household of Faith, Psalm. 47.3. To this Jesus we are
called to go forth; on this Magnetic and Glorious Object are we to fix our
Eyes and Hearts. If the Wise Men acknowledged him as King when he lay in a
contemptible Cradle, and the Thief addressed to him as such when he hung on an
ignominious Cross, shall not we much more confess and adore him now, crowned
with Honor and Glory, and sitting on the Right hand of the Majesty on High?
Shall we dote on a World that is a sink of Sin, and a Scene of Vanity? Shall be
we fond of the vile and base Life of the First, dislike and disparage the
glorious Life of the Second Adam? Shall we be charmed by, or chained to poor
beggarly Objects below, and despise the glorious Portion and rich Inheritance
of Christ above? Shall a short Life, clogged with Sin, clouded with Sorrows,
^^^^^^tered with continual Temptations and Warfare, be preferred before a Life
of Immortality, ennobled with glorious Holiness, perfect Peace, and triumphant
Joy.

2. Christians should consider what this World is, and the Men of it are; That
they are called out from the World, it self is devoted to the Fire, this Earth
must be burnt up, 2 Pet. 3.10. And shall we feed on that which must be reduced
to Ashes? Shall we lay up our Treasure and Portion where the Flames will devour
and consume all? And what are the unregenerate Men of this World, but Spiritual
Carcases, dead in Sins and Trespasses? Strabo, in his Geography, lib. 17. tells
us of a City in Egypt, call (...), The City of Dead Men, because of the
multitude of Dead Bodies that were Embalmed there: And he speaks of the City of
Caunus, lib. 13. That the Inhabitants were so pale, that Stratonicus said of
them, (...), That Dead Men walked about. And is it not so here? Men that are
dead in Sin, walk about, and perform only the Acts of the Natural Life. The
World is said to lie in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19. as dead Lazarus is said to lie
in the Grave, John 11.41. (...). The Verb is used in the first place, and the
Participle of the same Verb in the other. This corrupt World is set out by the
Dead Sea, Ezekiel. 47.10. in which no Fish did live: Engedi and Eneglaim, there
mentioned, were Places that did lie, one at the beginning, the other at the end
of the Dead Sea, where Sodom and Gomorra stood of old; and on the Banks of it
Spiritual Fishermen are said to stand to draw Men out of this Dead Sea, into
Communion with Christ the Prince of Life. The Cities of the blind Gentiles are
said to be desolate, Isa. 54.3. because there were none in them that did live
the Life of God: And the Psalmist speaks of Wicked Men as dead Carcases, when
he says, The Pit is dug for them, Psalm. 94.13. And shall we not come forth
from such a World to Jesus Christ? As God said of besieged Jerusalem of old,
Jer. 38.2. That he that staid in the City should die by the Famine or
Pestilence; but he that did go forth and yield to the King of Babylon, should
live: So those that stay in this City of the World, must be condemned and
perish, 1 Cor. 11.32. but those that go forth, and submit to Jesus Christ,
shall be saved, and live for ever, Heb. 5.9.

3. We should consider what Jesus Christ endured for us, Heb. 12.3. How great a
Person was he? What provoking Contradictions did he suffer, and that from base
Worms, and for vile Sinners? He sanctified himself for our sakes, to be a
Priest and Sacrifice, John 17.19. He was wholly for us; he was born, died; rose
again, ascended to Heaven, intercedes there, and will come again, for the good
of his People, Isa. 9.6. Romans 4. last. Heb. 6. last. Heb. 7.25. John 14.2, 3.
This precious Foundation was laid low in the Earth, for us to build on; this
Noble Grain of Corn was sowed in the Dust, that we might spring up from him to
Everlasting Life: This excellent Bunch of Grapes was cast into the Wine Press
of the Wrath of God, that we might drink new Wine with him in the Kingdom of
his Father: This generous Stock was wounded and cut, that we as Grafts might be
joined to him, and live in him for ever. Do we believe? Or can we think on
these things, and yet stick at any Service, or recoil from any Sufferings for
the sake of Jesus Christ?

4. Let us consider how Honorable the Sufferings of Saints for Christ are,
Gal. 6.17. I bear about in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus; the print of
the Stripes and Wounds he had suffered for Christ's sake. Saints may much more
glory in these, than Soldiers do in the Scars of their Wounds. Was it not more
Honorable for some of the clean Creatures preserved in the Ark, afterward to
be offered in Sacrifice to God by Noah, than for the unclean Creatures to
survive them, or, for other Creatures to perish in the Deluge? Genesis 8.20.
Sufferings for Christ are part of our conformity to him in bearing the Cross,
and Testimonies of our Adoption, that being chosen out of the World, and called
into the Kingdom of Christ, therefore Earthly Men hate and abhor us, John
15.19. The Sufferings of Saints are short, their Evil things are measured by
days, Psalm. 94.12, 13. but their Good and Happiness is commensurate to
Eternity, 2 Cor. 4.17. They drink of a Cup of Afflictions, but it is a Cup like
Christ's in this, that it passes away by our drinking of it, Matthew. 26.4.
Wicked Men shall drink of the Cup of Wrath, and yet it shall always abide at
their Lips; but Saints shall drink of Christ's Cup of Sufferings, and the Cup
shall pass away, their Tears shall be dried up, their Warfare shall be
finished; sorrow and sighing shall fly away; Weeping shall endure but for a
Night, Joy shall come in the Morning, Psalm. 30.5. After the smoking Furnace of
Bondage and Sufferings, shall come the burning Lamp of Deliverance and Liberty,
Genesis 15.16.

6. God sees and will reward the Sufferings of his Saints, Romans 8.18. 2 Cor.
4.17. Though God does set forth some of his People as men appointed to death, 1
Cor. 4.9. yet he has not appointed them to Wrath, but to obtain Salvation by
Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 5.9. The Plowers indeed make long Furrows on them, but
God sowes them with the Promise of Everlasting Life; while Men think to destroy
their Gold of Grace, God is refining them from their Dross of Corruption; while
Enemies would blow away the good Wheat that is in them, God is winnowing them
from their Chaff. As Xerxes stood on the Shore, and beheld the Sea Fight of his
Men with the Grecians, and when any of his Captains fought valiantly, he had
his Scribes by him, to write down his Name, and the Name of his City and Ship,
that he might reward him: ( See Herod. Hist. 1.8.) So Christ is on the calm
Shore of a blessed Eternity, he beholds all the Courage and Conflicts of his
Servants, he registers all in his Book, and takes it on account, in order to an
eternal Reward.

7. Consider the Benefit that has accrued to the Church, and the Advantage
that has redounded to the Kingdom of Christ, by suffering Saints. When Saints
have suffered Death for Christ, their Carcases have enriched and fatted the
Ridges of Zion's Field, their Blood has watered the Furrows of Immanuel's
Land, and made it more fruitful: When these Grains of Corn have fallen to the
Earth, and died, many more have sprung up in their room. Peter Martyr, in Romans
8.36. excellently observes, That the Gospel has been propagated in the World
by Miracles and Torments; by Works done above the Power of Nature, and by cruel
Sufferings, patiently and joyfully endured, beyond the strain or strength of
Flesh and Blood. These were wonderful Attestations to, and Confirmations of the
Truth of the Christian Religion.

8. Let us consider, That Christ's Interest shall at last be prevalent,
victorious, and triumphant. Crafty Worldlings desire to be of the strongest
side; The Decree of Heaven, Psalm. 2.7. and the Zeal of the Lord of Hosts, is
for the Establishing of the Kingdom of Christ, Isa. 9.7. The Nations indeed
have their time, and are angry with Christ and his People; but the time of his
Wrath will also come, Rev. 11.18. when he will tread them under his Feet,
punish and destroy them for ever, Psalm. 110.1. Psalm. 21.8, 9. Luke 19.27. God
the Father has promised to make all Christ's Foes to be his Foot-stooll:
Though Jacob be but a Worm, yet shall he thresh the Mountains, Isa. 41.14, 15.
And though Zion be as a Tabernacle, weak and contemptible in the Eye of the
World, yet its Stakes shall not be removed, nor its Cords broken. Christ must
reign, till he has subdued all his Enemies: And though to serve Christ's
Kingdom, seems to be as the Potter's Vessel, and his Enemies seem to have the
Rod of Iron to dash it to pieces; yet Faith has another View and Prospect of
Things, it beholds all the adverse Powers of the World but as a frail Potter's
Vessel, and Christ as having the Rod of Iron, and an Almighty Arm to use it,
for the dashing of them to pieces.

This Treatise, My Lord, that I humbly present to Your Honor, is not
unseasonable. If we look abroad into the World, we may perceive, that God has
made many Shilohs among the Protestant Churches, Jer. 7.12. and he sends us to
those Shilohs, to behold their Ruins and Desolations. We yet stand on the
Shore, and behold the Shipwracks of others; but if he that Parks in the wild
Ocean, and treads its mountainous Waves into a smooth Plain, does not prevent,
we may quickly feel and taste the same Fruits of Antichristian Rage and Fury.

My Lord, I have Dedicated this small Piece to Your Honor, as a Token of my
Respects, and as a Testimony of my Gratitude to You, for Your Favor and
Kindness expressed toward me, who am one of the meanest of the Servants of
Christ. As the Sacrifices of the Law did not discharge the Debt of Sinners, but
were (...), Col. 2.14. a Handwriting, or Bond, by which they confessed
themselves obnoxious to God their Great Creditor; so I presume not to pay my
Debt by offering Your Honor this small Treatise, but to recognize my
Obligations, and to confess my Engagements to Your Lordship. That the Wing of
Providence may overshadow Your outward, and that the Well of Life may refresh
Your inward Man; That You may be established in the sound Belief and exemplary
Practice of Gospel Truths, and so feel the Power and taste the sweetness of
them, for Your Eternal Comfort and Happiness, it is the earnest Desire, and it
shall be the servent Prayer of,

Febr. 7. 1681. My Lord, Your most Humble and Obliged Servant,SAMVEL TOMLYNS.

Heb. 13.13. Let us go forth therefore unto him without the Camp, bearing his
Reproach.


IN the Twelfth Verse the excellent Author of this Epistle speaks of the
Sufferings of Christ, as prefigured and typified by the solemn Sacrifice for
sin, that was Offered by the Jewish High Priest on the day of Atonement: That
Sacrifice was not offered on the Altar, as other Sacrifices were, but was burnt
without the Camp, only the blood of the Sacrifice was brought into the most
Holy Place, to make Reconciliation for iniquity; and for this end was sprinkled
on, Lev. 16.14.
and before the Mercy Seat; and the Fat of the Sin Offerings only was burnt on
the Altar, Lev. 16.25. but the Flesh and Skins both of the Bullock and of the
Goat that were offered for sin, were to be carried without the Camp, and there
to be burnt, Lev. 16.27. vid. Lev. 4.12, 21.

These solemn Anniversary Sacrifices, offered on the great day of Atonement
(being the tenth day of the seventh Month) did not only shadow out the Nature
of Christ's Sacrifice, viz. that he was to be a Sacrifice for sin, Isa. 53.10.
2 Cor. 5. last, but did also point at the very place of his Sufferings; that he
should be carried without the Gates of the earthly Jerusalem, and there be put
to death. When the Israelites were Travelers in the Wilderness, the Sacrifice
was burnt without the Camp; but when they arrived at, and were settled in
Canaan, then the Sacrifice was burnt without the Gates of the City of
Jerusalem: And Jesus Christ, to fulfill this Type, suffered without the Gate.

The Divine Penman of this Epistle proceeds, in the words of the Text, to
improve the Doctrine that he had delivered concerning Christ's suffering
without the Gate, and on it does ground an excellent Exhortation, and press a
weighty Duty, to wit, To go forth to Jesus without the Camp, bearing of his
reproach. The Sufferings of Christ were not only expiatory, but also exemplary;
they did not only serve to appease God, but also to instruct and animate men to
tread in his steps, to imitate his pattern, to bean his Cross: As Christ was an
Abject, so his people must expect to be Outcasts; the world that was so unkind
to him, will not be friendly toward them; as he was treated as unworthy to
live among men, so they must reckon to be cast out as unmeet to be accounted
and reputed either as Parts of the Commonwealth, or Members of the Church;
they must look to drink of Christ's Cup, and to be baptized with his Baptism;
Romans 8.36. 1 Cor. 4.9.
and so account themselves as Sheep for slaughter, as men devoted to death, as
condemned Malefactors going without the Gate to Execution.

In the words we may observe these several Parts:

1. A Duty urged and enforced on the Hebrews, in which the Author of this
Epistle does comprize and comprehend himself; Let us go forth to Jesus.

2. The place to which they were to go; viz. without the Camp.

3. We have the difficulty of this Duty, and what it will cost us to comply
with it, we must share in the reproach and ignominy of Jesus Christ. To be
separated from the world, to be exclaimed against, to be hooted and pointed at
by men, to be spoiled, imprisoned, condemned, and executed as vile Heretics,
as infamous Malefactors, carries in it a great deal of shame in the Eye of
sense: When the people of God do suffer hard things, they that are either
actors in their Tragedies, or spectators of their Miseries, are very prone and
ready to conclude that they have committed some great evil of sin, and so
deserved this evil of punishment. I suffer (says Paul, 2 Timothy 2.9.) as an
evildoer, even unto Bonds. And Christ foretells to his Disciples, that the men
of the world should cast out their names as evil, Luke 6.22. and elsewhere,
Matt. 5.10, 11. he intimates, that Adversaries should revile them, and speak
all manner of evil falsely against them, for his names sake. Nothing is more
ordinary and common, than that the world should calumniate, brand, and black
those that will not wear its Livery, and shape themselves after its Manners and
Example.

And in these words [bearing of his reproach] we may discern and espy a motive
and argument, secretly couched, to encourage and animate them to go forth to
Jesus, and to bear reproach; for it is his reproach, we are no worse used and
treated than our Lord was; we are but conformed to him in ignominy and
revilings: Was the Prince of life, the King of glory, thus clouded and
eclipsed, thus blackt and stigmatized by the world? and shall we be tender of
our Names? shall we dote on our Credit, or be fond of our Reputation? shall we
shrink and recoil from sufferings and reproaches, when the Son of God submitted
and yielded to them; when the great Captain of our Salvation passed through
them to his Glory? O shall not this exceedingly hearten us to bear the Cross,
to endure reproaches, when we imitate and follow Christ in all this, when he
will account our sufferings and reproaches to be his, and will charge and
punish wicked men, as having hated, reviled, and persecuted him in all they
have done to us?

The Doctrine that I shall insist on from the words, is this,

That it is the Duty of Christians to go forth to Jesus without the Camp.

Three things are here to be explained.

1. What is meant by the Camp.

2. What it is to go forth without the Camp.

3. How Christians are said to go forth to Jesus without the Camp.

1. What is here meant by the Camp?

Answ. By the Camp I understand Cities, Towns, and the Society of the men of
the world that live in them. There is in the word Camp an allusion to the Camp
of Israel in the Wilderness: And the phrase intimates the temporary, short, and
mutable condition of men in this world: Though men have strong Houses, stately
and beautiful Cities, yet all these are to be reputed but as weak Tents, as a
Camp pitched down for a Night or two, and then suddenly removed. It Is true, the
men of this world would stay here, and six their abode below on this earth; and
when the Scripture paints out their inward desires and carnal affections, it
describes them as dwellers on earth, Luke 21.35. when as Saints are set forth
but as sojourners, 1 Pet. 1.17. and confess themselves Pilgrims and Strangers,
Heb. 11.13. yet when the truth of their state is represented to us, then they
are set forth but as Travelers through the world, and their Houses are but as
Tents, their Towns and Cities are but as a Camp, that they lodge in, in their
passage toward Eternity. The world passes away and the lusts thereof, 1 John
2.17. The fashion of the world passes away, 1 Cor. 7.31. Look to the Heavens
above, to the Earth beneath, the Heavens shall vanish away like smoke, the
Earth shall wax old as a Garment, the inhabitants of it shall dye in like
manner: There is nothing visible but what is mutable, flitting and fading; we
have no solid basis, no sure foundation to rest on, till we come to Gods
salvation that shall be for ever, and to his righteousness that shall not be
abolished, Isa. 51.6. As Saints are said to have their Camp, Rev. 20.9. so we
read of the Tents of Wickedness, Psalm. 84.10. None have any sure continuing and
abiding state in this world, all are traveling from hence, and journying
toward another world: but yet this is intimated in the phrase, that wicked men
seem in the eye of sense to be in a far better state here, than the people of
God; they are as Soldiers at rest in their Camp, well lodged and accommodated
in their Tents, under covert and shelter, in safeguard and security, not
obnoxious to dangers and Enemies, as Gods people seem to be, that are turned
and shut out of this Camp, that are exposed to the rage of a fierce and
pursuing Enemy, that are driven to and fro, hurried up and down in the world,
and may easily be gleaned, soon picked up and destroyed, as Soldiers that
straggle from an Army, or are shut out of the Camp. The Apostle excellently
describes his own and others state that were gone out of the Worlds Camp, 1
Cor. 4.11. Even unto this present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are
naked, and are buffetted, and have no certain dwelling place. Wicked men are
often as Soldiers well defended by the walls of their Camp, when Gods Saints
are exposed to storms of sufferings, to the inroads and invasions of Enemies.

2. What is it to go without this Camp?

I Answer, Several things are meant by this expression:

1. The Hebrews are exhorted to forsake the Temple, the Ceremonial Worship, and
the Mosaical Pedagogy: Not to cleave to, or build upon those Sacrifices or
Ceremonial Worship that was carried on within the walls of the earthly
Jerusalem, and that the Priests were daily conversant about in the Temple; but
by Faith to go forth to the Sacrifice of Christ, by Faith to cleave to, feed
upon that as all-sufficient for the purging of their guilt, the filling and
satisfying of their souls. The very offering and burning some Sacrifices for
sin, on the solemn day of Atonement (no part of which did redound to the
Levitical Priests, and that they had no right to eat of) did point at the great
and true Sacrifice of the Messiah; the benefit of which should not accrue or be
imparted to those that did still stick to the Sacrifices of the Law, and adhere
to the Mosaical Ceremonies, and seek their reconciliation and salvation by
repeating of them, and continuing in the practice of them. If men stick to, and
trust on any thing but Christ and his Sacrifice, for righteousness and
justification before God, they hereby cut themselves off from Christ, and have
no right to the benefit of his Sacrifice: He will not share the glory of our
Justification with brutish Sacrifices, or men's own Works. O foolish Galatians
(says Paul, Gal. 3.1.) who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the
Truth! that is, that you should not, according to the Gospel, trust on, and
cleave to Christ and his righteousness only for your justification and
acceptance before God? Has not Christ been evidently set forth as crucified
before your eyes? Has not the greatness of the Sorrows and Sufferings of the
Son of God, have not the ends and design of his Death been in a lively manner
painted out before your Eyes? And can you think after all this, that Christ
will admit Mosaical Ceremonies, or Man's Works, to be Partners with him in the
Great Work of Justification? Is there any need of Mixtures or Additions of our
own to be joined to the Sacrifice of Christ, as a supplement to supply any
defect that is in the Death of Christ, as to the attaining of this great end of
our Justification? No, we must renounce all Ceremonies, Sacrifices, Works of
our own, and go out to Jesus, and adhere only to his Sacrifice, for the
purifying of our Consciences, and removing of our Guilt.

2. When the Apostle says we should go out from the Camp, he means we should
Renounce and be ready to Relinquish the Favor, the Friendship, the Society of
the Men of this World; and when we cannot possess and enjoy them, and yet be
Faithful to Jesus Christ, to go forth from Towns and Cities, and bereave our
selves of our Houses, Estates, and outward Worldly Comforts, when we cannot
retain them without dishonouring Christ, wounding Conscience, staining our
Garments, and hurting our Souls. Our Love to Christ must be the Reigning,
Sovereign, and Supreme Love in our Souls, and must give Rules and Laws how long
we shall retain, and when we shall dismiss and cast away outward things. When
they tempt us from Christ, to stay with, and cleave to them, we must grow
jealous of them; and our jealousy must be cruel as the Grave, Cant. 8.6. Then
we must hate and forsake whatever is sweet and dear to the Natural Man, and is
like to prove a fatal snare to our souls, a bribe from Satan to buy off our
love from Christ, and to tempt us from our Loyalty to this glorious King, and
from our Chastity to our heavenly Husband; in this case we must turn the world
out of our hearts, cast it out of our hands, throw all things below behind our
backs, and follow Christ. Thus Moses may be said go without the Camp, when he
renounced and relinquished the Honors of Pharaoh's Court, all the Pleasures
and Treasures of Egypt, joining himself to his Brethren that were the Servants,
Worshippers, and People of God. He might have kept himself in Pharaoh's Court
and Palace, and been unconcerned at the burdens and bondage of the Israelites;
he might have lived as in a strong and safe Camp: But he refused to be called
the Son of Pharaoh 's Daughter, and chose rather to suffer afflictions with the
People of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin that were but for a season;
esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures of Egypt,
Heb. 11.24, 25, 26. So those eminent Saints and Worthies that we read of Heb.
11.37, 38. did go forth without the Camp, when they left Cities and Towns,
forsook their Houses, and wandered up and down in Deserts and Wildernesses, were
clothed but with Sheepskins and Goats, and had no other Chambers or Beds to
lodge in but Caves and Dens of the earth; they had hard Fare, vile Raiment, and
bad Lodging, while others had delicious Feasts, costly and gorgeous Garments,
warm Chambers, and soft Beds.

Object. But how may it be said that Christians go forth without the Camp, or
that it is their own voluntary and free act, when indeed the world casts and
drives them out? as Isa. 66.5. Your Brethren hated you, and cast you out for my
Names sake. John 9.34. it is said, the Pharisees and Jews cast out the man that
spoke honorably of, and gave glory to Christ. So Luke 6.22. They shall
separate you from their Company, and cast out your Names as evil: In these
words Christ seems to allude to the Custom of the Jews, that when they
excommunicated a man, did blot out his Name from their Public Registers and
Records, as a man that was spiritually dead, and no longer to be reputed as a
Member of their Church or Synagogue. So that it seems the world obtrudes and
imposes sufferings on the People of God; how then are they exhorted, or said to
go out of the Camp?

Answ. These things may well consist together, and do not justle or contradict
each other; as 2 Chronicles. 26.^0. the Priests are said to thrust Vzziah out of the
Temple, and yet he himself is said to haste to be gone, as he was willing to
withdraw in the sense of Gods hand stretched out against him; so the World
casts out, and yet Saints go out without the Camp. The Men of this Earth are
bent and rage against the Saints of the Most High; yet if they would recede
from the Truth, and decline from the pure Worship of Jesus Christ; if they
would send an Ambassy to the World, pray for conditions of Peace, Luke 14.32.
be brought to their Lure, and stoop to their Wills, they might be reconciled to
their Enemies, and gain their Favor, Heb. 11.35. They were tortured, and
accepted not of deliverance: after they had some taste of Torments, some sense
and feeling of Anguish and Pain, their Enemies ceased a little time from their
cruelty, gave them some respite and interval of Ease, and then fell to
colloguing with them, and alluring of them, and making them fair. Promises of
Life and Preferment, if they would desert Gods Truth and Worship, and comply
with their Will; but these Spiritual Champions disdain such Offers and Terms;
They accepted not of deliverance, that they might obtain a better Resurrection.
So Christ's sincere Disciples do in Christ's Language take up their Cross, Matthew.
16.24. as they choose rather to suffer than to sin; to go without the Camp and
please God, than to stay in it and displease him: there needs no other Cords
but their own fervent Love to Christ, and their fixed purposes to be faithful
to him, to bind these voluntary Sacrifices to the Altar of sufferings, Psalm.
118.27.

3. How, and in what sense, may Christians be said to go forth to Jesus without
the Camp?

Answ. When we own Christ's Truth, avow his Ways, adhere to his sure and
spiritual Worship, join our selves to him by a firm and lively Faith, and
cleave to him with full purpose of Heart, forsaking all things for him, then we
go to Jesus; hereby we declare whose we are, to whom we belong, and whom we
will follow even to the Death: We go forth to Jesus, when we are ready to be
bound, and to die for his sake; when we are conformed to him in Sufferings, and
submit to be used and treated by the World as Jesus Christ was: He was no
Citizen, Darling, or Favorite of this World, as soon as Born he experimented
what the courtesy, he tasted what the kindness of the World was to him; there
was no room for him in the Inn; he was thrust out into the Stable; and laid in
a Manger: Afterward the Worlds enmity did more ripen, and rise to a greater
height, he was filled with Sorrows, loaded with Sufferings, crowned with
Throns, bathed in his own Blood: These were the Fruits that Heavenly
Husbandman received from his own ungrateful Vineyard: and when we consent to
have Fellowship with Christ in his Tribulations, then we go forth to him, when
we are contented to bear reproaches and disgraceful Sufferings from the World,
for his sake to be cut off from the Esteem, Favor, and Society of the World;
to be excluded from their Company, Dainties, and Delights; to be removed from
Men as Lepers, and condemned Malefactors, (for such were disgracefully turned
out of the Camp of Israel of old, Numb. 12.10.14. Lev. 24. v. 23.) as Christ
was carried without the Gate, being condemned to Death, as if he had been a
Blasphemer against God, and a Traitor against Caesar.

Object. But here it may be questioned, how Christians can be said to go forth
to Jesus without the Camp? Does he still stand without the Camp, is he yet
Suffering without the Gate; or hanging on the Infamous Cross, on the Fatal Tree?

Answ. It is true, that the Personal Sufferings of Christ are at an end: God
has taken him from Prison and Judgment: He has raised him from the Grave, and
exalted him at his Right Hand, Tears are wiped from his Eyes, and a Massy
Glittering Crown is set on his Head. He is entered into his Royal City and
Palace, placed in his Throne, and Feasted with all the delights of the Heavenly
Paradise; but yet Christ suffers and is Persecuted in his Members, Acts 9.4.
Saul, Saul, why Persecutest thou me? His Gospel, his Interest, his People are
discountenanced and frowned upon by the World; they are not entertained, but
are rejected of the Men of this Earth, and in this respect Christ may still be
said to stand without the Gate, and to be put without the Camp; his Truth, his
Worship, his People are disgraced, and disdained by the World, Luke 19.14. His
Citizens hated him, after he was gone into a far Country, even into Heaven; and
sent a Message after him, to express they held the same fixed resolution; that
he should not Reign over them: Mark this Expression, they sent a Message after
him; they did not only declare their contempt and enmity to his Face when he
was yet present as to his Humane Nature in the World; but they continue their
disloyalty, they persist in their Rebellion against him: They do not repent of
their former rejection of him, and Cruelty practiced on him; they are no better
Natured toward him now he is in his Exaltation, then they were in his state of
Humiliation; they are as sierce against, and injurious to his People, as they
were to him in his own Person; so many Saints as they slay, so many Martyrs as
they cut off, so many Messengers they send to Heaven, to relate to Jesus Christ
their obstinate Malice and Rebellion against him. As Stephen soon after Christ,
so many thousands of Saints that have suffered since, have been sent on this
Message to Heaven; to declare that the World will not have Jesus Christ to
Reign over them: And in this respect we may be said still in our Sufferings to
go forth to Jesus without the Gate. This I take to be the Sense, principal
scope and intendment of this Divine Writer in this Verse, and therefore I shall
suit my subsequent Discourse to this, as the main design of the words, and
shall proceed to give Reasons why Christians must go forth to Jesus, enduring
contempt and Reproachful Sufferings for his sake.

1. Reason. Christians must go forth without the Camp to Jesus; because they
are not of this World: Christ twice in that Excellent Prayer in the 17th of
John mentions and insists upon this, John 17. v. 14.16. they are not of the
World, as I am not of the World; and the same words are repeated in the 16th
Verse; his People much needing the Care, Protection, and Comforts of the Father
on this account: Believers are said to be Redeemed from the Earth, from among
Men, and out of every Kindred, Tongue, People, and Nation, Rev. 14.3, 4. Rev.
5.9. Christ gave himself for their sins, to deliver them from this present Evil
World, Gal. 1.4. And he has chosen them out of the World, John 15.19. that
they may not continue, be condemned, and perish for ever with the World; and
shall not Saints by an Overt Act own and avow this Truth, that they are not of
the World; and be ready and willing to go without the Camp; and by this declare
they are not of the same Piece, are not of the same Spirit with the World; that
though they have lived and conversed among the Men of the World, yet they are
not of their Body and Fraternity, but being Redeemed from their vain
Conversation, and translated into the Kingdom of Gods Dear Son, they are
Related to him as Members to a Head, as Subjects to a King? When Saints leave
their Habitations, Estates, and all converse with the Men of the World for
Christ's sake, they manifest they are not of the World, and that their Hearts,
Hopes and Treasure is not here below.

2. Reas. All the Happiness of Christians is laid up in Christ: He is their
life, Col. 3.4. The Lord their Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. He is their Peace,
Ephesians. 2.14. He is their hope, 1 Timothy 1.1. He dwells in them as the hope of
Glory, Col. 1.27. Yea he is said to be all, Col 3.11. Christ is all, and
Christians are said to be complete in him, Col. 2.10. they have all that is
necessary, excellent and truly desirable in him, and therefore well may they be
required to forget their People, and their Fathers House, to leave and forsake
all for him, Psalm 45.10. O! shall we not go forth to him that is our Life,
Righteousness, Peace, and hope of Glory?

3. Reas. Christ for our sakes was led without the Gate of the Earthly
Jerusalem: Jesus that he might Sanctisie the People, Suffered without the Gate:
If he had not carried our sins, and exposed himself to endure our Curse, he
could not have fallen into the Hands of his Enemies, and been Nailed to the
Cross; it was our Iniquities, and his own love that made him so weak; otherwise
all the Power of the World could not have imposed Sufferings on the Son of God,
or have bound this Lamb of God to the Horns of the Altar. But he put in his own
Name into our Bond; he became our Surety, and thereby cast a Vail on his own
Holiness and Righteousness, and was not dealt withal by God as he was in
himself Holy, 2 Cor. 5. last. Is. 53.6.
harmless, undefiled, but as made sin for us; our guilt being transferred, our
Iniquities being laid on him: Thus he that knew no sin in himself, became a Man
of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief, Is. 53.3. he was as a Worm for the World
to tread on, Ps. 22.6. a mark for Men to shoot at; Genesis 7.11, 12.
the true Ark of Salvation, not only assaulted with Waves below, but beat on
with Storms from above; the Windows of Heaven were opened as well as the
Fountains of the great Deep below were broken up: For it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he did put him to grief, Is. 53.10. he had not only a Baptism in a
Sea of Sufferings without, but he drank in a Cup of unexpressible Sorrows. The
Waters came into his Soul, Ps. 69.1, 2. He complained in his Agony in the
Garden, that his Soul was sorrowful, to the Death, Mat. 26.38. his Soul was
troubled, John 12.27. And his Holiness was thus Veiled by our sins, that our
sins might be Veiled by his Obedience, and covered by his Righteousness; he was
the slain Goat, as he was delivered for our sins; and he was the escape Goat, as
he carried them quite away, and was raised again for our Justification, Romans 4.
last. The Sacrifices that were slain and burnt on the Day of Atonement, Figured
Christ's, as I have already intimated: These Sacrifices were so charged and
loaded with the sins of the People of Israel, in a Type, that he that carried
them forth and burnt them without the Camp, was to wash his Clothes, and bathe
his Flesh in Water, and then be admitted into the Camp; so he that led forth
the escape Goat on whom the Iniquities of Israel were laid, was to wash his
Clothes and bathe his Flesh in Water before he could be received into the Camp;
they seemed so to be defiled by touching Sacrifices on whom the sins of Men
were laid; and so Christ was Condemned, and cast out of the Gates of Jerusalem,
as if he were a very unclean, loathsome, and abominable Person; having yet no
sin of his own, but being burdened with the sins of his People. O! what
reproach was this, for Jesus to be separated and thrust out from among the
Citizens of Jerusalem, and then as a Sacrifice to be burned in the Fire of the
Vengeance and Wrath of God without the Camp; as those Sacrifices for sin were
burnt in Material Fire without the Gate, on the Day of Atonement! And this is
further to be observed, that the Blood of these Beasts, so charged with sin,
was yet brought into the most Holy Place in the Temple, to sprinkle the Mercy
Seat, and to make Atonement by it in a Type; even so though Christ died as an
Infamous Person in the Eye of the World, and as one charged with the sins of
his People, in the account of God, yet his Blood as most precious, is brought
into the true Heavenly Sanctuary, cries in the Ears of God, and is pleaded
before his Glorious Throne, for the blotting out our sins, and the making our
Peace with God. Thus our Transgressions (which are our true and real shame) and
Reproaches are covered, and wiped away before the Lord: O! did Jesus Christ die
to take away those sins that would have been our Eternal Infamy and Reproach,
and shall not we willingly go forth to Jesus without the Camp, bearing the just
and undeserved Reproaches from the World?

4. Reas. The World still banishes Christ, thrusts and keeps him out from among
them: This is their Language against God and his Son Christ, Come let us break
their Bonds in sunder, and cast their Cords from us, Psalm 2.1, 2, 3. Cause the
Holy One of Israel to cease from before us, Is. 30.11. We will not have this
Man to Reign over us, Luke 19.14. his word has no place in them, John 5.38.42.
and the love of God and Christ dwells not in their Souls; and may I not here
apply the words of the Prophet Jeremiah, They have, says he, rejected the Law
of the Lord, and what Wisdom is in them? Jer. 8.9. so I may say, the World
rejects the Lord of this Law, and what Wisdom or Excellency is there in them?
O! shall we value the Favor, Esteem the Friendship or Communion of such a
World as rejects Jesus Christ? Fox Martyr.
It is related of Bishop Ridley, that it repented him that he had Eaten and
Drank, that he had accepted any Meat or Entertainment in the House of a
Princess that refused to hear the Gospel Preached, when it was by him offered
to her; and shall we Magnify the kindness of a World that is unkind to Jesus
Christ, will not yield to his Authority, entertain his Kingdom, submit to his
Laws, or accept of his Salvation? O! should we not call that Place, and those
Persons Ichabod, 1 Samuel 4. two last Verses, that thrust away Christ, will not
suffer him to dwell and reign among them? Where is Glory, if Christ be excluded
and kept out? what is Trade, Honor, Riches, if Christ be absent? O! how
desolate, how solitary, how uncomfortable should that place and people be to
us, here we may not protess Christ, may not Worship him, and enjoy Communion
with him in his Ordinances? 2 Chronicles. 11.14.16. as the Levites and Israelites
came away to Jerusalem.
If the World rage against us, would separate us from Christ, and obstruct our
Converse with him, how freely and readily should we go out from such a World.
When the Israelites by their Idolatry had highly provoked God, and done much to
drive him away, and to berave themselves of his Gracious Presence among them,
Moses took the Tabernacle and Pitched it without the Camp, far off from the
Camp, and those that sought the Lord went out of the Camp, unto the Tabernacle
to Worship God, Exo. 33.7. So truly the World sets up so many Idols of
jealousy in their Hearts, and so put the stumbling Block of their Iniquity
before their Faces, that Christ cannot delight in them, or dwell among them;
his Tabernacle is (as I may so speak) Pitched without this Camp, and shall we
not go forth to the Tabernacle of Christ, and enjoy Communion with him; though
by this we lose a place in the Worlds Camp? O! will you not follow Christ, and
resort to him? will you prize their Favor, or court their Friendship, that
slight and reject Jesus Christ? As, Amos 7.10. the Idolatrous Priest accuses
Amos the Prophet of the Lord to the King of Israel, and says, the Land was not
able to bear his words. And Ezekiel. 3.7. the House of Israel will not harken unto
thee, for (says God) they will not harken to me. Jer. 12.8. Mine Heritage is
unto me as a Lion in the Forest, it cries out against me, therefore he hated
and forsook it. And shall we linger and stay in such a Camp where God and
Christ are not listened too, where the Word will not, cannot be born; where
Sinners indeed cry out against God, when they pretend only to declaim against
and revile Men? O Righteous Father (says Christ) the World does not know thee,
John 17.25. As for Christ he was in the World, and the World was made by him,
and yet it knew him not, John 1.10. and the Spirit of Truth the World cannot
receive, because it knows him not, John 14.17. And should we be much
concerned or dejected, if such a World does not know us, 1 John 3.1. but
reproaches, and casts us out?

5. Reas. We cannot be Faithful to Christ, or enjoy Communion with him for
ever; if we do not go out to him without the Camp, if we do not venture and
Sacrifice all for Christ; if we be ashamed of him before Men, he will be
ashamed of us before his Father and his Holy Angels; if we deny him, Mat.
10.32, 33. he will deny us; but if we confess him he will confess us before his
Father in the Great Day of Judgment: We cannot serve two Masters, Mat. 6.24.
especially when those are contrary to each other, and each of them demands our
whole Heart and Service; we cannot please God, Christ, and the World too. Know
you not that the Friendship of this World is enmity with God? whosoever
therefore will be a Friend of the World, is the Enemy of God, Jam. 4.4. You
cannot keep in with the World, but you must break with God; you cannot gratify
and oblige the World to you, except you will fashion your selves according to
its Pattern and Example; you must drink in its Corruptions, stain your selves
with its Filth, and run with them to the same excess of Riot, else they will
exclaim against you, and speak Evil of you, 1. Pet. 4.4. If you have not
ductile Consciences, flexible and compliant Spirits and Tempers, if you cannot
change, say and unsay, the World will not care for you; it will be hard (if not
impossible) to keep in with the World: and that Soul is in a most dangerous
case, that is fixed and resolved in this, that he will be the Friend of the
World, that he will not venture the Frowns of Men, or hazard his stake in the
World, that will not suffer Shipwreck of his Interests and Concerns on Earth.
If a Man be thus Principled and affected, he is the Enemy of God and Christ; he
does prefer something else before and above them; he will swallow and practice
that which is very grievous and displeasing to God, rather than be undone by
Men; and hereby he proclaims his Enmity against God; therefore this should be
rooted and riveted in our Hearts, that we must suffer with Christ, if we would
Reign with him; we must be Faithful to the Death, if we would receive the Crown
of Life, Rev. 2.10. And Paul says, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. This is a Faithful saying,
that if we be Dead with Christ, we shall live with him; if we Suffer with him,
we shall Reign with him; if we deny him, he will deny us. It is observable, how
the Apostle ushers in this Assertion, what a Character of Truth he puts on this
Sentence: If we Suffer with him, we shall Reign with him; this, says he, is a
Faithful saying: Why should he preface thus these two Verses, but because he
saw there was need of it? Flesh and Blood can hardly swallow and digest this
Doctrine of Suffering: How do men stretch their Wits to distinguish themselves
from under an Obligation to Sufferings? How do they dread and recoil from the
Cross? surely they may reign without sufferings; Christ will not be so hard to
them, as to deny and reject them, if they shrink and comply in dangerous Times:
But let not Men beguile and deceive themselves; the Apostle is peremptory in
this, he does not, he cannot mince the Matter; this is a Faithful saying, if we
suffer we shall reign with Christ; if you refuse Christ's Cross, you refuse his
Crown.

6. Reas. We should go forth to Jesus without the Camp; for it is but little
that we leave or lose by ownning and cleaving to Jesus Christ: The Holy Ghost
disgraces, debases, and lays low all the Grandeur and Glory of the World; by
calling it a Camp: O! what a short and mutable thing is a Camp! How easily is
it removed, how soon is it gone? Our Life is but a Vapor that appears a
little while, and then vanishes away, Jam. 4.14. Our Days on Earth are but as
a Shadow that flies away and there is no abiding, Job 14.2. 1 Chronicles. 29.15.
Man is like the Flower and the Grass of the Field; a Wind comes over it, and
quickly withers this Flower, and blows out this Lamp of Life, Ps. 103.15, 16.
The Sentence is already past, Dust thou art, and to Dust thou must return, Genesis
3.19. The Body is dead by reason of sin, Romans 8.10. If God does but loose our
Cords, our Tent will presently drop down to the ground; if he say return, we
must presently lie down in the Dust, Psalm 90.3. If he give out the Sentence,
Jer. 15.1. Let them go forth, there will be no continuing in the Camp, no
staying in the World; if you cleave and cling to the World never so fast, if
God says, let them go forth, you must be removed from hence: Those who embrace
and hug their Earthly Comforts and Enjoyments most, must be stripped and deprived
of them whether they will or no: The wicked is driven away in his wickedness,
Prove. 14.32. As the whirle wind passes, so the wicked is no more, Prove. 10.25.
He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world, Job
18.18. His substance shall not continue, neither shall he prolong the
perfection thereof upon the earth, Job 15.29. God shall likewise destroy thee
for ever; he shall take thee away, and pluck thee out of thy Dewlling Place,
and root thee out of the Land of the living, Ps. 52.5. In this Verse we may
observe an Elegant Climax: It is said, God shall pluck a Wicked man out of his
Dewlling Place; but yet may he not continue and flourish elsewhere? No, God
shall root him out of the Land of the living: But if he be rooted out of the
Land of the living, may he not find Favor and Mercy in another world? No, to
this it is answered, God shall destroy thee for ever: God sets the men of this
Earth in slippery places, he casts them down into destruction, Ps. 73.18. Those
that will not go without the Camp to Jesus, that hold fast their Riches and
Honors, how soon may they be bereaved of them? Micah 1.15. I will (says God)
bring an Heir unto thee, O Inhabitant of Mareshah: And what Heir is meant? By
an Heir here the Lord intends Robbers, and Spoilers, which he would let loose
to break in upon them: such Heirs as they never thought of or intended. When
men, by their care and industry, have been like Birds laying up, and filling
their Nests with Riches, as Eggs, a Robber may come and take all away, as Is.
10.14. the King of Assyria glories, My Hand has found as a Nest the Riches of
the people; and as one gathers Eggs that are left, have I gathered all the
Earth: It will be our Wisdom and Interest, to make a Virtue of Necessity: We
must forsake these things whether we will or no; and is it not better to
relinquish them for Christ, which will turn to our account, and unspeakable
advantage? And is it any great matter to leave a mutable Camp, a weak Tent? if
we look upon things with a Spiritual Eye, and judge right judgment, we shall
have very low thoughts of all Natural Excellencies and worldly Glory: Observe
how the Scripture represents these things, as passing and perishing, Their
Beauty shall consume in the Grave from their Dwelling, Ps. 49.14. Does not
their Excellency that is in them go away? Job 4.21. All Flesh is Grass; and all
the goodliness thereof is as the Flower of the Field, Is. 40.6. When they die
they shall carry nothing away, their Pomp and their Glory shall not descend
after them, Ps. 49.17. And should we stick at going out of such a Camp, where
Beauty consumes, Excellency goes away, all the Goodliness of the Flesh fades,
and all the Glory of it vanishes away?

7. Reas. We ought to go forth to Jesus; for then there will be a happy issue
of all our Sufferings, a good return of our Venture, a full Compensation of all
our Losses: Jesus was led without the Gate, was put to a servile, ignominious,
and painful Death; but did God leave him in the Hand, and under the Power of
Enemies? Did he sink under the burden of his Sorrows? Was he swallowed up in a
Sea of Sufferings? Has he not abolished Death? Has he not overcome the World,
led Captivity Captive, and Triumphed over the Malice of Earth, and the Rage of
Hell? Is he not returned to his Father, arrayed with the Spoils of his
Enemies, and the Trophies of his Victory? Is he not entered gloriously into his
Royal City above? Has not Gods Salvation set him up on high? Ps. 69.29. And
may we not with comfort look up to Jesus Christ, Exalted at the Right Hand of
God, as Joshua and the Israelites, fighting in the Valley, might with hope look
up to the lifted Hands, and elevated Rod of Moses in the Mount? Exodus 17.8, 9,
10, 11, 12. As God did not desert the Head Christ, so he will not forsake his
Members: May we not see the Event of all our troubles in the issue of Christ's
Sufferings? May we not from his Victory, gather matter of hope as to our
success? Those that go forth to Jesus, will he not lead them unto Glory? Heb.
2.10. Has he not prayed that they may be with him, John 17.24. and promised
that he will come again and receive them to himself, that where he is, they may
be also? John 14.23. Suffering Saints shall not always stand without the Gate;
or be hurried up and down in this Wilderness; Jesus Christ will lead them to a
blessed City of Habitations, Ps. 107.7. He will carry his Flock into delicions
Pastures in the Paradise of God; he will lodge his Brethren in his Fathers
House; he will conduct his Spouse into that Royal Bride-chamber that is
furnished, and gloriously adorned above: Saints shall come out of their great
Tribulations, and be before the Throne for ever, Rev. 7.14, 15. Crying, Pain
and Sorrow, and all Afflictions will pass away: Death shall be swallowed up
into Victory: All Tears shall be wiped from their Eyes, and their reproach and
rebuke shall be taken away, and cease from all the Earth, Is. 25.8. The next
words to the Text do mention an abiding City that Believers do look for, Heb.
13.14. Jesus was reproachfully led without the Gate of the earthly Jerusalem;
that he might with Honor and Glory lead his Saints within the Gates of the
heavenly Jerusalem: O! will you not prize this goodly and glorious City, whose
Walls are Salvation, and whose Gates are Praise? Is. 60.19. Will you prefer a
being in an uncertain and momentary Camp, before a place in an Eternal City? Do
you dread the loss of your Camp? And will you not much more fear exclusion out
of this Blessed City? John 12.42. They feared to confess Christ, lest they
should be put out of the Synagogue: But should we not much more dread to deny
Christ, lest we should be shut out of the City of God? Would you have a place
of Rest, of Honor, of Eternal Pleasures, after your Days of Vanity and Sorrow?
O! then go out to Jesus, and this Captain of Salvation will convey you safe to
this desirable and glorious City; where your Heads shall be Crowned with
Honor, and your Hearts be filled with Triumphant joy for ever.

The Use of the Doctrine.

Use 1. This may reprove those that are unwilling to own and confess Christ, to
go forth to him, or to appear for him: How many Formal Christians think they
may tarry in the Camp, they may retain the friendship of the world, they may
preserve their Honor, Profits, and Civil-Interests, and yet keep in with Jesus
Christ too? As Nazianzen speaks of some that judged they might, as in a Dance,
go in the middle, leading Christ in one, and the World in the other hand. And
God complains of the Idolatrous Jews, that they enlarged their Bed, Isa. 57.8.
as if they would make room for a lawful Husband and an Adulterer too: Are not
too many thus affected, that as double-minded men waver, fluctuate, and stagger
between God and the World, Christ and their own Carnal Interests? These account
it harsh Doctrine, to be told they must go without the Camp to Jesus; that they
must lose their Friends, cast off and detest their nearest Relations, and turn
their backs on all that is sweet and dear to them in the World. O how do they
find fault with, and cry out against these things as very unmeet and
unreasonable to be imposed on them: What, shall they be ruined and undone in
the World for an Opinion or Practice of Religion? This is very hard and bitter
to flesh and blood; they would have Christ to come within the Camp to them,
they would not go without the Camp to him: They would have the Son of God to
indulge them, and dispense with them so far as may save their stake, and comply
with their carnal interest: They would reconcile God and the World; and so
serve two Masters, reap two Crops, and enjoy two Portions; have the beams of
the Worlds favor, and the Light of Gods Countenance too: But how grievous and
unpleasant is it to hear that they must strip themselves of all seen things,
for love to an invisible Lord, and in expectation of a future and Spiritual
Happiness? How does the Flesh murmur and repine at the leaving and loss of all
its present Possessions and Enjoyments? When men have labored and toiled in
the World to get an Estate, what shall they cast all away in a moment, and not
enjoy the Fruits of their labors? Yet thus Christ's Disciples did, they had
toiled all Night, at last by Christ's direction, casting of their Nets, they had
enclosed a great number of Fishes; yet they were not so pleased and delighted
with this large and rich draught, but that when they came to the Shore, they
forsook all to follow Christ, Luke 5.6, 7.11. How contrary are those then to
this Doctrine and Duty, that would indent and compound with Christ, that he
should bring them a smoother and easier way to Heaven, than those have gone,
who through many Tribulations have entered into the Kingdom of God, and who will
vary their Course as the Winds do shift and change, and follow Christ but as
the Young Man did, who left his Garment and fled away naked, when Christ's
Enemies endeavored to take hold of him by it? Mark 13.51, 52. So when the
world takes hold of them by the Garment of their Profession, they leave it and
fly away shamefully naked, as to their Souls.

Use 2. This Doctrine should put us on the Trial and Examination of our selves;
are we willing and ready to go forth to Jesus without the Camp, bearing of his
Reproach? In order to the discovering of the frame of your Hearts, and the
truth of your Spiritual State, let me propound a few serious Questions to you.

Quest. 1. Have you set down and counted the cost, what it will stand you in to
be Christians indeed? Are you furnished with Spiritual Money in your Hearts, to
go through with this Building, and to bring it to perfection? Luke 14.28, 29.
Have you well considered and weighed all the hazards, losses, and sufferings
that do attend the Profession of Christianity; that the Fine may rise very
high; the Furnace may be heated very hot? Phil. 3.8. (...), For whom I have
been Fine at all; or, as our Translation, I have suffered the loss of all
things. (...) is taken by the Grecian Lawyers, vid. Zauch. in Locum.
for a Mulct and Fine. It is always a Crime in the Eye of the wicked World, to
separate from their corrupt ways, and cleave to Christ's Truth and pure Worship:
When the world are restrained; when the Hands of Wicked men are bound; then the
Fine runs lower; the men of this Earth only reproach and revile the People of
God, for this reputed Crime of forsaking Satan's Camp and Tents, and following
Christ the Captain of Salvation. But there are Times when Satan is loosed; when
the Dams are broken down, and the restraints are taken off from his
Instruments; then a Flood of Temporal Evils pours in upon the People of God:
Now the Fine is increased, they are threatened with spoiling of Goods, loss of
Liberty and Life, if they will not deny Christ, and comply with the inventions
and corruptions of men: There are Seasons when Sailing toward Heaven seems
very dangerous in the Eye of Flesh and Blood: As Paul, Acts 27.9, 10. (When
Sailing began to be dangerous, toward Winter) says, Sirs, I perceive this
Voyage will be with hurt and much damage of the Lading of the Ship, and of our
Lives. Even so men may perceive and discern such Times, when the Voyage to
Heaven is like to be with much Damage of all the Wealth and Riches that they
have laded themselves with; yea their very Lives may be lost: Have you thought
of such cloudy times, of dark hours of temptation, of the gloomy Valley of the
Shadow of Death, that God may try you whether you will cast all overboard, to
keep the purity and peace of your Consciences; suffer shipwreck of your Estates
and Honors, rather than suffer shipwreck of Faith and your Integrity? You may
lay the Foundation of your Spiritual building in a peaceable time, in Halcyon
days; but great storms and fights of Affliction may arise and surprise you
before you have finished your Building: As the Foundation of the Temple of
Jerusalem was laid in Peace, without opposition or contradiction from the
World; but before they could finish it, their Enemies bestirred themselves,
procured an Authority and Order from the King of Persia against them, and
speedily put it in Execution, causing the Jews to cease by force from
prosecuting of this Building: Compute the 3. of Ezra the 8, 9, 10, 11. with 4.
of Ezra 21.23. Thus it may be with you. Consider therefore whether your Hearts
are fired, and your purposess fixed for Christ; Can you say with Paul, You are
ready to be Bound and to die for the Name of the Lord Jesus? Acts 21.13. Are
you not rather resolved against standing any brunt, bearing any hardship,
suffering any loss for that Profession? as Henry the 4th of France is said to
have spoken; that he would venture no further into the Sea of Religion, but
that he might still see the Shore, and retreat at his pleasure to it. Have you
not such secret resolutions as these; that you will not interest your selves
too deeply, and engage too far in any matter of Religion; but that you may make
a fair and safe retreat if you see need? Or have you reckoned up all the
troubles and losses that you may be exposed to for Christ, and are come to this
resolution, with Paul, Acts 20.24. None of these things move me, neither do I
account my life dear to me, that I may finish my Course with joy? Do you judge
of all Losses and Afflictions, as Paul; that said, I count the Sufferings of
the present time, not to be worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in us, Romans 8.18. Are you resolved to go forth to a Despised, Hated,
and Persecuted Jesus; and with Peter, to count your selves safer with Christ on
the Waves, than in the Worlds Ship without him? Matt. 14.26, 28, 29.

Quest. 2. Have you sold all for Christ? Matt. 13.44, 45. He that found the
hidden Treasures, for joy went and sold all that he had, that he might buy the
Field, and assure the Treasure to himself: Christ is a Rich Treasure, a Pearl
of inestimable Price: O! have you found this Treasure, this Pearl? Do you
discern, espy, and know the Worth and Riches of Jesus Christ? Are you so
affected with him, as to sell all for him? And what is it to sell all for
Christ? Surely it is to part with the esteem, to relinquish the inordinate love
of this world, or any thing in it. When the Market is fallen, the Price of these
things beaten down, as it were to nothing; buy those Spiritual Goods that are
imported by Christ the heavenly Merchant from another World: O! have your Souls
such a sight of Christ and his Excellent Commodities, that you are weaned from
your Estates and Lives, that you little value any thing here below; yea count
all things but Dung that you may gain Christ? Phil. 3.8. If you have indeed
thus sold all things; it will not be very difficult to yield possession; to
quit the use and enjoyment of that which your Hearts are dead to: That which is
truly put and turned out of your Hearts, will certainly be cast out of your
Hands in the day of Trial and Adversity.

Quest. 3. Are you indeed Married to Jesus Christ? 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused
you to one Husband, even to Christ, Romans 7.4. that you may be Married to him
that is raised from the dead: Has he spoken and gained your Hearts? Has he
allured and drawn your Souls to himself? In Jer. 2.2. God speaks of the love of
Isreal's Espousals; That she went up after him, and followed him in a
Wilderness, in a Land that was not sown; where they might fear want, and feel
Penury, without a miraculous and extraordinary Provision: If you are truly
espoused to Christ, you will follow him in a Wilderness. I have read an History
concerning the Mogul, a Great Prince in the East Indies, that grew jealous of
his Son, lest he should aspire to his Kingdom, and dethrone him in his absence
from his Imperial City: And therefore caused a Tower to be built, without any
Gate or Door, yet well stored with all necessary Provisions, in it to shut up
his Son, during the time of his absence: When this was understood, the Wife of
this Young Prince desired to be shut up with her Husband in this Tower; such
was the great love that she did bear to him. Thus if you love Christ as a
Husband, you will go out to him; you will not be separated and parted from him;
but will say as Ittai to David, 2 Samuel 15.21. As the Lord lives, where my Lord
the King is, there will thy Servant be, whether in Life or in Death: As Rachel
and Leah were ready to leave and forsake their Fathers House, and to follow
Jacob their Husband into his Country and Fathers House, Genesis 31.13, 14, 15, 16.
Even so will thou determine to go forth to, and follow Christ to his Heavenly
Country, if he be thy Husband, and the dearly beloved of thy Soul.

Quest. 4. Have you cast the Anchor of your hope within the Vail? Heb. 6.19,
20. Is your Treasure and hope laid up in Heaven? Matt. 6.20. Col. 1.5. That way
which our Anchor is cast, our Souls will move: This is wonderful; that a
Christian at the beginning of this Voyage, casts his Anchor into the Haven; and
his whole Voyage is but Sailing to the end of his Cable, and to the Possession
of that firm Land which his Anchor does take hold of: Nothing will or can
establish you in the Storms that you you may meet with; but the hope of
everlasting life to be enjoyed in the invisible World: This present world is as
a rough Sea; Wicked Men hate, and rage against the People of God: As some Seas
are still rough, and the Waves rise and roll continually, Vid. Scalig. Exercit.
58.
because of subterraneous Winds that rise into the Bowels of those Seas. So the
Men of this world are as a Sea that has a Wind within it self, viz. Their
Malice and Enmity against the People of God; and therefore though no wind of
injury or provocation blow on them from without, yet they cannot cease
Maligning and Persecuting the people of God with their Hands or with their
Tongues. And we shall never venture out on this rough and rouling Sea, if we
have not cast the Anchor of our hope within the Vail; and by it taken hold of
Jesus, as our forerunner into Glory: Sinful self-love will lay an Imbargo on
us, and keep us within the Port and Camp of the worlds friendship, if we do not
foresee and fasten on something in another World, which will countervail all
the Damage, and recompense all the Losses that we sustain here: If our All lay
here below, we shall never go out from our Treasure, our Portion, and our
Feast: Men will never consent to be totally destroyed; if they have not a new
Interest in, and Title to another world, they will cleave to this present
World: Have you therefore provided Bread, that the world knows not of; Bags
they cannot risle or take away; an Inheritance they cannot reach or rob you of?
Heb. 10.34. They took joyfully the spoiling of their Goods, knowing within
themselves, that in Heaven they had a more enduring substance.

The third Use is for Exhortation.

Use. 3. Is it the Duty of Christians to go forth without the Camp to Jesus?
Then I would press you to a compliance with, and the Practice of this Duty: O!
go forth to Jesus; own, confess, and adhere unto him. This Exhortation I would
urge and enforce with several Motives. And then, Secondly, lay down several
Directions how you may be enabled thus to go forth to Jesus. First, I shall lay
down Motives to this Duty.

1. Motive. Consider who Jesus is, how great and Glorious a Person he is: He is
Styled Jesus the Son of God, Heb. 4.14. Having a great high Priest that is
passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our Profession.
Shall we draw back from, or be ashamed of the Son of God? Shall the vain shows
and passing Pageantry of this World, outshine in our Eyes, and darken the
Glory of the Son of God? He is the self-existent, and self-sufficient Eternal
Jehovah; his Name is I am, Exodus 3.14. And this I am, should annihilate all the
things of this World in our esteem and account. Prove. 23.5. Will thou set thy
Eyes on that which is not? Shall that which is not allure and draw our Hearts
from I am? As the Sun obscures and hides the Stars, so this Son of
Righteousness, which is the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express
Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3. should vail and darken all Creature-Beauty and
Excellency: Shall such vile Worms as the Sons of men be dreaded or loved more
than the Almighty and blessed Son of God? Will you withdraw from him, and cast
him off, to ingratiate your selves with poor and beggarly Creatures? This is as
if a man should turn his back on the full Exchequer of a Rich and mighty King,
and betake himself to an Almshouse, God the Father possessed this Son of his
(that is called Wisdom) from everlasting, Prove. 8.22. He Possessed him as a
Rich Treasure, and a Spring of Eternal Delights: And this seems by far a more
Glorious Title; That he is the Possessour of such a Son; than that he is the
Possessour of Heaven and Earth, Genesis 14.22. And does the Father Glory in such a
Possession; and shall not we to cleave to, and hold fast this blessed Son of
God? Is he not able to do more for us, and will he not be better to us than the
whole World? However Men revile and abhor him, he is glorious in the Eyes of
God, Is. 49.5.7. And shall he not be precious in our Eyes? To you that believe
he is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7.

2. Motive. You cannot be sincere Christians if you go not out to Jesus Christ,
and prefer him not before the whole World: The very truth of saving grace lies
in this, to wit, in our esteeming and regarding Christ more than all things
else: We must remember him and his Love, so as to forget all things else in
comparison of him, Cant. 1.4. We will remember thy love more than Wine, we will
be glad and rejoice in thee. And how is Christ to be remembered? We do not
rightly remember him, if we do not forget our People and Fathers House for him,
Ps. 45.10. And so seek all our comfort, contentment, and satisfaction in him:
We must so esteem Christ, as utterly to despise whatever comes in competition
with him, Cant. 8.7. If a Man would give all the substance of his House for
Love, it would be utterly despised. O! how should we disdain whatever is
offered to buy our love off from Christ; or would substitute it self as a
beloved in his room and stead: all things should be accounted but Dung for
Christ, Phil. 3.8. And so must we love Jesus Christ, as to hate other things in
comparison of our transcendent love to Christ, Luke 14.25, 26. So Christ
teaches us, that if any Man will come after him, he must hate Father and
Mother, Wife and Children, House and Lands, yea and his own life too; or else
he cannot be his Disciple: As Jacob is said to hate Leah, and to love Rachel,
Genesis 29.30, 31. because Leah had but a little pittance in comparison of Rachels
greater Portion of love: So we must love Relations and Life so little in
respect of Christ, that we may truly be said to hate them, and love him; and in
an hour of temptation, we must as readily part with them, as with hated things:
He that loves Father or Mother, Son or Daughter, more than Christ, is not
worthy of him: We must so cleave to the Lord, Acts 11.23. as to forsake and
cast away all other things for him, Luke 14.33. Whosoever he be, he that
forsakes not all that he has, cannot be my Disciple. Selfdenial is the true
savor of Christianity; and without this, a Nominal Christian is as Salt that
has lost its savor, and is good for nothing, Luke 14.34, 35. He that takes
not up his Cross and follows Christ, is not worthy of him, Matt. 10.38. If
ever you will approve your selves true Christians, you must be ready to leave
the Camp and go out to Jesus.

3. Mot. Consider what will earthly Comforts avail or advantage thee without
Christ: If thou forsake him, and cleave to them, they will prove a Curse unto
thee. O! how hurtful and pernicious is that to our Souls, that entices and
draws us from the Son of God, (1 Timothy 6.9.) and as a Weight does plunge us and
sink us down into perdition and destruction: The lusts of men after these
things, (...), do immerse and drown Souls in Destruction: These earthly things
are as a Weight that do press down a Racer, and hinder him from running his
Course, Heb. 12.1. It is the cares about, or the inordinate enjoyment of these
things that overcharge the hearts of men, Luke 21.34. (...), lest your hearts
be as a Ship too hard or deep Laden, that therefore is in danger to founder
and sink down in the Sea; and cannot well make way in its Course. Are not those
things mischievous to us, that hinder us in our Race, and that obstruct us in
our Voyage toward the Haven of a Blessed Eternity? It is said, the prosperity
of Fools shall destroy them, Prove. 1.32. They are Simple that turn away from
Christ to any Creature; and though they seem to flourish for a time in the
World, yet their Plenty feeds and fuels their lusts, and so helps forward their
ruin and destruction. Thus their Table proves a Snare to them, Ps. 69.22. and
by all their Prosperity they are but Fatted for the Slaughter, and more fitted
for Destruction. Can the enjoyment of any of these things countervail the loss
of Jesus Christ; or be a suitable Portion to us in the room of Jesus Christ? How
easily can God imbitter all these things to us; and make us sick and weary of
them? Judas could take no pleasure in the Pieces of Silver for which he sold
Christ, Mat. 27.34. Francis Spira could not endure to look on his Children for
the love of which he had denied the Truth of Christ; vid. Hist. of Spira.
he could not abide to eat any thing, so weary was he of life; all he took was
forced as it were upon him: A wounded Spirit who can bear! The Favor of
Princes will not bind up broken Hearts, or set broken Bones, or heal wounded
Spirits. An Apostate may suffer more in one Nights Horrors, for denying Jesus
Christ; than a sincere Christian endures in many days Torments, for owning and
confessing him: Account therefore, nothing can be either safe or sweet to you,
which is the Hire of an Harlot, or the Wages of Iniquity; I mean that you enjoy
as the reward of your Treachery to Christ.

4. Mot. If you go forth without the Camp, if you are cast out as Spiritual
Lepers in the Worlds Eye; or are led out as Malefactors to Execution, you are
but treated as your Head Lord and Master was; and are you better than he?
Marvel not, (says Christ) If the World hate you, for it hated me before it
hated you, John 15.18. It called the Master of the House Beelzebub; and will it
begin to Honor, or cease from reviling his Servants? Matt. 10.24, 25. You are
not above Christ, or are to expect better usage than he had. The world was a
Wilderness to him; and shall it be a Paradise to us? He received here his Evil
things, and shall we expect our Good things on this Earth? Is it fit that
Members should lead a pleasant and delicious life under a Head Crowned with
Thorns? Did the World cast out Christ, and will it take us in? if it excercised
so little Hospitality toward the Son of God; will it open its Doors to us?

5. Mot. If by going forth to Jesus, you expose your selves to Temporal Evils,
yet he will be a shelter to you from greater and worser Evils, Is. 32.2. a
covert from the Wind, a refuge and hiding place from the Tempest of the Wrath
of God: Though you may be the worlds Butts to be shot at, yet you shall not be
Gods Mark; Christ will be your Shield to guard you from the Eternal Arrows of
Divine Vengeance: He is a Rainbow round about the Throne, that Storms shall
not fall from Heaven to overwhelm you, Rev. 4.3. He is a Priest on his Throne,
a Mediator at the Right Hand of God, to maintain your Peace with Heaven; and to
deliver you from the Wrath that is to come. You shall not be Food to the Worm
that never dies; nor fuel to the Flames that shall never go out. The Blood of
this Paschal Lamb is sprinkled on Believers, to keep destroying Justice out:
Though the world draw upon you; yet the Sword of God is for ever sheathed
toward you: Though men cast you out, Christ will seek you out and take you in:
God your great Creditor will not arrest and imprison you, and Conscience shall
not accuse and condemn you; for you are sprinkled from an Evil Conscience by
the Blood of Christ; though winds do blow high without, yet there shall not be
a Storm and dreadful Earthquake, or rather Heart-quake, within. in. It is worse
to be cast as unsavory Salt out of the House of God, Luke 14. last. than for
our constancy and faithfulness to Christ, to be thrust out of the Camp of men;
and this greater Evil Christ frees from: For the Sons of God shall abide in his
House for ever, John 8.35.

6. Mot. When you are called to go forth of the Camp to Jesus, what are you
required to leave, but what you are already dead to, if you are true
Christians? Col. 3.3. For you are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in
God. In Christ Believers are already dead to the Natural life that flows from
the first Adam. This life Christ has laid down, extinguished and abolished for
ever in himself: He is risen again to a more Excellent, Higher, and Nobler
Life; and this Believers should repute, reckon, and esteem as their Life. The
Apostle intimates, that we ought not to regard the Natural life as our life,
but to account that is our life which is hid with Christ in God; and that we
are risen with Christ, Col. 3.1. and so have the beginnings and first Fruits of
this new and glorious life. Now what are all the Riches, Honors, and Pleasures
of the World, to a dying, or to a dead Man? Why should we be so sollicitous or
anxiously careful about a life, or the concerns of that life that is abolished
by Christ, and that we are dead to in Jesus our Head? All the Delights and
Comforts of this world, are but the Appendixes or Appurtenances of this life
that is abolished by Christ, and Saints are not to enjoy their Happiness in the
old life of the first, but in the new life of the second Adam.

7. Mot. By going out to Jesus Christ without the Camp, we defend the Gospel,
strengthen the Faith, and inflame the Hearts of others with love to, and zeal
for Christ; and have the comfort of our own tried and approved Graces.

First, We defend and confirm the Gospel. Phil. 1.7. the Apostle speaks of his
Bonds, as his defense and confirmation of the Gospel: O! What an Honor is this
to be Christ's Champions, and by our Sufferings to defend and confirm the Truth
of the Gospel? This is a rational Argument, and Evidence offered to the
Spectators of Saints Sufferings, that surely this is truth; and these men are
fully satisfied and assured that it is so, else they would not thus spend their
Blood, and lay down their lives for it.

Secondly, This strengthens the Faith of others, and incourages them to take up
the Cross; and daunts the Hearts of Adversaries. Hereby the Faith of the Saints
is fortified, Phil. 2.17. Paul speaks of his being offered upon the Sacrifice
and Service of the Phillipians Faith, (...), That is, If my Blood be poured out
as a Drink Offering to shadow the Sacrifice of your Faith. He alludes to the
Drink Offerings of Wine, that were of Old added to Sacrifices, according to the
Law of Moses, Levit. 23.13, 18. The Sacrifice and Service of the Saints Faith,
would be much advantaged by Paul's Martyrdom; how would his Blood water those
heavenly Truths that he had sown among them, and make them take deeper root,
and fructify more abundantly. And Paul's Bonds encouraged and imboldened others
without fear to publish the Gospel, while they beheld his resolution and
constancy, Phil. 1.12, 13, 14. The sparks that have flown from the Flames of
Suffering and Martyred Saints, have taken hold of the hearts of Spectators, and
have fired them with love to Christ, and Zeal for his Glory. Justin Martyr
professes, that he was much influenced and wrought upon, by the courage and joy
of suffering and dying Christians. And hereby often the Hearts of Enemies are
quailed and discouraged from proceeding in their Cruelty. Austin tells, that
when Julian the Apostate commanded the Christians at Antioch to remove the Body
of Babylas, they fell a singing the 114th Psalm; at which the Emperor being
enraged, he commanded Salustius his Captain to apprehend some of them: Who
accordingly took several Christians; and among them one Theodorus, a Young man,
whom he caused to be Tormented for several Hours, yet he still continued
singing the 114th Psalm: At which Salustius was so dismayed, that he caused the
Tormentors to cease; and went to the Emperor, and desired him that no more
might be Tormented, for all the Christian Suffering did but tend to their
Glory: By whom the Emperor was persuaded to torture no more of the Christians
at Antioch, whom he had seized upon.

And hereby Christians have the comfort of their tried and approved Graces: The
Apostle salutes Apelles as one approved in Christ, Romans 16.10. O! what a mark
of Honor is it for a man in signal services and eminent sufferings to be
approved as sincere in Christ? A tried Faith is a precious Faith, 1 Pet. 1.7.
O! how comfortable is it for a Christian to say, This Faith has been in the
Furnace, this Love has passed through a Fiery Trial, and has not sailed or
abated? Christ has been evidenced to be dearer to me than all the world?

8. Mot. If we go forth to Jesus, we shall be no losers by it: A visit from
Christ will make a Prison better than a Palace; He will not leave you
comfortless, he will come to you, John 14.18. When you are thrust out of the
worlds Camp, and seem as naked men in the open field, yet then the Power of
Christ shall rest upon you, and as a Tent overshadow you, as the word (...),
used by the Apostle, does import, 2 Cor. 12.9. If your sufferings do abound,
your consolations by Christ shall abound much more, 2 Cor. 1.4. When all men
forsake you, the Lord will stand with you and for you, 2 Timothy 4.17. Whatever
you leave and forsake for Christ and the Gospel's sake, shall be recompensed to
you an hundred fold, Matthew. 19.28, 29. and that now in this time, as it is
expressed, Mark 10.30. and that with Persecutions, as is further intimated;
though the world rage, and persecute the people of God, yet these Persecutions
shall not frustrate, or obstruct, the performance of the Promise.

But how shall the Promise be fulfilled?

I answer, In a double sense it is made good.

1. Those that forsake their Relations according to the Flesh, shall have the
Favor and Friendship of a new Kindred according to the Spirit; and there is
nothing like to Love in the Spirit, Col. 1.8. Love on a Spiritual account is
the Purest and Noblest Flame, an Eternal Fire, that shall never be
extinguished. You that leave Parents, Brethren, Sisters, Kinsmen, that are
related to you in the first Adam, you shall have a new Stock of Kindred,
related to you in the second Adam. Elder Christians shall express the kindness
of Fathers and Mothers, and younger Saints shall manifest the love of Brethren
and Sisters; and so you shall have a hundred Spiritual Kinsmen for one Natural
Kinsman that you lose. Christ designs to join and link Men of several Nations
in the nearest, best, and strongest Bonds; and to gather some of all Nations
into one Family and household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. Ephesians. 2.19. and thereby to
kindle the most admirable and excellent Love among the Members of this New
Family: And those that forsake House and Lands, shall have the Hearts, Houses,
and Purses of their Spiritual Kindred opened to them, to receive their Persons,
and supply their Necessities: and this will the more incline and sway them to
extend such Kindness, because they account they exercise Hospitality to Christ,
they take him in, feed and cloth him in his Members.

2. Suffering Saints receive a hundredfold now in the present time, as they
experience the smallest Portion and Pittance of outward things that they enjoy,
to be a hundredfold better than the greater Plenty and Abundance of the
Wicked, Psalm. 37.16. A little that a righteous man has, is better than the
riches of many wicked. And why is it better? Surely this is that which enhances
and advances the value and worth of what the Righteous have, that it flows from
the Love of God as a Father; that it is cast in as an Addition to the Kingdom
of God and his Righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. that Godliness has not only the
promises of this Life, but of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. that as God's
Firstborn, Heb. 12.23. they have the double Portion, Provision on their way,
and the Eternal Inheritance at the Journeys end: God breeds, feeds, and
maintains them in their Minority, and has laid up great Portions for them in
Heaven; there a Crown is laid up, 2 Timothy 4.8. an Inheritance is reserved, 1
Pet. 1.4. a Rest remains for them, Heb. 4.9. While their Bodies feed on God's
Creatures, their Souls may delight in, and feast on their Fathers Love;
accounting, that he gives bread to them that fear him, he will ever be mindful
of his Covenant, Psalm. 111.5. that he spreads their Table, fills their Cup,
Psalm. 23.5. annoints their heads and hearts with Oil of Joy; as Ointment was
poured on great and noble Guests, when they were entertained at a Feast, Cant.
1.12. Mat. 26.7. They take all as coming immediately from God, Genesis 48.15. The
God that fed me all my life long. He looks beyond Joseph, Egypt, and all
Creatures; he ascends to God: as the Priests had the Lord for their Portion, he
provided and gave maintenance to them; the Altar was as it were their Field,
from whence they had Bread and Flesh, Mal. 1.22. therefore what was brought to,
and laid on it, is called the Fruits of it, as if it grew there for the
Priests, that had their Portion of the Sacrifices, and are therefore said to
live upon holy things, and partake with the Altar, 1 Cor. 9.13. Even so God is
the Portion of his People, even in Temporal as well as Spiritual respects,
Psalm. 16.5. The Lord is the portion of my inheritance, and of my cup. Their
very outward Enjoyments are as Shewbread, or Face-bread, as it is in the
Original, Exodus 25.30. They receive them as those Loaves of Shewbread from the
Face of God; they see his Face and Love in them, and therefore may call them
Peniel, Genesis 32.30. They take their daily Provision as a Dish sent from their
Father's Table; as Joseph is said to send Messes from before him to his
Brethren, Genesis 43. last. Their Food is seasoned with the sense of their
Father's Love, and with the hope of his Kingdom and Glory; and so their Sawee
is better than their Meat. Besides, after this Hundredfold in the present
time, they are to inherit Everlasting Life. Christ says, He that loses his
life shall find it; but he that finds it, shall lose it, Mat. 10.39. David
said, Died Abner as a fool? 2 Samuel 3.33. So I may say, Do Saints die as Fools?
Do they lavish out their Blood, and rashly squander away their Lives? Surely
no; they well understand themselves, and know what they do; if they lose their
Lives for Christ, they shall find a better Life for their very Bodies. They lay
down the vile common Plebeian Life of the first Adam; but they shall at the
Resurrection receive and take up the Honorable, Royal, and Glorious Life of
the second Adam, Phil. 3.21. He shall fashion our vile Bodies like his glorious
Body. If we be faithful to the death, we shall receive from Christ the Crown of
Life, Rev. 2.10. Mark that Expression, [The Crown of Life.] This very Life is a
Crown; it is a Royal Life. Romans 5.17. it is said, That they that receive an
abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign in life, So
that Saints lose a base and common Life, and are recompensed with a Kingly
Life. All Vails shall be taken off, all Clouds shall be scattered, all
Reproaches shall be wiped away from the Saints; the righteous shall shine out
in the kingdom of their father, Matthew. 13.43. (...), as the Sun, that disperses
all Clouds.
But those that resolve to save their lives shall lose them. This is certain,
that by a fond and sinful sparing of their Lives here, they shall cut
themselves off from all the Glory and Blessedness that Saints shall enjoy in
their Souls and Bodies: Hereafter they shall only Be, to be Miserable; and be
continued, to endure the Blows of an Almighty Arm, to drink the Wine of the
Wrath of an Eternal God; and this is but a Husk and Carcass of Being, Isa. 66.
last, to be preserved to be Fuel of Everlasting Flames: This State of the
Wicked therefore is not called Life, but the second Death; yea, sometimes in
this Life Apostates meet with remarkable and infamous punishment, and quickly
lose that Life that sinfully they preserved. He in Queen Mary's days, that
said, See Foxes Acts and Monuments.
he could not burn for the Gospel, (of which in King Edward's Days he had been
a forward Professor) was himself, and all his House and Family, burnt in the
Night, by a Fire that rose suddenly: And the Priest that denied the Truth in
France to save his Life, and was discharged out of Prison, as he was going home
met with two Men that had a quarrel with him for merly, who fell upon him, and
killed him. See Clarke 's History of the French Martyrs.

Secondly, I shall now lay down some Directions how you may attain such a frame
of Spirit as will incline you readily and freely to go forth without the Camp
to Jesus.

Direction 1. Endeavor to get a clear sight of the Shortness of Life, and the
Vanity of all the Things of this World. Surely every man walks in a vain show,
Psalm. 39.6. What is this vain show? I answer, It is the Natural Life, and the
earnest and restless Endeavors of Men about it, and for it. This Life is but a
vain show of Life, as a Shadow that has the shape of Man's Body, but yet is
but a vain show of a Body, or a Picture that has the resemblance of a Man, of
his Head, Face, Body, Hands, and Feet; but come to handle it, there is nothing
but Canvas and Colors; there is only a vain show of a Man, and of his Members,
but no Flesh, Bones, or Life. So this present Life is but a Shadow, a vain show
of that true and real Life that flows from Jesus Christ, and is to be enjoyed
for ever with him. And all the Labors and Toil of Men, to provide for and
maintain this Life, is but a vain show of Business: Men seem to do something,
but indeed do nothing to purpose, as long as they neglect theit Souls: It is a
busy Idleness, a laborious doing of nothing; just like Children that make
Pies, build Houses, dress Babies, and talk over every piece of their Work, as
if it were some very serious weighty thing; and all is but a piece of childish
Folly and Vanity. When God awakes to judge the World, how will he himself
despise, and render most ridiculous and contemptible to others, this Image of
worldly men? Psalm. 73.20. How will he deride their Folly, that forget their
Souls, cast God and his Word behind their backs, banish the Thoughts of
Eternity out of their Minds, and satisfy themselves with such a vile Life, and
such a vain Image of Happiness? And the Psalmist, in this 39 Psalm, ver. 6.
says, That a worldly Man heaps up Riches, and knows not who shall gather them.
He seems to allude to the Custom of some Countries, where the Corn is heaped
up, and set Artificially in the Field, so as to preserve it from Weather, till
all their Harvest is cut, and then they gather it all into the Barn: and in
this Expression he shows the shortness and uncertainty of Life; when one Man
has plowed, sowed, reaped, heaped up in the Field, and is near the enjoyment
of the Fruit of his Labors, his Soul is suddenly required, his Life vanishes,
and another gathers into the Barn, and enjoys what he had toiled for. The Holy
Ghost calls it but the fashion of this world, 1 Cor. 7.31. The fashion of this
world passes away. Some conceive it is an Allusion to a Comedy, in which one
acts the part of a Buyer, another of a Lover that wooes and marries, and
another of a Mourner; but all this is a vain show, it is but a personating Men
and their Actions; there is nothing of this that is True and Real, but all is
Fiction and Imagery. The Affections of the Actors do not answer to their
Actions: So says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. They that have Wives, should be
as if they had none; those that buy, as if they possessed not; those that weep,
as if they wept not; and they that rejoice, as if they rejoiced not. And why
should Christians be so much unconcerned about the Things of this Life? The
Apostle renders the Reason in ver. 31. For the fashion of this world passes
away. All is but a Comedy, a vain show; and therefore persons should not
earnestly let out their Thoughts, or lay out their Affections on the things of
this World. Man is said to fly away as a shadow, Job 14.2. and Riches are said
to fly away as an eagle toward heaven, Prove. 23.5. And both Expressions do set
forth the Vanity of Life and Worldly Enjoyments.

Direction 2. Endeavor to see and seriously to believe the misery of all those
that have their portion in this life, Psalm. 17.14. David desired to be
delivered from those that were men of this world, and had their All here; he
dreads to have his Lot among such, he would not eat of their dainties, Psalm.
141.4. Their Bellies were indeed full of the choicest, rarest, and best
Dainties of the Creature (which the Psalmist calls God's hid treasure, because
those things are not common, ordinary, or every where to be found) but here is
no mention of any Food or Furniture for their Souls. The Kings Daughter is all
glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. and David speaks of the joy that God put into his
heart by the light of his countenance, Psalm. 4, 6, 7. It is spoken of as a
grievous sin to mind earthly things, Phil. 3.19. and it is threatened as a sore
punishment for Men to have their names written in the earth, Jer. 17.13. They
that are written in the Earth, how soon may their Names be blotted out, and
their Happiness destroyed? But it is a matter of highest comfort and joy to
have our Names written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. Rejoice in this, that your Names
are written in Heaven. The Wind, or the Foot of the next Traveller, may blot
out a Name written in Dust; but who can or shall ascend and blot out a Name
written in Heaven? How are Men debased that set their Hearts on things below?
How disgraceful is it, to be called only Men of this World, Men of this Earth,
Children of this World, stooping and bowed down wholly to these present and
perishing things? Psalm. 17.14. Psalm. 10.18. Luke 16.8. And how woeful is their
State that receive their Reward, their Consolation, their Good things here?
Matthew. 6.2. Luke 6.24. Luke 16.25. But when Death comes, their Candle is quite
put out; they have no happy Reward after Death! they shall never see the Light,
Prove. 24.20. Psalm. 49.19. They shall inherit nothing but Beggary and Poverty,
Torments and Misery, in another World. This World is the Bastards Portion, but
Heaven is the Childrens Inheritance. As Satan with the Fruit of a Tree deprived
our first Parents of the earthly, so Satan with the Trifles of this World
cheats earthly Men, and bereaves them of the Heavenly Paradise. As the
Israelites in Egypt labored only for present Meat and Drink, they had no
Wages from the Egyptians; so Worldly Men toil only for present Provisions and
Enjoyments, they shall have no reward, Prove. 24.20. As Ismael was turned out of
Abraham's House with a few Loaves of Bread and Bottle of Water, and was not to
be Heir with Isaac, Genesis 21.10, 14. even so the Men of this World shall be
thrust and excluded out of God's House, and be put off only with present and
temporal things; but shall not be Heirs with the Saints in Light. And shall we
stay with such in the Camp? Is it not better to suffer from them, than to be
condemned and perish for ever with them? 1 Cor. 11.32. Though the wicked spring
as the grass, and all the workers of iniquity do flourish here, yet they shall
be destroyed for ever, Psalm. 92.7.

Direction 3. We must overcome and be Crucified to the World, Gal. 6.14. The
World is Crucified to me, and I am Crucified to it, (says Paul). If the world
be as a dead Carcass to us, and we are as dead Carcasses to it; it will be no
hard thing to separate and part two such dead Carcasses, they cannot cling to,
and embrace each other: If the world be Crucified to us, that is be laid low in
our esteem and judgments; then we shall be Crucified to it, that is our
affections will die to it: He that is Born of God overcomes the World, 1 John
5.4, 5. If men be not born of God, have not a higher Nature, and better life
than others, there will be neither Spiritual Soldiers, or Weapons to fight
against, and overcome the World: The new Nature inclines men toward, and
raises them up to higher Riches, Honors, and Pleasures, than those that are
the Objects of Sense. Worldly lusts come to be starved, by the Souls sight of,
and longing after heavenly enjoyments: And the more these are prized, and
pursued, the more a Christian is weaned from all things below: And keeps a
Spiritual Fast, something like Christ's Fast in the Wilderness, who for Forty
days did not only abstain from eating, but did not hunger after Food, Matt.
4.2. For it was at the end of Forty days that he was an hungry. So this is that
Excellent Fast that we should aspire to; not to esteem, hunger, or lust after
the things of this World: Grace teaches to deny worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12, 13.
As Pilgrims and Strangers we are to abstain from Fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2.11. If
the world live in our Hearts, if our Affections cleave to it, it will be a mere
force, an Act of Violence to tear us from what we embrace and delight in as our
Happiness: Thus it was with the Israelites; they came out of Egypt, as to
bodily separation from it, but they brought Egypt out in their Hearts; they had
Pleasant and Delightful thoughts of Egypt; with Complacency they call to mind
the Fleshpots of Egypt, and the fullness of Bread they had there, Exodus 16.3.
And in the 11. of Numb. the 5. Verse. We remember the Fish which we did eat in
Egypt freely; the Cucumbers, the Melons, the Leeks, the Onions, and the
Garlic: There they accounted they had their Varieties, Fish and Flesh; several
sorts of Sallets and Fruits; but now they reckoned they were at short Commons,
and confined to one Dish, ver. 6. There is nothing but this Manna before our
Eyes: And their Soul was dried away with it. And Numb. 16.13. Some of them chid
with Moses, and challenge him for bringing them up out of Egypt, which they
call, a Land flowing with Milk and Honey: O! how excellent, pleasant a Land is
Egypt in their Eye! The Epithetes God gave to Canaan, they transfer and apply
to Egypt, as if the Country they were called from, did better deserve this Name
than the Land that they were called to: And they seemed so far to be
transported with the love of Egypt, and to repent of their leaving of it, that
they stirred up one another to make a Captain, and to return thither again: And
Stephen asserts, that they returned to Egypt again in their Hearts, Acts 7.39.
Thus too many pretend a separation from the World, yet the World is still in
their Hearts: And while it is thus, they will never go forth without the Camp
to Jesus. But Christians should strive to imitate Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
The Scripture says, that if they had been mindful of the Country from whence
they came out; they might have had opportunity to have returned, Heb. 11.15.
Hereby the Divine Penman sufficiently intimates, that they were not mindful of
Vr of the Chaldees, the Country from whence Abraham came. They did not confess
themselves Pilgrims and Strangers, because drawn from Vr; but because they were
yet on Earth, and not arrived in Heaven: They were quite weaned from, and dead
to Vr, and all other Countries on Earth. Thus the world should be rooted and
banished out of our Minds and Hearts. Christ has chosen his people out of the
World, John 15.19. and therefore they should not remember or be enticed by it,
but leave this Camp, and go forth to Jesus.

4. Direct. Labor to get a clear sight and deep sense of the love of Christ to
perishing Sinners; and particularly to your own Souls. How wonderful is it that
He that made all things should be made Flesh, 1 John 1.2.14. that the Creator
should become a Creature: That the Fountain and Ocean of Being should take a
Humane Nature; and so become a drop of Being. A Diamond or Ruby is debased when
set in Iron or Lead; what a wonderful condescension is it then, that the Divine
Nature should be joined with a Humane Nature in the Person of the Son? How did
he that was in the Form of God, and thought it no Robbery to be equal with God;
empty and humble himself, by becoming man. They are very Excellent and
Emphatical Words that the Apostle uses, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. (...), he emptied
himself of all Majesty, State, and Divine Glory in the Eye of Man, which the
Apostle admirably expresses thus, He was found in Fashion like a Man: That is,
he looked but like an ordinary and common Man, as if there were nothing
extraordinary or supernatural in him, as if he were no more than a Man. Thus he
veiled his Eternity, Omnipotency, Immensity, and infinite Wisdom; by becoming
an Infant of Days, a Weak Child, confined to a Manger or a Cradle, and not able
for the present to speak and express the inward Sentiments of his Soul: The
Ancient of Days, yea he that was Ancienter than Days; whose goings forth were
from Everlasting, came forth of Bethlem but yesterday! Mic. 5.2. All Temporal
Benefits are compared by Parisiensis to sparks of Fire: But when Jesus Christ
came into the World, this he says was a Mountain of Fire cast into the Earth:
How should the Hearts of the Sons of Men be inflamed by this wonderful and
astonishing kindness of God, in sending his Son? And Christ did not stop here,
but he stooped yet lower, when he was he found in fashion of an ordinary common
Man; he humbled himself to death; and that not an ordinary or common one, but
to the death of the Cross: A death that Servants, Thieves, and the worst of
Malefactors were adjudged to: A painful, lingering, and most shameful death it
was; and this he did undergo that Sinners might not Perish Everlastingly: He
that was the Judge, and might have destroyed Offenders; O! that he should stand
and suffer as an Offender! He that might have Executed Vengeance on us, did
endure it for us: He (to whose Justice we might have been offered up as whole
burnt-Offerings in Everlasting Flames) became a Sacrifice himself. Needed the
Father or the Son to have valued the loss and ruin of a world of Sinners? What
are all Nations to God, but as the drop of a Bucket, and as the small Dust that
cleaves to the Balance, Is. 40.15. And who values the loss of a drop of Water,
or of a mote of Dust? And as unconcerned might God have been at the loss of the
whole World; but the Bowels of the Son of God yearned toward a perishing
World; and rather than the Sheep should go to the Slaughter, the Shepherd
offers himself to be their Ransom and Exchange. And how resolved was Jesus
Christ to perfect this work, Is. 50.6, 7. He gave his Back to the Smiters, his
Cheeks to those that plucked off the Hair: He hid not his Face from Shame and
Spitting; he set his Face as a Flint. This expression may be illustrated and
commented on by the words of Luke, Luke 9.51. In Isaiah we have the Prophecy,
in Luke the History of Christ. He steadfastly set his Face to go up to
Jerusalem, (says Luke.) He set his Face as a Flint, (says Isaiah.) Christ was
resolved to go through the Storm; he knew what a dreadful Tempest did abide him
at Jerusalem; yet he would not recoil, draw back, or turn his Face from it. He
was as steadfast, as resolved, as if his Face had been a Flint, and without
sense or feeling of Pain and anguish, of Blows and Wounds: Again it is said, he
poured out his Soul to the death, Is. 53.12. How much love is employed and
imported in this Expression, That Christ had as low and vile thoughts of his
Life, and was as freely and willingly ready to part with it, as if he had but
poured out so much Water on the ground. O! how bounteous and large Hearted was
Christ, that he did not spare his very Blood! Love made him yet wisely and
holily prodigal of his Life, he poured out his Soul to the death.

Christ's Adversaries upbraided him thus, Matthew. 27.42. He saved others, but
himself he cannot save. These very Words of Christ's Enemies signify and set
out to us the wonderful Love and excellent Self-denial of Jesus Christ. He
wrought Miracles to heal the Diseases of some, and he raised up others from the
Dead; some he kept from presently falling into the Hands, others he rescued
from the Jaws and Power of Death: And they thought, surely he that was so kind
to others, would much more be prompted and induced by Self-love to save
himself, if he could; and because he did not deliver himself, they conclude he
could not. How do they exult and triumph, as if his Power were dried up and
gone, his mighty Arm withered or broken; as if his Relief and Help were
confined to others, but he could extend no Salvation to himself: And why did
not Christ then save himself? Surely it was in wonderful pity and kindness to
Sinners, that he would not save himself, till he had suffered and satisfied for
them; and so could not only save himself, but also save them too. O, how was
Christ wholly swallowed up in Love to his Father and perishing Sinners, when he
prayed thus, Father, glorify thy own Name! John 12.27, 28. As if he should
say, Father, whatever become of me, whatever I suffer and endure, glorify thy
own Name, glorify thy Justice in punishing Sin, and so make way to glorify
thy Mercy. in pardoning Sinners. Meditate of these great Truths of the Gospel;
use them as a Spiritual Burning-glass, till thy Heart be enflamed toward Jesus
Christ.

Direction 5. We must have an high Esteem and Value for Jesus Christ; and our
Hearts must burn with Love toward him.

1. We must have an high Esteem of Jesus Christ, Cant. 5.10. My beloved is
white and ruddy, the chiefest of ten thousands. White, as to the Purity of his
Life; and Ruddy, in his Bloody Passion and Death, Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer
than the children of men, Grace is poured out into thy lips. Thy Name (says
the Church, Cant. 1.3.) is as an Ointment poured out: All his garments smell of
Myrrh, Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm 45.8. We must account Christ better than our
People, and our Fathers House: That it is our Interest to please him, though we
disgust and displease the whole World; and that it will be our advantage to
cleave to him, though all men should frown on us, be imbittered toward us, and
enraged against us: His Love is better than Wine; and his Kindness better than
Life, Cant. 1.4. Ps. 63.3. Let all the world be put into the Balance to weigh
against Christ, it will be found to be lighter than Vanity; what is all we have
to be esteemed in regard of Christ? We must sell all to buy the Pearl of Price,
but we must not sell this Pearl to buy Peace, Liberty, or a quiet enjoyment of
our Estates in the World: If we come out from Wicked Men, God and Christ will
receive us, 2 Cor. 6. 2 last Verses. We should little regard the Worlds
rejecting of us, if Christ will receive us. Should a Man be grieved if he be
turned out of the Cottage of a Beggar, and received into the Palace of a King?
As the King of Sodom said to Abraham, give me the Persons, and take thou the
Goods to thy self: So we should say to Carnal men, take you the Goods of this
world to your selves, but leave me the Person of Christ; and I shall account my
Lines are fallen to me in Pleasant Places, and I have a goodly Heritage.

2ly. Our Hearts must Burn with love toward Jesus Christ, Cant. 8.6, 7. Many
Waters cannot quench love, neither can the Floods drown it: O such a divine
Flame of love should be kindled in our Hearts, that if the World lets in upon,
and turns over us Rivers of afflictions, Floods of sufferings, yet all may not
be able to quench it: If we thus love Jesus Christ, we shall follow him. As
Ruth said to Naomi, Entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following
after thee: For whither thou go, I will go; and where thou lodgest I will
lodge: thy People shall be my People, and thy God shall be my God: Ruth 1.16.
So those that love Christ will say to the World, Allure me not to leave Jesus
Christ, or to return from following of him, where he is, there will I be: his
God shall be my God, his People shall be my People. As Peter was so in love
with Christ, that he cast himself into the Sea, that he might swim and come to
Christ standing on the Shore, John 21.7. So Christians that highly prize, and
dearly love him, will be willing not only to come to Christ by a Natural death
(as other Disciples came to Christ by their Boat or little Ship, John 21.8.)
but to be cast into a Sea of sufferings, and so come to Christ by a violent
Death. As Ignatius, an ancient Father, in his Epistle to the Romans, expresses
himself thus. (...). etc. -- (...). Let the Fire, the Cross, the Wild Beasts,
and other Instruments of Cruelty come on me, only that I may obtain and enjoy
Christ. He cared not what he suffered or endured, so that he might come to
Christ: Love is said to be stronger than Death; and Jealousy is cruel as the
Grave, Cant. 8.6. As Death kills the strongest, and the Grave swallows up all
the bodies put into it, and turns them into Dust, so true servent love to
Christ will subdue all opposition, Conquer all resistance, and is Cruel to what
would tempt or draw it from Christ: So did Paul love Christ, that he desired to
be dissolved, to be taken to pieces, so that his Soul might be with Christ,
Phil. 1.23.

6. Direct. We must eye and frequently think upon the Examples of suffering
Saints, who through Faith and Patience have inherited the promised Kingdom and
inheritance. Heb. 11.36, 37, 38. there is a short account of the various
sufferings of several of the Lords Worthies, what losses they sustained, what
tortures they endured; that they might obtain a better Resurrection, Heb.
11.35. yet the World to come, was not so much Unvailed and Revealed then, as it
is now; well may the duty of selfdenial, and bearing the Cross, be more
explicitly required, and more often pressed in the Gospel, Matthew. 16.23, 24.
when the motives and encouragements to it are more clearly and abundantly
revealed. We see Death foiled and abolished; a new Life obtained, and Heaven
possessed by Christ as a forerunner. Yet Saints of old supported their Hearts
with the hope of a glorious Resurrection, and this carried them through the
greatest losses, and the most exquisite torments: and their Example is improved
in Hebr. 12.1. Being compassed with such a cloud of Witnesses, let us run the
Race that is set before us. There may perhaps be an allusion to the Cloud that
went before, and guided the Israelites in the Wilderness, and directed them in
the way to the Earthly Canaan: So we have a great Cloud of Spiritual Witnesses,
that have testified God's Truth, and their own Love and Loyalty to him, with
their Blood; and shall not their Examples both guide and animate us to the same
Faith and Patience as they practiced? Their sufferings teach us, that the way
to the Heavenly Canaan lies through the Briars and Thorns of afflictions, and
that through many Tribulations, we must expect to enter into the Kingdom of
God. We may learn from them, that it is possible for poor frail Men to overcome
all the Rage and Cruelty of the World, that the greatest Torments may be
patiently endured, and that Christ can Ride Triumphant on such poor Worms as we
are; and by the weakest conquer all the strength and power of the World. The
same Spirit that animated and enabled them, is yet alive, to Cloth us with
like Magnaminity and Resolution; the Captain of Salvation is the same; the
Spiritual Weapons that we are to fight with, are the same; the promises of
Spiritual supplies and supports are the same; why then should Christians now
despond or despair of like success and victory? How many of the Primitive
Saints did trend in their steps, despising Torments, and trampling on Death it
self? Justin Martyr In dial. cum Tryph. Jude^.
applies that of Micah. 4.4. to the Christians of his time; he thus Addresses
to the Enemies of the Church, saying, You behead us, burn us, and in several
other ways kill us; but yet you cannot make us afraid, or destroy us: When the
Devil raged in the Roman Heathen Emperor, Rev. 12.1.2, 3, 4. A great Red
Dragon standing before the Church, that was as a Woman in Travel, to devour her
Man-Child, to destroy any Christians as soon as they were Spiritually brought
forth to Christ; yet this did not hinder Men from Embracing and Professing
Christianity, v. 11. but they overcame all the threatenings and cruelty of the
World by the Blood of the Lamb, and the word of their Testimony, and they leved
not their lives unto the death. Cyprian said of old, Nos Christiani Spiritu
magis viventes sumus, quam Corpore: We Christians do live rather in our Spirits
than in our Bodies. They did estimate and value the life of their Better, and
despise the life of their Baser part. Arnobius contr. Gentes, tells the
Heathen, You benefit and not hurt us by killing of us; our Souls are in our
Bodies as in a dark Prison, and by Martyring of us, you do but pull down the
Walls of our Prison, and let in the pure and comfortable light upon us. What a
great Speech is that of Ignatius, in Epist. ad Rom: (...). Now being bound in
Christ, I learn to desire no worldly or vain thing. He intimates, he was weaned
from, and dead to all things in this World. And does not the same Spirit dwell
and act in all the Saints of God? How then should we trust upon the same
Spirit, for the same quickening, Courage, and Strength?

Direction 7. We must look beyond this World, and above our ill Treatment and
Usage here. Faith sees him that is invisible, Heb. 11.27. and causes the Soul
to look at the things that are not seen, 2 Cor. 4. last. Though Christ be
withdrawn from the Eye of Sense, and Heaven be behind the Vail, far removed
from the Apprehensions of the Natural Man; yet Faith can pierce the Heavens,
behold the Churches King there in his Glory, and see that goodly Heavenly
Canaan that is afar off, Isa. 33.17. If your Eye does not go out of the World,
your Hearts will not go beyond it; and if your Eye and Hearts do not pass out
of this World, you will never be willing to go without the Camp to Jesus. It is
Faith that must survey that glorious City that is above, and make report of it
to the Soul: It is the Belief of what is testified of it in the Scripture, that
must animate the Soul to overcome all the Dangers and Difficulties that are in
the way to it. You must listen to what the Word declares concerning this
excellent City. Glorious things are spoken of this Heavenly Zion, the City of
our God. Christ mentions it as an excellent Privilege, to have the Name of the
City of his God to be written on any Man, and for him to be reputed a Citizen
of the New Jerusalem, Rev. 3.12. I will write upon him that overcomes the Name
of the City of my God. There is no Temple, or need of the Light of the Sun or
of the Moon in this City; God is All here to his People, to their Souls without
Ordinances, and to their Bodies without Creatures, Rev. 21.22, 23. This is a
most rich and self-sufficient City; it needs not Provisions to be brought in
from without, the Tree of Life grows in it, Rev. 22.1, 2. and a River of pure
Living Water issues from the Throne of God and of the Lamb. The Fruit of this
Tree of Life, and this River of Living Water, will make a delicious and eternal
Feast to all the Inhabitants of this Blessed City. Look for this abiding City,
that has Foundations, Heb. 11.10. Heb. 13.14. from whence all Sorrow, Pain,
Misery, and Death are banished for ever, and where fullness of joy does dwell,
and rivers of spiritual pleasures do flow for evermore.

All Gods Children shall be gathered into their Fathers House; all his Subjects
shall be taken into, and shall dwell in the Kings Palace: And Gods Palace is
not like the Great Turk's Seraglio Turkish Seragl at the end of Tavernier 's
Travels.
, which one ingeniously calls a Paradise for one, but a Prison to all others
that reside in it. But this Royal Mansion of the King of Glory is not only a
Paradise to Christ, but to all his Members; they enjoy the Riches, partake of
the Honors, and taste the Pleasures of it: Let Faith pass within the Walls,
and walk in the Streets of this heavenly Jerusalem. O! strive by a Spiritual
Eye to see the true King Solomon wearing his Glittering and Glorious Crown:
though men hid their Faces from him (as a Leper) trod on him as a Worm,
despised and abbhored him, Is. 49.7. yet he was glorious in the Eyes of the
Lord, God the Father received him into Heaven, and welcomed him thither with
these Honorable Words, Sit thou on my Right Hand till I make all thy Foes to
be thy Footstool, Ps. 110.1. And as Christ was treated after his Sufferings, so
will he entertain his People after their Sorrows and Afflictions: How welcome
will they be to him, when they come out of the Field, and arrive from off a
Stormy and Raging Sea? how will he cheer and comfort them? How kindly will he
speak to them? What marks of Honor will he put upon them? How will he praise
their Faith, commend their Love, approve and applaud their Constancy and
Loyalty to him? 1 Pet. 1.7. How honorably does Christ speak of Antipas, Rev.
2.13. He Styles him Antipas his Faithful Martyr. So Christ will Paint out the
Services and Sufferings of his People before his Father; he will acknowledge
and confess their Names thus, These are they that have followed me in a
Wilderness; that have walked after me in the Valley of the Shadow of Death;
that have abode with me in dark hours of Temptation; that have passed through
Fiery Trials, and have endured great Fights of Affliction: have taken joyfully
the Spoiling of their Goods; that have rejoiced they were accounted worthy to
suffer for my Namessake; that have not loved their Lives to the Death. How will
such a Confession of their Names by Christ, put Eternal Honor on the Saints?
O! look beyond this gloomy Valley of the Shadow of Death, to an Inheritance in
Light, Col. 1.12. Look beyond this short Night of Sorrows and Sufferings, to
the bright and glorious Morning of the Resurrection, Ps. 49.14. Though Saints
now bow down, and are laid as the Mire of the Streets, Is. 51. last. Yet the
upright shall have Dominion in the Morning, they shall tread down the Wicked,
they shall be as Ashes under the soles of their Feet, Ps. 45.14. Mal. 2.3.
Abigal went forth to David in his Afflicted State, 1 Samuel 25.4, 14, 40, 42.
Married and followed him in a Wilderness; and afterward did partake of his
Honor and Prosperity. We read, that after Saul's Death, he led her out of this
Wilderness-state, into the Royal City of Hebron, 2 Samuel 2.2. Even so, if you
now go out to Christ while his People are in a Wilderness, Afflicted and
Persecuted in the world, Jesus Christ will make you partakers of his Honor,
Felicity, and Glory: The time will come when this Spiritual King David will
lead his Afflicted Spouse to his Royal City above; will place her at his Right
Hand, and delight in her as his Hephzibah for ever.

8. Direct. We must be filled with the Spirit Ephesians. 5.18. As there is such a
strong and swift Current that always runs in at the Straits Mouth, into the
Mediterranean Sea, that a Ship cannot come out at the Straits Mouth, if it has
not a good stiff Gale of Wind: So truly, there is such a strong Torrent of
Self-love, and Carnal Affections that runs into the Camp of this World, that a
Soul can never come out to Jesus through the Streights of Afflictions and
Sufferings, and cross this violent Stream of sinful self-love, and worldly
lusts, if the Sails of our Souls be not mightily filled with the Gales of the
Spirit. The Hebrews, after they were enlightened, endured a great fight of
Afflictions, Heb. 10.32. And who is it that does enlighten, but the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation? Ephesians. 1.17.18. Our sight is cleared and recovered by the
Spirits Eye Salve, Rev. 3.18. so that we can see more, and further than the
rest of the World: Hence Saints are called Children of Light, Luke 16.8.
because they look into, and take hold of another world: As Stephens Eye was
extraordinarily fortified and improved, that he could see up into Heaven, and
behold Jesus at the Right Hand of God, Acts 7.55, 56. So the Spirit does so
renew and enlighten the Eyes of Saints Minds, that they can see Invisible,
Heavenly and Eternal things: And it is this sight that establishes the Heart
against the threatenings and terrors of the World: That which is born of the
Spirit, is Spirit, John 3.6. that is, Such are Spiritual Creatures, and are
also called Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15.48. If you are Spirit, you will not lust after
and be captivated by Carnal things: If you are heavenly Creatures, you will not
stoop and bow down to this Earth for your Happiness: It is by the Spirit that
we must mortify the Deeds of the Body, and Members upon Earth, Romans 8.13. Col.
3.5. These lusts that are fixed on, fed and filled by Objects on Earth, are
tempting and drawing down Souls to a Center and Portion here below; and it is
by the Power of the Spirit only, that we can repress and subdue them: The
Apostle bids Timothy to partake of the Afflictions of the Gospel, according to
the Power of God, 2. Tim. 1.8. If we are to bear them our selves, and were left
to the frailty of Nature, how soon should we be foiled and overcome? But
Saints, by the Spirit and its power, are enabled to deny themselves, to conquer
the Flesh, and tread the world under their Feet. Christ has promised not to
leave his People comfortless, John 14.16, 18. but that he would send them the
Comforter: What the Spirit shows, John 16.13.8. Romans 16.17. Ephesians. 1.13.
testifies, seals to the Souls of Believers, is sufficient to buoy up the
Hearts of Christians against all Temporal Evils: If the Spirit could make
supply instead of Christ's Bodily Presence with his people; if it could cheer
them in the absence, and withdrawing of Christ's Humane Nature; can it not much
more comfort us in the absence or loss of outward Enjoyments? As a Tree that
has a River at its Root, can retain its Verdure and Flourishing Sat, though
there be a great Drought, and no Showers come upon it, Jer. 17.8. Ps. 5.2. So
if we have the Comforter within, if we are watered by the Rivers of its
Consolations, may we not be satisfied from our selves, Prove. 14.14. though we
have no Showers of worldly comforts or enjoyments? If men would stir, and
labor, and thereby excite their Natural Heat, they would not absolutely need
Fire in the coldest Weather to warm them. So if Christians did more stir up
Faith, and walk in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost, Acts 9.31. they would little
need or regard the worlds consolations: If you be led by the Spirit of Christ,
it will in some measure work in you, as in him; it will raise in you such
apprehensions, and kindle in you such Affections as were found in Jesus. He
that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. That is, He is of the
same Spirit, of the same Temper, of the same Disposition and Inclinations with
Jesus Christ: As if the same Soul did animate many Bodies; these several
Persons would be of the same Will, and have the same Affections: So the Spirit
of Christ dwelling in his People, the same will be in them as was found in
Jesus, Romans 8.9. Phil. 2.5. O! how freely did Jesus Christ yield himself to
sufferings and death? Ps. 40.7, 8. Lo, I come, I delight to do thy will, O God;
yea thy Law is within my Heart. And what was the Will of God, that Jesus Christ
did delight to do? We are told what this Will was, in Heb. 10.10. viz. that
Jesus Christ should offer his Body once for all! How difficult and hard was
this Service? yet such a Law of Love to the Father and perishing sinners was
written in the Heart of Christ, that he was straightened till this Bloody Baptism
was fulfilled, Luke 12.50. Though his Cup of Sufferings was so deep, so large,
tempered with so many bitter Ingredients, yet he resigned himself, and said,
Father, if this Cup may not pass except I drink of it, thy Will be done. Matt.
26.42. When Peter tempted him to favor, spare, and indulge himself, he sharply
rebuked him, and said, Get thou behind me Satan, thou art an offense to me,
Matt. 16.22, 23. How did Christ deny himself, and subject his Will to the Will
of God? And when Christ was raised from the Dead, how did he despise and
disdain to be tempted to stay here below by the best things of this World?
Would the Riches, Honors, Pleasures, of this world then have allured the Eye,
captivated or chained the Heart of Christ here below? Could such things stay or
stop, detain or six him here below? Was he not exceedingly raised in his Mind
and Affections, above the best things of this world? This was his Request and
Prayer to the Father, Now glorify me with thy own self, with the glory that I
had with thee before the Foundations of the World, John 17.5. His Mind did soar
upwards; his Heart did aspire to a heavenly Kingdom and Glory. Now if this
Spirit of the Lord Jesus do dwell in our Hearts, will it not fix our hearts,
and fortify our resolutions to go through Fire and Water, Floods and Storms,
for the Honor of God, and for the Glory of Christ? Shall we be of timorous,
base, dastardly Spirits, if the blessed Spirit of Jesus do dwell in us? And
shall we not slight also and contemn, turn our Eyes from, and our Backs upon
all the Beauty and Excellency of this world, if the Spirit has given us a
sight of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ? Shall we not cry out to God,
as the Psalmist, Ps. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is
none on Earth that I desire besides thee. How will such a Soul rate away and
rebuke tempting Objects, and say, Get you gone, I have fatness and sweetness; I
have fullness and satisfaction in my Lord Jesus; my Eyes are closed against your
Beauty, my Ears are stopped against your Charms: Christ I have chosen, and I see
no cause to repent of my choice; to him therefore will I cleave and stick for
ever? And that you may obtain this blessed Spirit, and all Spiritual good
things, as flowing from him; Bow your Knees to the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ: And if Parents that are evil, do yet know how to give good gifts
to their Children, much more shall our heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to
them that ask him, Luke 11.13.

FINIS.

