A Word of Information To Them that need it; Briefly opening some most weighty
Passages of Gods Dispensations among the Sons of Men, from the beginning; And
insisting a little upon the State and Condition of the Nations, wherein they
now stand, and particularly of ENGLAND: For this end, That Men may remember
themselves, and turn unto the Lord; and seek to be delivered from the Mysteries
of Iniquity, to walk with God in Fellowship and Communion. To which (as
pertinent hereunto) is annexed, An ADDITION concerning LORD-BISHOPS, and
COMMON PRAYER BOOK. With a Tender ADMONITION to those called PRIESTS, or
MINISTERS: And also, A Loving EXHORTATION to those that have SEPARATED from
their SUPERSTITIONS.

By W. T.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-Spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1660.

A Word of Information To Them that need it, etc.
GOD made Man at the first Upright and Innocent, and Pure and Holy, walking
with him in his pure Nature, in perfect peace, and in boldness before him,
having his Understanding filled with Light and Knowledge from the Lord, and his
spirit possessed with the Spirit of the Lord. And therein he walked before the
Lord in great liberty; only in one thing the Lord laid a Restraint upon him,
Thou shall not eat (says he) of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil,
neither shall ye touch it: for in the day thou eatest thereof, dying thou shall
dye, Genesis 2.17. and 3.3.

Now there was no way for that old enemy Satan, to rob Man of this happy,
peaceable, innocent Condition, but by getting him out of the bounds where God
had set him: for where no Law was, there could be no transgression: and where
no transgression was, death could not enter: for death came in upon Man by sin,
Romans 5.12.

Therefore Satan that old Serpent, sets upon Man here, to allure and entice
him, and flatter him into a trial of that which God had forbidden him, by
presenting a pleasurableness and profitableness in it.

Man yielding, the bound was broken that kept Man with the Lord, and kept out
death and misery. And now Sin entering. (that is, transgressing of Gods will
and pleasure) here with Sin, Death entered: and another spirit than before had
possession in man; even the spirit of the Serpent, that got in, and became
Ruler in the Disobedience.

And now Death came over all in Man, and over all Men. The flourishing state of
his soul in Righteousness and Innocence, that dyed: a spirit of shame and fear,
that covered him, and he now fled from the presence of the Lord. And death also
must now come upon his body, as well as upon his soul: for to dust that must
return. Thus dying Man dyed, according to the Word of the Lord.

Yet now the Lord's mercies were not clean shut up from his Creature, which he
had made so excellent, and given dominion unto over all other Creatures upon
the Earth, Genesis 1.28. but he leaves a way open still for Man's return unto
himself, through a promised Seed, which was contrary to the seed of the Serpent;
and should bruise the Serpents head, that enticing spirit that leads to
Disobedience, Genesis 3.15. So then here is no returning now for Man back again
from Death to Life, but through that Seed that breaks the head of the winding
disobedient spirit.

Now in this fallen state Man lives, and begets Sons and Daughters, and
multiplies and replenishes the Earth. Thus the Earth is filled with Men and
Women, begotten in the fallen condition.

And so as Men increased and multiplied, Sin also that increased, until the
Lord repented that he had made Man, and so drowned every living Creature
wherein was the breath of life, that lived and moved upon the face of the
Earth, Genesis 6.5, 6, 7, 17.

Yet in this sinking dying condition, a Seed there was from the beginning that
served and obeyed the Lord, whose hearts were after him to return again unto
him, who wrought works of Righteousness, and walked with the Lord; as righteous
Abel, and Seth, and holy Enoch, who was translated that he should not see
death. And besides these, a Generation that called upon the Name of the Lord,
and so were called the Sons of God, Genesis 4.26.

Yet these also in process of time wore out, after that they began to corrupt
themselves, mingling themselves with the Daughters of Men, Genesis 6.2. So that in
the days of Noah, only Noah was found Righteous in his Generation, Genesis 6.8,
9. whom the Lord therefore (with his family) reserved from the Flood, to plant
the Earth with, after he had drowned the old world of the ungodly, Genesis 7.1.

Then again, after the Flood, as Men began to multiply, so they corrupted their
ways again before the Lord, so that in Abraham, the eleventh from Noah, which
was about three-hundred sixty seven years after the Flood, God began to gather
to himself a People again out of the rest of the world, who should bear his
Name; and so he called Abraham out from his fathers house, and out of his own
Country, to walk with him where he would appoinc him, Genesis 12.1.

When Abraham was come out, then the Lord blessed him, and promised him to make
of him a great Nation, and that he would bless him that blessed Abraham, and
curse him that cursed Abraham. And said furthermore to him; In thee shall all
families of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 12.2, 3.

So his Posterity in Isaac and Jacob, were counted for the Lords Inheritance,
and owned by him above all the World; and called his Son, his Firstborn. And
by that name he required them of Pharaoh, when he sent to deliver them out of
the house of bondage, Exodus 4.22, 23.

Then when the Lord had delivered them by an outstretched Arm from under
Pharaohs Bondage, to lead them into the Land of Canaan, which he had promised
to Abraham: When he had separated them from Egypt, and brought them into the
Wilderness of Sinai, There he gave them Statutes, and Ordinances; a
Miuistration of Laws, written in Tables of Stone.

Of this Ministration Moses was made the Mediator between God and them; and it
was confirmed by many mighty Signs and Wonders. The Miracles done in Egypt by
the hand of Moses, their passing therow the Red Sea, as on dry land: Moses his
fasting forty days and forty nights: The terrible and dreadful Presence of the
Lord on the Mount; besides his going before them in a Pillar of Cloud by Day,
and in a Pillar of Fire by Night: And many other Signs and Wonders, all
confirmed this Ministry given in the hand of Moses.

Notwithstanding all this, and many more great Signs and Wonders which they saw,
yet this People rebelled against the Lord, and did not walk with him with all
their heart, but grieved him continually, as he complained of them by Moses,
and afterward by all his Prophets.

So that in the fullness of time God sought out another People to bear his Name;
and turned over the Promises made to Abraham, to a spiritual Seed, Children of
the Faith of Abraham: and brake down this partition wall (standing in outward
Ordinances) which he had put between the Jews and Centiles, because they were
all alike.

And so out of both he gathered a People to himself; and made his Son the
Captain of them; and gave to them another Ministry.

Not a Ministration written in Tables of Stone, (as the first was, which was
outwardly presented before their eyes to look upon) But a Ministration which
was inward, written in the Heart, by the Spirit of the living God.

Of this Ministration, the Son was made Mediator; and so this Ministry was
confirmed also by great Signs and Miracles which he did, in healing all manner
of sickness and infirmity among the people, and raising of the dead, and such
like.

This Ministry was of a New Covenant, the Ministry of the Spirit into the
Heart; and therefore it was needful that the Mediator thereof should be such a
one as could enter the spirit of the Creature, even the Lord that Spirit, who
could stand at the door of the heart to minister, Revel. 3.20.

And so here came forth this great Mystery, hid from Ages and Generations,
namely, CHRIST in you the Hope of Glory.

And under this Ministry the Apostle affirmed, That if any man have not the
Spirit of CHRIST, he is none of his, Romans 8.9. for that is his Ministry, to
minister the Spirit; and therefore his Servants and Ministers said plainly,
that they were not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.

Therefore see where all they are that partake not of the Spirit of Christ
Jesus, nor have any Testimony thereof in themselves, witnessing with their
spirits that they are the Sons of God; nor feel the operation thereof in their
own hearts, drawing them after Righteousness and Holiness, but deny it, and
scoff at it in others, (that acknowledge the same, being guided and taught
thereby) as usually Persecuters of Christians have done in the Reign of
Antichrist.

Now, after this Ministry came forth, here arises the Great Mystery also of
Iniquity against it; namely, an Antichrist against Christ in his Ministry, a
carnal worldly spirit, clothing it self under a Form of outward Observations,
and yet setting it self to keep down this Ministry of Christ Jesus; even to
quench and keep down this Spirit of Christ, with the Outward Form, void of the
Power.

This Mystery began to work in the Apostles days: Therefore they called the
Saints out from a Form without the Power, 2 Timothy 3.5.

But it could not grow to the height, till that which let was taken out of
the way.

That which let then, was something that let the Outward Form, which it
grew up under; and that the Persecuting Roman Emperors did a long while: for
they persecuted and killed such as did but profess themselves Christians; so
that under them the Mystery could not come to its height, till they were taken
out of the way. But then, after they were taken out of the way, and the form of
Christianity had scope, then it grew apace, till at last it was headed with an
Universal Bishop: which name the Pope took to himself, and so still it grew,
adding one Superstition to another, and one Abomination to another, and
prevailed greatly against the Saints of the Most High, Revel. 6.9, 10, 11. and
7.14. and 13.7.

So here the holy City was trodden under foot, by this Outward Court, that was,
the Gentiles gotten into an Outward Form, but came no nearer, Revel. 11.2.

And so the Mystery prevailed, until it spread over many Waters, that is,
Peoples, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues, and reigned over the Kings of the
Earth, Revel. 17.1, 15, 18.

And so here, that which the Papists make one great mark of their Church,
namely, the Universality and Consent of Nations; is plainly a great mark of the
Mystery of Iniquity, which overspread multitudes of Nations for a long time,
Revel. 17.2. and 18.3.

And under this Great Mystery, the Portion of the Saints has been, that they
have been persecuted and slain, Revel. 17.6. and 16.5, 6. and in great
Tribulation.

The WHORE making the Nations believe that they were HERETICS, and so killing
them, because they Dissented from their Universal or Catholic Church, as they
called it.

Now here is one chief end of this Writing, to put men upon this Consideration,
Whether you be yet under this Mystery, or come from under it? Whether or no you
have got victory over the Beast, over his Image, over his Mark, over the number
of his Name; as the Saints do, Rev. 15.2. Or you be yet drunk with the Wine of
her Fornication? Rev. 17.2. Are you on the Persecutors part, who are many; or
on the Persecuted part, who are few in comparison? Are you drunk, or are you
sober? are you drunk with men's Inventions, and with blind Zeal, and Ignorance,
and wrath to defend them; or are you come to sobriety, to hear the voice of the
Spirit, and of the Scriptures?

Do not think that because there was a breach from gross Popery in England
formerly, that therefore you are out of the Mystery: For you did but break off
from her in some things, but the Life of that Mystery is not yet slain among
you, so long as you Persecute, and tread under foot the Servants of the Lord;
if you retain the Spirit of the Mystery, that marks you for her Servants,
reform as much as you will in your outward Observations.

One thing I would have you consider of;

Whether do you think that England did step at one step out of the depth of the
Mystery of Iniquity, back again into the pure Truth, as it was once delivered
by Christ and his Holy Apostles? Consider it well.

Nay verily, there have been many stepping forward; and you who in outward
appearance had removed one degree, yet you persecuted all that saw more of the
Mystery than your selves, and separated therefore from you: Whereby it is
apparent, that the Spirit of the Mystery was still in you; And you prosecuted
them with the names of Blasphemy, as the great Whore does that Mother of
Harlots; and your Mother therein; teaching you to call them Heretics, that is,
such as separate from the Truth, because they separated from you; making them
odious by your Names of Blasphemy which you fix upon them, that they might be
hated of all men; and persecuted by you without pity. Such measure have all
they met withal, who have seen your Error in Worship, or Doctrine, or Life,
and have therefore witnessed against it, so far as they saw.

Thus it has been with your Mother, your Church of England, and this has been
her manner of dealing with all that have stepped out from her Errors. She has
retained the Spirit of her Mother, the Mother of Harlots in this her
Fornication, and she cannot clear her self of it. The Imprisonments, Whippings,
and Persecutions of all those She calls Heretics, will jointly witness
against her, That the Spirit of the great Whore is yet retained in her, whose
Mark is Blood. This Mark can she not wipe off, since many have perished in
Prisons, even of late years, through her Persecution.

But if any will contend against it, and defend her to be out from the Mystery
of Iniquity, and in the Truth, walking in the Truth as a True Church of Christ:
We are able to prove to the contrary through the strength of the Lord, even
from her Teachers, from her Ordinances, and from your Lives and Conversations;
all which demonstrate you to be gone astray from the truth, as it was delivered
by Christ, and his Holy Apostles; and are in the Fornication of the great
Whore; are yet drunk with the Wine thereof, and shall also drink of the wine of
her wrath, if you repent not.

Your Teachers teach for hire, as the False Prophets did of old, against which
the True Prophets cried out for so doing. Your Ordinances, none of them will
abide the measuring line of the Scriptures: and so are but the outward Court,
left out for the Gentiles, who tread the holy City under foot. Your lives are
carnal; Your Conversations earthly, in the Lusts of the Flesh, in the Lusts of
the Eyes, in the pride of life; yea, Your Solemnest Meetings are full of that
sin, for which God drowned the old World, Genesis 6.11. even full of Uiolence;
witness the violence done to any that come in, to speak a sober word of truth
among you, and to inform you of your condition. Oh sink down into your selves,
and think, Is such a Company the Spouse of the Lamb Christ Jesus? Is this his
Church, his Body, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, were such things abound?

Take this Word home to your hearts, and consider it well; namely, that you
are not got out of this Mystery of Iniquity, till that from whence it grew be
dissolved. That you may understand this saying, take notice, that the Mystery
of Iniquity grew from hence, even from the Earth unsubdued in Man's heart, which
covering it self with a Profession of Truth outwardly, formed that Profession,
or Religion to its own Lust or Liberty, that the Earth might still be saved
alive in Man, and live, and he enjoy his Lusts therein. And here in this state
stood Balaam, and in his way did the first Heretics run in the Apostles times,
loving the wages of Balaam for reward; and in his steps do they walk to this
day: and those that are one with them in the root and ground, though differing
in outward appearance.

For to this day its the same; The Earth standing in Man's heart, and a
Religion or Profession raised up over that, forms a Mystery of Iniquity, and
begets an Antichrist. It forms a Mystery of Iniquity, or a mist to hide
Iniquity with; it raises a smoke out of the Pit of Man's heart, to blind the
eyes of men with, and begets an Antichrist, a Spirit of Persecution, seeking to
blast the True Spirit with Reproaches, which is Blasphemy. And so under the
name of Heretics, and such like, to slay them, to rid them out of the way,
because they strike at the root, in which they live, by their holy
Conversation; and by their chaste Mind, to the Wisdom of the Lord; abhorring
the smoke and mist of men's devisings, which arises out of man's heart.

More particularly to deal with you, and to set before you your own state or
standing, let us compare you a little with the Primitive Times, and see whether
you answer to the Church then, or to the World which hated it, and persecuted
it.

The Church of Christ then suffered by the World, being distinct from the
World, called out of it, and therefore hated by them of the World, Ye suffered
joyfully the spoiling of your goods, (says Paul to the Church) Heb. 10.32, 33,
34. 1 Thessalonians. 2.14, 15, 16. 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. So then in that time there was the
Haters and the Hated; the Spoilers and the Spoiled; the Abusers and the Abused;
the Wolves devouring, and the Sheep devoured.

Now compare your Church with them. Are you the Sufferers, or those that put
others to Suffering for Righteousness sake? Did not the people of tender
Conscience who could not worship God after the Traditions of men, suffer under
your Church, both formerly when the Antichristian Lording Bishops ruled it, and
so fled, some to New England, and others to other Places? And sinc they were
put down, still you have been the same. What haling, pulling pushing, abusing
of people has been in your Congregations, and by them of your Congregations!
what beating in your Synagogues, stoning in your Streets, stocking, whipping,
imprisoning, persecuting, spoiling of goods, etc! And nowthat those
Antichristian Prelates are coming in again, you are still the same, and the
same measure has been met withal from some of you already.

If any say, Those that did so, or do so, are but the Rude Rabble, and are not
to be counted for our Church. I Answer, These things have been done among you,
and by them that are of you unrestrained. If by the Rude Rabble, then behold
the Rude Rabble are the strongest part of your Church, if they do such things,
and you cannot restrain them from that violence. If you say. Yea, we could have
hindered them if we would, but we did not, because we look upon those they
abused, as Seducers. Answ. Then see, you consented to their violence, and so
made your selves Partakers with them; as Saul did, when he consented to them
that stoned Stephen. But say you, They were Seducers, they were Heretics that
were abused, and our Ministers spoke against them. I Answer, So did they stone
Steven, as a Seducer, and all the violence done to them that feared the Lord,
was in such like thoughts of them; they thought they were Seducers, and their
Ministers spoke against them. But where did ever the true Church use violence
even to Seducers and Heretics? Consider that. They suffered violence
themselves, but never used violence to others. So see your selves now on what
part you stand: For whatever they be that you use violence to for conscience
sake, whether they be in the Truth, or be Seducers; yet your violence to them
declares you not to be the true Church, but to be the World, where the
persecution is found. You are on the Persecuters part, not on the Persecuted:
You are not they that the World hates, but you are they that do hate others
for Conscience sake; such as Paul said they Themselves were before Conversion,
hateful and hating one another, Titus 3.3. and so others suffer under you for
Conscience sake, even those against whom you cannot justly complain, for any
wrong done to you by them: and so they suffer innocently as to you, although
they should be Seducers. So see your selves now, That your Church resembles not
the Church of Christ in the Primitive time: but You fully resemble the World,
that then abused the Saints, and Servants of the Lord. And for your counting
and calling them Heretics, and Seducers that suffer under You and your
Ministers: This makes the Sufferers more resemble the true Church, to be called
and counted Seducers by a violent Generation; for so were the Saints accounted
in the Primitive times by a like Generation as you are. And whereas some may
say, Its but the rude Rabble that use violence. I answer, Its manifestly proved
by their Actions, that not only they, but their Teachers also are guilty of the
same violence, partly by stirring up the Rude People, and encouraging them
thereunto; and partly also by exercising it with their own hands, as some of
them have done; and partly also by unjust proceedings, through Covetousness
and Desire of filthy Lucre, mingled with a wrathful, raging, implacable,
cruel, unjust, and unmercifull Spirit, having spoiled Families, making a prey
of their Goods. Judge in your selves, Is this like the Saints in the Primitive
Times, or like the World? Is this like the Sheep, or like the Wolves that
devour? Again your principal men in many of your Congregations, have had a deep
hand in these Actions of Violence, even your JUSTICES, and other OFFICERS among
you, who have sometimes encouraged the Rude Rabble in their Violence against
the Innocent, and oftentimes even themselves buffetted and abused, and whipped
and stocked, and thrust out from among them, those that harmed them not; yea
often have sent them to Prison, and there most cruelly entreated them, during
their pleasure, and that without any just crime, or breach of any of their
Laws many times; even thus have they dealt to such as have wronged no man, but
only sought to inform you of your dangerous state in which you stand, as
enemies to God, and his Truth, and ways; wading in Superstitious Inventions,
which will not profit you. For this thing have you thus abused them: and you
are all guilty from top to toe, from highest to lowest, who have consented in
your hearts to the violence done. So see your state where you stand: See by
your Antipathy to such as fear the Lord, and by your Agreement with the world,
where you are. You are yet even of the world, though you be counted a Church.
You have the Name, but not the Thing: You have not the Spirit and Life of the
Saints: And so we have good reason to separate from you, and to come out from
amongst you, as we are commanded by the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. Revel. 18.4.
For, your Comparison holds better with the Synagogues of the Jews, than with
the Churches of Christ: and yet you fall short of them also.

In them there was Haling, Pulling, Beating, Thrusting forth, Abusing, using
Violence; as you may read in the Acts of the Apostles. And so here is your
pattern, even the Synagogues of the Jews, where the Servants of the Lord were
abused, for holding forth the Truth. But herein you excel those Synagogues in
Wickedness, and fall short of them in Moderation: In that they gave liberty to
men to speak among them, and to reason and dispute among them; as you may read,
Act. 13.14, 15. and Act. 17.1, 2. and in many other places in that Book: Where
you may read what liberty they gave unto the Apostles and Saints in those
times; though they came with a new Doctrine to them, which overturned all their
former state of a Church: yet did they not abuse or molest them, until they
heard Doctrine delivered which they accounted dangerous and erroneous: But you
with open mouth and violence are ready to swallow men up before they can well
speak a sentence out to be understood; yea, though you your selves cannot deny
the truth of that which is spoken. So that you fall far short of the Jews
Synagogues in moderation and sobriety: even short of those whom you your selves
count Persecuters of the true Church. How should you then be the true Church?
Your Violence breaks out, before you understand wherefore; so did not theirs:
So you are worse than they. And this is your state and condition. So see your
selves herein; and see your Ministers what they are that encourage you herein.

The Old World which was destroyed by water, and Sodom and Gomorrah which were
destroyed by fire, are revived in your Streets and Assemblies; yea, in your
solemn Assemblies, in the point of Violence, which was a principal thing
topping up all their wickedness, for which they were destroyed. The Old World
was full of Violence, Genesis 6.11. and so was Sodom unto strangers: And so are
your Streets and Synagogues; and therefore spiritually you are more like Sodom
and Egypt, where our Lord is crucified, than to the Church of Christ.

Therefore take not your selves any longer to be that you are not; nor
blaspheme the Name of Christ any longer, by calling your selves his Church,
while you live in such wickedness; but rather fear his Indigation, lest that,
or some like judgment come upon you, which came upon those who lived in
Violence as you do. The Church of Christ is pure; And whoever gets the name,
and yet lives in impurity, shall be kept out from entering into the New
Jerusalem, which is now coming down from God out of Heaven; not seen with
outward eyes, nor known to carnal hearts, nor entered into by the unclean; and
yet her gates stand open day and night.

But to keep lower to your capacity. In the Primitive times the Church was
patient under their sufferings, 2 Thessalonians. 1.4. Are you so? Or are not they
rather found such, who suffer by you? Do not ye cast out hard speeches with
your Violence against them that are found in the like patient suffering with
the Saints in the Primitive times? So see and judge impartially: Is it you that
resemble the Church of Christ; or is it those that you rage against that
resembles it?

Again, Is not your Church made up of such persons as fear not God, ungodly men
and women, Sweaters, Drunkards, Cursed speakers, Revilers of those that are
good, Proud and haughty and high-minded Persons, glorying in Apparel and gay
clothing, other than what the Apostles of our Lord approved of; conceited
persons, yet dark and ignorant in the things of God, men that take pleasure in
Wantonness and Vanity, and Pastimes (as they call them) who count foolish
talking and jesting, an ornament to their speech, and grace to their behavior,
being past feeling in themselves of the things that displease God, and quench
the Spirit; men that savor not the things of God, nor have any pleasure and
delight in Holiness and Righteousness, to whom it is a burden even to hear of
things spiritual, that belong to the Kingdom of God, out of whose communication
spiritual things are banished; so that it is uncouth and distastful to them to
confer of the things of the Kingdom of God before them, and especially when
they are feeding themselves without fear upon the good creatures of God. Others
are carnally minded, worldly minded, having their spirits eaten up with the
Thoughts of the world, and Cares of the world, and Love of the world, and
Honor of the world, and Lusts of the world; Covetous persons, who dare lie one
to another for their advantage, and overreach one another for the greediness
of gain; Promise-breakers, who will promise to one another, and frequently fail
one another in their Promises; so that you dare hardly trust one another.

Is not your Church now made up of these and such like persons, guilty of these
and such like wickednesses? Pick out all that are such (in your thoughts) and
see how many will be left behind. If any be, they are called out by the Lord,
who says, Come out of her my People, lest you partake of her sins, and so
partake of her plagues. To be superstitious, though never so much in the
traditions of men, it will not keep off the wrath of God from such workers of
Iniquity. And you have nothing else (that is peculiar to your selves in your
Church State) to be zealous of: as has been manifested in another Writtng,
called, A Reproof to your Priests, or Ministers, etc.

Now consider in the fear of God, as if you were to give account of your
judgment in that thing before him, and before his holy Angels; Are such as
these, think you, such (I say) as are reckoned up, such as your Church is made
up of; Are such (I say) the Church of Christ? Are these the Church in God the
Father, sanctified by his Spirit? Are these the body of Christ? Are these the
pillar and ground of Truth? For the true Church of Christ is all these. If such
persons as you consist of be the Church, then tell me who are the World? Oh how
apparent it is what you are! and yet have you Teachers heaped up to your selves
after your own lusts, answerable thereunto, who sew pillows under your elbows,
and bear up your name for CHRISTIANS in this State.

If any one oppose the things here written, I shall more closely come to him
with these QVAERIES following, which I require him to answer in himself clearly
without dawbing, lest he stop his own way, and the way of others from returning
and looking after the Kingdom of God.

Quaery. 1. Whether there be such a thing as a Cup of Fornication
over-spreading the Nations since the days of Christ, wherewith the Nations are
made drunk? according to Revel. 19.2. Chap. 18.23. Quaer. 2. Whether there be
such a thing as a great Whore that sits upon many Waters, that is, Peoples,
Multitudes, Nations and Tongues? according to Revel. 17.1, 15. Quaer. 3.
Whether she has not prevailed to corrupt the Earth with her Fornication,
according to Revel. 19.2. even to give to all Nations to drink of the Wine of
the Wrath of her Fornication, Chap. 14.8. and 18.3. and so to make them drunk
therewith, Revel. 17.2. Yea, and prevailed over the Kings of the Earth also, to
make them drink of the same Cup? Revel. 17.2. Chap. 18.3. Quaer. 4. Whether
this great Whore shall not be judged from the Lord, and burnt with fire?
according to Revel. 18.8. Quaer. 5. Whether shall not they that partake of her
sins, partake of her plagues? according to Rev. 18.4. Quaer. 6. Whether cannot
this Whore be known to the Servants of the Lord, seeing the Book of the
Revelations which declares her, was written for this end, to show unto his
Servants things which were to come to pass? Revel. 4.1. and Chapter 1.1. Quaer. 7.
Whether it does not highly concern us all to be able to know her, and the Cup
of her Fornications, that so we may avoid her plagues, by coming out of her?

More particularly thus: Whether it does not highly concern us all to know,
What this Whore is? What her golden Cup of Fornication is? and by what means
she reaches it forth unto the Inhabiters of the Earth, to make all Nations
drunk therevvith, that so we may take heed of it, and seek to be cleared from
it?


If these QVAERIES be yielded unto; then in the next place (for discovering a
little further what this Whore and her Fornication is) it is Quaeried;

1. Whether she be not called WHORE for departing from the Bed of Christ to
another husband? More plainly thus: for departing from being chaste to the
Counsels of Christ, and from lying down in his Wisdom; to let in the Wisdom of
the flesh, and submit to the Inventions of man, instead of Christ's Counsels?
Whether her Whoredom does not lie herein principally, according as the
Israelites formerly were charged with Whoredom for the like? Ezekiel. 6.9.

2. And whether this be not the golden Cup of her Fornication, wherewith she
has overcome the Nations, and made them drunk: namely, A Pack of men's
Inventions and Traditions, gallantly composed to the fleshly mind, and decently
ordered together, and imposed and upheld with great reverence (as to outward
appearance, and as all Idols have been upheld with a like reverent Solemnity)
so that therewith she has taken the minds of the Inhabiters of the Earth so
generally, and the Kings of the Earth also; and has subjected them to those
Inventions, and overcome their minds to fall under them, as under the Counsels
and Ordinances of the Lord; and with that conceit has made them drunk: so that
they being intoxicated with that conceit, like drunken men, will hear no reason
against them, though evident from the Scriptures; but even like Drunkards,
fight and quarrel, and are ready to buffet, and kill and slay them, that shall
not submit to the same Inventions with them, and call them, and count them
Ordinances of God as they do?

Let any one that opposes this, show what the general Cup of Fornication is
since the days of Christ, if this be not it: and let him show how his Cup will
answer the things spoken of in the Revelation concerning it. Let him show
another Cup so general, wherewith the Nations have been made drunk, according
to what is said, Revel. 14.8. and 17.2. and 18.3, 23. and 19.2.

3. If the Cup of Fornication be thus understood, then it is Quaeried. Whether
the means by which she reaches forth this Cup to the Inhabiters of the Earth
so generally, be not by their National Ministries? Whether any other way is
found large enough and adaequate to the work; namely, to effect a general
Fornication to men's Inventions, and to subject the minds of men so generally to
own Inventions and Traditions of men, for Ordinances of God; and to keep them
resting under that Fornication, but Ministries that may go over them all?

4. Whether the Nations be willing to lie down under, and submit to; or have
layen down under, and submitted to the Deceivings of any Ministries, but them
they own, and pay Wages to? If they be deceived, as the Scripture witnesses
they are, Rev. 18.23. Then is it not from their own Ministries, seeing they
will not receive Truths nor Deceits neither from any other, but fight against
them?

Now thou who have read these things, and thereby receivest any light into
thine understanding; take heed henceforth of reviling the Servants of the Lord,
who in his fear follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, leading them out of the
Mystery of Inniquity by steps, as they have been able to bear: Who have tried
their ways by the Word of Truth, and tried also the false deceivable ways of
men's Traditions and Inventions. Take heed, I say, of speaking evil of the
things thou understands not: and if thou have been guilty hereof formerly,
repent of that wickedness, and pray to the Lord to forgive the thoughts of
thine heart, and the hard speeches of thy mouth, uttered against the ways of
Truth in the time of thy Ignorance.

And rest not until thou have got out of those Mists which have risen out of
the bottomless Pit, and which have darkened the Sun in the firmament; that is,
the pure shining of the Light into the Conscience. Haste, haste out of that
which the Wrath and Indignation of the Lord must come upon, and fly to him in
the humility of thy soul, repenting of thy error, and blindness, and
hypocrisy, and evil state and course of life thou have been in, and come down
to be guided and led of that pure Light which leads to Eternal Life, and so to
come to the Covenant of God, the New Covenant, which all are in that are owned
by him. For this is my Covenant, says the Lord, In those days, I will write
my Laws in their minds, and put them in their hearts. And whosoever is not come
into this Covenant, he is not owned of God: For all his, from the least to the
greatest, shall all be taught of God, by his Spirit. And therefore says the
Apostle plainly, Romans 8. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none
of his. Now this is that which The ANTICHRIST by the Mystery of Iniquity, has
held you off from: for his working has been against the New Covenant, which we
now clearly see, and by what means he does it, (eternal praises be given to our
heavenly Father, who has made known his wiles and deceivings) For it has been
with a golden Cup, that the Anti-Anointing, or Antichrist has deceived the
Naitons; even a fine spun outward Form of Religion, of some kind or other; So
keeping their minds still outward from that New Covenant; keeping them busy
with this Form or that Form outward, that they might never come to mind God in
the way of his Covenant. For whereas the New Covenant comprehends all the
Worship of God inwardly in it self; Circumcision inward, Baptism inward, viz.
the answer of a good Conscience to God, which is that that saves; Temple
inward, House of Prayer inward, Worship inward in Spirit, and in Truth.
Contrariwise, The Mystery of Iniquity has kept men's minds still outward, and
pleased the carnal spirit with abundance of Outward Observations; thereby
resting it in them, by blessing them in their diligent Observation thereof; So
that they have not been stirred up to seek after the knowledge of God in
themselves, and to feel the Communion and Fellowship inwardly with him in the
way of his New Covenant in the Spirit, which CHRIST was made the Mediator of.
And so about these Outward Forms and Ordinances (so called) they fight and
quarrel, and seek to kill and destroy, and so still are kept in the murdering
spirit.) And so lot this be A Sign unto you, to let you know in what State that
Spirit holds you, that makes you zealous for outward forms. Is it not in the
murdering State where Cain was? and yet you see not his wiles; for he that
murders is the same from the beginning. In the New Covenant its otherwise: for
there is a Spirit that delights to seek and save that which is lost; and that is
of God, and conformable to the Image of his Son; To whom be Glory and Honor
for ever, Amen.

An ADDITION concerning LORD-BISHOPS.
Let the Light in every ones Conscience (who have any acquaintance with the
Scriptures) judge, Whether Our Lord Jesus Christ allowed of that Lordship and
Dominion, which those called Lord-Bishops take upon them, or exercise; when as
he reproved the very first appearance of such a thing among his Disciples, read
Matthew. 20.25, 26. Mark 10.42, 43. Luke 22.25, 26. says he, The Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are great exercise
Authority upon them; But it shall not be so among you: but whosoever will be
great (mind, that's the thing he reproves) whosoever will be great let him be
your Minister, that is, servant (and then he repeats it over again in other
words) And whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your Servant. And in
Luke its thus expressed; Let him be as a younger. As if he should say, carry
quite contrary to such a one in the thing that he would have. Whereas he
affects Greatness, carry to him as a Servant, and as a Younger; give him not
the honor of an Elder.

Now where is their Obedience to Christ, who dare take upon them such a thing
which he has so plainly forbidden? Yea, and forbidden others also to receive
them as such, if any will be so bold as to exalt themselves among them, and
become great. For faith our Lord, If any will get up, and be great among you,
let him be your servant, and as a younger. Wherein the words of Christ is
employed; That Dominion and Greatness cannot grow up among them, except they
concur with him that seeks it, and give it to him. Therefore as laying a
charge of keeping down such a spirit, upon the rest of his Disciples, he bids
them, not to concur and consent to such a thing, nor to give that greatness
to any of his Disciples among them, if they should seek it; but to carry to
such, as to a Younger, and not as to an Elder; and to let him be as one that
serves, and not as one to Lord it, and Rule, and have Dominion. And so to keep
down that spirit, that it may not be among You as it is among the Gentiles,
that know not me to be the one Lord. Honor is in him that gives it; If you
give it not they cannot have it.

To open the thing a little further, for the simplicity's sake, that is in some
who think, That because there is the name Bishop in Scripture, that therefore
such Bishops as have the Name now in these days, have their Authority from
Scripture. To such I say, Mind but the Scriptures well, and you will find that
the Name Bishop was not given to one that Lorded it over the rest; but to the
several Pastors, or Teachers, or feeders of the Flock of Christ, read Act.
20.17, and so on to the 28, and 35. The place is so translated that it may be
you will discern little in the bare reading of it. I shall therefore open it a
little plainly, according to the Letter of it; not by giving you another
meaning, or Interpretation, then what it says, but by letting you see what it
says.

In the 17 Verse its said, that Paul sent from Miletus to Ephesus, to call the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus. When they were come, he puts them in mind
after what manner he had been among them at all seasons, serving the Lord in
all humility of mind, etc. And so sets his own Holy Conversation, in which he
had lived among them, as an Example fresh before their eyes, to have it in
remembrance: and tells them, that they should see his face no more: And so
exhorts them, saying, Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock over which
the Holy Ghost has made you OVERSEERS, to feed the Church of Christ, which he
has purchased with his own blood. That Word that may yet keep the thing a
little dark to you, is the word OVERSEERS, which should be translated BISHOPS,
(if that word be to be used at all in Scripture) For its the same here which is
in other places of Scripture, where you read the word Bishop, namely (...),
EPISCOPOS, Bishops. And why it should be translated OVERSEERS here, and BISHOPS
in other places, I know not, except to keep the people in ignorance. For,
translare it Bishops here, and then too great a light (might they think) would
be let in to the people to fee what ones the Bishops formerly were. For here
the people might see, There were many of them in one Tongregation, or, at
least, more then one here in this Congregation at Ephesus, which was but a
City, and the Flock or Congregation in which the Holy Ghost set them Bishops,
was but a Company of people gathered out from the rest of that City, (as you
may read in the 19. Chapter where you may see the very beginning of this Church,)
And yet was there several Bishops in that Company, (...). Take heed to your
selves (says the Apostle,) and to all the flock in which the holy Ghost has
set you Bishops, (...), to feed the Church of God (or in plain English) to feed
the called out Flock of God, which he has obtained by his own blood: For so
was the Church, It was a Flock called out from among the World; and so the word
(...) sounds.

So then, in this Church at Ephesus (which was but one Company or Flock, lately
gathered out of the world,) In this one Flock were set Bishops more then one:
and there they were set to feed them, and watch over them, which were therefore
called (...), Watchers over, which is here translated OVERSEERS, but in other
places of Scripture its translated BISHOPS.

Now, if you will have the word OVERSEERS here used, as it is in the
Translation; then do but use the same word in all other places of Scripture
where you find the word Bishop (as it is the same in the Greek which you call
the original,) and then not so much as the Word BISHOP would be found in the
Scriptures. Or if you had rather retain the word Bishop, then use it in this
place (namely Act. 20.28.) as well as in other Places: And then you may plainly
see, that they were no Lords, but were Pastors and Feeders of the Flock; and
several of them were set in this one Congregation at Ephesus, not as
Strangers, meeting there for a season, but set in it by the Holy Ghost, to feed
them, and have a care over them, to keep them walking in the simplicity of the
Truth, and pure Life of Righteousness, and hence from their Vigilance over
them were they called (...) Watchers over, or Overseers. And this is that which
is called Bishop, in our English Translation of Scripture.

Or if we look upon the word (...), Bishop, as taking its rise from (...) and
(...), which are soon put together; then ((...), signifying, in, among, over,
before; and (...), in Latin, Meta ad quam Sagittarii collimant, A Mark to have
in ones eye to aim at) then I say, the word (...), Bishop, imports as much as A
Mark, or example set before one to have in ones eye; one eminent, and worthy to
be followed. But I stick not upon curious Derivation of Words; whencesoever the
Word is derived, yet the thing understood by that Word, contains that in it.
And thus CHRIST, the alone Archbishop The word Archbishop stgnifies
Chief-Bishop, and its all one with Chief-Shepheard: and is proper to Christ
alone. Therefore the Apostles gave it only to him, calling him (...) that is,
Chief-shepheard, 1 Pet. 5.4. And Christ Jesus absolutely forbade this
pre-eminence to all his Disciples, it being proper only to himself. So that he
that usurps the Title of Archbishop, or Chief-Bishop, to himself, is a Robber
of Christ's honor; and stands in direct Rebellion against him in that thing,
who said, It shall not be so among you, But whosoever will be chief among you,
let him be your Servant, Matthew. 20.16, 17.
was a Mark, or Example to aim at, above all Examples, Learn of me (says he)
for I am meek and lowly in heart: And next unto him the Holy Apostles
propounded their own innocent, unblamable Conversation, as an Example or Mark
to look at, and follow: Follow us (says the Apostle) for our Conversation is
in Heaven, Phil. 3.17, 20. And they required this still, of all others, who
were received as Bishops among the Saints, that they should be men without
blame. A Bishop (says he) must be blameless, 1 Timothy 3.2. That so they might
be as living Examples, before the rest. Not Lords over Gods Heritage, but being
Examples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. And so Paul bids Timothy, be an Example to
the Flock, 1 Timothy 4.12. And thus they were (...), Leaders, or Captains, by
example, and by going before the rest in a Holy Life, not by a Lordly Power,
(for that was excluded plainly, and forbidden both by Christ, and by his
Apostles,) but I say, by Example: And therefore they were to be unblameable
men, or else they were not to be received as Bishops, because they could not be
Ensamples to the Flock; if their Life was blamable. Now such as these, who
walked before the Flock, in a Holy Life; feeding them with the Word of Truth,
and leading them in the same Steps, by their Example, these were called (...),
Ductores, Leaders, which is translated Rulers, Heb. 13.7.17. (...), etc.
Remember them that have he Rule over you, and Verse. 17. Obey them that have the
Rule over you, (which Expressions they that are out of the feeling of the Life
of Truth, are ready to apply to the upholding of an Antichristian Power.) But
take but the words together, and compare spiritual things with spiritual, and
you will see who they were the Apostle speaks of, when he names those that have
the rule over the flock. They were such Leaders of the Flock, by their
unblameable Example, and pure Faith. Mind his Words, Ver. 7. Remember (says
he) your Leaders, (for so the Words are rendered nearer to the Greek) who have
spoken to you the Word of God, whose faith follow, considering the end of their
conversation (what is that?) Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and
for ever. And Verse. 17. he bids, Obey such Leaders, and submit your selves, for
they watch for your Souls (they break their sleep and ease for your Souls,) as
they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief,
for that is unprofitable for you. See, they were such men whom the Apostle bids
remember, and follow, and submit to, as were of an exemplary Faith, and of an
exemplary Conversation, which had Christ, the Meek Lamb of God, for the end of
it. Now such Leaders as these the Lambs are ready to follow, and to submit to,
and obey them that thus go before them, leading them by an unblamable
Conversation, and by the wholesome word of Truth. But a Stranger they cannot
follow, they cannot follow a Proud Man, a Scornful Man, an Earthly-minded Man,
a Deceitful Man; a Lording Spirit, that seeks an Earthly Kingdom, and
Dominion, and to have pre-eminence here. Such they cannot follow; As they are
Babes and Little Children themselves, so a Little Child must lead them. And so
the Scripture of the Prophets is fulfilled which Prophesying of the Kingdom of
Christ, says, A Little Child shall lead them, Isa. 11.6. One that's Innocent,
Humble, Meek, Lowly in heart like Christ. Pure, Faithful, Unblamable in his
conversation: Such a One shall lead, and such a One must he be that is a Leader
in the Kingdom of Christ. Not a Great pufft up proud Lord. For he by his
Example leads quite from the Kingdom of God, whither the Lambs are going, and
leads into the Pomp and Vanities of this present world, from which they are
flying, and against which he made others to promise and vow; though he be the
forwardest to lead into them. How should the Lambs follow such a one? judge
you, and judge as you will be judged.

Again further, The Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, (which is the evidence of
things not seen, and the substance, or being, of things hoped for) This Faith,
I say, is not consistent with Exaltation, and Greatness, and Lordship among
the Ministers of Christ. Therefore says Christ Jesus to such, How can ye
believe, who receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that comes
of God only? John 5.44. You may see, he looks upon such, as out of the Faith.
For observe, the ground of it lies thus. His Faith, or the Faith that he works,
which is the Faith of his Kingdom is not a dead blind thing, such as the Faith
of the world is: But it is a clear sight, Evidence, or Demonstration of things
not seen; even of the things of his Kingdom, which the carnal eye sees not,
nor the bodily eye; Now, where does a man come to this Sight or evidence, this
open view, (as I may say) of things spiritual, wherein the Faith of Christ's
Kingdom consists? Christ himself has told us, It is in a Low Place, that is,
in a Low Condition, the state of a Little Child, as of one new born; And
except a man come to this, He cannot see the Kingdom of God. For while the
mind and heart of the Creature is pregnant, or filled with desires, and
affections that are of this world, there is no room for things spiritual, and
eternal to enter: Neither does he obtain the sight of them from the Lord, for,
It Is to Babes that he reveals them. Therefore a man must be emptyed, and
brought down as a Child, before God open to him the Treasures of his Kingdom.
God hides the things of his Kingdom, and keeps them back from the High and
Lofty, who are big with Wisdom, and Prudence, and Learning; and reveals them
unto Babes, (praised be his Name therefore) He replenishes the Humble and
Hungry with Good Things, but the Rich he sends Empty away. The Proud he beholds
a far off. his Eye is upon such a one to bring him low, and abase him. So that
as men grow great and high, and lift up themselves, they go out from the place
or condition of seeing the things of the Kingdom of God: they go from the
condition to which God shows them, and to which he gives the evidence and
demonstration of them inwardly by his Spirit: and so this is to go out from the
Faith of Christ, which consists in this evidence, or sight, or demonstration
shining into the soul, and giving possession of the thing seen unto the soul.
And therefore how can ye believe, who receive Honor one of another, and go up
into Greatness, out of the sight of the Kingdom which is Spiritual? The lower
that the Creature becomes, the more capable he is to receive of the Spiritual
Treasure, and the further he enters into the Kingdom that is Spiritual, and not
of this World; but the higher he grows in this Worlds Pomp, and Greatness, and
Glory, the further off he goes from the Faith of Christ: So that one may say to
such, How can ye believe? And here we stand upon firm ground, in denying the
POPE, who takes the title of Universal Bishop; and in denying all other Lording
Bishops, followers of his steps; I say, we stand upon firm ground in denying
them all, as men gone far, far, far off from the Paths of such Bishops as the
Scriptures own; and are fallen under the temptation which Satan presented
before Christ, even the glory of this World: And whither then can they lead us
by their Example? Consider it well. The Kingdom of God consists of little
Children, says Christ, and a little Child must lead them; and not such as are
great, and seek pre-eminence: such are gone out from the Faith, and follow the
steps of Diotrephes, who loved to have the Pre-eminence (that thing which
Christ had forbidden) 3 Epist. Joh. ver. 9, 10. shows you what he did. He began
to be a Wolf in the Church of Christ, when he had entered into the love of
Pre-eminence. And so it must be with those that follow his steps; It cannot be
otherwise, especially now since the Mystery of Iniquity has formed and founded
a Politic Kingdom for their great spirits to rise in, in the similitude of the
World (though under the pretense of Christ's Church) And so they cannot be
Examples to the Flock, if they would, but must be Devourers thereof; The very
Mystery that they have given up themselves into, will force them to be
Devourers and Scatterers of the Flock; though some of them may have a pity
arising sometimes in their hearts, and would not; yet the Mystery of Iniquity
is so deeply founded, that it carries them on who come into it whether they
will or no, to help to bear it up against the Lambs of Christ: As a Wheel in a
Clock is forced on by the motion of other Wheels: So it is in this great
Mystery. And so the Lambs cannot look upon any that manage a place in the
Kingdom of that Mystery, as full Friends and Examples, but as Enemies and
Devourers, and Scatterers. And so it has been, ever since this Mystery of
Iniquity got up, The Lambs have been scattered and devoured, and trampled upon
by that spirit that loves the Pre-eminence. And hereof there has been
sufficient proof: For though those Wolves have gloried in the Church, the
Church, (as the Masters of Assemblies and Provinces) yet the Church has been
trod in the dirt by them. And therefore if any one would look back upon the
Church of Christ, and view the state of it for many hundreds of years past;
they must not look upon the National Episcopal Churches, to think to see it
there; but upon them who have been devoured, scattered, persecuted, slain, kept
under, and trod upon by those Episcopal and National Churches. If you would see
the true Church where it has been in these times past, See it there under
Persecution by the Bishops, and by others that loved to have the Pre-eminence;
or else you cannot see it at all: For the Bishops Churches, and such as theirs,
have been but the Outward Court, given to the Gentiles, which have trodden the
holy City under foot, Revel. 11.2. And so the Dominion and Greatness, and
Lordship, such as the Lords of the Gentiles use, (which was forbidden by Christ
among his Disciples, Matthew. 20.25, 26.) This they could bring into the Outward
Court, which is given to the Gentiles; because it is answeable to the Gentiles,
and their nature. And so the Outward Court has had the manner of the Gentiles
Government in it, and it has been suitable to them: But whosoever comes to be a
little Child in the Kingdom of Christ Jesus, he will find it unsuitable to his
spirit; and that he must lie down as a Sufferer under it, as his
fellow servants have done, who have suffered great Tribulation under it, and
have been trampled under foot by it for hundreds of years, And here has been
the state of the Church of Christ, the holy City, It has been sore shot at, by
Words, Revilings, Reproaches, Blasphemies, several Nicknames, Persecutions,
Tribulations, which it has endured under the great prevailing Mystery of
Iniquity, which has prevailed over Multitudes, Nations, Kings, Tongues,
Peoples: But yet (though it has had the strength of the Gates of Hell) it
could not prevail against this Little Flock of the Lambs of Christ, (according
as Christ promised to Peter) who have still risen (though trodden under foot)
and have been made to witness against it, in some part of it or other. Nor
shall it ever prevail against the Lambs, the true Church, to root them out, as
it desires. The time is near for the tumbling down of those Mysteries again;
and then Woe, Woe, and Wailing will be the portion of them that are found therein.

And so now you may see whither they are gone that seek Pre-eminence, and
Greatness, and Lordship in the Kingdom of Christ: They are gone out from the
Doctrine of Christ; they are gone out from the Faith of Christ, and so from the
Fellowship of God, 2 John 9. For God dwells not with the high and lofty, but
with the lowly in heart, with him that is of an humble and contrite heart; such
as the Doctrine of Christ teaches us to be. From all these things they are
gone out, who exalt themselves as Lords over Gods Heritage. Whither then are
they gone? Even into the World, and so into the Enmity with God: for, he that
will be the Friend of the World (by loving the things of it) he makes himself
the Enemy of God: And so they stand in the Enmity, not in Amity with God; in
the World, not in the Church of Christ. For it is in the World where the gods
many, and lords many are. There be, faith Paul, gods many, and lords many; but
to us (who are in the Church, and of the Church of Christ) there is but one God
the Father, and one Lord (namely) Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 8.6. Ephesians. 4.5. Now, if
to us there be but one Lord, who is Jesus Christ, as the Apostle affirms: Then
where is there any place among us for the many Lords? If any other will be
Lord, must be not go out into the World to receive his Lordship there? seeing
there can be no more Lords admitted of among us but One, who is the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. And therefore that was a common phrase of speech among the Apostles and
Disciples of Christ, to say, Our Lord JESUS CHRIST or, CHRIST JESUS our Lord,
acknowledging and ascribing that peculiar Prerogative over them, to him alone.
And therefore the Apostles did forbid others to be Lords, or, as Lords over
Gods Heritage; and bid them be Ensamples to the Flock, 1 Pet. 5.3. (...),
Impressions (as it were) or Footsteps for them to walk in. Now, how can they be
Examples, and leave Impressions for the Lambs of CHRIST'S Kingdom to walk in,
of Meekness and Lowly-mindedness, who get up into Greamess and
High-mindedness? who love the World, and seek to be great in it? Can these be
Examples to the Flock of CHRIST, teaching them by their Example to walk humbly
with God, and lowly in heart, not loving this present evil world, nor the Pomp
and Glory of it, who get into the Pomp and Glory, and Greatness of it
themselves? If this be to be Ensamples, to go a quite contrary way; then may we
as well say, That a Coward that runs from his Colors, is an example of
Courage; or that a Drunkard or Glutton is an example of Temperance; or that
those who turned back in their hearts to Egypt, were examples of perseverance
in the journey to Canaan, whom God slew in the Wilderness, that they never saw
the borders of Canaan. And it were well if all the backsliders in heart, who
for the Love of this present evil World do turn their backs of the Spiritual
Kingdom of God, would consider this, and call to mind the hand of the Lord
against them, and fear before him; for his hand is not shortened. And confider
seriously with your selves in coolness of spirit, If you think in your
consetences, that the righteous and holy God will be thus mocked by them that
shall pretend to be his Servants; namely, to have them to thrust themselves
into those places, and under those names where they should be examples of
humility, to teach his little Flock by their examples, to be humble and lowly
in heart, and then to lead them a quite contrary way by their example: Yea, to
enjoin others by words, (before they admit them into the Congregation of
Christ's Flock, as they express it in their Common Prayer Book; I say, before
they admit them to enjoin them) to promise and vow, to forsake the Devil and
all his Works, (and in particular) the vain pomp and glory of the World, and
all the covetous desires of the same; and then by their example teach them the
contrary, and set a pattern before them of embracing this present evil World
(like Demas) and of getting up into the vain pomp and glory of it.

Judge righteously in the fear of God, and let the Light of Christ have place
in your hearts; and judge righteously for God, if such be not Enemies to the
Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Enemies to your Souls, keeping them in
darkness and blindness, by their earthly and carnal conversation, and loving
of this present Worlds glory: and whether you are ever like to come to see the
Kingdom of God by following them, who are gone so far from the path of it
themselves?

Trifle not with God, for he will not be mocked. And he is bringing up again
into sight and possession that Kingdom (praises be to his Name) which has long
been trodden under foot in the outward Court, by such as are of this World, and
love the greatness and glory of it, (as the Gentles do) and are therefore
counted and called by him Gentiles, Revel. 11.2.

And now kiss the Son of Righteousness which is arising, lest he be angry, and
ye perish out of his way (as some have done) when his wrath is kindled but a
little; And let go the Superstitious Vanities, wherewith the Nations have been
deceived for a long time; and turn to his pure Truth, and embrace his pure
Doctrine according as he left it, and come to live in it, and to find your
Teacher near you, that you may find fellowship with God in your souls. So shall
you soon become wiser than your Teachers, and wiser than your Ancients, and
grave Doctors and great Lords; and you shall witness the words of the Psalmist
true in your selves, Psalm. 119. ver. 99, 100.

Touching the Common Prayer Book.
When Christ ascended up on high, he gave Gifts to men for the Work of his
Ministry; and so they were every one to administer as of the Ability which God
gave: That God in all things might be glorified, through our Lord Jesus Christ,
1 Pet. 4.11. which Gifts the Spirit of God did enable them with, distributing
to every one severally as he pleased: And they were to do the Work of their
Ministry as from that Ability, that God might be glorified for his manifold
Gifts. And so the Apostles they kept to that: If they preached, they spoke as
the Spirit gave them utterance, and so bad others do so, to speak as God gave
ability; and, as the Oracles of God. If they prayed, they prayed as the Spirit
enabled them. We know not what to pray for as we ought, says Paul, but the
Spirit helps our infirmities. It was not a Book that helped their infirmities
in Preaching, or Praying; but it was the Spirit. So here was their ability, in
the Spirit, not in a Book.

But then afterward, as men degenerated from the Truth, and went out from the
Doctrine of Christ, and of the Apostles, and sought to be great, and have
pre-eminence in the Earth; here they went out from Communion with God, and his
holy Spirit; and so the Spirit of the Lord withdrawing, and leaving them, they
were left destitute of that help. And then wanting the assistance and supply of
the Spirit of God, they went to work another way, to uphold their Ministry; and
invented Forms of Prayer to be a help, which they could at all times make use
of, though the Spirit of God had withdrawn it self. And this supply now would
serve any one to help them in that Ministry, which was suitable enough to their
earthly Kingdom. And so here grew up all manner of Superstitions and
Inventions, now when the Spirit had withdrawn it self; and the bottomless Pit
was opened, and smoke came up out of the Pit, which darkened all: and here grew
up the Mystery of Iniquity to an Head, to a City, to a compacted Form and
Method, and Government, like the Gentiles; and now makes war with the Saints,
and with them that stood in the simplicity of the Spirit, and would not become
one with them in this their humane, invented, estranged way, in which they were
gone astray. And so this City grew to be a great City, spreading over
Multitudes, Tongues, Kings, Peoples, Nations: And it trod under foot the little
City of God, that Holy City, his Little Flock, which could not join with them
in their invenced ways. And this great City prevailed much over the Saints and
Servants of God; and boasted much, and gloried over all, saying in her heart, I
sit as QVEEN: and so compelled all great and small to take this her Cup of
Fornication, and drink thereof: and she has prevailed to make them drunk
therewith, And whosoever would not come and drink of her Cup, nothing was to be
expected by them, but Tribulation from her. And so they have found it
sufficiently, and felt it from her hands. As the Scripture also witnesses, in
several places of the Book of the Revelations, which was given forth to declare
of that Whores Reign, before it came. Now this degenerated Episcopacy, or
Bishops way, which is gone out from the Doctrine of Christ, and from his holy
Spirit, and stands in an Earthly Power and Dominion, cannot well tell how to
subsist, and uphold its Kingdom and Ministry, without some such supply as a
Common Prayer Book, which may be ready for them, and help them, though the
Spirit have left them. Yet that it might be taking in the minds of people, they
have composed it of as many good words as they can: which Satan can well give
way to, so long as it stands in the Disobedience and Opposition to the Kingdom
of Christ, and of his Spirit. And so it is a golden Cup which this Whore has
in her hand, as well in that respect, (having many good words, and fair
expressions in it, to deceive the minds of the simple) as also in regard of the
Outward Treasure, that it is made the way to; there being no liberty to any to
trade and grow rich with the Merchandise of that Kingdom, but such as shall
conform thereto; and such have a bait of Gold, and outward glory, and
preferment attainable fet before their eyes, in the examples of others, as a
Mark for them to aim at. And so herein their Bishops and Masters of that
Worship are Examples to their Flock. And so here is a sutableness between these
three, namely, between The exalted Spirit (that is gone out from Christ, and
from his Doctrine, after the World) and between her Cup, and the Fornicators
with her; all of the World, all out from the Spirit; and so being of one
nature, all three acquiesce in one another, and join hand in hand to uphold one
another. But where is the Babe, that is truly regenerated from above, and born
again by the Spirit of God, that can now join in the upholding of such a dead
spiritless Sacrifice, since the Light of Christ has so shined forth to make it
manifest from whence it is? Have not the Lambs of Christ formerly been
persecuted and slain, for refusing Conformity with the Whore in her Worship, so
far as they saw Light against it? and can they do any less now? For they find
it not suitable to that Spirit which they are born again of.

Judge in your selves by the Light of Christ Jesus, and according to the
Witness of God; Is it suitable to the New Covenant, a Covenant inwardly
written in the heart by the Spirit of the living God, in which a Creature is to
be led of the Spirit, and guided by the Spirit, and in which he stands in
Communion with God, having access to God in that Spirit that gives him the
feeling of his presence, and teaches him what to pray, forming in his heart
strong desires and earnings after God and his Righteousness, and forming in
him a filial frame of Spirit, in which he cries Abba, Father: and in which he
can draw near unto God as a Father. Is it suitable to such a Covenant as this,
wherein God does thus set at liberty inwardly his Sons and Daughters, and
enlarge their privileges in the Spirit, and give them such access to him to
worship him in Spirit? Judge in your selves, is it suitable to this Covenant,
to annex to it a dead literal formal Common Prayer Book? the Ministry of which
may be performed without any measure of the Spirit of the New Covenant; yea, by
such as are so far off from that Spirit in which the New Covenant and its
Ministry stands, that they make a mock thereat? But the Common Prayer Book,
standing in Opposition to that Spirit, which they mock at and despise, and
stand in opposition to themselves, hence both standing in one ground, They love
it, and hug it; for being in the same ground, that unites. Hence it is that the
Common Prayer Book gets so much affection and approbation from all sorts of
debauched and wicked livers: they can generally flock to that as to their own;
for it sprung from that root in which they stand; both out of the New Covenant;
both strangers to the Spirit of God. They being dead to the Life of the Spirit,
and not knowing what it is to be led thereby; and it also being dead as to the
ministering of the Spirit, a dead thing which any dead man may perform, and be
accepted of by them that impose it, though he be a Hater of the ways of the
Spirit of God. A Drunkard, Swearer, Liar, any Profane Person that has not
tasted of the Gifts of the Spirit of God, given for Edification of the Body.
Yea, Scoffers, Scorners, Deriders at the Spirit, such as are so far off from
the New Covenant of the Spirit, that they taunt and kick at the very owning of
the Spirit, and blaspheme them that own it (as may be proved by several
Testimonies) Yet such can perform that Ministry of the Common Prayer Book,
because it is a dead thing, suitable to their dead hearts; and which they can do
in their dead condition, and well admit of, without disturbing of themselves in
their dead condition: and can please their dead consciences therewith, because
it lets them be at rest in the death of sin, where they delight to be,
unwakened, under death. And so Death is ministered unto by Death; and Death
delights in Death; and the Dead are kept in their Graves by that which is dead:
As common experience has daily given testimony. For where are they that are
awakened out of the death of Sin, into the life of the Spirit by that dead
thing? But it is even as a long over one asleep, to keep them in that sleep.

It pitties my heart to see what deep Egyptian Darkness is upon the Hearts of
many, who thrust themselves into the Ministry, (as pretending for CHRIST,) And
yet are so ignorant of the things that pertain to the Kingdom of God, as that
they understand not by what ability that Ministry is to be upheld. But set upon
it, as in pursuit of an earthly Kingdom to themselves, (as indeed theirs is)
and that with such carnal supplies and furniture, wherewith they have furnished
themselves; as any mere carnal Man may have, who has no savor of things
spiritual: Thou blind man that dare uphold such a dead Service and Worship:
Do thou not know, that CHRIST JESUS ascended up on high, and gave Gifts to
men for the work of his Ministry under the New COVENANT? And were not all they
that did Minister, to minister as of that ability which God gave, in, and by
the Spirit, as a fruit of CHRIST'S Ascension? And so were not now to be
Ministers of a dead Letter, but of the Spirit, by ministering to others in the
Spirit, as the Spirit ministered to them. And so as the Covenant is spiritual,
so is the Ministry spiritual. As the Covenant is not a Covenant written in
Tables of Stone, or Brass, or Paper, or Wood, but in the heart by the spirit;
so the Ministry must answer it. It must be also a Ministry, not standing in
Books and Writings, outwardly read; but in Gifts of the same Spirit. And this
the Apostles held out clearly in their Practice and Doctrine. And let the
Wisdom of Men reason what it will to the contrary; and plead according to its
carnal Understanding: Yet seeing Christ our Lord, and the Mediator of the New
Covenant, and Establisher of the Ministry thereof, has appointed that it
should be so, (namely, that his Ministry should be performed by the Abilities
of the Spirit, which he ascended to give,) We ought therein to rest, and not to
strive against his Will and Wisdom; nor to impose Inventions of men into any
part of his Ministry: (So setting our will against his, and our Wisdom against
his:) For so to do is Whoredom of Spirit from Christ; its Willworship,
Idolatry, Stubbornness, Rebellion, and the Prop of Antichrist, a Cup of
Fornication, such as the Nations are made drunk with, and upon which the wrath
of God will come, because of Rebellion therein against his Son. Even as his
wrath came upon Israel after the flesh, for their wilfulness in following
their own Wisdom, and Traditions of other Nations, and would not be guided by
his Directions then under the First Covenant: And their Examples are written
for our Admonition.

If any say to me, That Good men, and some Martyrs have suffered for the
Common Prayer Book, I Answer, I deny not but Good Men, and Martyrs have
suffered thus far on the behalf of it: that is, They have testified against
Service in another tongue which they understood not, and so born testimony for
the Common Prayer Book, against the Masse-Book, which was in Latin; that is as
much as to say, They have testified for the having it in a known Tongue,
against the having it in an unknown Tongue. And so here was one step forward
from the dismal darkness of Egypt spiritual. And their faithfulness in that
was accepted of God; and the rest winked at. But now that the true Light makes
more still manifest, we are to testify against that which is further opened to
be evil in it; and to be faithful to that, as they were to what they saw.

A Tender ADMONITION to all those called PRIESTS, or MINISTERS.
O Ye that are called Priests or Ministers, who preach to the people for hire,
and keep them in a Form without the Power, Is it possible, that a Word of
experience, (showed me in the spirit, being kept low with the Lord, and in his
fear) may reach any of you, I could willingly tell it you, for my heart pitties
you, as you are men, and I should rejoice in your Salvation, as well as of
others. But I see you stand in greatest danger of all men, both by reason you
have strengthened your selves in your holds by seeming Arguments, and
Interpretations of Scripture, and Opinions of Men: And also because Truth
strikes directly at your Diana, by which you subsist, and have your livelihood
(as you call it) Therefore its hard for you to lend an ear to hear the Voice
that calls out: or to open your eye to let in a glimpse of that light that
discovers it. For if such a thought or motion do but offer it self, I know
Satan follows it immediately with this at the heels: What then will become of
us? Oh that there were faith in you, to trust God for your outward being and
supply! and a contented heart to live at Gods allowance. Then would the
Teachings of Truth more easily enter, and find place. And verily trust him,
and let your eye be open to see the light which would shine into your own
Consciences, if your unbelief did not stop it, and if your loving this present
evil world, and the deeds of darkness, did not keep you back from coming to
it. For he that loves truth, comes to the light, that his deeds may be made
manifest that they are wrought in God. Trust God I say for your outward
subsistence, (and he will not forsake you utterly) and let the light arise in
your consciences, concerning your ways: and seek first the Kingdom of God, and
the Righteousness thereof, and you have the words of Christ for it, which is
above the word of any King (who is Truth it self and cannot lie) that all these
things shall be added unto you. I have found his word true by experience,
everlasting praises to his name. And Oh how could I rejoice to see your hearts
brought down out of your formal ways, into the Obedience and power of Truth!
That you might not stand as a stop in the strait way, hindering your own and
others return unto God in the way of his Covenant. My heart envies you not, (I
speak in the presence of the Lord,) but in a tender Compassion to you I speak
thus plainly and familiarly to you: longing even for your Salvation also; that
if it be possible you might be delivered out of that deep pit in which you are
fallen. For I have seen your horrid darkness in which you stand. God in mercy
showed it unto me, and kept me out of it. And I saw plainly, that if I had
entered into your livings (as they are called) I had entered into it. But blessed
be his name that kept me, and allured me into the wilderness, there to feel
his love, and made me to sit down weeping in remembrance of ZION, which I saw
to be far off, and trodden under foot by the Gentiles, which had got into the
outward Court; and were there glorying in their Ordinances: and crying out upon
others as Seducers and Deluders, and Heretics, while the HOLY CITY was trodden
under foot among themselves. But the Lord has showed me upon whom the strong
delusions are sent: and for what Cause. It is upon the disobedient, who have
pleasure in unrighteousness: and for that cause, because they love that, and
choose unrighteousness to live in, rather than the fear of God. Therefore does
the Lord send them strong delusions, even to believe a lie. Come down to become
as little Children, and you will see the same also* And I tell you plainly,
until you do come down, to become as little Children, you cannot see God, you
cannot see the Kingdom of God; you cannot judge righteously, of the things of
the Kingdom of God. For how should you judge right of things that you cannot
see?

Therefore humble your selves under the mighty hand of God; and fear him, who
will make all bow before him, and stoop to his will, one way or other. And
stand not upon your Learning, or Parts, or any such thing: For such things are
of light account in the sight of God: but come down to the place where God
feeds his Babes: even a low place it is: a place of poverty of Spirit, a place
of mourning, a place of hungring and thirsting. And I tell you till you come
thither, you shall never feel any thing of the presence of God to your
everlasting comfort. And if you miss this, what good will your Learning with
all your vaunting do you? Will it not all vanish away with vexation, when an
evil conscience arises, and torment there enters, and abides tormenting you in
the presence of God, and his holy Angels, because you have neglected the one
thing needful: even to walk with him in his fear, in his pure light; and so in
a good conscience kept clear in the sight of God? For without this the blood of
Christ cleanses you not from your sins. Mind that, lest you daub up your
selves with untempered mortar. I say, the Blood of Christ cleanses you not in
the way of an evil Conscience, in walking contrary to the Light of Christ. But
says John, If we walk in the Light, as God is in the Light, then have we
fellowship -- and the blood cleanses. But walking contrary to the Light, there
is made shipwreck of a good Conscience, and the Conscience condemns, and God is
greater than the Conscience, to condemn.

Consider it deeply; for it is writ in Love and Faithfulness to your souls, by
one that yearns after your good, and not after your destruction.

AN EXHORTATION to Those that have separated Themselves from the SUPERSTITIONS
of the PRIESTS.
YOU that have turned your backs of EGYPT (spiritually so called) and have
suffered hard Speeches, and Reproaches, and Injuries of Wicked Men, in coming
out of their grosser Abominations and Superstitions; There is a tender respect
in my heart toward you, who have done this, in obedience to a Principle of God
in your hearts: And my Desire for you is, That You may not lose your Reward, by
looking back again to EGYPT: or by turning aside to this present evil World:
or to any of the hurtful Lusts therein: or by taking up your Habitation short
of the Land of Rest: But that you may be preserved in that tender Principle
that led you forth, that therein you may go forward and not backward. But now
do not think that you are come to the end of your journey, because You have
stepped out of Egypt. Remember the many Journeys and Removes the Israelites had
after they came out of Egypt, before they arrived at the good Land of Promise;
and faint not, but gird up the loins of your minds. Only take heed of those
things that caused many to fall in the way, and be not discouraged though
Pharaoh seem to pursue you with an Host: For the Egyptians may be hardened to
pursue to their own destruction, and to prosecute the Seed as if they would
swallow them up: Look to him that led you out, and hold on your way: follow the
Pillar of smoke and of fire, the Power and presence of God, that his wing may
be over you: and take heed of murmuring at the difficulty of the way, as some
murmured and perished: for Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way that
leads unto Life. Take heed of unbelief, for that enters not into the Promise:
It Is Faith that overcomes: In that go on and make war with the enemies of your
souls, that are in the way, spare none, suffer no secret lust to remain alive
in your hearts: but let the sword of the Spirit come over them, to mortify and
slay them; and do not satisfy your selves because you have got into this or
that Form: for, What will that avail you, if you go no further? It Is the life
and power that the Kingdom of God consists in: See that you sit not down short
of that. Are you come to Truth and Faithfulness in your hearts, so that the
world finding your honest; plain, faithful Conversation, dare trust you, and
commit any thing they have to you in assurance that they shall not be defrauded
or deceived by you? If you be not, but live in Covetousness and Deceit, its
neither your departing from Egypt, nor sitting down under any Form whatsoever
that will do you any good. For you are not yet come to the Kingdom of God,
which is in Righteousness and Truth. Are you come to an unblamable
conversation before men, so that they have nothing justly to charge you with,
and to a good conscience before God, which answers to the Light of the Lord in
you, and so accuses not? Are you come to Mercy, and to a tender compassionate
heart that delights in it; and seeks to save your fellow creature, and not to
destroy the life of any, but only to deliver it from that which would destroy?
If not, the nature of the Savior is not yet formed in you. Are you come to the
Light which lets you see your hearts, and all the secret thoughts and intents,
and purposes of them; and to love it, and turn to it, and follow it? Are you
come to the New Covenant, to receive the Law of God in the Spirit, from Christ
the Mediator thereof, who is the Lord, that Spirit that ministers it: and so to
hear the word that's nigh you in the mouth, and in the heart? Are you come to
feel the Anointing abiding in you, which keeps you abiding in Christ, as you
are taught thereby: and which discovers to you Seducings and Delusions of that
spirit of Antichrist, that works to lead you from it? Are you come to that
inward fellowship and communion with God, which the Apostles of the Lamb
enjoyed, and sought to bring the babes of Christ unto? Are you come to feel the
vvorking of that Spirit of truth in you, which mortifies the deeds of the
flesh, which would hinder your communion with God? Are you come to that spirit
that renewes and sanctifies, and changes your hearts, and casts out the old man
with his deeds; and brings forth love instead of hatred, patience instead of
frowardness and hastiness, lovvlinesse of mind instead of loftiness,
harmlesnesse instead of hurting, pity instead of hardheartednesse, gentleness
instead of roughness, faith instead of fear and distrust, faithfulness
instead of guile and deceitfulness, temperance and sobriety instead of
excess, and such like wholesome fruits as these instead of the contrary? Are you
come to that which thus strikes at Iniquity when it would appear in you, and
cuts it down; and brings forth the contrary? Are you come, I say, to that
spirit which is the Root from whence all good fruits do spring; which is that
good Land which flows with milk and honey; that Promised Land, that true
Resting Place? If you be not come to these things, How can you think your
selves at a period? How can you think that you are come to Canaan spiritual
where such fruits as these grow? How can you sit down as if you were already
got into the good Land? Come gird up the loins of your mind, and go forvvard
with us. Let us press on to perfection; having our faces still forward in
that Kingdom, the Treasures of which have no end; And clogg not your selves
with the love of this present evil world, for that will press you down, and
keep you back, and be a weight to you. Mind the one thing needful, and press
toward the mark, of the high-Calling of God in Christ Jesus.

Will it satisfy you to break off from Egypt, if you perish in the
Wilderness, and fall short of the promised Land, the Land of Peace and Rest;
even the Promise of the Father, The Spirit of Truth, the Comforter, which leads
into all truth, and into that righteousness, the work of which is peace, and
the effect of which is quietness, and assurance for ever? Isa. 32.17. Will you
make that a Possession for ever, where you had but a Lodging place (as it were)
for a night or two, while the Pillar of smoke and fire stood over it? Will you
stay behind the cloudy pillar when it is lifted up and gone forward? Will you
not go along with the power in which the Kingdom of God stands? Does not the
Apostle call out of the Form when the Power is gone? Come, Let us go forward
together, not looking back again to Sodom, as Lots Wife did, who was therefore
turned into a Pillar of Salt: nor as they did who said, Come, let us make a
Captain and turn back to Egypt, whose carcasses therefore fell in the
Wilderness. Remember Caleb and Joshua who followed the Lord fully with all
their heart, whom the Lord therefore set into the Land of Promise; who pressed
still forward, when others began to hang back through fear of the lofty Giants;
whose Faith follow. And take heed of lusting after evil things, as they lusted
who fell by the way. Come down out of all Exaltation from any Form that you are
got into, be it what it will; and come into meekness, lowliness of heart,
humbleness of mind, gentleness in the fear of the Lord; and become as Little
Chidren, for in plainness of Speech, this is the way that our Captain is gone
before us, and has left word for us to follow him in. Take my Yoke upon you,
and learn of me, (says he) for I am meek, and lowly in heart; and you shall
find rest for your souls: for my yoke is easy, and my burden is light.

Bear with me in my pleading thus with you. For we would not have you lost who
have borne the abuses of the world, and the fury of a wicked and untoward
Generation for Conscience sake. Be not weary, nor faint in your minds; nor say
in your hearts, Where is the Promise of his coming? for one day is with the
Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day. In his time he will
come and not fail. Happy is he that endures to the end, waiting for him. He
shall reap that faints not. My Affections are toward you who have seen the
great Whores Cup of Fornication, and have through sufferings broke off from her
with us. If you be low enough for our Company we would not lose you. Is it not
the same God that we press after? Is it not the same fellowship with him
inwardly in the soul? Is it not the same bread that comes down from Heaven,
which you would feed upon, to the inward satisfaction and content of your
souls, which is the strength of our hearts, and which we feed upon, every one
in his measure? And do you find it in your Form, where you stick? If not,
mind the footsteps of the Flock, and which way God has led them, and where he
feeds his Lambs; and mind that which leads them, and must lead you into the
fresh Pastures, where they find food which satisfies. Let go your partition
Walls, so as not to bear up your selves in your thoughts above others thereby,
(as the Pharisees did) and come into the unity of the Spirit, where the
everlasting Unity stands, and which knits all the members of the body together;
and even from the highest to the lowest, though scattered in many appearances.
So that our bounds lie not in form but in the spirit, and where we feel the
life. If the Kingdom which you seek be not of this world, but of another that's
invisible; if it be within, not without; then you must come to that inward
guide, to lead you into that inward and invisible Kingdom, which leads out of
the things that unite you to the world, (namely the lusts of the flesh, the
lusts of the eyes, and the pride of life) and him must you follow out of these
things into the Kingdom. Call that Guide by what name you will, Wisdom, as
Solomon did; or the Light which enlightens every man that comes into the world;
or the Spirit, or what other name soever it is named by in the Scriptures; That
you must obey and follow out of that which defiles and corrupts, into that
which is pure, and holy, and eternal: For without holiness no man shall see
God, nor come to have fellowship with him.

THE END.

