A TORY Plot: OR THE DISCOVERY OF A DESIGN Carried on by our late ADDRESSERS
AND ABHORRERS, To Alter the Constitution of the Government, And to Betray the
PROTESTANT RELIGION.

By Philanax Misopappas.

LONDON, Printed for N. L. to be sold by Richard Janeway, 1682.

TO THE READER.
I Am so heartily desirous of an Union amongst all that go under the Name of
Protestants, against the Common Enemy the Papists, that I would never have
singled out any of them under so black a Character as the Title gives them, if
their designs had not been so palpable, and to unite with them were not to
endeavor to alter the Constitution of the Government, and to give the
Protestant Religion its fatal blow. I am far from laying this charge upon all
the subscribers of our late Addresses: for as there are many of them such as no
good subject would refuse to subscribe, if he did not think them needless: so I
have that charity for many that were induced to subscribe even the most
obnoxious, that they did it rather in complacence to the importunity of the
Promoters, than to serve any bad design. But I cannot so acquit the Contrivers
of them; as none that loves the English Laws and Liberties and the Protestant
Religion, will (I believe) think there is any reason I should, when he has read
the following Animadversions. Whether the Presenters were chosen out of the
chief of these, or whether they were but made use of like the Cat's foot, (that
the odium and it may be punishment might one day rest upon them) I cannot tell:
But if one may make an estimate of the Promoters in general, by some of those
that presented them, Esquire Duppa will tell you they did not very well deserve
that countenance and honor that was given them for their labor. For it was
somewhat pleasant to observe our young Knights ranked in the Gazette (Nov. 10.
last) with Runaway servants and strayed Horses, for not paying their Fees; and
threatened, that course would speedily be taken for recovery thereof, according
to His Majesty's late Order and Directions thereupon.

As to the Discourse it self, I must beg the Reader's patience while he peruses
the former part of it, if he think I am too long in coming to the business: for
it was necessary first to take a view of the just and orderly proceedings of
the late Parliaments, if one would expose the designs of our Addressers that
have loaded them with so many Calumnies. It is an undoubted privilege of
Parliament, that none should be questioned out of it for any thing spoken or
transacted in it: And yet at how many Bars have the whole House of Commons
been of late arraigned and condemned? Common humanity teaches to speak well of
the dead, though faulty: but to revile ones own flesh and blood when gone,
though truly Loyal and faithful, is intolerable barbarity. But when his Majesty
shall say to these dry bones, Live, and they shall stand upon their feet, they
will be the fittest to declare their resentment of such profane trampling upon
their Ashes.

ERRATA.
Page 10. l. 15. r. Addressers. p. 16. l. 21. r. unreasonable p. 23. l. 13.
dele by.

THat there has been a design carried on for many years of extirpating the
(miscalled) pestilent heresy of Protestantism, and re-establishing the Roman
Catholic Religion in these Kingdoms, none, after so evident and repeated
proofs of it, can have the impudence to deny; and least of all should we expect
it of them who have pretended that deference to the public judgment (or
Conscience, as they term it) of the Nation, that they have delivered it as
their opinion, that every private one ought to conform to it. For if the
unanimous resolution of three or four Parliaments, and the sundry intimations
and acknowledgments of several Proclamations are not in their opinion a
sufficient declaration of the common or public judgment, nor that, a competent
ground to settle their belief upon, I know not what can be supposed to be. For
though perhaps when they talk of a public Conscience, they mean none but the
Kings; yet if ever the King be infallible, I would the readiliest expect him to
be so, when he has the concurrent advice and consent of the whole Nation. And I
think it most reasonable to assert, That there is infinitely greater cause and
security for conforming our belief to the opinion of the King, Lords and
Commons in a matter of fact examined with the greatest care and scrutiny, than
that our practice should exactly square to their Laws (be the matter of them
never so controvertible) which yet these Gentlemen will affirm they ought to do.

Supposing then that the aforesaid Resolves and Proclamations were not made nor
issued without th maturest deliberation, and fullest assurance of the truth of
those Testimonies and Evidence that occasioned them; it cannot be reputed too
great credulity to believe, that Popery was to be introduced by those means and
methods that the discoverers of the Plot attested. Those are so well known,
that I shall not need to enter upon particulars. As to Scotland and Ireland, in
which the design was laid as well as in England, affairs have been so managed,
that it is still as to us kept in a great measure secret. But as to England, a
Nation always jealous of their Rights and Liberties, it was despaired that she
would ever be wheedled to put on the Roman yoke; and therefore there was no
hopes of bringi g that about but by force And now there wanted a plausible
pretense to get up an Army. We were secure and quiet at home, and therefore no
occasion for any standing Army to quell Insurrections, which was the occasion
of getting one a foot in our neighbor Nation. We were at Amity with all
Christendom, therefore no reason to stand upon our guard or arm for our
defense. But the genius of the English being most adverse to the French, the
making a show of a War with them, was hoped would be least opposed or
suspected. And though a great many of the more sagacious could hardly believe
that we sincerely intend ed to force the French to end that War that we had
encouraged them to begin, and enabled them with Men, Horses and Ammunition (in
abundance) to prosecute: yet so apprehensive were the greater number of the
danger of the growing greatness of that Monarch, and so willing to believe what
they so earnestly desired, that not only was the King Imposed upon by those
that were about him, but the Parliament thereupon assembled, induced to comply
with the design. Accordingly an Army of thirty thousand men or upwards is
appointed to be raised, and a proportionable Tax Leavied for their Pay: But
still as the Forces increased, the more eager were our Plenipotentiaries at
Ni^eguen for making up a Peace. Which at last was got patched up with so little
advantage to the Confederates, whose quarrel we made a show to espouse, that
they have lost more by the Peace than they had done by the War. And now one
would have thought the new raised Army should have been presently Disbanded;
but as we used to say, It is easier to raise the Devil than to lay him again,
so this Army that was got together by one Sessions of Parliament, was hardly
got dissolved by two. But for this also there wanted not a pretense; That it
was necessary to continue in Arms till our Neighbors had disbanded, and the
Articles of the Peace (as to restoring of Towns, etc.) fulfilled. But by this
time the Vizard was pulled off the design, and every one saw it in its own
complexion. For in the mean time had the most execrable Plot that ever was
contrived in the World, been discovered; wherein having resolved on the Murder
of His Majesty, as soon as that should be accomplished, and the D. of Y. should
arrive at the Crown, this Army, into which many known Papists, but more,
Popishly inclined, had already been thrust (and which might have been modeled
at pleasure by the new Sovereign) was to have been employed in this most horrid
villainy. Not that by this alone they could compass their ends, though there had
not been a man in it but what was devoted to their Interest (of which I believe
there were many) but this was one step toward the effecting the Tragedy of a
Massacre. But besides this open Force, they had listed underhand a greater, of
which Dr. Oats his Narrative acquaints you with the chief Officers. But above
all, their reliance was upon the French, who was now got clear of the
Confederates, and was at leisure to serve their ends and his own ambition. But
by the good providence of God, none of those weapons that were formed against
His Majesty prosper'd, but he still remains alive the protector of our
Religion, Lives and Liberties. Though if any of the Instruments they employed
had dispatched him out of the way, they were not unprovided of a pretext to make
the odium of it fall upon their greatest enemies. An intimation of which they
gave us in procuring Mr. Claypoole to be sent to the Tower about that time,
whose relation to Cromwell might make him to be presumed the greater Confident
of his party. It was suggested he should say, That he and two hundred more had
resolved to kill the King. It matters not how ridiculous such a Deposition
seems at this time of day; but if the King had been cut off before the Papists
were suspected or discovered to have such a design, there are enough who bear
themselves high upon the name of Protestants, that would sooner have believed
the Fanatics to have committed the Fact, than the Papists, and would have been
ready to have joined with the Papists to their utter extirpation. And these
Nominal Protestants are the men whose designs I shall now apply my self to
trace and discover.

The Long Parliament who first made a considerable enquiry into the Popish Plot
being dissolved, and the next that followed being by their sudden dissolution
prevented from bringing those to their Trials that the former had committed;
there sprang a jealousy in the hearts of many, that some about His Majesty,
who influenced his Counsels, were either themselves concerned in the Plot, or
had too great a kindness for those that were, seeing they thus obstructed the
further discovery of it, and prevented the prosecution of the Conspirators. But
lest this disappointment should prove fatal to His Majesty, and give the
Papists and their Adherents too much scope and opportunity of still carrying on
and perfecting their wicked designs, several worthy and Noble Peers out of
their great affection to their Sovereign whom they apprehended in minutely
danger, and zeal to the Protestant Religion and for the English Liberty, both
which were bound up in His Majesty's Life, Petitioned His Majesty for the
Sitting of the Third, which was chosen, but not as yet Assembled. Those that
had advised the untimely dissolution of the former, and the prorogation of
this, were alarmed hereupon, and possess His Majesty that such petitioning was
tumultuous, and contrary to I know not what Law of King James, and advise him
to prohibit it by Proclamation. At the same time their little Emissaries were
ordered to discourage it every where, and among the rest Sir George Jeffe ies
here in the City, who (as the Parliament in their Address against him word it)
Well knowing that many of His Majesty's Loyal Protestant Subjects, and
particularly those of His Majesty's great and famous City of London, out of
Zeal for the preservation of the Protestant Religion, His Majesty's Royal
Person and Government, and in hopes to bring the Popish Conspirator to speedy
Justice, were about to Petition to His Majesty in an humble, dutiful and legal
way, for the Sitting of this Parliament, the said Sir George Jefferies not
regarding his duty to His Majesty, or the welfare of His People, did on purpose
to serve his own private ends, and to create a misunderstanding between His
Majesty and His good Subjects, though disguised with pretense of Service to hi
Majesty, maliciously declare such petitioning, sometimes to be Tumultuous,
Seditious and Illegal, and at other times did presume publicly to insinuate
and assert, as if His Majesty would deprive His Citizens of London of their
Charters, and diverse other Privileges, Immunities and Advantages, and also of
His Royal Favor, in case they should so Petition, etc] But notwithstanding
these discouragements, many Counties and Corporations did Petition the King to
the purpose aforesaid; which these Gentlemen not being able to prevent, they
framed an Anti-petition, under the Notion of an Abhorrence, wherein they
endeavored as much as in them lay to induce his Majesty to conceive a sinister
opinion of the honest and humble desires of his most loving and loyal Subjects.
And their insinuation had that effect, that it was many Months ere the
Parliament was permitted to Sit. In the mean time our Pulpits began to Echo
with the Mischiefs of Separation, the danger the Church and State were in from
Fanatics; R. L' estrange struck up his Fiddle, and played us the Old Tune of
Forty one; he industriously labored to bring the Witnesses of the Popish Plot
under suspicion of combination and perjury; Sir Robert Yeomans and Sir Robert
Cann of Bristol, with Thompson a person fit for their Chaplain, avowedly
declare, that there was no Popish Plot but a Presbyterian Plot; and it has been
the common Cry of the whole Herd from that time to this, That His Majesty and
the Church of England was and is in as great or greater danger from the
Dissenters than from the Papists. But notwithstanding all the prejudice they
endeavored to create in His Majesty against his loving and faithful Subjects,
he was so careful of his own and his people, safety, as to assemble this long
desired Parliament in October 80. What opinion the House. of Commons had of our
Abhorrers, as these Gentlemen have not yet forgotten, so they have given
bystanders some diversion to observe how ever since they have resented their
treatment. We shall only observe what thanks the Commons conn'd G. Earl of H.
who was believed to have a principal hand in dissolving the last, and staving
off the sitting of the present Parliament. In an Address against him to the
King they thus express themselves: That being deeply sensible of the manifold
dangers and mischiefs, which have been occasioned to this Kingdom by the
dissolution of the last Parliament, and by the frequent Prorogation of this
present Parliament, whereby the Papists have been greatly encouraged to carry
on their Hellish and damnable Conspiracies against His Majesty's Royal Person
and Government, and the Protestant Religion now established amongst us, and
have had many opportunities to contrive false and malicious Plots against the
Lives and Honors of several of His Loyal Protestant Subjects; and having just
reason to believe that the said dissolution was promoted by the evil and
pernicious Counsels of G. Earl of Hallifax; Do therefore most humbly pray his
Majesty -- That he would be graciously pleased to remove the said G. Earl of H.
from his presence and counsels for ever. But notwithstanding this Address he
still keeps his station. Sir Rob. Yeomans upon confessing the accusation
against him and begging pardon of the House, is dismissed. But Sir Rob. Cann
reviling his Accusers, and especially being a Parliament man, for him to be
guilty of such an expression, was so great an aggravation, that being expelled
the House, he is committed to the Tower. Thompson's punishment was prevented by
the dissolution of the Parliament.

And now the Parliament according to the direction of his Majesty, vigorously
prosecute the Plot, try all the ways and methods whereby his Majesty's safety
might be ensur'd and Religion secured. As for themselves, they present an
Address, declaring their resolution to preserve and support the King's Person
and Government, and the Protestant Religion both at home and abroad; for which
the King thankt them heartily. As to the Plot, they appoint a Committee to
inspect and to take an Abstract of the Journals of both Houses, as to matters
relating to it; upon the Report whereof they resolve Nemine contradicente, That
the D. of York 's being a Papist, and the hopes of his coming such to the
Crown, has given the greatest countenance and encouragement to the present
designs and Conspiracies against the King and Protestant Religion.] And, That
in the defense of the King's Person and Government, and of the Protestant
Religion, this House does declare, That they will stand by his Majesty with
their Lives and Fortunes; and that if his Majesty shall come by any violent
Death (which God forbid) they will revenge it to the utmost upon the Papists.
Hereupon they bring in a Bill and pass it, for securing the Protestant
Religion, by disabling James D. of York to inherit the Imperial Crown of
England and Ireland, and the Dominions and Territories thereto belonging; but
with a Proviso, that it should extend to the person of the Duke of York only.
But the Lords rejecting this Bill, and thereby the most probable Expedient the
Commons could think of, for the security of his Majesty and the Protestant
Religion being frustrated, they then in a Committee of the whole House make
these two Resolves, First, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That as
long as the Papists have any hopes of the D. of York 's succeeding the King in
the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, the
Kings Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Lives, Liberties, and Properties
of all his Majesty's Protestant Subjects, are in apparent danger of being
destroyed.] The Second, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That the
House be moved, nThat a Bill be brought in for an Association of all his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects, for the safety of his Majesty's Person, the
defense of the Protestant Religion, and the preservation of his Majesty's
Protestant Subjects against all Invasions and Oppositions whatsoever; and for
the preventing the Duke of York, or any Papist from succeeding to the Crown.]
To both which Resolves the House agreed. As to this Bill of Association, we
shall have occasion to speak to it afterward: but as to the Bill of Exclusion,
we must say something of it here, the rather, because our late Addresses and
Abhorrers have taken occasion thence to revile this incomparably Loyal House of
Commons with endeavors of subverting the Government. And I shall demonstrate
both its Legality, its Equity, and its Expediency.

1. As to its Legality, I could never hear more than two things opposed, the
one, that Kings holding their Crowns by right of Primogeniture, it is against
the Law of Nature to put by the next Heir; the other, that it is against the
Oath of Allegiance. The first is so silly an Allegation, that one would think
no man that has heard of the several forms of Government in the World, or read
the History of his own Nation, could have the confidence to insist upon it. In
how many Kingdoms has force and violence and the longest Sword settled an
absolute Monarchy? How often has that yoke been shak'd off, and the Government
turned into a Free State? How many different models of both Monarchies and
States are there at this day in the World? and yet none of them (that I know
of) but are, and ought to be, owned by the Subjects for lawful Governments, and
submitted unto for the Lord's sake. If Princes held by this right, how
impossible were it for them to make out their Title ab origin, if questioned?
Or shall we say, that all States live contrary to the Law of Nature, because
they retain not this form of Government? What shall we say of God's giving the
Kingdom of Israel to Saul of the Tribe of Benjamin the youngest of Jacob's
sons, or to David the youngest of his Father's sons, and of the Tribe of Judah,
while none of Reuben's Offspring ever sat upon the throne? Or if God may by
prerogative dispense with this Law, how came David to put Adonijah by the
throne, and seat Solomon in it? Here in England King William 2. was King
William 1. his third son, and yet was advanced to the Crown, and his eldest
Brother Rtobert shamm'd off with a Dukedom. King S ephen succeeded H. 1. though
that King had a daughter, Maud the Empress, then living, and Stephen had also
an elder Brother, named Theobald. King John was admitted to the Crown, though
his elder Brother's son was living. It were endless to give Instances both out
of sacred and profane History of the like nature. Away then with this
extravagant fancy, and let the Sovereign Powers think their right sufficiently
proved by the Law of the Land, by their present quiet possession, and the
Allegiance of their Subjects. But now this Oath of Allegiance is pretended not
only to oblige those that take it, to the present Sovereign, and to his lawful
Successors after his decease, but even in his lifetime. To this it is obvious
to say, that it is a Solecism and Nonsense to affirm that any one is a man's
Heir or Successor while himself lives; for the Successor only commences such at
his Predecessor's death: And therefore he that intentionally swears Allegiance
to the former in the lifetime of the latter, is in plain terms a Traitor. For
the plain intent and meaning of the Oath is no more than this, That seeing in
Monarchies that are hereditary there is no Interregnum, but upon the death of
the present Sovereign his Successor is immediately invested in his power, it is
prudently provided by this Oath that the Subjects Allegiance shall not be
suspended till the new Sovereign's Coronation, that thereby the mutual
stipulation might be renewed: but as the Heir's entering upon the Gevernment
does imply that he accepts it upon the same conditions as his Predecessor held
it; so does this Oath as effectually bind the Subject before the Coronation as
after. And hereby are very great hazards and inconveniences prevented: for
Multa cadunt inter calicem supremaque labra; and the Coronation being usually
performed with great pomp and ceremony, many accidents may happen, before all
things can be prepared for the Solemnity, that may require the utmost service
of the people, and therefore it is requisite they should in the mean time be
under his command. But now all the question is, Whether such a particular man
has so unalterable a right to be such a ones Heir, that no Crime can forfeit
that right, no Power annul it? What the Crime in our present case is, we should
better have known, if the hasty dissolution of so many Parliaments, and a Noli
prosequi had not hindered. But that we may resolve this Query, let us make a
Fiction of Case. Suppose the present King and his Ancestors for several
Generations sincere and hearty professors of the Protestant Religion, swearing
at their Coronation that they will defend and protect it, as the most
considerable branch of the Law of the Land. And suppose him that expects to be
Heir, perverted from this to the Popish Religion, notwithstanding the examples
of his Ancestors and the Commands of his Martyred Father to the contrary.
Suppose his principal Servant and greatest Confident braging of the apparent
likelihood of rooting out this pestilent Northern Heresy, and of the zeal of
his Master in the Cause; declaring that his Master's and a Neighboring
Monarch's Interest (the most dangerous enemy to his Country) are inseparable.
Suppose this Confident also actually engaged in contriving the Murder of the
present Monarch, to hasten his Master's coming to the Crown. Supposing all
this, we can hardly imagine a Crime to be blacker, or a person more obnoxious
to a suspicion of designing the subversion of the established Religion, and in
it of the Government, if ever he should be seated in the Throne. So that if any
Crimes can be a sufficient cause of Exclusion, or if any person can be put by
his pretensions to the Crown, these are the Crimes and this is the person that
demerit it. And now let us consider whether a Parliament have not a power to
inflict such a punishment on such offenses. It is from the Laws enacted by
Parliament, that such a Fact has such a punishment awarded to it. That Felonies
are punished with Death, as well as Murder, (though it be otherwise in many
Countries, and also by the Divine Law) That Words without any other Overt Act
are as Treasonable, and render the Speakers liable to the same death and like
forfeit of Estate, as actual Assassinating the King would do. The Parliament
can make saying that which in the nature of the thing is not impossible to be
true, to be Treason. The King alone, to those offenses that by the Law deserve
death, can appoint banishment or perpetual imprisonment, etc. if they respect
himself only; but if the people be interested, then can He with the two Houses
inflict what punishment they please. They can Attaint any man, or take off the
Attainder, as they see good. They can legitimate a Bastard, or illegitimate one
that is born in lawful Wedlock. Of both we have Instances in Q. Mary and Q.
Elizabeth, for both of them in 28 H. 8. were declared illegitimate, whereas one
of them must needs be legitimate; and in 35 H. 8. they were both of them
rendered inheritable to the Crown, which must needs be as much as legitimate,
though one of them must necessarily be illegitimate, the latter being born,
while the former's Mother was living. (For if according to the determination of
the Universities domestic and foreign, the Brother, by the Law of God, might
not Marry the Relict of his Brother, then King Henry's Marriage with Queen
Mary's Mother, that had been his elder Brother Prince Arthur's Wife, was
unlawful and consequently null in it self ab initio, before the declaration of
it in Parliament in Ann. 24. of his Reign; or if it was not unlawful nor null,
then must his Marriage with Queen Elizabeth's Mother be certainly unlawful, and
consequently Queen Elizabeth illegitimate.) They can Divorce a man from his
Wife for other causes than Adultery, so that the Parties shall be at liberty to
Marry others, Non obstante our Savior's declaration as to the Jewish Economy;
yea, they can and have granted such a power to Doctors Commons, that Impotency
in the Man shall be a sufficient cause for divorce or a nullity; as we had an
Instance about four years ago in one Rowley and Mrs Pitman his wife (And by the
way, if impotency be a sufficient cause for dissolving the sacred tie of
Marriage, because the main end of Marriage, the propagating mankind, is thereby
frustrated: it may be equally reasonable to debar such an one the Espousal of
the Government, as it is notorious before hand, is perverted to an utter
incapacity of answering the ends of it.) And on the other side the Parliament
can grant a divorce, if the Woman be incapable of generation: and so was Henry
the eighth in the 32 year of his Reign divorced from his Queen the Lady Anne of
Cleve, who survived to the fourth year of Queen Mary, but the King married
again within little more than a month after this divorce. But to proceed. The
two Houses can give away the whole Kingdom to the King, so as to make him sole
possessor of all; and He and they can dispose of or alienate the Crown Lands,
or any branch of the King's Revenue, as they please. They can banish any man,
and make him in worse condition than an Alien; and on the other hand can
naturalize any Foreigner. In a word, they have an unbounded absolute dominion
over the Lives, Liberties and Estates of any subject in the Kingdom, and such
is every one but the King himself. We have had Instances of Queens being
beheaded: in relation to which we shall not need to inquire whether they were
really guilty of the Crimes laid to their charge; it is sufficient to observe
that supposing them guilty of the Crimes, they are not exempted from the
punishment. And who is nearlier related to the King than she that is one with
him? who nearer allied to the privileges of a Crown, than she that has had it
set upon her head? And if such a one may be brought to the Scaffold, and die
the deserved death of a Traitor, as it is unreasonbale for any other to expect
to be excused, so could no man argue the high Court that condemned her to die,
of Injustice, but rather admire their lenity and mercy, if they should mitigate
the punishment, into a banishment from the Kingdom, from the Rights of a Queen
and of a Consort. They that have power to inflict the greatest punishment,
cannot be denied the privilege of assigning what commutation they please. And
as they are the only competent Judges what offenses are and ought to be
esteemed Capital; so if they shall judge the Crime before them of an inferior
nature, they may proportion the punishment at their discretion. As to our
present case, we have not (as I intimated above) had the advantage to be fully
informed of the Crime, and so cannot pass an estimate of its demerit: But if it
amounted to so much as I have supposed, (or may be more) as it does in it self
deserve, so have I shown that the Parliament have a power to punish it with,
(at least) an Exclusion from the Government. And thus much for the Legality of
the Fact.

2. And as it is lawful, so is it an Act of the greatest Equity and justice in
the world. For though it be very laudable and a duty for private men to forgive
private injuries, and to do good for evil: yet offenders and offenses against
the Government, and the public weal, are of another nature and consideration.
Thus if a man assault my person, wound my reputation, trespass on my ground, or
the like, it will argue a Christian temper and conformable to the holy Laws and
example of our Savior, to pass it by without requiring satisfaction or
reparation. But now if one Prince make an In-road into another Country, and
make spoil therein, satisfaction ought to be demanded and exacted both by
divine and humane Laws. Or if any man or number of men endeavor the murder of
the King, the subversion of the Government, or the like: in these cases the old
Law still takes place, An Eye for an Eye, and a tooth for a tooth. Nay, if the
design be laid and resolved upon, though not to be put in execution till after
some distance of time, it is just to treat the designers at the same rate as if
they were actually engaged in the fact. Thus if one Prince has certain
information by some of another Prince's Cabinet Council, that that other is
preparing to Invade him: it is just and lawful by the Law of Nations that he
should first enter with an Army into that other Prince's Territories, and by
making the seat of War there, to hinder the devastation of his own. And thus
the imagining the King's death, or entering into consultation how to compass it,
is as capital an offense as actual perpetrating the villainy. In like manner if
he that pretends to the succession, be a person, that is already engaged in a
design to alter the Government, that by the accursed tie of his deluded
Conscience, and the destructive principles of his Religion has given certain
notice that he thinks himself obliged to extirpate the Religion established, and
to persecute the resolved adherers to it to the death; what in the whole world
is more equitable and moderately just, than that this person should be
incapacitated from doing all this evil, by preventing his accession to the
Throne, which he will thus defile with blood and profane with damnable Heresy?

3. And as to its Exped ency or policy, every man certai ly must be convinced
of that, that values his Religion, Life or Liberty. And here a man could not
but smile (if the matter we are a speaking of, were not so serious) at the
impertinence of some of L'Estrange's Clergy, and others, that can object that a
Bill of Exclusion is against our Religion; it is obvious what Religion they
mean: For Christ's it cannot be, who came not to divide inheritances, and
modulate the Civil Constitutions of Kingdoms: Render to Caesar the things that
are Caesar's, is a plain demonstration that he intended not to give Laws to
Governments. And if these Gentlemen can think that any command or example in
the Old Testament countenance their assertion, though I could never hear of any
one, yet who knows not but that our Nation and all other Christian Kingdoms,
have always thought themselves no further obliged by the Civil Constitutions
of the Jews, than they have translated them into those of their respective
Countries? But neither is it contrary to that Religion that these Blades are
truly of, and hope one day to profess publicly: For though the Papists have
made themselves merry with traducing that opinion of the Puritans, That
Dominion is founded in Grace; yet it is notorious that they hold the same
opinion themselves. Every one that is verst in their Writings (or has read
those of our own) must needs observe it to be their constant doctrine, that no
Heretical King (and such is every one with them, that is not a Roman Catholic)
has any right to rule, but the Pope may depose him and give his Kingdom to whom
he will. I mean not here to defend the Puritans opinion, especially in that
sense to which it is wrested by some; but I say, the Argument is very strong
and cogent ad hominem, That seeing in their own opinion a Protestant has no
right to rule, because they believe him to be an Heretic; We may very well be
permitted to prevent a Papist from ruling, who we are sure is the most damned
Heretic in the World. And it is reasonable that men of our belief and
constitution should as confidently acquiesce in an Act of Parliament, as a
Papist should on the Bull of a Pope. Besides, there is something in this that
may well be referred to the former head of Equity, seeing -- Non Lex est
justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices ante perire sua.
No juster Law, than that a man be tried
By Laws which he would have others to abide.


For there is no reason in the world a man should take advantage of a
principle, which he will not allow that others should likewise improve to their
own benefit.

It was an oracular saying of a bad man, It is expedient that one man die for
the people: I will not blaspheme my Savior with comparing the person now under
consideration to Him, nor mean to cast an imputation upon the House of Common,
for concurring with Caiaphas's advice (though being High Priest that year he
spoke as one inspired from Heaven) but taking the words abstractedly, without
consideration of the Speaker or the Person spoken of, nothing can be imagined
more honestly and reasonably politic; and if applied to the case in hand,
nothing more expedient. For when matters are come to this pass, that either a
Nation in general must be deprived of all that is dear to them, their Religion,
their Liberties, and it may be their Lives, or that one man that will be the
Author of all this mischief, must be put out of a capacity to effect it, though
by excluding him from a Right which otherwise he were entitled to; it needs not
much deliberation what course to take, seeing I have already proved that to
resolve upon this latter is not contrary to Law, is most consonant to Equity,
and above all, the most expedient. Which last consideration I shall pursue no
further, being so excellently done already in The Character of a Popish
Successor.

Having thus vindicated the passing of the Bill of Exclusion, I have in doing
so detected the designs and interests those have espoused, that have on this
account calumniated these Honorable and Loyal Senators with endeavors to
subvert the Government established, with Republican designs, with the Nickname
of Presbyterians, and all that is odious. His Majesty indeed has, the natural
affection toward a Brother, his incomparable lenity of disposition, and his
consciousness of having deserved so infinitely of those that seek his ruin,
that he cannot easily believe there can be so monstrous ingratitude in nature;
I say he has all these to Apologize for his not giving countenance to the Bill,
and to keep Him in the good opinion of his Loyal Subjects: But for others that
have none of these colored Glasses to look through, they may indeed affirm, as
they do, that white is black, but they lie against the truth and their own
eyes, and prove nothing with all their confident clamor, but that they are
well pleased at the King's danger, and triumph in the hopes of a Successor for
their turn. This will be more plain by and by, when I come to examine the
Addresses, which will also give us occasion to observe the perverse
construction they give of the Act for repealing 35 Eliz.

This Parliament indeed deserves the heaviest censure for striking down so
strong a pillar of the Cause as the Lord Stafford, when one and thirty Lords
had set to their shoulders to support it. Losers may have leave to speak, and
we'll hear what they can say, when we have taken a turn to Oxford

This Session continued almost three months, and brought forth but three living
Acts, a fourth was still-born and never saw the light. After a prorogation for
a few days this Parliament was dissolved, and another called to assemble at
Oxford; that seeing Pisgah had proved so unfortunate, it might be tried whether
Peor would be more favorable. It was fit the people should be minded of his
Majesty's Prerogative; and whatever private reasons the King might have for it,
the subject had a satisfactory reason when they understood their Sovereign
would have it so. Some insinuated to his Majesty that it was ominous; but He
was not so superstitious as to apprehend any danger in going thither, though
perhaps too apprehensive of it since his return back. There was a great
concourse of people, many going thither in complement to their Members, many
merely out of curiosity, being invited with the Novelty; and some (perhaps)
over sagacious, to defend the Assembly, if they should be assaulted by the
Papists. The House of Commons declared to all the world (as the Speaker expressed
it in his Speech at his presentment to the King) that they were not given to
change; which was true as he meant it, seeing he had been Speaker too in the
last Parliament; but was also prophetical, for they still pursued the same
means for preservation of the Protestant Religion and the King's person. The
Bill of Exclusion that past the House the last Parliament, is still esteemed
the only thing that can do it. Sir L. J. condemns it of injustice, irreligion,
perjury (which I think I have sufficiently vindicated it from:) but it was
observed he had no body to second him, his objections were such downright
Cant. Others of the Duke's friends finding the House absolutely of opinion that
it was lawful, endeavor to stave it off by offering an Expedient that might as
well answer the ends of that Bill, and not be subject to such incoveniencies.
And that was, That the Duke should have the title of King, but the Regency or
administration of the Kingly power, should be in the next Heir. A pretty
wheedle! as if by granting the Name to the immediate Successor and thereby
declaring that the right was in him, would not give him a fairer pretense and
opportunity of usurping the Power likewise, than if he were excluded the title
as well as administration. Besides, this Expedient is founded on this bottom,
it must suppose him to be either an intolerable knave or a perfect fool, a
desperate Villain or a Madman. His greatest enemies would acquit him of the
latter imputation, and his friends from the former, so that the Person and the
Power would soon be piec'd together. Sir F. W. said, that seeing an Act of
Parliament against common sense is void, and that it were a contradiction and
nonsense to make a man King and not to suffer him to exercise Kingly power; if
such an Act should pass, it would signify nothing, unless it were to show that
the House of Commons were outwitted. It was clearly carried therefore that it
was safer, nay that it was absolutely necessary, that the old Bill of Exclusion
should be insisted on.

But there was another business in this Parliament that made as great a
controversy, and which occasioned the speedy dissolution of it. Edw.
Fitz-Harris had hired Mr. Everard to draw up a treasonable libel in the name of
the Nonconformists, (giving him instructions for it) which was to be printed
and sent about by the Penny-post to the Protesting Lords, and the Leading men
of the House of Commons, etc. who were to be taken up as soon as they had it,
upon hopes that upon search it might be found about them. This shamplot being
discovered to authority, Fitz-Harris was seized on, and committed to Newgate;
where inclining to confess the bottom of the design, he was transmitted to the
Tower. Sir R. C. and Sir G. T. give information of his confession that he had
made to them, to the House. Whereupon the House Resolve, That the same Edw.
Fitz-Harris be impeached of High Treason, in the name of all the Commons of
England, and that Mr. Secretary Jenkins do go up, and Impeach him at the Bar
of the Lords House. But the Lords refused to proceed upon this Impeachment, and
directed that he should be proceeded against at the Common Law. This the
Commons Resolve to be a denial of Justice, a violation of the Constitution of
Parliaments, an obstruction to the further discovery of the Plot, and of great
danger to his Majesty's person and the Protestant Religion. And indeed (not to
mention that the Bishops intermeddled in rejecting the Impeachment in which
case being Capital they had no right to Vote) when the Upper House had made no
scruple in the former Parliament of receiving the Impeachment against the Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs (a Commoner) it was plain what considerations influenced
them at this time to be of another opinion. However about twenty there were
that protested against this rejection, and esteemed the Commons demand of
Justice there, to be reasonable and just, and such as ought to have been
granted. But a speedy dissolution soon reconciled this difference, and
Westminster Hall has since determined the controversy.

And thus having given a short account of the businesses agitated and the
manner of proceeding in these two Parliaments, we shall be able to make the
truer estimate of the grounds upon which some have made so bold to traduce them.

The Members were scarcely got home, but out comes a Declaration, charging them
with unwarrantable and arbitrary proceedings: but giving assurance, that his
Majesty would call frequent Parliaments, that he would make the Laws the Rule
of his Government, and that he would maintain the Religion established. Many
begin to long for the performance of the first promise, that would not doubt of
the two latter from so good and gracious a King, and so hearty a Protestant.
But others by magnifying and inculcating the King's Prerogative of calling
Parliaments when and where he please; seem willing to persuade Him, He may be
dispensed with in the breach of it. Not that these are greater Friends to the
Prerogative than the other, but they care less for Parliaments that alone can
enable the King to uphold the Religion and the Government.

Out of Complement to this Declaration are Addresses presented from all hands;
some indeed containing nothing but thanks for the gracious promises therein
contained, such was that from Warwickshire, etc. the most, only a Declaration
that they mean to keep their Oath of Allegiance in being true and faithful to
the King, his Heirs and lawful Successors: And these truly were dignum patella
operculum, That when his Majesty had promised nothing but what he had obliged
himself to at his Coronation, by a more sacred tie; these to express their
acknowledgment of the favor, barely say what they had formerly swore to. All
this sort of Addressers might even as well have let the matter rested, and have
concurred with the City of Lincoln in their opinion, who (in their Address)
say, they thought there was no better way of expressing their Faith and true
Allegiance to his Majesty's most Sacred Person, and their grateful sense of His
excellent Government, than a peaceable and quiet demeanor in their several
Callings and Stations, an humble submission to acquiesce in his Majesty's good
and wholesome Laws, relating to the Government both of Church and State, and a
readiness, as often as his Majesty in his Princely wisdom judges fit to call a
Parliament, to choose such Members as they conceive to be perfectly devoted to
his Majesty's Service, and the welfare of the Church and State, as now by Law
established, without intermedling with the Calling or Dissolving of them]
though even these that thought thus, that they might follow the fashion, play
the fool for company, as themselves render the reason of their Address. And it
must certainly be from the impertinence of this sort, that the Inns of Court,
those Fountains of Law and Loyalty, disdained to serve up any such Crambe; and
those two famous and Mother Cities, London and York, looked on and had the
diversion to see their Children act like such.

But if we have any reason to question the discretion of these Addressers, we
have much more cause to suspect the honesty of the following. This kind are
continually a bawling out Whore to others, that they may have a Monopoly of the
Trade themselves. You arraign, you asperse the Government, you reflect on
Authority, is their general accusation; whilst they do the same things avowedly
in the face of the Sun. Thus Ripon account it a matter of the highest joy and
satisfaction, that they are delivered from the unwarrantable proceedings of the
House of Commons. If they have indeed proceeded unwarrantably, let his Majesty
and They fairly dispute it in God's name at their next Meeting: but what have
these Scoundrels, a Parson's Son and a company of Spur-makers, to do with it?
The one might learn from his Father to keep to his Text, and the others from
the Bootmaker to look to their Lasts, without calumniating an essential part of
the Government. Yet the term unwarrantable is somewhat modest though; now enter
jingling Will with his Myrmidons, complaining, that the House of Commons made
use of an Arbitrary and Illegal power, to the great prejudice of his Majesty's
Loyal Subjects, contrary to the known Laws of this Kingdom, and to the
discouragement of the Members of that House, and all other Loyal Students and
Practisers of the Laws A little discouragement will serve their turn, God
knows! and if they want a better pretense for their Idleness, they are welcome
to this, let them take what course they please; I Will warrant 'em neither Grey's
Inn nor Westminster Hall will lament the loss or much want their company.
However we must acknowledge them good Proficients for their standing; for they
know more Laws of the Kingdom, than the oldest man of their House. They had
done well to have particularized the Laws and the Offenses; however because the
whole Gang are acted by the same Spirit, we may inform our selves at least of
the latter from Chesterfield, who return Loyal thanks for his Majesty's
Dissolving the Parliament, and thereby preserving them from the late growing
Usurpation, of Arbitrary Government, by imprisoning his Majesty's Subjects,
etc. Manet alta mente repostum Judicium Paridis, etc. This usurping Parliament
lodged five Friends in the Tower for nothing else but designing to murder the
King and to alter the Government in Church and State; Another honest
Protestant, for saying there was no Popish, but a Presbyterian Plot. O Crimes
unpardonable! A third sort were committed to the Sergeants Ward for betraying
the liberty of the Subject, and contributing to the design of subverting the
ancient legal Constitution of this Kingdom and introducing Arbitrary Power. O
Usurpation! O Arbitrariness! But what shall we think of them that insinuate
their belief of the King's being in more danger of the Parliament, than of
either Papists or Presbyterians? Enter Weobley and Richmond. Weobley: We shall
still acknowledge God's goodness in blessing us with a Prince who so prudently
foresaw the ruin of Your Self and us, which must have been expected from such
unparalled Mischiefs which were threatened, if they had not been timely
prevented (by Dissolving the Parliament.) Richmond, We Your most dutiful, etc.
present to Your Sacred Majesty, from our Hearts, a more thankful
acknowledgement for your most gracious late Declaration, than we can in any
words express: whereby you have assured unto us, the preservation of our
Religion, Liberties and Properties, that were all lately like to have been
swallowed up in monstrous confusions, if the special Spirit of God had not
inspired Your Heart to prevent it. Here not to mention the imputation of
Enthusiasm cast upon His Majesty, which such a Master of Reason would be
ashamed to pretend to, what is the scope of both these Addresses but to work
His Majesty into an apprehension of Treasonable and Rebellious Designs against
His Person and the Government carried on by Two Parliaments, than which none
ever expressed a greater care and providence for the preservation of both? This
is the only saving Card that the men of this Interest have to play, to make the
King jealous and fearful of his Parliaments, and consequently to breed a
diffidence in them of Him, that the foundations of the Government being renderd
thus unsteady, they may upon a favorable juncture overturn it, and erect their
own new Model. And to accomplish this design, it is not only the method of these
whiffling Boroughs already mentioned and of others I might recite, (as
Weymouth, Thetford, etc.) but of deeper heads: The University of Cambridge it
self reflecting on these Parliaments, speaks of them in these terms: That
factious and malicious men have not proceeded to plunder and sequestration, to
violate our Chapels, rifle our Libraries and empty our Colleges as once they
did, next to the overruling providence of God, is only due to the Royal care
and prudence of Your sacred Majesty, who gave so seasonable a check to their
arbitrary and insolent undertaking.] What could be spoken more malicious, or
what, if his Majesty could be induced to believe it true, could possibly tempt
him more to resolve never to put himself into the danger of the like Assembly?
And that we need not question their desire and design os cashiering
Parliaments, they take upon themselves a power of repealing an Act of
Parliament; for they make bold to affirm, That no Religion, no LAW, no fault or
forfeiture can alter the Succession: whereas the Statute of 13 Eliz. has made
it Treason to affirm that the LAWS and Statutes made in Parliament do not bind
the Right of the Crown, and the descent, limitation, inheritance and governance
thereof. It were needless to recite the like assertions in other Addresses, for
these are enough to convince any man of the design, that is not engaged in it;
and those that are, will never be convinced but by a Parliament which in due
time may persuade them to recant. And to make his Majesty more favorable to
their purpose, and lest his Wants and necessities should be stronger Arguments
to Him for assembling a Parliament (the only Legal means of supplying them)
than their Insinuations for staving him from it, they first accuse the late
Sessions for unreasonably obstructing his Majesty's demands of supplies of money
(so Northumberland) and then to put Him into a readier method of furnishing
himself, the County Palatine of Durham in their late Anti-Associations, as they
call it, thus express themselves: [And that we may not only verbally express
our Loyalty, we do as in Duty and Allegiance bound give this Assurance, That
our Lives and Fortunes sha l be ready, and that we will CONTRIBVTE MONEY to our
uttermost Abilities, when ever your Majesty's occasions shall require.] No
mention at all of a Parliament, but both by the words and the whole scope and
drift of this Address, it is plain, they mean a voluntary Contribution,
whenever His Majesty shall signify that his occasions require it. Thus by
these few passages we see how industriously they are engaged in carrying on the
leading half of the Popish Plot, viz. Arbitrary Government; we shall next
inquire what assistance they afford the following half, to wit, the extirpating
the Protestant Religion and introducing of Popery. And I doubt not but to make
it appear, they are thorough paced in this also.

In the Parliament that began October. 21. 1680. there were two Bills that had
each two Readings, and were Committed upon the debate of the House; the one,
for Uniting of his Majesty's Protestant Subjects; the other, for exempting his
Majesty's Protestant Subjects dissenting from the Church of England, from the
Penalties of certain Laws: whether they would have passed or no is uncertain,
however they were quashed by the Prorogation of the Parliament. But there was a
third Bill which passed both Houses, entitled, An Act for the Repeal of a
Statute made in the thirty fifth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth. As the
late Long Parliament repealed the Statute de Haeretico comburendo, for fear, if
Popery should once again get the upper hand, it would be executed upon
Protestants as it was in Queen Marys days; so this present Parliament,
foreseeing that this Act of Queen Elizabeth, that was made against the
Prownists and Barrowists of those days (as appears in the Journals of
Parliament of that Queen lately published by Mr. Starkey) was likely to be
perverted to the ruin of the Estates, Liberties and (it might be) Lives of
Protestants in the days of a Popish Successor; and thinking it prudent to
provide even against the present dangers from the Common Enemy the Papists, by
bearing a gentler hand over the dissenting Protestants, (on whom this Act was
in part executed) and thereby uniting them more firmly in Interest and
Affection with the Church of England; I say, upon these considerations this
present Parl. thought fit to repeal that Act of 35 Eliz. But at the end of the
Sessions, when this Bill should have been presented (with the others that were
expedited) unto his Majesty for his approbation and passing it into an Act,
there was no fight or tidings of it. By whose default it was thus smothered,
there has been no opportunity since to find out. However some of our late
Addressers throw the odium of it upon his Majesty, telling him, That he was
unwilling to pass his Royal Assent to any Act which may repeal that of 35 Eliz.
(Vide Kents Address.) How these Gentlemen come to understand the King's mind in
this case, I know not: Sure I am, it is very unlikely but his Majesty would
have passed this Bill recommended with the concurrent advice and consent of
both Lords and Commons, if it had been tendered to Him, seeing he has always
professed so great a regard to tender Consciences, and himself from his own
motion granted them an Indulgence against this and several other Acts of
Parliament, which every one may remember how difficultly he was prevailed with
by the Parliament to retract, saying he was resolved to stand by it But these
men would have it believed that He Is now otherwise inclined; and besides, if
their Insinuations of his Majesty's command to stifle it were true, it were
palpable that He had shaken the very Constitution of Parliaments, according to
which all Bills that have past both Houses, ought to be presented to his
Majesty. But no truly Loyal Subject will believe so gracious a King capable of
being perverted to so great an Invasion of the Rights or breach of the Rules of
Parliament, let such ill-designing flatterers suggest what they please. But
where ever the fault of this miscarriage lay, our Addressers were heartily glad
of it, and Petition the King that he will put this Act of 35 Eliz. in
execution, for the safety of the Church, his Majesty's Sacred Person and
Government. (So Ripon, Sussex, etc.) They accuse the Two Houses as enemies to
our Church and Religion, which they endeavored to undermine and ruin when
they went about to Repeal this Act, which is a chief Bulwark of both. (So
Holland in Lincolnshire.) Now one would think, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled, better knew what would maintain
our Religion than these men: but the truth is, our Religion is not the same
with the Parliament and them, and so no marvel if what will maintain the one's,
would ruin the other's. They call their Religion that which is established by
Law, and this they will defend with their Lives and Fortunes: In this
protestation the rankest Papist in England will join with them, believing Magna
Charta to be the firmest Law, and Popery to stand as unshaken thereupon as an
House founded upon a Rock, for all the blasts and billows of (supposed)
Heretical Kings and Parliaments, all whose Acts and Ordinances against Holy
Church, a Papist reckons to be in themselves void. And considering all the
circumstances, even a charitable man may be pretty confident that this
expression [Religion established by Law] is commonly used in this sense, when
he observes that a Gentleman presumed to be no very zealous Protestant, in a
late Print is represented as promising to stand by it, and to endeavor to
preserve it. (But this by the way.) Hence it is that our Addressers account it
matter of highest Joy and Satisfaction to understand the King's resolution to
maintain the Succession of the Crown in its due and legal course of Descent. Oh
how it tickles their fancies, to have hopes of a Popish Successor! So Ely
cannot but REJOICE to find His Majesty expressly professing himself in his own
Royal Judgment so nearly concerned in Honor, Justice and Conscience to
preserve the rightful Succession of the Crown in its Legal descent. Thus
Northumberland do with the greatest TRANSPORT of JOY and THANKFVLNESS return
His Majesty their most humble and express acknowledgment for opposing with such
incomparable resolution the Arbitrary and unnatural proceedings against the
undoubted right of his Succession in the person of his Royal Brother, the
greatest Example of Trust, Duty and Obedience to his sacred Majesty. They would
almost persuade one, this Royal Brother absented himself from the King's Chapel
in obedience to his Majesty's Command: or else they will give the Dissenters
leave to style themselves his Majesty's most dutiful and obedient Subjects, in
imitating so great an Example. -- But to the Point. I said above, that the
prejudices of natural affection, etc. that the King is biased by, may permit
him to stand fair in the opinion of hearty Protestants, notwithstanding his
opposing the Bill of Exclusion; and this entailing a Popish Successor, might
be matter of their patience and submission: but to be so transported with Joy
hereupon, as our Addressers express themselves to be, is a plain token they
never intend to be burnt for Heretics when such a one comes to the Crown, but
will (with Derbyshire, etc.) most heartily, to the utmost expense both of their
Lives and Fortunes, assist, support, maintain and defend such a Successor, with
the Regalia's and Prerogatives of his Crown, and the Religion and Government
both of Church and State as established by Law. I believe these Gentlemen are
not so divested of Flesh and Blood, nor have so perfectly learned of the
Apostle to rejoice in tribulation, but that Fire and Faggot would drive them
into sadder apprehensions, if they knew not of a Trick to escape them. But this
is the ground of their Triumph, that in such an ones Reign they shall be able
to take a fuller revenge on the Schismatical Dogs, than the present mild Laws
and more indulgent Prince will permit them. Who sees not how their fingers itch
to be at it, that observes their illegal and inhumane treatment of honest and
peaceable Protestants at Bristol, etc. even whilst Laws to punish them for such
barbarities, are in force? to what Cruelties then will not their Fury carry
them, when it shall be encouraged and spurred on by Law, and the Commands of a
Jesuited King?

What shall I say of their preferring Popery before Presbytery; of their
accounting Calvin a worse man than Ignatius Loyola, and his Doctrines more (or
at least as) pernicious? What construction can a man put upon their
incredulousness of a Popish Plot, that has been so sufficiently attested to be
real; while they profess their firm belief of a Presbyterian Plot, that has
twice at least been detected by the King and Council to be forged and
Fictitious (in the cases of Dangerfield and Fitz-Harris) and was never yet
believed by any Jury? What rejoycings at the acquittal of Wakeman, Gascoyne,
etc. and what applause of the fairness of their Trials! but when a Protestant
comes to be acquitted, where is the man amongst them that (shall I say) is
glad, nay, that does not (with Durham in their Anti-Association) complain of
packt Juries, and (with the Middle-Templers) of Juries perverting the Laws, and
usurping to themselves an Arbitrary and Tyrannical Dominion? Which of them
exclaims not presently like Norfolk against partial Grand Juries, such as can
violate their Oaths, to procure impunity for Treason, and think it merit to
affront and oppose the Government? Into what Tory's Heart ever did it enter, or
which of their Tongues ever made the motion, to Abhor the most damnable
Conspiracy of the Papists, to Murder the King, Massacre his Subjects, and
subvert the Protestant Religion? but when a Sham-Association, and yet that only
to prevent a Popish Successour's coming to the Crown, is obtruded upon the
World; then, nothing but Death and the Cobbler, Treason! Rebellion! Can such men
think any man so blind as not to see how they stand affected? 'Twere needless
to observe how generally they have got by heart Thompson's two Letters to prove
Sir Ed. Godfry Murdered himself, and of what weight those absurd and
contradictory suggestions seem to them; what impressions the dying Jesu ts
Speeches have made upon their Consciences, and how charitably scrupulous they
are grown: whilst they question not but College dyed with a Lie in his mouth.
What Clergyman that has taken L'estrange for his Guide (and those are more
than a good many) that will confess the Pope to be Antichrist, or the Church
of Rome to be Idolatrous; let Usher, Mede, Moore, Stillingfleet, etc.
demonstrate it never so plainly? They must needs acknowledge, they will tell you,
that there are many corruptions in the Church of Rome, BUT, what Constitution
is without them? They will profess their desires of an Accommodation, though
they certainly know, that if such a thing ever be. Protestantism must be
swallowed up in Popery; for the Church of Rome, as such, cannot recede from one
tittle of their present Confession, unless they would let go the very
foundation of it, their pretense to Infallibility. In a word, show me the Tory,
Clergy or Lay, that will not call the Parliament a Faction, esteem the D. a
Saint, affirm the Scarcrow of Schism (upon the Punctilio's of Ceremonies) to be
a greater evil than any at this Day tolerated in the Church of Rome, and the
five Points agreed upon at the Synod of Dort, more destructive doctrine than
any of the Conventicle at Trent.

I will not descend to the Speeches or actions of particular persons; for as
that would be tedious, so I should think my self injurious, to charge upon the
whole Gang the Extravagancies of a few. But the affirmations, opinions and
demeanor that I have enumerated and described, are so common to all of them
that I have conversed with, and are so truly and properly characteristical,
that none can call me unjust, or say that I have misrepresented them. Upon the
whole matter therefore, I appeal to the judgment of any unprejudiced man,
whether the persons I have been speaking of, be not designing enemies of the
Power, Privileges and Freedom of English Parliaments; and whether from their
transport of joy at the likelihood of a Popish Successor, etc. they be not
apparently Well-wishers unto Popery.

It remains that we speak a word or two of the Bill of Association. We observed
above that when the Bill of Exclusion was rejected by the Lords, there was
another agreed by the Commons to be brought in, ( Dec. 15. 80.) for the
Associating of all his Majesty's Protestant subjects, for the safety of his
Majesty's person, the defense of the Protestant Religion, etc. and for the
preventing the Duke of York or any Papist, from succeeding to the Crown. And
about five days after, in an Address to his Majesty, they humbly petition him,
That when a Bill should be tendered to his Majesty in a Parliamentary way, to
disable the Duke of York from inheriting the Crown, his Majesty would give his
Royal Assent thereto; And as necessary to fortify and defend the same, that
his Majesty will likewise be graciously pleased to Assent to an Act whereby his
Majesty's Protestant subjects may be enabled to ASSOCIATE themselves for the
defense of his Majesty's person, the Protestant Religion, and the security of
His Kingdoms. Let any man judge whether these were not as calm, orderly and
warrantable steps toward an Association, as any could be devised. And indeed
our Abhorrers, for all their Clamours against Associations, have not the face
to say any thing against these proceedings: Only they cry, they will enter into
none without his Majesty's consent; as if the Parliament had told the King,
they would enter into one whether He would or not. But they think they have got
a better pretense for decrying and abhorring them, than these motions toward
one in the Parliament, and that is, the model of one said to be found in the E.
of Shaftsbury's Closet. Now though I doubt not but in convenient time it will
be made out, as clear as a Negative can be, that that paper was not found
there: yet for discourses sake we will suppose that it was. And then I say,
that if there were any thing contained in it that were of it self Treasonable;
I know not how it would have affected my Lord Shaftsbury, unless it had
appeared either to have been of my Lords handwriting, or that he had tendered
it to be subscribed by any one, or at least it had been proved that my Lord
knew of its being there. None of which has been, nor I am confident can be made
out by any one. And if my Lord, at whose door they lay it, be no more concerned
in it; there is no color of reason in the world to charge I know not what
others for consenting to it. So that we have a great cry, and a little wool.
The Mystery of Abhorrence therefore lies here: As the former Addresses were
calculated against the Bill of Exclusion; so the late Abhorrences, against the
Bill of Association that was to back it. And as both these Bills aimed at
nothing else but the safety and defense of his Majesty's person and the
Protestant Religion, and the security of these Kingdoms, by means which the
House of Commons in their great Wisdoms thought lawful and necessary for those
ends: So our Addressers and Abhorrers seem to aim at the clean contrary; For if
the Papists do see the way made plain for a Popish Successor (as these
Gentlemen endeavor to make it) his Majesty's most sacred person is in
continual danger of being assasinated by the desperate Instruments of the
Popish Faction; which if once effected (which the good God forbid!) what then
will become of the Protestant Religion and the welfare of these Kingdoms, I
tremble to contemplate.

But I would have all Papists to know, that we are not yet scared out of our
wits with the noise of Abhorrences, nor would I have them over-confident of
carrying the day, for all the interest they have made. When Queen Elizabeth
with her Protestant Subjects were in like danger from the Q. of Scots and her
Traitorous Faction (27 Eliz.) as his present Majesty with the like subjects now
are from a Parallel, we find very great numbers of the best quality
spontaneously entering into an Association, (putting thereto their hands and
Seals) wherein, If her Majesty should come to an untimely death, they did not
only bind themselves never to allow, accept or favor any such pretended
Successor, BY whom or FOR whom any such detestable Act should be Attempted or
Committed, as unworthy of all Government in any Christian Realm or Civil State:
But did also further protest -- to persecute such person and persons to death
with their joint and particular Forces, and to act the utmost revenge upon
them, that by any means they or any of them could devise or do, or cause to be
devised and done for their utter overthrow and extirpation.] And if the Queen
of Scots and her Faction should (only) attempt any Act, counsel or consent to
any thing that should tend to the harm of her Majesty's Royal person, they
would with their joint and particular Forces, withstand, offend and pursue, as
well by force of Arms as by all other means of revenge, all such persons, of
what state soever and their Abettors, and never desist from all manner of
pursuit against them, to the utter extermination of them, their Counselors and
Abettors.] Now it does not at all appear, that the Queens pleasure was
consulted in this affair, but that the Associators did it purely of their own
heads: for in those days there was that mutual confidence betwixt Prince and
people, that Loyal subjects never feared the incurring the charge of Treason
for contriving and using all possible means for the preservation of their
Sovereign: but contrarily, when this Association was turned into an Act of
Parliament soon after (entitled, An Act for provision to be made for the surety
of the Queens Majesty's most Royal person, etc.) these Associators are therein
styled, Her Majesty's good and faithful Subjects, and are acknowledged to have
done it, in the name of God and with the testimonies of good consciences. But I
urge not this, as if any Association were to be entered into against the
Sovereigns mind; for it is one thing to do a thing without his Pleasure first
known, and another to do it against the signification of it: However the
Association proposed in Parliament, that occasioned this discourse, was so far
from being carried on against the King's mind, that we see they petitioned Him
for his assent to it, before they had made any progress in it; which as I do
not know that he has granted, so neither that he has denied.

To be short: As I will not take up Arms without the King's Commission, nor
enter into any Association, to commence in his lifetime, against his consent:
So I do protest (as I doubt not, many thousands will do with me) that if his
Majesty shall come by any untimely and violent death, or shall be forced to a
Resignation (which is a Political death) He, BY whom or FOR whom such untimely
death shall be procured, or such Resignation extorted, Shall not Reign over me.
For I cannot think any man that has one drop of Royal blood in his Veins, so
much incapacitated for the Crown as such a Traitor.

FINIS.

