A LETTER TO MR. MEAD, IN ANSWER to several Unscriptural, and Unsound Sayings
of his, in a Sermon against the Seventh-day Sabbath, Preached at his Place of
Meeting, the Twenty Third of the Second Month. 1682.

WROTE the same Day the Sermon was Preached, refuting his Arguments, and
turning them back, making their Unskilfulness and Weakness manifest; and
clearly Evidencing, That the Seventh-Day is the Sabbath Day; by clear
Scripture-Testimony, and sound Arguments grounded thereon.

Published for his Hearers, because he would neither hear an Objection in
Public, nor admit of a Conference in Private.

Prove. 27. 5. Open Rebuke is better than secret Love. London, Printed for the
Author, and are to be Sold by John Lawrence at the Angel in Cornhil, near the
Royal Exchange.

A Prefatory Epistle TO Mr. Meads Hearers.
Men, Brethren, and Fathers;
AND all you that heard him that day, Read the Defense which I make for my self
in this Practice; you are my Witnesses (especially such of you as were near me)
how I behaved my self in your Assembly, giving no disturbance, or cause of
offense to any Man; but listening attentively to the Word spoken, lest I should
let any of it slip: And when the Sermon was ended, I stood up and assayed to
speak; but a Psalm being called, I abode in silence until the whole Service was
over; and then I stood up, and Meekly, Reverently, and Submissively craved
leave to speak; to which Mr. Mead answered, That I had no Call to speak there.
And I replied, He would better judge of that when he had heard what I had to
say; (for he knew not but I might Report that God was in you of a Truth, 1 Cor.
14. 25.) but I was again repulsed, and denied leave to speak: Wherefore I went
away peaceably, neither with Noise or Tumult. And as I went forth, several of
you witnessed, That I spoke modestly, and wished that I had been heard; and
others of you gave me assurance, That Mr. Mead would be ready, and free to have
private Conference with me, and urged me to take a convenient Season to go to
him; upon which I hasted home, and the same Afternoon wrote a large Letter to
him; and I have Printed my Letter herewith, that you may judge betwixt us: For
receiving no Answer to my Letter, neither in public (for he omitted Preaching
the next First Day) nor in private: I took a Friend with me, and went to his
House, and told him, I was the Man, that in his public Assembly, desired leave
to speak; and had since Wrote unto him, and receiving no Answer to my Letter, I
made bold to wait upon him for it: At which he Majesterially asked me as the
Chief Priest asked our Lord Jesus Christ; By what Authority I spoke in his
Meeting? At which I wonderingly repeated his words -- And he replied
(demandingly) Ay, I ask you by what Authority? And said farther, That I made a
Disturbance in the Worship of God, and occasioned a Scandal to be cast upon
them. To which I mildly answered, That I made no Disturbance in the Worship of
God; neither gave any occasion of Scandal; and that I spoke by the Authority of
the Scriptures; and pulled out my Bible, to show from the Scriptures, that my
Practice therein was to be justified: But he not caring to have an Authentical
Answer to His Majesterial Demand, Pilate like, John 18. 38. went off from that,
and told me, I had Notoriously Abused him in my Letter, calling him ignorant
Fellow, and asking him if he were not ashamed. To which I answered, That I did
not call him ignorant fellow; but to say he was ignorant of this or that, I
thought no crime, and hoped he would acknowledge his ignorance in some things
(and indeed ignorance is the fairest excuse that can be made for him) and I
hope he would be ashamed of an Error; and I wondered that he should so Treat
me: but he said, he had shown my Letter to my Betters and his too; and that he
had a sufficient account of me, what a fellow I was; insinuating, as if he had
heard some ill thing of me, but mentioning nothing; but I knew, he that
reproved a Scorner, would get to himself a Blot: And I urged to have an Answer
to my Arguments, but he ignorantly told me, I deserved no other answer, but to
be sent to the House of Correction; and he could spend his time better, than to
talk with such a fellow; and so he showed me the way to the Door. And more such
like words he gave me, though I gave him no one provoking word, but Debased my
self to Gain upon him; because I had heard he was a Proud Highminded Man. When
he said I deserved to be sent to the House of Correction, I answered him, That
I was glad he had not Power: And so I am, for if he had power, I might have a
Scandalum Magnatum brought against me, of more Hundred Pounds Damage, than I am
worth, though the Letter was privately sent to his own hand, and he suffered no
damage at all. It may be, some of you will not know how to bear my
Plain-dealing with the Man you so much Love; but how do you think I can bear,
being threatened with a House of Correction, a place for vagrant Rogues, and not
for a Man that is well known, and lives in good Repute, whose Wife, and
Children, and Servants, are all an Honor to him? How do you think such a Man
can bear such Majesterial Threats, from one that has no power over him? and
how provoking was it to be despised and scorned, as not worthy to be spoke to;
and how unlike humble Paul was it to carry it thus? for Paul became all things
to all Men, that he might by any means Save some. If any of you do judge my
Style too harsh, I desire you will weigh his Carriage to me in the same
Balance; and for what was suggested against me, I told him it was a light
thing with me, to be Judged of Man's Judgment; but let them that Accuse me,
speak nothing but the truth, and I challenge them to search my whole Life, and
publish my Crimes, if they themselves be not guilty of them: through Mercy I
have been kept from the common Pollutions of the Times, and Corruptions in my
Calling, fraudulent Dealing, and Usury; and of this I have Witness: And I am
sure the worst he could hear of me, was, that I am a Passionate Man; Ay, I am
persuaded, that was the account he had of me; for he took a ready course to be
too hard for a Collerick Man; but he did not magnify his Office therein. I do
not glory in my Passion, or count it a light Sin, but write it to my shame,
that he may not think I exalt my self above him, when I would have him be
ashamed of any Error he committed; and if an Enemy will discover any Sin in me,
that I do not see in my self, I will count him my Friend therein: Nay, though
he do it out of Malice, I will accept it in Love; and if I shall get the
farther Knowledge of Sin in my self (by this Controversy) so that I may
overcome it, I shall count I have good Gain; but if I can also convince him and
you of the Error in his Doctrine, which I write against, I shall gain that I
Labor for: Though what I have said in have, be very short of what might be
pleaded for the Truth; yet if fudes be laid aside, and a Conference be admitted
in a calm cool Spirit, I doubt not, but to Answer whatever this Objecter has
to say against the Truth and Duty I pleaded for: But if instead of that, Sin be
added to Sin, and I am slanderously reported, and scandals be raised of me,
which for matter of Fact, are not true, and need to be answered, you must not
expect that I can print books to clear my self. No, that will be too costly.
The cheapest way I can think of at present, is, to publish my Defense (if I am
wronged) in some of the News books: And there you may expect to hear of me, on
any such Occasion,

W. T:

A LETTER to Mr. MEAD, etc.
Honored Sir,
THe Leave I Craved, with humble submission, in your public Assembly this day,
being not granted; I have wrote some of those Objections I had then to make Ex
Tempore, against the greatest part of your Sermon, which you delivered
premeditately, and with the help of Notes. And though I am but a Youth in
Years, and of mean Capacity, whereby I am much your Inferior and Unequal; yet I
hope through Grace, I am a Babe in Christ, having a Spiritual Palate, whereby
I can in some good measure discern the sincere Milk of the Word, from the
unsavory sayings of men without, and against the word of truth: And from thence
it is I am Emboldened to engage in this Controversy with you: And before I
engage in the Refuting your Arguments against the Lords
Honourable-Seventh-day-Sabbath, I first assure you, that I will endeavor to
keep as close as I can, to the exact form and due order of your Arguments; and
if in any thing I miss it, if you will make it known to me in writing, I will
admit that to be your mind and meaning, which you shall so declare to me in
writing to be your meaning. And that you may not mistake me, I declare to you,
that it is not any Argument against the Godhead, or against the Power of
Christ, that I do oppose: for I do firmly believe, The Lord Jesus Christ to be
God, Equal with the Father; that he is Jehovah, and the Holy Spirit is Jehovah;
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, one Jehovah. But my Objections are against your
Assertion, That Jesus Christ has Changed the day of the Sabbath; And that it
was necessary he should so do. Your Scriptures for it, you said, you laid down
the day before; and I not being present then, do not know them, and so cannot
Answer to them: but those Texts of Scripture, which have usually been brought
against it by Dr. Owen, and other Objectors against the Lords Honorable day,
are largely discoursed, and their Genuine sense and proper meaning are held
forth, and cleared up (agreeing with the whole Scripture where it Treats of
that Subject matter) in a Treatise of the Sabbath, wrote by Mr. F. Bampfield,
sold by Mr. Lawrence at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal Exchange. Your
humane Authorities, which you brought to back your other plea, have no
Authority with me, neither ought they to have any Authority in the conscience
of any man, being contrary to Christ, and the word of Christ, and contradicting
of one another. Justin Martyr, your first Author, says they assembled on the
Sunday; and gives this as the ground of it, That being the first day wherein
God separating the light from the darkness, did Create the World, And Jesus
Christ our Savior rose again from the dead: This is the ground of their
Assembling, and both groundless. For the world was not made in a day, but in
Six days, and the Seventh was Created a Sabbath, and Sanctified a Sabbath; and
the (...) in the Fourth Command, being future Piel, he shall Sanctify; does
clearly prove the Continuance of its Sanctifiedness: for it is still a speaking
word, the like you have in the first of Genesis concerning the light, (which
your Author would make a wrong use of) (...) there shall be light, and there
shall be light; the Word not only gave light a being, but continues it in its
being; so this Word not only Sanctified the Sabbath, but continues it
Sanctified as long as the word remains in the Command; what, because Justin
Martyr, and the people with him, voluntarily met on that day, and gives a
groundless reason for it, will you from thence Embolden your hearers to
Transgress the Seventh-day Sabbath? which sin, the Lord has Threatened so many
Judgments against; and which fin you can hardly, prove your Author Guilty of:
for although they met upon Sunday, and observed several other Festivals, with
as great Veneration, and imposed them with as great Authority, even Easter day,
and all the fifty days from Easter to Whitsuntide, were accounted Holy; and
Solemnized with no less observation than the Sundays were. Thus the Church was
Corrupted, with the observation of Holy Days so early, and with diverse other
Superstitions, as Mixing water with the Wine in the Lords Supper, and standing
in their devotion, making Kneeling, which is the proper posture in prayer, to
be a crime in those Holy Days, with many other Corruptions; and must the
practice of such a corrupt generation of Churches be brought forth; for a
Confirmation of a Doctrine in this age, of growing light; No, its too late to
impose upon us with such Authorities. Yet your own Authors, call no other day
the Sabbath but the Seventh; nor for a thousand years after Christ, were
Historians so bold to call any other day by that name, or give that day any
other name, and very many Churches did observe the Seventh-day Sabbath, as your
Historians mention; and one main difference between the Eastern, and Western
Churches, was that the Western Churches, fasted and afflicted themselves on the
Sabbath, which being no proper work on a Sabbath day, the Eastern Churches
admonished them to reform it. Neither did they observe Sunday as a Sabbath, but
did their common business thereon, when their Assembling was over; neither did
they pretend any Scripture ground, for their meeting on Sunday, but took it up
Voluntarily: and afterward when it came to be confirmed by Edicts of men, even
then much work was allowed to be done upon it, and the Seventh-day Sabbath was
not made void, but obedience required to that also; but I am a weary of this.
How contrary to the word of God in your own Judgment, was the sentence of the
venerable Counsel of Laodicea, that you even now, when your first day is at the
height, durst not say Amen to it; but the Churches were corrupted in the
Apostles time, Antichrist was then already come, and therefore we need not run
to the Church History, to find Errors in them, for which we should not take
them for a rule, since we are not referred to them, but to the Law, and to the
Testimony.

But you come to Arguments, to prove that Christians are not tied to the
observation of the Seventh day-Sabbath; though tied to the observation of the
Fourth Command (a plain contradiction in its self) and one of your Arguments,
which you call unanswerable, is.

That believing Gentiles or Christians, are not bound to the observation of the
Seventh-day Sabbath, neither by the Law of Nature, nor by the Law of Moses, nor
by the Law of Christ; and because this is the great Argument you rest upon, and
trust in, I shall first put you in mind of some of your own Concessions; and
then speak directly to your Argument, as you enforced it.

You grant that believers are bound, to the observation of the Ten Commands as
a Rule of Life, (and I hope you will grant as a Rule of Faith, and Worship too;
or else you will leave out the greatest Commandment) you also grant, that Law
can no more be Changed, then the nature of good and evil can be Changed; that
its the Express Idea of Gods image; and that God can as soon cease to be, as
the Law to be Changed; that what is of Moral Equity, Extends to every believer
or every man. Although you disowned all that was in the Fourth Command to be
Moral, yet you owned these three things Moral: as First, the Observation of a
Sabbath. Secondly, that this Sabbath is a Seventh part of time. Thirdly, that
this Seventh part of time must be of Gods own appointing; and as Corrupt as you
are, in your opinion about the Fourth Command; either through ignorance of the
proper Significancy, and Genuine meaning of the Hebrew, (...) and (...) (or
worse then ignorance) yet you have granted so much Truth, that you cannot deny
the Seventh day to be the Sabbath, without contradicting your own words; for
Sabbath Day and Seventh-day are connatural, it) is the Seventh-days proper
nature, to be the weekly Sabbath, and that I will evidence to you, if you will
appoint time and place; and the Hebrew (...) and (...) are Notes of
demonstration pointing out a certain, known, determined, fixed, unchangable Day
in every week, and not a Seventh part of time barely; but that set Seventh day.
And the Lord has never appointed another day, which you grant must be of the
Lords appointing; and when you spoke, that Christ has power to change the
Sabbath, as he is God, do you not tremble to impose upon your hearers, with
such devices? Did you not declare, God could as soon cease to be, as the Law of
the Ten words to be changed? your unskilful defining of the Law of nature,
shall not help you out in this case, as I will show you presently; therefore I
now come to answer your supposed unanswerable Argument in its Three parts.

You said believers are not bound to the observation of the Seventh day
Sabbath, by the Law of nature, because (say you) the light of nature cannot
discern the Seventh day, from any other, for there is no difference between one
day and another in nature: take a man and shut him up in a dungeon a
considerable time; where he can see no light, and when he comes forth, he
cannot know the Seventh day from any of the other days, and because the Seventh
day cannot be known by the Light of the nature, it is not of the Law of nature.
With a great many more of such like words, (by the way I would tell you, that
exact Astronomers have observed, that natural days are not of Equal Length, and
it were worth your research into it; whether the Seventh day be not longer in
time, and have more minutes in it then the first.)

But for answer to your Argument, if no Law be a Law of nature, but that which
may be known by the Light of nature; then the first Command cannot be a Law of
nature; for by the Light of nature we cannot come at the knowledge of the True
God, of a God in Christ; neither by that Rule, is the Second Command a Law of
nature, for by the Light of nature (as it is depraved by the fall) man knows
not, that an after God is not to be worshipped; but the Heathen and Pagans, that
have not the Light of the written word, nor of the Enlightening Spirit they
worship after Gods. Neither can the Third Command be a Law of nature by that
Rule; for by the Light of nature men know not that great and dreadful name
Jehovah, AElohecha, which is not to be taken in vain; neither can that part of
the Fourth Command, which you acknowledge to be Moral, a Seventh part of time,
be a Law of nature by that Rule, (for to use your own dark demonstration) shut
a man up in a Dungeon all his days; where he can see no Light; and the Light of
nature, will not teach him the knowledge of the Seventh part of time; No, he
must be taught by the Word, which is the ground of knowledge; how to number
Seven, and how to measure the days, by the Luminaries of heaven: Neither can
the Fifth Command, be a Law of nature by that Rule; for take a Child from his
Parents before it knows them, as the Turks do, and breed it up where they shant
know of one another, and call it by another name, and it cannot know its
Parents to Honor them: Neither can the Sixth Command be a Law of nature by that
Rule, for you know, you said if it were a Law of nature, natural Conscience
would Check for the breach of it; but unbelieving men that have not faith, they
have killed, and will kill the Saints, and think they do God good service in
it, they are so far from the Checks of Conscience. For shame retract this
ignorant definition of the Law of nature. But to Answer your second part of
your imaginary unanswerable Argument.

Secondly, Your second part of your Argument was, That Believers are not bound
to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath, by the Law of Moses, or the Law, as given
forth by Moses, because the Law of Moses was given only to the Jews; and
therefore Believers were freed from the whole Law, as given by Moses, and must
receive it as renewed by the Power of Christ.

Answ. How is that? Dare you say again as you did, That we are freed from the
Law, as given at Sinai? Did not Jehovah Christ give the Law at Sinai? Psalm. 68.
17, 18. Did not the whole Earth quake at his Presence and Voice? ver. 7, 8.
Heb. 12. 25, 26. Ephesians. 4. 8. Is not this Christ the Angel that was with Moses in
the Wilderness, who then spoke to him in Mount Sinai, of whom Moses received
the lively Oracles to give unto us? Acts 7. 37, 38. And will you reject this
Law, as given at Sinai, because it was handed to us by Moses? Is not this Law
of Moses to be remembered in the Last Days? Mal. 4. 4. and the Context. Unless
Christ's Righteousness be imputed to you for your Justification, Moses will
accuse you to the Father, John 5. 45. Had the unbelieving Jews believingly
heard Moses, they would have believed Christ, ver. 46. If you will not believe
Moses his Writings, how can you believe Christ? I know not how you will
Evidence your Faith in Christ, but by your Obedience to this Law of Moses,
James 2. 18. especially.

Will you not hear Moses? then you are not of the mind of Glorified Abraham,
Luke 16. 29. Will you not hear Moses? then you will not be persuaded, though
one Rose from the Dead.

Thirdly, The third part of your Argument was, That Believers are not tied by
the Law of Christ, to observe the Seventh-day Sabbath; for Christ never
Reinforced this Law; and the Apostle, who spoke by Command from Christ, leaves
Men to their Liberty, whether to observe it or not.

Answ. How unskilfully do you divide the Word of God? Have I not proved in my
last Answer, that Christ gave the Law at Sinai? And is not that the Law of
Christ? And of unchangeable Nature? And does not that Law plainly require it?
Nay, Does not our Lord Christ declare, That the Sabbath was made for Man? Mark.
2. ver. 27. and, Does he not say, he is Lord of the Sabbath? ver. 28. What,
would you Rob Christ of his Lordship, and give him another for it? It will not
be accepted by him, no other is a Type of our Eternal Rest. (Compare King Ahab
and Jezebels Dealing with Naboth for his Vineyard to this.) Why should our Lord
bid the Jews pray, that their Flight be not on the Sabbath Day (which was to be
near Forty Years after) if they were not bound to observe the Sabbath? Mat. 24.
20. How can our Lord's Word be Fulfilled, Mat. 5. 17, 18. if the Sabbath be
changed from the Seventh-Day to the First? For, more than one jot or one tittle
will pass from the Law, if the Sabbath Day be changed, which is so pointed out
by Notes of Demonstration, by Particles, by Pronouns, by Prepositions; all
significant to point out the Seventh Day, as I have showed already. Have a care
of Teaching Men to break any one of Christ's Commands, or of Erring in one
point, James 2. 10. If you would have any other Re-inforcing of this Law, than
what I have mentioned; pray show me where the Seventh Part of time has any
other Re-inforcing, and yet you assert a Seventh Part of time to be Moral, and
to be the Law of Christ. How Unskillfully did you open and apply, Romans 14. 5.
One Man esteems one day above another; another esteems every day alike; This
you said Related to the Seventh-day Sabbath, and that the Apostle (by Command
from Christ) left Men to their Liberty, to do as they were persuaded in their
own Mind. What if a Man be persuaded, the Seventh-Day is the Sabbath? according
to your Doctrine, he is to be left to do, as he is persuaded in his own Mind;
and not to be set against with Frightful words, as if he were departing from
the Living God, as your Text was; nor set against with whole Sermons, that have
no Alliance to the Text they are raised from. Neither should a Man of this
persuasion be slandered, as if he fell into an Error, that had many other
Errors attend it? No, he should be left to do, as he is persuaded in his own
mind. What if a Man esteems every day alike, and Works every day, and keeps no
Sabbath; or Idles every day, and does no Work? By your Doctrine he must be left
to his persuasion. You went to contradict your self, by bringing another case,
which would no ways agree, nor run* parallel with it; that of Christ's saying
to the Woman of Samaria about Jerusalem and that Mountain, not being the places
of Worship, Whence you Argued, every place is alike, a place of Worship, which
has no footing in that Scripture; but I will let that pass, to show you how
Unskilfully you Argued from thence; for if all places were alike places of
Worship; yet that does not leave Men to their own persuasions, whether to
Worship or not: No, our Lord tells us, The Father seeks true Spiritual
Worshipers; so that Worship is still required there; and if you would have any
inference from this, it must be; then Men may Worship where they will; as to
the place, if it be indifferent, then in the Idols Temple, or where Men have a
mind. This is the most you can get by this Unskilful Comparison. O but you
added, We were freed from Moses his Yoke, and were to take Christ's Yoke upon
us: Are we? then we must not walk after our own persuasions; and if we are to
take Christ's Yoke upon us, then we are to keep his Sabbath, that plain
pleasant Way of his, and to call it our delight, etc. and he will multiply
Blessings upon us.

Thus I have been helped, to throw down your strong hold in which you trusted.
Yet for fear this should fail, you brought another from the constant practice
of the Apostles, who you said slighted the Seventh-Day, and met upon the First:
Tremble at the Word of the Lord which gives the lie to your Assertion, Acts,
14. 13. - 44. and 16. 13. and 17. 2, 3. and 18. 4. and if you will prove the
Apostles met on the first day of the week, for Instituted Worship, first tell
me, whether in Matt. 28. 1. Mark. 16. 2. Luke 24. 1. John 20. 1. 19. Acts 20.
7. and 1 Cor. 16. 2. that which is Rendered the First day of the week, be not in
every one of those places one of the Sabbaths; and if so, what those Sabbaths
are; and whether then you will find any ground to bottom your Assertion upon,
that the Apostles met on the first day for Instituted Worship? You also had a
third Argument from Revel. 1. 10. I was in the Spirit on the Lords Day, which
you would have to be the first day of the week; but gave not one Scripture for
your Interpretation. What must it be taken for granted upon your saying? But I
will offer Scripture and Argument against that Interpretation. Did you not
acknowledge the Seventh-Day is called the Sabbath of the Lord, and the Lords
Holy Day; and does not our Lord Jesus Christ say he is Lord of the Sabbath Day;
so that if it meant any one particular day in the week, it must be this
Seventh-day Sabbath, and this is a solid ground so to judge. But I think it is
no ingenious Interpretation of the place, to limit it to any particular day in
the week; for John saw in Visions, and heard by Voice, all those things that
are Revealed in that book, and was Removed from place to place, a work too
great to be concluded to be done in one natural day, unless you had clearer
Evidence that it was so; But does not this day evidently relate to that
providential day of the Lord Christ's Appearing in the fulfilling of this
Prophecy; for this manifestation by Vision and by Voice to John, was, as if
the thing had been acted and performed before his Face, as if the day of the
performance of those Prophesies had been come: He was so in that day in the
Spirit, that it was to him made Real, and that not only to Faith but to outward
Senses, and this providential day has many days and years in it. Now you are
Retired from your task in the Pulpit, do you not see how like a drowning man
you caught at every straw to uphold your Cause; but it sinks and falls before
Christ's triumphant Word.

But here is one broken Reed more you had to lean upon, your Fourth Argument.

You said the Promises to the Observers of the Seventh-day Sabbath, and
threatenings against the Transgressors of it, were transferred to the First Day.
But how did you go to prove it, not by Scripture which is profitable for
Doctrine; but by Experience (O said you) Who are the People that are blessed in
soul and in body and estate; but the conscientious Observers of the First Day.
But pray Sir, consider, Did not the Lord manifest himself once and again to
Solomon at the High Place, and bless him in soul, body, estate, and all? Should
he therefore conclude and say, The blessing is transferred from the place of
Instituted Worship to the forbidden High-Place; and therefore that is to be
gone to; when there is an express word of the Lord transgressed in so doing.
(if the Lord should not overlook sins in his People, when would he ever
manifest himself to them) and for the judgments inflicted on those who had a
conscience of sin in the profaning the day, and yet dareingly did it; there is
no Argument in it; nay, you make the same thing an Argument against the
Seventh-day Sabbath; for (said you) If the Seventh-day Sabbath be Observed,
then the penalty against Transgressors must be observed. Then (said you) we
should have stoneing work in our streets. When as you had but one
Scripture-instance of the executing the penalty on the Transgressor of the Law
of the Sabbath, and it was done at the Word of Jehovah, the Judgment was the
Lords, it should make you fear to offend and not fear to obey. And though that
be such a Bugbear to fright off your Hearers from the Seventh-day Sabbath; yet
you say, the transferring the Penalty from the Seventh Day to the First, is an
Argument for the first day being the Sabbath: But to let your Argument run upon
its own feet, it will be thus, That Sabbath Day that has such a penalty Annexed
to it, is not to be owned under the Gospel; but the penalty annexed to the
Seventh-day, is transferred to the first day: Therefore the first day is not to
be owned for a Sabbath under the Gospel. Is not this your Position, and the
natural Consequence? Does it not turn upon you?

But I will not let you have the last word, therefore I will add this farther:
Does not the Scripture Record the like punishing of transgressors of the rest
of the Commands? must they therefore be Rejected? will you stand it out against
the Lord, to escape his strokes? It will be hard for you to kick against the
Goads: Therefore close in with him, by timely Repentance; and lay hold of his
strength, and make peace with Him, and you shall make peace with Him. The Lord
will not be trifled with, neither do I trifle with you: unless you give me a
satisfactory Reply by Letter, or Answer my Objections one way or other, the
next First Day; you may Expect I will take some other Method to make my
Objections known to your Hearers.

From my House in East-Smithfield, at the Golden-Hart, 2d. Month 23d. at
Evening. 82. W. Tovey.

POSTSCRIT.
THe 14th of the 3d. Month in the Morning, I caused several of these Letters,
etc. to be given to Mr. Meads Hearers; but when he came to Preach in the
Afternoon, I hear he took no Notice of my Arguments, but used several
Raileries; And Paraphrasing upon my Trade, said, I called my self Gold Smith,
but my Gold was Copper. But (although I did not call my self Goldsmiths to him,
yet that is my Calling, and my Gold is Standard) if it were Copper, why did he
not lay it to the Touchstone of the Word, and make it Manifest? For, There
things will appear in their true Colors. No -- he would be excused from that
Task, because I would not let Him have the last word in My Letter: But I think
he is better skilled at Scoffing, than at trying Doctrines by the Word; else,
Why did he use that old proverb, Who so bold, as blind Bayard? But I seriously
commend that Old Scripture to his consideraiton, Isa. 42. 18, to the end, --
Who Blind, but (...) Servant? or Deaf, as my Messenger? etc.


