A Full and True RELATION Of the most Terrible and Dreadful Tempest of Thunder
and Lightening, Hail and Rai^ That ever yet was seen or heard in England.

Giving a Faithful Account ^f the vast Losses, Damages, and Calamities
sustain^^ theirby in the Towns of Hitching Off^y, Eccleford, Pott^^ Clifton,
Henl^, Bigglesworth, with several other Villag^^ and Market Towns in the
Counties of Hartford, Bedfor^ Huntington, etc Wherein even Men have some by
Lightening, and others by the Fury of the Hail been miserab^^ and suddenly
slain, particularly one at Offley, whose Dea^ Body by the force was driven
three Miles toward a Tow^ called Hitchin^, nigh to which place three Horses
were taken up with Saddles, etc. On their Backs, their Ride^^ having miserably
perished by the Hail.

To which is added, (...) particular Account of the sad and dismal Disasters
that happened at Potton in Bedfordshire, where the Lightening wa^ so
extraordinary scorching, as to burn up the very greet Corn as it grew in the
Fields, with this hightening circ^mstance of Wondert that one Acre should be
Burnt to the ^old Clods, and the very next not in the least touched A^^ also a
particular Relation of the great Damages susta^n'd by Sq. Harvey and others, in
their Houses, Corn, Cattle etc.

^he Whole communicated in a Letter out of Hartfordshier from Mr. (...) Tord,
to his Son-in-law Mr Burchfield near the Blew-Coat at Bishopsgate Bars

(...)* The truth of this Relation will be Confirmed by (...) Mr Beaumont, at
the sign of the Hand in Hand (...) (...)

True and particular Account of the ^ate terrible and dreadful Storm of Hail,
etc.
I Having received the full Particulars of the ensuing dreadful Relation, not
only from the aforesaid Worthy Gentleman, but also from several other ^berating
Circumstances, and being well satisfied with Truth thereof, as a subject worthy
of our most serous ^^^sideration, I have carefully published the same from the
^^^^inal Copy, which is as follows.

(...) ^on William,
(...) here send you a very dreadful and strange Relati^^ from Hitching, Potton,
and Offly, but indeed it (...) ^ot more strange then true; for so it happened,
that (...) the Fourth of this Instant, about Three of the Clock ^he Afternoon,
at Offly, about Three Miles from ching, in the County of Hartford, there arose
out (...) ^he Southwest a very strange dark Cloud and seve^^^ other great dark
Clouds arose from the East, and ^^^e from the West and some North, meeting with
(...) fury as though they designed to rush in Battle, break^^^ out into most
dreadful cracks of Thunder, and ^es of great Lightening one against another, in
an ^^usual and strange manner, being so very great in ^^ny places that the very
Houses shook and totterd, even where I was though I was not near the bigg^ (...)
the Tempest by Five, or Six Miles.

About Offley it began to be so very dreadful, the People began to be very
sorely affrighted, n^^^ly with the Lightening, and Thunder, but also the
greatness of the Hail, which came down in s^ (...) prodigious manner, that
never the like was se^^ (...) read of in this Kingdom, there fell, some as b^^
(...) Hen Eggs, some as big as Penny Loves, and some ^^^ger. Many People do
affirm there were as big as (...) Crown of a Hat, most of them in strange shapes
forms, much like pieces of thick Ice, which held ^^^wring down for about half
an Hour, in which (...) it covered the Eearth in several places Five, or Six
(...) in Thickness, especially on the Hills and dry ch^^pion Ground
notwithstanding the Rain which (...) with it

It did much harm about Offley, one Man being an adjacent Field, was either
killed by the Lightni^^ or knocked on the Head by the Violence of the H^^^ and
Rain, by which his Body was driven away do^^ (...) Hills, and taken up near
Hitching, after having flo^^ed near three Miles: There was also taken up t^
(...) Saddle-Horses, and an Horse with a Panel on (...) Back, the Riders
whereof, it is feared where killed (...) the Hail, tho their Persons, perhaps
covered w^^^ Earth, are not yet found; for the Ground being ve^^ dry, and the
Storm sudden and violent, it was ov^ flowed in some places five or six Foot
deep, to the Co^sternation of the People of those parts, it happeni^^ to be on
the Market Day, many were in the Mark^^ ^assing and repassing on the Road: I
believe several, getting the Rainbow, the Seal of God's Covenant ^^^h Noah,
expected nothing less than a Universal ^^^uge; the Hail was measured, and (when
much wast^ some were Eight and others Ten Inches round: credibly reported that
the weight of several were ^^^teen, sixteen, and some twenty Ounces.

One Man that was in the Field, tho in the very ^ts of the Storm, told me
himself, that notwith^^^^ding he crept into a thick Hedge for shelter, yet a
^stone struck through and hit him such a blow as ^ded him for a long time, and
he verily believed, ^^^t the same Hailstone would have beat his Brains (...),
had he not been sheltered by the Hedge.

The Harm done at Hitching is very considerable, (...) I believe the whole is
not as yet known; for it is ^r'd there are more slain than are yet found out,
^^^w^thstanding we have an account of seven persons suddenly destroyed. From
Lightening and Tempest; ^n Plague, Pesilence, and Famine, from Battle and
^urder, and from Sudden Death, Good Lord deliver (...)

In Offley field or near it in the forenoon of the same (...), it is affirmed,
by several that saw it, that where ^^^y had Plowed, and laid their Land upon
Stich^s (...) in the Afternoon the violence of the Hail had ^t all the Earth
down again, and laid it as plain though it had not been Plowed, but rolled with a
wheven and plain to the great Astonishment of the ^^^olders. Besides the
dreadful fright and Amaze^^nt the People were in, lest their Houses should be
beat down on their Heads, (for their Tyles and W^^dows were all shattered to
pieces) there was also m^^^ Harm done by the Water in several Cellars, S^ and
Warehouses, some particular persons have two-Hundred pounds worth of Harm done
in than half an Hours time.

This dreadful and Astonishing Tempest, with (...) fury, passed from Hitching,
where it left Hail, aforesaid. Five Foot in Thickness, and so raised. Water in
a short time that no person could pass, (...) went over the Fields and came
near to Clifton and ^ly in Bedfordshire, and so toward Bigglesworth, (...) so
to Potton, another Market Town, and from the down into Huntingtonshire, where,
for the prese^^ we shall leave traceing it, and proceed to an ex^^^ Relation of
the Loss, damage, and Harm sustained and about the Township of Potton.

And first, On the South-West side of the To^^ there was Rye growing, a great
deal whereof ev^^ Green as it was entirely was consumed and Burnt (...) but
what escaped the fiery Lighiening, fell by the f^ of the Hail, and was beat down
beyond Hopes of a^^ Recovery: But what is most astonishing is That (...) part
of the Crop of a Field or Close should be destr^^'d, and the other not in the
least harmed: One Ma^^ Corn burnt up, another Man's beat flat to the Ea^^^ and
yet prehaps a Plat of Ground betwixt both (...) ^^ther on one Hand or the other
in the least wrong notwithstanding the Corn in each was of eq^^^ groth, But yet
we cannot attribute this so wonder a Judgment to any thing of Sin more in one
M^^ then another, if we remember what Christ told his ^^sciples in the 13 of
Luke, when some told him of (...) Galileans Whose Blood Pilate had mingled with
^^^ir Sacrafice; Suppose ye (said he) that those Galile^^^, were sinners above
all the Galilans, becase they suf^^^^d such things? I tell you, nay; but except
ye repent, ye ^^^^l all likewise perish. Or those Eighteen upon whom the ^er of
Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye they were ^^^ners above all Men that dwelt
in Jerusalem? I tell (...) nay, etc. I could heartily wish that those
princi^^^ly concerned, would look upon it as a Warning Repent, and that others
would esteem it as a Me^^nto not to be ungrateful to Heaven, which in Mer^has
preserved their Persons and Substances from the ^y, Misery, and Calamity of so
dreadful and sud^^^ a Judgment. Ingrato homine terre pejus nil creat (...) very
Heathens could say; but to be concise.

^n the Town of Potton, as aforesaid, so terrible and ^sterous was the Tempest
that besides several greatly ^^maged, two New Houses were entirely levelled
with (...) Ground; And indeed so strange and wonderful ^^s the Shower or rather
Storm, that the People ^^^ld neither discern any thing that was above Two ^^^es
off them, there was no intermission of Drops, but (...) Water power'd down like
a River out of the Clouds ^^^hout any separation.

^t Eccleford near Sandy, the Hail broke most part ^he Tyles and Windows of a
great House, belong^^^ to one Squire Harvies the reparation whereof (...) a
modest compution will cost about a Hundred and.

Of any particular persons in or about this Tow^ Killed I have no certain
Account, yet there is seve^^^ (more is the Pity) in the Borders of
Huntingtonshir^ Nor is the Loss amongst Cattle, of all sorts, less th^^ the
Damage in Corn: The whole being indeed wi^^out any addition in respect both of
the Thunder Light^^ing and Hail, even more dreadful and terrible th^^ can be
well related, or easily conceived.

Upon the whole I crave leave to observe, that this terible Judgment is little
inferior in dread those fearful ones executed, at several times on (...) sinful
and rebellions Israelites, obstinate Pharaoh (...) so there is all reason
imaginable to believe that t^^ ^dos, as those did formerly, forebode and
fore-r^ something very extraordinary: I could heartily wi^^ it would be every
man's particular care and goo^ prudence (let his profession be what it will)
seriou^^^ to examine whither this so very visible Finger of G^^ is pointed out
unto us, as a Trial of our Faith, P^tience, etc. or as a just reward for our
heinous Sir and vile Iniquities; for my own part, I am veri^^ persuaded; that
now, even now, the Ax is laid un^^ the Root of the Tree; therefore every Tree
that bring not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and cast into the Fi^^

Jehovah, like a tender hearted Father, deals wi^^ us, and happy were we would
we but see it, he fi^ allures and strives to win us by Mercies and Favou^^ and
then upon refusal, gently corrects, not furious^^ in rage and passion, but with
a sweet Mixture and a^lay of Mercy shows us the evil of our ways and foolisness
of our doings. Woe be unto us if we take n^ note of these things, if we do not,
then as the Scrip^^^^ says it will certainly be more tolerable for So^^^ and
Gomorrah in the great day of the Lord than ^s.

(...) sum up the whole, and to prevent, as much (...) be, the world from being
abused with false Re^s I could not but think my self obliged to de^ that this
before recited dreadful Relation con^ nothing but very matter of fact, as the
same was ^y abstracted from the Original Letter sent to Mr. ^field next door to
the Blew-Coat in Bishops-Gate-(...) near the Bars: which said original Letter,
for ^urther and better Satisfaction of such as may be ^tful of the truth
hereof, is to be seen at Mr Ni^ Beaumonts at the Sign of the Hand in Hand-Ally
^^^^out Bishops-Gate.


FINIS.
Licended and Entered according to Order.

^^NDON, Peinted and Sold by J. Wilkins, (...) and the green Dragon Tavern, in
Fleet Street. 1697.


