A LETTER FROM Captain John Tosier, Commander of His Majesty's Ship the HUNTER
at JAMAICA.

With a Narrative of his Embassy and Command in that Frigate to the Captain
General and Governor of Havannah; to demand His Majesty of Great Britains
Subjects kept Prisoners there:

The Account and manner of their Delivery, with a List of their Names, and
Times of Bondage.

AS ALSO, English His Majesty's Subjects, cast away and remaining Eighteen Days
in a Long Boat at Sea in a sad condition, taken up by the said Captain John
Tosier.

Printed in the Year 1679

A Letter from Captain John Tosier, Commander of His Majesty's Ship the Hunter
at Jamaica; with a Narrative of his Embassy and Command in that Frigate to the
Captain General and Governor of Havannah.
SIR,
I Have received your most welcome Letters, and they came not to my hand till
the 20th. Instant, because of my being at Sea: For by virtue of his Exellencies
the Earl of Carlisle Captain General and Governor of Jamaica's order, I failed
from hence the 25th. of January last, (as well in Quality of Ambassador, as
that of my Command) for Havannah to demand from the Captain General of that
place His Majesty's Subjects of Great Britain, which were kept worse Slaves
then those of Argiers, and so often denied to several persons of Quality, which
have been sent Ambassadors from time to time, with Frigates of Fifty Guns and
upwards. I gave you some account of this my last; and was much troubled in
order to the management of so great an affair and of a concern as that was,
(but God be thanked) to the honor of my Master the King of England, for whose
service, if I had a 1000 lives, I would sacrifice them all, I obtained that
success which was not expected from me by any: For the Spaniards were never
known to have delivered any English that they took in the West Indies before
now. And thousands of people would have ventured most of their Estates against
that success which I brought home with me (blessed be God) for the honor of
His Majesty and the English Nation, and the great satisfaction of my Lord and
all Jamaica; all which has here been acknowledged for a great piece of service,
done not only for the present but future good, there never having been the like
president before: The Particular of which short Negotiation I have here
enclosed, sent you with a List of their Names, to which I refer you.

The next day after I received the Prisoners on board, It pleased God further
to Crown our success by the Preservation of Captain Joseph Graves and 14 of his
men (all His Majesty's Subjects) who were in a long Boat, and had been cast
away eighteen days before thirty Leagues to the Eastward of the Havannah, and
expected nothing but to be utterly lost, or to be Slaves in the Havannah at the
best. Captain Graves sailed hence a Month before I went out, and was bound for
London; I believe he will come and see you, and give you thanks for my kindness
to him which he owned here.

The great goodness of God is to be observed herein, for the first time I saw
this man, he was Dr -- and did so much abuse me, that I could hardly endure it,
but I was withheld: Yet that it so happened I should be an Instrument to
preserve him, you may imagine the great joy we had on Board, I for my good
fortune in this undertaking; the poor Slaves for their deliverance, and Captain
Graves with his fourteen men for their preservation in all their perils.
Between them our Ship got two Names in two days, the first was the Blessing of
England by the Slaves of Havannah, and the second the Preservation by the
Wrackt men.

And though this Voyage is never made in less then three Months and sometimes
in four: We (putting our selves to. allowance, having 61 of his Majesty's lost
Subjects on Board, besides our complement of men) made our Voyage in seven
weeks and three days. My love and kindness to -- etc.

Port Royal in Jamaica the 28th. of March 1679. SIR, I rest Your Affectionate
Friend and Servant. JOHN TOSIER.


ON the 25th. of January 1678/9. I Sailed from Port Royal in Jamaica for the
Havannah, upon the North-side of Cuba, with Orders to demand His Majesty's
Subjects that were there Prisoners. On the 11th. of February I arrived upon the
Coast, where I lay off and on two days for a settled Weather; on the 13th. I
Sailed within two Miles of the Moors Castle, with our Courses in the Brailes,
and our Top Sails a Trip, Jack, Ancient and Pendant flying, and sent in my Boat
ashore with my List, and Mr. Richard Bear his Excellency the Earl of Carliles
Gentleman of the Horse, who was sent my Interpreter to the Governor; as soon
as they were within command, the Guard of the Moors Castle commanded them
ashore, and put a Sergeant and Soldiers on Board them, who Guarded them up to
the Governor, and left another Guard upon the Boat, that none of the men
should come on Shore: I sent by them his Excellencies Letter to the Governor,
and to show my Sailing Orders, and to desire his Excellencies leave to enter
into, and depart out of that Port of the Havannah with the King of Englands
Frigate under my Command at my pleasure, and to have my Salutes answered Gun for
Gun: As soon as this was read, the Governor answered them, that all those of
the Kings Subjects there, were Pirates, and therefore would deliver none; and as
to my coming in, he was very willing, but he must put a Guard upon the Kings
Ship; and Salutes, he could not answer so much as one Gun; and then bidding
them go three times out of his house, sent them Guarded away to the Boat, and
so forced them to Sea at seven a Clock at Night, and very dark upon a dangerous
Coast, where they Boagged all Night, whilst I stood off and in, not thinking
they would turn them out so late: The next Morning at six a Clock I took up the
Boat with this answer, and at Nine sent them a shore again, with full Power and
Instruction to tell him, that His Majesty's Ship under my command is well
Manned, where he might be very safe and welcome if he would vouchsafe to give
her his Company; and that His Majesty of England never spared his Powder to
answer Civilities, nor received such Indignities as Walters or Guards on Board
any of His Majesty's Ships of War, which will be a strange report, when His
Majesty shall come to hear of it. And to tell him further, that though I with
His Majesty's Frigate cannot be admitted upon Honorable Terms, that I sent him
word, that his Excellency Charles Earl of Carlisle, Captain General and
Governor of Jamaica, has commanded me one of the Captains of His Majesty of
Great Britains Ships of War, attending that His Majesty's Island of Jamaica,
to desire his Excellency in the King of England's Name, and in obedience to the
Order of the Catholic King, all the Subjects of His most Excellent Majesty,
that are detained Prisoners at the Havannah, that they be forthwith set at
Liberty, and delivered to me, to be Transported to the Territories of the King
of England.

With s^veral other directions, in case of a further denial to demand a sight
of their Commitment upon Record: If Pirates, to send them for Old Spain, and
there to be Tried, and not to be kept in perpetual Slavery; relating the
several Complaints made to the King and Council, of their most barbarous usage
to our Nation here with the force of Authority, when at the same time we treat
them with all tender kindness in the World, etc.

But before this Latter discourse was ended, the Governor caused the Prisoners
to be called over in a back Court near his house, and examined some of them,
one after another; who before he had done, said, though I have no order to
deliver them to you, and that I may be blamed, yet take them all with you, and
if there be any more, let them come forth immediately and they shall be
discharged, at which Declaration, they all being 46. in number, gave such
Cheer-ho, that they made the house ring, saying, God bless the Blessing of
England, which they called our Ship; immediately I hoisted out the long Boat,
and had them all on Board in less then three hours: Whereupon I set Sail the
next day for the Bay of Mettances to Water, and so to Port Royal, where I
arrived the 20th day of March following, to the great satisfaction of all men
here.

A List of all His Majesty's Subjects that were Prisoners at Havannah, and
received on Board His Majesty's Ship the Hunter, under the Command of Captain
John Tosier, lying off and on before the Harbor, on February 14. 1678/9. And
the next day entered into Victualing at half allowance.
Yrs. Mths. 1 Mr. William Winford 2 6 2 James Pung. 2 8 3 Francis Redmain. 5 4
Thomas Richardson. 5 6 5 John Evans. 6 7 6 Thomas Cock. 6 7 7 Ralph Graves. 5 6
8 Jonas Johnson. 5 6 9 Ambrose Brown. 6 10 John Kenneday. 5 6 11 Robert Peppin.
5 6 12 Nicholas Gunniop. 4 5 13 Thomas Macket. 4 7 14 Peter Watson. 4 7 15
Thomas Hall. 4 16 Richard Harris. 4 17 John Vaughan. 3 3 18 Robert Mercum. 3 3
19 Joseph Rivers. 5 20 Richard Merrington. 3 3 21 Ambrose Hensree. 3 3 22
Robert Chiffin. 2 10 23 Robert Middleton. 2 10 24 Gilbert Dike. 2 7 25 John
Alexander. 2 7 26 John Woodcock. 2 7 27 James Hall. 2 6 28 Morris Smith. 2 6 29
Henry Webber. 2 6 30 William Owens. 2 6 31 Patrick Cairney. 2 6 32 Thomas
Mason. 2 1 33 John West. 2 1 34 Benjamin Willis. 2 5 35 Nicholas Stonning. 2 5
36 Cornelius Lachlon. 2 5 37 Thomas Loind. 1 9 38 Noah Parker. 1 9 39 Thomas
Butler. 1 9 40 Ambrose Rose. 1 9 41 John Horn. 1 10 42 Hugh May. 1 3 43 Thomas
Bishop. 1 3 44 Thomas Maynder. 1 3 45 Thomas Rous. 1 3 46 George Winch. 1 3

FINIS.

